AN IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE Wars of Ireland.

Let this be Printed,

March 2. 1692/3. Charnock Heron.

A CONTINUATION OF THE IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE Wars of Ireland,

From the Time that Duke Schonberg Landed with an Army in that Kingdom, to the
23 d. of March, 1691/2. when Their Majesty's Proclamation was published,
declaring the War to be ended.

Illustrated with Copper Sculptures describing the most Important Places of
Action.

Together with Some REMARKS upon the Present State of that Kingdom.

By GEORGE STORY, Chaplain to the Regiment formerly Sir Tho. Gower's, now the
Earl of Drogheda's.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

TO THE KING's Most Excellent Majesty.
Great SIR,
THO I Am no Soldier my self, yet four years Conversation with men of that
Profession has emboldened me to Address Your Sacred Majesty, not for Your Royal
Protection against the future Attacks of those who will call the Account I have
given of their management in Ireland, A new making War upon them; Nor to ask
Your Majesty's Patronage to a Work so imperfect, which would be a Presumption
impardonable: But with the deepest sense of Duty, and humblest Submission, to
beg Your Majesty's Pardon for adventuring formerly to publish some part of Your
Majesty's Generous Actions, and Hazardous Undertakings in that Kingdom; and now
for my Ambition in repeating the same, which will always be a Subject far
beyond the reach of so mean a Pen as mine.

I have nothing to value my self upon, but the honor of being employed in Your
Majesty's Service ever since Your Majesty's happy Accession to the Throne,
encouraged thereunto for those Reasons amongst many more, That all Englishmen
who have a pretension to the Title of being Brave, never had a more happy
opportunity of recovering and maintaining the Ancient Glory of this once most
renowned Kingdom, than under the Auspicious Conduct of Your Sacred Majesty; by
whose Great Example many of those whose very Constitutions were of late softened
with Ease and Pleasure, are now invited to Feats of Arms worthy the Offspring
of their Ancestors. And what greater Comfort and Satisfaction can Men of any
other Profession receive, than in seeing Your Majesty still so zealous in the
defense of that Interest, which themselves have so great a share in?

May Your Majesty therefore, and Your Royal Consort, be as happy in Dutiful and
Obedient Subjects, as we are under Your most Prudent and Gracious Government;
to which no man can bear a greater Zeal, nor pray more heartily for Your
Majesty's long Life, Health, constant Prosperity and Glory, than

Your MAJESTY's Most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most Obedient Subject, GEORGE
STORY.

THE PREFACE.
HE that endeavors to give an Account of so many men's behavior as must needs
be concerned in three Active Campaigns, is sure to want neither Envy, nor
Detraction; some finding fault with one thing, and some with another; so that
it is impossible to expect or hope for the pleasing of all Parties; nor indeed
is it fit to endeavor it: The Reputations of men however are tender things,
and therefore every prudent man, when he has occasion to touch them, will be
careful to do it very nicely. And yet it happens often to those that write,
that either through heedlesness they disoblige some that do not deserve it; or
out of rashness provoke others that may make them repent it; in which Cases
there sometimes needs an excuse for Offenses given, even where they never were
intended.

Those, and a great many other Considerations, have not frighted me from
meddling with a Subject, wherein not a few of the most eminent Persons of our
Age have born a part; and the rather, because I find it has laid all this while
neglected; and not any one as yet, besides my self, has undertaken it (except
in some small Collections out of our public News.) I endeavored two years ago
to give the World a true Account of the Matter of Fact, as it happened the two
first Campaigns, and how Matters then stood with both the Armies. And this bore
the name of, An Impartial History of the Affairs of Ireland the Two last Years;
wherein I was desirous to make the Book it self answer its Title; and also to
show the great hopes there was then in gaining the whole Kingdom in a short
time after; which I am next about to show you how it fell out, so far as I have
been able to make an enquiry into it. But since it is probable that the First
Part has not reached so many Hands as this may, I have here repeated some of
the most material Passages from the beginning, and added some few things that I
have been informed of since I writ the other; tho my main Design is to be as
particular in the last Campaign, as I have been formerly in the other two,
which was done by way of Journal; as this is also, when you come to the end of
the Abridgment: In all which put together, you have the Principal Occurrences
from Duke Sconberg's landing in that Kingdom, till Their Majesty's
Proclamation, dated at Kensington, March the 3 d, 1691/2. Declaring that War to
be ended; with some further Observations about the past and present
Circumstances of that Nation.

The Blood spilt, and Treasure spent, in this unhappy War, has doubtless been a
sufficient Grievance to both Kingdoms; yet we have no great reason to be out of
humor at it now, there being at that time an apparent necessity for it; by
which the War is also removed to a greater distance, till we can gain a Firm,
Honorable, and Lasting Peace from abroad, that so Their Majesty's may be at
leisure to free their own Dominions from the Vices and Corruptions of a
Licentious Age.

But I am no Politician; and therefore what I have to offer in behalf of this
Undertaking of mine, is only this; That it was the honor I had for the Memory
of that Great Man Duke Sconberg, and a desire to set the World right at that
time in their Judgments, how Matters stood with both Armies, which put me first
upon the Design. And the favorable Acceptance that my first endeavors met
with in Ireland, has encouraged me to continue them; though I must be so
grateful as to own the kind Resentments of some in my own Country also, and
particularly those of my Lord Bishop of Salisbury, who has been pleased, not
only to commend the Undertaking, but to honor me with the Correction of some
of my Papers with his own Hand, and also with an Account of the reasons for
some Particulars, that before I was in the dark for want of.

I hate to clog Truth with any Artifice; nor is there any occasion for such an
endeavor, supposel had an inclination or skill to do it; for whilst things are
fresh in every ones memory, if a man should be guilty of any notable and wilful
Mistake that way, there are a great many able to find it out. I have done the
Subject therefore no injury, but by my own defects, which by this means I have
exposed to the public Censure of all People.

I have seen a great part of the most notable Adventures however, from the
beginning to the end, and want only skill to give a good Account of them.
Bystanders commonly see more than those actually engaged in Battle; here every
man is tied to his Post, and minds the Business only that is before him; when
those that are Lookers on, have nothing else to do but to observe: So that
wherein I have been defective in this Point, is more for want of Judgment than
Opportunity; and those that are Judges in the Military Art, I hope will pardon
me where I have made use of Terms that are not proper to that Profession. But
besides what Observations I have been able to make my self, I have had the
benefit of several Diaries, and some of those writ with good skill; I have
looked over all our Public Accounts too, and been freely allowed the advantage
of several Public Papers and Letters at the Secretary of War's Office, and
other places; so that you have all that I know of the matter; and I hope it is
no crime in me to know no more than I do; tho I will not warrant what I have
said from being guilty of several Mistakes; for men relate things generally as
they conceive 'em; and of many that have seen the same thing, few there are
that relate it alike, every one speaking of it according to his own Notions, or
as his mind is turned by clear or confused Conceptions; which alone may be
sufficient Encouragement to any judicious. Undertaker to be at the pains to
complete the Work, especially when they see a thing of that Importance so
slovenly managed: Tho I am the first that has chalked out the way, and have
some Reasons to believe, that whoever writes afterward upon this Subject, will
take more upon Trust than I have done.

There is already published An Account of the State of the Protestants in
Ireland under the late King's Reign; most of whom found it true by experience
what is there at large related; which is the reason that at this day in Ireland
you will find no Jacobites but Papists. Some of whom I hear have made it their
boast, That they have answered that Book; but I Am sufficiently assured. That
the Reverend Author who writ it, is able to make it good: And what credit one
of the Romish Faith, and an Irish Evidence too, will gain by contradicting pure
Matter of Fact, any sober man may easily foresee. Sir Richard Cox has also been
pleased to say, That he will oblige the world with a Third Volume of his
History; upon which Considerations I have said little of things before our own
Landing, and afterward have for the most part confined my self to matters
relating to the Army, even in which, if we take things as they rise, there have
been several Actions on our side, that have made but an indifferent Figure to
us, who possibly did not stand in a good light, and so could not discern the
true Reasons of things; only we ought to be satisfied, that Public Authority
is not to be subject to the private Passions and Opinions of the people; nor
the Laws of Government either in Armies or elsewhere, to the Fancies of every
pretender.

Some perhaps may ask what part of our Army had the greatest Interest in the
Glory of those Victories which we have gained in that Kingdom, we being
composed of so many different Nations, which must needs create Emulation, if
not Envy it self? It has been an Observation before my time, That all people
generally have a good opinion of themselves, and magnify their own
Contrymen either as to Courage or Customs, though it be often without the
least show of Reason: The Turks you see contemn us, and we them as much: The
Grecians in former times called all the world but themselves Barbarians, and
now they are as much despised by most people: The Italians deride the French,
and they again scoff at the Italians: The Spaniards laugh at all, and every
Country again at them: We call the Irish Wild and Rude, and they think to be
even with us in calling us English Churles, and other Names of Reproach; and
notwithstanding they were worsted, yet their Officers would confidently affirm,
That their men had as much Courage as those that beat them. The Danes too
magnified their own Actions, and the Dutch and French did as much for
themselves; yet if you will grant me but for this once to be impartial, I can
affirm by often-repeated experience, That I never saw any thing contemn Death
to that degree, (and that too in all shapes) as the English Officers and
Soldiers did upon all occasions. And if any endeavor to take the greatest part
of the Glory of that War from them, they do them not that Justice which the
Merit of their Cause deserves: Not that other people did not behave themselves
very well, but the Numbers of no other Nation were equal to ours; or if they
had, can I by any means allow they could have outdone us.

I have done our Enemies all the Justice in every point, that the Merit of
their Cause would bear, and that too from several of their own mouths, upon
whose Credit I have related many Circumstances. And as to our own side, I am
very far from having the least prejudice to the Person of any man; nor if I
had, could I ever persuade my self to take so poor a Revenge, (if any) as to
asperse him unjustly; this would be my own loss, and not his: So that if any
man happen to be injured by what I have said, (though there is a great
difference between being wronged and offended) I declare it no wilful Mistake,
and shall be very ready to ask his Pardon; which I will not do to any man, for
saying what I know to be true.

But what I am most sorry for is, That I question not but a great many
Gentlemen have deserved very well in this War, tho it has been my Misfortune
not to know their Names; and yet I hope that Time and a more diligent Enquiry
will do them Justice.

What I have writ toward the end of the Book, concerning the past and present
States of that Country, was done with the rest in April last, when the noise
of the French Descent filled every ones ears; and the same discourse being now
revived, I shall let it stand as it is, with this Remark, That though I am no
Prophet, yet if they do make an Attempt, I hope they will have the same Fate that
others have had before them.

Whatever my Account of these matters may be, yet the Maps that I have
inserted, which illustrate the principal Battles and Sieges, are very good, and
cost no small Pains and Charges to bring them to that perfection: But when I
read over these Papers my self, I find the Style of the whole harsh and
unpleasant; which must needs be much more so to others, especially in an Age
wherein so many Learned and Great Men have brought our Language to so great
Perfection: But all the hopes I have is, That the most Learned Men are aptest
to put the most favorable Construction upon a private man's Endeavor, and
will be ready to pardon a great many Defects in one that means well: and as for
all the Censorious men in the world, I shall not be much concerned at what they
say.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 6. for 1690. read 1689. p. 27. l. 10. for Coltiers r. Cottiers: p.
28. in the Marg. dele A List of Their Majesty's Army. p. 42. l. 2. dele (a). p.
46. l. 10. for have r. having. p. 50. l. 29. for Raparees r. Raparee. p. 53. l.
4. dele here. p. 57. l. 15. for drawn on r. drawn up. p. 90. l 10. for Handshot
off r. Head shot off. ibid. l. 32 for terrible r. terribly. p. 109. l. 30. for
in these r. these. p. 116. l. 20. r. necessaries. p. 126. l. 29. for 1000 r.
10000. p. 151. l. 13. for went r. going. p. 162. in the Marg. for Monks r.
Mackay 's. p. 165. l. 16. for litera r. literae. p. 181. l. 19. for been r.
breve. p. 187. l. 17. for Connor r. Connel. p. 191. l 25. for amounted r.
mounted. p. 215. l. 16. the word being misplaced. p. 249. l. 5. for Commader r.
Commander. p. 254. l. 15. for Account r. which Account. p. 260. l. 32. for each
r. reach. p. 292. l. 8. r. Major-Generals. ibid. l. 11. r. Boats p. 295. l. 29.
dele Sir. p. 318. l 31. before the word Kingdom, add King or. p. 324. l. 35.
for Conversation r. Conversing.

There are some other small Errors in Pages, Months, or Names, which the Reader
may please to Correct as he finds them.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
A Brief Account of the Cause of the War, Page 2 The State of the Protestants
in that Kingdom, 3 The late King lands there from France, Ibid. Protestants
routed at Drummore, Ibid. An Irish Parliament called, 4 Derry Besieged and
Relieved, 4, 5 The Irish beat at Croom-Castle, Ibid. Duke Schonberg lands in
August, 1689. 6 Carigfergus surrendered; with the Articles of Surrender, 7 Newry
burnt by the Irish, 9 Our Army march to Dundalk, Ibid. And encamp there nigh
Ten weeks, 10 Sligo taken by the Irish, Ibid. A Party of the Irish repulsed at
Newry, Ibid. The Battle of Cavan, 14 The Danes land in Ireland, Ibid. 5000
French Foot land at Kinsale, 15 Charlemont surrendered, 16


CHAP. II.
HIS Majesty lands in Ireland, 18 Our Army marches toward the Boyne, 20 His
Majesty's narrow escape the day before the Battle, Ibid. The Battle at the
Boyne, 22 The Number of the Dead, 23 The late King quits Ireland, 25 Our Army
march to Dublin, 26 His Majesty's Declaration to the Irish, 27 A List of our
General Officers, 28 And of those belonging to the Irish, Page 30. The Number
of men in both Armies, 31 Lieutenant General Douglass sent with a Party to
Athlone, ibid. A Commission granted by the King to secure Forfeited Goods, 32
Wexford, Waterford, and Dungannon Fort surrendered to his Majesty, 34, 35
Limerick besieged, 36 Some of our Guns surprised, 37 A Fort taken; then an
Attack made upon the Town, 38 His Majesty raises the Siege, and returns to
England, 39, 40


CHAP. III.
THE French Forces quit Ireland, 41 Bir besieged by the Irish, 42 Count Solm's
Answer to the Duke of Berwick's Letter, 43 Lieutenant General Ginckle made
Commander in Chief, Ibid. Lords Justices begin their Government, 44 Earl of
Marlborough sent into Ireland, Ibid. Cork and Kinsale surrendered, 45 The Irish
attempt our Frontiers, 46 Part of our Army move toward the Shannon, 48
Rapparees in the Bog of Allen, 49 Those people serviceable to the Irish
Interest, and how, 50 My Lord Tyrconnel returns from France, 51 Sarsfield made
Earl of Lucan, 55 The Irish defeated at the Mote of Greenoge, 57 Several
Adventures with the Rapparees and Parties of the Irish Army, 58, 59, 60, etc.
Some of our Regiments take the Field at Mullingar, 68


CHAP. IV.
THirty Rapparees killed, 72 Major Wood defeats a Party of the Irish, 73
Several Skirmishes between the Irish and Militia, 74, 75, Some of our Seamen
and Militia join, and march into the Enemies Quarters, 77 Monsieur St. Ruth
lands in Ireland to command their Army, 78 Our great Officers take the Field at
Mullingar, 80


CHAP. V.
THE Fortifications at Mullingar contracted, Page 85 A Stratagem of the Irish
to get Horses, Ibid. The Irish Army march toward Athlone, 86 Our Army Besieges
Ballimore, 87 Its Situation described, ibid. The Fort surrendered, 91 Its
Fortifications improved, ibid. Our Army joined by the Duke of Wertenberg nigh
Athlone, 94 That Town Attacked, with the manner of it, 95 The English Town
taken, Batteries against the Irish Town, 98 A Design to pass the Shannon
frustrated, 100 The Enemy burn our Close Gallery, 102 A Council of War held,
105 The Town Stormed, 107 The Number of the Dead, 108 A part of our Army left
in the Country, and why, 110 What happened in other Places of the Kingdom
during this Month, ibid.


CHAP. VI.
THE Irish Army Removes, 114 The Dead buried at Athlone, ibid. The Irish
resolve to give us Battle, 115 Irish Prisoners sent toward Dublin, 117 The
Lords Justices Declaration to the Irish, ibid. The Enemy's Camp and Posture at
Aghrim described, 122 Monsieur St. Ruth's supposed Speech to the Irish, 123 The
Battle of Aghrim, 127 The number of the dead on both sides, and of the Irish
Prisoners, 136 Instances in former Battles wherein the Irish have been routed
with little loss to the English, 142 An Account of some Irish Prophecies, 145
Loughrea deserted by the Irish, 148 Portumna Surrendered, ibid. Our Army marches
toward Galway, 259 The Town Besieged, 160 The Articles of Surrender, with
their Majesty's confirmation of them, 165 Our Army returns toward Limerick,
174 An Account of what happened in other places of the Kingdom during this
Month, 174, 175


CHAP. VII.
SEveral fresh Regiments ordered toward the Camp to recruit the Army, 179
Brigadier Leveson sent with a Party toward Nenagh, A Treaty with Balderock O
Donnell, 182 Our Army marches to Cariganliss, 186 News of the death of my Lord
Tyrconnell, 187 Irish Lords Justices Act after his death, 188 An Order about
the Rates of Provisions, 186 Another prohibiting the Buying of Cattle without
the General's License, ibid. Our Army approaches Limerick, 188 Ireton's and
Cromwell's Forts taken, 189 A Party sent to Castle Connell, 190 Our Ships come
up the River near the Town, 191 Brigadier Leveson sent into Kerry, 193 A brief
Account of what happened in other places of the Kingdom during the Month of
August, 195


CHAP. VIII.
OUR Bombs set the Town on fire, 240 The Irish design a Sally, but are
repulsed, ibid. Brigadier Leveson routs a Party of the Irish in Kerry, ibid. A
Design to pass the River, 205 A new Battery contrived toward the King's
Island, 206 A Breach made in the Wall, 210 Guns planted near St. Thomas's
Island, 213 Colonel Earl sent into England, 214 My Lord Lisburn killed, 215 A
Party pass the River upon a Bridge of Boats, 216 The Irish in a great
Consternation, 217 Debates whether the Siege should be continued, or turned
into a Blockade, 220 Orders in case of an Alarm, 222 Our Forces pass the River
a second time, 223 The Attack at Thoumond Bridge, where six hundred of the
Enemy were killed, 224 A Remarkable Paper found in the Pocket of a Colonel in
the Irish Army, 225 The Enemy beat a Parley, 228 A Cessation agreed to.
Hostages exchanged, 229, 230 The Irish Proposals rejected by the Generals,
ibid. Articles agreed to, 231 The General's Letter to Sir Ralph Delaval, giving
him an Account of the Cessation, 232 A brief Account of what happened in other
parts of the Kingdom during this Month, 268, etc.


CHAP. IX.
THE Lords Justices come to the Camp, 238 The Articles signed, ibid. The
Articles at large both Civil and Military, with Their Majesty's Confirmation of
them, 239, etc. Our men take possession of the Irish Town, 256 A
Lieutenant-Collonel imprisoned for denying to go into France, 257 A Declaration
from the General, 258 My Lord Lucan's Arguments to the Irish to persuade them
to go into France, 260 Their Foot drawn out, and put to the trial, ibid. The
Lords Justices return toward Dublin, ibid. Our Army decamps, and goes to
Quarters, 263 Some of the Irish go toward Cork, 264


CHAP. X.
THE Campaign ended, and Irish Prisoners of War released, 268 Some Rapparees
deliver up their Arms, 269 A Proclamation of pardon to the rest, ibid. The
Ulster Irish return home with their Cattle, 270 The French Fleet comes into the
Shannon, 271 Some Objections against the Articles of Limerick answered, 275 The
last of the Irish march from Limerick, 281 The General goes to Dublin, and
thence for England, 288 Major General Mackay and Major General Talmash go for
England, 284 The Danes ordered to be shipped off, ibid. Fortifications of
Ballymore and Mullingar demolished, 285 Our Transport Ships that carry the
Irish, return from France, 288 The Late King's Letter to the Irish at their
Landing, 289 Their Reception in France, ibid. My Lord Lucan's Release to the
General, 292 The Irish that stayed with us, very unruly in their Quarters.
Orders and Instructions for breaking them all, except two Battalions, 294, 295
The Oaths taken according to the New Act of Parliament. 296 An Order to turn
out all Papists from our Regiments, 297 A Proclamation declaring the War of
Ireland ended, 302


CHAP. XI.
A Brief Account of the former and present Circumstances of Ireland, 304 Its
Division into Provinces and Counties, Bishoprics and Parishes, Cities and
Corporations. Its Soil, etc. 305, 306 Sir John Davis's Reasons why Ireland has
been so long in being entirely subjected to the Crown of England, 307 What
Tavistry is, 309 This a Reason why the Irish did not improve their Country, 310
Of Fosterings and Cosherings, ibid. Ireland ought to be put into a Condition to
bear its own Burden 314 What Methods the Irish first took to make the old
English join with them, 315 A brief Account of the Expenses of the former War,
ibid. An Essay toward the Charge of this, 316 A modest conjecture at the
Numbers lost on both sides, and in the Country during the War, 317 The
Interest of England to advance the power of the English in Ireland, 318 Our
Ancestors sensible of this, 320 The former Evils still remain, ibid. The
Interest of the Irish-Papists themselves to advance the Power of England, 321
Two Objections answered, 322 Religion in the first place to be taken care of,
323 An Invasion from France at this Juncture upon any of these three Kingdoms
not practicable, 326 A Remark upon the last that endeavored it. 328


A Continuation of the Impartial History OF THE WARS of IRELAND.
CHAP. I.
A brief Account, by way of Introduction, of the Cause of the War. The state of
the Protestants in that Kingdom. The Late King's landing there. The Sessions of
Parliament in Ireland. Protestants Routed at Drummore, and other Places. Derry
Besieged; and Relieved. The Irish beat at Croom Castle. Duke Sconberg lands in
August 1690. Carigfergus Surrendered. Newry Burnt. The Army marched to Dundalk.
And Encamp there nigh ten Weeks. Sligo taken by the Irish. A Party of theirs
Repulsed at Newry. The Battle of Cavan. The Danes land in Ireland. 5000 French
Foot land at Kinsale. Charlemont Surrendered.

Irish themselves, when they were far from being one of the most Reformed
Nations in the World, had their Bards, and Ballad-makers, who have taken no
small pains in their way to render the Chieftains of their own Country as
famous as others. Nay, the Greatest Generals and Emperors have in the midst of
their Conquests employed some of their time to leave the immortal Memory of
their own, and other Great Men's Actions in writing; the omission of which has
been a great defect in the middle Age of the World, since those are commonly
the most Competent Judges of the management of Affairs, and ablest to give a
true Account.

But because in this Fighting Age, wherein we now live, their time is other
ways employed; and Great Men have scarce leisure to read, much less to write
great Books; we must be contented to take the best Accounts we can get of their
Actions from meaner Hands, such as have been Eyewitnesses of them, or at least
have good grounds for what they tell us. And forasmuch as the Disturbances in
Ireland have made so great a noise in the Ears of all Europe, whilst they
lasted; and my self as a constant Attendant on their Majesty's Army, having
been an Eyewitness to the most Remarkable Occurrences; I shall not scruple to
tell the World all I know; which as it is for the most part little else but the
bare matter of Fact, I hope it may not be despised, though it come from so mean
a Hand, and in so homely a Dress.

I need not trouble the Reader with a long Discourse about the Occasion of the
War; The general Aversion of the People of England to Popery, and their being
ill treated by a Prince of that Persuasion, made such a sudden Change in that
Kingdom, as the like never happened before in any Age or Country: But Ireland
was under different Circumstances; the Roman Catholic Party being there by
much the stronger (at least more numerous) of whom my Lord Tyrconnell had,
during the late King's Reign, been modelling an Army that might be ready on all
Occasions to maintain the Popish Interest, by which the Protestants in that
Kingdom were brought upon the very brink of Ruin, and then forced most of them
to fly from thence to secure their Lives against an Insolent and ungovernable
Irish Army; who by order from the Government, seized upon all the Horses and
Arms they could find in the Hands of the Protestants throughout the Kingdom,
and made all possible Preparations to resist a powerful Army from England,
which was but reasonable to look for, since it is so inconsistent with the Laws,
Interest and Policy of this Kingdom, to have Ireland in any other hands but
their own.

On the 12th of March the Late King, with about The Late King lands in Ireland.
1800 men from France, landed at Kinsale in the West of Ireland. And on the
14th several of the Northern Protestants that had betaken themselves to Arms,
were routed at a place called Drummore, by Lieut. Genesis Hambleton (who was some
time before sent into Ireland to treat with my Lord Tyrconnel to deliver up the
Sword; but joining with his Lordship, and the Irish at his Landing, he was
preferred to that Post.) He had with him at Drummore about 2000 of the Irish
standing Army, and nigh as many Rapareers, though he killed but few of the
Protestants, they making a Running Fight of it, as others also did at
Killileigh, Claudyfoord, and some other Places; several flying into England, or
Scotland, though the most resolute amongst them went toward Londonderry,
where in a short time they were actually besieged by the greatest part of the
Irish Army.

And then the Irish make Preparations for the sitting of their Parliament,
which was on the 7th of May 1689. wherein all the mere Irish were admitted as
An Irish Parliament called.
Members; and most of the English Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and substantial
Tradesmen of that Kingdom, were attainted by name; their Estates and Goods
being declared forfeited, if they returned not by a certain day, which to the
greatest part was next to an impossibility.

There were some Protestants however in this Parliament who endeavored to do
their Absent Brethren, and the Protestant Interest, all the faithful service
imaginable; particularly the Bishop of Mead, who made several excellent
Speeches in the House of Lords in opposition to their Proceedings; but the
Current was then too strong to be stopped, and whoever endeavored it, their
Attempts were fruitless.

But the greatest Thorn in their sides at that time in The Siege of
Londonderry.
Ireland, was the City of Londonderry, which contemned both their Threats and
fair Promises, baffling the chie^ of their Forces for at least Four Months
together, without any extraordinary Supplies from England, till they were
reduced to the last Extremity: Yet on the 25th. of March the Besieged had some
Arms and Ammunition brought them by Captain James Hambleton. And on the 13th.
of April, Colonel Richards and Colonel Cunningham were sent with Two
Regiments from England to their Assistance; who coming to the Lough of Derry*
and being ordered to obey the then Governor Lundy's directions, they were told
by him, That the Town could not hold out a Week; and that their coming in would
only be the loss of their men, and the Besieged also; and advised them to
return, which they did, tho they lost their Regiments upon it.

military map A GROUND PLAT OF LONDONDERRY andtc



Then went Major General Kirk, with his own Regiment, Sir John Hanmer's, and
Brigadier Stuart's, who anchored in the Lough Two Months; during which
Major General Kirk sent to their relief.
time a great many French Commanders were sent to the Irish Camp, and also the
late King himself went down to encourage the Besiegers, fresh Supplies of men
going thither daily, but all to no purpose; which when he saw how unsuccessful
the Attempts of his Irish Army against the Town were like to prove, it is
confidently reported, that he expressed himself to this effect, That if he had
had as many Englishmen in his Army, as he had of others, they would have
brought him it stone by stone ere that. But being weary of so tedious a Siege,
he returned to Dublin; and at last, the Dartmonth Frigate forced her way up to
the Town; and the Irish raised their Siege on the last of July. The Management
of this Affair was blamed by some of themselves, who were either for pushing on
the Siege with their whole Army, or else for making a Blockade, and so going
into Scotland with the rest of the Army, as my Lord Melfort advised, and as my
Lord Dunee earnestly writ for several times; but some of the Irish Officers
advised the late King to a Medium, by making a slow and regular Siege, which
would teach his men to be the better Soldiers; but thereby he lost his
opportunity, in not sending to reinforce Dundee, whereby he might at least have
changed the seat of the War.

Nor were the Inniskilliners behind their Neighbors of Derry in opppsing the
Irish on all occasions; for besides several Actions of moment performed by them
at other times, the very day before the Siege of Derry was raised, the
Inniskilliners hearing of about Six thousand of the Irish Army, commanded by
Major General Mackarty, (commonly called my Lord Moncashel) that were marching
toward them, in order to Besiege their Town also, they very bravely met them
nigh Twenty Miles from home, and at a place called Newtown Butler, near
Croom-Castle, they fought and routed the Irish, killing and drowning in Loughs
and Bogs nigh Three thousand, The Battle at Newtown Butler.
Mackarty himself and some few more being taken Prisoners: The whole Body of
the Inniskilliners, both Horse and Foot, were not above Two thousand; and
scarce Twenty of those were killed, with about Fifty more wounded. This I have
had confirmed by several very good men of that Party; and it is in a great
measure owned by the Irish themselves.

After these Affronts, the Irish Army retire into Leinster Duke Schonberg lands
with an Army in Ireland.
and Munster, in order to recruit and refresh themselves; when they had soon an
account (to their sorrow), That Duke Schonbergh, General of all Their Majesty's
of Great Britain's Forces, was landed with an Army at Bangor in the North of
Ireland: This was on Tuesday, August the 13th. and on the 17th. the General
with his Army marched to Belfast; from whence on the 20th. he sent Five
Regiments of Foot, with some Horse, to Invest the Town of Carrickfergus; and
the next day, followed himself with the remainder of the Army. There were Two
Regiments of Foot in the Town, under Mackarty Moore the Governor, and Owen
Mackarty, who held it out till the 27th. at what time the following Articles
were agreed to and signed.

Articles of Agreement between Frederick Duke of Schonbergh, General of Their
Majesty's Forces; and Col. Charles Mackarty Moore, Governor of Carrickfergus,
August 27. 1689.
Art. I. THAT the Garrison shall march out with flying Articles of Carrickfergus.
Colors, Arms, lighted Matches, and their own Baggage to morrow by Ten a Clock.

II. That in regard the Garrison are in such Disorders, none be admitted into
the Town, but such a Guard as we think fit to send to one of the Gates, which
shall immediately be delivered to us, according to the Custom of War.

III. That the Garrison shall march out to morrow by Ten a Clock, and be
conducted by a Squadron of Horse to the nearest Garrison of the Enemy; and there
shall be no crowding nor confusion when they march out.

IV. That nothing be carried out of the Town, which belongs to the Protestants
or other Inhabitants.

V. That the Governor obliges himself to deliver all Cannon, and other sort of
Arms, Munition, Victuals of any kind, into the hands of such a Commissary as
shall be ordered by us to receive them to morrow morning.

VI. That if there be any thing due from the Garrison, to the Inhabitants of the
Protestant Religion, it shall be paid; and what has been taken from them, shall
be restored.

VII. That a safe Conduct for all the Inhabitants of the Country, and such of
the Roman Catholic Clergy that came for shelter to this Garrison, shall be
allowed, and that they go to their respective habitations, together with their
Goods, and there be protected, pursuant to King William 's Declaration, bearing
date the 22 d. of February last past.

VIII. That care shall be taken of the sick and wounded men of the Garrison that
cannot go along with the Regiments; and that when they are in a condition to
follow the rest, they shall have our Pass.

SCHONBERG.

Pursuant to which Articles, the Irish marched out, tho the Duke himself had
much a-do to protect them from the Violence of the Country People; the
Injuries they had received in being plundered and stripped by them, were so fresh
in their memories. The Irish had about 150 killed and wounded during the Siege,
and the Duke near the same number; and Wednesday the 28th. and the day
following, the Army marched back to Belfast, where they were joined by Duke
Schonbergh's French Horse, Sir Thomas Gowers Foot, and some other Regiments
sent from England. On Saturday the last of August, our Army was Our Army
mustered at Belfast.
Mustered, being Four Regiments of Horse, one of Dragoons, and Eighteen
Regiments of Foot, (viz.) Horse, Earl of Devonshire's, Lord Delamere's, Col.
Coy's, and Duke Schonberg's, with Col. Leveson's Dragoons. Foot, one Battalion
of Blew Dutch, Carleson's White Dutch, Princess Anne's, Col. Wharton's, Earl of
Drogheda's, Lord Lisburn's, Earl Meath's, Lord Roscommon's, Lord Lovelace's,
Earl of Kingston's, the Duke of Norfolk's, Col. Herbert's, Sir Edward
Deering's, Sir Thomas Gower's, Col. Earl's, La Mellionere's, Du Cambon's, La
Callimot's; and a day or two after, we were joined by most of the Inniskilling
Horse, who stayed with us during the succeeding Campaign.

military map

The Duke having ordered most of his Artillery and Ammunition on Board at
Carrickfergus (our Train Horses being many of them as yet at Chester) and then
to go for Carlingford, within eight miles of Dundalk, he marched The Army march
to Newry.
his Army forwards on Monday the 2 d. of September, and came on the 6th. to
Newry, which he found laid in Ashes by the Duke of Berwick, who having been
there with about 1700 Foot and Dragoons, and two Troops of Horse, had retired
toward Dundalk the evening before, and left Newry in a flame. Here the General
posted Capt. Palliser of Sir Thomas Gower's Regiment with Fifty men in an old
Castle that was unburnt; and on Saturday the 7th. we Thence to Dundalk.
marched to Dundalk, where the Army encamped on a low moist Ground, nigh a mile
short of the Town. On Sunday the 8th. Major General Kirk's, Sir John Hanmer's,
and Brigadier Stuart's Regiments, joined us from the North.

The Irish Army were at this time in a great Consternation, The Irish in
confusion.
and it was debated whether they should quit Drogheda and Dublin, and so retire
toward the Shannon; but my Lord Tyrconnel opposed it; and when Marshal De Rose
understood that Duke Schonberg halted at Dundalk, He was sure (he said) that he
wanted something necessary for their going forwards; and therefore part of
their Army advanced, first to Ardee, and then in a day or two to a place called
the Bridge of Fane, upon a small River within three miles of Dundalk, whither
the late King with his whole Army (being about 28000 well armed, and nigh Ten
thousand indifferently armed men), followed about the 15th. at what time we
began to entrench our Camp; and also some shipping with Provisions came to us.

Friday the 20th. we were alarmed with the Enemies The Irish make a show of
fighting.
approach, and they did appear upon the Hills above the Town, next day drawing
out their whole Army with a Train of Artilery, which the Duke seeing, ordered
all his men to stand to their Arms, and expected the Enemies attacking him, but
that they had no great mind to; and after a Discovery of a Plot by some French,
to carry the rest over to King James, one Du Plessy and five more being hanged,
as also Two hundred others sent for England, the Enemy seeing that opportunity
lost, they returned with the main Body of their Army to Ardee, where they
encamped till about the 4th. of November, and then they marching off, we
thought it high time to do so likewise, after being encamped almost Ten weeks
in a very unwholesome place, and pestered with all the disadvantages of bad
weather, by reason of which we lost in the Camp, in our going to Quarters, and
in them and the Hospitals, at least one half of our men, the Army consisting
then of Nine Regiments and Two Troops of Horse, Four Regiments of Dragoons, and
Thirty Regiments of Foot, whereof Two Regiments of Horse, One of Dragoons, and
Six of Foot, did not come to the Camp, but were quartered in the Country.

About this time a Body of the Irish under Sarsfield Sligo taken by the Irish.
retook Sligo and James-town, the Duke not being in a condition to send a
sufficient number of men to their Relief. Upon the 8th. and 10th. of November
our Army decamped, and were dispersed afterward over the North in Quarters;
and not long after, (viz.) November 24. early in the morning, Major General
Boiseleau with about Seventeen hundred men, endeavored A Party of the Irish
repulsed at Newry.
to surprise Newry, and a good part of them were actually in the Town, but were
beat out again by about Sixty of Sir Henry Inglesby's Regiment (all that were
then well of 'em), with some few Townsmen that had rebuilt their Houses; the
Irish making military map The English Camp near Dundalk

so great haste away, that not many of their number were slain, six Soldiers
and a Lieutenant-Collonel being only left upon the spot; we had also two
Captains and six men killed, and some few wounded: And so ended that great
Contrivance, in endeavoring to surprise first that, and afterward all our
Frontier Garrisons; which as the case then stood with us, had been no difficult
task to perform.

Toward the latter end of November, the General ordered a Meeting of all the
Country Gentlemen then in the North of Ireland, to be at Lisburne, where his
Grace's Head Quarters were fixed, at what time they presented the Duke with an
Address, and then agreed upon Rates for all sorts of Provision; which by
Proclamation from the General were commanded to be sold accordingly.

December the 12th. Colonel Woolsly marched with a Party toward Belturbet,
which was surrendered to him by the Irish; and on the 13th. the Duke went to
view Charlemont, a strong-hold which the Irish then had, and kept for some time
afterward.

Toward the latter end of December, the Irish began to lessen the Coin of
their Brass-Money, calling in the large Half-Crowns, and stamping them a new
for Crowns; and near the same time Major General Major General Mackarty makes
his escape.
Mackarty made his escape from Inniskilling, where he had remained a Prisoner
ever since the Rout at Croom Castle. Colonel Hambleton, Governor of the Town,
was Tried by a Court-Marshal for it afterward, but producing Major General
Kirk's Letter to him, wherein he desired that some further Conveniences might
be allowed Mackarty than formerly; upon which it being done (with the Duke's
consent, who took Mackarty for a man of Honor) the Governor was acquitted.

January, our Regiments being all very thin, and it appearing a little
difficult to recruit them in England, most people being then out of humor for
the loss of their Relations and Acquaintance, nor altogether that number of
Volunteers appearing then as formerly, therefore several Regiments were broke
one into another, and the supernumerary Officers continued at half-pay till
Provision could be made for them in other Regiments; Sir Tho. Gower being dead,
my Lord Drogheda's Regiment was broke into his, and his Lordship made Colonel
of it; my Lord Roscommon's Regiment was broke also into Colonel Earl's; and
Colonel Zanchy's (formerly my Lord Lovelace's) Sir Henry Inglesby's and
Colonel Hambleton's of Inniskilling, were broke into other Regiments; and
about the 12th. 16th. and 20th. most of the Officers designed for that Service,
went from Lisburne toward England, for Recruits to the Army.

January the 18th. A Proclamation was published, strictly forbidding Cursing,
Swearing, and Profaneness in Officers or Soldiers, under the Penalties
enjoined in the Articles of War, and his Grace's utmost Displeasure; but
neither this, nor yet the Judgments of God then hanging upon us for those and a
great many other sins, had that effect that the General and other good men
heartily wished for; and no doubt of it, the Debaucheries in Armies are the
highway to Ruin, since those both obey and fight best, that are the most sober.

The 22 d. Brigadier Stuart went with a Party of Five hundred Horse and Foot
toward Dundalk, destroying several Cabins amongst the Mountains, where the
Irish used to shelter themselves; and his Party brought in a considerable Prey
at their return.

The 25th. the General went from Lisburne, in order to visit our Frontier
Garrisons, and appointed stores of Bread, Cheese, Shoes, and other Necessaries
at several places, especially at Armagh, the Metropolis of the whole Island.

On the 11th of February, a part of our Army being The Irish Army in motion.
drawn together to attend the Enemy's Motion, who we understood were then in a
Body toward Dundalk; The General himself went to Drummore, and so to
Loughbritland, in order to give the Enemy Battle, if they advanced; our Men and
Horses having recovered by this time from their late Diseases to a Miracle. Sir
John Laneir, and Brigadier La Mellionere, advanced with a Party toward
Carlingford, but returned with an Account, that there were only three Regiments
at Dundalk, as formerly; but the Design of the Irish lay another way. For
whilst the Duke was abroad on that side, Colonel Woolsley had notice that the
Enemy were resolved to fall upon Belturbet, where he then commanded; to which
purpose they had already crowded a Garrison of theirs called Cavan, eight miles
from Belturbet, at what place they expected a greater Force in a day or two;
but Colonel Woolsley, to be beforehand with their visit, marched from
Belturbet on the 12th, about Four in the Afternoon, with Seven hundred Foot,
and Three hundred Horse and Dragoons, hoping to surprise the Enemy next Morning
early; but he met with so many Difficulties in his march, that instead of being
at the Place before day, as he designed, it was fair daylight before he came
near it; the Enemy had also taken the Alarm, and were so far from being
surprised, that instead of the usual Garrison (which we only as yet expected
there) the first thing that our men saw, was a Body of the Enemy's drawn up in
good order, and judged to be about Four thousand. It was rather therefore a
surprise upon us, than them; however, we fought and routed The Battle of Cavan.
them, killed Brigadier Nugent, with several other Officers, and about Three
hundred Soldiers, taking Twelve Officers, and Sixty private Men, Prisoners;
burnt the Town, and returned with a good Booty; having lost Major Trahern,
Captain Armstrong, and Captain Mayo, with about Thirty private Men, and double
the number wounded.

And to let the Enemy see that we were ready Sir John Lanier goes to Dundalk
with a Party.
for them on all sides, Sir John Lanier marched again on the 15th toward
Dundalk with a Party of One thousand Horse, Foot and Dragoons; he came before
the Place early next Morning, which the Enemy had fortified very regularly. And
placing some of his men near the Works on the North-east Side toward the
Bridge, he sent a Party of Colonel Leveson's Dragoons cross the River, who
took Bedloe's Castle, an Ensign and Thirty men surrendering themselves
Prisoners; In the mean time another Party marched in at the South-west End of
the Town, and burnt most of what was left without the Works; in which Service
we lost a Lieutenant, and two or three Dragoons; our Men returning with a Prey
of Fifteen hundred Cows and Horses.

The beginning of March, landed the Duke of Wertenberg The Danes land in
Ireland.
with Six Thousand Danes, being proper men, very well Clothed and Armed. On
the 12th, Colonel Callimot, with a Party, endeavored to burn the Wooden Bridge
at Charlemont, which he set fire to, and killed about Twenty of the Enemy; lost
his own Major, with about Six men, and so returned.

March the 14th, Five thousand French Foot under 5000 French land in Ireland.
Count Lauzune, and the Marquess de Lery, landed at Kinsale, in order to join
the Late King's Army; for whom, in exchange, Major General Macharty, and near
the same number of Irish, were sent into France, our English Fleet, then
attending the Queen of Spain, made this Undertaking more easy to the French.

April the 6th, Colonel Woolsley, with a Party of Seven hundred men, attacked
the Castle of Killyshandra, seven miles from Belturbet, where the Enemy had a
Garrison of One hundred and sixty men, commanded by one Captain Darcy; after
some Mines were fixed, and a brisk Assault or two made upon their Works (in
which we lost Eight men) the Besieged surrendered, and we left a Garrison of One
hundred men in the Place. Nigh which time a great many Recruits, as also
Colonel Cutt's, Colonel Babington's, with a Danish Regiment of Horse, landed
at White-House.

April the 18th, Sir Clousley Shovell went into the Bay Sir Clousley Shovell
takes a Frigate out of the Bay of Dublin.
of Dublin, and brought from a Place called the Salmon Pool, a Frigate of
Sixteen Guns, and Four Pattereroes, laden with Hides, Tallow, some Plate, and
other Rich Movables, designed for France; the Late King, and several of his
Irish Regiments, marching as far as Rings-End, where they were all Witnesses of
so wicked an Action (as they called it) done on so good a Day, it being
Good Friday.

May the 2 d, Lieutenant-Collonel Mackmehon, with Relief put into Charlemont.
about Four hundred men, Ammunition, and some small quantities of Provisions,
got into Charlemont in the Night, but our French and other Regiments posted
thereabouts, watched him so narrowly, that though he made two or three
Attempts, yet he could not get out again. And the second Week in May, several
English, a Brandenburg, and Three Dutch Regiments landed. By which time also
all our Recruits were completed, and the Regiments Clothed; so that we had
now an Excellent Army, all over-joyed with the Assurance that His Majesty in
person designed to make that Campaign in Ireland. A part of our Army also begin
to take the Field, and Encamp almost round Charlemont; Cannon and Mortars were
sent up that way too, in order to force old Teague O Regan, the Governor, from
his Nest, if he would not quit it otherways; but their Provisions being spent,
and no hopes of Relief appearing, on the 12th of May the Governor desired a
Parley, and after some time it was agreed, That his Garrison should march out
with their Arms and Baggage, which they did Charlemont surrendered.
on the 14th, being about Eight hundred (besides two hundred Women and
Children) four Companies of Colonel Babington's Regiment taking possession of
the Place. We found Seventeen Pieces of Cannon, one large Mortar, Eighty three
Barrels of Powder, with some Fire Arms, and other useful Materials in the
Castle.

The same day that Charlemont was surrendered, Colonel Woolsley, and Colonel
Foulks, with Twelve hundred men, went to a Castle called Bellynacargy, in which
the Enemy had Two hundred men; this was situate in a small Lough, so that our
men were forced to march up to their middles in water to make their Approaches;
the Enemy fired smartly upon us, killed us Two Captains, an Ensign, and
Seventeen men, and wounded Forty three; but when they saw us resolved to have
the Place, they hung out their White Flag, and agreed to march away without
their Arms.

About the middle of May, one Captain King, Mr. Wingfield a Councellor at Law,
and Mr. Trench a Clergy man, with five or six more, came from Dublin military
map A Ground Plot of ye STRONG FORT of CHARLEMONT in IRELAND.

With the Town River Marshes Boggs and places adjacent etct

in an open Boat, and gave the Duke a more exact Account how Matters went in
the Irish Quarters, than any he had received formerly, which were of use to His
Majesty afterward. The 6th of June Count Sconberg (now Duke of Leinster) came
from England, and with him the Train, with some Arms and Ammunition, as also
Two hundred Carpenters, with other Artificers for the service of the Army.

CHAP. II.
His Majesty lands in Ireland. Our Army takes the Field. The King marches
toward the Boyn. His Majesty's narrow Escape the day before the Battle. The
Battle of the Boyn. The number of the Dead. The Late King quits Ireland. Our
Army marches to Dublin. His Majesty's Declaration to the Irish. A List of our
General Officers; and of those belonging to the Irish Army. The number of men
in both Armies. Our Army divides. Lieutenant General Douglass marches with a
Party toward Athlone. A Commission granted by the King to secure forfeited
Goods. Wexford secured. Clonmell quitted. Waterford, and Dungannon-Fort
surrendered to His Majesty. The King intends for England, and sends some Forces
thither. But returns to the Camp. Limerick Besieged. Some of our Guns
surprised. A Fort taken. An Attack upon the Town. Our men draw off. His Majesty
raises the Siege, and returns to England.

ALL People were now big with hopes of His Majesty's coming for Ireland, who
left Kensington the Fourth of June 1690. took Shipping at Hylake His Majesty
Lands in Ireland.
on the 12th; and on the 14th, being Saturday, he landed about Four in the
Afternoon at Carigfergus; from whence, being upon the Road to Belfast, he was
met by the General, Major General Kirk, and a great many more Officers of the
Army that were there, expecting His Majesty's Landing: And that Evening landed
his Highness Prince George, the Duke of Ormond, Earl of Oxford, Earl of
Portland, Earl of Scarborough, Earl of Manchester, my Lord Overkirk, my Lord
Sidney, with a great many other Persons of Quality, some of them Officers in
the Army, and others Volunteers. The two following days His Majesty was
attended by most of the Nobily, Clergy, and other Gentlemen inhabiting that
part of the Kingdom. He was presented also with an Address from the Episcopal
Clergy, and another from several Presbyterian Ministers, both which His Majesty
received very graciously.

The King stayed at Belfast till Thursday the 19th; and having set out a
Proclamation to encourage all People, of what Persuasion soever, to live
peaceably at home, His Majesty went to Hilsburrough, giving Ordes for his Army
to take the Field. And on the All our Army takes the Field.
22th His Majesty Encampt at Loughbritland with that part of the Army which had
their Rendezvous there, and never laid out of the Camp (except upon his Journey
from Caruck to Dublin), after that, during his stay in Ireland. That Morning a
Party of Two hundred Foot and Dragoons going from Newry toward Dundalk to
discover the Enemy (who ere this had taken the Field, and then lay encamped
there) our men fell into an Ambuscade of about Four hundred of the Irish, at a
narrow Pass upon a Bog, nigh a place called the Four-mile House, by which we
lost Twenty two of our Party, and Captain Farlow, with another Officer, were
taken Prisoners, but the Enemy did not gain much by this Attempt, for they lost
more in number than we did. Captain Farlow was the first who gave the Late King
a certain Account of King William's being in Ireland, for till then he would
not believe it.

June the 27th, our whole Army joined at Dundalk, making in all about Thirty
six thousand, though the World called us at least a third part more: The Irish,
at our approach hither, had removed to the Boyn; And on Sunday the 29th, our
Army marched beyond Ardee, which the Enemy had fortified much after the same
manner as they had done Dundalk; and early next morning our whole Army moved
toward the The Army marches to the Boyn.
Boyne, making their Approaches very finely. After some time His Majesty sent
down small Parties of Horse to discover the Ways, and then rid toward the Pass
at Old Bridge, having a full view of the Enemy's Camp as he went along; His
Majesty stopped some time at Old Bridge to observe the Enemy's Posture, and then
going a little further, His Majesty alighted to refresh himself, and sat nigh
an hour upon the Grass; during which time the Enemy brought down two
Fieldpieces under Covert of a small Party of Horse, and planted them at the
Corner of a Hedge undiscovered; and when His Majesty, the Prince, and the rest
were mounted again, and riding softly the same way back, their Cannonier let
fly, and at the second Shot was so near the killing His Majesty, His Majesty's
narrow Escape from a Great Shot.
as that the Bullet slanted upon his Right Shoulder, took away a piece of his
Coat, and struck off the Skin; which might have been a fatal Blow to his Army,
and Kingdoms too, if the Great Creator of the World, who orders and governs all
things, had not been at his Right Hand, where he always is, and, I hope, will
be, as well for the defense of His Majesty's Sacred Person, as the good of
those he has undertaken to protect.

The Enemy then fired those two Pieces as fast as they could charge and
discharge, doing some damage amongst our Horse that were drawing up before
them, which made the King give Orders for his Horse to rein a little backwards,
and have the advantage of a Rising Ground between them and the Cannon.

About Three a Clock in the Afternoon some of our Fieldpieces came up, which
were immediately planted, and then played into the Enemy's Camp: the rest of
the day was spent in our Army's Encamping, and in firing Great Guns one upon
another from several Batteries, without any extraordinary loss

Whether His Majesty had already an Account of what had happened to the
Confederate Army at Flerus, I am not able to give an Account; but it is probable
he had some intimation of it; since in a Council of War held that night, His
Majesty seemed positive in passing the River next day, and therefore gave
Orders for his Army to be ready accordingly.

The late King had likewise another Council of War on his side the River,
wherein all the French and Irish Officers agreed, (which was the only time they
ever did so before or after), Not to give us Battle, but to march off in the
night, and then retreat toward Athlone and Limerick filling all their Towns
that were tenable, as they went, with sufficient Garrisons to defend them. And
their reason was this; as soon as Sir Cloudsley Shovel with his Squadron of Men
of War had seen the King safe in Ireland, he was ordered to sail immediately,
and join my Lord Torrington, then at Sea with the English Fleet; which the
French having notice of, and that all our Transport Ships with our Provisions
and other Necessaries for War, were left at Carigfergus-Bay with little or no
Convoy, and would have Orders to coast along as the Army marched, they resolved
to send Ten small Frigates and Twelve Privateers into the Channel, and burn all
our Ships; which if it had been done then, our Communication from England had
been in a manner cut off, and our Army forced to subsist upon the Country, or
starve; at least we had been debarred those Necessaries, without which the War
could not have been carried on: This Design of the French was not unknown to
the King, and therefore he was the more earnest in going forward: It was
advised therefore in the Irish Camp, That seeing we had a better Army by much
in the Field than theirs (and might probably beat them if they engaged), to
march away, and so protract the time till they saw what became of the Design
about burning our Ships, which they were confident would take effect. But the
late King himself was very much bent upon fighting, alleging, That if he
retreated with his Army, and left Dublin and other places to the Enemy, the
Irish, who are soon disheartened, and only judge according to appearance, would
all desert him by degrees; and then himself and those that stood by him, would
be delivered up to the Mercy of the Enemy: So that seeing him in this humor,
they were in hopes that a vigorous fit of Valor had seized him, and that he
would next day play the Hero, in either Conquering Valiantly, or Dying
Gloriously; and then having ordered the disposing of their Army, they concluded
to stay and watch our motion.

Tuesday the first of July, early in the morning, his Majesty The Battle at the
Boyn.
sent Lieut. Genesis Douglass, my Lord Portland, my Lord Overkirk, and Count
Schonbergh, with above Ten thousand Horse and Foot up the River, to pass
toward the Bridge of Slane; which the Enemy perceiving, they drew out several
Bodies of Horse and Foot toward their Left, in order to oppose us: our men
however, marched over without any difficulty, being only charged by Sir Neal O
Neal's Regiment of Dragoons, who were partly broke, and himself killed. As Soon
as Lieutenant General Douglas and his Party were got over, he sent an Express
to his Majesty to give him an Account of it; who then ordered the Dutch Guards,
two French Regiments, two Inniskilling Regiments, Sir John Hanmers, and several
others that lay most military map The Battle at ye Boyne

convenient for that Ground, to pass the River, and Attack the Irish on the
other side, which they did with a great deal of Bravery and Resolution, first
beating the Irish from their Hedges and Breast-works at Old Bridge, and then
routing the Duke of Berwick's Troop of Guards, my Lord Tyrconnel's, and
Colonel Parker's Horse, who all behaved themselves like men of English
Extraction, as indeed most of them were; during which time his Majesty passed
the River below with the Left Wing of his Horse, and charged the Enemy several
times at the Head of his own Troops, nigh a little Village called Dunore, where
they rallied again, and gave us two or three brisk Attacks; but in less than
half an hour were broke, and forced to make the best of their way toward
Duleek, where there was a considerable Pass, and whither the other part of the
Irish Army that faced Lieutenant General Douglass, had made what haste they
could, when they heard how it had gone with their Friends at Old-Bridge; our
Army then pressed hard upon them, but meeting with a great many difficutlies in
the Ground, and being obliged to pursue in Order, our Horse had only the
opportunity of cutting down some of their Foot, and most of the rest got over
the Pass at Duleek; then night coming on, prevented us from making so en-entire
a Victory of it as could have been wished for.

On the Irish side were killed my Lord Dungan, my The number of the Dead.
Lord Carlingford, Sir Neal O Neal, with a great number of other Officers, and
about Thirteen or Fourteen hundred Soldiers; and we lost on our side nigh Four
hundred; but the loss of Duke Schonberg, who was killed soon after the first of
our Forces passed the River, near the little Village called Old-Bridge, was
much more considerable than all that fell that day on both sides; whom his very
Enemies always called a Brave Man, and a Great General; whose Name will make a
considerable Figure in History, whilst there are such places as Germany,
Flanders, France, England, and Ireland. Monsieur Callimot, a brave and worthy
Gentleman, died soon after him, of his Wounds, having followed that great man
in most of his Fortunes; whose elder Brother the Marquess Ruvigny had Duke
Schonberg's Regiment of French Horse bestowed upon him by the King. For the
further Particulars of this Battle, and what happened during the preceding
Campaign, and also the most material Circumstances of this, I refer the Reader
to the First Part of this History, already printed.

Some will pretend to say, That his Majesty was a little too soon in the
passing his Foot over the River, for the Left Wing of the Irish Army seemed
resolved to fight Douglass; but when they heard how things went at Old-Bridge,
they retreated immediately toward Duleek, and so marched off untouched: But
there was a very good reason for what his Majesty did in this case, for it was
about a quarter past Ten when our Foot first entered the River; and if the King
had deferred it an hour longer, then the Tide, which generally comes up above
Old-Bridge, would certainly have prevented our men from passing either there or
below; so that the Right Wing of our Army had been exposed to the hazard of
fighting all theirs, and the rest not able to come to their relief, till
possibly it had been too late; and this may serve to answer whatever can be
objected in that case.

The late King at the beginning of this Battle stood by an old Church near the
Village called Dunore; but as soon as he saw his men give way, he made haste to
Duleek, and from thence to Dublin, whither he got that Evening by Nine a Clock,
and early next morning sent for the Popish Lord Mayor, with some other Officers
of the City, and gave them a charge not to burn it; and then going toward
Bray, scarce looked behind him afterward till he got to Waterford, and so on
Shipboard for France, leaving his poor Teagues to fight it out, or do what
they pleased for him: And what was more remarkable, finding some of the Frigates
at Waterford that were to go upon the Project of Burning our Ships, he told
them all was lost, and that it was past time, and so took them along with him;
which prevented any further Attempts upon our Ships. Whilst his present Majesty
King William gave his Army other kind of Proofs both of his Courage and
Conduct, having a Soul far above Fear, or any thing that may look mean in so
Great a Prince: Nor ever had an Army a more entire Affection for their chief
Commander, than his Majesty's for him; his Resolution being always undaunted,
and their only Fear being for his Majesty's Person. And whatever difference
happens hereafter between his Majesty and his Army, can only be this, That they
desire to stand between his Person and all Danger, but he always has a mind to
put himself between them and it. May we long therefore have such a General in a
King; and he not only Soldiers but Subjects too of all other Professions, that
honor him to that degree.

Those of our English Forces that were engaged, and had opportunity to show
themselves, gave signal demonstrations of their Courage and Bravery; the
Inniskilliners, and French too, both Horse and Foot, did good service; and the
Dutch Guards deserve no small Honor for their Conduct that day.

After the Battle, our Army lay upon their Arms all night at Duleek, having
left our Tents all standing beyond the Boyne: And next morning his Majesty sent
Brigadier La Mellionere, with One thousand Horse and Dragoons, a Party of Foot,
and Eight Pieces of Cannon, to summons Drogheda, wherein the Irish had a
Garrison of about 1300 men, commanded by my Lord Iveagh, who surrendered the
Town, upon Condition, That his Garrison should have leave to march out without
their Arms, and be conducted to Athlone: Tho their Barbarity in tying the
Protestants in Town back to back, and placing them where they expected our Guns
to play, ought not to be forgot. This is a Town of no great strength, only a
Mount whereon are planted Ten Guns on the South Side the River, seems capable
of Defense.

Thursday the 3 d. of July, his Majesty had an Account, That the Irish had left
Dublin, and were making what haste they could toward the Shannon; upon which
the Duke of Ormond marched to that City, with One thousand Horse, and found
Captain Farlow Governor of the Castle, who two days before had been a Prisoner;
his Grace took possession of all the Out-Guards of the Town with his Horse, and
the Dutch Blue Guards were sent to the Castle. The 5th. His Majesty with his
Army marches to Dublin.
our Army marched to Finglass, a little Village two miles to the North-west of
Dublin, where we lay encamped for several days. The 6th. being Sunday, his
Majesty went to St. Patrick's Church in Dublin; and next day toward the
evening, the Bishop of Mead, the Bishop of Limerick, Dr. King, and all the
Clergy then about Dublin (except the Lord Primate, who sent his Excuse to his
Majesty, by reason of his great Age and Infirmness) waited upon the King at his
Camp, where the Bishop of Mead made an excellent Congratulatory Speech, for
his Majesty's happy Victory, and their Deliverance: Whereunto his Majesty gave
a Gracious Answer. And the Bishop of Lim^rick desired they might appoint a Day
of Public Thanksgiving, and have leave to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to
the occasion; which was granted.

The same day his Majesty signed a Declaration, His Majesty's Declaration to
the Irish.
wherein he promised Protection to all poor Laborers, common Soldiers,
Countrey-Farmers, Plow-men and Coltiers; as also to all Citizens, Tradesmen,
Townsmen, and Artificers, who either remained at home, or having fled from
their Dwellings, should return by the first of August following, etc. leaving
all others to the Event of War, unless by great and manifest demonstrations
they would convince his Majesty that they deserved his Mercy, which he promised
never to refus^ to those who were truly penitent.

A great many of the Irish Officers complained, The Irish Objections against
the Declaration.
That this Declaration was too narrow in excluding them from any Advantage by
it; and that they were obliged afterward to stick together, as being their
only safety; but this Declaration was narrower than his Majesty's Royal
Intentions, on purpose to comply with the English Proprietors of that Country:
And as to the Irish Officers, this was only a pretense; for when it was
enlarged afterward by his Majesty, and the Government the year succeeding made
them all the reasonable Proffers that could be hoped or wished for, yet most of
them continued obstinate till they could not help it. But tho his Majesty was
very careful to have this and his other Declaration that succeeded it,
observed, yet some Officers and Soldiers were apt to forget the King's Honor,
with that of our Country and Religion too, when they stood in competion with
their own Profit and Advantage.

That day and the next his Majesty took a view of his Army by distinct
Regiments; nor did the inconveniency of the bad Weather which fell out at Our
Army mustered.
that time, prevent him from observing each Regiment very nicely; the whole
number of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons that marched in the Ranks, was 30330,
besides 483 Reformed Officers, as also all the Officers and Sergeants in the
Army, and Four Regiments in Garrison; so that the complete Number of our whole
Army was at least 36000, as is said before. Nor will it be improper to g^ve
here a List of our General Officers, who commanded this Campaign under his
Majesty, and were employed in his Service; but we must take it from the
beginning, since his Grace Duke Schonberg was killed ere this.

A LIST of the General Officers of Their Majesty's Army, 1690.
FRederick Duke of Schonberg, Captain General. A List of their Majesty's Army,
1690.
The Duke of Wirtenbergh, General of the Danes. Count Solmes, General of the
Foot. Count Schonberg, General of the Horse. Lieutenant General Douglass. Lord
Overkirk, Maistres Generals des Camp. Earl of Portland, Maistres Generals des
Camp. Henry Lord Viscount Sidney, Major-Generals of Foot. Count Nassau,
Major-Generals of Foot. Major General Kirk, Major-Generals of Foot.
Major General Tetteau, Major-Generals of Foot. Monsieur Screvenmore,
Major-Generals of Horse. Maj. Genesis La Forest, Major-Generals of Horse. Sir
John Lanier, Major-Generals of Horse. Monsieur Du Cambon,
Quarter-master-General. Brigadier Trelawney, Brigadiers of Foot. Sir Henry
Bellasis, Brigadiers of Foot. Sir John Hanmer, Brigadiers of Foot. Brigadier
Stuart, Brigadiers of Foot. Brigad. La Mellionere, Brigadiers of Foot. Brigad.
Villars, Brigadiers of Horse. Brigad. Eppinger, Brigadiers of Horse. Brigad.
Schack, Brigadiers of Horse. Sir Robert Southwell, Secretary of State. Thomas
Coningesby, Esquire (now Lord Coningesby) and Charles Fox, Esquire,
Pay-masters-General. Sir John Topham, Advocate-General. Henry Wythers,
Adjutant-General of Foot. Francis Russel, Adjutant-General of Horse. George
Clark, Esquire, Secretary at War. Monsieur Perara, Commissary-General of the
Provisions. Abraham Yarner, Esquire, Muster-master-General. Dr. Lawrence,
Physician-General. Charles Thompson, Esquire, Chyrurgion-General.
A CATALOGUE of the General Officers A List of the Irish General Officers.
and others in King Jams's Army; taken out of the Muster-Rolls: June the 2 d,
1690.
DUKE of Tyrconnel, Captain General. Duke of Berwick, Lieutenant-Generals.
Richard Hambleton, Lieutenant-Generals. Count Lauzune General of the French.
Monsieur Leary, alias Geraldine, Lieutenant General. Dominick Sheldon,
Lieutenant General of the Horse. Patrick Sarsfield, Major-Generals. Anthony
Hambleton, Major-Generals. Monsieur Boiseleau, Major-Generals. Thomas Maxwell,
Brigadeers. John Hambleton, Brigadeers. William Dorrington, Brigadeers. Solomon
Slater, Muster-master-General. Robert Fitzgerald, Comptroler of the Musters.
Sir Richard Neagle, Secretary at War. Sir Henry Bond, Receivers General. Louis
Do, Receivers General. Sir Michael Creagh, Play Master General. Foelix Oneil,
Advocate General. Dr. Archbold, Physician to the State. Patrick Archbold,
Chyrurgeon General.
The Irish had at that time in their Army Two Troops of Horse-Guards, with
another of Horse-Granadiers; Eight Regiments of Horse, Seven Regiments of
Dragoons; a Regiment of Foot Guards of Twenty two Companies, and Ninety men in
a Company; Forty four other Regiments of Foot, Thirteen Companies in a
Regiment, and Sixty men in a Company, which with the Five thousand French Foot,
made their Army, according to their own Computation of the Regiments, and the
numbers in each, to be 39320 Foot, 3471 Horse, and 2480 Dragoons, which in all
make an Army of 50271. besides their Rapparees in all the Corners of the
Country; but these were all that they had to man the whole Garrisons of
Ireland; so that they were not above 27000 at the Boyn, besides the French.

But to return. About the 8th or 9th of July it was known abroad, That His
Majesty had an Account of the Misfortune of the English and Dutch Fleets, at
which time he divided his Army, and marched himself toward Kilkenny with the
greatest part of it. For though His Majesty was sensible, that going with his
whole Army toward Athlone, and so into Connaght, was the readiest way to
reduce the Irish; yet having some Reasons to apprehend that the French, after
the Battle of Flerus, might send off Detachments from their Army, and so
disturb England; or at least send part of their Fleet, and burn his
Transport-Ships, he made have to secure Waterford Haven for them, since the Bay
of Dublin is no Place of safety. Sending at the same time Lieutenant General
Douglas with three Regiments of Horse, two of Dragoons, and ten of Foot,
toward Athlone, Ffty miles to the Northwest from Dublin; before which Place he
came on the 17th with the aforesaid Party, Twelve Fieldpieces, and two small
Mortars: The Irish burnt and deferted that part of Athlone on Leinster side,
the Bridge called the English Town: But seeing our Party, and our Train not
suitable to such an Undertaking, and having three Regiments of Foot, nine
Troops of Dragoons, and two of Horse, in, and about the Town, with a fresh
supply of Forces not far off; they positively refused to deliver up the Place,
which Lieutenant General Douglas seeing no hopes of forcing them to, on Friday
the 25th, early in the morning, he raised his Siege, and marched to join the
King's Army again, having not lost above Thirty men before the place, but near
Three hundred by Sickness, and other Accidents. Our rising from before that
Town did so puff up the Irish, that one Malady, the Late King's High Sheriff
for the County of Longford, got at least Three thousand of the Rabble, or such
like People together, near Mullingar, where they hectored and swaggered for
some days; but Colonel Woolsley with his own Horse, and two Regiments of Foot,
being sent back to secure that part of the Country, about Forty of his Horse,
being an Advance Guard, fell in with a Party of the Irish toward the Evening,
which giving the Alarm to the rest, they immediately began to disperse, and
every man to shift for himself; and Night coming on, our Party had only the
opportunity of killing about Thirty of them, High Sheriff Malady himself being
wounded, and never since able to raise such another posse Commitatus.

But to return to His Majesty's Camp, which on the 9th, he pitched at a place
called Cromlin, two miles to the West of Dublin, where the King settled the
method A Commission about Forfeited Goods.
of granting Protections according to his Declaration. And then gave a
Commission to Francis, Earl of Longford; Anthony Lord Bishop of Mead; Robert
Fitzgerald, Esquire, Sir Henry Fane, Doctor Gorge, William Robinson, Esquire, Joseph
Coghlin, Esquire Edward Corker, Esquire, and Henry Davis, Esquire, or any five of them, to
enquire into, seize, and secure all Forfeitures to the Crown by the General
Rebellion of the Irish Nation: This Commission empowered them to appoint
Deputies to summon and swear Witnesses, to call the Justices of the Peace, and
Deputy Lieutenants to their Assistance, to let Leases for a year, and in
doubtful Cases, to consult the Judges learned in the Law; and this Power of
theirs to continue until a more legal method could be put in practice when the
Courts of Judicature were open. The Bishop of Mead, whether his Lordship was
sensible of the Defect of the Commission at first, or else did not like the
Proceedings of some of the rest, he soon forbore his attendance at their
Meetings; but several of the rest proceeded in their Business, and took
possession of Goods of all sorts, as well in the Hands of Roman Catholics, and
on their Grounds, as in the hands of Protestants, where they had been left by
their Catholic Neighbors; upon which account those Gentlemen had the
misfortune to be much censured afterward, as well by some in the Country,
where they made Seisures, as by the Commissioners of Their Majesty's Revenue,
who complained of the small Returns made into the Exchequer. This occasioned
several of the abovenamed Gentlemen, who had been employed to make a
representation of their Case afterward to the Lords Justices, which I have
seen, and it was to this effect: That amongst a great many Discouragements in
so troublesome an Employment, their Commission it self was so defective, that
it seemed a perfect Snare to them (contrary to the intent or Interest of His
Majesty) in that it gave them power to seize upon all Forfeitures, but not to
dispose of any (except of Lands by lease for a year) by which means, the Goods
seized by the Commissioners, and their Deputies, were often either stole, or
forced away, sometimes by the Army, and at other times by the Rapparees, after
they had been at great charge about them. And a great many other things they
have to say for themselves, by which it appears, that those Aspersions cast
upon some of them were groundless though others of them, or wherever the
fault else laid; some, I say, there were who did Their Majesty's Affairs no
great Advantage, nor themselves much Credit by their management. But this being
a matter of public Concern, is none of my business to look into.

His Majesty then marched forwards, and from a Wexford secured.
Place called Castledermot, sent Brigadier Eppinger with a Party of One
thousand Horse and Dragoons to secure Wexford, which before his Arrival was
deserted by the Irish Garrison. The King all along upon his march was acquainted
with the Disorders and Confusion of the Irish Army, and of their speedy marches
to Limerick, and other Strong Holds. The 19th His Majesty dined at Kilkenny, a
Walled Town, wherein stands a Castle belonging to the Duke of Ormond, which had
been preserved by Count Lauzun, with all the Goods and Furniture. And next day
His Majesty Clonmel quitted by the ^ish.
understood that the Enemy had quitted Clonmell, whither Count Sconberg marched
with a Body of Horse.

Monday the 21st, The Army marched to Carrick, where the King received an
Account of the state of Waterford, and whither Major General Kirk went
Waterford and Duncannon Fort surrendered.
next morning with a Party to summon the Town, wherein were two Regiments of
the Irish, who submitted upon condition to march out with their Arms; As did
also the strong Fort of Duncannon in a day or two after, which gave His Majesty
sufficient shelter for all his Shipping. When Waterford was surrendered, His
Majesty in Person went to view it; where he admitted my Lord Dover to a more
particular Protection than ordinary, because he had applied himself formerly by
a Letter to Major General Kirk to desire a Pass for himself, and Family, to go
into Flanders.

His Majesty, at his return to the Camp, declared The King intends for England.
his Resolution to go for England, and leaving Count Solmes Commander in Chief;
he went as far as Chappel-Izard, nigh Dublin, with that Intention; ordering one
Troop of Guards, Count Sconberg's Horse (formerly my Lord Devonshires) Colonel
Matthews's Dragoons, Brigadier Trelawny's, and Colonel Hastings's And sends
some Forces thither.
Foot, to be shipped off for that Kingdom. And on the first of August His Majesty
published a Second Declaration, not only confirming and strengthening the
former; but also adding, That if any Foreigners then in Arms against him in
that Kingdom would submit, they should have Passes to go into their own
Countries, or whither else they pleased.

A Proclamation was also published for all the Irish in the Country to deliver
up their Arms; and those who refused, or neglected, to be abandoned to the
Discretion of the Soldiers. As also another Proclamation for a Weekly F^st. And
then His Majesty appointed Richard Pine, Esquire Sir Richard Reves, and Robert
Rochfort, Esquire Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, who began now to act
accordingly.

But the King received a further Account from England, But returns to the Camp.
That the loss at Sea was not so considerable as it was at first given out; and
that there was no danger of any more French Forces landing in that Kingdom;
they having already burnt only a small Village, and so were gone off without
doing any further damage. The danger of that being therefore over, His Majesty
returned to the Army, which he found encamped at Golden Bridge, nigh Cashell,
and about seventeen miles from Limrick, where His Majesty had intelligence of
the Posture of the Enemy in, and about that City.

August the 8th, Lieutenant General Douglas, and his Limerick Besieged.
Party from Athlone, joined the King's Army at Cariganlis. And on the 9th, the
whole Army approached that strong Hold of Limerick without any considerable
loss, the greatest part of their Army being Encampt beyond the River, in the
County of Clare. His Majesty, as soon as his Army was posted, sent a Summons to
the Town, which was refused to be obeyed by Monsieur Boiseleau, the Duke of
Berwick, Sarsfield, and some more, though a great part of their Army were even
then willing to Capitulate. Next Morning early the King sent a Party of Horse
and Foot under Major General Ginckell, and Major General Kirk, to pass the
River, which they did near Sir Samuel Foxon's House, about two miles above the
Town.

The same day, some Deserters from the Enemy gave his Majesty an account of
their Circumstances; and one of our own Gunners did as much for us, who
informed the Enemy of our Posture in the Camp, as also of Eight Pieces of
Cannon, with Ammunition, Provisions, the Tin-Boats, and several other
Necessaries then upon the Road, which Sarsfield with a Party of Horse and
Dragoons had the luck to surprise two Some of our ^^ns surprised.
days after at a little old Castle called Ballynedy, within seven miles of our
Camp, killing about Sixty of the Soldiers and Waggoners, and then marched off
with little or no opposition, tho his Majesty had given Orders for a Party of
Horse to go from the Camp and meet the Guns the night before.

Tuesday the 12th. Brigadier Stuart went with a Party Castle Connel taken
and four Fieldpieces to Castle-Connel, a Strong-hold upon the Shannon, four
miles from Limerick, the besieged being 126, under one Captain Barnwell, after
some time submitted, and were brought Prisoners to the Camp.

Sunday the 17th. at night, we opened our Trenches, Our Trenches opened.
which were mounted by Seven Battalions under the Duke of Wirtenbergh,
Major General Kirk, Major General Tetteau, and Sir Henry Bellasts, beating the
Irish out of a Fort nigh two old Chimneys, where about Twenty were killed; and
next night our Works were relieved by Lieutenant General Douglas, my Lord
Sidney, Count Nassau, and Brigadier Stuart, with the like number; and the day
following, we planted some new Batteries; which his Majesty going to view, as
he was riding toward Ireton's Fort, he stopped his Horse on a sudden to speak to
an Officer, a Four and twenty pound Ball the very moment grazing on the side of
the Gap where his Majesty was going to enter, which certainly must have dashed
him to pieces, had not the commanding God of Heaven prevented it, who still
reserves him for greater matters. This I saw, being then upon the Fort, as I
did that other Accident at the Boyne before.

Wednesday the 20th. we attacked a Fort of the Enemies A Fort taken.
nigh the South East Corner of the Wall, which we soon took, and killed 50,
taking a Captain and twelve men Prisoners; and about an hour after, the Enemy
sallyed with great Bravery, thinking to regain the Fort, but were beat in with
loss, there being killed in the Fort and the Sally about Three hundred, though
we lost Captain Needham, Captain Lacy, and about Eighty private men.

We continued battering the Town, throwing in Bombs and Carcasses till
Wednesday the 27th. when a considerable Breach being made, Five hundred
Granadeers supported by Seven Regiments of Foot, and all our Works double
manned, were ordered to attack the Counterscarp, and lodge themselves as
conveniently as they could thereabouts. Between three and four An Attack made
upon the Town.
in the Afternoon, the Signal being given, our men attacked the Enemy very
briskly, beating them from their Works, and so over the Breach into the Town;
but several of them pursuing too far, and the rest not seconding them, as
having no Orders to go any further, the Irish also seeing themselves pursued by
so military map A PROSPECT of LIMERICK BEARING DUE WEST

Exactly showing ye Approaches Batteries and Breach etct

Sold by R. Chiswell in St. Paul's churchyard

small a number, they were persuaded to face about, and out-numbring our poor
men they killed a great many of them; fresh Regiments also coming from beyond
the River, and all together adventuring upon the Walls; our men below having
likewise no cover, after a Dispute of three hours and an half (in which time
there was nothing but one continued Fire of Great and Small-shot) our men were
obliged to return Our men draw off.
back to their own Trenches again, having lost 15 Officers, (besides the
Foreigners, and those of the Granadiers) about 50 wounded, 500 men killed, and
near One thousand wounded, whereof greatest part recovered; tho I Am apt to
think the Irish did not lose so many, since it is a much easier thing to defend
Walls, than by plain strength to force people from them.

Next day the Soldiers were in hopes that his Majesty would give orders for a
second Attack, and seemed resolved to have the Town, or lose all their lives;
but this was too great a risque to run at one place; and they did not know how
our Ammunition was sunk, especially by the former day's work; we continued
however our Batteries; and then a storm of Rain and other bad weather begun to
threaten us, which fell out on Friday the 29th. in good earnest; upon which his
Majesty calling a Council of War, it was concluded the safest way was to quit
the Siege, without which we could not have secured our heavy Cannon, which we
drew off from the Batteries by degrees, and found much difficulty in marching
them five miles next day. Sunday the last of August, all our His Majesty raised
the Siege.
Army drew off; most of the Protestants that lived in that part of the Country
taking that opportunity of removing further into the Country with the Army;
and would rather leave their Estates and all their Substance in the Enemies
hands, than trust their persons any more in their power.

His Majesty seeing the Campaign nigh an end, went toward Waterford, where he
appointed Henry Lord Viscount Sidney, Sir Charles Porter, and Tho. Conningsby,
Esquire Lords Justices of Ireland; and then setting And returns to England.
sail with a fair Wind for England, his Majesty was welcomed thither with all
the Joy and Satisfaction imaginable.

CHAP. III.
September, 1690.
The French Forces quit Ireland. Birr besieged by the Irish; who draw off
toward Banoher Bridge. Count Solms 's Answer to the Duke of Berwick 's Letter.
Lieutenant General Ginckel made Commander in Chief of the Army. Lords Justices
begin their Government. The Earl of Marlborough sent with a Fleet into Ireland.
Cork and Kinsale taken. The Irish make Attempts upon our Frontiers. Part of our
Army move toward the Shannon. Rapparees in the Bog of Allen: Those People
serviceable to the Irish Interest, and how. My Lord Tyrconnel returns from
France. Sarsfield made Earl of Lucan. The Irish defeated at the Mote of
Greenoge. Several Adventures with the Rapparees, and Parlies of the Irish Army.
Some of our Regiments take the Field at Mullingar.

ON the sixth of September our Army marched to Tipperary, about fourteen Miles
from Limerick, where they begun to disperse toward their respective Quarters.
And we had an Account by some Deserters, that my Lord Tyrconnel and all the
French Forces were Shipped off at The French leave Ireland.
Gallway for France. The reason of this was also enquired after by a great
many; that the French should absolutely quit Ireland, at a time when we had
raised our Siege, which might have given them hopes of re-gaining the next Year
what they lost this; at least, to defend the Province of Connaught against us,
and so protract the War beyond what they could have hoped for if the Town had
been taken; and that if the want of Provisions was an Objection, it was easier
to carry those to the Men than bring the Men to their Provisions. But the
reason that I have heard given for their departure was, That the late King
appearing very unexpectedly in France, at a time when all People were
over-joyed with the News of the Battle of Flerus won at Land, and a Victory
also gained at Sea; to palliate matters therefore as to himself, he laid all
the blame upon the Irish, that they would not fight, but many of them laid down
their Arms in such order, as if they had been Exercising; which indeed some of
them did: Upon which, the Fr. K. concluding that all was lost in that Kingdom,
he sent Orders to Count Lauzun to make the best of a bad Market, and so come
off for France as well as he could, with all his Men. But the Irish, taking
heart of grace at our Fleets and the Dutch Armies misfortunes, they held out
beyond expectation: And those Orders of the French Kings, not coming till after
His Majesty had raised the Siege of Limerick, Count Lauzun waited about twelve
Days for a Countermand; but that not appearing he set sail for France, though he
met with contrary Orders at Sea; but then it was too late: For His Majesty had
been a Fortnight at London before they heard at Paris that the Siege of
Limerick was raised; which showed, that whatever good Intelligence they might
have from England or Ireland at other times, they wanted it now; but whether
the Wind was cross, or what else was the reason, I am uncertain.

About the fourteenth we heard that Sarsfield, with a part of the Irish Army,
had marched over the Shannon at Banoher-Bridge, and besieged the Castle of
Birr, wherein Birr besieged by the Irish.
was only a Company of Colonel Tiffin's Foot, who stoutly defended the Castle,
the only temble place; but Major General Kirk marching thither with a part of
our Army, the Enemy quitted the Siege and marched off.

At this time Count Solms, who commanded in Chief, was at Cashel, where he
received a Letter by a Trumpeter from the Duke of Berwick, then at Limerick,
complaining that they heard of a Design of ours, to send all those Prisoners,
we had taken at several places, to be Slaves in the Foreign Plantations; and
withal, threatening ours with the French Galleys. But this was only a trick of
the Irish Officers themselves, to prevent their Soldiers from deserting, making
them believe there was a Contract to sell them all to Monsieur Perara the Jew
for so much Bread, (which made the name of the Jew very terrible to the Irish.)
But this was a mere Story of their own framing; and therefore Count Solms sent
the following Answer to the Duke's Letter.

Henry Count de Solms, General of Their Majesty's Army in their Kingdom of
Ireland.
HAving never before heard of a Design, to send those Numbers Count Solms's
Answer to the Duke of Berwick's Letter.
of your Men we have Prisoners, to the Foreign Plantations, we detained your
Trumpeter here for some Days, in hopes we might have been able to trace this
Report which you send us word is spread about of such our Intentions; but no
enquiry we have made, giving us the least light therein, we have reason to
think, that neither those Prisoners we have of yours need fear so long a
Voyage, nor those few of ours in your hands be apprehensive of yielding a small
Recruit to the French King's Galleys: However, we think fit to declare, that
your Men shall severely feel the effects of any ill usage you shall offer to
ours; for which they may reckon themselves obliged to their Generals.

Given at our Headquarters, at Cashel, the 21st. Day of September, 1690.
To the Duke of Berwick, or the Officer in Chief, commanding the Enemies Forces.


Soon after this, Count Solms went for England, and the Lieutenant General
Ginckel made Commander in Chief.
Baron de Ginckel was made Lieutenant General, and Commander in Chief of the
Army, who went to his Headquarters at Kilkenny.

Toward the middle of September, Henry Lord Viscount Sidney, and Thomas
Coningesby, Esquire, two of the Lords-Justices, went to Dublin, where they took
the usual Oaths of Chief Governors of that Kingdom, before the Commissioners of
the Great Seal; and immediately begun their The Lords-Justices go to Dublin.
work of putting the Country in as good a condition of Safety as the nature of
the times would bear.

Whilst the King was employed in the Field with his Army against the Town of
Limerick, it was first proposed by the Earl of Nottingham, to my Lord
Marlborough, and afterward approved of in Council, as very Advantageous to
Their Majesty's Affairs, to send a Party from England, who, joining with a
Detachment from the King's Army, might reduce those two important Garrisons of
Cork and Kinsale; and provisions were made accordingly: But not being ready so
soon as was designed, His Majesty, upon His return for England, sent the Earl
of Marlborough with his own Regiment of Fusiliers; Brigadier Trelawny's,
Princess Ann's, Earl of Marlborough sent into Ireland.
Colonel Hastings's, Colonel Hales's, Sir David Collier's, Colonel
Fitz-Patrick's, one hundred of the Duke of Bolton's, and two hundred of the
Earl of Monmouth's, with my Lord Torrington's and Lord Pembrook's Marine
Regiments.

September the 22d. my Lord Marlborough landed some Men in Boats near Cork,
where they beat the Enemy from a Battery that disturbed our Ships, and forced
the Irish to leave their Guns behind them. An Express was sent to Major General
Scravemore, then on his march with a Body of Horse; and, after that, another to
the Duke of Wirtenberg, who both in a few Days joined my Lord Marlborough with
about fifteen hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot. The Town of Cork held out
till the 28th. being five Days, and then the Garrison, about four thousand five
hundred, submitted to be all Prisoners of War; Cork surrendered to him.
amongst whom were the Earls of Clencarty and Tyrone; Colonel Mackellicut the
Governor, Lieutenant Colonel Ricat, etc. The Duke of Grafton received a mortal
military map CORK CITY

Wound in our last approach, of which he died in few Days. Then my Lord
Marlborough, first sending Brigadier Villers with a Party of Horse to Invest
Kinsale, he marched himself with his Army, on the Second of October, encamping
Kinsale besieged,
near the new Fort, (the Town being deserted by the Irish.) And next Morning
early, Major General Tetteau, with 800 Men, passed the River in Boats, and
stormed the old Fort, (formerly called Castle nigh Park,) wherein were about
four hundred and fifty, nigh half of whom were killed and blown up, and the
rest submitting at discretion, were made Prisoners. Then his Lordship sent a
Summons to the new Fort, which refusing to yield, our Guns were planted in two
places; the Danes on the left, and the English on the right. On the 5th of
October the Trenches were opened, and the Fort held out till the fifteenth,
when two Mines being sprung, and our Galleries ready to lay over the Ditch, the
Enemy beat a Parley; and the Garrison (being about 1200) had liberty to march
out, with and surrendered.
their Arms and Baggage, having a Party of Horse to conduct them to Limerick.
In this Fort we found a very considerable Magazine, and great plenty of all
sorts of Provisions: We had about 200 Men killed and wounded in our several
Attacks, but a greater number sick, by reason of cold and bad Weather. However,
the gaining those two Places, of Cork and Kinsale, was a piece of good service,
and rendered the work of the succeeding Campaign much more easy. This some have
looked upon as one of the greatest blemishes in the French Politics, that they
should neglect the Fortifying of Kinsale, one of the best and securest Harbors
in the World; and, by keeping of which, they might have ruined our Western
Trade especially, and yet endeavor to Fortify Limerick, an Inland Town, of no
use to them. All that can be said in this is, That they were once so good
natured, as to comply with the Irish Interest, and neglect their own.

After the taking of those two Towns, the Irish that lay October, 1690.
in the County of Kerry made several Incursions, and burnt some small Villages
in the County of Cork: and near the same time, another Party burnt Balliboy, a
Village 8 miles The Irish make some attempts upon our Quarters.
from Birr, wherein there was then six Companies of the Earl of Drogheda's
Regiment, who finding themselves very much outnumbred, and the Village no ways
Tenible, they retired all to a Mount nigh the middle of the same Village, which
they defended till the Irish were obliged to quit the place, have killed us
about 28, themselves leaving 16 dead upon the Streets, besides several more
that were killed in Plundering the Houses. And several such Accidents happened up
and down the Kingdom, most of which are already related in the former part of
this History.

But if I am not much mistaken, it was our Interest when we raised the Siege of
Limerick, to secure most of the other Passes upon the Shannon; which had been
no very difficult Task, before our Army was dispersed; there being a great many
places very near the Shannon, more tenible than those we retired to seek
further into the Country; which made the Line much longer, and consequently not
so easily defended; besides a plentiful Country that would have been then in
our Quarters, and the benefit of making Inroads into Connaught when we pleased.
But instead of that, we left the Enemy all the Forts and Passes upon the
Shannon; by which means they could not be kept in their own Province, though they
could keep us out. But since this was either wilfully overseen, or else
neglected by some Great Officers Commanding in those parts at first, the
Government thought fit afterward to Order, That all who expected Protection
from them, should come within the places of Castlehaven, Mackroomp, Our
Frontier Line.
Mallow, Ballyhooly, Fermoy-Bridge, Caperquin, Cahir, Goulden-Bridge, Cashell,
Thurles, Roscreagh, Birr, Mullingar, Longford, Castleforbus, Finuah, Cavan,
Belturbet, Inniskillin, military map Balleek, and Ballyshannon, those being
appointed our December, 1690.
Frontier Garrisons; all without which places was reckoned beyond the Line, and
in the Enemies Quarters.

Toward the beginning of December, his Majesty, for the A Privy Council
appointed in Ireland.
better ordering the Affairs of that Kingdom, appointed a Privy Council, and
gave out new Commissions to supply the places of several Judges, as yet
awanting in the respective Courts of Judicature.

But though the Irish in and about Limerick, and indeed in most other places
within their Line, were reduced to great necessities, both as to Provisions and
Clothes; yet this did not prevent them from having a very good opinion of
themselves, nor blunt the Edge of that Vainglorious Boasting, so peculiar to
that sort of People, as may appear by a pretended Declaration of the then
Brigadeer Dorington's, who after several invective Expressions against his
Majesty and the English Government, and Wheedling Insinuations to all
Foreigners and others, who he pretends were drawn in at unawares, he promises
to protect, and receive into Pay all Officers or Soldiers that would forsake
their Majesty's Service, and advance them according to their Merit; or those
that had no mind to serve, should be Transported into France, having all
necessary Accommodation, and be provided for in the mean time. Dated at
Limerick the 13th. of December, 1690. and Signed W. Dorington,

But this worthy Declaration had no other effect than to show the folly and
vanity of the Publisher; only I cannot but observe what a scurvy Return those
Officers and Soldiers of King William's, to whom he addresses himself, made
him for his kind proffer; since instead of going to him for his Pass into
France, they soon after sent his Worship himself Prisoner into England.

Monday the 15th. of December, Henry Lord Viscount My Lord Sidney goes for
England.
Sidney being appointed one of the Secretaries of State for England, set Sail
for that Kingdom: And on the 24th. Sir Charles Porter, another of the
Lords-Justices, came from thence, being Sworn Lord Chancellor of Ireland on
the 29th. and then received the Purse and Great Seal from the late
Commissioners.

We had now a part of our Army on their March toward Part of our Forces move
toward the Shannon.
Lanesborough Pass, Commanded by Major General Kirk and Sir John Lanier:
Lieutenant General Douglas was also upon his March toward Sligoe, as was Major
General Tetteau in Munster, toward the County of Kerry: The first Detachment
beat the Irish from their Works on this side the River; and staying there some
time, returned to Quarters, as did also Lieutenant General Douglas. Major
General Tetteau Marched toward Ross, taking a Fort called Screnelarld, in his
way; after which the Irish set most of the Country on Fire, and retreated: He
took also another Fort, wherein were 80 of the Irish, who being attacked by
fifty Danes, and fifty of the Kinsale Militia, our Men carried the place, and
put most of the Enemy to the Sword. Then our Party Marched toward Tralee,
where Lieutenant General Sheldon bad been with 21 Troops of Dragoons and 7 of
Horse, but with his Men had deserted the Town, and made what haste they could
toward Limerick, resolving to force their way through Lieutenant General
Ginckel's Troops, (who then was abroad also with a Party) if they were not very
much stronger, or otherways to kill all their Horses and save themselves, by
crossing the Shannon in Boats: But not being informed of this, our Men returned
without securing a considerable quantity of Provisi^^^ then in Trallee, which
the Irish got afterward to supply the Garrison of Limerick.

The Rapparees by this time were got to the end of the Rapparees in the Bogg of
Allen.
Bogg of Allen, within 12 miles of Dublin, and there Robbed and Plundered the
Country all about, Fortifying an Island in the Bogg to secure their Prey, which
being so nigh Dublin, it made a great noise: So that Colonel Foulks with his
own Regiment, part of Colonel Cutts's, and a Detachment of the Dublin Militia,
as also three small Fieldpieces, Marched out toward them: The Irish at first
seemed to defend the place; but as our Men advanced, they quitted their Posts,
leaving us to fill up the Trenches they had made cross the Causeway; which
done, Colonel Foulks Marched over into the Island of Allen, where he met with
Colonel Piper, who had come in at the other side; but the Irish betook
themselves to the Woods, and we only got some small Booty which they had left.

I have heard, that my Lord Baltimore at his coming over from Ireland in King
James the First's time, to give his Majesty an account of the State of that
Kingdom, amongst otherthings, told the King, That the Irish were a wicked
People, but had been as wickedly dealt withal. I make no Applications of the
Expression to our selves, though most people that have been in that Country know
how to do it.

But as to any public Action, little of moment happened, for some time after we
returned to our Winter Quarters, though the Rapparees, being encouraged by our
withdrawing, were very troublesome all the Country over: nor will it be amiss,
once for all, to give you a brief Account how the Irish managed this Affair, to
make the Rapparees so Considerable as they really were; doing much more
mischief at this Upon what account the Rapparees were servicable to the Irish.
time of the year, than any thing that had the face of an Army could pretend to.
When the Irish understood therefore how our Men were Posted all along the Line,
and what advantage might be hoped for at such and such places, they not only
encouraged all the protected Irish to do us secretly all the mischief they
could, either by concealed Arms, or private Intelligence, under the pretense of
their being Plundered and abused; but they let loose a great part of their Army
to manage the best for themselves, that time and opportunity would allow them:
to all these they gave Passes, signifying to what Regiment they belonged, that
in case they were taken, they might not be dealt withal as Rapparees, but
Soldiers. These Men knew the Country, nay, all the secret Corners, Woods and
Boggs; keeping a constant Correspondence with one another, and also with the
Army, who furnished them with all necessaries, especially Ammunition: When they
had any Project on Foot, their method was not to appear in a Body, for then
they would have been discovered; and not only so, but Carriages and several
other things had been wanting, which every one knows that is acquainted with
this Trade: Their way was therefore, to make a private appointment to meet at
such a Pass or Wood, precisely at such a time of the night or day as it stood
with their convenience; and though you could not see a Man over night, yet
exactly at their hour, you might find three or four hundred, more or less, as
they had occasion, all well Armed, and ready for what design they had formerly
projected; but if they happened to be discovered, or overpowered, they presently
dispersed, having beforehand appointed another place of Rendezous, ten or
twelve miles (it may be) from the place they then were at; by which means our
Men could never fix any close Engagement upon them during the Winter; so that
if they could have held out another year, the Rapparees would have continued
still very prejudicial to our Army, as well by killing our Men privately, as
stealing our Horses, and intercepting our Provisions. But after all, least the
next Age may not be of the same humor with this, and the name of a Rapparees
may possibly be thought a finer thing than it really is, I do assure you, that
in my Style they never can be reputed other than Tories, Robbers, Thieves, and
Bogg-trotters.

The Insolence of those People however, in the Bogg of Allen, was curbed by
Colonel Foulks and Colonel Piper, before their return, who killed one Gibney a
Captain, and several others: About which time, the King disposed of all
January, 1691.
the vacant Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Preferments, void in Ireland
since the death of King Charles the Second.

On the 14th, of January, about sixty of the Garrison of A Party of ours march
beyond the Shannon.
Castle-Forbes, in the County of Longford, with some of the Militia, passed the
River Shannon, and burnt several places on the other side, bringing off a good
Booty, without any loss. And seventeen Transport Ships, with two Men of War,
were ordered from the Bay of Dublin toward Kinsale, to carry the Earl of
Marlborough's and Colonel Fitz-Patrick's Regiments into Flanders, together with
the Prisoners taken at Cork and Kinsale; these having joined some other
Vessels, suffered much in their Voyage to Flanders, by reason of bad Weather,
and some of them forced upon the Coast of England, one or two Ships being lost.
And nigh the same time the Dover Frigate brought into Kinsale, a French
Privateer of 22 Guns, and 10 Pettereroes, belonging to St. Maloes. Several
Prisoners are now taken in scampering Parties, and some Deserters come in, who
all give an account of the extraordinary scarcity of Provisions and other
Necessaries amongst the Irish; though this was only true in part, for Prisoners
will stretch to gain favor, and Deserters are commonly prejudiced; so that
they make things as they would have it, or speak by hearsay, few of them
telling any thing of their own knowledge; for before a Man deserts any side, he
commonly converses with those that are most disaffected, and consequently least
trusted; he comes off partial however; so that no extraordinary stress is
usually to be laid upon such Informations.

Nigh this time several Ships arrived at Gallway from France, My Lord Tyrconnel
returns from France.
and brought over my Lord Tyrconnel, Sir Richard Neagle, and Sir Stephen Rice,
with about only 8000 l. in Money; which was a great disappointment to the
Irish, who had a small distribution by way of Donative, but not as pay. There
came also some Soldiers-Coats and Caps, but such sorry ones, that the Irish
themselves could easily see in what esteem their Master of France had them.

A Party of the Militia of Bandon advance into the Enemies Quarters, and
killing some few stranglers, brought off a good Prey, according to the custom
of the Country. But afterward about 1500 of the Enemy pass the Black-Water, A
Party of the Irish besiege Fermoy.
near Fermoy, where there was some of the Danes posted in a Fort, which the
Irish pretended to Attack; upon their near approach our Men fired, and the
Irish seemed resolute for some time, but sixteen of them being killed, with a
French Officer, the rest were presently a little more calm; and then they made
an attempt on the other side, on Fermoy-Bridge, but were beat back with two
small Fieldpieces, (which they had Intelligence were removed) and six of them
killed at that place; but by this time part of Colonel Donep's Horse were come
to Castle Leons, and fifty of them, with 30 Militia Dragoons, engaged a greater
Number of the Irish, and killed sixty, pursuing the rest nigh two Miles, till
they came toward their main Body, which was commanded by Brigadier Carol, who
was obliged to retire without what he came for.

Richard Pyne, Esquire, formerly one of the Commissioners of the Great Seal, is
now made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. And, Jan. 26, some Recruits
are sent from Dublin, to reinforce the Garrison of Ki^meague, in the Isle of
Allen, and other places in the County of Kildare. And now, to satisfy both the
Army and Country as much as could be, comes out a Proclamation; That all
Persons who had given subsistence of Provisions, etc. to the Army, should
receive satisfaction for the same according to the Rates made public in the
beginning of Winter. And that all Arrears of Pay due to Officers, or Soldiers,
who died, were killed, or removed from Their Majesty's Service, should be paid
to their Relations. In order to which, there were certain Commissioners
appointed, to state the Accounts of the Army: February, 1691.
These Commissioners were William Robinson, John Stone, Edward Corker, John
South, and Edward Molineux, Commissioners appointed to state the Accounts of
the Army.
Esquires, who, some of them, here sat every Day, for many Months together,
upon this Affair.

Jan. 29. A Ship belonging to Chester-Water was cast away in the Bay of Dublin;
Ball the owner, and all the Passengers being lost. The same Day upwards of 200
Prisoners were put on Board there, and sent to Cork, with Orders to be
transported to Flanders. A Detachment of the Garrison of Cork, being two
hundred Foot, and 300 Dragoons, march toward Church-Town and Buttafant, two of
the Enemies Frontier-Towns in that County, where they had a Party of Horse and
Foot; but they withdrew at our approach, leaving the Places to be burnt by our
Men, which was done accordingly.

The beginning of February a Party of the Army, with some of the Militia,
marched from Clonmell, within ten Miles of Limerick, meeting with little
opposition; killed only about twelve straggling Rapparees, and burnt what
Cabbins and other places of shelter for the Irish they met withal; returning
with a prey of Cattle, and three or four Prisoners.

February the 4th. A Declaration was published at Dublin A Declaration from the
General to the Irish.
by Lieutenant General Ginckel, setting forth, That Their Majesty's had no
design to Oppress their Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, in either
their Religion, or their Properties; but had given him Authority, to grant
reasonable Terms to all such as would come in and submit according to their
Duty. But this Declaration (as others before it of like nature) had not the
wished-for effect; since the Irish are generally of that Temper, as to think
you are most afraid of them when best Terms are proferr'd: This made the Irish
Peasants value themselves mightily upon King William's first Declaration, after
the Rout at the Boyne, who then looked upon themselves to be the most
considerable part of the Irish Nation, because they had Terms proferr'd before
the Great Ones.

The sixth, a Proclamation was published by the Lords-Justices A Proclamation,
prohibiting the destroying Improvements.
and Council, prohibiting all Officers and Soldiers to plunder, or take away
the Goods either of Protestants or Papists; nor cut down Improvements, (as some
unreasonably went about;) nor to take the Horses and Cattle out of the Plough,
or to exact and levy Money: Of all which there had been frequent Complaints;
and therefore the Soldiers were commanded to pay their Quarters with their
Subsistence which was ordered them, and the Officers too, from the first of
January.

Nigh this time, Francis Sheldon and John Green, two Commissioners sent over to
build Ships in Ireland.
that were Skilful in the Art of Building Ships, were both sent over, in equal
Commission, by Authority of the Navy-Board in England, to build Ships for Their
Majesty's Service at Waterford or Wexford; nigh which Places, and in the County
of Wickloe, there is good store of suitable Timber, and other Advantages for
building Ships at easier Rates than in England; but what progress has been made
herein, I am uncertain.

February the 8th. Colonel Brewer and Major Boad, with a Party of 150 Horse,
and 200 Foot, marched from Mullingar toward Meers-Court, to Relieve that and
some other Garrisons with Provisions, and some Men; which having done, Colonel
Brewer went with a Party toward Ballymore, to view the Posture of the Enemy at
that place; he met with a small Party of them at a Pass, a Mile on this side
the Fort, whom he put to flight, and pursued to the Garrison, nigh which he
killed six or eight, and burnt the House at the Pass when he returned, bringing
the Owner away Prisoner.

February the 10th. Sir Richard Reynolds, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, came from England and sat as Judge in that Court, being
afterward sworn of the Privy Council. And nigh the same time we had an
account, that considerable Numbers of Recruits, both for Horse and Foot, lay
ready at Bristol to be shipped for Ireland. The Montague and Dover Frigates bring
into Kinsale a Privateer of St. Maloes, of 24 Guns and six Pettereroes. A Party
of our Army, quartering at Bally-Hooly in the County of Cork, went into the
Enemies Country and killed 25 Rapparees; and soon after Major Kirk killed 16
more, taking two Officers Prisoners; yet, for all this, the Enemy watched all
opportunities of Advantage, killing our Men by surprise in a great many places;
but especially, keeping Correspondence with the protected Irish in all corners
of the Country, they stole away our Horses The Irish steal away our Horses to
Recruit their own Army.
sometimes in the Night, and often at Noonday, when our Men least suspected
it; by which means they recruited their own Horse considerably, and did us no
small disservice; nor is it probable, unless they had made use of some such
ways, they could have brought any Body of Horse into the Field, worth taking
notice of, the succeeding Campaign, whereas we were sensible afterward that
their Horse were once not contemptible.

The 9th. two Officers and a Soldier desert from Limerick, and come to Cashel:
And a Day or two afterward about 100 Protestants are permitted to come away,
who all agree, that the Irish were more dissatisfied since my Lord Tyrconnel's
Landing than before, since the Money and Clothes, brought them from France,
were both in themselves very contemptible; the one for quantity, and the other
for quality.

We had also an Account that Sarsfield was made Sarsfield made Lord Lucan.
Earl of Lucan, and Lieutenant General of the Army; Dorington, Major General;
and Barker, General of the Foot.

One Langton was Hanged at Kilkenny for endeavoring to seduce a Soldier of
Count Nassau's Regiment and some others. And at Birr, the Rapparees killing one
of Colonel Hamilton's Soldiers, drew out his Guts, and mangled his Body after
amost barbarous and unusual manner. Several Ships arrive at Waterford with
Meal, Biscuit, Corn, and other Provisions for their Majesty's use; and a great
many Merchant Ships come to that and other Ports, with Victuals and other
conveniences, for the Army and Country.

On the 13th. about 400 of the Irish Army, Commanded A Party of the Irish burn
Edenderry.
by Lieutenant Colonel Conner, came to Edenderry, and burnt greatest part of
it, killing 7 Men and a Woman, and had 11 of theirs killed by a Militia Troop
then in Town, who were obliged to defend the strongest Houses; and the Irish
returning by Phillips-Town, burnt Bally*Brittan.

And now the Civil Government begun to look with a Judges appointed to go their
several Circuits.
better countenance than formerly; for February the 17th. the Judges were
appointed for their several Circuits; (viz.) Munster Circuit, Lord Chief
Justice Reynolds, Mr. Justice Cox. Leinster Circuit, Lord Chief Justice Pyne,
Mr. Justice Jefferson. North-East Circuit of Vlster, Lord Chief Baron Healy,
Mr. Justice Lyndon. North-West Circuit, Mr. Baron Eclyn, Mr. Sergeant Ryves.
These all went their districts accordingly, and found things much out of order
in several places, by reason of the looseness of the Times, and the general
inclination of most people to a disorderly way of living.

February 24th. a large French Pinck bound from Bourdeaux to Connaught with
Wine, Brandy, Salt, etc. was driven by stress of Weather into Arcklow-Haven;
the Men being made Prisoners, the Ship and Cargo were seized for The Duke of
Berwick and others of the Irish Army, go for France.
their Majesty's use. And nigh this time we heard, that the Duke of Berwick,
and some other great Officers of the Irish Army, were gone off from Limerick to
France, being discontented, as 'twas said, at my Lord Tyrconnel's way of
Proceeding in the Government.

The 25th. Lieutenant Colonel Lillingston went from Roscreagh with a Party, to
Monogall, where he surprised a Company of Colonel Oxburrough's Regiment, and
several Rapparees, killed 35 and took 5 Prisoners, with one O Conner, who
Commanded.

The 26th. in the Morning, Lieutenant General Ginckel and Sir John Lanier,
having drawn a considerable Body both of Horse and Foot together, they advanced
from Streams-Town toward Athlone. The Enemy never wanted Intelligence of our
Motions, by reason of their Friends always amongst us; and therefore as we
approached, we found a Body of Horse and Foot, to the number of about 2300,
Commanded by Brigadeer Clifford, drawn on at a Pass 4 miles from Streams-Town;
the place it self was of great advantage, its natural situation being improved
by Art: but as soon as a Party of ours, under Captain Pepper of The Irish
defeated at the Mote of Greenoge.
Colonel Earl's Regiment, advanced on the other side, the Irish quitted the
Pass, being followed by our Horse and Dragoons toward the Mote of Greenoge,
where a greater Body of their Army was Posted upon the side of an Hill; and
those also upon seeing what happened, retired into the Town; at the entrance of
which, there was a very defensible Ditch, with a Pallisado'd Work, which the
Irish quitted, and Marched toward Athlone; our Advance Party being 10 of my
Lord of Oxford's Horse, 12 of Sir John Lanier's, Commanded by Cornet Lisle, and
sustained by Lieutenant Monk's Dragoons, (those were four choice Men out of a
Company in Major General Kirk's Regiment, mounted on Horseback, and Commanded
by Lieutenant Monk, who always did Dragoon service,) and a Party of Colonel St.
John's Foot, under Captain Worth, and all Commanded by Colonel Woolsley: those
overtook the Enemies Foot before they were got out of Town, very soon obliging
them to disperse into the Woods and Boggs, several being killed; and whilst
this was adoing, our Advance Party of Horse followed the Enemies Horse so fast
upon the great Road that leads toward Athlone, that our Body of Horse behind
could not come up, though they endeavored it by marching very hard: A great
many of the Irish fearing to be overtaken, quit their Horses, Boots and Arms,
making what haste they could to their usual shift, the Woods and Boggs; and
thus it continued for six miles, till they were got near Athlone. They lost all
their Equipage and Baggage, with a great many Horses and Arms, and had about
Two Hundred Killed.
two Hundred killed. We lost only one Trumpeter, and had four men more Wounded.

Major General Kirk stayed behind and took Cairn Castle; and the General at his
return, took Castle-Conway, in some few days dispersing his Men to their
respective Quarters.

The 28th. several Rapparees were killed and hanged by the Militia near
Montrath, they being usually more March, 1691.
severe upon those sort of People than the Army was.

March the 7th. a Cornet, two Quarter Masters, and some other Deserters, came
from the Enemy to Dublin, Some Deserters come in and encouraged by the General.
where the General then was, and received them very kindly, allowing them
subsistence, to encourage others to follow their examples. Several Ships arrive
at Cork, Waterford, Kinsale, and Dublin, with Provisions and other necessaries
for the Army; and the Militia kill some Rapparees, and bring in their Heads; a
Custom in that Country, and encouraged by a Law, which allows so much for every
Head, according to the Quality of the Offender; though the usual way is by
Proclamation from the Government, wherein the Offender and his Price are March,
1691.
named.

Nigh this time three of the Danish Soldiers deserting, upon Major General
Dorington's Declaration, or what other Inducements I know not; but they were
met upon the Road, between Limerick and Cashel, by four others that had
belonged to the Irish Army, and now deserting to us; these very fairly set upon
the Danes, took them Prisoners, and brought them back to Cashel, where they
were afterward hanged.

A Party of Colonel Villers's, and some Danish Horse, march from Tallow within
the Enemies Frontiers, kill two, and take some few Prisoners. And Colonel
Blunt, High Sheriff of the County of Tipperary, with his Militia Troop of
Dragoons, a Danish Troop of Horse, and others, to the Number of 200, went from
Clonmel as far as Mitchels-Town, nigh twenty Miles within the Enemies Quarters;
in which Expedition they killed forty seven Rapparees, took thirteen Prisoners,
and burnt several Cabbins where they used to shelter.

Captain Palliser, of the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment, went with a Party from
Carolante toward Portumna, where he surprised some of my Lord Galmoy's Horse,
and took several Prisoners; as also good store of rich Plunder, with Arms,
Clothes, and several other things of value.

Cornet Russel and one Crofton, come from the Enemies Quarters, and give an
Account, that Balderock O Donnel had got several Men together again, but
wanting Arms and other Accoutrements they begun to desert: And we also heard
that Judge Daily was secured, for being suspected to endeavor the delivering
up of Gallway to our Forces: And that Provisions and Forage were very scarce
in Connaught.

The Lords-Justices, and Council, to encourage the bringing of Arms and
Ammunition into Ireland by Merchants and others, they set out a Proclamation,
declaring A Proclamation to encourage the Importing of Arms.
that they shall be Duty-free; pursuant to which, Her Majesty made an Order of
Council in England, dated March the 3d. That no Duty shall be hereafter
demanded, or payable in Ireland, for any Arms which shall be carried to such
parts of that Kingdom as are, or shall be at the time of Importation, under
Their Majesty's Obedience; provided that the Parties exporting Arms from any
other parts of Their Majesty's Dominions, do enter into sufficient Bonds for
landing the same in such Parts of Ireland as aforesaid, and no others.

The Rapparees at this time were very troublesome nigh Several Rapparees killed
in the County of Longford.
Fox-Hall, in the County of Longford, till Lieutenant Colonel Toby Purcel, at
three several times, killed about one hundred of them; in the last of which
they killed fifty two; and, returning toward Quarters, they were waylaid by
the greatest part of Sir Donold O Neal's Dragoons: Our Party were thirty five
Dragoons, and one hundred and forty Foot; one Quartermaster Topham being, with
nine Dragoons, commanded as an Advance-Party to view the Enemy, as soon as
discovered by us, and seeing them in a confusion at his appearing, he charged
their Front; who, running away, made all the rest of the same humor, every one
endeavoring to get first to their Garrison at New Castle, three were killed,
and one Dillan with four more taken Prisoners. This Party (its said) was
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Barnwell: Upon this Defeat one Mack-Guire comes
from the County of Longford, with several hundreds of the Creights, and most of
the Stock that was left them; for which, and themselves, they obtained
Protections.

About the 10th of March we had an Account by some Protestants, that came out
of Connaught, that the Irish a little after my Lord Tyrconnel's landing, being
out of humor with the Brass Money, little or nothing being to be The Irish cry
down their Brass Money.
had for it, they cried it down by Proclamation, the Crown piece to three
Pence, the Half-crown to three Halfpence, the Shilling to a Penny, and the Six
pence to an halfpenny. After which the Soldiers lived upon free quarters:
Provisions also being scarce, and no Markets, for want of Money, those Parts
begun to be under worse Circumstances every Day.

We had Notice from Tallough, that Sarsfield had Rendezvous'd part of his Army,
and some of the Irish Militia, at Knockhany, and that he had detached ten Men
out of a Company, and as many out of each Troop, to Attack the Pass at Fermoy,
and beat up our Quarters at Tallough and thereabouts; upon which a Party was
detached from Youghall to strengthen that place, but Sarsfield only viewed his
Men, and picked out the most serviceable of the Militia to serve in the Army.

Nigh this time one Lonan, a troublesome Fellow, was hanged at Killkenny for
Seditious words. And on the 14th. a Party of Colonel Byerly's Regiment, with
some of the Militia, overtook a Party of Rapparees that were stealing away the
Cattle near Montrath, killing six, and took two, who were hanged next Morning.
The 17th. a Party of the Irish Army besieged Ballynagooly, a Frontier
Ballynagooly attacked by the Irish.
Garrison of ours in the County of Cork, but were beat off with the death of
five of their Men, and seven left Prisoners.

Lieutenant Colonel Lillingston, having the Command of a Party of three hundred
Foot, and some Horse, detached from Birr, Roscreagh, and the neighboring
Garrisons, he Nenagh burnt by a Party of our Men.
marched toward Nenagh, in the County of Tipperary, where there is a strong
Castle, belonging to the Duke of Ormond: Long Anthony Caroll was Governor of
this Place, having with him about one hundred Men; but in the places adjacent
there lived a great many Tories and Rapparees, whom Caroll could upon any alarm
bring together, to the Number of at least two thousand. He now had notice of
our Party's approach, and laid an Ambuscade for them; which being discovered,
his Men drew homewards, and we followed them into Town, which we burnt, but the
Castle was not to be attacked without Cannon; for though it was taken by
Lieutenant General Ginckel, and a Garrison put into it during the former Siege
of Limerick, yet, upon our Army's drawing off, part of the House within was
burnt, and so quitted by our Party; which was no sooner done, but the Irish put
a Garrison in it, by which they kept great part of a very good Country in their
possession: But seeing our Men could not Attack the Castle, they took a good
prey of Cattle; in getting of which, and burning the Town, they killed about
sixty Men; amongst whom was one Caroll an Officer, and a Man of great Bravery:
We lost only three Men in this Expedition.

A Party of Horse and Foot went also about this time from Mountmelick, to some
adjoining Woods, where they understood a Body of Rapparees were got together,
we killed that Day twelve, and the next Day six, taking a Lieutenant of their
Army Prisoner. Six of Colonel Lutterel's Dragoons desert the Enemy; and sixteen
Rapparees were hanged at Clonmel, and four were killed as they were making
toward a greater Party of the Enemy. Twenty seven Rapparees killed, and
thirteen taken Prisoners near Caperquin.


Twelve Troopers, and about thirty Foot, went from Caperquin toward A Glyn,
where they had Information that forty Rapparees were lodged, but they proved a
much greater Number than was expected, and obliged our Horse to shift for
themselves; which a Trumpeter seeing, who was upon a little Hill at a distance,
he first sounded a March, then a Charge, and gave a great Shout, as if some
more Horse were falling on; which took so well, that it frighted the Rapparees,
and made them run toward the Wood, in which posture, our Foot and Horse
falling upon them, killed twenty seven, and took thirteen Prisoners; three
whereof were called Captains, but being known Rogues, they were all hanged.

March the 18th. a good Detachment was sent from Cashel toward Emly, in the
County of Limerick, to meet with the Enemy, who were got into a Body
thereabouts. As we came toward the place the Enemy retired, and had twelve
killed in their going off. About this time, Colonel Russel's Regiment of Horse
(formerly my Lord Delamere's) was broke at Antrim, and Colonel White's Regiment
of Foot, which were all the Forces that were broke this Year. Colonel Tiffin
makes an Excursion toward Sligo, and met with no formed Body of the Enemy, so
that his Men had leisure to take a good prey, and bring off several Families,
who removed into our Quarters.

March 21. A detached Party of four hundred Horse and Foot, under the Command
of Major Culliford, marched from Cork toward Balycleugh, where the Enemy were
entrenching themselves, but when they saw our Men acoming they deserted their
Works, and left seven of their Men to be made Prisoners, four of whom were
Officers. Three hundred of Sir David Collier's Men and Militia march from
Bandon toward Bantry, where they killed nigh seventy Rapparees, and took
fifteen Prisoners. Some Rapparees were taken between Trim and Mullingar. And a
Party of the Militia, under Lieutenant Powel, were sent from Dublin to bring in
some Rogues, who were concerned in the Murdering six of Colonel Foulks's
Soldiers, but he and his Party were set upon by one O Neal, and twenty eight
more, who by the management of Lieutenant Powel and his Party were most of them
killed.

March the 28th. one Mark Baggot, formerly very Mark Baggot taken as a Spy
going into Dublin.
well known in Dublin, and Sergeant at Arms in the late King's time, was taken
coming disguised in Woman's Clothes into that City; he was shortly after Tried
as a Spy, and Condemned; but Execution for some time was respited, in hopes of
his doing service to the Government by some material Discoveries.

One Beecher, a Gentleman in the County of Cork, seized upon an Island on that
Coast, from whence he did much damage to the Irish thereabouts. And some
considerable Men in Killkenny, were seized for holding Correspondence with the
Enemy. About this time Landed several Recruits at different Ports from England,
with an Account of the French King's besieging the City of Mons, which
occasioned various discourses, according as people were inclined.

In the beginning of April, six Soldiers of the Garrison April, 1691.
of Birr, were barbarously Murdered by the Rapparees, as were others in several
places, whenever they met with opportunities. A Spy was taken and Sentenced
to be Hanged there, but brought from the Gallows, upon a discovery of several
protected Papists holding Correspondence with the Enemy. One Captain Darby of
the Leap, habiting himself and some of the Militia, with a small party of the
Army, like Rapparees, they easily came up with about Eighty of the Enemy, who
taking our men to be of their own Tribe, ten of them were killed, and the rest
made their escapes.

April the 9th. Brigadeer Stuart sent fifty Firelocks and twenty Dragoons from
Belturbet, to scour the County of Letrim; toward Mohill they discovered two A
Party sent by Brigadeer Stuart toward Mohill.
Troops of the Enemies Dragoons, and a Company of Foot, Guarding the Creights
and their Cattle, whom they fell upon, killed thirty and took five Prisoners,
with most of their Horses, and what small Baggage they had. And nigh the same
time, thirteen Rapparees were Hanged at Belturbet, being Tried by a
Court Martial. A Party of Lieutenant Colonel Purcell's Garrison, fell upon some
of the Irish Dragoons in the County of Longford, and killed six of them, others
being also drowned, who made more haste than good speed to pass the River.
Quartermaster Topham kills at one time six, and at another time seventeen
Rapparees, and took nine Prisoners, most of which were Hanged. Colonel Tiffin
sends two Hundred Foot and a Hundred Dragoons, from Bally-shannon toward
Sligo, who in their march killed Forty-two Rapparees, and took ten Prisoners,
bringing off a good Prey at their return.

April the 11th. being the Anniversary of their Majesty's Coronation, was
observed with the usual Solemnities. About five Hundred of the Irish came to
attack Clonakilty, a Garrison of ours in the County The Irish make several
attempts upon our Frontiers.
of Cork, but with no great difficulty were beaten off, having lost only three
Men in the Attempt. Next day they seemed resolved to do something
extraordinary; and Colonel Mack Finnins, Colonel Macarty's, and two more
Regiments, making in all about one Thousand five Hundred, Commanded by
Brigadier Caroll, came to Iniskean, with a design to have that place, and some
other small Garrisons near it, as steps to further advancements. There were in
Iniskean only two Ensigns, with Forty-four Men, who defended the Streets of the
Town for some time; but the Irish getting in at the back doors, and so firing
the Town, our Men betook themselves to an House that seemed the best shelter
the place could afford, and there they defended themselves against all the
Attempts of the Irish, though they were at last in hazard to have been burnt out,
but that Lieutenant Colonel Ogleby came seasonably from Bandon with a Hundred
and fifty Horse and Foot, which occasioned the Irish to draw off; and being
followed by our small Party of Horse in the retreat, and the action in Town,
they lost Seventy-two.

April the 14th. the Titular Popish Archbishop of Dublin, Father Brohey, and
Father Mooney, were found hid in a Cave within a Mile of Athy, and sent
Prisoners to Dublin.

The 18th. a Proclamation was published, to promise a Reward for the
Apprehending the murdersrs of some of Colonel Foulks's Soldiers in the Church
at Mallahuddart, fifty Pound being promised for one Christopher Brown, with a
Ten Pound a piece for five more concerned in the same Fact; with Pardon to any
of themselves that would discover the rest, some of whom were apprehended and
Hanged afterward.

April the 20th. a considerable Body of the Irish They attempt Macroomp.
advanced toward Macroomp, another Garrison of ours in the County of Cork,
where they seemed now to press us most; but a Party of Eighty Horse and three
Hundred Dragoons of the Army and Militia, were sent out under Major Kirk of
Brigadeer Villers's Regiment; these came within sight of the Enemy by break of
day, who being surprised at our unexpected approach, the Irish betook
themselves to the adjacent Boggs, in the pursuit of whom we killed twenty, and
took an Officer, with four Soldiers Prisoners.

A Party of Rapparees coming near Tallough, steal away several Horses, and four
Men belonging to Colonel Donep's Regiment of Danish Horse. This being easily
believed, could not be done without the knowledge of the Inhabitants in the
adjacent Villages, Col. Donep's Project to recover his Men and Horses.
the Colonel ordered several of them to be taken up, and threatened to Hang them
all, unless the Horses and Men were brought back by such a day, which was
accordingly done, and some of the Men that stole them delivered up.

The 24th. some Provisions going to Mullingar under a slender Convoy, were
seized by the Rapparees at Kinegad; but a Party of the Garrison hearing of it,
came time enough to kill four of them, and retrieve some of the Provisions,
though part of it was lost, the Boggs lying at that place so very convenient.

Twenty-one Rapparees who lately went over the Shannon, were taken nigh
Belturbet, by a Detachment from Finnagh; one Duffee and his Lieutenant
Commanding this Party, had Commissions from Balderock O Donnel. And now our
English Letters bring us an Account of his Majesty's safe Arrival at White Hall
on April the fourteenth.

Nigh this time his Majesty was pleased to Create Count Schonberg Created Duke
of Leinster.
Count Maynard (second Son to the last Duke of Schonberg) Duke of Leinster,
Earl of Bangor, and Baron of Mullingar; and there was a report, as if his Grace
should have then gone over into Ireland to Command the Army the succeeding
Campaign.

April 27. My Lord Meath's and my Lord Lisburn's Regiments came to Mullingar,
(the place designed for the Rendezvous of the Army) and encamp without the
Town. They found a great many of the Some Regiments come to encamp at Mullingar.
Irish that had made the best provision they could for themselves and Families
by the Ditch-sides: For Colonel Brewer, sometime before this, had commanded
them all out of Town, upon his being informed of their Correspondence with the
Enemy. This occasioned them to build a great many Hutts all along the dry
Ditches, which they make no difficulty in performing; for it is but bending down
two or three Sticks with one end on the Ground, and the other on the top of the
Ditch, and then a little Straw or long Grass makes it a Cabin in less that
half an hour, for a Family of ten or a dozen, young and old, to creep into.

The same Day one Brown was executed as a Several Rapparees killed by Colonel
Brewer.
Spy. And the 28th. Colonel Brewer, with Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, of my
Lord Meath's Regiment, went from Mullingar toward Dunore, with six hundred
Foot and twenty Horse; their Design was to surprise about two thousand
Rapparees that had hutted thereabout for some time: At break of Day next
Morning our Party came within sight of the Enemy; who took the Alarm, and began
to draw up on several Hills in distinct Bodies, both of Horse and Foot, and
made a show at first of advancing, in order to an Engagement; but they always
retired to their Fastnesses, upon the near approach of any of our Men: However,
the Party so ordered it as to kill nigh fifty, and burn their Hutts and
Cabbins, returning without any loss. The same Day the Governor of Meers-Court
went toward Ballymore, and at Night took the Patrole Prisoner, bringing off
some of the Horses belonging to that Garrison: Fourteen Deserters also came
from the Enemy to Mullingar. And a crook-back'd Beggar was brought a little
after to Colonel Brewer in a Sack; he had been formerly a Spy; and now, upon
his detection, he accused several protected Papists thereabouts, for holding
Correspondence with the Enemy. The Dragoons, posted at Fox-Hall, upon scouring
the Country, kill six Rapparees, and three more were taken near Tallough.

Nigh this time Captain Palliser, and one Lieutenant Captain Palliser and his
Men taken Prisoners.
Armstrong, went out with a Party of sixty Firelocks from their Quarters near
Birr; their Design was to surprise some of the Irish, and bring off a prey they
were informed of; but being betrayed by one Terence Mackgrah, who had all along
been protected, and pretended a particular Friendship to Captain Palliser, our
Men fell into an Ambuscade, ordered for them by Long Anthony Caroll; and having
freed themselves of that, they found themselves beset on all sides, so that
they were forced to take into an old Castle; and, after being almost smothered
in it with Smoke, they surrendered themselves all Prisoners of War; Lieutenant
Armstrong paid Money to be released, Captain Palliser made his escape the
beginning of June from Limerick, but the poor Men were kept Prisoners till
Limerick was surrendered.

Fifteen Rapparees took the Northern-Male going from Dublin, at a place called
Moyery-Castle, between Dundalk and Newry; six of which were some small time
afterward apprehended and hanged for it.

April 29. A Party of one hundred and fifty Foot, A Party of the Irish beat
off, who designed to intercept the Relief of Ballynagooly.
commanded by Captain Clayton, were sent to Relieve Ballynagooly; some distance
from the place they espied a Party of the Enemies Horse, who did not care to
meddle with them, because they supposed them well provided with Ammunition; and
about twelve at Night the Party relieved marched out: It was no sooner
Daylight than they espied near three hundred of the Enemies Horse and
Dragoons, and about the same Number of Rapparees, who had waylaid them,
expecting they would bring but little Ammunition from the Garrison; but Captain
Thornicroft, Lieutenant Hayes, and the Ensign, with the Party, resolved to make
the best of it, and so drew their Men into an old Pound, Breast-high; which
they had scarce done, till the Advance-Party of the Enemy came up and proferr'd
them Quarter; which they refused, and fired upon them; then the Irish main Body
advanced and made several very brisk Attacks, which our Men resisted stoutly,
killing several, and wounding others, who were carried off. The Garrison of
Cork taking the Alarm, sent out a Party to Relieve our Men, but the Enemy were
marched off before. The Enemy left Captain Coppinger, two more Captains, and
ten Men dead, and Major Slingsby was left wounded, who confessed their Party
carried off between fifty and sixty killed and hurt; and withal, that it was a
Judgment upon them, since they designed to promise fair Quarter, but afterward
to destroy our whole Party: We lost eight Soldiers and two Carr-Men, and had
five more wounded. This Party of the Irish, it is said, was commanded by
Brigadier Caroll, and Sir James Cotter.

Near this time one Captain Duffee, his Lieutenant, Twenty three Rapparees
hanged at Belturbet.
and twenty one more Rapparees were hanged by Brigadier Stuart's orders at
Belturbet, and another as a Spy at Cavan. A Detachment of five hundred Men,
out of the Militia of the City and County of Dublin, joining with Colonel
Piper, marched toward Clanbullock, where they expected to meet with a Body of
the Irish Army and Rapparees; but these having Notice of our Design the Night
before, they dispersed to their several places of shelter, so that few of them
were taken or killed.

April the 30th. being Her Majesty's Birthday, was observed with great
Solemnity; and all Hands were then at work in order to the fitting every thing
for the ensuing Campaign. Clothes, Arms, Ammunition and Recruits arrived daily
at Dublin from England.

CHAP. IV.
Thirty Rapparees killed. Major Wood defeats a Party of the Irish. Several
Skirmishes between the Irish and the Militia. One Captain Johnston surprises a
Party of the Irish Army. The Irish take a Prey nigh the Black-Water. Some of
our Seamen and Militia join and march into the Enemies Quarters. Monsieur St.
Ruth lands in Ireland to Command their Army. Mark Baggot hanged.
Lieutenant General Douglas encamps with a Party at Ardagh. Our Great Officers
take the Field. The General goes to Mullingar.

SEveral Ships arrive at Kinsale from England, and the Charles Galley and
Assurance Frigate at Waterford, with four other Ships under their Convoy, all
laden with Cannon, Ball, Bombs, Powder, and several other Materials necessary
for the Campaign.

The Governor of Clonmel, and Colonel Blunt, went Thirty Rapparees killed.
out with a Party of the Army and Militia toward Michelstown; but not meeting
with any of the Enemy, they were returning home, when some of the Men straggling
behind, one Cashean, a known Rogue, shot at a Corporal from behind a Bush,
which occasioned the Party to return and surround the Wood, in which they
killed thirty.

Toward the beginning of this Month, two hundred May, 1691.
and fifty Foot and a small Party of Horse, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
Hudson and Major Wood, went from Montmelick, and posted themselves amongst the
Woods and Bogs toward Portarlington: At break of Day the Foot entered and
scoured the Thickets, whilst the Horse secured the adjoining Passes; by which
means they killed eighteen, and took an Ensign, one Moor, with a Sergeant and
six Men Prisoners; they took also one of the Guards, and one O Rourk, who had
formerly stole several of the Dutch Horses at Munster Evan.

May the 1st. Major Wood having Notice that the Major Wood defeats a Body of
the Irish.
Rapparees were in great Bodies about Brittas in the Queen's County, he went
out with three hundred of my Lord George Hamilton's, and Colonel Lloyd's Foot,
and fifty of Colonel Byerly's Horse, with which he first killed nigh seventy
Rapparees; and leaving part of his Men to secure several Passes, he went three
Miles further, beyond a place called The Tougher of Malahone, having with him
one hundred and ten Foot, and thirty Horse; but instead of the Rapparees, whom
he only expected, he espied two Bodies of the Irish Army, said to be near eight
hundred in Number: Those he encountered, and after several Charges at different
places, he put them to the Rout, killing one hundred and fifty on the place;
amongst whom were one Captain Schales, and two Lieutenants; he took Major John
Fitz-Patrick Prisoner, who commanded the Party, and seventeen Officers more,
with six Sergeants, sixteen Corporals, two Drummers, and a Surgeon, and also
eighty private Sentinels. In all this Action we lost but a Corporal and a
Trooper, two Foot-Soldiers wounded, and Lieutenant Robinson. This may seem
incredible to those that are strangers to this Country, but I shall in
convenient time give you several Instances, both Ancient and Modern, which
deserve as much to be admired. And I can find no other reason for it, than that
it is no easy matter to persuade the Irish to fight whilst there is a Bog or a
Wood nigh them, though take them abroad and they make no contemptible Soldiers.

Nigh this time Captain Johnston, of my Lord George Captain Johnston surprises
some of the Irish Army.
Hamilton's Regiment, went with one hundred Men from Tyril's Pass to Ballimona
in the King's County, and toward break of Day he surprised two Troops of
Clifford's Dragoons, and a Party of my Lord Merion's Horse, with some Foot,
killing a Lieutenant, a Quartermaster and fifteen Dragoons; took Prisoners,
two Ensigns, six Dragoons, one Trooper, and two Foot-Soldiers, burnt the Town,
with the Furniture of what Dragoons were there quartered, bringing off twelve
Horses, with some Cows, and spare Arms, without any loss on our side.

A Party of Colonel Brewer's Men being abroad, and some of them straggling
between Mullingar and Kinegad, three were killed, and the fourth had his Eyes
put out, being used by the Rapparees after a most cruel and barbarous manner;
but three Rapparees being taken, and two of them hanged, one Hill, the third,
guided a Party of one hundred and ten Men, commanded by Captain Poynes, to a
place within six Miles of Mullingar, where the Rapparees lodged that Night; our
Men fell upon them, and killing about forty, they got good store of rich
Plunder.

Some more Rapparees were about this time hanged at Belturbet: And one Mr.
Woodward, with a Party, kills twenty nigh Kells that were stealing away his
Cattle. Lieutenant Schales, with a small Party of Sir John Lanier's Horse, and
Major General Kirk's Foot, killed eleven Rapparees near Wyands-Town, and sent
their Heads to Dublin.

May the 8th. The Duke of Wirtenberg came from his Quarters to Dublin; and five
Ships laden with Arms and Ammunition came into that Bay, by whom we understood
of His Majesty's departure from England a second time, and safe arrival in
Holland.

May the 9th. three Irish Press-masters taken nigh Macroomp, were Hanged at
Cork; and Lieutenant Moore goes with a Party nigh Bantry, where he killed five
of the Enemy, and took some Cattle; one Cornet Evanson kills four more; and
another Rapparee being Condemned, had his Life saved for guiding Lieutenant
Crawford to a Party of Rapparees nigh Macroomp, of whom seventeen were killed,
one Hanged, and eleven taken Prisoners.

There was now a Garrison of the Militia in Castle-Haven, one of those Forts
which the Irish delivered to the Spaniards in Queen Elizabeth's time, famous
for that Sea Fight in the Haven, between Sir Richard Levison and Don Pedro de
Zubiaur, the Spanish Admiral, where greatest part of the Spaniards were sunk or
disabled. From hence Colonel Townsend sent a Party of his Men to scour the
Country; they met with a Party of Rapparees, and killed one Regan their
Captain, with Borg his Lieutenant, and four more.

Nigh this time one hundred and fifty of the Irish The Irish take a Prey nigh
the Blackwater.
Army, joined with a Party of Rapparees, came over the Black-water and took a
considerable Prey from our side. Colonel Donep being not far off, gave the
Allarm to the Country by firing a Cannon, and with a few Danes and a Party of
the Militia, pursued the Enemy: A Danish Lieutenant and eight Men overtook them
at a place called Ballyderrawne, and had so much Courage as to Engage in the
Rear of nigh sixty; but the Lieutenant being killed, the rest retired, till
Colonel Donep came up with Twenty-four Danes and Militia, these put the Enemy
into some disorder; and then being reinforced by a greater number of the
Militia, they followed the Enemy beyond Killworth, and in the pursuit killed
fifty, whereof four were Officers, (viz.) Captain Butler, Lieutenant Condon,
another Lieutenant, and a Cornet, taking also forty Horses, several Arms and
Accoutrements, and recovered the Prey, with some more to make an addition to it.

May the 15th. a Party of the Militia of Bandon, took Captain Hugh Donavan, and
six of O Donavan's Regiment Prisoners: And about forty Rapparees were surprised
in a Wood in the Night as they sat at Supper, by a Lieutenant and eight Men,
who coming silently up to where they saw the Light, they fired amongst them and
killed four, the rest dispersing at the suddenness of the Accident; the
Lieutenant and his Men got about twenty Horses and other Booty.

One Major O Neal was sent from Athlone to view the Fortifications at
Ballimore; but instead of returning with an Account of the Place, he comes over
to us: And one Mr. Whittingham makes his escape out of Connaught, giving an
Account of several Murders committed by the Rapparees. Sir Garret Ailmer and
some other Prisoners, taken at Derry, etc. were exchanged: And our Provisions
going to the Stores at Mullingar, are again attempted by a Party of Rapparees,
upon the Common between that and Kinegad, which is eight miles, and a waste
Country, with Woods and Boggs on each side; but their design was frustrated by
eight of Colonel Brewer's Men, though they killed a Suttler by a Random-Shot.

May the 18th. Lieutenant General Ginckel, Commander in Chief of Their
Majesty's Forces for the succeeding Campaign, goes to view the Town of
Mullingar; and Provisions and Ammunition were daily sent thither, as also to
Belturbet, for the supply of our Northern Forces: and more Recruits both of
Horse and Foot, with Ammunition and Soldiers Clothes, arrive daily at Dublin
from England.

The Bay of Baltemore in Carberry, in the West of Ireland, is a safe place for
Ships of any Burden to ride in, and was one of those which the Spaniards much
frequented in former times, being called by them Valentimore. The Dragon and
Advice Frigates, Some of our Seamen and Militia join, and march into the Enemies
Quarters.
being about the middle of May in this Bay, they Landed a hundred Seamen, who
joining some of the Militia, marched up into the Country, and saw several
Parties of the Enemy; but they not caring to Engage, our People took what
Cattle and other Prey they had a mind to; and two days after the Dragon brought
a Privateer of St. Malo's of eight Guns, called the Swallow, to Kinsale; the
Commander of which gave the first certain Account, That several French Ships
with Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and some Officers, were gone into the River
Shannon toward Limerick, on Board of which Ships was Monsieur St. Ruth and
other French Officers sent to Command the Irish Army. And near the same time,
six Monsieur St. Ruth Lands in Ireland to Command their Army.
of our Ships come to Cork with Recruits and Provisions, under the Conduct of
the Smyrna Frigate.

A Party of three hundred Horse and Dragoons, with two hundred of the Militia,
went from Cork to relieve the Garrison of Ballynagooly; after which they went
to view Bally*Clough, in the Enemies possession, but upon our approach, they
drew into their Works, so that our Men killed only five, and took as many
Prisoners. Captain Barry of the Militia, kills six in a Wood at Ballyhooly
beyond the Black-water; and the Militia of Fermoy, upon an Expedition, kill ten
more, taking also eight Prisoners. One Maurice Spulane, a Rapparee Captain, was
killed nigh Castle-Haven; and Quartermaster Edwards kills sixteen nigh
Tipperary; and Captain Massey eight more in the County of Limerick; and three
were carried to Clonmell there to be hanged: four were taken in a Wood near
Dramoree, as they were dividing some Money they had stole. So that on all
sides, though these Vermin were at work to do Mischief, yet the Army, and
indeed the Militia, were as active to suppress them. However, the White
Sergeant, with one Mackabe and Cavenagh, were very troublesome nigh Kildare.
Those were three Fellows all under the same Circumstances, who running away
from the Irish Army, they got small Parties of Rogues together, and haunted the
Bogg of Allen, and other places of the Country thereabouts, which were
particularly well known to them, and by that means gave the Inhabitants no
small disturbance. They were hunted by the Militia nigh this time, and three of
the White Serjeant's men Shot at one time, and two of Mackabe's at another; and
soon after three more were killed near Murney. And our public Accounts tell us
of a hundred and ten Rapparees killed by Captain Baggott's Militia Dragoons
since the beginning of this Month in several Parties. But Cavenagh and his Men
being afraid to trade any more in the Bogg of Allen, they remove toward the
Mountains of Wicklow, where Lieutenant Cooly met with them, and killing
fifteen, took their Captain, upon which the rest dispersed, or joined with
Mackabe and the White Sergeant.

May the 20th. Mark Baggot, formerly spoke of, Mark Bagg^. hanged.
being condemned and reprieved till now, was this Day hanged, having said
nothing to the purpose, but that our best places to pass the Shannon were
Melick and Banoher.

May 24. Major Welden of the Militia, and Captain Phillips of Colonel Earls's
Regiment, kill thirteen Rapparees near Montmelick. Captain Underhill, of my
Lord Lisburn's Regiment, with sixty Foot and ten Dragoons, goes to Ballenderry,
May the 26th. where they met with a Party of nigh three hundred of the Irish
Army, whom they engaged, killing Captain Geoghagan and four more Officers, and
(as the Account was) fifty private Men. Next Day the same Captain went out with
only twenty four Men and killed twelve; but being set upon by a good Party of
the Irish, commanded by Colonel Geoghagan, he made his retreat to Dunore
Castle, having only one Man killed and another wounded. The same Day some Dutch
Horse being come to the Camp now at Mullingar, a Party of them went abroad,
killed several Rapparees, and brought in thirty Prisoners.

At this time Lieutenant General Douglas was marched Lieutenant General Douglas
encamps with a Party at Ardagh.
out of the North with a Body of Men and encamped at a place called Ardagh in
the County of Longford, twelve Miles from Mullingar: And the Duke of Wirtenberg
was gone toward Thurles, where the Foreigners that quartered last Winter in
Munster were ordered to Rendezvous, and to be ready to join the rest of the
Army nigh Banoher, where our Great Men had some thoughts at that time of
passing.

Our Train of Artillery was also upon their march from Dublin to Mullingar,
being such an one as never had been seen before in that Kingdom.

Major General Ruvigny is now at the Camp at Mullingar, Our Great Officers take
the Field.
whither went Major General Mackay on the 28th. who came lately from Scotland.
Major General Kirk and Sir John Lanier go for England, and land at Neston on
the thirtieth. And much about the same time the Duke of Leinster's Regiment of
Horse, formerly my Lord Devonshire's, landed in England and marched toward
Coventry. Major General Talmash being sent by His Majesty to assist the other
Great Officers this Campaign in Ireland, landed at Dublin the latter end of
May, having with him Sir Martin Beckman, chief Ingineer, and in a Day or two he
went toward the Camp.

About this time the Gentlemen of the County of East-Meath, meeting at Trim,
agreed to scour the Red Bog nigh that place, where the Rapparees haunted and
had done much mischief during the last Winter; the issue was, that thirty five
were killed, and six more fairly hanged. Some were also killed by the Militia
of the County of Waterford, and others near Kilmallock, by Parties that
advanced so far. By Packets from England the General had an Account by Letters
from Monsieur de Opdam, Lieutenant General of the Horse in Holland, who went to
Breda about the exchange of Prisoners taken at the Boyne, Cork, Kinsale, etc.
with the Dutch taken at the Battle of Fleur, that the French refused to release
the Irish Officers under such Characters as they gave themselves, but left them
under very ill Circumstances, upbraiding them in terms very disrespectful, though
they released the Irish Soldiers, and sent them to Thoulon, Marseilles, etc.
for the Sea-service.

This Month now draws toward an end, and all People that had any business
toward the Camp, are resorting thither; in order to which the Lords-Justices
set out a Proclamation, Commanding all Sutlers and others to carry no Ale, or
other Liquors to the Camp, but what was good and well brewed, and to be at
least six Days old; to prevent Fluxes and other Distempers.

There was also another Proclamation, Commanding all Persons that designed to
be Sutlers, to come to Dublin for Licenses, and to renew those each Journey.
But this being found inconvenient for the Army, it was recalled.

May the 30th. Lieutenant General Ginckel went The General goes to the Camp.
from Dublin, and lying that Night at Tycroghan, next Day his Excellency came
to the Camp at Mullingar, where he found (Foot, viz.) Major General Kirk's,
Lord Meath's, Lord Lisburn's, Lord Cutts's, Colonel Foulks's, Colonel Brewer's,
Lord George Hamilton's, and Colonel Earls's (Horse,) Sir John Lanier's,
Brigadier Villers's, Colonel Langston's, Rydesel's, Roucour's and
Monopovillon's, with Colonel Leveson's Dragoons, who, before his coming over
was made a Brigadier by His Majesty.

The Soldiers every Day in one Regiment or another began to appear fine in
their new Cloths; and, before the Army took the Field, the Lords-Justices, with
the Advice of the General, appointed several Officers, that had been or were
actually then in the Army, to Command the Militia in different places of the
Kingdom, not as being Absolute, but rather Superintendents of the whole: As in
the County of Cork Major Stroud was employed, in the Counties of Wickloe and
Wexford Major Brooks and Captain Phillips; as were also Major Tichburn,
Lieutenant Colonel Toby Caulfield, and others in several other places.

CHAP. V.
June, 1691.
The Fortifications at Mullingar contracted into a narrower compass. A
Stratagem of the Irish to get Horses. The Irish march toward Athlone. Our Army
goes toward Ballymore: That place besieged: Its Situation described. Four
Batteries planted. The General's Message sent in writing. A Parley beat: The
Fort surrendered. Ballymore better fortified. The Army march toward Athlone,
and joined by the Duke of Wirtenberg. We approach the Town. Batteries planted.
The order of the Attack. The English Town taken. Batteries against the Irish
Town. The Enemy ruin our Works. A design to pass the Shannon. The Enemy burn
our close Gallery. A Council of War held. A Party ordered to pass the River.
The Town stormed. An Express sent to St. Ruth. A part of our Army left in the
Country, and why. Major Culliford surprises some of the Irish. Inniskeen
fortified.

June the 1st. Very early in the Morning Grace and Hogan, two Rapparee
Captains, with eighty Men, surprised a Castle called Camgart, within six Miles
of Birr, kept all Winter by a Party of the Militia; the news of which was
brought some time after to Carolante, where was a Garrison kept by the Earl of
Drogheda's Regiment: The Account of this was brought in haste, and very
imperfect; so that Ensign Story (who was there with another Officer) thinking
to hinder the Irish from getting into the Castle, or at least if they were in,
to prevent the burning of it, he goes with all speed with a Party of thirty Men
from Carolante toward Camgart, being not above an English Mile; but the Enemy
were got in long before, and had secured all the Garrison, and seeing our Party
approach they kept themselves very close within the Works. The Ensign and his
Men coming nigh the place, and seeing no appearance of either Enemies or
Friends, he posted his Men in an Orchard within Musket Shot of the Castle, and
himself with two Men went up toward the Gate, but being got too nigh the
Works, a Woman carrying Water to a Cabin, made a sign that the Enemy was
within, which occasioned the Ensign to stop, at which they fired a whole Volley
upon him, killing himself and one of the Men; the Party could not bring off the
Ensign's Body, being so near the Castle; but, after some stay there, they
marched off without any further trouble from the Enemy. The other Officer,
Commanding in Carolante, sent back a Drum for Ensign Story's Body, which the
Irish made some scruple to deliver, but proferr'd to bury him Honorably, which
they did, allowing his own Drum to beat the Dead March before him, and
themselves fired three Vollies at his Grave, acknowledging at his Death some
former Civilities from him; which is very rare with that sort of People: But
this particular I mention to show the incertainty of the things of this World;
for this Officer was well and at liberty at nine a Clock in the Morning, but
before twelve he was not only in the power, but buried by his Enemies, and that
with great Formality. And a Man that is at the Pains to Describe other Peoples
Actions, may be allowed the liberty to leave one Page to the Memory of his own
Brother.

As soon as the General came to Mullingar, he ordered the Works that had been
made last Winter, for the security of that place, to be contracted into a
narrower compass, that fewer Men might be left for their defense, and planted
four Piece of Cannon upon the Mount, toward the South Side of the Town. Whilst
the General continued here, the Design of passing the Shannon at Melick and
Banoher seemed to be the most plausible; and therefore, June the 5th. the
General sent Mr. Trench (a Clergyman, and one who has been Mr. Trench sent to
the Duke of Wirtenberg.
very forward in Their Majesty's Service) to the Duke of Wirtenberg, then at
Bally-Boy, (as was expected) with Directions to view the aforementioned
places, and encamp thereabouts till the rest of the Army joined him; or, if he
could, to surprise a Passage over the Shannon, whilst the Enemy were gazing
upon the Motion of the other part of the Army: Mr. Trench, and his Party of
thirty Horse, with a great deal of difficulty got through the Enemy (who then
were at Bally-Boy, and most of that Country thereabouts) to the Duke of
Wirtenberg, whom he found encamped at Roscreagh; but, after Mr. Trench's
departure, the General and the rest of the Great Officers, considering that
should they decline to the left, toward Melick and Banoher, and leave the
great Road leading toward Athlone, if the Enemy would be desperate, there was
nothing to hinder them from marching even up to Dublin; and therefore they sent
another Express to the Duke of Wirtenberg, on the 7th. to march forwards, in
order to join the Army, toward Athlone.

Now you must know, the Irish having been very A Stratagem of the Irish to get
Horses.
industrious all the Winter past (and ever since) to form a Body of Horse, as
well by stealing ours, as by other methods most agreeable to their purpose:
their last Trick was, to order all the Gentlemen Volunteers in those Countries
within their own Jurisdiction, to appear with their best Horses and Arms by
such a day at Limerick, pretending to conferr marks of Honor and Distinction
upon the forwardest; by which means they Assembled a great many Men, and most
of them well Mounted, who all being drawn up in the King's-Island, the greatest
part of them were on a sudden ordered to dismount and deliver up their Horses
for the use of the Army, who they were told, could better manage them for the
King's Interest. In a day or two after this, the whole Body They march toward
Athlone.
of their Army being about twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse and
Dragoons, moved toward Athlone, which way they understood by their Spies, that
our Army designed to march.

Saturday June the 6th. the General with his Army Our Army march toward
Ballymore.
marched from Mullingar to Rathcondra, between Meerscourt and Cairn-Castle,
being about six Miles, leaving at Mullingar nine Twenty four Pounders, one
eighteen Pounder and three Mortars. Within a Mile of our Camp we were joined
upon the march by Lieutenant General Douglas with the following Regiments,
(viz.) Foot: Lieutenant General Douglas's, Brigadier Stuart's, Sir Henry
Bellasis's, Colonel Tiffin's, Colonel St. John's, Colonel Gustavus Hamilton's,
Colonel Herbert's, and Colonel Creighton's, as also Colonel Woolsey's: Twelve
Troops of Horse, with Colonel Wynn's and Sir Albert Cunningham's Dragoons. The
same day a Deserter of my Lord George Hamilton's was hanged upon a Bush as the
Army marched by. That night the General sent out a strong Party of Dragoons
toward Ballymore, as well to prevent relief from getting in, as to secure the
Enemy from stealing of in the night toward Athlone: These meeting with some of
that Garrison abroad, killed four, and brought in two Prisoners, one of which
was very much wounded, and gave an Account, That the Garrison in Ballymore was
a Detachment of their best Men sent from Athlone, being about a thousand in
number.

June the 7th. the Army marched to Ballymore, Ballymore besieged.
and by twelve a Clock had beat the Enemy within the Works, and surrounded the
Fort; the Enemy firing their small Shot, and two small Turkish Pieces that were
mounted upon old Cart-Wheels. But before I give you an Account of the taking
this Fort, it will not be amiss to give you a slender Description of it.

I do not find any thing Remarkable of this place The Place described.
in former times; it is only a small Village upon the Great Road between
Mullingar and Athlone, being ten Miles distant from each. The place has always
been very poor, and had only two or three Houses of Entertainment in it, the
rest being all Irish Cabbins, to the number of a hundred or thereabouts,
(though now there is neither House nor Cabin standing.) A little to the right
of the Town as you go to Athlone, stood a pretty Church upon a rising ground;
about a hundred and twenty Yards from which there lies a spot of Ground about
six Acres, which is almost an Island, by reason of a great Lough to the East,
North, and North-East; and on the North-West there is Bogg; a small neck of
Land running from the Church on the South-West, prevents it* from being
altogether an Island. This Isthmus had been formerly Fortified with a double
Ditch, and within that a Stone Wall, and then there stood a pretty strong
House, where one Widow White lived the year before, when Lieutenant General
Douglas marched that way to Athlone, who took Protection, and secured a good
stock of Sheep and Cows in this Peninsula whilst we lay Encamped by the Town.
At the further end next the broadest part of the Lough, stood a strong Danish
Fort (as this Kingdom is every where full of them) now Fortified with a Ditch
twenty Foot broad and ten Foot deep, being also Pallisado'd round. Toward the
East and North-East, the Lough is so broad, that Cannon can do no execution
over it; but toward the South-East, there is a large round Hill which
overlooks the Island, and from whence you may see into all places of it. This
place was neglected by us last year, as being so poor in it self, that it could
not support a Garrison; but the Irish seeing the natural strength of it, and
withal the advantage of disturbing our neighboring Garrisons from thence, they
presently fell to work and Fortified it; here they kept a Garrison all Winter,
and toward the Spring sent that Detachment thither which we now found.

At the approach of our Army the General sent a The Fort Summoned.
Summons to the place; but Lieutenant Colonel Mylo Burk being proud of the name
of Governor, would not hearken to the General's mild Proposals; then four
Fieldpieces were brought down, which played three or four hours at Random upon
the Island; and a Sergeant and fifteen Men being in an old Castle nigh a
quarter of a Mile to the South-West of the Fort, after all hopes of being
relieved, was cut military map off; the Sergeant fired upon some of our Men and
killed one or two, for which, as soon as the Castle was Surrendered, he was
hanged.

By ten a Clock at night, four Batteries were raised, one below the Hill on the
East toward the Lough side, Four Batteries planted.
of six Guns, two more of four a piece, toward the Church, and another for
four Mortars. On Monday the 8th. about Sunrising these Batteries began to
play, and some time after the General sent a Summons to the Governor, That if
he would not deliver up the Place within two hours, he should have the same
Treatment that his Sergeant met with the day before. But he pretending to
mistake the Message, and desiring his Excellency to let him have his pleasure
in Writing, the General sent a Gentleman again with this following Note.

Since the Governor desires to see in Writing the The General's Message to the
Governor, sent afterward in Writing.
Message which I just now sent him by word of mouth, he may know, That if he
Surrenders the Fort of Ballymore to me within two hours, I will give him and
his Garrison their Lives, and make them Prisoners of War; if not, neither he
nor they shall have any Quarter, nor another opportunity of saving themselves:
However, if in that time their Women and Children will go out, they have my
leave.

Given at the Camp this 8th. day of June, 1691, at 8 a Clock in the Morning.
Bar De GINCKEL.


But nothing less than marching out with Bag and Baggage, Drums beating,
Colors flying, etc. would satisfy this Noble Governor: Upon which, the
General ordered all our Guns and Mortars to fall to work, the Bombs tearing up
the Sandy Banks, and the Irish running like Conies from one Hole to another;
whilst the Guns were battering the Works and making a Breach, the Irish in the
mean time did what they could with their two Guns and small Shot; but
Lieutenant Colonel Burton their Ingineer, had his Hand shot off from one of our
Batteries, and their Works went down apace, which made the Irish very uneasy.
This Siege however, was very delightful to our whole Army, who had a view of it
from the adjoining Hill. My Lord Justice Coningesby also, who was now in the
Camp, and stayed here for some time, having the satisfaction of being an
Eyewitness of the forwardness of our Soldiers.

About twelve a Clock the Enemy beat a Parley, and A Parley beat.
hung out a white Flag, but the General would not take notice of it; and our
Batteries went on with that success, that two Breaches were made, one in the
uttermost Fort next the Town, the other on the Works on the same side within
the Island; and the General seemed resolved to Storm the Fort next morning at
the coming up of the Tin Boats: there were four large Boats however then in the
Camp, which were the Fleet prepared last Year for Hoard's Expedition upon the
Shannon, and were all Winter at Mullingar. These the General ordered to be
Launched upon the Lough, and filled with Armed Men. The Enemy seeing this, and
their Island being altogether open on that side, they were most terrible
afraid of being all destroyed: So that about seven a Clock they began to beat
a Parley again, and hung out their Flag, begging Quarter for God's sake: which
the General hearing and being in his own temper a very Merciful Man, he was
pleased to order the Guns and Mortars to forbear firing; and by eight of the
Clock, the Governor and some of the Officers coming out, they surrendered The
Fort surrendered.
the Place at discretion: Upon which Colonel Earl, with eight hundred
Firelocks, marched in over the Breach that our Guns had made; and the Enemy,
laying down their Arms, were continued Prisoners in the Fort all Night.

June the 9th. About six a Clock in the Morning the What Stores and Provisions
found therein.
General went to view the Fort, wherein were found fifty one Officers, seven
hundred and eighty Soldiers, and two hundred and sixty Rapparees, who were most
of them Armed; these were all sent Prisoners to Dublin, and from thence all,
except the Officers, were sent to Lambay, an Island above a League from the
Continent. There were also nigh four hundred Women and Children, all crowded up
in this sad place, who were set at liberty. Our Men found also in the Fort four
hundred and thirty Sheep, about forty Cows, and fifty Garrans, and good store
of Oat-meal. We lost in this Action only eight Men; and the Irish had about
forty killed by our Bombs and Cannon. But it seemed very inaccountable to most
People, that the Enemy neither endeavored to relieve or quit this place, since
they lost in it above a Regiment of their best Men; though this was but what they
did afterward at several places nigh Limerick.

The 10th. In the Morning early two hundred Men Ballymore better fortified.
were drawn out to work at the Fort, which the General had ordered to be better
fortified by a Line of Communication from the Outworks to the Danish Fort, and
other additions toward the Waterside; our Men fell to work at first in
repairing the Breaches, but were obliged to desist by bad Weather; however they
levelled all the Batteries and Trenches that we had made against the Fort. And
Orders were given out that Night for one hundred Men of a Regiment to be for
the Works in the Morning, with a Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign. The Sutlers
that were ready to go to Mullingar were to have a Guard at the Hospital, where
they were to take up what Men were sick or wounded: And the Majors of each
Regiment were to have a particular Care that the Men's Arms were fixed and
clean; which Orders were often repeated.

June the 11th. One Captain Tailor and two private Men desert from the Enemy,
who acquaint us, that my Lord Tyrconnel, by a Declaration, dated May the 15th.
had ordered all the Rapparees into Connaught, to recruit their Army; and that
the General, St. Ruth, at his going toward Athlone, had ordered Brigadier
Maxwel's Men to drive all the Cattle in those parts in the Rear of the Army,
for their support; and that the Irish talked of giving us Battle; though they
were generally dissatisfied with the few and mean Clothes sent them out of
France, and the small allowances of Provisions, etc.

This Evening it was given out in Orders, that the Chaplains should say Prayers
at the Heads of their respective Regiments at ten in the Morning and seven at
Night, and to admonish the Men from Swearing; a Vice too common at all times
amongst us.

The 12th. the Soldiers were prohibited Gaming; and all Guards were to be
relieved constantly at nine a Clock. Our Line of Communication was then
finished, and we were working upon a Spur, Half Moon, and Horn-Work, with a
good Ditch to cover the Drawbridge and Entrance to the Out-work. There was
also a Bastion begun to the Right, toward the Lough, and a large Half Moon
toward the Left, both which command the new uttermost Work; and the Fort was
ordered to be amended by throwing part of it down, and building it a new. A
Work was likewise designed along the Lough-side to cover those within, that
side being open, and none could stir in the Fort but were exposed to Shot from
the Hill. A Platform was also designed for eight Guns on the top of the Mount.

The same Day ten Guns and three Mortars, left at Mullingar, were brought up;
and four Troopers desert the Enemy, who confirm the Report of their being at
Athlone with the greatest part of their Army.

June the 13th. One hundred Prisoners were sent from the Camp to Carne-Castle,
(a place three Miles hence, where the Rapparees used to shelter themselves) and
demolished it. And stealing being become very common in the Camp, a Fellow was
hanged for stealing an Horse; which wrought some Reformation for a time.

The 14th. and 15th. we continued improving the forementioned Works. On the
16th. a strong Party of Horse was sent to view Athlone. And on the 17th.
Lieutenant Colonel Toby Purcell was left Governor of Ballymore, with four
Companies of Lieutenant General Douglas's Regiment, who went himself toward
the North, and from thence to Flanders. The same Day my Lord Lisburn was sent
out toward Lanesborough with a Party of two thousand Foot and five hundred
Horse, who, meeting with a small Party of the Irish Horse, killed two or three,
and the rest fled in haste toward the Shannon, but mistaking the Ford one or
two more were drowned. That Evening Orders were given out, That no Sutler or
other Person whatever should buy any Ammunition, Arms, or Accoutrements, or any
thing that belongs to the Soldiers, on pain of Death; because the Soldiers, for
a little Money, would be apt to sell their Clothes or Shoes. And, if as great
Care were not taken of most of them as of Children, they would soon be in a
very indifferent condition.

June the 18th. The Army marched from Ballymore, The Army march toward
Athlone, and is joined by the Duke of Wirtenberg.
and encamped that Night at Ballyburn Pass near Twoy, where we were joined by
that part of the Army commanded by the Duke of Wirtenberg and Count Nassau,
being all Foreigners, and seven thousand in Number; and now our Army is about
eighteen thousand.

The General with a Party of Horse views Athlone, where he could see several of
the Enemy's Horse upon the little Hills nigh the Town, and their Camp about two
Miles beyond the River upon a narrow Neck of Land between two Boggs, where they
remained till the Town was taken.

June the 19th. Very early in the Morning our Advance-Party We approach the
Town.
marched, and by nine a Clock had beat the Enemy from several out Ditches to
within the Walls of the English Town on this side the River, our Men lodging
themselves in the same Ditches. For though the Irish quitted it the Year before,
and burnt the Houses both without and within the Walls upon the approach of
Lieutenant General Douglas, yet they designed to show more Courage this time,
and defend this side the River also; which made some blame Lieutenant General
Douglas, as guilty of an Oversight, in not demolishing the Walls when he
quitted it the Year preceding; but those that accompanied him in that
Expedition know that he had not time for it. And since the Irish seemed so
Brave, the General was resolved to lose no time, ordering three Guns to be
planted nigh a Ford on Lanesborough-side, which played all that Day upon a
Breast-Work that the Enemy had on the other side. About six in the Evening our
Guns came up to a Battery planted between Isker and Athlone; and that Night we
were hard at work in raising another Battery, on which we mounted nine eighteen
Pounders. And,

June the 20th. about eight a Clock in the Morning Batteries planted.
our Battery began to play on a Bastion not far from Dublin-Gate; by twelve we
made a Breach the breadth of the Bastion, and continued firing to prevent the
Enemy from raising any Works within. About three a Clock a Council of War was
held, wherein the following Rules were agreed upon, in order to the storming
the Place at five. Which, because they show the Method of Attacking Towns by
Storm, it will not be impertinent here to insert them.

Order of the Attack at ATHLONE the Twentieth of June, 1691, at Five in the
Afternoon.
There are to be Commanded from each Wing a hundred The Order of the Attack at
Athlone.
and fifty Granadiers, in all three hundred, which are to be Commanded by a
Lieutenant Colonel and Major, six Captains, twelve Lieutenants, twelve
Sergeants, and that Detachment shall be disposed of as follows.

1. A Lieutenant, Sergeant, and thirty Granadiers; who as soon as they shall
enter the Breach, shall take to the Right toward the Bridge, to prevent the
Enemies getting that way into the Town; but if they find any Retrenchment
before the Bridge, they shall Post themselves in Covert as well as they can
thereabouts.

2. After them a Captain, two Lieutenants, two Sergeants, and fifty Soldiers.

3. Then the Lieutenant Colonel, three Captains, five Lieutenants, five
Sergeants, with a hundred and twenty Granadiers, who shall follow the two
former Detachments toward the Bridge.

4. After these the Major, with two Captains, four Lieutenants, four Sergeants,
and a hundred and ten Granadiers, who are to take to the Left, and clear the
Rampart of the Enemy.

5. After these fifty Workmen, whereof Twenty-five are to follow the
Lieutenant Colonel to the Right, and Twenty-five to go after the Major to the
Left, with Hatchets, Pick-Axes, Shovels, and Hammers.

6. After them shall follow the two Battalions of Stuart and Prince Frederick,
whereof Stuart is to go to the Right, and Prince Frederick to the Left; and the
Officers are to take care that the Men do not press on too fast, but cover
themselves from the Enemies Fire as soon as they can.

7. After these two Battalions, two hundred Foot to carry Fascines, and each of
them to carry Tools along with them.

8. After these shall follow the Regiments of Brewer, to sustain Stuart, and
Count Nassau to sustain Prince Frederick.

9. The Workmen are to open, as soon as possible, the two Gates of the Town,
that the Horse and Foot may come in that way.

10. The Lieutenant-Colonels, or Major, (or both) that shall come first to the
Ford on the left of the Bridge, is to take care to prevent the Enemies Sallying
that way; and also, that their Men do not fire one upon another.

11. All these foregoing Detachments are to be Commanded by Major General
Mackay, and the Brigadiers Stuart and Vittinghoff.

To sustain all these, a good Body of Horse were got ready, and a Lieutenant of
Colonel Cambon's Regiment, according to Orders, having the Advance Party of
thirty Men, went under Covert of certain Hills within a hundred and fifty Yards
of the Breach, then Advanced upon the Plain before his Men, and the rest of the
Detachments following the Enemy fired upon us very smartly; but our Men went on
and kept their fire till they were at the Breach, which the French Lieutenant
first mounted, throwing his Granade and firing his Piece, ordering his Men to
do the like, and with great bravery encouraged his Party, though he lost his
Life in the Action. Our Granades so galled the Enemy, and the Men pressed so
fast upon the Breach, that the other quit their Works and run toward the
Bridge, whither we pursued them, and even to the foot of the Drawbridge; the
The English-Town taken.
Irish in their hurrying over the Bridge, crowded forwards so fast, that
several were crushed to death, and not a few forced over the sides of the
Bridge, who were either killed or sore bruised. When our Men had possession of
the Town they rung the Bell, and covered themselves at the Bridge foot. We lost
not above twenty men, and had about double the number Wounded; the Enemy had
about sixty killed and more wounded. Brigadier Stuart was Wounded in this
Action, and one Captain, with three private men of the Enemies taken.
Lieutenant Colonel Kirk of Brigadier Viller's Regiment, was unfortunately
killed by a great Shot from the Town, as he lay viewing the Action upon the
side of an Hill. That Evening our three Guns were drawn off from the Ford, and
nine Guns from the Battery into the Town.

June the 21st. several Detachments of Horse were Batteries planted against the
Irish-Town.
sent abroad, one Commanded by Colonel Woolsley, went toward Ballymore to meet
the eleven Guns and three Mortars that were upon the Road, and also to hasten
the Pontoons. This Evening a Battery was begun at the foot of the Bridge to the
Right, for five Twenty-four Pounders, and a Floor made for six Mortars.

The 22d. about five in the Morning, our Batteries were finished, and by six
the Cannon and Mortars begun to play very briskly on the North-East side of the
Castle where it was weakest, and by seven in the Evening a large Breach
appeared in the Wall. In the Afternoon a French Lieutenant Colonel was brought
off by our Men, who had laid under the Bridge since the Attack; he was sore
bruised, and his Back almost broke, but seemed not to be so much afflicted with
his own private Misfortune, as in being engaged with a People who were like to
prove but very indifferent defenders of his Master the French King's Interest
in that Kingdom.

The 23d. our Guns and Mortars continued firing all Night with that success,
that by five in the Morning the whole side of the Castle was beaten down, and
our Bombs had that effect upon it, as to make it very unserviceable to the
Enemy, who were now forced to make an Hole on the West Side of the Wall to get
out and in, though in a day or two they had no business there at all. About two
that The Tin Boats come up.
Afternoon our Tin Boats, Floats, and other Materials, came to the Camp, with
Colonel Byerley's and my Lord of Oxford's Regiments, and a great many People
were set to work to repair those Boats that were spoiled the Year before nigh
Limerick; for there being more New ones expected from England than really came,
and what we had being judged too few, those Old Boats were brought out of a
place where they had been thrown by, and so were fitted up to lay next the
Shore; which occasioned a Report, that they were concealed on purpose by the
Store-keeper; but the thing was as it is here related. The same Afternoon a
Prisoner was taken nigh the Bridge, who gave an Account, that Sixty-four Men
were in a Mill upon the Bridge, which being fired by our Granades, and those
within not being able to quench it, nor get thence, they were all consumed with
the Fire, except the Prisoner and one more that escaped by leaping into the
Water. A Drummer comes to the General from the Town, with an Answer of his
Letter, sent the Day before, about the exchange of Prisoners.

The 24th. was spent in raising three Batteries, one below the Bridge, another
above it, and a third without the Town-Wall by the Riverside, opposite to a
Bastion the Enemy had made on the other side the River. That Evening one of my
Lord Lisburn's Men going under the Bridge to see for Plunder, found a pair of
Colors amongst the dead Men; and though the Enemy fired a great many Shot at
him, yet he brought them off flying, and presented them to the General, who
rewarded the Soldier with five Guinnea's.

We begin now to contrive Methods of passing the River, and a Lieutenant of
Horse was commanded with a Party to a Ford toward Lanesborough, where the
General was informed there might be an easy and undiscovered Passage for most
of our Army, whilst our Cannon amused the Enemy at the Town. This Party went
and found the Pass according to Information; but though he was positively ordered
to return as soon as he had passed the River, yet such are the powerful Charms
of Black Cattle, to some sorts of People, that the Lieutenant espying a Prey
some distance from him on the other side, must needs be scampering after them;
by which means our Design was discovered, and the Enemy immediately provided
against it, by throwing up strong Works on the other side: The Lieutenant, I
beard, was afterward tried, and suffered for it.

That Night the Enemy raised two Batteries above The Enemy plant new Batteries.
the Castle, the one close by the River, the other at a greater distance from
it upon a rising Ground; the one of four, the other of three six Pounders; with
the latter of which, June 25. they played on the old Walls in the Town, where
our Men were lodged, but did little or no harm; with the other they shot into
some of our Regiments, encamped near the River, which obliged them to remove to
a greater distance. Our Battery of six Twenty-four Pounders below the Bridge,
played on the Enemy's Breast-Work on the other side, which did it very great
Damage, and also ruined most of the Houses that were as yet left standing;
which so exposed the Enemies other Works to our view, that they were forced to
quit most of their Trenches, none appearing but some few behind the Castle.

The 26th. was spent in firing from seven Batteries Seven Batteries now at work.
upon the Enemies Works, and a great many were killed in endeavoring to repair
them. About thirty Wagons laden with Powder come to the Camp; and that Night
we possess our selves of all the Bridge, except one Arch at the farther end on
Connaught side, which was broken down, and we repair another broken Arch in our
possession; and all Night our Guns and Mortars play most furiously. For the
Design of passing the River at the Ford being frustrate, the General and the
other Great Officers resolve to try what can be done in forcing our way through
Athlone it self, and therefore we labor hard to gain the Bridge; but what we
got here was Inch by Inch as it were, the Enemy sticking very close to it,
though great Numbers of them were slain by our Guns: And this Service cost us
great store of Ammunition.

The 27th. seven Rapparees were brought in, being taken at Ballynehewen; to
which place the General ordered a Garrison of a Lieutenant and twenty Men. That
Afternoon one hundred Carrs came from Dublin to the Camp laden with
Cannon-Ball: And all that Day our Guns and Mortars fired without intermission.
We raised also a Battery of five Guns in the Meadow below the Town, to stop the
way the Enemy had on that side of coming into the Town. And in the Evening our
Men burn the Breast-Works the Enemy had on the other side the broken Arch with
throwing their Granado's; for most of these being made of Fascines, and the
Weather being hot, they soon dried and easily took fire. That Night we wrought
very hard on the last Arch in the Enemies possession. So that on,

Sunday the 28th. in the Morning our Beams were laid The Enemy ruin our Works.
over and partly planked; which the Enemy perceiving, they detached a Sergeant
and ten Men out of Brigadier Maxwell's Regiment, being all bold and daring
Scots, these were all in Armor, and came over their own Works with a design to
ruin ours, but were all of them slain; and yet this did not discourage as many
more from setting about the same piece of Service, and they effected it by
throwing down our Planks and Beams, maugre all our Firing and Skill, though they
all lost their Lives as Testimonies of their Valor, except two who escaped
amongst all the Fire and Smoke: This made us resolved to carry on our Work by a
close Gallery on the Bridge; which was done. But all last Night and that
Morning the Enemy were hard at work, in repairing some old, and making new
Trenches in the Meadow opposite to our new Battery; and our Guns are now
playing very briskly, especially on a place called Connaught-Tower, which stood
on the Northside the Castle, and was so solid, that it took up more time to
bring down than any one part of the Castle.

This Afternoon a Council of War was held, wherein A design to pass the Shannon.
it was concluded, That next Morning we should attempt passing the Shannon; one
Party to go over the Bridge; a second to pass upon the Floats and Pontoons; and
a third Detachment were to go over the Ford below the Bridge; where our Horse
were also to pass and second the Foot; a large Breach being made on the other
side for their entrance. And accordingly at Night Orders were given out, That
forty three Granadeers, eighty three private Men, three Captains, five
Lieutenants, two Ensigns, and seven Sergeants out of each Regiment, with
fifteen Shots a Man, and every one a green Bough in his Hat, should be ready by
six a Clock in the Morning under the Walls of the Town, and all to be commanded
by Major General Mackay; but the whole to be done with the greatest silence and
secrecy imaginable. Killkenny was the Word that Night.

The 29th. in the Morning our Men were ready according to Orders, and marched
to the Town-Wall, where they stood at their Arms; but before our Boats and
their Appurtenances could be drawn into the Town it was ten a Clock; and all
this Morning we observed great Bodies of the Enemy march into the Irish Town
(though our Cannon were very troublesome to them) for the Irish guessing at our
Design, or rather being assured of it by some Deserters, they drew a very
considerable Body of their choicest Men to their Works. But whilst these
Preparations were making on both sides, the Granadiers of both Parties that
defended the Breast-works on the Bridge, throwing The Enemy burn our close
Gallery.
Hand-Granadoes one at the other; the Enemies Grenades set fire to our
Fascines that lay close on the broken Arch where our Gallery was, which
suddenly flamed so violently, that our Men could not endure the Fire and Smoke
that blew in their faces; and though they labored very hard to extinguish it,
yet could not prevent the burning that part of the Breast-work next the broken
Arch, but preserved all the rest, by raising another Breast-work on a sudden
just behind the burnt one. By this time it was past twelve a Clock, and the
Generals finding the Attack upon the Town that way like to cost many Lives,
they deferred it till new Measures were Consulted on; nor knew they well what
to think at present, seeing themselves defeated in so great a Project; and, as
it fell out, Providence in all appearance had ordered it for the best; for it is
probable, that if our Men had really forced the Bridge at that time, they would
have run great hazards in storming the Town, the Enemy being so well provided
for them; and then our Retreat could not have been without the ruin of more Men
than it has pleased God we lost in all the Actions since. All that Afternoon
our Guns continue firing. And also,

June the 30. Our Canon play without ceasing and in the Afternoon another
Council of War was held, wherein the difficulties of staying there any longer
were represented, all the Forage being consumed A Council of War.
for several Miles round, so that they must resolve to do something with
Expedition, or else to remove with the whole Army to some more likely Pass,
which wanted not its inconveniences neither, since by this means the Enemy
were encouraged, and our own men disheartened at the beginning of the Campaign,
and not only so, but upon our removing there was a way open for the Enemy even
to Dublin it self, at least into all the Countries adjacent, by which means we
must expose at least our Provisions to hazard, and so be forced to go back to
make a defensive, instead of an offensive War; And on the other hand to make an
Attack upon the Town, not to succeed, and then be forced to remove would be of
more fatal Consequence.

However, the Duke of Wertenberg, the Major Generals, Mackey, Talmash, Ruvigny
and Tetteau, urged that no brave Action could be attempted without hazard, and
considering the goodness of our own men, and the faintness of the Enemy in all
great Attacks that had been made upon them, hitherto, they stood up for the
probability of the attempt, proffering themselves to be the first that should
endeavor to force the Enemies Works in their own persons, (particularly Major
General Talmash, very forward and instrumental in promoting was of it,) which
they happily performed accordingly, for the Detachment drawn down the day
before was ordered still to be in a readiness, and A Party ordered to pass the
River.
the General gave Command that they should be all brought (...) three days
before, by three of the Danes, (one being a reformed Officer, who with two
more, boldly ventured in the face of all their Works, and in opposition to
their Vollies which were made at them, and that at Noonday) and found
passable, so that all things being in this order, six minutes past six a Clock,
Capt. Sandys and two Lieutenants led the first Party of 60. Granadeers all in
Armor, and 20 a Breast, seconded by another good Body, who all with an amazing
resolution took the River, the Stream being very Rapid and deep, at which time
our Great and Small Shot began to play from our Batteries and Works on our side
upon the Enemies Works on the other, and they fired as thick as possible for
them upon our men that were passing the River, who forced their way through Fire
and Smoke, and gaining the other Bank, the rest laid Planks over the broken
part of the Bridge, and others were laying the Bridge of Boats, by which our
men past over so fast that in less than half an hour we were Masters of the
Town; and all the Trenches except one beyond the Town, for the Irish being
amazed at the suddenness of the thing, and the resolution of our men, with no
great difficulty began to give ground, and soon after made the best of their
way toward their Camp, tho a great many of them were killed in their Works;
and yet it is observable that our men when they saw themselves really Masters of
the Town, were not at all forward to kill those at their mercy, tho it was in a
manner in the heat of Action, but the Rubbish and Stuff thrown down by our
Cannon was more difficult to climb over than a great part of the Enemies Works,
which occasioned our Soldiers to Swear and Curse even amongst the Bullets
themselves, upon which Major General Mackay told them that they had more reason
to fall upon their Knees and thank God for the Victory, and that they were
brave men, and the best of men if they would Swear less.

The Soldiers however got good store of Plunder What Stors were ^^und in Town.
amongst the Ruins, and a great many dead men were found in the Castle; there
were six Brass Guns and two Mortars in Town, with about 20 Barrels of Powder,
12 Hogsheads of Meal, some Wheat, and a great many other things. We lost in
this Action only 12 men, and Lieutenant Col. Collumbine with 4 more Officers
and 30 Soldiers wounded: The Enemy they say lost 500 at this attack, and as
many more during the Siege as made them 1200, amongst whom were Col. O Gara,
Col. Richard Grace, Col. Art Oge Mackmahon, two of the Mack Genuess, and
several others: there were taken Prisoners Major General Maxwell, a French
Adjutant General, Capt. Dalton, one Capt. more, and two Lieutenants, with about
60 private Men.

At our men's first entering the River, an Express An Express sent to Saint R^th.
was sent from the Town to Monsieur St. Ruth, then in the Irish Camp signing
Articles against My Lord Tyrconel, as some say, but going out a shooting as
others report, who when he heard the news, said it was impossible that the
English should pretend to take a Town and he so near with an Army to Succor
it, but being very soon assured that the English were actually possessed of the
place, he lamented his misfortune extremely, and ordered several Detachments to
beat the English out again, but then he was sensible of a former oversight, in
not demolishing those Fortifications of Athlone next his own Camp, for now the
English possessed their own Works entire against themselves. (Tho some say that
St. Ruth had given orders for those Works to be thrown down the next day)
several Parties however of the Irish, both Horse and Foot came in all have
toward the Town, and stopped their men that were running away at the furthest
Trenches: Upon which Col. Gustavus Hambleton advanced with a Party of
Granadeers, and there was a pretty warm dispute for some time, and Major
General Maxwell, newly made a Prisoner, was confident they would beat us out
again, but when he saw them retreat upon our men's advancing and firing, he was
soon convinced of his mistake.

Athlone, it seems in the last Wars, was neither well fortified nor provided,
for Sir Charles Coot with 2000. choice Horse and as many Foot went towads
Sligoe, and made a show of sitting down before it, but slipped over the Curlue
Mountains, and with no great difficulty took Athlone, as also Portumna, whilst
Ireton with the main Body of their Army forced Killalow Pass, and sat down
before Limerick. But this last was an Action that is scarce to be parallelled
in History, that a strong Town should be taken by Storm cross a great and rapid
River, when a powerful Army lay within less than two Miles to support it; but
the same providential attendance that waited upon us at first, did now and
afterward assist us.

But it will not be improper to leave the General and his Army for a while at
Athlone, and see what happened in these active times in several other places of
the Kingdom, for tho the Irish had drawn most of their Forces toward Athlone,
with a design if possible to oppose our passing the Shannon, yet they being at
this time all of one side, and consequently very numerous, they ordered matters
so, as a great many Rapparees, and some of their Army were left in different
parts of the Kingdom, especially in the Counties of Cork, Sligoe, and Kerry,
who waited all opportunities to do us what mischief lay in their power, and
this was one reason that Col. Coys Horse, and Col. Matthews Dragoons, with Col.
Hastings, Sir John Hanmers, Princess Anns, Major General Trelawny's, Col.
Hale's, the Bandenburgh and Danish Regiment of Foot were left in the County of
Cork, as well to keep in the Irish on that side, as to secure those Garrisons
from any foreign Invasion. My Lord Drogheda's Regement was left in Westmeath,
and Col. Mitchelburns, and Col. Venners in the A part of our Army left in the
Country, and why.
North; and besides those we had in most places of the Kingdom under their
Majesty's Government a very active Malitia, who were ready on all occasions to
do Service.

Toward the beginning of June, Major Culliford with a Party of Col. Matthews
Dragoons and some Militia, make inroads into the Enemies Quarters, and bring
several Preys from thence, but with little loss of men to either side. But
hearing that a Party of the Enemies Horse and Foot, to the number of 2000. or
more (as was reported) were ordered to defend a part of the County of Cork and
that of Kerry, from whence the Irish had got greatest part of their Relief the
preceding Winter* and were in hopes still so to do, Major Culliford Major
Culliford surprises some of the Enemy.
with 120. of Col. Matthew's Dragoons and 50* Militia Foot, surprised two of
the Enemies Troops, killed about 20. and pursued the rest to Newmarkit, where
we killed 15 more, and took a prey, and after that went four Miles further in
hopes of a greater, which we met with: But Sir James Cotter being nigh the
place with about 500. Horse and Dragoons fell upon our men as they were in
disorder, killed 20 and took as many Prisoners: Major Culliford with 80. men
made good their retreat, and in the mean time 24. Militia and a 11 Dragoons got
to a place called Drumaugh, with part of the Prey, and 20. of our men under
Capt. Bower did the Enemy some mischief in their drawing off, killing 23, or
there abouts. The same day Col. Hastings, Col. Ogelby, etc. with 200. of the
Army and 500 Militia, being at Ballynagooly, and understanding Major Cullifords
danger, they marched beyond Balycleugh to his Relief, where the Enemy had lined
some Hedges, but our men forced them from thence, and that Evening killed 50,
next morning relieving those who took unto Drumaugh, killing 13, and burning
all the Country thereabouts.

Nigh the same time our Militia kill and take several Rapparees near Cashell,
and Major Welden with a party from Mountmelick kills 14. A party also of Col.
Woolsley's Horse being Detached to scowre the Country about Bally-Boy killed
50. Rapparees at several times.

Judge Cox being made Governor of the Militia Judge Cox orders Iniskean to be
Fortified.
in the County of Cork, Fortifies Iniskean, and puts a a Garrison in it, sending
some of the Militia under Col. Townsend toward Bantree, where they killed nigh
a 100 Rapparees, and brought off good store of Plunder; and Col. Hastings from
Cork seizes upon Drummaneer, a considerable Post near the Black Water.

June the 17. A Party marched from Cashel and Clonmell, who were in expectation
of meeting with 400. Irish nigh Typerary, but they having notice of it,
withdrew, only our Party met with about 30, most of whom were killed and the
Town Burnt. The Rapparees near Roscreagh had a design to steal the Cattle of
that Town, but in the effecting of it 12. were killed, and the Prey rescued.
Capt. White, and some of the Militia went toward the Bogg of Allen, where they
killed 13, and the rest with Mackabe their Leader escaped for that time.

June the 19. A Party of the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment went from Athy to a
place called Clonmellera, having along with them Sir Thomas Atkins High Sheriff
of the Queens County, and a Party of the Militia; their design was to surprise
several notorious Rogues, whom they had information were Harbored in that
place; they killed about 8. or 10. tho they did not meet with those Rogues that
they expected.

June the 20. Two Rapparees were killed at Caperquin, and two at the Gualtire;
and nigh the same time there was a party of a ragged Irish Regiment called the
Prince of Wales's, under one Delany a Franciscan Friar near Castle-Town, not
far from Cashell, who being frighted with a Rumor that part of our Forces were
marching that way, they all endeavored to shift for themselves. Three of our
Danes were surprised near Clonmell and carried to the Mountains, but they and a
Militia Trooper getting loose in a place where the Rapparees had bound them,
killed three Rapparees and got safe home; Ten more were killed near Thurles,
and Twelve a day or two after near Bally-Boy, as also two of Lutterill's
Dragoons.

My Lord Blaney, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Monahan, having ordered the
Militia of that County to be in Arms, they killed 7 Rapparees at one time, and
5 at another in the County of Monahan, and two more in the County of Armaugh;
his Lordship by his diligence being very instrumental in keeping in the Irish
from making Excursions from those parts about Sligoe. And toward the latter
end of June the Lords Justices, by a Proclamation, ordered the Weekly Fast to
be renewed, and every Friday to be set a part for craving the assistance of
Almighty God, in prospering of our Fleet and Army.

CHAP. VI.
The Irish Army Decamp. The Dead buried at Athlone. The Enemy resolve to give
us Battle. The Works of Athlone repaired. A party of our Horse surprised. The
Irish Prisoners sent to Dublin. The Lords Justices Declaration to the Irish.
Our Army march from Athlone. The Enemies Camp and Posture described. The Orders
that Night. Monsieur St. Ruth 's supposed Speech to the Irish. Our Army in
sight of the Enemy. The Line of Battle. The Battle of Agrim. A party of our
Foot beat off Reinforced by Major General Talmash, they beat the Enemy.
Monsieur St. Ruth killed. Their Army Routed. The number of the Dead. And of the
Prisoners. Our loss at the Battle. Instances in former Battles, wherein the
Irish have been Routed, with little loss to the English. An account of some
Irish Prophecies. Our Army lie upon their Arms that night. Brigadeer Eppinger
goes toward Portumna. Loughrea deserted by the Irish. Our Army march thither.
Then to Athenree. July 1691.
The General goes toward Galway. The Town described. Siege laid to it. Major
General Mackay passes the River. A Fort taken. The Irish beat a parley.
Hostages exchanged. The Articles of Surrender. Our Army return toward
Limerick. A Brief account of what happned in other places of the Kingdom,
during this Month.

THE first of July, My Lord Portland's Regiment of Guards Landed at Dublin, and
marched in two or three Days toward the Camp; upon our taking the Town, Mons.
St. Ruth with the Irish Army The Irish Army decamp.
decamped that night, and marched toward Milton Pass; and next day about 10 a
Clock their Rear Guard of Horse stood on the other side of Melahy, their Foot
vanishing out of sight toward Balynasloe: for Monsieur St. Ruth, being outdone
in so considerable a matter as the losing Athlone, he was resolved to retrieve
his loss or Dye, since he could not be answerable to his Master that employed
him for what had already happened: and therefore he used all the means possible
to strengthen his Army and find out a convenient place of advantage to try his
Fortune in, since he saw that we were not shye in affording him opportunities;
and now he begins to be very kind to, and familiar with the Irish Officers,
whom formerly he had treated with Disrespect and Contempt; and to Caress the
Soldiers, tho a little before, he would Hang a Dozen of them in a morning, for
very slender faults, as they thought: he draws therefore his Army into the most
convenient posture he could, to watch our Motions.

The first thing our General did after the Town was The Dead about Athlone
Buried.
taken, was to order the Dead in and about the Town to be buried; and in the
Evening all our Army was drawn up, and 41 pieces of Cannon fared three rounds,
being seconded by the Horse and Foot, and then followed Bonfires for Joy that
the Town was taken, which had cost us 12000 Cannon Bullets, 600 Bombs, nigh 50
Tun of Powder, and a great many Tun of Stones shot out of our Mortars.

But after the Town was taken, the Soldiers were many of them unruly, and
committed several outrages; therefore it was given out in Orders that night,
that no Soldier should go to the Town, or over the Water, on pain of Death: and
the Sutlers that went to Dublin, were ordered to go to the Hospital, and take
up the sick and wounded Men. And here let me observe once for all, that we had
much better conveniences for our Sick and Wounded this Campaign than formerly,
having a great many large Tents set up in form of a Quadrangle, with Quilts and
other conveniences for every Soldier: nor was Dr. Lawrence, Physician to the
Army; Charles Thomson Esquire, Surgeon General; Mr Thomas Proby, and the
rest of the Surgeons wanting in their careful industry to recover and heal
the Sick and Wounded; which no doubt must be a great encouragement to the poor
Soldiers, when they know that if any misfortune attends them, they shall
undoubtedly be taken care for. The Enemy Resolve to give us Battle.


July the 2 d. We had an account by some Deserters, that the Enemies Foot were
gone beyond Balynasloe, and their Horse were Encampt on this side of it; that
they resolved to stay thereabouts and Fight us, tho at present they were in a
great Consternation, and seemed doubtful of their own performances. A great
many of the Country people and Deserters came hourly in, and the General gave
them all protections, assuring them that they should be kept Inviolable against
any of our Army or others, resolving to punish the Offenders with Death: but on
the other hand expected all conformity of dutiful Subjects to their Majesty's
from them: and if any were found to carry Intelligence to the Enemy, or
harbor, succor or conceal them, they should suffer Death for it. This day the
General had an account from one Capt. Aughmouty, that the Enemy had quitted
Lanesbourgh, and that he with his Troop had possessed himself thereof.

July the 3 d. The General commanded his Army The Works of A^hlone repaired.
to begin the repairing the Works of Athlone, which were strangely shattered by
our Cannon, and not one House left whole in all the Town: Especially the
Castle, which was beat down to the ground on the Southeast side, as was also
the Tower within it; we fell to work therefore, and put some few shattered
Houses in a condition to hold our Magazines and Stores, which were daily coming
up from Dublin and Mullingar, and without which we could not march forwards.
That morning William Robinson Esquire, one of the Pay-masters to the Army, came
with Money, as also many Wagons and Carts, with Ammunition and other
Mecessaries. A Trumpeter returns with an answer of a Letter sent to the Enemy,
about the exchange of Prisoners.

The Fourth proved very Rainy, yet our Men were employed in clearing the
Streets; repairing the Breaches, and mounting four of the Enemies Guns taken in
the Town, upon some of our spare Carriages. That Evening a Party of 20 Horse
and ten of Kirk's Granadeers A party of our Horse surprised.
mounted were sent out to view the Enemies Camp, being Guided and Commanded by
one Higgins a Converted Priest; but they fell into an Ambush of 400 of the
Enemies Horse, in the Woods of Clanoult, our men defended a Bridge, and fought
stoutly for some time, but were at last broke, 15 killed, and 4 taken
Prisoners, the rest escaping with Higgins, who was sadly Wounded.

The 5th. Major General Maxwell, and other Prisoners were sent toward Dublin,
but some of them make their escapes. Three out of Col. Parker's, and as many
out of My Lord Antrim's Regiments deserted to us. The 6th. The Prisoners sent
to Dublin.
one of our men taken Prisoner, two days before was released by Lieutenant
General Sheldon; and that Evening it was given out in Orders, to be ready to
march by 5 in the morning, the left Wing over the Pontoons* and the right Wing
over the Bridge, which was now repaired, and every Soldier was to have 15 shot
of Powder. The 7th. the Army marched over the River, and a Prisoner that had
made his escape going to Mullingar was taken nigh Banoher, and having stole a
Horse, he was hanged with a Rapparee, guilty of the like Fact: Capt. Villers
returns with 30. Horse from viewing the Enemy still at Balynasloe, and the
Militia possess some Passes upon the Shanon. And because a Declaration
published this day by the Lords Justices, by direction from England, made a
great noise, both in the Enemies Camp and ours; as also all the Kingdom over,
during the remainder of the Campaign, being that upon which the Articles of
Galway and Limerick, and all the Irish Capitulations were afterward founded,
it will not be amiss here to give you the Declaration it self, at large as it
was Published.

By the Lords Justices of Ireland, a Proclamation. Charles Porter, Tho.
Coningsby.
SInce it has pleased Almighty God to give so great Success to their Majesty's
Arms, toward the Reduction of the Kingdom of Ireland, that in all probability
the whole must in a short time be brought under Their Majesty's Obedience, with
great Effusion of Blood and Destruction of Their Majesty's Enemies: Their Most
Excellent Majesty's in Compassion to their Seduced Subjects, to avoid further
Effusion of Blood, and that nothing on Their Majesty's part be wanting to
Encourage and Invite all who are now in Arms against Them, to subject
themselves to Their Obedience and Government, have Commanded us. And we the
Lords Justices of this Kingdom, by Their Majesty's special Direction and
Command, do by this Our Proclamation Publish, Declare, and Promise, that All
and Every the Private Soldiers, now in Arms against Their Majesty's, in the
Enemies Army, who shall within three Weeks (after the Date of this Our
Proclamation) surrender up Themselves, their Horse, Arms and Furniture, to the
Commander in Chief, or any other Their Majesty's Officers, shall not only be
paid a reasonable Rate for their Horse, Arms and Furniture, which they shall so
deliver up, but shall be fully and freely Pardoned, of all Treasons, and other
Crimes and Offenses against Their Majesty's; and that All and Every Person or
Persons, who now are Governors, Officers, Commanders or Soldiers of or in any
Cities, Towns, Forts, Castles, or other Garrisons in Their Kingdom of Ireland,
not already under Their Majesty's Power and Obedience, who shall surrender,
deliver and yield up any such City, Town, Fort, or Garrison, unto the General
or other Officer of Their Majesty's Army, within three Weeks after the Date of
this Our Proclamation; and All other Officers and Soldiers now serving or
being in the Enemies Army or Quarters, who shall within three Weeks time after
the Date of this Our Proclamation, come in, and bring with them their
Regiments, Troops, or Companies, or some considerable part thereof, and submit
themselves to Their Majesty's Obedience, and deliver up their Horses, Arms and
Furniture of War, they and every of them, both Officers and Soldiers, shall be
fully, freely, and absolutely Pardoned of all manner of Treasons, Crimes or
Offenses, committed against Their Majesty's, Their Crown and Dignity; and shall
also be Restored to, and put in Possession of all their Estates forfeited for
such Treasons, Crimes and Offenses; and if any Citizens, and Inhabitants, or
other Persons, Residing in the City of Limerick, or Town of Galway, shall
within the time aforesaid, either of themselves, or by joining with any other,
be Instrumental, or assisting in delivering up either of the said Places, to
Their Majesty's Obedience, they and every of them shall be likewise fully,
freely, and absolutely Pardoned of all manner of Treasons, Crimes or Offenses
committed against Their Majesty's, Their Crown and Dignity; and shall also be
Restored to, and put in Possession of all their Estates forfeited for such
Treason, Crimes or Offenses; and we do hereby further Publish and Declare, that
if any Officers and Soldiers now in Command in the Enemies Army, or in any of
the Cities, Castles, Forts, or Garrisons of the Enemy, not having any Estates
forfeited, or to which he or they can be Restored, shall render unto Their
Majesty's any of the Services aforesaid, such Person and Persons, Officers and
Soldiers, shall be fully and liberally Rewarded, by the General of Their
Majesty's Army, in such or greater Proportion, as the Services by them done
shall deserve; and such of the said Officers and Soldiers as shall desire to
Enter into Their Majesty's Pay, shall be Received in the like or better Post
and Condition, as they now Serve under the Enemy; and lest those who are to
take Benefit by this Proclamation may be Apprehensive of being prosecuted for
Exercising their Religion, tho Their Majesty's have sufficiently manifested to
the World, by the Rest and Quiet not only Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, but
those of England, have enjoyed under Their Government, may be sufficient to
Remove any such Apprehensions, we are commanded further to Publish and Declare;
And we do Hereby Publish and Declare, that as soon as Their Majesty's Affairs
will permit them, to Summon a Parliament in this Kingdom, They will endeavor
to procure them such further security, in these particulars, as may preserve
them from any disturbance, upon the account of their Religion; and we do hereby
Advise and Admonish all such Persons who still Adhere to the Enemy, Carefully
and Prudently to consider the ill Estate and Condition whereunto they are
Reduced, and seriously to recollect into their Minds and Memory, the Quiet and
Blessed Estate and Security which they enjoyed under the English Government;
and the vast difference betwixt that and the Tyranny of France; and withal, the
terrible Consequences which must follow, if they any longer neglect returning
to their Duty, and thereby lose the Benefit of Their Majesty's most Benign, and
Gracious Compassion and Intention toward them.

Given at Their Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 7th. Day of July, 1691. in the
Third Year of Their Majesty's Reign.
God Save the KING and QVEEN.
July the 8th. all the heavy Baggage was a passing over the River, and it was
ordered that the Officers of the Quarter-Guards should go frequent Rounds, and
send all the Soldiers they found Gameing, or Drinking, after Taptoe, to the
Provoe's; the General being much displeased at such Disorders, by means of
which a great many irregular things were done, especially, Plundering and
Robbing of Tents, which yet was continued (tho several were made Examples) to
the very end of the Campaign. It was also ordered that an Account of all those
that were killed and wounded, since our coming to this Town, should be returned
to the Adjutant General, which was about Sixty Killed and a Hundred and Twenty
wounded.

And that the General might leave nothing unattempted which might contribute to
the bringing the Enemy over by fair means, he settled Allowances of Subsistence
to all Persons that would come off, according to their several Qualifications
(viz.) Colonels of Horse, and Dragoons 11 l. 10 s. per Month; and Foot 10 l.
per Month, and so proportionably to every one.

July the 9th. proved a very hot day, till about 5 in Extraordinary Rains and
Thunder.
the Afternoon, when it fell a Raining, and then such Thunder, Hail, and a
Hurrycane of Wind, as the like had scarce been seen before, this continued for
two Hours, in which time two Men, and a Boy, were killed by Lightning, and two
or three more hurt in the Prince of Hess's Regiment.

The Town being now pretty well cleared, and new Works raised on Conaught side.
On Friday the 10th. Our Army March from Athlone.
of July, the General having left Col. Lloyd Governor of Athlone, with his
own, and Lieut. Genesis Douglas's Regiments, he moved forwards with the Army, and
Encamped that Night at Killcashel, 7 Miles nearer to the Enemy, whence the
General went to view the Pass at Ballynasloe, a small Village upon the River
Suck, where stands a Castle, built formerly by the Ancestors of my Lord
Clanrickard; from hence the Enemy was retired 3 Miles further.

Saturday the 11th. we marched to Ballynasloe, and encampt along the River Suck,
upon the Roscomon side; this is a good Pass, and the Irish might have given us
some trouble in gaining it; but that they had found out a much better place as
will soon appear. As our Army was Encamping, our Great Officers went to the
Hills of Knocksdunloe, in the County of Galway, about a Mile distant from our
Camp, from whence they could see the Enemies out-Guards, upon the Hills of
Corbally, who upon our Approach retired to the Isker of Liscappull, two Miles
from Ballynasloe, upon which we advanced to the Hills of Corbally, whence we
could take a view of the Enemies Camp, which lay on the other side Aghrim
Castle, three Miles beyond Balynasloe, and extended it self from the Church of
Killeommodon, on their Right, to a place called Gourtnapory, above two Miles in
length: on their Left ran a small Brook, having The Enemies Camp, and Posture
described.
steep Hills, and little Boggs on each side, next to which was a large Red
Bogg, almost a Mile over, at the end of which stood the Castle of Aghrim,
Commanding the way to their Camp, passable for Horse, no where but just at the
Castle, by reason of a small River, which running through a moist Ground, made
the whole a Morass or Bogg, which extended it self all along to the Enemies
Right, where was also another Pass called Vrachree, having a rising Ground on
each side of it; the Enemies Camp lay along the Ridge of an Hill, on the side
of which stood two Danish Forts, from thence to the Bogg below was nigh half a
Mile, and this cut into a great many small Enclosures, which the Enemy had
ordered so as to make a Communication from one of them to another, and had
lined all those very thick with Small Shot; this showed a great deal of
Dexterity in Monsieur St. Ruth, in making choice of such a piece of Ground as
Nature it self could not furnish him with a better, considering all
Circumstanstances; for he knew that the Irish naturally loved a Breast-work
between them and Bullets, and here they were fitted to the purpose, with Hedges
and Ditches to the very edge of the Bog.

The General upon viewing the Posture of the Enemy, and a Map given him of the
Ground, he found it no easy matter to Attack them; but resolved however to
march toward them next day; and therefore it was given out in Orders at Night,
that all the Army (except two Regiments left to Guard the Baggage) should The
Orders that Night.
be under Arms next Morning without beat of Drum, and no Baggage to stir, nor
any Tents to be removed, nor yet any to march with the Regiments but such as
carry Arms, and those to march as strong as possible, with all their Arms fixed
and clean; those that wanted Ammunition were presently to have it from the
Stores; the Granadiers were to be drawn to the Right and Left of each Regiment,
with two Shells a piece, and five Pyoniers to be ready at the Head of each
Regiment when called for; the Word, that Night, was Dublin.

Monsieur St. Ruth, at the approach of our Army, seeing us resolved to give him
Battle, he gave his Men all the due Encouragement that possibly he could,
ordering Masses and Prayers to be said in all Parts of the Army. And as the
Report goes, the Irish were obliged by their Priests not to give Quarter to any
Soul living, but to pursue every Man to Destruction, they being assured of a
most glorious Victory; and St. Ruth himself is said to have made the following
Speech, to the Irish, the day before the Battle, it being found afterward
amongst the Papers of his Secretary, who was killed in the Field.

Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers,
I Suppose it is not unknown to you, and the whole Christian Mounsieur St.
Ruths supposed Speech to the Irish.
World, what Glory I have acquired, and how Successful and Fortunate I have
been in Suppressing Heresy in France, and propagating the Holy Catholic
Faith; and can-without Vanity boast my Self the happy Instrument of b^inging
over thousands of poor deluded Souls from their errors, who owe their
Salvation to the pious care of my thrice Illustrious Master, and my own
Industry, assisted by some holy Members of our unspotted Church: while great
numbers of those incourigable Heretics have perished both Soul and Body by
their obstinacy.

It was for this reason that the most Puissant King my Master, Compassionating
the miseries of this Kingdom, has chosen me before so many worthy Generals to
come hither, not doubting but by my wonted Diligence I should Establish the
Church in this Nation, on such a foundation as it should not be in the power of
Hell or Heretics hereafter to disturb it: And for the bringing about of this
Great and Glorious Work, next the Assistance of Heaven, the unresistable
Puisance of the King my Master, and my own Conduct; the great dependence of all
good Catholics is on your Courage.

I must confess since my coming amongst you, things have not answered my
wishes, but they are still in a posture to be retrieved, if you will not betray
your Religion and Country, by an unseasonable Pusilanimity.

I Am assured by my Spies, that the Prince of Oranges Heretical Army, are
resolved to give us Battle, and you see them even before you ready to perform
it. It is now therefore, if ever that you must endeavor to recover your lost
Honor, Privileges and Forefathers Estates: You are not Mercinary Soldiers,
you do not fight for your Pay, but for your Lives, your Wives, your Children,
your Liberties, your Country, your Estates; and to restore the most Pious of
Kings to his Throne: But above all for the propagation of the Holy Faith, and
the subversion of Heresy. Stand to it therefore my Dears, and bear no longer
the Reproaches of the Heretics, who Brand you with Cowardice, and you may be
assured that King James will Love and Reward you: Louis the Great will protect
you; all good Catholics will applaud you; I my self marching formations THE
LINE OF BATTLE. July 12. 1691

will Command you; the Church will pray for you, your Posterity will bless you;
Saints and Angels will Caress you; God will make you all Saints, and his holy
Mother will lay you in her Bosom.


Titus Livius before a Battle, frequently brings in the Roman Generals saying a
great many fine things, and making long Speeches, which possibly they never
dreamt of, tho most of them were well bredmen; and if they did make use of
those Speeches, that way of treating Armies is now quite out of Fashion,
especially it is improbable it should be done by a General, who understood as
little Irish as most of his Army did French: Nor is it to be believed that
Monsieur St. Ruth was a man of that Boasting vainglorious humor that this
Speech makes him, tho I have heard from some of the Irish Officers since, that
he told them they had gained the Character of Cowards both at home and abroad,
and now was their time to retrieve it, and that they Fought for their Religion,
King and Country, etc. However it was, all who saw the spot of Ground he had
made Choice of, can but admire his Conduct in this particular: And no doubt his
Army had all the Masses, Persuasions, and other encouragements that could be
thought of; amongst the rest that powerful one of Brandy, which made a Dragoon
of ours tell some of their Prisoners after the Battle, that they had the
advantage of us, both in Prayers and Brandy: The English being indeed too
remiss in point of Devotion, not looking up to that Power, to which we are most
indebted, for all that we can pretend to that is Good.

But to return to our own Army, Sunday July the Our Army march in sight of the
Enemy.
12. about Six in the Morning we marched, the Foot over the Bridge; the English
and French Horse at the Foord above, and the Dutch and Danes over two Foords
below, with directions to put themselves in order of Battle when all past the
River, which was done on a kind of uneven hilly Ground, and the method being
agreed before, the two lines of Battle were thus, as in the Copper Plate are
described.

It Is to be observed that My Lord Portland's Horse is not in this Line of
Battle, because they came not up till after it was ordered; hour they had
their full share in the Acton, and Col. Foulks's Regiment was always to guard
the Train, but being then convenient for it, and the General resolving to make
all the Force he could, they had also their part, both of the Honor and
Service of the Action. And tho Brigadeer Stuart is there set down, it is only as
to his Post, for he was then at Dublin ill of his Wounds received at Athlone.
Col. Lloyds Regiment was also in Garrison at Athlone, and two more left at
Balynasloe, so that we were not altogether so strong as this Line of Battle
makes us.

In this order (the Morning proving Foggy) our Army stood till nigh 12 a Clock,
and then were Commanded to Advance, the General going with a party before to
view the Enemy, and perceiving some of their out Scouts upon the Hills, ordered
a party to beat them thence, upon whose advance the Enemy retired from place to
place, till they were within half a Mile of their Camp, by which means the
General had an opportunity from an high Hill to the Right of the Enemy, to view
their whole Army, posted as before described: by which posture, they had the
advantage by at least 1000 men, but being assured of the valor of his Army,
the General resolved to draw nearer, and expect what further opportunities of
advantage might offer, in order to which, and for the security of our own Army,
he saw the necesity of gaining that Pass to the Right of the Enemy, called
Vrachree, where the Irish had some men posted, he sent therefore a Danish
Captain with 16 Troopers to force it, but the men run away from a less number
than themselves, tho the Officer behaved himself very well, and the rest
retrieved their Honor afterward; upon this the General ordered two Hundred of
Sir Albert Cunninghams Dragoons to march to certain Ditches, nigh the said
Foord, to keep the Enemy from coming over, and in the mean time our Army was
marching forwards; by this time it was Two a Clock, and the General finding the
necessity of having that Foord, and other ways that led to the Right of the
Enemy, as the most proper ways to assault them, he ordered Cunninghams
Dragoons, at the Ditch, to advance toward a Party of the Enemy that stood on
the other side, and were sustained by a considerable Body, behind the House of
Vrachree, all which, at the advancing of our Dragoons, retired behind an Hill
nigher their Camp, and where a greater Body was posted; then some of our
Dragoons pressing on too far were obliged to retreat a little disorderly, the
Enemy sustaining their Men by several fresh Parties, which the General
perceiving, he ordered Briggadeer Eppinger's Dragoons to get between them and
their Camp; but this was discovered by the Enemy, who had the advantage of
pouring in so many Men upon us that they would have been too hard for our
Dragoons still, if they had not been quickly seconded by greatest part of the
Earl of Portlands Horse, who behaved themselves with great Bravery, and lost
several Men and Horses in this part of the Action: And what was at first only a
Skirmish, had by this time engaged a considerable Body on both sides, fresh
Parties being still sent out, tho after about an hours dispute, the Enemy were
obliged to retire in some Disorder, over the Brook, that flanked the Right of
their Army, no considerable damage being done as yet to either side.

Then all things seemed pretty quiet for a while, and our General Officers
coming together, began to consult whither it was fit to give the Enemy Battle
that Night, considering the disadvantages we were to expect in Attacking them,
some therefore were for deferring the Battle that Night, and so to fall on by
break of day next Morning, which was so far agreed to as that our Tents were
ordered to be sent for, and pitched along the other side the Bogg; but then
perceiving the Enemy to be in some Disorder* by what had already happened, they
concluded not to delay their Attack, lest the Enemy should March off in the
Night, and so afford us no more opportunities; it was therefore agreed to
prosecute the Battle on the Enemies Right, by that means proposing to draw part
of their strength from Aghrim Castle, nigh which their main Body was posted,
that so our Right might have the easier Passage over to Attack their Left, and
then our whole Army might have opportunity to engage. This (I am told) was the
Advice of Major General Mackay; a Man of great Judgment, and long Experience,
and it had its desired Success.

Our Army was disposed of as you see in the Line of Battle, only the General
moved up and down as he saw occasion, as did also the rest of the General
Officers; and before the Battle began, there was no distance left between the
first and second Line, since a great part of the second Line were the first
that engaged. The Irish Army was commanded by Monsieur St. Ruth, Lieutennant
General D'usson, Monsieur De' Tessec, Lieutenant General Sarsefield, Major
General John Hambleton, Major General Dorington, and several other.

About half an hour past Four in the Afternoon, a part of our Left Wing moved
toward the Enemy, and by Five the Battle began a fresh. A Party of our Foot
marched up to their Ditches, all strongly guarded with Musketeers, and their
Horse posted advantageously to sustain them: here we fired one upon another for
a considerable time, and the Irish behaved themselves like Men of another
Nation, defending their Ditches stoutly; for they would maintain one side, till
our Men put their Pieces over at the other, and then having Lines of
Communication, from one Ditch to another, they would presently post themselves
again, and flank us; this occasioned great firing on both sides, which
continued on the Left nigh an hour and an half, e're the Right of our Army, or
the Center engaged, except with their Cannon, which played on both sides. All
this while our Men were coming up in as good Order as the Inconveniency of the
Ground would allow, and now Major General Mackay, and the rest, seeing the
Enemy draw off several Bodies of Horse and Foot from the Left, and move toward
their Right, where our Men pressed them very hard; they laid hold on that
advantage, and ordered the Foot to march over the Bogg, which fronted the
Enemies main Battle. Colonel Earl, Colonel Herbert, Colonel Creighton, and
Colonel Brewers Regiments went over at the narrowest place where the Hedges on
the Enemies side run furthest into the Bogg. These four Regiments were ordered
to march to the lowest of the Ditches, adjoining to the side of the Bogg, and
there to post themselves till our Horse could come about by Aghrim Castle, and
sustain them, and till the other Foot had marched over the Bogg below, where it
was broader, and were sustained by Col. Foulk's, and Brigadeer Steuarts. Col.
Earl advanced with his Regiment, and the rest after him, over the Bogg, and a
Rivulet that ran through it, being most of them up to their Middles in Mudd and
Water. The Irish at their near approach to the Ditches, sired upon them, but
our Men contemning all Disadvantages, advanced immediately to the lowest
Hedges, and beat the Irish from thence. The Enemy however did not retreat far,
but posted themselves in the next Ditches before us: which our Men seeing, and
disdaining to suffer their Lodging so near us, they would needs beat them from
thence also, and so from one Hedge to another, till they were got very nigh the
Enemies main Battle. But the Irish had so ordered the matter, as to make an
easy Passage for their Horse, amongst all those Hedges and Ditches, by which
means they poured in great numbers both of Horse and Foot upon us: which
Colonel Earl seeing, encouraged his Men, by advancing before them, and saying,
There was no way to come off but to be Brave. As great an Example of true
Courage and Generosity as any Man this Day living. But being both flanked and
fronted, as also exposed to all the Enemies Shot from the adjacent Ditches; our
Men were forced to quit their Ground, and betake themselves to the Bogg again,
A Party of our Foot beat back.
whither they were followed, or rather drove down by main strength of Horse and
Foot, and a great many killed. Colonel Earl, and Colonel Herbert, were here
taken Prisoners; the former, after twice taking and retaking, got free at last,
tho not without being wounded.

Whilst this was a doing here, Col. St. John's, Col. Tiffin, Lord George
Hambleton, the French, and several other Regiments, were marching over below
upon the same Bogg. The Irish, in the mean time, laid so close in their
Ditches, that several were doubtful whether they had any Men at that place or
not: but they were convinced of it at last; for no sooner were the French, and
the rest, got within twenty yards, or less, of the Ditches, but the Irish fired
most furiously upon them; which our Men as bravely sustained, and pressed
forwards, tho they could scarce see one another for Smoke. And now the thing
seemed so doubtful for some time, that the Bystanders would rather have given
it on the Irish side; for they had driven our Foot in the Center so far back,
that they were got almost in a Line, with some of our Great Guns, planted near
the Bogg, which we had not the Benefit of at that Juncture, because of the
mixture of our Men and theirs.

M. G. Ruvigny's French Horse, and Sir John Laniers, being both posted on the
Right, were afterward part of Our Horse pass the Bogg, near the Castle of
Aghrim.
them drawn to the Left, where they did very good Service. And the Right Wing
of our Horse, in the mean time were making what haste they could to succor our
Foot; for seeing their Danger, and indeed that all was in hazard by reason of
the Difficulty of the Pass, they did more than Men, in pressing and tumbling
over a very dangerous place, and that amongst Showrs of Bullets, from a
Regiment of Dragoons, and two Regiments of Foot, posted conveniently under
Cover, by the Enemy, to obstruct our Passage. Our Horse, at this place, were
sustained by Major General Kirks, and Colonel Gustavus Hambleton's Foot, who,
after we had received the Enemies Fire, for a considerable time, marched under
the Walls of the Castle, and Lodged themselves in a dry Ditch, in the throng of
the Enemies Shot from the Castle, and some other old Walls, and Hedges,
adjoining. Those that have seen the place, and considered the Disadvantages
that our Men had at such a Juncture to encounter withal, must needs Acknowledge
the Action very Brave. For its reported, that Monsieur St. Ruth, seeing our
Horse draw that way, and then begin to scramble over at a place where only two
a Breast could pass, and that too with great difficulty; after all which, they
had no other way to march, but to go within thirty yards of the Castle. The
French General seeing our Men attempt to do this, asked What they meant by it?
And being answered, That they would certainly endeavor to pass there, and
Attack him on the Left; he is said to reply with an Oath, They are brave
Fellows, its a pity they should be so exposed, or Words to that purpose.

Our Horse, with much difficulty, made good that Pass; Sir Francis Compton,
with my Lord of Oxford's Regiment, being one of the first that could be in a
posture to Engage, he fell at Random in amongst the Enemy, and charged them
briskly, with Sword in Hand: and tho his Men were once or twice Repulsed, yet
being seconded with part of Major General Ruvigny's Horse, Colonel Langston's,
and some of Colonel Byerley's Horse; as also Brigadeer Leveson's Dragoons, they
soon made Good their Party on that side, though not without the loss of several
both Men and Horses.

The Major General Talmash, seeing the Disadvantage Major General Talmash
Succors our Foot.
our Foot labored under in the Center, he showed at once an extreme concern
for his Countrymens being repulsed, and as much Generosity and Courage, by
hastening to Succor those that at that time stood most in need of it; coming up
therefore in all haste, with some fresh Men, he gave Orders for our broken
Regiments to halt, and face about, which they did immediately, and returned the
same Measure to the Irish, that some of themselves had met withal, the very
Minute before, that is, they knocked them on the Head; for the Irish followed us
toward the Center of the Bogg, which tho not two hundred yards from the lowest
Ditches, yet before the Enemy could recover those again, our Men had killed
above three hundred of them, and then marched boldly up to their old Ground
again, from whence they had been lately beat: which is only natural to English
Men; for it is observable, that they are commonly fiercer, and bolder, after
being repulsed than before; and what blunts the Courage of all other Nations,
commonly whets theirs, I mean the killing of their Fellow Soldiers before their
Faces.

At the same time, Major General Mackay had fallen upon the Enemy with a good
Body of Horse on their Left, and then Major General Ruvigny went along the side
of the Bogg, with another Party of Horse, who did extraordinary Service,
bearing down all before them: then the Horse and Foot of our Right, and their
Left mixing, there was nothing but a continued fire, and a very hot dispute all
along the Line. The Irish endeavoring to defend their Ditches, and our men as
forward to beat them from thence. But the thing was doubtful not much longer,
for Mons. St. Ruth, when he first saw our Foot in the Center repulsed, in a
great Ecstasy, told those next him, that he would now beat our Army back to the
Gates of Dublin. But seeing our Horse press over toward the Castle, he ordered
a Brigade of his own Horse to march up; then Riding to one of his Batteries,
and giving orders to the Gunner where to fire, he was marching toward the
place where he saw us endeavor to come over, but was killed with a great Shot
from one of our Batteries, as he rid down the Hill of Monsiuer St. Ruth killed.
Killkomodon, the place where the main stress of the Battle was fought, being
just under the Enemies Camp. When Monsieur St. Ruth fell, one of his Retinue
threw a Cloak upon his Corpse, and soon after removed him beyond the Hill, his
Guard going off at the same time, which the Irish Horse perceiving, a great
many of them drew off also.

I never could learn what became of his Corpse, some say that he was left stripped
amongst the other dead, when our men pursued beyond the Hill; and others that
he was thrown into a Bogg: However tho the man had an ill Character in being
one of the greatest Persecutors of the Protestants in France, yet, we must
allow him to be very brave in his Person, and indeed considerable in his
Conduct, since he brought the Irish to fight a better Battle, than ever their
Nation could boast of before. And this was the reason, as the Irish report,
that the General being killed, tho it was not presently known, yet their Army
was soon in Confusion for want of Orders, and so the Horse forced to draw off.
But the truth of it was, the Irish before they began to shrink, had behaved
themselves beyond all expectation, and had fought longer than ordinary; yet
when they saw our Horse come over so dangerous a Pass, and our Foot in the
Center Rally, and resolve to dye every man rather than be beat back again; the
Irish then thought they must be beat if the other would not: so that
notwithstanding all their advantages of Hedges and Ground, Sun and Wind, they
were forced to quit one advantageous Post, and after that another, till being
beat from Ditch to Ditch, they were driven up to the Top of the Hill of
Killkomodon, where The Irish Army Routed.
their Camp had laid, which being levelled, and they exposed to our Shot more
openly, they began now to run down right; the Foot toward a great Bogg behind
them on their Left, and the Horse on the Highway toward Loughreagh.

During all this stir, and noise, on the Right and Center of the Army, those
toward our Left, that first Engaged, kept their Ground, and not much Action
happened there for near two Hours past; nor did the Danish Horse and Foot that
were on the Left of all, disturb the Enemy as yet, but stood opposite to
several Bodies of Horse and Foot, that faced them on military map the other
side the small Brook: But then perceiving Mackay's Battallions to drive the
Enemy before them, lest those Bodies that faced them should have fallen back to
the Relief of their flying Party, they then engaged them, and for about half an
hour there was pretty hot work. But the Enemy being then in a declining
Condition, and pressed hard on all sides, they fled all out of the Field; their
Foot were miserably slaughtered by our Horse and Dragoons, as they made toward
the Bogg, and their Horse were pursued nigh three Miles: but the Night coming
on, with a thick Misty Rain, prevented us from getting between them and a very
Advantageous Pass, nigh Loughreagh; so that most of them escaped; the Night,
also and the Bogg, saved the Lives of many Thousands of their Foot; for our
Foreigners, and especially the Danish Horse, are excellent Pursuers.

The Irish upon their advantage in the Center of the Battle, had taken some
Prisoners (as has been said) but not being able to carry them off, they killed
Col. Herbert and one or two more; which several have looked upon as a piece of
cruelty: and yet it is no more than what has been often practiced in such Cases,
and that to a greater degree; for at the Battle of Agincourt, Fought between
Hen. 5th. of England, and Charles the 6th. of France upon the 24th. of October.
1414. the number of the Prisoners taken by the English, being very great, and
King Henry after the Battle, perceiving fresh Troops of the King of Sicill's to
appear in the Field, and these strong enough without any new rallyed Forces to
Encounter his wearied Soldiers; that he might not therefore have both Prisoners
to Guard, and an Enemy to fight at once, he commanded every man to kill his
Prisoner, contrary to his Generous Nature; which was immediately done, some
principal men excepted: and then upon his Message to the Enemy either to Fight
or immedately to quit the Field, they chose the latter: And some say that My
Lord Galway had hard measure from some of our Foreign Toopers, who killed him
after he had surrendered himself a Prisoner; not to themselves, but to some
others.

The place where this Battle was fought, will make a noise in History for the
future, tho there is nothing worth taking notice of near it: For that which they
call the Castle of Aghrim is only an old ruinous Building, with some Walls and
Ditches about it, and never has been a place of any Strength, only as it is
seated upon a Pass. There are about half a score little Cabbins on the other
side a small Brook, with the Ruins of a little Church, and a Priory Dedicated
to St. Catherine, and founded by the Butlers; the whole being at this day the
Estate of the D. of Ormond.

After things went clear on our side, this old Castle Aghrim Castle taken.
was taken, and a great many put the Sword in it. Col. Burk the Commander, his
Major, Eleven Officers more, and Forty Soldiers were made Prisoners.

In this Battle, we took from the Enemy nine pieces of Brass Cannon, which they
had planted at several places to their greatest advantage; all their
Ammunition, Tents and Baggage, with most of their small Arms, which they threw
away, to run the faster; we took also Eleven Standards, and thirty two pair of
Colors: The General rewarding every one that brought any in the next day, and
sent them afterward by my Lord O Bryan, as a present to Her Majesty. We killed
seven Thousand of the Irish upon The number of the Dead.
the Spot, as was generally believed, and there could not be many fewer, for
looking amongst the Dead three days after, when all our own and some of theirs
were buried, I reckoned in some small Enclosures 150 in others 120, etc. lying
most of them by the Ditches where they were Shot; and the rest from the top of
the Hill where their Camp had been, looked like a great Flock of Sheep,
shattered up and down the Country, for almost four Miles round: And the Irish
themselves, tho they will not allow so many to be killed, yet they own, that
they lost more, which they could never have any account of, except they stole
home privately, or else turned Rapparees. We took also above four hundred and
fifty Prisoners, of the chief of whom, and those killed, there was shortly
after a List, in Print, which time has informed me of some mistakes in, tho
possibly there may be some as yet remaining.

The General and Field Officers taken Prisoners, 26. (viz.)
Lord Duleek. Lord Slane. Lord Buffin. Sir Nicholas Brown alias Lord Killmare.
Major General Dorrington. Major Genesis John Hambleton. Brigadeer Tuite. Col.
Walter Bourk. Col. Gordon O Neal. Col. Butler of Kilkash. Col. O Connel. Col.
Edmund Madden. Lieut. Col. John Chapel. Lieut. Col. John Butler. Lieut. Col.
Baggot. Lieut. Col. John Border. Lieut. Col Mack Genuis. Lieut. Col. Rossiter.
Lieut. Col. Mack Guire. Major Patrick Lawless. Major Kelly. Major Grace. Major
William Bourk. Major Edmund Butler. Major Edmund Broghill. Major John Hewson,
with 30 Captains, 25 Lieutenants, 23 Ensig. 5 Cor. 4 Quarter Masters, and an
Adjutant.
KILLED.
Monsieur St. Ruth General of the Irish Army. Lord Killmallock. Lord Galway.
Brigadeer Connel. Brigad. W. Mansfield Barker. Brigad. Hen. Mack J. O Neal.
Col. Charles More, his Lieut. Col. and Major. Col. David Bourk. Col. Vlick
Bourk. Col. Cohanaught Macguire. Col. James Talbot. Col. Arthur. Col. Mahoony.
Lieut. Col. Morgan. Major Purcel. Major O Donnell. Sir John Everard, with
several others, not yet known, besides at least five hundred Captains and
Subaltern Officers.
We lost Seventy Three Officers, who were killed in this Action, with an
Hundred and Eleven Wounded. Six Hundred Soldiers were Killed, and Nine Hundred
and Sixty Wounded, as appears by the inserted Lists of both Horse and Foot,
given in two days after, by the General's Command, and sent to the King. Nor
are we to imagine the Number of the Dead exceeded the Lists given in, but
rather the contrary, since whatever men were wanting before, it was a good
opportunity to fix them here: Greatest part of our Wounded Men recovered again,
and several of them were actually upon service before the Siege of Limerick was
ended. Amongst our dead were Major General Holstaple, who commanded the Earl of
Portland's Horse, Col. Herbert, Col. Mongatts, Major Devonish, Major Cornwall,
Major Fox, and Major Colt.

An Account of what Officers and Soldiers belonging to the Foot, were Killed
and Wounded in each Regiment, at the Battle of Aghrim, July 12. 1691.
Col. L. Col. Majors Capt. Lieut. Ensigns Soldiers IN Killed. Wounded. Killed
Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed Wounded.
Killed. Wounded. Kirk's Regim. 1 2 7 10 Col. Gust. Hamb. 6 9 Ed. Geo. Hamb. 1 1
9 45 Col. Herbert's. 1 3 1 32 45 Sir Hen. Ballasi 1 1 2 23 Col. Brewer's 1 1 1
1 7 Brigad. Stuart 1 1 1 1 ^6 43 Col. Earl. 1 1 2 1 1 2 37 70 Col. Tiffin. 19
40 ^ol. Creighton 2 1 1 12 14 Col. St. John. 1 1 2 2 5 4 13 54 Ed. Lisburn. 1 1
2 16 64 ^d. Meath's. 1 2 1 1 7 8 ^ol. Foulks. 1 1 1 2 1 1 ^5 40 lord Cutts. 1 1
1 3 4 16 39 Count Nass^u. 1 5 12 Prince of Hesse 1 1 2 2 10 45 La Mellione^r. 1
1 8 4 Cambon. 1 4 1 4 2 4 0 35 Belcastle. 1 1 9 1 6 5 21 54 Groben. 2 1 3 4 10
50 The Danes. 1 1 1 2 6 ^0 Foot in all. 2 6 1 2 4 3 13 24 9 35 9 28 33^ 781
Horse in all. 1 1 6 5 15 3 13 4 263 125 Horse and Foot 3 6 1 2 4 4 19 29 24 38
22 32 ^00 906

A List of the Officers. Troopers, and Horses, Killed and Wounded at the Battle
of Aghrim.
col. Majors Capt. Lieut. Corn. Troopers Horses. Killed. Wounded. Killed.
Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed. Wounded. Killed. Wounded.
Vill^rs (...). Oxford. 1 2 1 45 21 24 V^^lers. 1 1 2 1 1 26 22 41 Langston. 7
10 12 Ruvigny. 2 2 9 1 9 1 40 9 26 15 4 3 13 2 11 1 118 62 50 132 (...) Br.
Lanier. 23 5 11 24 Bverly. 1 7 5 14 Woolslev. 7 7 10 1 37 5 23 48 Epp^^g^rs
^rig. La Forest. 1 12 3 Donep. 1 1 9 10 Scescad. 10 2 Boncur. 2 2 Portland. M.
G. Holstvle kill. 1 21 6 34 16 1 1 1 1 1 54 23 34 16 (...) Brigade. Monopullan.
Ginckel. 2 Schack. 1 1 2 6 Re^desel. 1 6 Neve^heuse. 1 3 5 Rheireren. 2 8 0 1 1
4 3 4 25 Dragoons. Eppinger. 2 2 0 Leveson. 7 5 Cunningham. 1 1 1 1 41 27 Winn.
In all 1 1 6 5 15 3 13 4 263 125 111 221

The Line of Battle will direct you how many Regiments we had in the Fight, and
considering all Circumstances, they could not make up seventeen thousand Horse
and Foot. The Irish were nigh Twenty Thousand Foot, and Five Thousand Horse and
Dragoons, as appears from the most Rational Accounts that can be gathered from
the number of their Regiments, and the Confession of their own Officers; so
that it may seem incredible to a great many, that in so long and sharp an
Engagement, with so great odds and disadvantages, that we had not a great many
more Men killed and wounded on our side. But this is not so great a wonder in
this Kingdom, if we'll look back upon the several Conflicts that our Ancestors
have had with that unhappy People: tho in this last War, four parts in five of
these against us were degenerate English. Nor ever were they under so good
Discipline, or yet so unanimous formerly as now, which no doubt made the Battle
much sharper; though it may seem strange that those of the English in Ireland,
that are Roman Catholics, should out of their blind Zeal to Popery, so quite
forget from whence they came, that they join with the mere Irish, against all
the Ties of Nation, Blood, and indeed of Interest. But as the Nature of Man is
apter to degenerate than improve; so do the English oftener fall in love with
the Barbarous Customs of the Irish, than on the contrary. Hence we read of the
Earl of Desmond's complaining that the English were taking away their Estates
and Country; and advises the Irish to join with him in their Defense: and yet
his own Family had not been then in Ireland, above three Generations, and not
that difference of Religion between them and the Natives as now; and it is
observable that several Families removing out of England into Ireland, call
themselves by the Counties in England, from whence they came, for two or three
Generations, and then forgetting those, they often turn mere Irish; for put a
drop of Wine into a pint of Water, and it presently so far incorporates, as you
can by no means discern it: so is it often with an English Family that has the
Misfortune to be planted amongst the mere Irish; for it soon becomes of the
same stamp with themselves. The consequence of which has been looked upon to be
so pernicious to the English Interest in that Country, that not only the
English have been forbid Cohabitation with the Irish; but there was a time when
Thomas Lord Borough, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, amongst other Instructions,
had Charge to enquire what English Undertakers had, contrary to their
Covenants, suffered Irish Men to Inhabit their Lands. Cox, Vol. 1. Page 413.

But I shall forbear this Subject for some time; and since I am run abroad, I
shall give you some of many Instances in former times wherein the Irish lost
considerable numbers, with small loss to the English.
Instances, wherein the Irish have been formerly overthrown by the English, and
that with very little Loss to the Britains. To omit therefore the inequality of
Numbers, at the first Conquest; and the little loss commonly on our side, in
those great Victories then obtained: In the Year 1316. William de Burgo, and
Richard de Brimingham, encountered Falany O Connor, King of Conaught, and killed
the King, with 8000 of his Men, near Athenree, with very little loss to
themselves; and yet the numerous Offspring of those brave English Commanders,
are all, or most of them, at this day reputed Irish, and have declared
themselves for that Interest. August the 9th. 1336. The English gave the Irish
another defeat in Conaught, with the loss of one Man, killing Ten Thousand of
their Enemies. And Anno 1504. the Lord Deputy Kildare fought with Bourk (then
turned Irish,) and a great many other Irish Lords in a strong Confederacy at
Knocklow, on the 19th. of August, and killed four thousand (some say 9000.) and
not one man killed or hurt on his side.

In the Year 1566. Col. Randolph Governor of Derry, sallyed thence with 300
Foot and 50 Horse upon O Neal, who then designed to Besiege the Town; In which
Sally, Four Hundred of the Irish were killed, without the loss of one English
man, except Col. Randolph himself. James Fitz-Maurice, and others were also
Defeated in Queen Elizabeth's time, and Four Hundred of them killed, without
the loss of one English man, except a Servant of one Captain Malby's

And Sir George Bingham Routed a Party of the Irish, The Irish always come off
the losers.
Commanded by the Bourks, at a place called Ardaner, being three thousand in
number, of whom only Seven escaped, and yet very little loss to Sir George's
side. August the 8th. 1647. Six thousand of the Irish are said to be killed at
the Battle of Dungan-Hills, fought by Maj. Genesis Jones, and not above Twenty
English slain.

And what wonder is it then, if the Battle of Aghrim, the Greatest and Best
that ever the Irish fought, should be won with the loss of so few on our side.
But such is the unhappiness of that People, that tho they always have the worst
of it: yet Campion makes this severe Remark upon them, and affirms, That
notwithstanding their Oaths and their Pledges, they are no longer true than
they find themselves the Weaker. And indeed all things considered, it can be
reckoned no other than a misfortune to England, in having that Island so near
adjoining, whose Inhabitants have all along differed from us in Language and in
Interest; and of late also in Religion too. Hence sad experience tells us, that
the Blood and Treasure of England have been Exhausted upon Ireland, when ever
any Foreign Prince could think his Affairs secure, or advanced by a dispute in
having the Irish Natives on his side, who have been ready always to join with
any against England, whose Subjects they have over and over again acknowledged
themselves, tho Heaven seems still to blast their attempts and perfidy to that
degree, that what side soever they have taken as yet against the English, has
never prospered. Which And those also that set them a work.
puts me in mind of a Story that I have heard relating to the former Wars, when
several of the Irish Nobility and Gentry assembled at Kilkenny, were consulting
what means to use for the driving out of Oliver Cromwell, then lately Landed
with an Army from England; and after several proposals, all which were found
difficult, My Lord Clanmalera a well meaning Gentleman amongst them, but who
seldom used to make Speeches, he now stood up, and after a profound silence,
and great expectation, he gravely advised them by all means to join with
Cromwell, and to espouse his Interest heartily, as the only Expedient to Ruin
him: and then to confirm his Opinion he gave them several instances of their
being unfortunate to their Friends and Confederates formerly. As to this last
Effort of theirs (which yet I pray God may be so) it was no less unhappy than
any of the former, since before that, Ireland was in the fairest way imaginable
of being made for ever an English Country: for the Natives were generally
poor, and not able to carry on a War even against the English of their own
Kingdom; whose Servants or Tenants commonly they were, till by an unaccountable
Zeal for Popery in King James; a dexterous management in My Lord Tyrconnel to
make himself Great, and so to advance the Interest of his Nation; together with
a secret design of the French King's, for his own sake, the Irish were
encouraged to that degree, that the Child as yet unborn may curse the occasions
of so much Blood spilt, and Treasure lost, as has been expended in their
suppression; and yet I see little advantage that either themselves or any of
their Patrons have got by the Bargain.

I shall conclude this Digression, and the Battle of An account of some I^ish
Prophecies.
Aghrim, with an Account of a Prophecy, which the Irish had of a Battle to be
fought at this place. I was told by a Gentleman, who lives now in that
Neighborhood, that at least a year before the Battle was fought, several of
the Vlster Creights, driving their Cattle that way, some of them asked this
Gentlman the name of that Castle, who when he told them that it was called
Aghrim: one of them replied, that was the place where a great Battle was to be
fought; and that the English men should think their Coats too heavy in climbing
up those Hills. This was also mentioned by Col. Gordon O Neal (found stripped
amongst the Dead next day, and made a Prisoner) and several other of the Irish
Officers after the Battle, which kind of Predictions are never rightly
understood till they are past: for the Irish interpreted this to signify the
English men's running away from them, but they found it by experience, that the
English thought their Coats too heavy in the pursuit of the Enemy: tho some say
this Prophecy is meant of the Hills near Ardee, the day before the Battle at
the Boyn, which was so Hot, that very few were able to carry their Coats. Nor
is there any other people more Superstitious in this point than the Irish; and
yet some of their Predictions are very remarkable, especially at Kingsale, when
the Spaniards landed there, where the Lord Montjoy, then Lord Lieutenant, was
showed the Ground several days before, whereon the Great O Neal was defeated by
him. And this was done by an old Prophecy, which puntually named and described
the place. Toward the end also of the former Wars in Ireland, whilst Ireton
lay before Limerick, my Lord Broghill was sent with a Detachment out of the
Army to a place called Knocknaclashy, to observe a Body of the Irish: My Lord
found several people got there before him, on purpose to expect the fate of the
last Battle of Ireland, to be fought on that Ground, as their Prediction run;
and tho the Irish Forces were as then not upon the Spot, yet it so fell out
that the Battle was fought there; the Irish Routed, and this the last
Field-Conflict that happened during those Wars. I have heard also some of the
Irish tell us before we got theither that we should not succeed at the first
Siege of Limerick: and they had no other reason for it but because one of their
Prophesies said so.

But I have spent too much time in these trifles, and Our Army lay upon their
Arms all night.
therefore to return: Whoever have been concerned in like Cases, may easily
imagine what satisfaction it was to the General and whole Army, to find
themselves entirely Masters of the Field, and their Enemies all dipersed; but
the day being gone, and few of our Tents come up, the men were ordered to lie
upon their Arms all Night: their dead Adversaries (who two hours before had
made a considerable Bustle) lay now very quietly by without disturbance. Next
day the General ordered a public thanksgiving to be kept, through the Army,
for this happy Victory, and gave command that all our own dead should be
Buried, and those of the Enemy also that lay on the ground where our Tents were
to be pitched. But the rest of the Irish remained still unburied, no
Inhabitants being left in that part of the Country to perform it; for it has
been an Ancient Custom amongst them, still to remove out of the way with their
Cattle and all their Substance, at the approach of an Enemy: And Judge Cox
observes that in the Year 1178, toward the beginning of the English Government
in Ireland, Conaught was invaded by Miles Coghan, and Young Fitz-Stephens: but
they were forced to return for want of Provisions, which has since frustrated
more well contrived designs, and great Expeditions, than any other Accident.
But this was not our case at this time, and the greatest mischief that happened
by the Irish removing, was to have the Carcasses of their Countrymen for want
of Burial, exposed to the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field; many
Dogs frequenting the place, afterward and growing so fierce by feeding upon
man's Flesh, that it became dangerous for any single man to pass that way. And
there is a true and remarkable Story of a Greyhound belonging to an Irish
Officer: the Gentleman was killed and stripped in the Battle, whose Body the Dog
remained by night and day; and tho he fed upon other Corpse with the rest of the
Dogs, yet he would not allow them or any thing else to touch that of his
Master. When all the Corpse were consumed, the other Dogs departed, but this
used to go in the Night to the adjacent Villages for Food, and presently to
return again to the place where his Masters Bones were only then left: and thus
he continued till January following, when one of Col. Foulks's Soldiers being
quartered nigh hand, and going that way by chance, the Dog fearing he came to
disturb his Masters Bones, flew upon the Soldier: who being surprised at the
suddenness of the thing, unslung his Piece, then upon his back, and killed the
poor Dog.

Next morning after the Battle, one Fitzgerald and six Troopers came from the
Enemy, and told us that what of the Army was left, made the best of their way
toward Limerick: But that they were so shattered and frighted, that very few
of their Foot would be got thither. The same day Brigadeer Eppinger, with a
Party of 1200. Horse and Dragoons Brigadeer Eppinger sent with a Party toward
Portumna.
was ordered toward Portumna and Banoher, two Passes upon the Shanon, where
the Irish kept Garrisons all last Winter. And on the 14th. those places were
Surrendered upon Condition to march out with their Arms and Baggage: First
toward our Camp, where they had liberty to lay down their Arms, if they
pleased; or else to go on toward the Irish Army. Loughrea, Melick, and other
places thereabouts were also Deserted by the Irish, who most of them took
toward Limerick, as the safest place of Retreat: whither they went in no kind
of order, but rather like people going to a Fair, the Roads as they passed
being full of Hampers and other stuff, which they had been in too great have to
lug along; yet that very night after the Battle they Robbed and Plundered one
another upon the Road. That Evening it was ordered that all the Officers that
were not upon Duty, should be at the General's Quarters next Morning at 9 of
the Clock, to attend the Funeral of Major Genesis Holstaple: and what Soldiers
would bring in Muskets to the Artillery, should have 6 d. a piece for them: by
which means they brought in a great many Wagon loads full of the Arms lost and
thrown away by the Irish; and tho the price was reduced to two pence
afterward, yet there still came a great many in. Our Hospital was then pitched
at Garbally, about three Miles nearer Athlone: and it was likewise ordered that
if there were any Sick or Wounded men that were not sent to the Hospital, they
should be brought to the Artillery at Five in the Morning, where they would
find Wagons to carry them to Athlone, Six Hundred Wagons being then ordered
to bring up Bread and other Provisions from the Stores, which by that time were
fixed there.

The 15th. Major O Connor, and 60 men that had been Garrisoned at Banoher
Bridge came to our Camp, where 40 of the men laid down their Arms, to whom the
General gave 5 s. a piece for encouragement, and ever after the Irish deserted
apace.

The 16th the Army marched to Loughreagh, a small The Army marched to Loughreagh.
Town seated in an indifferent good Country, but remarkable for nothing so
much as for several Synods and Assemblies kept there, by the Popish Clergy, in
year 1650. when the late unhappy Troubles where at the height. Those were the
Congregational Party, who sometimes condemned the Cessation, and at other times
they approved of it; But at last they Excommunicated the then Marquess of
Ormond, for acting by the Kings Commission, tho he valued themselves very
little, and their Excommunication much less. And it were to be wished that
other Churches too, as well as that of Rome, were better advised in this way of
Censuring.

This place we found Plundered by the Irish Army, as well their own People as
the English; the Irish Soldiers giving their Contrymen this reason for what
they did, that they had better be Plundered by their own people, than give what
they had to the English Army, who would certainly strip them in a day or two
more.

The 17th. We marched to Athenree, within 8 Miles Thence to Athenree.
of Galway, standing in a plain dry Country, and encompassed with a pretty
good Sone Wall; but we found not above 30 Irish Cabbins in all the Town, most
of which were deserted too, and the Inhabitants gone with the rest of the
Neighborhood, toward the Mountains of Slewbaughty.

There was a Religious House in the Town, built at first, by Miles Bruningham,
in the Year 1241; and tho it had been defaced when other Monasteries were
suppressed, yet the Irish had pretty well repaired it again. But upon our
Approach, the Monks had left their House, and greatest part of their Books. By
the Ruins of two Churches, within the Walls, and another Religious Place or
two without, it appears a Town of some Antiquity; and I find this to be the
place where Bruningham defeated the Irish, and slew Eight Thousand of them; the
Town being walled afterward, with the Money raised of Armor, and spoil gotten
from the Irish; for every one of the English that had double Armor of the
Irish, gave one half toward the Walls of the Town; of which Bruningham was
made Baron, and one John Hussy, a Butcher, did wonderful Feats that Day.

Afterward frequent skirmishes happened hereabouts, between the English and
Irish, and the Town it self was burnt in Queen Elizabeth's time, by the Mackan
Earla's, the Church not escaping; one of them saying, upon his being told that
his Mother was buried in it, That if she were alive, he would sooner burn her,
and it together, than that any English Churl should fortify there. Soon after
this, 2000 l. Tax was laid by the Lord Deputy to Rebuild the Town; but as they
were about it, and the Work well nigh finished, the New Gates were set on Fire
again, by my Lord Clanrickards Sons, who passed the Shannon, and changed their
English, for Irish Apparel, then sacked the Town, drove away the Masons, and
defaced the Queens Arms. This place it seems has not been very considerable
since, by reason of the Condition we found it in. Our Army encamped on the
Plains, not far from the Town, the General going with a Party, three Miles
nearer Galway: from whence being upon a rising Ground, we could see into the
Bay, where there lay then Six Ships; Three of which went off that Night. It was
given out in Orders, that the Men should be kept close in the Camp, and to be
ready to March in a Minutes warning, without beat of Drum; but on farther
Consideration, we rested. On the 18th. the General going, with a Party, to a
place called O Ranmore, seated upon the very end of the Bay of Galway, which
the Irish had burnt some days before; His Excellency thought it not convenient
to approach so nigh, as to view the Town of Galway, which we could not do
without went within half a Mile of it, tho not one of the Irish appeared; for
they had only a few Scampering Dragoons in Town; and therefore when the General
had viewed the most convenient ways to March his Guns and Carriages, and sent
an Aid du Camp to discover who Major General Scravemore was, who had gone
abroad also, with a Party another way; he returned to the Camp, whither one Mr.
Shaw, a Merchant, and some others, came Some Protestants escape out of Galway,
and inform the General of the state of that place.
from Galway, and gave the General a full Account how matters stood within;
that the Garrison were only 7 Regiments, and those neither full, nor well
Armed; that they agreed not amongst themselves about keeping or surrendering the
Town, tho it was probable they would never abide a brisk Attack; that D'Vssone,
the French Lieutenant General was there, and that my Lord Dillon was Governor,
and that the Irish expected Balderick O Donnel, with his Party to come into
Town, by way of Ire, Conaught, without whom they were not in a Condition to
make Resistance. The heat of Expectation, from this Irish Deliverer, was now
pretty well cooled; and at the Battle of Aghrim, he was at one Mr. Miller's, at
Bally-Cushean, about Six Miles from Tuam, having a Party of about one Thousand
Men at Hedford, Ballinrobe, and up and down the Country, who upon the News of
the Battle, were for marching in all haste toward the Mountains: but not
seeing our Army approach so soon as they expected them. Balderock, at the
Instigation of one Linch* a Popish-Priest, and one who called himself Dean of
Tuam, sent back a Party to that Town, who alleging that the People were making
great Preparations to receive the English Army; they stripped the Inhabitants,
and burnt the Place, at such a time, when the People not only expected to get
in their Harvest, but also hoped for the Protection of the English Army; but
found the contrary, as well to their disappointment as loss. This Town is
dignified with an Archiepiscopal Seat, and is that where the first Castle that
ever was in Ireland, as to any pile of Lime and Stone, was built in the Year
1161. by Rotherick O Connor, the Monarch; and for the rarity called Castrum
Mirificum. The Inhabitants here inform us that the Town was burnt in the former
Wars, by O Donnel's Grandfather, who turning about from a rising Ground, and
beholding the Flames, he fell down dead from his Horse, without ever speaking
another word. With the Pillage of this Town, and some other Places of the
Country about, Balderock, and his Party, marched to a Place called Cong,
amongst the Mountains, in the County of Mayo; his Men were then dwindled away,
and not above Six Hundred in Number. So that he was so far from being
serviceable to Galway, that his Design was to keep amongst the Mountains, till
he could make Terms for himself, upon which account he writ to the General,
before our Army removed from Galway.

Nigh the same time Judge Daily who lived in that part of the Country had sent
to the General, desiring that a Party might be sent for him, who should
seemingly force him from his Habitation; this Gentleman and some others of the
Irish had kept a Correspondence with our Government for several Months past,
and had proposed the surrendering of Galloway, and some other things, which was
the occasion of a part of our Armies marching to the Shannon the Winter before,
but whether they were real and sincere in what they proposed, or they did it
only to gain time, and by that means to benefit their own Party, may well be
questioned, since those very men continue still the greatest Patrons of the
Irish, and what they told the General at that time was at best a Mistake, for
they informed him that the Garrison of Gallway was five thousand men at least,
and those well armed, that the Stores were considerable, and the Town almost
impregnable, that Sarcefield with the whole Body of the Irish Horse was upon
his march with a Resolution to raise the Siege, and that Balderock's Party was
above six thousand strong; But though the General had no great reason to believe
all this, yet he thought it convenient to suppose the worst, and therefore was
doubtful whether to befiege the Town, or to stay for the heavy Cannon which
were at Athlone: yet upon the repeated Assurances of several Protestants that
those were only Tricks to gain time, he resolved to approach the Town of
Gallway the day following. Orders were therefore given out that the Army should
march in two Colums, with an hundred men of each Wing for a Rear Guard,
Commanded by a Lieutenant Colonel of the Right-Wing: A Captain, Lieutenant,
and Ensign with fifty Firelocks were to march at the Head of each Regiment.

The ninteenth we marched from Athenree, the General The Army march to Gall^way.
leaving three thousand Horse and Dragoons there under the Command of
Lieutenant Genesis Scravemore and Major Genesis Ruvigny as well for the Convenience
of Forage, (the Ground nigh Galloway being very Barren and Rocky) as to
observe the Enemies Motion by securing the Passes, and by that means our great
Guns that were designed to come from Athlone, if the Town did not submit
without putting us to the Trouble. The Town The Town described.
of Galloway is no doubt one of the Ancientest and Greatest in Ireland, and yet
I do not find many remarkable things of it formerly, it being always rather a
place of Trade than Action of another Nature: It was first governed by a
Provost, then Sovereign and Bailiffs, then a Mayor and Bailiffs, now by a Mayor
and Sheriffs, It was most of it burnt in the year 1500. but soon rebuilt by
reason of the Richness of the Inhabitants: the Houses within the Walls are
generally very strong, and the Streets narrow; it was blockt up by Sir Charles
Coot, and Major General Ludlow in the year 1652. and surrendered to Sir Charles
on the 12th. of May following, the loss of which carried with it at that time
the Fate of Ireland. There lived a great many rich Merchants in it of late by
reason of the convenience of its Situation for Trade with Spain or France, but
most of them are Irish, which might be one great reason to expect the having it
delivered upon reasonable Terms, rather than by resistance to have it ruined.
The Town is Seated at the Foot of a narrow ridge of Land, having Galloway-Bay
on the South and South-East, a large River coming from Lough Cerbe on the West,
and toward the North there lies a low Bog, through the midst of which runs a
narrow but deep River proceeding from the Great one that slides by the Town:
this River and Bog each about a Mile and an half toward the North-East, and
then end together, the River sinking under ground at the Foot of a large Hill;
but appears again at an Old Castle nigh Oran-More, where it runs into the
utmost Creek of the Bay. The Ridge of Land between the Bog and the Bay toward
the East is but very narrow, and may with no great difficulty be Fortified,
without which the Town is not to be defended since an Army may approach under
covert of this Ridge within less then an hundred Yards of the Town-wall, where
there is a rising Ground that overlooks a great part of the Town. There had
been some works upon the neck of this Ridge in former times, and the French had
begun to repair them, but had not brought them to any perfection; the Irish
however were hard at work upon a Fort at the end of this Ridge, and nigh the
South-East Corner of the Wall, they had levelled all the Hedges nigh the Town,
as also the Suburbs toward the Eastgate, and several very strong Works were
cast up to defend that part of the Town: within the Wall on that side there
stands a round Citadel with eight Guns, having a Platform nigh it of six Guns
more, at the South-East corner of the Wall were eight or ten Guns planted;
there stands also a Turret toward the middle of a large Curtain that runs
along next the Bay, on which were three Guns, and toward the River they had
planted five more, which with those that looked toward the West and North, made
in all about forty six Guns, most of which were amounted upon little mean
Carriages, something like those they commonly have on Shipboard. We had no
opposition at all in approaching the Town, but the Irish that they might do
something, burnt my Lord Buffin's House seated by the River nigh a Mile from
the Town, some of them staying in the Orchards till they were beat from thence
by a Party of our Horse; they burnt also their Suburbs toward the North-West
Gate, and made a show as if they were preparing for a vigorous resistance.
As Soon as a part of our Army was drawn as near as the The Town Summoned.
General thought convenient, he sent a Trumpet to the Town, profering them the
Benefit of the Lords Justices late Declaration if they would surrender without
any further trouble, whilst the Trumpeter was in Town, the Irish fired three or
four great Guns, which is not usual in such Cases; but they pretended
afterward that it was done by some Gunners that knew not of the Trumpets being
there; the Answer however sent by my Lord Dillon, who was Governor, was to this
effect, That Monsieur de Ussone, who Commanded in Chief was of the same opinion
with himself and the rest of the Officers, and that they were resolved to
defend the place to the last. That Afternoon was spent in the posting of our
Army. The Irish in the mean time firing their great Guns from the Town, though
with little loss to us, because of the convenience of Ground we had to Encamp
on. There were only three Ships left now in the Bay, who anchoring nigh the
Town, they made off from the Shore as the Army marched in. And there was a
Proposal offered to make all our Tin-Boats into four Floats, and put two small
Fieldpieces upon each, with which we were to attempt the seizing the Ships in
the Bay, for it was supposed that if the Ships had Guns, yet our Floats would
be so flat as to lie under them, and so we might with no great danger either
board or sink the Vessels, but after having made the Floats and mounted some of
our Guns upon them, the design was found impracticable for several Reasons, and
we had an opportunity of lamenting our misfortune, in not having at that time
so much as one English Frigate near us. The Boats therefore were to be employed
other-ways, for as soon as it was grown dark Lieutenant A Party of Monks pass
the River.
General Mackay, with Colonel Tiffins, Colonel St. John's, Monsieur Cambons,
Lord George Hambletons, one Dutch, and a Danish Regiment of Foot, with four
Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons were wafted over the River, about two Miles
above the Town: by break of day our men were all safe on the other side,
meeting with no opposition, only a small Party of Dragoons fired at the first
Party that landed, and then scoured off; whether the Irish really expected
Balderock O Donnell to come into Town that way is uncertain, however we had now
destroyed all hopes of it, and he retired again into the County of Mayo, from
whence he writ to the General as has been said. On Sunday in the Evening, not
many hours after we appeared before the Town, one Captain Bourk deserted from
the E^^my, and gave the General an account, that the Fort the Irish were making
toward the South-East was almost finished, and therefore the sooner it was
attacked, it would be the easier gained, and that it was as necessary for us to
take as them to keep it, because i^ commanded a great part of the Wall on that
side the Town. N^xt Morning early A Fort taken.
Count Nassau with a Party of Granadeers and two Regiments of Foot was
conducted by Captain Bourk the safest way to attack this Fort: (Major General
Talmash would needs go a Volunteer as he usually did (when it was not his turn
to command) we managed it so well that our Granadeers were got almost to the
Foot of the Enemies works before they discovered us, upon which the Irish made
some faint firings, but our men then rushed forwards, and threw in their
Granado's, which soon forced the Enemy to retire by a Line of Communication
that was drawn from the Fort to the Town: we lost in this Action only a
Lieutenant and five Men, having two Lieutenants and eight men more wounded, and
after the Fort was in our possession the Irish fired both small and great shot
upon us from their Walls, by which they wounded several, and killed one
Mounsieur Madronet, an Ingineer, as he was giving Orders to the Workmen.

That morning five Troopers desert from Balderock's Party giving some account
of his present circumstances, tho when the Irish within saw a part of our Army
beyond the River, they still made show of resisting, and burnt all the Suburbs
on that side the Town, which were very large, and the Irish the readier to
destroy them, because most of the Houses thereabouts had formerly belonged to
the English. About ten a Clock, and whilst their Suburbs were yet in a flame
the Irish beat a Parley, the Governor sending The Irish beat a Parley.
a Drummer wi^^ a Letter to the General to desire a safe Conduct for some
Persons to come out in order to a Capitulation: To which the General returned a
satisfactory Answer, and presently a Cessation was commanded between the Camp
and Garrison, those in Town crowding in great numbers upon the Walls, and our
Soldiers going to the outside of the Irish Works, enquiring each for their
Friends and Acquaintance in one another Army.

In the afternoon Hostages were exchanged in order Hostages exchanged.
to a Treaty. Those on our side were Lieutenant Colonel Purcel, Lieutenant
Colonel Coot, and the Marquess de Rhada, Lieutecant Colonel to my Lord Cutts.
The Enemies Hostages were Lieutenant Colonel Linch, Lieutenant Colonel Burk,
and Lieutenant Colonel Reyley. The Articles were not agreed upon that day, and
the Irish prevailed with the General to continue the Cessation till Tuesday at
ten a Clock; which time being come, the General ordered eight Guns and four
Mortars to be drawn down to that Fort we took the day before, and there to be
planted, then sent a Drum to command away his Hostages; but the Irish had some
debates amongst themselves, not that they pretended to hold out the Town, but
about the method of Surrender, and the Substance of their Articles. Their
delays however made the General impatient, and he sent once or twice to hasten
their Resolutions: At last Lieutenant Colonel Burk one of their Hostages was
permitted to go in, Major General Talmash, as was believed, being inclined to
lay the Treaty aside, desired him, When they were ready to begin afresh, to
give us a sign to secure our selves, by firing a Gun into the Air: The other
replied, That they would not fire from within till we provoked them to it from
without: But after some further time it was agreed to, that next Sunday
morning, the Town should be delivered up upon the following Articles.

The Articles of Galloway, as they were confirmed afterward by their
Majejesties.
GUlielmus and Maria Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Litera Nostrae pervenirint salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulamentum quarundum literarum patentium de confirmatione
gerenda, and apud Westmonasterium decimo Septimo die Februarii ultimo
praeterito in Curia Cancelaria Nostra Irrotulata ac ibidem Recordo Remanente in
haec verba.

WIlliam and Mary by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come Greeting:
Whereas certain Articles bearing date the one and twentieth day of July last
past, were made and agreed upon, by our Trusty and well belvoed, Rebort Baron
de Ginckel Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of Our Forces in Our
Kingdom of Ireland, and the Constable and Governor of Our Town of Galway in
Our said Kingdom; Whereby Our said General promises, that We should ratify
these Capitulations within the space of three months from the date thereof, or
sooner. The Tenor of which said Articles is as follows, Viz.

Articles granted to the Town and Garrison Articles of Galloway.
of Galloway by Lieutenant General Ginckell, Commander in Chief of Their
Majesty's Forces the 21st. of July, 1691.
I. THat the Town and Fort of Galloway shall be given up to his Excellency or
such Officer as he shall appoint, on Sunday Morning next by six of the Clock;
together with all the Stores of Ammunition, and Provision, and Magazines of all
sorts without Embezlement, and that immediately upon the signing these
Articles, such Persons as the General shall appoint have leave to inspect them.

II. That all Deserters that are in the Town shall be given up.

III. That immediately after the signing these Articles, all the Outworks of
the Town shall be delivered to such Officers as the General shall appoint to
take Possession of the same, and that the General shall withdraw all the Cannon
from the Wall.

IV. That till the Town is surrendered as aforesaid, the General may order such
Works and Batteries to be made as he shall judge convenient, provided he does
not bring them within three yards of the Wall, nor the Guns within ten yards of
the Batteries; and that in the Town they shall not proceed to work to fortify
the same any further.

V. In Consideration of the said Rendition his Excellency gives leave to
Lieutenant General d'Vssone, Monsieur Metlet Commissary of War, and the rest of
the French Officers and Soldiers, and others of that Nation now in Gallway, to
go to Limerick with their Arms, Bag, and Bagage, whether they shall be safely
conducted the nearest way, and in case that the said Lieutenant General
d'Vssone shall want Horses to carry his Equipage thither, the General will
furnish him with them.

VI. That such of the Garrison as desire it may remain in Town, or go to their
respective homes and enjoy the benefit of this Capitulation, and the rest shall
march to Limerick with their Arms, six pieces of Cannon, Drums beating, Colors
flying, Match lighted, Bullet in mouth, and as much Ammunition and Provisions
as each Officer and Soldier can carry with him, and that they shall be
furnished with Draught-Horses, and Harnesses for their Guns if they want them,
which said Guns they shall have liberty to choose, provided they take none
above twelve Pounders.

VII. That the wounded and sick Officers may stay in Town till they are cured,
and that then they shall be sent to Limerick with a safe Conduct, and in the
mean time shall be provided in Town with necessaries for their Cure and
Subsistence.

VIII. That the Governor, Constable, Mayor, She riffs, Aldermen, Burgesses,
Freemen and Natives of Gallway, and the Inhabitants thereof, or the reputed
ones by any former Charter of King James the II. granted before his Abdication,
or any of his Ancestors, shall have a general Pardon of all Attainders,
Outlawries, Treasons, Fellonies, Premunires, and all manner o^ Offenses
committed since the beginning of the said King James's Reign, to the date
hereof.

IX. That all and every of the Garrison, Officers, Governor, Constable, Mayor,
Sheriffs, Aldermen, Burgesses, Freemen, and Inhabitants aforesaid, shall enjoy
and possess their Estates real and personal, and all other Liberties and
Immunities as they held or ought to have held under the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation, or other-ways by the Laws of this Kingdom, freely discharged from
all Crown-rents, quit-rents, and all other Charges to the date hereof.

X. That the Names of the Roman Catholic Clergy of the Town of Gallway be
given to the General, on or before Tuesday next, and that they as well as the
Laity of the said Town, shall have the private Exercise of their Religion
without being prosecuted on any Penal Laws for the same, and that the said
Clergy shall be protected in their Persons and Goods.

XI. That the Gentlemen of Estates now belonging to the Town and Garrison of
Gallway shall have liberty to keep a Gun in their Houses for the defense of the
same, and wear a Sword and Case of Pistols if they think fit.

XII. That all the Roman Catholic Lawyers of the said Town shall have the free
liberty of Practice that they had in King Charles the Second's time.

XIII. That such of the Officers belonging to any of the Regiments that are now
in Gallway, and not present at the signing of these Capitulations shall have
the benefit of the same, provided they shall submit within three Weeks to the
Governor of Gallway for the time being, who shall be appointed by the General,
or that they shall have a safe Conduct to go to Limerick in the same manner as
the said Garrison has.

XIV. That such other Persons now in Town as desire to go out with the Garrison,
or such part thereof as goes to Limerick shall have liberty to do so, and carry
their Families and Goods along with them, and that such Officers Wives
belonging to the said Garrison as are there or in any other part of Conaught,
may at the same time depart with their Goods, or at any other convenient time
afterward, particularly Colonel Edmund Reily's Wife, Mother and Family, the
Lady Jvaugh and her Daughter, and Lieutenant Colonel Luke Reily, his Brother
Philip Reily, their Wives and Families.

XV. That immediately all Acts of Hospitality shall cease on both sides, and
that if it shall happen that any provoking Language shall pass between the
Soldiers, they shall be punished by their respective Officers for the same,
and not permitted to fire on one another.

XVI. That for the due performance of these Articles, the Governor shall
immediately give the Persons undernamed for Hostages,

Earl of Clanrickard. Colonel Dominick Brown. Lord of Iniskillin. Major Dillon.
Lieutenant Col. Bodkin.
Lastly, The General promises to have these Capitulations ratified by Their
Majesty's within the space of three Months from the date hereof, or sooner if
possible.

Signed and Sealed the day abovementioned by the Commander in Chief of Their
Majesty's Forces, and the Constable and Governor of the said Town
interchangeably. Dillon. Clanrickard. Iniskillin.

Signed and Sealed in the presence of Dominick Brown. John Bodkin. Thomas
Dillon. James Skeleton. James O Brian. Hugh Dogherty. John Stephenson. Oliver O
Gara. William Bourke. Anthony O Dogherty. Robert Linch. Bryan O Neile. Hugh O
Neile. John Dogherty.




And whereas the said Town of Gallway has been since in pursuance of the said
Articles surrendered to us: Know ye that we having considered of the said
Articles, are graciously pleased hereby to declare that we do as far as in us
lies ratify and confirm the same, and every Clause, Matter, and Thing therein
contained. And as to such part thereof, for which An Act of Parliament shall be
found to be necessary, we shall recommend the same to be made good by
Parliament. And shall give our Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills that shall be
passed by our two Houses of Parliament for that purpose.

Provided always and our Will and Pleasure is, that these our Lettees Pattents
shall be enrolled in our Court of Chancery in our said Kingdom of Ireland
within one year next ensuing. In witness, etc.

Witness our self at Westminster the Seventeenth Day of February. Anno Regni
Regis and Regina Guillielmi and Mariae quarto per been de privato Sigillo.
Nos autem tenorem praemissorum praedict. ac requisitionem Atturnati Generalis
Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hyberniae duximus exemplificandum
per praesentes. In Cujus rei Testimonium has litteras nostras fieri facimus
patentes Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmonasterium quinto die Aprilis Anno
Regni eorum quarto. Bridges.
Examinat. per nos S. Keck Lacon W. Child In Cancel Magistros.



This Town with a good Garrison in it might have July, 169^.
given us more trouble, and so have postponed the Siege of Limerick: yet
considering their present Circumstances, they did not manage ill in procuring
for themselves those Terms which they had, though the General might safely
condescend to grant any thing included in the Lords Justices Declaration, which
both the Articles of Gallway and Limerick are. At the same time that Gallway
was Capitulating, there came a Drum from Limerick, which put us in hopes that
all was over, and that they had a mind to make Terms not only for Gallway but
for the Irish Nation in general, but it was only about the exchange or
releasing of some Prisoners, which at that time could not be granted, or rather
it was to understand what became of Gallway that so the others might take their
measures accordingly,

As Soon as the Articles were signed, William Robinson The Stores viewed.
Esquire Deputy Play Master to the Army was sent into Town to take an Account of the
Stores, and Tuesday in the Afternoon we took possession of all their Outworks,
the Enemy dismounting all their Cannon also, and thus we continued a Friendly
Correspondence till Sunday the 26th. when about seven a Clock in the Morning
Monsieur d'Vssone the French Lieutenant General came to our Camp and stayed
about half an hour from whence he had a Guard for his Person to Conduct him
toward Limerick: Sir Henry Bellasis being appointed Governor, The town
surrendered.
he marched to the Town with his own, Colonel Brewers and Colonel Herberts
R^giments, and about nine a Clock he took Possession of all the Guards. The
Irish before they marched out were dividing some Gunpowder in the Street, which
accidentally taking fire, some had their eyes blown out, others had their Hair
and Clothes burnt off, above twenty of them being disfigured by it; the
suddenness of this Accident, bred some confusion military map THE TOWN OF
GALLOWAY Besieged the 19th of July and surrendered ye 14th 1692.

at first, and three of our Regiments being then in Town, each side seemed to
suspect the other, and the Irish showed some signs of being afraid that our Men
were falling upon them, but the thing was presently over and the poor men taken
care of: most of them that happened this disaster going to two Irish Bishops for
their Benediction, who were then in the Street and ready to march out with the
Garrison.

About ten a Clock my Lord Dillon marched out with the Irish Garrison, being not
above two thousand three hundred men, and those but indifferently armed and
worse clothed, they had six pieces of Cannon according to the Capitulation
(four of which were Iron) and drawn by six Teams of our Horses, having a Guard
of Horse and Dragoons from our Camp to conduct them to Limerick. At twelve a
Clock the General himself went into Town, being attended after his entrance by
the Mayor and Aldermen, the Recorder making a Speech to wish him Joy.

In the Evening one Captain Brain O Neal with most of his Company deserted from
the Enemy, as did also several others, and taking the Oath of fidelity to their
Majesty's were either dismissed to their several Habitations, or else were
entertained in our Army as their fancy led them. We found several Guns in Town
unmounted, and two or three very fine Brass Guns which they had not planted in
any place to be made use of, there was also good store of Ammunition left,
besides eight hundred Hogs-heads of Meal, and other things of value.

July the 27th. That part of the Army encampt beyond the River under Lieutenant
General Mackay marched through the Town, and our men were set to work in
improving the Fort which the Irish had formerly begun toward the South-East
Corner of the Wall, six of our Guns were likewise sent into Town since we had
furnished the Irish with Draught-horses for so many of theirs, then we levelled
all the Batteries and other Works that we had begun against the place, and all
sick Soldiers that were not able to march, were ordered to be taken care of by
the Governor, except such as were sent in Wagons toward Athlone.

The 28th. we marched back to Athenree, and as the Army were in motion, Captain
Coal with nine Men of The Army removes.
War and eighteen other Ships appeared in the Bay of Gallway, to whom the
General sent Orders to sail immediately for the Shannon; the twenty ninth we
marched to Lougbreagh, and the next day proving very rainy the Army rested. The
31th. the Army marched A Squadron of Ships come into the Bay.
toward Airs Court a well improved place and a good Country all about, but
upon occasion of the Waters being swelled by the former days rain, or else
through the mistake of Orders, the Army encamped that night in three several
places, which had been a good opportunity for a vigorous Enemy to endeavor the
retrieving of their Losses, but the Truth of it was, they were at too great a
distance for any such Attempt.

And since we have brought the Army to the end of A Brief Account of what
happened in other places of the Kingdom.
this month let us leave them a while on their march toward Limerick, and
briefly give an account of what happened much about this time in several other
parts of the Kingdom.

July the 1st. Lieutenant Colonel Dawson marched with a Party of the Militia
toward the Comorra Mountains not far from Waterford where he killed three
Rapparees; and Major Stroud being one of the Officers appointed by the
Government to Command the Militia in the County of Cork, killed ten Rapparees
near Baly-Cleugh; and in ten days there were sixty more killed in that part of
the Country adjoining to Bandon, by Lieutenant Colonel More and others of the
Militia, and Colonel Blunt killed five near Cashell.

In the beginning of April one Duppine obtained Letters Patents for the setting
up a Linen Manufacture in Ireland, this was very taking at first, and a great
many of the Chief men in the Kingdom had shares in it. On the 8th. of July the
Lords Justices with several of the Nobility and Judges met at the Thols^ll, in
Dublin, and there admitted several new Members of the said Corporation, but
what this project will come to in this Kingdom is as yet uncertain.

The same day our Smirna Fleet came into the Harbor of Kinsale, and we had an
account that our Grand Fleet was then nigh Cape-Clere.

About this time five and twenty Rapparees were killed near Mount Melick, and
part of the Militia of Roscreagh go toward Nenagh, upon an expedition for
black Cattle and killed ten Rapparees; one Captain Warren killed nine also in
the County of Killkenny. On the 17th. ten Ships with Mortars, Bombs,
Ammunition, etc. came from Dublin to Kinsale, being part of those convoyed
afterward by Captain Coal to Limerick, and then our Fleet convoyed the
Smirna-Fleet from Kinsale toward England: Ships also came to Waterford with
one hundred Recruits for the Brandenburg* Regiment who suffered much in the
former Siege of Limerick, and some few also for the Danes.

John Weaver Esquire High Sheriff of the County of Westmeath by Order from the
Government gives Protections to several Rapparees, and those discover a knot of
Rogues, twenty three of whom were killed by the Militia, and three Gun-smiths
also who were at work for them, on a Forge built in the midst of a great Wood.
July the 20th. a Party of the Irish Army appear nigh Cashell, but marched off
again without attempting any thing: And Colonel James Barry with a Party of the
Militia killed five and thirty Rapparees near Tallough, but being waylaid by
the Enemy, most of his Party were killed or taken Prisoners, and himself
carried to Limerick, where he remained a Prisoner till the Town was surrendered.
The 22 d. three Rapparees were killed near Cork, and four more toward Cahir.
The 23 d. Lieutenant Colonel Ramsey, Captain Kingsly and other Officers with
one hundred Soldiers out of Colonel Venner's Regiment (formerly Sir Edward
Deering's) joined with four hundred of the Militia marched toward Sligo to
view the Posture of the Enemy thereabouts, and it being reported that
Lieutenant General Sheldon's Horse were in that part of the Country; two
hundred Horse and Dragoons were sent abroad to discover the Truth of it.
Lieutenant Colonel Ramsey with the rest of the Party marched to Ballysedara
Bridge, four Miles from Sligo where he found old Sir Teague O Regan with eighty
Horse, and about two hundred Foot very Advantageously posted, to hinder our
passage that way, but our Party attacking them, they gave ground after some
time, and Sir Francis Hambleton with some of the Militia, and a Troop of
Colonel Winn's Dragroons coming in the mean time, the Enemy were pursued almost
to the Fort of Sligo, about thirty of them killed and ninteen taken Prisoners,
amongst whom were two Lieutenants and an Ensign, and the Store-keeper of Sligo.
Sir Teague himself narrowly escaping for his mean Appearance was the reason
that a Lieutenant was seized instead of him.

The Earl of Drogheda's Regiment had now Orders to march from the Queens County
to Mullingar, where the men were daily employed to improve and strengthen the
Works, my Lord himself marched always with his Regiment, and then took a great
deal of pains as well in seeing the Works completed as in forwarding the
Stores, and also in hearing and redressing Complaints and Grievances relating
as well to the Army the Country. A Party of the Militia bring in some Prisoners
from the Island nigh Lanesborough who were afterward sent to Dublin.

Seventeen Rapparees were killed in the County of Kildare by two Parties of the
Militia, and three hanged at Edenderry; five hundred of the Militia of the
County of Cork under the Command of Colonel Beecher met with about four hundred
of the Irish beyond a place called Shibbareene, and after a small dispute the
Enemy were put to flight, by which means our Party had almost surpised
Mackarty Moore and Colonel O Donavan who were not far off, the Enemy lost nigh
sixty, and the Militia got a considerable Booty of Cattle, and nigh the same
time one Barry a Captain with ten of his men deserted from the Enemy.

On the Thirtieth of July, part of the Militia of the County of Wickloe, being
two Troops of Horse, two of Dragoons and five Companies of Foot rendezvoused on
the Murrough five Miles from Wickloe, where they were viewed by Major Brooks
and Captain Phillips appointed by the Government as Superintendents of the
Militia of that County. And thus ended this active month of July in Ireland
where more execution was done then in all Europe besides, notwithstanding the
great Preparations.

CHAP. VII.
Several fresh Regiments ordered toward the Camp to Recruit the Army.
Brigadier Leveson sent with a Party toward Nenagh, that place deserted by long
Anthony Carol. A Treaty with Balderock O Donel. The Army marches to Cariganlis.
The General with a Party views Limerick. News of the Death of my Lord Tyrconel.
Irish Lords Justices act after my Lord Tyrconels death. A Party sent to meet
our Guns. Colonel Lumnley goes with a Party toward Charlevil. A Spy returns
with an account of the Estate of Limerick. An Order about the Rates of
Provisions. Another prohibiting the buying Cattle without the Generals License.
Our Army goes to Limerick. Iretons Fort taken, then Cromwels Fort. Col. Donep
killed. Our heavy Cannon came up. A Party sent to Castle-Cannel Our Ships come
up nigh the Town. Batteries planted. The Enemy afraid of our passing the River.
Brigadier Leveson sent into Kerry. Some Protestants released from St. Thomas 's
Island. Major General Talmash commands in the Trenches. A brief Account of what
happened in other places of the Kingdom during the Month of August.

THe General being assured, that the Irish were Fresh Regiments sent for to the
Camp.
using their utmost skill and industry to rally and reinforce their shattered
Army, and not knowing how far despair might carry Men, that were come now to
their last Stake, considering also that we had a strong Town before us, which
would be the work of some Time to reduce, if the Enemy made what Resistance
might justly be expected; his own Troops being likewise harrassed by continual
labor and toil, suffering often through scarcity of Bread and other
Necessaries by reason of continual marching: Those and other Considerations
prevailed with the General to send for all the Regiments that had been left in
Munster and other places, except Colonel Hastings at Cork, and some
Inniskilliner's in the North; and some of them being already upon their march;
we were joined on the First of August at Banoher The Army marched to Banoher
Bridge.
Bridge by Colonel Matthews Dragoons, and Colonel Lloyd's Foot; the latter upon
further consideration, being ordered back to Athlone, for that Balderock's
Party was still on foot. Banoher is about fourteen miles from Athlone down the
River toward Limerick, and is a very strong Pass, at which the Irish kept
three Regiments all the precedeing Winter, building small Huts to shelter
th^mselves from the Weather: The Bridge it self consists of seventeen large
Arches, one of which was broke down by the Irish, and another is since fallen.
At the Bridge end, on Leinster side had been a considerable Stone Fort, built
in the former Wars, now demonished by the Irish, but on the other side of the
River they had cast up a Work close to the Bridge, and there planted four Field
pieces, behind which stood an Old Castle, not to be forced without Cannon, and
nigh that a very Regular*Fort, and well palisado'd, so that it was not so easy
a thing to force this place at any time during the former Winter as some
Coffee-House Generals, and pot valiant Soldiers made it, but Men, that have
been bred up that way, and are actually upon the Place, are commonly best
Judges of what is fit to be attempted in such a Case, though it is not
convenient they should always give Reasons for what they do to every one who
pretend to be concerned. Our Army encamped here on a narrow Neck of Ground left
by the slopeing of the River on the Right, and a vast Bog on the Left. The
Encampment being so strong, that it had been impossible for any Army or numbers
of Men to have forced us from our Ground.

August the Second, the Army halted, and a detachment Brigadier Leveson sent
forwarwards with a Party.
of four Men out of each Troop of Horse, with a Party of Dragoons, making in
all five hundred men, under the Command of Brigadier Leveson, were sent
forwards to scowre the Country: On the Fourth this Party went to Nenagh, where
stands the Remains of an Old Castle built by King John, and now the Inheritance
of the Duke of Ormond: The Roof of this Castle was burnt by a Party of our Army
at our decamping last year, but the Walls, and some other conveniences remain
still, being possessed all Winter by long Anthony Carol, whose Party was now
about five hundred: Hearing therefore of Brigadier Levesons approach, he
detached a Party toward a Bridge about half a mile from the Place, thinking to
maintain that Pass till his Men might march safely off toward Limerick, but at
his coming to the Bridge, perceiving our Men marching to the Right and Left to
incompass him, after some few shots, he retreated to Nenagh setting the small
part of the Town that was left on fire, which was soon Nenagh deserted by the
Irish.
quenched by some English Prisoners, that had been kept there, but now
released, when the Irish made toward Limerick, when our Men got to Nenagh,
Major VVood was ordered with a Party to pursue the Irish, which he did almost
to Cariganlis, taking most of their Baggage, and about four hundred large
Cattle, which the Irish were in too great haste to carry off.

The Third our Army marched to Bir, but the passage over the Bridge at Banoher,
being exceeding troublesome, it was late before the Guns and Carriages could be
got up, and therefore we rested on the Fourth. And now we found, that
notwithstanding all the supplies of Horses that we had out of England, yet
there still wanted a great many for the use of the heavy Cannon, and therefore
it was proposed to bring them down from Athlone to Limerick by Water, but that
being found impracticable, the General sent to Dublin, where most of the
Nobility and Gentry furnished him with their Coach Horses, but all those not
being sufficient a great many more were pressed by an Order from the Government.

The Fifth we marched to Burasicane, where there had been a pretty English
Plantation, but burnt down the former Winter, by the Garrison of Bir, because
they did not desire to have the Rapparees in so near a Neighborhood.

The Sixth we marched to Ninagh, where we stayed four days for want of Bread
and other Necessaries, The Army march thither.
it being no small difficulty to furnish an Army with constant Supplies in a
desolate Country, when they are still upon their march, and where every thing
must he carried upon the Axletree.

Friday the Seventh, The Lord Justice Coningesby came to the Camp, where he
staid nigh a Fortnight: And

Saturday the Eighth, a Party of Horse and Dragoons with several Pioneers went
toward the Silver Mines to mend the Roads for our heavy Carriages: Another
Party at the same time marching toward Killalow Pass, who brought in seven or
eight Prisoners. A Brigadier of the Guards and two more Horsemen desert the
Enemy and inform us, that they were encamped nigh Cariganlis, and making what
preparations they could to withstand us, forcing all the Irish into Arms, that
were within their Jurisdiction, and arming their Foot anew out of the Stores at
Limerick, and that they talked of giving us Battle again before we should
approach the Town. The same day one Mr. Richards came A Treaty with Balderock O
Donel.
from Balderock O Donel to our Camp, where he stayed two or three days, and
then went toward Dublin in order to wait upon his Majesty, who was then in
Flanders. His business was to assure the General of Balderooks affections to
their Majesty's Service, and that if he might have the Men he brought over with
him admitted into pay in order to serve his Majesty in Flanders or elsewhere,
himself made Earl of Tyrconnel, to which he pretended a Title from his
Ancestors, and have two thousand pounds given him for his expenses, he would
then come over to us, and bring a considerable Body of the Irish along with
him, The General therefore considering that it was no ill policy to get the
Irish to draw blood one of another, consented to some of O Donnels proposals,
and the business was shortly after completed, though Balderock complained
heavily that the thing should be made public to the great hinderance August,
169^.
of the Numbers of Men he designed to bring off, and almost to the hazard of
his own life, for this Treaty was first in the Dublin Intelligence, and then in
the London Gazette dated August the 13th. which was before the thing was really
completed, but those that have seen Balderock, will believe that it was partly
his own fault. There was also an Officer sent at the same time by Sir Teague O
Regan from Sligo about the surrender of that place, the Articles being in a
manner agreed to, but this business was afterward delayed, and the Government
obliged to be at the expense and trouble of sending a Body of men from Dublin
and other parts of the Kingdom to reduce it by force, and its confidently
averred that this happened merely by the covetousness of one of our Colonels, who
had the Secreet of this Affair committed to his management.

August the 9th. Lieutenant Colonel Oxborough of Colonel Lutterill's Horse, his
Lieutenant and their Attendance desert, and come to our camp, and a Foot
Officer with eleven Musquiteers and their Arms came in also: A Man and a Woman
were this day hanged in the Camp, the Man for robbing Tents, and the Woman for
being accessory to the Murder of one of our Soldiers nigh Gallway. The time
limited in the Lords Justices Proclamation dated July the 7th. being now
expired, and the General willing still to use all fair means possible to bring
in the Irish without the effusion of more Blood, he therefore orders the
following Declaration to be prepared.

By Lieutenant General Ginckell, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces.
August, 1691.
THE Enemies of Their Majesty's Government, A Declaration from the General to
the Irish.
and the Disturbers of the Quiet of this Kingdom having been very industrious
to conceal the Grace and Favor which has been offered to such as should return
to their Duty. To take away all manner of excuse for the future, from those
that still continue in Arms, I have thought fit to publish, that though the Term
prescribed by the Lords Justices in their Proclamation of the seventh of July
is expired, so that no man can lay claim to the Condiscentions therein made;
yet if within ten days from the date hereof, any Person or Persons shall do the
Services therein mentioned, I promise with the Consent of the Lords Justices,
who are thereunto empowered by Their Majesty's, that they shall have a full and
free Pardon of all Treasons, Crimes, and Offenses by them committed against
Their Majesty's Government, and be restored to their Estates forfeited by the
said Treasons, etc. And to show their Majesty's Bounty and Confidence in them
that leave the Enemy, and have a mind to testify their Zeal and Affection to
Their Majesty's Service. I do hereby engage that all such Officers and
Soldiers as come off from the Irish with a Body of Men, or surrender any Town
or strong Castle into our Hands within the abovesaid ten days, shall have if
they desire it the same or better Post or Employment in the Army then they
left, and a Reward suitable to the Merit of the Service they perform, as those
have already had who have surrendered themselves: But in case the Persons
invited by this Declaration should neglect in time prescribed to lay hold on
the same, they must never more expect the like Advantageous Terms and
Condiscentions.

Given at the Camp by Nenah the Eleventh Day of August 1691. in the Third Year
of Their Majesty's Regin* Bar. De Ginckell.

The Army that day marched to a place called Shalley, in a wild and desolate
Country nigh the Silver-Mines, where in the former Wars, about seventeen of Sir
George Hambleton's Followers were slain by the Kenedies, and here Major General
Trelawyng's Regiment joined us; the 12th. we marched to a place called Tulla,
where we halted next day, and our Advance Guards brought in one of the Enemies
Outscouts a Prisoner. Several Deserters also come off to us, amongst whom were
two of the Horse Guards, who inform the General that the Irish Foot were drawn
into Limerick, and their Horse having burnt several places that escaped their
fury last year, were retired likewse near the Town; we understand also that my
Lord Tyrconnell was taken suddenly very ill, and there were several disorders
amongst the Chief Officers in Limerick, some of them being suspected to incline
to our side: From hence the General sent a Spy who took several of the
Declarations in order to disperse them in Town.

The 14th. we marched to Cariganliss, and the General The Army go to
Cariganliss.
with the rest of our Great Officers went with a Party within two Miles of
Limerick, near which three of the Enemies Scouts being posted upon the top of a
round Hill toward our left, two of them deserted to us as our Party drew off.

The 15th. in the Morning early, fifteen hundred A Party go toward Limerick.
Horse and Dragoons, commanded by Major General Ruvigny, and one thousand
detached Foot as a reserve in case of danger commanded by the Prince of Hess,
with six Field-peeces were ordered to march toward Limerick, with whom went
the General and all the Chief Officers in order to view the Town: The Enemy had
lined the Hedges in several places with Foot, and there appeared two Squadrons
of Horse and a Party of a Dragoons about a Mile on this side the Town, who
fronted our Men for some time, but when they saw our Advance Party resolved to
push them, they retired nearer home, and afterward their Foot fired several
Small-shot, but without any harm to us, though about seven of the Enemy were
killed by our Dragoons: We stayed several hours within less then Cannon-shot of
the Town, upon the Ground where we encamped the year before, we could see that
they had repaired Ireton's Fort and built another some distance to the Right,
where formerly stood an Old Church, and a third was begun also with a Line of
Communication from one to the other, but not as yet finished, they had then two
Field-peeces in Ireton's Fort, but did not fire them, and drew them off to the
Town next day. Whilst we staid there, first a Drummer, and then one Hagan a
Captain came off to us, who informed the General that my Lord Tyrconnell died
the day before; some say of Grief, because things went My Lord Tyrconnell dies
at Limerick.
not according to his desire, and that after all his Endeavors and good
Services to promote the Catholic Cause, he was slighted to that Degree, that
whilst their Camp lay by Athlone, one Lieutenant Colonel Conner came to my
Lord's Tent and bid him be gone from the Camp, else he would cut his
Tent-Cords: My Lord Tyrconnell knowing that he durst not be so impudent without
a considerable Faction to support him, went next Morning early toward
Limerick, where he remained till his death, which some say was not without
suspicion of foul play, in being poisoned with a Cup of Rattafeau, this is
nothing but Apricock-stones bruised and infused in Brandy, which gives it a
pleasant Relish, some of which my Lord Tyrconnell had given him at an
Entertainment; and falling ill upon it, he often repeated the word, Rattafeau,
which made several believe that he had received Poison in that Liquor, because
he would not comply with the prevailing Faction then in Town. But most People
say that he died of a Fever: However it was, he certainly had managed the
Affairs of that Kingdom from his entrance upon public Business to his dying
day with as much dexterity and zeal for the Interest he As to his encouraging
one J^nes to Assassinate King William in the year 1690. proved by Original
Letters under his own hand; I leave others hereafter to give a more particular
account of.
pretended to serve as any man could have done.

At the General's return from viewing the Town, he found a considerable
quantity of Bread-Waggons come to the Camp under the Convoy of the Militia
Horse and Dragoons of the County of Tipperary, whom the General viewed and sent
home again. We had now a Train of nine 24 Pounders, nine 18 Pounders, and three
Mortars with Ammunition and other Utensils of War proportionable, which left
Athlone on the 12th. under the care of Col. Lloyd's Regiment and a Party the
Militia, who were met upon the Road by the Earl of Drogheda's and Colonel
Venner's Foot Regiments with a small Party of Horse, but the General remembering
what happened to our Train the year before, and that the same People were still
as industrious as formerly. Major General la Forest with a good Detachment of
Horse and Dragoons was sent on the 16th. to meet our Cannon.

The same day a Captain and a Lieutenant desert from the Enemy and confirm the
Report of the death of my Lord Tyrconnell, and withal that Francis Plowden Esquire
(one of the Commissioners of the Revenue in the late King's time) had brought
over a Commission from the late King out of France, appointing Sir Alexander
Fitton, Sir Richard Neagle and the said Francis Plowden Esquire to be Lords
Justices of Ireland, which Commission lay dorment till my Lord Tyrconnel's
death, by which it appeared that his Adversaries were like to prove too many
for him if he had lived, and that tho he had promoted the late King's desires
(though not his real Interest) to the utmost, and was of the same Religion too
with himself, yet he was in a fair way of being served as Some of the Irish
Officers suspected for holding a Corre^pondence with our Ar-
others had been before him.

We understood also that Colonel Henry Lutterill was not only suspected to hold
a Correspondence with our Army, but was taken into Custody and tried for his
life, in that he with some others had consulted about the surrender of the
Town, for which they designed to put him to death, but that they either wanted
clear Proof, or else waited for Advice from France about it, but the occasion
of Colonel Lutteril's confinment was upon the account of a Letter brought him
by a Trumpeter from some great Officer in our Army when the Garrison of Gallway
was conveyed to Limerick, for the Trumpeter having given one to Sarcefield,
denied his having any more Letters, but being threatened with hanging if
searched and any more Letters found about him, he produced another to Col.
Lutterill, upon which the said Colonel and Lieut. Col. Burk that came from
Gallway were both confined: They were jealous also of Brigadier Clifford, though
they did not think fit at that time to take any great notice of it; all which
accounts we had confirmed by a Packet of Letters intercepted upon the Road to
Killmalock, amongst which was one from a Priest giving the Irish great hopes of
Victory after all, For that God had scourged the Nation round for their sins,
and now he hoped he would cast the Rod into the Fire. That Afternoon Sir John
Hanmer with his own Regiment, Colonel Hales's, the Brandenburg, and a Danish
Regiment of Foot, and Colonel Coy's Horse join the Camp, and those with two
Regiments more that came up with the Train made us a stronger Army then at the
opening of the Campaign.

The 17th. the Weather being exceeding Stormy; Sir William King who had been
formerly Governor of Limerick, but a Prisoner for part of these two years
past, came to our Camp, who was very serviceable to the General both in his
Advice, and otherways during the remainder of the Campaign. The 18th. Colonel A
Party sent toward Charlevil.
Lumley went out with a Party of four hundred Horse toward Charlevili, where
we understood some of the Enemy had posted themselves, but having notice of our
approach they quitted the place, though some of them A Party sent toward
Charlevill.
were killed in the going off, and one Captain Massey stayed behind and fired
his Pistols at our Advance Party, but he and a Cornet being seized, and
Protections found in both their Pockets, they were afterward hanged as
Deserters.

The 19th. A Spy sent from Tulla to disperse the A Spy returns from Limerick.
General's Declarations in Limerick, returned, having effected his business
without being discovered, and some other people seized upon suspicion of doing
it, he gave also a good Account how Matters stood then with the Irish, that
their Horse and Dragoons called 5000 in number, were encamped beyond the River
in the County of Clare, that a vast number of Creights and their Cattle were
all drawn toward the Town, and that the bad weather was as injurious to them
as us, in that most of their Foot were in the Town, and in their works, which
lying low were almost filled with Water, but that they had demolished some of
their new works on this side the Town, least their men should desert from
thence to our Army; and that the Irish talked of a Pacquet-Boat come from
France, by which they were encouraged to hold out having promise of Provisions,
and immediate Succors to follow: The same day a Trumpet was sent to Limerick
about the exchange of some Prisoners we then had with the Irish that were taken
formerly upon small Parties in the Country. And on the 20th. two Troopers and a
Dragoon desert from the Enemy, but the weather was now so very bad that the
Army could not move, and it was much feared that our Guns would not be got up
the ways were grown so deep, however our men were not idle, but in the midst of
all the rain and wet they made Faggots, and other necessary Preparations to
being the Seige.

The General had now some suspicion that Balderock O Donnel was not sincere in
what he had promised, as appears by his Letter sent this day to Col. Lloyd,
then on his march with the Guns; part of which was as follows.

SIR,
BY a Letter this day received, I have some reason The General's Letter to Col.
Lloyd.
to apprehend that O Donnel is not so sincere in his Treaty as is to be wished:
For that reason, as soon as you have convoyed the Cannon till they join the
Detachment under the Marquess La Forrest's Command, I would have you return
with your Regiment to Athlone, and send the Northern Militia back to their
Country, to prevent any Inroads he may make that way. But if you find that O
Donnel submits, as he promised, or that Sligo is surrendered, you must continue
your March according to your former Orders, etc.

Camp at Cariganless, Aug. 20.

But this was only Misinformation, for O Donnel made it appear afterward that
he was sincere in his Intentions, and that he had no mind to join with Sir
Teague O Regan, as was suspected. The 21st the Badness of the Weather
increased, and several Regiments were forced to remove their Camps, the Water
overflowing their former Ground. Major O Conner and nine more desert the Enemy,
and inform the General, that if we had either of the Passes at Killalow or
Bryans-Bridg, a great many of the Enemies Horse and Dragoons would desert. And
this Evening our Tinboats came up to the Camp, being brought by Water from
Athlone toward Killalow.

The General taking notice of the extravagant Rates Orders about ascertaining
the Rates of Provisions.
the Sutlers and others that furnished the Camp with Provisions, had raised
their Goods to, he sent out an Order that all Ale from Dublin or Wickloe should
be sold at 6 d. per Quart, all other Ale coming above forty Miles, at 5 d. and
all under forty Miles, at 4 d. White Bread to be sold at 3 d. a Pound, Brown
Bread at 2 d. Claret at 2 s. 6 d. per Quart, Rhenish at 3 s. Brandy at 12 s.
per Gallon, etc. And that no Person should presume to exceed those Rates, on
the Penalty of forfeiting all his Goods, and suffering a Month's Imprisonment.
But they presently found out a Trick for this, and called all Drink that came
to the Camp, Dublin or Wicklow Ale; and were so far from observing this Order,
that Drink growing scarce toward the close of the Campagn, they sold their Ale
at 14 d. per Quart. Another Order was likewise published about the buying of
Cattle, as follows.

By Lieutenant General Ginckell.
THat all Persons may avoid the buying of Cattle of An Order against the buying
of Cattle without the General's License.
the Officers and Soldiers, which has hitherto been attended with great
Inconveniences, I have thought fit to order and declare, That whosoever shall
buy any Cattle from any Officer or Soldier of the Army, without Leave first
had in Writing from my self, shall forfeit the said Cattle to their Majesty's
Use, and be delivered to the Civil Magistrate to be proceeded against as a
Receiver of stolen Goods. And for the Encouragement of all those who shall
detect any of the said Abuses, I do farther direct, That whosoever shall
discover any Cattle thus bought, and bring them, or so secure them that they be
brought to my self, shall have one half of the same for a Reward of his Pains
and Care he has taken.

This Order was dated the day before, and now published in the Camp, which
prevented a great many Followers of the Army from committing several Disorders,
that of themselves they were very much inclined to.

August 22. the Weather begun to amend: and Francis Burton Esquire was sent by the
General to the Squadron of Ships then in the River, with Orders for them to
sail nearer the Town. The 23 d two hundred and fifty fresh Draught-Horses were
sent out to hasten up the Train; and each Regiment was ordered to make ready
2000 Fascines to begin the Work at Limerick. One Dowdall a Counselor, and
Sheldon a Lieutenant in the Irish Foot-Guards, desert: and two Troopers and a
Sutler were condemned at a Court Martial, the two Troopers for robbing, and the
Sutler for buying Goods of them, contrary to the General's strict Orders. That
Evening also our Guns came within sight of the Camp: and the Weather now
seeming to promise us our wonted Success, the General resolved to move
forwards; but since the Irish Army were all in and about the Town, and 'twas
probable they might design us some Trouble in our Approach, therefore it was
ordered that at break of Day next Morning the Army should be ready to march,
but without beat of Drum; six hundred Horse, three hundred Dragoons, and one
thousand Firelocks, and two hundred Granadeers out of each Line for an
Advance-Party: these were to march in two Lines at the Head of either Wing,
with four Fieldpieces each, and twenty five Pioneers a piece to cut down any
Rubs that might be in their way; the whole Body of Horse were to march after
the detached Foot, with each Man three Fascines before him, which they were to
leave where ordered; so that the Enemy might see we were resolved to spare no
Pains, rather than go without the Town a second time. Then all the Foot were to
march, and after them the Train; and no Baggage whatever to march near the
detached Party, who were to march directly to the Quakers House, and there to
make a Halt till the Foot came up. Then the Right Line to fall into the Road on
the right Hand, and the Left Line on the other Road from the Quakers House: and
all to draw up afterward in order of Battle; so to march easily toward the
Town, making several Halts to observe the Enemies Motion. These Orders I have
set down, to show the Reader the Method of approaching Towns, when an Army
expects Opposition from an Enemy, though the Irish did not give us much
disturbance in this. But before we leave Cariganless, I know not whether it may
be worth the Reader's while to be informed of a Tradition that the People in
the Neighborhood have concerning 2 old Castles that stand nigh half a Mile
from this place, and not above a stone's cast one from another: they say that
in former times two Brehons, or Irish Judges, lived in those two Castles, who
happened at last to have some Disputes about their Properties; and their Wives,
though they were Sisters, used to stand upon the Battlements of their own
Houses, and scold at one another for several hours together; which at length
one of them being weary of, she found out a Trick only to appear and begin the
Fray, then she would place an Image that she had dressed up in her own Clothes,
in such a posture as her Sister could not discern it from her self at that
distance; who not sensible of the Cheat, she used to scold on, and at last
fretted her self to death, because she could not be answered in her own
Language. But I Am afraid the Women in this Country will scarce pardon this
Story: And therefore according to the former Orders,

Friday the 25th, the Army marched toward Limerick, Our Army approaches the
City of Limerick.
leaving two Regiments of Foot and one hundred Horse till the Cannon come up
next day. Our Advance-Party of Horse and Dragoons met with no great Opposition,
only some small firings between them and the Irish Out-Guards, with no great
damage to either side. We made our Approaches much after the same manner we did
the Year before, tho we drew more to the Left, and nearer the Shannon, but
fixed our Camp further from the Town.

When greatest part of our Army was got up, our Detached Body of Foot, under
the Command of Lieut. Genesis Mackay, was ordered to Attack Ireton's Fort, and the
old Church-Fort, where we expected the Enemy had lodged a Party; our Men made a
Line cross the Fields, and were sustained by several entire Regiments of Foot,
and a Body of Horse. We advanced toward both the Forts at one time, and found
the upper one deserted: and when we came almost within Musket Shot of Ireton's
Fort, the Irish quitted that also, and retired toward a little stone Fort nigh
the Outworks of the Town. Our Men seeing them draw off, rushed forwards and
fired; but to no great purpose, for the Enemy, after some faint Returns,
presently lodged themselves in the other Fort: And toward the Evening Count
Nassau with a Party attacked Cromwell's Fort, standing to the left of the other,
which the Irish had made pretty defensible, and wherein they had then about 500
Men lodged: Our Granadeers were in the Front, who were saluted with a Volley of
Shot from the Enemy; but this being a thing they were now pretty well used to,
they ran forwards, and threw in their Granades; and then being followed by the
whole Party, the Irish in less than half an Hour left the Fort to our
Discretion: We had only tow or three killed, and the Enemy about ten, though
some made them a great many more.

Oliver Cromwell, in the former Wars of Ireland, never went further than
Clonmel; for there receiving Orders from the Parliament to go for England, he
entrusted the Management of the Army to Ireton; who at the besieging of
Limerick, built several Forts; two of the most remarkable, bearing the Names of
Ireton's and Cromwell's, were now ordered to be called Mackay's and Nassau's
Forts, because gained under those Commanders; and by those Names we shall call
them for the future; when there is occasion to mention them. When we came up
toward the Town, we found a Man newly hanged upon the Gallows, who the Irish
said was an Officer of theirs, and put there for endeavoring to desert to our
Army. The General having some Intimation of a Salley designed from the Town
that Night, and judging it not improbable, since they had so good a Body of
Horse behind it, he commanded therefore that our Horse should not unsaddle, but
each Troper to lie all Night by his Horse's Head, to be ready upon the first
Alarm. Col. Donep, who commanded our advance Party of Horse, was killed that
Evening by a random Shot; being a Gentleman who had a very good Character, both
among the Danes and English.

The 26th all our Train came up, as also a great many Carriages with Bombs,
Ball, Shovels and Pickaxes, and 800 Barrels of Powder. This Night we broke
Ground, and made our Approaches with no great loss, casting up some Works nigh
the Shannon toward the West, behind which the Danes encamped, and maintained
that part of the Work during the Siege. We improved also these Forts deserted
by the Irish, and drew a new Line from the old Church Fort to Mackay's.

The 27th in the Morning the Prince of Hess with his The Prince of Hess sent to
Castle-Connel.
own Regiment, Col. Tiffin's, and Col. St. John's, five pieces of Cannon, and
about 700 Horse and Dragoons, marched to Castle-Connel, which we had not blown
up effectually last Year, and wherein the Irish had now a Garrison of 250 Men.
They refused the Prince's Proffers to them at first; but after two Days Siege,
were content to be all made Prisoners of War. The same Day Maj. Genesis Scravemore
went with another Party, and four Guns, to Carick-a-Gunnel, a Castle upon the
River, three miles below the Town, wherein was a Garrison of 150 Men, who also
submitted to be Prisoners of War, as did one or two Castles more; the leaving
these Detachments in such places being very inaccountable, since they had a
mind to defend them no better. This seems rather want of Instructions what to
do, than Courage to perform it; for to give the Irish their due, they can
defend stone Walls very handsomely. We read that Sir George Carew, President of
Munster in Queen Elizabeth's Time, took the Castle of Dunboy in the West of
Ireland by Assault, where the Irish made the most resolute Defense of any of
the like nature before or since; for the Garrison being 130 choice Men, were all
either killed or hanged for holding out; and some of them defended the very
Vaults during a whole Night, though all the rest of the Castle was taken; and
one Mack Geoghagan being desperately wounded, when he saw the English enter the
Vault, he endeavored to cast a lighted Candle into a Barrel of Powder to blow
himself and them up together; but was prevented in his Design, and so died.

The Irish planted two Fieldpieces on the opposite side the River, by which
they obliged two Regiments of our Dragoons that lay close to the Shannon to
remove; but as soon as we had placed some Guns to flank their small Battery,
they drew off. Orders were given to fit up 600 Bombs, and 1000 Hand-Granades:
and in the Afternoon eighteen of our Ships came up the River, within a mile of
the Town, and fired some Shots into the Irish Our Ships come nigh the Town.
Horse-Camp as they sailed along, they being encamped at that time nigh the
River, at a place called Craightulagh: This put several of the Irish much out
of Countenance, for till then they were made believe, that either we had no
Ships in the River, or else those we had would quickly be swallowed up by the
French Fleet, which they hourly expected.

The 28th an Order was sent to Kinsale, for the rest of the Provision-Ships
then in that Harbor to sail to the Shannon. And the General went on board some
of those Ships that came up the Day before, giving Command to bring on shore
several Pieces of new Cannon and Mortars; which was performed on the 29th. And
all the Prisoners that had been taken in several Castles, being about 400 in
number, were sent toward Clonmel, with a Party of Horse and Dragoons to guard
them. This Evening our Line of Circumvallation was finished, and our other
Works, by hard labor, much improved; the Enemy playing hot upon us from the
King's Castle, and three more Batteries. Our Business was now to raise a
Battery for ten Guns and seven Mortars, which was performed before next
Morning; and August the 30th our Guns and Mortars were drawn down to it: the
first began immediately to play on Thoumond-Bridg, and the Houses on that side
the Town; at Night also our Bombs began to fly with pretty good Success, 101
being thrown before next Morning.

The Enemy now desert Killmallock, a Town upon the The Enemy desert Killmallock.
Road between Cork and Limerick, whither the Irish flocked in great Numbers in
former times, to welcome the Earl of Desmond out of England, who was sent over
upon some Reasons of State by Queen Elizabeth; their first Saluations were to
throw Wheat and Salt upon him in token of Peace and Plenty: But next day, when
they saw him go to Church, they fell to murmur, and spit at him, and never
would own him more: And so hateful was not only our Religion, but even the
Civil Habits and Customs of the English to some of them, that in the same
Queen's Reign it was with much difficulty that some of the Irish Nobility could
be persuaded to put on their Robes, when they were to appear in the House of
Lords in time of Parliament. And I have heard it affirmed by those that knew
it, that even in this last War, and (if I am not much mistaken) in the
Parliament that was held at Dublin by the late King too, it was proposed by
some, to destroy all fine Houses, and every thing else that looked like
Improvement, and so return to the former barbarous way of living of their
Ancestors, that it might not be worth the while for England, or any other
Nation, to seek a new Conquest over them: but these Men did not consider that
England has been at too much Expense, and is now too well acquainted with
Ireland, ever to be without it.

August 31. One Capt. Morice, a Lieutenant, and eleven Dragoons belonging to
Sir Donald O-Neal's Regiment, deserted from beyond the River, and tell us, that
the Enemy were mightily apprehensive of our getting over; but that their Horse
and Dragoons would endeavor to watch our Motion, and do all they could to
prevent us. Our Batteries play very hard all this Day; and at Night, four out
of each Troop of Horse and Dragoons throughout the Army, were ordered to work
at a new Battery, to the Right of the former, and somewhat nearer the Town;
they wrought very stoutly, and finished their Battery before next Morning. This
was a thing very unusual for Horsemen, especially to work in Trenches; but
there was in a manner a Necessity for it, for our Foot were upon Duty by whole
Regiments every second Night, beside Detachments and Workmen upon sundry
Occasions every Day: And therefore Adjutant General Withers was commanded to
order the Regiments that marched to the Trenches, not to mount with Colors,
that the Enemy might not be sensible how fast our Duty came upon us.

The same Day a Party of four hundred Horse was Brigadeer Leveson sent into
Kerry.
sent abroad to scour the Country: And Brigadeer Leveson, with seven hundred
Horse and Dragoons, went into the County of Kerry, to reduce the Irish in those
Parts: Which some of the Inhabitants in other Places will needs call the most
natural Irish in the Kingdom; and yet they say, every Cow-boy amongst them can
speak Latin, on purpose to save them from the Gallows, when they come
afterward to be tried for Theft: For though there be very severe Laws against
it, and often put in Execution; yet Robbing, Plundering or Stealing, are
accounted but small Crimes amongst the Natives, if not done to their Lords or
Followers: for what they could purchase formerly, they thought it clear Gain,
and Castles built to secure it; which thievish Spirit is not as yet quite
banished that part of the Country, nor scarce any other part of the Kingdom.
And though this sort of People have been always observed to have dexterous
Faculties at more kinds of Mischiefs than Stealing: yet it is no new Complaint,
That by long Use it is grown to a mischievous Custom in Ireland, that Rebels
and Malefactors might, with the Money they had gotten by Pillage and Plunder,
when they set Places on fire, procure for themselves Protections, and escape
without Punishment. Cox, Vol. 1. p. 415. Brigadeer Leveson, at his going into
Kerry, found the whole Country up in Arms against him; my Lord Merion's and my
Lord Bretta's Horse being there to assist the Rapparees.

About a Mile above Limerick, there lies a small Island in the Shannon, called
St. Thomas's Island, where formerly stood a Chapel dedicated to that Saint,
but now ruinous, though at present there are two or three small Houses in the
Island, and some little Enclosures. Here the Irish had kept several of the
Protestants belonging to the City, under a Guard, for some time past; and now
they were released by Major Stroud, who kept Guard at Anighbegg with a Party of
the County of Cork Militia; the Irish Captain, and some others of their Guard
coming off also with them. But what can be a greater Testimony of a rapacious
Humor than this? for some of the Militia stripped their Fellow-Protestants of
what the Irish had left them, as they conducted them from the Island to our
Camp; which I would not have said, but that I had it from the Mouths of those
very People that were so served; who during their stay in Town with other
Protestants of all sorts, had showed the greatest Affection and Compassion
imaginable to those of our Army that were Prisoners there: but now the Scene
was altered; and all the shift that themselves could make for some days, was to
make up little Places to creep into amongst the Fascines that lay on heaps by
the General's Quarters, till our Wagons carried them farther off into the
Country.

This Night Major General Talmash commanded in the Major General Talmash
commands in the Trenches.
Trenches, by whose Diligence and Example the Works were run nearer, and much
strengthened, though the Enemy fired very briskly all Night, and did us some
Damage. The Battery raised by the Troopers was also improved, (lying between
Nassaw's Fort and the other Battery) and eight Guns brought down to it; but
this being judged also too remote from the Town, the Guns were never planted.

But it is now time to leave the Camp a little, and look backwards to see what
was done in other parts of the Kingdom during this Month of August. And first
at What happened in other Parts of the Kingdom this Month.
Dublin, there was great care taken to procure as many Horses as could be got
for the necessary Occasions of the Army. Provisions likewise of all sorts and
Ammunition were sent up continually: and the Harvest being now almost ready,
and very few Hands being left to take care of that Corn which the Irish had
sown in several places of Connaught, the Lords Justices therefore order a
Proclamation to be published, August the fourth; That whereas since the Battle
of Aghrim, and the Surrender of Galway, the Farmers, Cottiers, and other
Inhabitants of Connaught, had withdrawn themselves, so that there were not
Hands sufficient to get in the Harvest; It was therefore proclaimed, That all
Farmers, Cottiers and Under-Tenants following the Enemies Camp, that should
within fifteen days return to their Habitations in Connaught, and apply
themselves to the bringing in the Harvest, they should not only quietly and
peaceably enjoy their several Farms as they formerly did, etc. but should be
fully and absolutely protected, if not guilty of private Murder. And that all
Persons that would mow the Grass, and reap the Corn upon the Land of such
Absentees as would not return themselves, should have one half of such Corn and
Hay to their own proper Use, and be protected in the quiet and peaceable
Possession thereof, behaving themselves as good Subjects, and bringing the
other half to some convenient Place upon the Farm for the King's Service.

But how good soever the Design might be, I heard of little Effect this
Proclamation had: for several of the Irish last Spring had plowed and sown
their Lands in Connaught, hoping we would never come thither; and those that
did not plow, expected to come over, and get enough on our side the Shannon:
but when they were disappointed in both these, they would yet go along with the
Crowd in hopes of returning again in a small time. And it is observable that
there have not been so many Marriages for many Years before amongst the Irish,
as was last Winter in Limerick, Galway, and all Connaught over; whether it was
out of confidence that they should certainly be Masters of the Kingdom after
all, or else that they were crowded into a narrower Compass, and so had the
more Opportunities of Courting, I leave others to judge.

August the fourth, Sir Albert Cunningham's Dragoons being left at Galway when
the Army moved from thence, marched now to Portumna and Athenree; and a hundred
Foot detached under Major Smith, to Loughrea.

By Letters from Cashell, August 5. the Government had notice that great Heats
and Debates arose daily amongst the great Officers in the Irish Army; and that
some Persons endeavoring to get off for France, were forced back again, and
the Ship taken, wherein the Goods belonging to Monsieur Saint Ruth, the late
General, were on board; and that several Ladies were forced ashore in Kerry, or
obliged to return to Limerick; and that a Privateer brought into Rye a Prize of
six Guns and six Patereroes, bound from Limerick to France, having several
Passengers on board; amongst the rest, my Lord Abercorne, who was killed in the
Fight, as were several more killed and wounded on both sides. What Letters and
other Papers they had, could not be recovered, for they threw them overboard.

Nigh this time Colonel Mitchelburn with his own Regiment, and a Party of the
Militla, invest Sligo; and Terms were proposed, but not agreed to, as is
already said.

Part of the Virginia Fleet, being seventy two Sail of Merchant-Ships, came
into Kinsale Bay on the twelfth of August, under the Convoy of the Experience
and the Wolf, forty Sail more of them being gone to Bristol.

August the 13th, three Leagues West of Cape Clear, a French Man of War met
with 14 English Merchantmen homewards bound from Antego, Mevis and Monserat,
and took two of them, the rest escaping into Cork and Baltimore Havens. Two of
our Men of War went in quest of the Frenchman, but could not meet with him. My
Lord Kinsale leaves the Enemy, and comes to Kinsale: and seven Rapparees were
killed at a place called Montervary in the County of Cork. Croneen, Devane and
Sexton, three noted Rogues, were killed; and one Murphey taken near Macroomp by
Major Fenwick.

August the 16th, some Irish Soldiers that escaped at the Battle of Aghrim,
and afterward set up for themselves, took a Prey of Cattle near Kinsale, and
drove it fifteen Miles; but being pursued by a Party of the Militia, four of
them were killed, and the Prey recovered. Nigh the same time a Dutch Vessel
laden with Wine and Salt, came into Bantry Bay; and some of O Donevan's Men
surprised her at Anchor: but Col. Beecher with four Boats, manned with a Party
of his Militia, came about from the Island of Shartin, and retook the Ship,
forced twelve of the Irish into the Sea, who were drowned, and took twenty four
more of them that had got into their Boats.

August the 17th, one hundred and forty Commission-Officers, taken at
Ballymore, Athlone and Aghrim, were sent on board several Ships with a Guard of
Dublin Militia, conducted by the Monmouth Yatch, and to be delivered to the
Governor of Chester. Capt. Darby of the Leap kills eight Rapparees in an
Island near Birr. And August the 20th, Capt. Dunbar was sent by Sir Henry
Bellasis Governor of Galway, to take possession of the Island and Garrison of
Buffin, which he had obliged to submit upon the following Articles.

Articles and Capitulations agreed upon by Sir Henry Bellasis Governor of
Galway, and Colonel Timothy Royrdan Governor of Buffin, concerning the
Surrender of the said Island and Garrison.
First, That the said Island of Buffin, and the Fort thereof, and the adjacent
Islands belonging to the Earl of Clanrickard, shall be surrendered to such
Officers as shall be appointed by the Governor of Galway, with all the Stores,
Ammunition, Provisions and Magazines of all sorts, without Imbezelment, so soon
as the Governor of Galway shall think fit to send thither after Captain
Nicholas Blake's return from thence.

Secondly, In Consideration of the Surrender as aforesaid, the Garrison shall
march forth with flying Colors, Drums beating, Match lighted, Bullet in Mouth,
and as much Ammunition as each Officer and Soldier can carry with him.

Thirdly, That the Governor, Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison, the
Lord Atheery, Lieutenant Colonel John Kelly, and all the Inhabitants of the
said Islands, shall possess and enjoy their Estates Real and Personal, as they
held, or ought to have held under the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, or
otherways, by the Laws of this Kingdom, freely discharged from all Crown-Rents,
Quit-Rents, and all other Charges to the Date hereof: And that Col. John Brown
his being in Buffin, shall not bar him from the Capitulations of Galway: and
that if the said Colonel John Brown shall desire to go to Limerick, the
Governor of Galway promises that he shall be safely conducted thither with his
Horses, Servants and Arms.

Fourthly, That the Governor, Officers and Soldiers, and other the
Inhabitants thereof, by any Grant of King James the Second, before his
Abdication, or any of his Ancestors, shall have a general Pardon of all
Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, Felonies, Premunires, and other Offenses
committed since the said K. James's Reign, to the Date hereof.

Fifthly, That the Garrison, Officers and Soldiers, shall be transported from
thence, either to Galway, or the River Shannon, in order to go to Limerick, or
otherways march over Land with safe Conduct, as to the Governor shall seem
fittest; with Arms, Bag and Baggage, as aforesaid.

Sixthly, That the Governor of Buffin shall be furnished, if need be, with
necessary Horses to carry his Equipage to Limerick.

Seventhly, That any of the Inhabitants of the said Island that shall desire
it, may go or be transported to Limerick, with their Goods, along with the
Garrison, and be as safely conducted as they; and that if they shall march by
Galway, the said Soldiers, if they shall need it, shall be furnished with four
Days Provision of Bread for their march to Limerick.

Eighthly, That Capt. Michael Cormack, and Capt. Dominick Brown, if they will,
may stay and remain in the said Island, and enjoy their Stock, Corn, and other
Goods, under safe Protection, with their Servants and Families. And that if any
of the Garrison, Officers or Soldiers, or any of the Inhabitants, shall desire
to stay, they may, with the like Advantage, and one Priest. That if any Ships
shall happen to be at Buffin, at the time of the Surrender, they shall have
free liberty to go out of that Harbor; and that the said Capt. Michael
Cormuck, and Captain Dominick Brown, may go to any place in the County of Mayo,
where their Concerns are, and there remain, with their Corn, Goods and Stock as
aforesaid.

Ninthly, That for the due perfecting of these Articles, Captain Nicholas Blake
is immediately to repair to Buffin, to have them signed by Colonel Royrdan the
Governor of that Place, and in eight Days to return with them so Signed: And
for assurance of his return, he has given Lieut. Col. John Kelly, and Capt.
Richard Martin, as Security.

Tenthly, The Governor of Galway promises, that the General shall have these
Articles and Capitulations ratified, after such manner, and within such time as
the Articles of Galway shall be.

That for due performance of these Articles and Capitulations, the Governor of
Galway, and the Governor of Buffin, have interchangeably Signed and Sealed
them, the 19th Day of August 1691.

Signed and Sealed in the presence of Tim. Royrdan. Geo. Dunbar, Anthony
Tellett.


This and the Isle of Arran lie some Leagues to Sea from the Mouth of the Bay
of Galway; in the former of which there is a strong Fort, with about a dozen
Guns; in both which Islands there always have been Garrisons kept.

Nigh this time three of the Militia were killed in the Bog of Allen by
Mackabe's Party; and two days after four of the Rapparees were killed, and
Mackabe himself narrowly escaped, with the loss of two more of his Men, himself
being forced to strip and run cross the Bog. The Militia now were very active
about the Bog of Allen, and killed five more at one time, and ten in a few days
after; amongst whom was the White Sergeant, which occasioned ten more of the
Crew to come in and submit.

We had now an Account that our Fleet was at Torbay, and the French Fleet at
Breast; but that ours had Orders to put to Sea again in ten Days.

August the 25th, a thousand Militia Foot, under Colonel Rorger Moore, and five
hundred Horse and Dragoons, with three Fieldpieces, marched from Dublin
toward Sligoe, making, with Detachments from other Counties, in all five
thousand Men, to be commanded by the Earl of Granard, to whose Conduct the
reducing of that troublesome Fort was now committed.

And toward the latter end of August, some Rapparees stealing Cows nigh Cork,
six of them were killed, and four executed; two more were hanged at Carlow by
Sir Thomas Butler's Orders, and one of Mackabe's Servants killed: and thus
ended the Month of August.

CHAP. VIII.
September, 1691.
Our Bombs set the Town on fire. The Irish design a Salley, but are repulsed by
my Lord Drogheda 's Regiment. Brigadeer Leveson routs a Party of the Irish in
Kerry. A Design to pass the River. A new large Battery made toward the King's
Island. A Breach made. Some thoughts of storming it. Guns planted nigh St.
Thomas 's Island. The Cannon and Bombs play at the Cathedral; and why. Colonel
Earl sent into England. Rejoicing in the Camp for the Defeat of the Turks. My
Lord Lisburn killed. A Party ordered to pass the River by a Bridge of Boats. The
Irish in a great Consternation. The Castle on the Weir taken. Debates whether
the Siege should be continued, or turned into a Blockade. Orders in case of an
Alarm. Some Guns shipped. Our Men pass the River a second time. The Attack at
Thoumond Gate. Six hundred of the Enemy killed. A remarkable Paper found in the
Pocket of a Colonel in the Irish Army. The Enemy beat a Parley. A Cessation
agreed to. Hostages exchanged. The Irish Proposals, rejected by the General.
Articles agreed to. The General's Letter to Sir Ralph Delaval, giving him an
Account of the Cessation. A brief Account of what happened in other Parts of
the Kingdom during this Month.

SEptember the First, Col. Woolsley, with a Party of 500 Horse and Dragoons
went toward Killalow, it being reported that Sarsfield was moving that way,
upon some secret Expedition, into our Quarters. All last Night, and that
Morning, our Bombs and Cannon played upon the Town, setting it on fire in some
Places, which was no small trouble to those within to put it out. It Our Bombs
set the Town on fire.
was ordered that Afternoon, that most of our Guns and Mortars should be
shipped again; and at Night Maj. Genesis Tettan commands in the Works. A little
after our Guards were relieved, we understood the Irish designed a Salley; in
order to which, a considerable Body of their Men advanced toward our Works,
between Nassau's Fort, and the great Battery where the Earl of Drogheda with
his Regiment was then upon Duty. His Lordship The Irish intend a Salley,
perceived the Irish were coming, and therefore ordered his Men not to fire
till they should advance within Pistol-shot of us, and then to give them a
whole Volley: But the Soldiers perceiving the others Approach, would not
forbear to shoot amongst them, which was the reason that the Irish could not be
persuaded to advance any But are repulsed by my Ld Drogheda's Regiment.
further, though they had then a very good Opportunity, since there was but one
Regiment at that time to defend above 300 Yards of the Works. We had one Man
killed, and two wounded, and were in a small time reinforced by Col. Venner's
Regiment, and a Party of Horse were sent down, to remain all Night as near the
Works as they could conveniently. The Guns played, and Mortars also, for some
part of the Night; but the General saw that our Batteries were too far off, and
therefore new Measures were consulted on.

The Second in the Morning early, came an Express from Brigadeer Leveson, then
at Newmarket, or thereabouts, to acquaint the General, that having intelligence
on Monday in the Evening, where my Lord Merion's and my Lord Britta's Regiments
of Horse lay; he marched Brigadeer Levison routs a Party of the Irish.
as privately as he could that way; and about one a Clock in the Morning he
fell in with them, killing several, and military map LYMRICK

dispersing the rest; my Lord Merion himself escaping very narrowly. Then he
divided his Party to pursue their broken Troops; but they knowing the Country,
made most of them a shift to escape. My Lord Castle-connel and his Lady were
taken Prisoners, or rather came to the Brigadeer, having fared very
indifferently in the Enemies Quarters all Summer. Major Wood being earnest in
the Pursuit, broke his Leg by the fall of his Horse.

A Council of War was this day held, and also a Court Martial, whereof the Earl
of Drogheda was President; at which, amongst other things, a Woman was
condemned for endeavoring to entice some of our French Soldiers into Town,
whom she took to be Roman Catholics. This Evening two great Mortars, 18 Inches
and an half Diameter, that were brought from Shipboard, were mounted, and
several Bombs thrown; but they did not do the hoped-for Execution: which
occasioned the drawing them and the Guns off from the Batteries, with a design
to attempt something elsewhere, or, if it could be, to pass the River: which
the Enemy having private A Design to pass the River.
notice of, they removed their Horse-Camp about two Miles to the North-East of
Limerick, posting four Regiments of Dragoons to guard the Shannon below
Anighbegg, where they had three Regiments of Foot lay entrenched. The Cannon
however had been so troublesome to the Inhabitants, that most of them left the
Town, and encamped under Sheets and Blankets, with what else they could
procure, nigh a Party of their Horse, where they and their Army wanted nothing
so much as Salt. The General seeing the Enemies Camp removed, went to a
convenient Place to view them.

The third, the Guns and Mortars put on board, were again unshipp'd, (upon new
Measures being taken) and brought up to the Artillery-Ground. One of Col.
Nugent's Dragoons deserted from the Enemy, leaving them the Night before, and
says that 17 Regiments of Horse and Dragoons belonging to their Army, were most
of them at that time beyond the River, but neither well equipped nor clad, nor
were the Regiments nigh full.

The 4th, Lieut. Col. Peck with the Princess Ann's Regiment, came to the Camp:
and in the Evening a Party of 300 Horse and Dragoons were sent to reinforce
Brigadeer Leveson: and some Reports there were that he was surrounded by the
Enemy; upon which the General sent to him to return: but it proved only a Prey
of Cows that the Enemy had taken from some of the Countrey-People, who had
bought them from the Brigadeer's Party at the Rout they gave the Irish.
However, the Brigadeer had Orders afterward to secure the County of Kerry, and
to endeavor the reducing the Enemies Garrisons there, six Guns being ordered
for that Service. For the Enemies keeping some small Garrisons between our Camp
and Cork, was a great Disadvantage to us in point of Provisions, which
otherwise we might have expected Plenty of from that part of the Country. The
Duke of Wyrtemberg (as it is said) by the Advice of my Lord Castle-connel, who
was come to our Camp, had A new Battery contrived nigh the Kings Island
now found out a Place for a new Battery, nigh the King's Island, on the
Riverside, which was thought nearer the Town than the former, and from whence
we could batter the English Town more effectually. This Place in our public
Accounts was said to be within Carbine shot of the Wall, and yet it was at
least 300 Yards from it. Nor was there any Convenience to raise a Battery any
nearer against this part of the Town, by reason of the River to the Right, and
a low Morass Ground on the Front. But some Disputes about this new Battery were
raised before it self, though at last it was concluded on; and several
Regiments both of Horse and Foot were ordered to move toward the Right, as
well for the security of our Battery, as to front the Irish Army who were gone
that way before us. We were at work also very hard upon a Line of
Contravallation, raising three or four new Forts between the old Church and the
King's Island, to secure the remaining part of our Army, in case some of them
should be commanded over the River.

September the 5th, in the Evening we begun to work The Battery begun.
at our new Battery. At first the Enemy did not discover us; but after some
time the Moon shining very bright, they found us out, and fired both great and
small Shot very lavishly, killing five or six; but still the rest went on
bravely with their Work, and had soon brought it into such a Condition as to
secure themselves.

The 6th, one Barnwell deserted the Enemy, and tells us they seem resolved to
defend the Town, which they might do, except we passed the River, having all
the County of Clare open to go out and in at pleasure. Our Men work still at
the Battery, which being designed for a great many Guns, it could not be
finished in one Night, tho the Rain did us some Damage. This Night some
Townsmen swam over the River, and confirm the Account given by Barnwell the day
before, that the Irish resolve not to give us the Town except we pass the
River, since they had a free Passage to bring in and take out what they
pleased: and amongst other things, they had forty Chirurgions Chests that
landed from France in Kerry, which were conveyed cross the River, and so into
Town at Thoumond Gate. They informed us also that most of the Towns-people
having left it, and the Soldiers lying continually in the Works, our Bombs did
not do that Execution that was hoped for: but that upon whatever House a Bomb
fell, the Irish Soldiers presently rushed in and plundered it. And tho the
Weather seemed to threaten us, yet this was no great Discouragement; since if
it came to the worst, we had now our Ships in the River, and could at any time
put our Guns on board, which Convenience we wanted the Year before.

The General had now an Account from Brigadeer Leveson out of Kerry, that the
Enemy according to their usual way of destroying, had burnt Tralee; and that he
had secured two of the Irish Captains that were active in that Affair: upon
which he sent the following Answer.

Camp at Limerick, Sept. 6. 1691.
SIR,
SInce my last to you I have received your Letter of the and notwithstanding
what I writ about your returning to the Camp, I now desire you will stay with
your Detachment in Kerry for the Safety of that Country, and secure your self
there as well as you can. I have sent you the Princess of Denmark 's Regiment,
to be disposed of as you shall judge best. As for those two Captains that burnt
Tralee, I would have them both hanged if they cannot produce Major General
Sarsfield 's, or the Orders of the Commander in Chief for what they did: and
then I desire you will respite their Execution till you send me a Particular of
their Case.

To Brigadeer Leveson.
Bar. de Ginckell.


September the 7th, this Letter was sent the Brigadeer (then encamped at
Lixnaw) by Capt. William Fitz-Maurice, of the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment, and
Son to the Lord of Kerry, who this Morning left the Camp, with about twenty or
thirty of that Country-Gentlemen in his Company, having also an Order for a
Guard of Horse and Dragoons from Asketon. But next Day coming to Listoell,
within five Miles of the Brigadeer's Party, one of the Enemies Dragoons
mistaking them for a Party of their own Men, came hastily up and told them, he
was at first afraid they had been English, but that my Lord Merion's, my Lord
Britta's, Sir Maurice Eustace, Sir James Cotter's Dragoons, with a Body of
between 3 and 4000 Irish, lay behind the Hill; this Fellow they immediately
shot for his pains, and sent to give the Brigadeer notice of their Danger,
making all convenient haste toward Lixnaw: But the Enemy soon had notice of
them, and drew out several Parties to intercept their Passage; our Men however,
with some difficulty, gained a Pass: and yet the Irish ordered the matter so,
as to be in a fair way to destroy them all, had not the Brigadeer appeared with
a Party in the mean time; for having received an Account that the Irish were
got into a Body in such a place, he was going then with a Party to discover
them, not knowing the Danger our own Men were in. Upon the Brigadeer's
approach, when our Men understood who it was, they gave a Huzzah: At which the
Irish began to draw off; and being in great Confusion, by reason of their eager
haste to pursue our small Party, the Brigadeer fell upon them in that posture,
and killed about thirty, taking Lieut. Col. O Ryan, and about thirty more
Prisoners, the rest making too great haste to the Woods and Bogs to be
overtaken. Our Party then went to the place where the Irish Camp had been, and
found two Barrels of Powder, with a great deal of other Luggage, left behind.

At Limerick the Enemy fired very briskly upon us all that day, with eight Guns
which they had planted in the King's Island, and other places: However we
finished the Platform of the great Battery, and the flooring for the Mortars.

September the 8th, our new Batteries were all ready; one to the left of ten
Fieldpieces, to shoot red hot Ball; another to the right, of 25 Guns, all 24
and 18 Pounders; The Batteries finished, and play upon the Town.
and in the Center were placed eight Mortars, from 18 Inches 3 quarters, to 10
Diameter: these stood altogether upon the North-east of the Town nigh the
Island: then there were 8 Guns of 12 pound Ball each, planted at Mackay's Fort;
and some also toward the River on the South-west, where the Danes were posted:
Those fell to work all at a time, and put the Irish into such a fright, that a
great many of them wished themselves in another place, having never heard such
a Noise before, nor I hope never shall in that Kingdom. One of the great
Mortars had a Shell burst in her, flinging the Mortar and Carriage nigh two
yards from the flooring; which is demonstration, that the firing the Fuse
before you give fire to the Mortar, is neither the readiest nor the safest way;
but this was the method of all our Foreign Bombardeers: tho one Lieut. Brown,
afterward at Mackay's Fort, made use of a much better way, as shall in time be
related. We threw Bombs, Fireballs and Carcasses all day long, and our Guns
were discharged almost without ceasing; by which there appeared a considerable
Breach in the Wall, within the King's Island, between A Breach made
the Abbey and Ball's Bridge; and our Bombs, Fireballs and Carcasses, had the
like success upon the Houses in Town.

The 9th more Provision-Ships are ordered from Cork, under the Smirna-Merchant.
We improved our Forts between the old Church and our great Battery; and our
Guns fire all day at the Breach, by which it was widened to a great Degree, and
also a great many Houses beat down: we dismounted also two Guns from a Spur in
the King's Island nigh Balls-Bridg, and played from Mackay's Fort upon four
Guns more that disturbed us, from a Place where their black Battery was the
Year before. The Enemy had cast up a Blind to prevent our beating down
Balls-Bridg, but as our Battery was planted, the Blind was ineffectual, though
we did not mind the Bridge much on that Side. A great many Bombs and Carcasses
were thrown into Town, which set it on fire; and we understood afterward that
several People were killed in the endeavoring to quench it. That Morning all
the empty Casks in the Army were ordered to be taken up and carried to the
Artillery, where they were to be made use of when there was occasion for
Floats. The Enemy that Afternoon made a Pretense of sallying; and some of them
came out to secure a Ditch not far from our Battery, but were soon repulsed,
and several of them killed, with the Loss of one Granadeer on our Side. There
was also a Work begun close to the Riverside, adjoining to the Island, but the
Springtide over-flow'd it next Day. Though several Woolsacks were carried down
in order to make an Attack Some thoughts of storming it.
upon the Island, and from thence upon the Breach; but this being found
difficult, the Woolsacks were left with a Sentinel upon them at Night; which
the Irish perceiving, some of them came over the River in the Night in Cots,
and burnt several of the Woolsacks, the Sentinel looking on, and alleging for
an Excuse, That he had no Orders to fire. The General gave Command to draw off
the Guns from Mackay's Fort, to some more convenient Place: But Colonel
Wythers, Adjutant General, informing him what Execution some that were planted
there did in the Town the Year before, he ordered them to continue firing,
which they did to very good purpose.

Sept. 10. There was an Order for a Pinnace and its Crew to attend Francis
Burton Esquire who made several Journeys into the County of Clare, and had so
ordered the Matter, that Clare-Castle was to be delivered up to us, though for
some Reasons the General neglected the Opportunity till it was included in the
General Capitulation. In the Morning one Capt. Dobbin, a Quartermaster, and
Sergeant, desert the Enemy, and told us, that the Bombs did great Execution in
the Town, and had killed several: Our Guns fire very hard all that Day, and in
the Evening a Bomb fell into a store of Wine, Brandy, Oats and Biscuit, spoiling
a great part of it. The Town was also set on fire in several Places, which
burnt great part of the Night: And that Evening two Mortars were brought from
on Board, and planted at Mackay's Fort, being managed by Lieutenant Brown,
Lieutenant Lieuten. Brown our best Bombardeer.
to Capt. Pitts Miners, who did more Execution than all the rest, firing three
for one of theirs, and throwing the Bombs very exact; he neither made use of
Sand upon the Bomb, nor fired the Fuse; but putting it into the Mortar with the
Fuse down, the Flash of the Powder kindled the Fuse as it was discharged from
the Mortar. Colonel Wythers was sent by Sea, and Robert Powley Esquire by Land, to
hasten up our Fleet, which we understood was at Cork, the General having some
Accounts that the French designed to relieve the Town.

On the 11th the Breach was widened at least forty Paces; and Floats being
prepared, there were great Debates amongst the chief Officers whether it should
be attempted by Storm, (tho most say it was only designed at first for the more
convenience of battering the Town;) Deserters telling us of a great Ditch
without the Wall, always full of Water, and well pallisado'd, besides several
Works within, which would have rendered the Attempt very hazardous: but
afterward we found little Truth in this, though indeed we could not do the
Enemy a greater Pleasure, nor our selves a greater Prejudice in all
Probability, than in seeking to carry the Town by a Breach, before those within
were more humbled, either by Sword or Sickness: for we understood certainly
that they had as many Men within as we without; besides the Hazard in getting
into, or keeping the King's Island, where there stood a most excellent Fort
with a double Line of Communication from thence to the Town, manned for the
most part by the best of their Dragoons dismounted. Part of the Guns however
were drawn off from Ireton's Fort to a new Battery, which was to the Right of
the great one; and some planted nigh St. Thomas's Island, to cut off the Irish
Communication Guns planted near St. Thomas's Island.
by a large Causey that led that way toward the Town. Five Deserters came off,
who tell us of some Officers killed upon the Key by a Bomb; that they had only
two Tuns of Powder in Town, and that their Stores were a great part of them
buried in Ruins. Some of Sir Albert Cunningham's Officers gave the General an
Account from Lieutenant Colonel Ecklin, that Sir Albert was killed by a Party
of the Irish at Colloony, nigh Sligoe, where they surprised him in the Morning
early, most of his Dragoons shifting for themselves; and Balderock O Donnel,
who then had joined him, very hardly making his Escape: But the English
Pacquets brought us better News of the Turkish Army's being defeated in
Hungary, and a great many Thousands slain.

The 12th most of our Guns and Bombs are directed The Cannon and Bombs fire at
the Cathedral.
toward the great Church in the midst of the English Town, because we
understood that it was made their principal Store; and four Deserters tell us
what great Damage was already done in all Places of the Town. But the Irish
continuing obstinate, and the endeavoring to reduce the Town by Force with
such a little Army as we had seeming dangerous, considering the very great
Strength of their Works which were still entire, though the Town was much
shattered; those and other Reasons were like to render it a Work of longer time
than at first we hoped for, and the Winter now drawing on apace; therefore
Orders were given to fit up Killmallock for a Place of Stores. And,

On the 13th the General sent Colonel Earl into England, Col. Earl sent into
England.
to acquaint her Majesty with the present Circumstances of Affairs; that if we
should not take the Town this Season, it would be absolutely necessary to send
more Frigates, in order to block up the River Shannon, since Capt. Cole that
commanded, and other Marine Officers then in the River, had given it under
their Hands, that they could post twenty Frigates so advantageously toward the
Mouth of the River, under some Islands, that they should be able to live all
Winter, and keep off twice the Number, if any Attempt should be made by the
French toward the Relief of the Town; and that in the mean time the Army was
to make as nigh a Blockade as they could. This was but melancholy News to both
Officers and Soldiers, who were all willing to undergo any Hardships rather
than go away without being Masters of the Place.

The 14th some Dragoons with an Officer desert the Enemy; a Sergeant of theirs
gave us notice where their Ammunition lay, and our Guns fire very hard all Day
at the Place, the General and all the great Officers continuing the whole
Afternoon at the Battery, and were very well pleased to see a Bomb blow up some
part of their Powder. At Night our Works were double manned, and our great Guns
beginning to the right, the whole Line made three running Fires, which were
seconded by as many from several Regiments both of Horse and Foot, drawn up at
the Heads of their respective Camps: this was for Joy of the Christians Success
in Guns fired for Joy the Turks were defeated in Hungary.
Hungary against the Turks; but it alarmed the Irish, who stood at their Arms
all the Night, being much puzzled to know the meaning of it; some saying that
our Fleet had beat the French; and others, that it was only for a Blind at our
going off; and every one as they fancied. Orders were now given for the
demolishing Castle-connel, Carick a Gunnell, and other Places upon the Shannon;
and several Miners were at work upon them.

The fifteenth, the Finnan Regiment of Green Danes march toward Clonmell, in
order to go to Waterford; and most of our Guns were drawn off from the
Batteries as a Blind, to a Design at Night; being a great many Men at work all
day to prepare our Tin-boats and Floats. That Afternoon my Lord Lisburn then
upon Duty with his Regiment, to the Left of the Great Battery, his Lordship
having laid down to rest him in a little Trench-Tent, just in the rising up was
unfortunately shot by a My Lord Lisburn killed.
great Gun from one of the Enemies Batteries; being a Man of excellent Parts,
and who had showed himself very diligent and forward upon all Occasions, since
the beginning of this War.

In the Evening it was ordered that four hundred Granadeers, A Party ordered to
march over the River.
so soon as 'twas dark, should parade at the Head of Major General Kirk's
Regiment, from whence they marched about nine at Night, being joined with six
hundred Workmen, with the Tin-boats, and sustained with five Regiments of Foot
commanded by Major General Talmash, and a Body of Horse and Dragoons under
Major General Scravemore, with six Fieldpieces. Those all march to a Place of
the Shannon about two Miles above our Camp, and by twelve at Night begin to lay
the Boats over. In the mean time the Granadeers commanded by Sir David Collier,
with Capt. Ketchmay of Sir John Hanmer's, Captain Alnut of my Lord Drogheda's,
Captain Parker of Colonel Gustavus Hamilton's Regiment, another Captain, and
eight more Officers, were wafted over by the Tin-boats into an Island where the
Bridge was laying, and from whence it was fordable to the other side, beating
some few Straglers of the Enemy from thence, who now and then fired at the
Workmen, but with little or no Loss to us; for the Night being very dark, and
the Enemy secure, because they judged us going off, the Bridge was almost
completed before they suspected it.

The 16th at Daylight our Bridge was finished; and A Bridge laid, and our Men
pass over it.
Colonel Matthew's Dragoons beginning to pass into the Island: by which time
Brigadeer Clifford had got the Alarm, who was not far off with four Regiments
of Dragoons; he seemed not very forward in the Matter, tho his Dragoons came
down on foot, and pretended to make some Opposition, as did also a Body of the
Enemies Foot, being about four or five thin Regiments, who advanced toward the
Ford, when Major General Talmash immediately commanded the Granadeers to wade
through: which done, they possessed themselves of an old House, and an Hedge or
two, about an hundred Yards from the Enemy; and were commanded not to be lavish
of their Shot, but receive the Enemies Fire till our Dragoons and some Horse
were got over, which were passing. Then the Enemy endeavoring to flank our
Granadeers on the Right, the Major General commanded a Detachment of Colonel
Matthews's Dragoons to beat them from that Post: which being done, and a good
Party soon got over, Major General Talmash ordered the Granadeers to advance,
being sustained by a Regiment of Foot commanded by Colonel Tiffin and
Lieutenant Colonel Bristow, a Party of Dragoons, and a Party of Colonel Coys's
Horse. This was done; and after some faint Resistance the Enemy run toward a
large Bog, and a Wood that was in their Rear, throwing away their Grenades,
Muskets, and every thing that proved troublesome: our Men pursued them, and
killed several upon the Bog, taking a French Lieutenant Colonel, a Captain and
some more Prisoners. Our advance-Party received Orders to halt till all were
got over, and then marched to the Left up toward the Enemies Camp. But by this
time the News of our passing the River was got to their Horse, and also toward
the Town, both Parties providing for their Safeties as well as they could: for
the People that were encamped without, endeavored to get into Town; but those
within drew up the Bridge, and would not admit them; and it is almost incredible
what a Noise and Confusion there was then at Thoumond Gate: their Horse tho
begin to buckle to Arms, and made a show of fighting, which was only to gain
time to secure their Tents and Baggage; and their Dragoons having their Horses
two Miles off at Grass, were forced to shift for themselves. Our Horse expected
Orders to pursue them; but they were commanded by the General and Lieut. Genesis
Scravemore, who were now come up, to halt till a greater Body advanced to
sustain them. Some of the Irish were now pulling down their The Irish in a
great Consternation.
Tents, others driving away the Cattle, and every one in a Hurry making what
haste they could toward the Mountains; and then the General ordered our Men to
advance toward their Horse-Camp, where they found Brandy, Beef, and a great
many other things: And a Party of our Granadeers met with about three hundred
Dragoon Saddles and other Accoutrements, which they burnt by Order. We did not
pursue however for fear of an Ambuscade, but sent to observe the Enemies March.
The Irish also nigh the Town were very busy in breaking down two small Bridges
cross a Causey, leading to the Town; but the firing of two of our Fieldpieces
put a stop to their Proceedings in that Place. There is a small white House
about half a Mile from the Town on Thoumond side, nigh which two Squadrons of
the Enemies Horse were drawn up, and about a Regiment of Foot posted in the
Hedges, to secure their Lords Justices, the Records, all their chief Ladies and
Treasure, which all were there, and had been as then no difficult, though a
very good Prize. But after some of our Parties had seen them go off in the
greatest Confusion that could be, we set two or three Houses on fire: and
staying on that side till about two a Clock in the Afternoon, we had Orders to
return, leaving a Guard in a Fort newly cast up on the other side, to secure
our Bridge; whenas it is not improbable, had we pursued our good Fortune, the
Irish Horse had been routed, and the Town delivered upon our own Terms.

The Irish had still a small Garrison in S. Thomas's Island, which now
submitted, where we got two pretty small Brass Fieldpieces. There was also an
Ensign with twenty Men in a Castle, in the midst of the River, a little below
the Island, who were made Prisoners: This is The Castle on the Wier taken.
called the Wier Castle, because it stands on a Salmon Wier. In the former Wars
the Irish had a Garrison here also, who deserting the Place, betook themselves
to the River: but being shot at, part of them came on shore toward the West,
who had Quarter promised them by a Captain in Colonel Tuthill's Regiment, and
yet were stripped and killed by the Colonel's Orders, who was tried and
cashiered for it; but the rest coming ashore on the East, where Colonel
Inglesby was, had better Treatment, and sent to the Town, Ireton being very
angry at the others Breach of Faith.

We had only one Sergeant killed in all this Day's Adventure, and about twenty
Men wounded, and the Enemy lost not above fifteen or twenty at most. One Capt.
Taaf in the Irish Royal Regiment deserts, and says the Besieged had not above
ten Days Bread, and that our Bombs had destroyed a great part of their
Ammunition. And that nothing might be left unattempted, to show their Majesty's
Clemency, the Government's Lenity, and the General's generous Compassion
toward the Irish, he orders the following Declaration to be sent them.

By Lieutenant General Ginckell, Commander in Chief of their Majesty's Forces.
ALthough their Majesty's have already been more gracious than could be
expected, or the Behavior of the Irish has deserved, yet to leave no means
untried that may bring them to a Sense of their Interest and Duty, and this
Kingdom to that quiet and settled Condition it formerly enjoyed, they have been
pleased to empower me to assure the Enemies Army, and the Garrison and
Inhabitants of Limerick, that if within eight Days from the Date hereof, they
shall surrender and submit themselves to their Majesty's Obedience, they shall
have that Pardon of their Offenses, Restitution of their Estates, and Reward of
their Services, and all the Benefits promised by the Lords Justices in their
Proclamation of the 7th of July last, from which they are not debarred by any
Act of Parliament, as they are falsely made to believe by some Persons who live
by sacrificing their Country to the Tyranny and Ambition of France, and ought
for that reason to be excluded from Mercy by both Sides: But if they shall
still continue obstinate, and neglect to lay hold on this Favor, which is the
last that will be offered them, they must be answerable for the Blood and
Destruction they draw upon themselves; for I hereby acquit my self before God
and the World, and wash my Hands of it.

Given at the Camp before Limerick this 16th Day of September, 1691.
On the 17th a Council of War was held, wherein it Disputed whether the Siege
continued, or a Blockade.
was hotly disputed, whether we should go on with the Siege, or march over the
River and destroy all the Enemies Forage in the County of Clare, and then make
a Blockade; and it was so far carried for the latter, that an Engineer was
ordered to go with a Guard toward Killmallock, and fortify that Place: but
before he got out of the Camp he was countermanded, and a great many
Pallisado's were brought up to Mackay's Fort, as if we intended to winter
there: three hundred Cars with Bullets, Bombs, and other Necessaries come to
the Camp from Dublin, and our Guns play still from the great Battery. Eleven of
the Enemies Troopers desert, and a Standard was brought in that was taken the
Day before; and my Lord Lisburn's Corpse were sent hence toward Dublin, there
to be interred. Our Bridge of Boats was this Evening removed toward St.
Thomas's Island, but being too short, it was carried to another Place, where it
had also the same Inconveniency.

The 18th, Orders were sent to the Men of War and other Vessels in the River,
to set some Men on Shore in the County of Clare, to destroy all the Forage they
could meet with, since this was the time of Harvest; and if we must needs
remove, the General was resolved to make the Irish Quarters as bare as
possible; and several of our heavy Cannon were put on Shipboard.

The 19th it being resolved to pass the River with a Party, either to prosecute
the Seige, or at least to burn the Forage; a Battery was raised between
Ireton's Fort and the old Church, to flank the Irish in Case of a Sally from
St. John's Gate, it being reasonable to expect one when part of our Army once
passed the River: and now our People were very busy in lengthning our Bridge,
which they found some Difficulty in fixing, because the the Rains had swelled
the River, and we had not Boats enough to reach over; but that Defect was
supplied by some large Carts and Barrels that were industriously fixed next the
Sides, and so the Work was completed, a Guard being always on the other Side
for its Security; and my Lord Lisburn's and Colonel Creighton's Foot were
encamped by it on our side. This Afternoon four Mortars were brought from the
great Battery to Mackay's Fort, that Place being judged the fittest for
bombarding, since the whole Town lay in a Line from thence. Three Rapparees
were also brought in by the Militia, and accused for murdering several of our
Men as they straggled from the Camp to dig Potatoes; one of them produced a
Pass, as being of my Lord Gallmoy's Regiment of Horse: but this was an usual
shift, for in a Day or two there being evident Proof against them, they were
condemned by a Court Martial; the General gave Orders that they should be broke
upon the Wheel; but being told that this way of Torture was against the Laws of
England, they were first hanged, and then their Quarters dispersed and hung
upon the Hedges, on the adjacent Highways to the Camp. That Evening the
General was informed that the Enemy resolved to make a Sally, and therefore
most of our Horse and Dragoons were ordered to remain sadled all Night: And in
case of an Alarm, the Commander in chief where it should be Orders in case of
an Alarm.
given, was immediately to acquaint the General with it; upon which three Guns
were to be fired from the Artillery, to warn the Regiments: those on the left
were to defend the left Trench, Kirk's, Earl's, and Hales's were to defend from
the Place my Lord Lisburn was killed to the great Battery; the other five
Regiments of that Brigade were to defend from Mackay's Fort to the Well; and
those Regiments of the Prince of Hesse, and La Mel^oner's Brigades were to draw
up at the Head of their respective Camps, and there remain till further Orders:
so that our Army being disposed of on this manner, the Irish would have met
with a very scurvy Welcome, if they had come at any time to visit us, but they
considered better of it, and so staid at home.

The 20th most of the rest of our heavy Canon were Some of our Guns shipped.
drawn off, and sent on Shipboard: Several Deserters come in, and some of our
Prisoners make their Escape through a Hole in the Goal, which our Cannon had
made, and inform the General of the State of the Town, that it was not so very
bad as some People made it, for unless we kept them in also on the other Side,
we could not hope to carry it, which Story had been very often told.

On the 21st the General received an Express with an Account of Sligoe's being
surrendered to the Earl of Granard; and it being fully agreed to pass the River
next Day, and a probable Consequence of that being that the Irish must needs
then or never endeavor to attempt the forcing of our Works on this side, when
they saw our Army divide; therefore it was ordered, that in case of an Alarm,
there should be a Signal given, which was by the lighting of a Torch upon a
Pike at Mackay's Fort; the Charge of which was committed to the Officer of the
Quarter-Guard, and he ordered to be very vigilant; the Regiments being disposed
of for Defense as before. The Quartermasters were also ordered to be be at
Major General Tetteau's by break of Day. And therefore,

September the 22 d, the General himself, the Duke of Our Men pass the River a
second time.
Wirtemberg, Lieutenant General Scravemore, with all our Horse and Dragoons
commanded by Major General Ruvigny, (except Colonel Coys's Horse, and fifty out
of each Regiment of Dragoons) with ten Regiments of Foot, (and fourteen Guns,
viz. ten 3 Pounders, and four 12 Pounders) taking also seven Days Provision
along, marched over our Bridge of Boats into the County of Clare, leaving Major
General Mackay and Major General Talmash to command on this side. All that
Morning as our Horse and Foot marched by this side of the Town, the Enemy fired
continually upon us from several Batteries, but did us no great Injury. At
twelve a Clock all our Men had passed the River; and about two, eighteen of
Colonel Matthews's Dragoons, being our advance-Party, were attacked by a Party
of the Enemy, who outnumbred ours, and obliged us to retreat, till sustained by
a greater Party, as was also the Enemy: and some small Firings continued till
about four, that our Foot came up, we advancing still, and the Enemy retiring
till they were got under their Cannon. Then all the Granadeers of our Party,
commanded by Colonel Tiffin, Lieutenant Colonel Hudson, and Major Noble,
sustained by Kirk's, Tiffin's, St. John's, and my Lord George Hamilton's
Regiments, were commanded to advance and attack the Works that cover Thoumond
Bridge, being one Fort to the Right above Musket Shot from the Bridge, The Attack
at Thoumond Gate.
another on the Left somewhat nearer; besides several natural Fortifications of
Stone-quarries and Gravel-pits, in all which the Enemy had posted a Detachment
out of eighteen Regiments, of about eight hundred Men. The Dispute was pretty
hot at first: and their Cannon playing from the King's Castle, and two or three
more Batteries, as also their small Shot from the Walls, the Attack seemed very
hazardous, and our Men ordered not to approach so nigh the Town as they
afterward did. However, the Irish being now pressed upon by our Granadeers,
they quitted their first Posts, and then were reinforced by another Detachment
from the Town: but all this could not do their business, for our Granadeers
were so very forward, and despised all Dangers to that degree, that they put
the whole Body to flight in despite of their Forts, Cannon, and all other
Advantages, and pursued them so close, that a French Major who commanded at
Thoumond Gate, fearing our Men's entering the Town with their own, he ordered the
Draw-bridg to be plucked up, and left the whole Party to the Mercy of our
Soldiers; those that were behind, pressing the others forward, and throwing
them down over the Fall of the Draw-bridg: then the rest cried out for Quarter,
holding up their Handkerchiefs, and what else they could get: but before
killing was over, they were laid on Heaps upon the Bridge higher than the Ledges
of it; so that they were all either killed or taken, except about a hundred and
twenty that got into Town before the Bridge was drawn up, and many of those cut
and slashed to the purpose. The number of the Dead is said to be 600 of the
Enemy killed.
six hundred, amongst whom we may reckon one hundred fifty four that were
drowned in being forced over the Fall of the Draw-bridg, and reckoned
afterward cast up upon the Shore. The Prisoners were Colonel James Skeleton,
(who died afterward of his Wounds) Lieutenant Colonel Edmond Hurley,
Lieutenant Colonel Francis Dempsey, Major Matthew French, John Nelvil Aid-Major
of Limerick, besides nine Captains, seven Lieutenants, six Sergeants, and
ninety seven private Men; all whose Names I have, but they are not worth the
while of writing down, or reading afterward. We took also five Colors; and,
as some say, three small brass Guns that were with a Party of their Horse. And
we lost in this Action Lieutenant Starlin, with twenty five private Men, and
had about threescore wounded.

One thing here remarkable is, that Colonel Skelton's A remarkable Paper.
Pockets being searched when he was taken Prisoner, the following Paper was
found amongst other things: The Paper it self I have, and will not be
answerable either for the Orthography or Sense; however take an exact Copy of
it. And first, something like the fashion of a Spear's Head, or a Wound as he
calls it, being slovenly drawn upon Paper, the following Words were writ about
it.

THis is the Measure of the Wounds of the Side of our Savior Jesus Christ,
which was brought from Constantinoble to the Emperor Charmaine in a Coffin of
Goulde, and is a most precious Relic, to the end that he or she that carried
the same about him, no Fire nor Water, no Wind, Tempest, Knaife, Lance or
Sword, nor the Divil cannot hurt him; and the Woman with Child the day she
sees the same Measure, shall not dey a sudden Death, but shall be delivered by
-- and if any Man carre the same about him with good Devotion, shall have the
Honor and Victorey of his Enemy. The day that any does read the sam, or heard
it read, shall not dey an evil Death. Amen.

Animis scriptoris in manu Saluatoris.

I have more Charity for any in Colonel Skelton's Post, than to believe that he
could write this Paper himself; for whoever did, understood neither English nor
Latin, nor yet Common Sense. I therefore believe it the Handwriting of some
poor ignorant Irish Priest, and kept by Colonel Skeleton either out of Ridicule,
or possibly out of some Religious Design; since I have heard that they had a
great many of those Papers printed and kept amongst them with a great deal of
Devotion: and if we'll look amongst them, we may find a great many Instances of
the like nature, and altogether as great Absurdities; for Colonel Skeleton was
no Irishman, nor could he well be fond of the Fopperies of that Nation. In the
former Wars we have several Relations of such like Religious Papers found upon
the Irish, with a great many Charms, and other such like Stuff; particularly at
the Battle of Knocknaclashy, the last of that Rebellion, and parallel to this
in several Circumstances: for amongst other Charms taken at that time, this one
is remarkable, viz. This is the Print of our Lady's Foot; and whoever wears it,
and says twenty Ave Mary's, shall be free from Gunshot. Cox, p. 68.

But this Digression I Am afraid is scarce pardonable; and therefore when our
Men had lodged themselves within ten Yards of the Bridge, (notwithstanding an
high Tower that stood near that End of the Bridge next to them) the Irish being
then cut off from all Communication with their Horse, and despairing of
Succors from France, they began soon to think upon giving up the Town: but it
must needs be thought very unaccountable, that when they saw our Forces divide,
and part of them endeavoring to approach the Town on their Side, they should
not then have brought all their Army together, and given us Battle, rather than
suffer the Town to be surrounded: nor could they have been so pinned up in the
Town by us if they really had been beat, but that their Horse and Dragoons
might have fought their way out again at some time when we had not been at our
Arms; for there was no Forage left nigh the Town, and our Horse could no more
stay long near it, than theirs within it. But it is probable e're this time that
they were grown jealous of one another, and a great many of them weary of the
War it self; and it is as probable that if their Horse and Dragoons, after a
brisk Trial of Skill, had been forced toward the Town, they had been served
the same sauce by the French Major as their Foot were; and therefore they were
wiser, and kept at a good Distance, beyond Six-mile-Bridg, and nigh Ennis,
toward whom the General sent a Party of our Horse.

Next Day, being Wednesday the 23 d, one hundred Cattle taken from the Enemy
the Day before, and six hundred more sent out of the County of Kerry by
Brigadeer Leveson, were divided amongst the Army. And though the Day proved
very rainy, yet our Guns and some Mortars ceased not to play upon the Town, nor
the Enemy to fire more furiously than they had done for some time before. One
Lieutenant Colonel Corbet came off from the Enemy, and proposed to the General
the bringing over my Lord Tyrconnel's and Galmoy's Regiments of Horse, and out
of those two to make one good Regiment to serve their Majesty's in Flanders,
provided he might have the Command of them. Toward Night the Rain begun to
cease, and both Storms were ended together, for about six a Clock the Enemy
beat a Parley The Enemy beat a Parley.
on both Sides the Town; one Colonel Ruth coming toward Mackay's Fort, where
the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment then were upon Duty: But Major General Talmash
shortly after coming that way, and being acquainted with it, he referred the
Matter to Lieutenant General Scravemore, and the Marquess Ruvigny. The General
being then beyond the River, Major General Waughup, or Lieutenant General
Sarsfield went out to him, and a Cessation was concluded for that Night.

The 24th in the Morning, Lieutenant General Sarsfield A Cessation agreed to.
and Major General Waughup came out to the General, and desired it might be
continued for three Days longer, till they could send to their Horse, who then
were encamped toward Clare, in order to their being included in the general
Capitulation which they then proposed, and the Request was granted. The Enemy
had now in Town two hundred forty and odd Prisoners of our Army and Militia,
that had been taken in the County of Cork, and other Places, who remained there
all the Siege, and were pretty well looked after whilst the Protestants had
leave to stay, who were inexpressibly kind to them; but no sooner were they
turned out of Town, but the poor Prisoners were in a miserable Condition, being
exposed to the Fury of our own Guns and Mortars, and about thirty of them
killed during the Siege. This Afternoon those alive were brought out to us, and
delivered between Mackay's Fort and the Town, many of them in a miserable
Condition; those of them that were not able to walk, were brought out upon poor
lean Garrons; and some died upon the Spot where they were set down, being weak,
and unacquainted with the open Air: Nay so barbarous had the Irish been in this
Particular, that they had not so much as ordered the Wounds of some of our Men
to be dressed that they had got in Prison by our own Guns; but after several
Days keeping them in that Misery, they brought them out, and made us all
Witnesses of their Barbarity: I give one Instance of a Dragoon in Colonel
Matthews's Regiment, who had his Hand shattered to Pieces, and being never
dressed, he died within an Hour after his bringing out. The same Day we had an
Account that Galloping Hogan, a Fellow that had got upwards of one hundred
Rapparees together, Horse and Foot, and got much Plunder by robbing the Sutlers
and other People, that came into his Power; he was now so bold as to set upon a
Party of Carrs coming toward the Camp with little or no Guard, nigh Cullen,
and took away with him seventy one small Horses, though he durst not stay to do
any further Mischief.

The 25th Lieutenant General Sheldon, the Lords Their great Officers come from
the Horse Camp to consult with the rest in Town.
Galmoy, Westmeath, Dillon and Trimblestowne, Mack Guire the Titular Primate,
the Titular Archbishop of Cashell, Sir Theobald Butler, and several more of the
Irish Officers, came from their Horse Camp; and dining with the General, they
went afterward into Town in a Boat rowed by French Seamen, (there being then
three Vessels drawn up within the Key, and one of them sunk across it, to
prevent our coming up the River in the Night by way of Surprise;) as they rid
by the End of the Bridge toward the Boat, a Party of their own Men were burying
the Dead killed in the last Action; they stopped and enquired for several
People, whom they there found dead: and the Cessation was continued till next
Day at ten a Clock.

The 26th, Sarsfield and Waughup dined with the General, and it was agreed that
Hostages should be exchanged in order to a further Treaty. Accordingly in the
Afternoon, Hostages exchanged.
my Lord Cutts, Sir David Collier, Colonel Tiffin, and Colonel Piper, were sent
into the Town, for whom were sent out the Lords Westmeath, Iveagh,
Trimblestowne and Louth.

The 27th the Irish sent out their Proposals, which were;

1st. That their Majesty's will by an Act of Indemnity The Irish Proposals.
pardon all past Crimes and Offenses whatsoever.

2dly. To restore all Irish Catholics to the Estates, of which they were
seized or possessed before the late Revolution.

3dly. To allow a free Liberty of Worship, and one Priest to each Parish, as
well in Towns and Cities, as in the Country.

4thly. Irish Catholics to be capable of bearing Employments, Military and
Civil, and to exercise Professions, Trades, Callings, of what Nature soever.

5thly. The Irish Army to be kept on Foot, paid, etc. as the rest of their
Majesty's Forces, in case they be willing to serve their Majesty's against
France, or any other Enemy.

6thly. The Irish Catholics to be allowed to live in Towns Corporate and
Cities, to be Members of Corporations, to exercise all sorts and manners of
Trades, and to be equal with their Fellow-Protestant Subjects in all
Privileges, Advantages and Immunities accruing in or by the said Corporations.

7thly. An Act of Parliament to be past for ratifying and confirming the said
Conditions.

These Propositions were very unreasonable, and they say mightily insisted upon
by Mack Guire and others of the Priesthood: this Man I Am told was Chaplain to
the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, when Plunket the Titular Primate was hanged
about the Popish Plot in Ireland; and few People daring to assume that Title at
such a Juncture, the Ambassador procured it from the Pope for him. When those
Proposals were brought out to the General, he was so far from granting them,
that he returned Answer, Though he was in a manner a Stranger to the Laws of
England, yet he understood Rejected by the General, and new Batteries ordered
to be raised.
that those things they insisted upon were so far contradictory to them, and
dishonorable to himself, that he would not grant any such Terms; and so
returned them, ordering a new Battery to be immediately raised to the left of
Mackay's Fort, for Mortars and Guns. Then the Irish sent again to know what
Terms his Excellency would please to propose to them, who after a Consultation,
sent them in twelve Articles, much the same in Substance with those afterward
agreed upon, and said he would allow of no other: He sent them however all the
Prisoners that we had of theirs in the Camp, in Requital of ours that were
released before, their wounded Prisoners having always the same Conveniences
with our own Men.

The 28th early in the Morning, Sarsfield, Waughup, Articles agreed upon.
the Titular Primate, Baron Purcell of Loughmoe, Archbishop of Cashell, Sir
Garret Dillon, Sir Theobald Butler, and Colonel Brown, the three last
Counselors at Law, with several other Officers and Commissioners, came to the
General's Quarters, whither he sent for all our General Officers; and after a
long Debate, Articles were agreed on, not only for the Town of Limerick, but
for all the other Forts and Castles in the Kingdom, then in the Enemies
Possession, as Ross, Clare, etc.

The same Afternoon an Order was signed for part of the Transport Ships to sail
from Cork to the Shannon, and there to take on Board some of the Irish Forces:
The following Letter was also sent by the General to Sir Ralph Delavall, who he
understood was upon the Coast with a Squadron of English Men of War.

Camp before Limerick, September. 28. 1691.
SIR,
I Have notice from my Lord Nottingham, that you The General's Letter to Sir
Ralph Dalaval.
were to come with the Squadron under your Command into these Seas; which makes
me send this to acquaint you, that I have entered into a Treaty with the City of
Limerick, and the Irish Army, which is now just come to a Conclusion. In the
mean time we have a Cessation of Arms at Land, and have agreed there shall be
one too at Sea, upon the Coasts of this Kingdom, since several of the Irish
Army are to be transported, and to make use of French as well as English Ships
for that Purpose: and therefore I must desire you will not hinder the Transport
Ships of France from coming into the Shannon, nor the rest of their Fleet into
Dingle*Bay. The French Intendant here has written his Part to the Squadron of
their Men of War that is expected, and gives Assurance that no Hostility will
be committed by them: and you will please to observe the same on your Side,
which is very necessary for their Majesty's Service, and the speedy finishing
the Affair we have in hand; to which I am sure you will contribute what you
may, as well as,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Bar. de GINCKELL.


The 29th all our Horse and Dragoons commanded by the Marquess Ruvigny go to
encamp beyond Six-mile-Bridg, for the Convenience of Forage, and a friendly
Correspondence begun between the Irish and us, several of our Army going into
Town, and others of them coming into our Camp.

The 30th most of the Irish General Officers dined with the Duke of
Wirtembergh; nothing further being to be done till the Arrival of the Lords
Justices, who were sent for to confirm the Articles according to Agreement: And
by this time the Irish Soldiers and ours were also pretty well acquainted,
they coming into our Camp, and our Men being admitted to view all their Works,
where we will leave them, asking strange Questions one at another, and look
back a little upon the Actions that happened in other Parts of the Kingdom during
this Month.

For whilst the Army was busied in the Field against A brief Account of what
happened in other Places of the Kingdom this Month.
the main Strength of the Irish, the Government was not wanting to order the
Militia in several Parts of this Kingdom, to suppress the skulking Tories, and
other mischievous Persons, who laid hold on all Occasions to do Mischief.

On the 5th of September a Party of Rapparees near Tallough, rob some Carriages
belonging to the Officers in the Princess Ann's Regiment, and got away into the
Woods. The Militia kill three Rapparees near Caperquin, and four more nigh
Lismore.

The 6th, our Barbados Fleet came into Kinsale under Convoy of the Princess
Ann, and the Bristol Frigates; and the same Day the St. Albans and Soldadoe
brought 7 French Prizes into Cork. The Militia of Dublin, and eight hundred
more from the North, being joined by Balderock O Donnel, with about twelve
hundred Irish, were at Abbey Boil the 9th of September, on their March to
Sligoe; and on their way they summoned Loughlin, commanded by Colonel Theobald
Dillon; and another Place commanded by Colonel Charles Kelly, both strong
Castles, and garrisoned by the Irish, which surrendered: and then the Earl of
Granard, Commander in chief, sent to summon Ballymott, which refusing to
surrender, Balderock with a thousand Men was ordered to attack it. This Place
they say is very strong, and at that time commanded by one of the O Connors,
who upon Sight of the Artillery surrendered upon Condition, to march with his
Party and Baggage toward Sligoe.

This done, my Lord Granard marches to Sligoe, having Advice that Colonel
Mitchelburn's Regiment, and some of the Militia under Lieutenant Colonel
Caulfield, had forced old Sir Teague and his Crew from several Outworks and
Ditches, and obliged them to retire into the Fort. The Earl of Granard and his
Party were hard put to it in their March thither over the Curlew Mountains; for
their Draught-Horses being none of the best, and several of them tiring, the
Men themselves were forced to draw the Cannon, and that for several Miles,
which they performed very cheerfully. That Afternoon the Enemy beat a Parley;
but we found it was only to gain Time: and therefore in the Evening we began to
fire with great and small Shot, and so continued most part of the Night without
any further Loss on our Side, but of an Ensign who had his Head shot off with a
great Shot. But the Enemy seeing a great many Carriages with my Lord Granard's
Party, they were persuaded that they had brought heavy Cannon, with Mortars,
Bombs, Carcasses, etc. So that they beat another Parley, and after some time
they consented to surrender the Sligoe surrendered to my Ld Granard.
Town upon the Articles that were agreed to on the 6th of August, viz. Their
Party to march to Limerick with Arms and Baggage; and that all the little
Garrisons thereabouts in the Hands of the Irish, should have the Benefit of the
Capitulation.

The Fort was surrendered on the sixteenth, being made of Turf, and having in it
six hundred Men and sixteen Guns; and Colonel Mitchelburn was left Governor.
In former times the Castle of Sligoe was a good Fortification, being built by
Maurice Fitzgerald Lord Justice, in the Year 1242.

September the 17th, the Dublin Militia return Conquerors home again, having
not lost one Man in their whole March: and those of the North march toward
Ballynewton and Castle-burk, to have them surrendered according to the Articles
of Sligoe; many Robberies and Murders being committed in that Country,
particularly on Dr. Brooks an eminent Physician, and three more, the Rapparees
first wounding them in several Places, and then for security cutting their
Throats.

September the 12th, the Irish take a good Prey near Tallough; and the Militia
to be even with them, take another Prey, and kill one of my Lord Merion's
Troopers, with two Rapparees. Captain Orfeur of Colonel Hastings's Regiment,
going out with a Party of the said Regiment, and some of the Militia, he killed
twenty of the Rapparees near Lismore, which so terrified the rest, that the
Country thereabouts was pretty quiet for some time.

On the 12th of August John Mackabe, the notorious Rapparee, who so much
infested the Bog of Allen, was brought with four of his Companions, by
Lieutenant Sheilds and Lieutenant Courtney, to Dublin; and on the 19th they
were hanged up in Chains at the Naas: This Fellow, and another called the White
Sergeant, had been both in the Irish Army, but broke there for some Rogueries;
and after a great deal of Mischief done to the Country, they both got what
they deserved, the one being killed, and the other hanged. About this time one
of the Militia was killed, and several wounded by the Rapparees near Caperquin;
but in requital the Militia kill five of them.

Toward the latter End of September, two Lieutenants of the Irish Army having
deserted, and got our General's Pass to go home, they were met withal by Hogan
and his Party, and stripped of what they had; but neither himself nor any of
his Crew could read the Pass, else it is probable they would have sent them the
way they sometimes did our Militia, when they fell into their Power. Two
Rapparees of one Higgins's Party are taken; and himself desires a Protection.
Six more are killed near Mountmelick. And on the 26th one Caloghan a great
Rapparee, and some of his Party, come in under Protection at Edenderry: for now
they began to be sensible how things were like to go on their side; and
October, 1691.
therefore when they were afraid to lose the Power of doing Mischief, they came
in, and not before.

And to conclude the Month, Hogan and his Party meeting with some of our
Militia Dragoons near Roscreagh, murder seven of them, and the eighth hardly
escaped. One Tiercy was seized and hanged: And one Purcell, after the Rope had
broke with him, promising to make a Discovery, was saved, and detected four
more. And nigh the End of this Month our Packets brought us an account of the
Death of Lieutenant General Dowglass in Flanders.

CHAP. IX.
The Lords Justices come to the Camp. The Irish General Officers come to the
General's Tent. Articles signed. The Articles at large, both Military and
Civil, with their Majesty's Confirmation to both. We take possession of the
Irish Town. A Lieutenant Colonel imprisoned for denying to go to France. A
Declaration from the General. My Lord Lucan persuades the Irish to go into
France. Their Foot drawn out, and put to the trial. The Lords Justices return
toward Dublin. Our Army decamps from Limerick: Some of the Irish march out.

OCtober the first, upon a Complaint from Lieut. Genesis Sarsfield, that some of
our Men begun to plunder and strip theirs as they found Opportunities, the
General gave Orders that the Soldiers should not go beyond our own Works. And
now the Irish begin to make Hutts in the King's Island, and draw several
Regiments out of the Town thither, keeping all their Gates fast-lock'd, lest
their Men should run away from them upon the news of going for France: for how
fond soever they might be of K. James's Service, yet few of the common People
have any stomach for traveling. That Evening about nine a Clock, the Lords
Justices came to the Camp; which being The Lords Justices come to the Camp.
signified to the Irish Officers, on the 2 d about 3 a Clock in the Afternoon,
came Sarsfield, Waughup, and all the other Great Men of the Irish Nation,
Civil, Military, The Irish Great Officers come to the General's Tent.
and some Ecclesiastical, (only 'twas observable that the French Lieutenant
Generals kept in Town, and pretended Indisposition, tho they signed the
Articles; and yet the Matter was not great as to us whether they had or not,
tho it was material to the Irish, as bringing them under the same Circumstances
with themselves.) But tho things were in a manner adjusted before, yet there
arose new Debates about the Rapparees, and other things, that lasted till 12 a
Clock at Night: Then the Articles were ordered to be engrossed, and the Irish
return into Town. My Lord Merion and my Lord Brittas were also now come from
Kerry, and their Party included in the Articles.

The 3 d most of the Irish Officers came again; and dining with the Duke of
Wirtemberg, they went all afterward to the General's Tent, where the following
Articles Articles signed.
were interchangeably signed: The former about the Surrender of the Town,
signed by the Generals; and the latter about the Privileges granted to the
Irish, signed by the General and Lords Justices jointly, being afterward
ratified by their Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, in
Form following.

The Civil Articles of Limerick.
GVlielmus and Maria, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae nostrae
pervenirint, salutem: Inspeximus Irritulament. quorund. literarum patenttum de
Confirmatione geren. dat. apud Westmonasterium vicessimo quarto die Februarii
ultimi praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Record. remanen.
in haec verba.

William and Mary by the Grace of God, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall
come, greeting: Whereas certain Articles bearing Date the third Day of October
last past, made and agreed upon between our Justices of our Kingdom of Ireland,
and our General of our Forces there on the one Part; and several Officers
there, commanding within the City of Limerick, in our said Kingdom, on the
other Part: Whereby our said Justices and General did undertake that we should
ratify those Articles within the space of eight Months, or sooner; and use
their utmost Endeavors that the same should be ratified and confirmed in
Parliament. The Tenor of which said Articles is as follows, viz.

Articles agreed upon between Lieutenant General Ginckell, Commander in Chief
of the English Army, on one Side; and the Lieut. Generals, D'usson and De
Tesse, Commanders in Chief of the Irish Army, on the other Side, and the
General Officers hereunto subscribing.
1. THAT all Persons without any Exception, of what Quality or Condition
soever, that are willing to leave the Kingdom of Ireland, shall have free
Liberty to go to any Country beyond the Seas, (England and Scotland excepted)
where they think fit, with their Families, Household Stuff, Plate and Jewels.

2. That all General Officers, Colonels, and generally all other Officers of
Horse, Dragoons, and Foot-Guards; Troopers, Dragoons, Soldiers of all kinds,
that are in any Garrison, Place or Port, now in the Hands of the Irish, or
encamped in the Counties of Cork, Clare and Kerry; as also those called
Rapparees or Volunteers, that are willing to go beyond the Seas, as aforesaid,
shall have free leave to embarque themselves wherever the Ships are that are
appointed to transport them, and to come in whole Bodies, as they are now
composed, or in Parties, Companies, or otherwise, without having any
Impediment, directly or indirectly.

3. That all Persons abovementioned, which are willing to leave Ireland, and
go into France, shall have leave to declare at the Times and Places hereafter
mentioned, viz. the Troops in Limerick, on Tuesday next at Limerick; the Horse
at their Camp on Wednesday; and the other Forces that are dispersed in the
Counties of Clare, Kerry and Cork, on the 8th Instant, and on none other,
before Monsieur Tameron, the French Intendant, and Colonel Withers: and after
such Declaration is made, the Troops that will go to France, must remain under
the Command and Discipline of their Officers that are to conduct them thither;
and Deserters on each Side shall be given up and punished accordingly.

4. That all English and Scotch Officers, that serve now in Ireland, shall be
included in this Capitulation, as well for the security of their Estates and
Goods in England, Scotland and Ireland (if they are willing to remain here) as
for passing freely into France, or any other Country to serve.

5. That all the Generals, French Officers, the Intendant, the Engeneers, the
Commissaries of War, and of the Artillery; the Treasurer, and other French
Officers, Strangers, and all others whatsoever that are in Lymerick, Sligo,
Ross, Clare, or in the Army, or that do Trade or Commerce, or are otherways
employed in any kind of Station or Condition, shall have free leave to pass
into France or any other Country, and shall have leave to Ship themselves with
all their Horses, Equipage, Plate, Papers, and all their Effects whatever; and
that General Ginckel will order Pasports for them, Convoys and Carriages, by
Land and by Water, to carry them safe from Lymerick to the Ships where they
shall be Embarked, without paying any thing for the said Carriages, or to
those that are employed therein with their Horses, Carts, Boats and Shallops.

6. That if any of the aforesaid Equipages, Merchandise, Horses, Money, Plate
or other Movables, or Household Stuff belonging to the said Irish Troops, or to
the French Officers, or other particular Persons whatsoever, be Robbed,
destroyed, or taken away by the Troops of the said General, the said General
will order it to be restored or payment made according to the Value that is
given in upon Oath by the Persons so robbed: or plundered, and the said Irish
Troops to be Transported, as abovesaid; and all Persons belonging to them are
to observe good Orders in their March and Quarters, and shall restore whatever
they shall take from the Country, or make restitution for the same.

7. That to Facilitate the Transporting the said Troops, the General will
Furnish fifty Ships, each Ship Burden two hundred Tuns, for which the Persons
to be Transported shall not be obliged to pay, and twenty more, if there shall
be occasion, without their paying for them; and if any of the said Ships shall
be lesser Burden, he will furnish more in Number to countervail, and also give
two Men of War to Embarque the Principal Officers, and serve for a Convoy to
the Vessels of Burden.

8. That a Commissary shall be sent forthwith to Cork to Visit the Transport
Ships, and see what Condition they are in for Sailing, and that, as soon as they
are ready, the Troops to be Transported shall March with all convenient Speed
the nearest way, in order to Embarque there: and if there shall be any more Men
to be Transported than can be carried off in the said fifty Ships, the rest
shall quit the English Town of Lymerick, and March to such Quarters as shall be
appointed for them Convenient for their Transportation, where they shall remain
till the other twenty Ships are ready, which they are to be in a Month, and may
Embarque on any French Ships that may come in the mean while.

9. That the said Ships shall be furnished with Forage for Horse, and all
necessary Provisions, to subsist the Officers, Troopers, Dragoons, and
Soldiers, and all other Persons, that are shipped to be Transported into France;
which Provision shall be paid for as soon as all are disembarqued at Breast or
Nantz, upon the Coast of Brettany, or any other part of France they can make.

10. And to secure the return of the said Ships (the danger of the Seas
excepted) and the payment for the said Provisions, sufficient Hostages shall be
given.

11. That the Garrison of Clare-Castle, Ross, and all other Foot that are in
Garrison in the Counties of Clare, Cork, and Kerry, shall have the advantage of
this present Capitulation; and such part of those Garrisons as design to go
beyond Sea, shall march out with their Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Ball in
Mouth, Match lighted at both ends, Colors flying, with all Provisions, and
half the Ammunition that is in the said Garrisons, and join the Horse that
marches to be transported; or if then there is not Shipping enough for the Body
of Foot, that is to be next transported after the Horse, General Ginckel will
order that they be furnished with Carriages for that purpose; and what
Provisions they shall want in their March, they paying for the said Provision,
or else that they may take it out of their own Magazines.

12. That all the Troops of Horse and Dragoons, that are in the Counties of
Cork, Kerry, and Clare, shall also have the Benefit of this Capitulation; and
that such as will pass into France, shall have Quarters given them in the
Counties of Clare and Kerry apart from the Troops that are commanded by General
Ginckel, until they be shipped; and within their Quarters they shall pay for
every thing, except Forage and Pasture for their Horses, which shall be
furnished Gratis.

13. Those of the Garrison of Sligo that are to join the Irish Army, shall have
the Benefit of this Capitulation, and Orders shall be sent unto them that are
to convoy them up, to bring them hither to Lymerick the shortest way.

14. The Irish may have liberty to transport nine hundred Horses, including
Horses for the Officers, which shall be transported Gratis; and as for the
Troopers that stay behind, they shall dispose of themselves, as they shall
think fit, giving up their Arms and Horses to such Persons as the General shall
appoint.

15. It shall be permitted for those that are appointed to take care for the
Subsistence of the Horse that are willing to go into France, to buy Hay and
Corn at the King's rates, wherever they can find it in the Quarters that are
assigned for them, without any let or molestation; and to carry all necessary
Provision out of the City of Lymerick; and, for this purpose, the General will
furnish convenient Carriages for them to the Place, where they shall be
embarked.

16. It shall be further lawful to make use of the Hay, preserved in store in
the County of Kerry, for the Horses that shall be embarked; and, if there be
not enough, it shall be lawful to buy Hay and Oats wherever they can be
found, at the King's rates.

17. That all Prisoners of War that were in Ireland the 28th. of September,
shall be set at liberty on both sides; and the General promises to use his
Endeavors that those that are in England or Flanders shall be set at liberty
also.

18. The General will cause Provisions and Medicines to be furnished to the
sick and wounded Officers, Troopers, Dragooners, and Soldiers of the Irish
Army, that cannot pass into France at the first Embarkment; and after they are
cured, will order them Ships to pass into France, if they are willing to go.

19. That at the Signing hereof the General will send a Ship Express to France,
and that besides he will furnish two small Ships, of those that are now in the
River of Lymerick to Transport two Persons into France that are to be sent to
give Notice of this Treaty, and that the Commanders of the said Ships shall
have Orders to put ashore at the next Port in France they shall make.

20. That all those of the said Troops, Officers, or Soldiers, of what
Character soever, that will pass into France, shall not be stopped on the
Account of Debt, or other Pretext.

21. If after the Signing this present Treaty, and before the Arrival of the
Fleet, a French Packet-Boat, or other Transport-Ship, shall arrive from France
in any Part of Ireland, the General will order a Passport not only for such as
must go on Board the said Ships, but to the Ships to come to the nearest Port
or Place where the Troops to be transported shall be quartered.

22. That after the Arrival of the Fleet, there shall be free Communication and
Passage between it and the Quarters of the abovesaid Troops; and especially for
all those that have Passes from the Chief Commanders of the said Fleet, or from
Monsieur Tameron the Intendant.

23. In Consideration of the present Capitulation, the two Towns of Lymerick
shall be delivered and put into the Hands of the General, or any other Person
that he shall appoint at the Times and Days hereafter specified; viz. the Irish
Town, except Magazines and Hospital, on the day of the signing these present
Articles; and as for the English Town, it shall remain, together with the
Island and free Passage of Thomond-Bridge in the hands of those of the Irish
Army that are now in the Garrison, or that shall hereafter come from the
Counti^^ of Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligo, and other Places abov^ mentioned, until
there shall be Convenience found f^^ their Transportation.

24. And to prevent all Disorders that may happen between the Garrison that the
General shall place ^^ the Irish Town, which shall be delivered to him and the
Irish Troops that shall remain in the En^lish Town, and the Island, which they
may do unt^ the Troops to be embarked on the first Fifty Shi^^ shall be gone
for France, and no longer, they sha^^ entrench themselves on both sides, to
hinder the Communication of the said Garrisons, and it shall b^ prohibited on
both sides to offer any thing that ^ offensive, and the Parties offending shall
be punished o^ either side.

25. That it shall be lawful for the said Garrison t^ march out at once, or at
different times, as they ca^ be embarked with Arms, Baggage, Drums beating
Match lighted at both ends, Bullet in Mouth, Colou^ flying, six Brass-Guns,
such as the Besieged shall chus^ two Mortar-Pieces, and half the Ammunition
that ^ now in the Magazines of the said Place; and for th^^ purpose, an
Inventory of all the Ammunition in the Garrison shall be made in the presence
of any Person that the General shall appoint the next Day after the present
Articles be signed.

26. All the Magazines of Provisions shall remai^ in the hands of those that
are now employed to take ca^^ of the same, for the Subsistence of those of the
Iris^ Army that will pass into France; and that if there sha^^ not be
sufficient in the Stores for the Support of the said Troops while they stay in
this Kingdom, and are cros^ing the Seas, that upon giving an account of their
Num^ers, the General will furnish them with sufficient Pro^isions at the King's
rates; and that there shall be a free ^arket in Lymerick and other Quarters
where the said Troops shall be: And in Case any Provisions shall ^emain in the
Magazines of Lymerick when the Town shall be given up, it shall be valued, and
the price de^ucted out of what is to be paid for the Provisions to be ^urnish'd
to the Troops on Shipboard.

27. That there shall be a Cessation of Arms at Land, ^s also at Sea, with
respect to the Ships, whether English, Dutch or French, designed for the
Transpor^^tion of the said Troops, until they shall be returned ^o their
respective Harbors; and that on both sides ^hey shall be furnished with
sufficient Pass-Ports both ^or Ships and Men; and if any Sea-Commander or
Captain of a Ship; any Officer, Trooper, Dragoon, or Soldier, or any other
Person, shall act contrary to this Cessation, the Persons so acting shall be
punished on ^ither side, and satisfaction shall be made for the wrong that is
done; and Officers shall be sent to the Mouth of the River of Lymerick, to give
notice to the Commanders of the English and French Fleets of the present
Conjuncture, that they may observe the Cessation of Arms ^ccordingly.

28. That for surety of the Execution of this present Capitulation, and of each
Article therein contained, the Besieged shall give the following Hostages.

29. If before this Capitulation is fully executed, there happens any Change in
the Government or Command of the Army, which is now commanded by Genera^
Ginckel, all those that shall be appointed to command the same, shall be
obliged to observe and execute what i^ specified in these Articles, or cause it
to be execute^ punctually, and shall not act contrary on any a^count.

D'Vsson, Le Chevalier de Tessee, Latour Monfort Mark Talbot, Lucan Jo. Wauchop
Galmoy, M. Purcell.


ARTICLES agreed upon the Third Day of October 1691. between the Right
Honorable Sir Charles Porter, Knight, and Thomas Conyngesby Esquire Lords Justices
of Ireland, and his Excellency the Baron De Ginckel, Lieut. General, and
Commader in Chief of the English Army, on the one part, and the Right
Honorable Patrick Earl of Lucan, Percy, Viscount Gallmoy, Col. Nic. Purcell,
Col. Dillon, and Col. John Brown, on the other side; on the behalf of the
Irish Inhabitants in the City and County of Lymerick, the Counties of Clare,
Cork, Kerry, Sligo, and Mayo, in consideration of the surrender of the City of
Lymerick, and other Agreements made between the said Lieut. Genesis Ginckel, the
Governor of the City of Lymerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing
Date with these Presents, for the Surrender of the said City, and Submission of
the said Army.
1. THat the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom shall enjoy such Privileges in
the Exercise of their Religion as are consistent with the Laws of Ireland, or
as they did enjoy in the Reign of King Charles the Second; and Their Majesty's
(as soon as their Affairs will permit them to summon a Parliament in this
Kingdom) will endeavor to procure the said Roman Catholics such further
Security in that Particular, as may preserve them from any disturbance upon the
account of their said Religion.

2. All the Inhabitants or Residents of Lymerick, or any other Garrison now in
the possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers now in Arms under
any Commission of K. James, or those Authorized by him, to grant the same in
the several Counties of Lymerick, Cork, Kerry, Clare, Sligo, and Mayo, or any
of them, and all the Commissioned Officers in their Majesty's Quarters, that
belong to the Irish Regiments now in being, that are treated with, and who are
not Prisoners of War, or have taken Protection, who shall return, and submit to
Their Majesty's Obedience, their and every of their Heirs, shall hold, possess,
and enjoy all and every their Estates of Freehold and Inheritance, and all the
Right, Title, and Interest, Privileges and Immunities which they, and every or
any of them held, enjoyed, or were rightfully entitled to in the Reign of K.
Charles the Second; or at any time since, by the Laws and Statutes that were in
force in the said Reign of King Charles the Second, and shall be put in
possession by order of the Government of such of them as are in the King's
Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without being put to any Suit or Trouble
therein; and all such Estates shall be freed and discharged from all Arrears of
Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, and other public Charges incurred, and become due
since Michaelmas 1688, to the Day of the Date hereof; and all Persons
comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their Goods and
Chattels real and personal, to them or any of them belonging, and remaining
either in their own Hands, or in the Hands of any Persons whatsoever in Trust
for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: And all and every the said
Persons, of what Profession, Trade, or Calling soever they be, shall and may
use, exercise, and practice their several and respective Professions, Trades
and Callings as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy the same in the
Reign of K. James the Second; provided that nothing in this Article contained,
be construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting Person now out of the
Kingdom, except what are hereafter comprised: Provided also, That no Person
whatsoever shall have or enjoy the Benefit of this Article, that shall neglect
or refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance made by Act of Parliament in England,
in the first year of the Reign of their present Majesty's, when thereunto
required.

3. All Merchants, or reputed Merchants of the City of Lymerick, or of any
other Garrison now possessed by the Irish, or of any Town or Place in the
Counties of Clare, or Kerry, who are absent beyond the Seas, that have not bore
Arms since Their Majesty's Declaration in February 1688/9, shall have the
Benefit of the Second Article, in the same manner as if they were present;
provided such Merchants, and reputed Merchants do repair into this Kingdom
within the space of eight Months from the Date hereof.

4. The following Officers, viz. Col. Simon Lutterill, Col. Rowland White,
Maurice Eustace of Yearmanstown, Cheviers of Maystown, commonly called
Mount-Linster, now belonging to the Regiments of the aforesaid Garrisons and
Quarters of the Irish Army who are beyond the Seas, and sent thither upon
Affairs of their respective Regiments, or the Army in general, shall have the
Benefit and Advantage of the Second Article, provided they return hither within
the space of eight Months from the Date of these Presents, and submit to Their
Majesty's Government, and take the abovementioned Oath.

5. That all and singular the said Persons comprised in the Second and Third
Articles, shall have a General Pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons,
Misprisions of Treasons, Premunires, Felonies, Trespasses, and other Crimes and
Misdemeanors whatsoever by them or any of them, committed since the beginning
of the Reign of K. James the Second; and if any of them are attainted by
Parliament, the Lords Justices and the General will use their best Endeavors
to get the same Repealed by parliament, and the Outlawries to be Reversed
gratis, all but Writing-Clerks Fees.

6. Whereas these present Wars have drawn great Violences upon both Parties,
and if Leave were given to the bringing of all sorts of private Actions, the
Animosities would probably continue that have been so long on foot, and the
public Disturbances last; for the quieting and settling therefore of the
Kingdom, and the avoiding those Inconveniences which would be the necessary
consequence of the contrary, no Person, or Persons whatsoever comprised in the
foregoing Articles, shall be sued, molested, or impleaded at the Suit of any
Party or Parties whatsoever, for any Trespasses by them committed, or for any
Arms, Horses, Moneys, Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, or Provisions whatsoever,
by them seized or taken during the Time of the War; and no Person or Persons
whatsoever in the Second or Third Articles comprised, shall be sued, or made
accountable for the Rents or Rates of any Lands, Tenements, or Houses by him or
them reserved or enjoyed in this Kingdom since the beginning of the present
War, to the Day of the Date hereof; nor for any Waste or Trespass by him or
them committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or Houses: And it is also agreed,
that this Article shall be mutual and reciprocal on both sides.

7. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprised in the Second and Third Articles,
shall have Liberty to ride with a Sword and Case of Pistols if they think fit,
and keep a Gun in their Houses for the Defense of the same, or Fowling.

8. The Inhabitants and Residents of the City of Lymerick, and other Garrisons,
shall be permitted to remove their Goods, Chattels, and Provisions out of the
same, without being viewed or searched, or paying any manner of Duties, and
shall not be compelled to leave their Houses or Lodgings they now have therein,
for the space of six Weeks next ensuing the Date hereof.

9. The Oath to be administered to such Roman Catholics as submit to Their
Majesty's Government, shall be the Oath aforesaid, and no other.

10. No Person or Persons who shall at any time hereafter break these Articles,
or any of them, shall thereby make or cause any other Person or Persons to
forfeit or lose the Benefit of the same.

11. The Lords Justices and General do promise to use their utmost Endeavors
that all Persons comprehended in the abovementioned Articles, shall be
protected and defended from all Arrests and Executions for Debt or Damage, for
the space of eight Months next ensuing the Date hereof.

12. Lastly, The Lords Justices and the General do undertake, That Their
Majesty's will ratify these Articles within the space of three Months, or
sooner, and use their utmost Endeavors that the same shall be ratified and
confirmed in the Parliament.

13. Q. Whether it be conform to the Laws of War, that one and the same Person
should be included in Articles of Surrender of three distinct places, as was
Col. J. Brown.
And whereas Col. John Brown stood indebted unto several Protestants by
Judgments of Record, which appearing to the late Government, the Lords
Tyrconnel and Lucan took away the Effects the said John Brown had to answer
the said Debts; which Effects were taken for the public Use of the Irish, and
their Army, for freeing the said Lord Lucan of his said Engagement past upon
their public Account for payment of the said Protestants, for preventing the
Ruin of the said John Brown, and for satisfaction of his said Creditors, at
the instance of the said Lord Lucan, and the rest of the persons aforesaid, it
is agreed, That the said Lords Justices, and Lieut. General Ginckel shall
interpose with the King and Parliament, to have the Estates secured to Roman
Catholics by Articles and Capitulations in this Kingdom, charged with, and
equally liable to the payment of so much of the said Debts as the said Lord
Lucan, upon stating Accounts with the said John Brown, shall certify under
his hand, that the Effects taken from the said John Brown, amount unto;
Account is to be stated, and the Balance certified by the said Lord Lucan in 21
Days after the Date hereof: For the true performance whereof, we have hereunto
set our Hands:

Present, Scravemore. H. Mackay. T. Talmash. Charles Porter. Tho. Conyngesby.
Baron De Ginckel.


AND whereas the said City of Lymerick has been since, in pursuance of the
said Articles, surrendered unto Us. Now know ye, That We having considered of
the said Articles, are graciously pleased hereby to declare that We do for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, ratify and confirm the same,
and every Clause, Matter, and Thing therein contained. And as to such parts
thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We
shall recommend the same to be made good by Parliament; and shall give Our
Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills, that shall be passed by Our Two Houses of
Parliament to that purpose. And whereas it appears unto Us that it was agreed
between the Parties to the said Articles, that after the Words, Lymerick,
Clare, Cerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them, in the second of the said Articles,
the Words following; viz. And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties, should be inserted, and be part of the said Articles; which
Words haivng been casually omitted by the Writer, the omission was not
discovered till after the said Articles were signed, but was taken notice of
before the second Town was surrendered. And that Our said Justices and General,
or one of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being
within the Intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the foul Draught
thereof. Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby ratify and confirm
the said Words; viz. (And all such as are under their Protection in the said
Counties) hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, ordaining, and declaring,
that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall, and may have,
receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof in such and the same manner, as if the
Words had been inserted in their proper place, in the said second Article, any
omission, defect, or mistake in the said second Article, in any ways
notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that these our
Letters Patent shall be enrolled in our Court of Chancery, in our said Kingdom
of Ireland, within the space of one Year next ensuing. In witness, etc. Witness
Our sel^ at Westminster, the Twenty fourth Day of February, Anno Regni Regis
and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae, quarto, per breve de privato sigillo. Nos
autem tenorem praemissor. praedict. ad requisitionem Attornat. General. Domini
Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae, duximus exemplificandum per
praesentes. In Cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. quinto die Aprilis Annoque Regni
eorum quarto,

Bridges.
Examinat. per Nos S. Keck, Lacon W. Child. in Cancel. Magistros.



Our Men had Orders to march into the Irish Town that Night; but it was after
Sunset before the Articles We take possession of the Outworks,
were signed; and therefore Major General Talmash that was appointed to take
possession of the Town, did not think it convenient to march in the Night, but
commanded Count Nassaw's and Colonel Gustavus Hamilton's Regiments to take
possession of the Stone-Fort, and all the Outworks of the Irish-Town: And on
the fourth, five of our Regiments marched in, and took possession of the Irish
Town, wherein we found 14 pieces of Canon, and a Church heaped full of Oats,
which the Irish had and of the Town.
the Benefit of, according to the Articles. The Works were all exceeding
strong, and the Town as dirty, the Irish had left very little else in it
however, but carried every thing away that might do them the least Service. Our
Regiments in Town were relieved every day as long as the Army staid, because
the Place was so disordered, that we could not abide long in it till things
were in some measure better disposed of. At our going in, we planted a Guard at
one end of Balls-Bridge as the Irish had at the other.

October the Fifth, One hundred Men out of each Foot-Regiment Our Batteries
levelled.
were ordered to level the Works that we had cast up against the Town; and,
about Ten a-Clock, the General received a Letter from a Lieutenant Colonel in
the Irish Army, complaining that he was imprisoned A Lieutenant Colonel
imprisoned for denying to go with the Irish into France.
for denying to go with them into France; which the General took so very ill,
that he ordered four Guns to be carried immediately down, and planted upon
Balls-Bridge, saying, with some heat, that he would teach them to play Tricks
with him; which my Lord Lucan hearing of, (for so we may venture to call
Lieutenant General Sarsfield now, since the Articles do it) he came out to our
Camp, and several sharp Words passed, my Lord Lucan saying, at last, that he
was then in the General's Power. Not so (replies the other) but you shall go
in, and then do the best you can; but he endeavored to excuse the thing, by
saying there were Prisoners of War, and Prisoners of State, for some
Misdemeanors against their Government; some of those, though not obliged by the
Articles, they had set at liberty, who coming warm from our Camp afterward,
they begun to rail and speak dis-respectfully of the Irish Officers, for which
this Lieutenant Colonel was imprisoned, and not for desiring to leave them; so
that after some other Replies, all things were quiet, and the Prisoner
enlarged. The General however sent ten Fieldpieces and six Canon into the
Irish Town, and in the Afternoon ordered the following Declaration.

By Lieutenant General Ginckel, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces.
THeir Majesty's having sufficiently manifested to the World their Intention of
bringing this Kingdom into a state of Quiet and Repose, and to the flourishing
Condition it formerly was in; and for that Reason have extended their Grace and
Favor to those that, till now, have been in Arms against them. We cannot but
let the Officers and Soldiers of the Irish Army know how willing we are to
indulge, and provide for them, that by remaining in this Kingdom, or serving
Their Majesty's abroad, had rather promote the British and Irish Interest, than
the Designs of France against both: And do therefore promise and declare, that
all Officers and Soldiers of the said Army that have a mind to return to their
homes, shall have leave to do so with all their Goods and Effects, and there be
permitted to live quietly and peaceably under the Protection and Encouragement
of the Government. And although, by the Capitulation, all the Troopers of that
Army, besides the six hundred that have License to go beyond Sea, were to
deliver up their Horses without payment, to such Persons as shall be appointed
to receive the same; yet we do hereby give the said Troopers and Dragoons leave
to sell their Horses to whom they think fit, and will pay them for their Arms
upon their giving them up to the Officer, commanding the Train of Artillery,
either in the Irish Town of Limerick, or the Camp: As also to the
Foot-Soldiers; they shall likewise be paid for their Arms, they bringing them
in. As for those Officers and Soldiers that are willing to take Service under
Their Majesty's, they shall have Quarters immediately assigned them, and
receive Subsistence till Their Majesty's further Pleasure; for which end they
may send two Officers of their own to England, or elsewhere, to receive from
Their Majesty's themselves what further Orders they shall please to give
herein. And whereas it has industriously been spread about, that such of the
Irish as enter into Their Majesty's Service will be sent into Hungary, and
other remote Parts, contrary to their Inclinations and Desires; We assure them
they shall not be obliged to serve in any Place against their Wills, no more
than be constrained to take Service here, or return to their homes, they being
at full and entire liberty to choose what part they will take; but if once they
go into France, they must not expect to return into this Kingdom again.

Given at the Camp. by Lymerick, the 5th. of October, 1691. Baron De Ginckel.

That Afternoon, my Lord Lucan and Major General Waughop made Speeches to the
Irish Soldiers in Town and in the King's Island, telling them, that though
they were under indifferent Circumstances at present; yet next Spring, or soon
after, they would either be landed in England, or else in Ireland, with a
powerful Army; every Officer amongst them keeping their present Posts, at
least, and would always be upon an English Establishment, and receive English
Pay, even in France it self; and a great many other Advantages were laid before
them, which would have seemed improbable to any but Irish-Men, who easily
believe what they would have, but are as soon dejected at any frivolous
Misfortune. And whilst they were at this Work, the General was settling the
Quarters of several of our own Regiments, who now had endured a very long and
active Campaigne.

The Sixth in the Morning a Sermon was preached to each Irish Regiment by their
Priests, declaring the Advantages to them and their Religion, by adhering to
the French Interest, and the Inconveniences, nay, certain Damnation, of joining
with Heretics; and then a good Quantity of Brandy given them to wash it down.
After that the Bishops gave their Blessings; and then the whole Body of the
Irish Foot were drawn out on the County of The Irish Foot drawn out, and put to
the trial who would go or stay.
Clare-side, being at least Fourteen thousand Men by Poll. The Lords-Justices
and General went over the River to view them, Adjutant-General Wythers being
appointed to acquaint them with the Advantages of our Service above that of
France; and how unnatural it was for them to choose to go serve in a Foreign
Country against the real Interest of their own, with much more to that
purpose, and Care was likewise taken to distribute the General's Declaration.
Then the Regiments were ordered to march, and those that were for France, went
on; but those that were inclined to us, had liberty to file off at a Place
appointed. That which they called the Royal Regiment, being then fourteen
hundred Men, seemed to go all entire except seven Men, which the General was
much concerned at; then my Lord Ivaeghe's Regiment of Vlster, Irish, came off
entire to our side, as did also Colonel Wilsons, and about half my Lord
Louth's, and a great many out of most other Regiments, Brigadier Clifford,
Colonel Henry Lutterel, and Colonel Purcel, all appeared averse to the going
for France. And on the seventh, the Lords-Justices having performed all that
was necessary on The Lords-Justices Return toward Dublin.
their side, they returned toward Dublin; and Colonel Earls, with a Regiment
of Danes, march toward Quarters. The Irish had kept their Stores pretty
entire, from the beginning of the Capitulation till after the Division of Men;
and then they distribute Bread, Brandy, Claret, and some little Money amongst
those that staid with them, as well to encourage some, as to prevent others
from going off, keeping their Gates always fast locked, and a strong Guard at
each. And now the General seemed displeased that the Irish used indirect means
to threaten their Men into a French Voyage, telling the Irish great Officers
plainly, that if they broke the Articles, he thought himself no longer obliged
to observe them; then Colonel Matthews, and Colonel Lumley were sent to the
Horse-Camp upon the same account: And this day, and the next, my Lord
Ivaeghe's, Colonel Wilson's, part of my Lord Dillon's, Colonel Hussey's, and
other Irish Regiments were mustered nigh the General's Quarters, making 1046 in
those two days, beside double the number that had Passes to go home; those that
were mustered had all of them Bread, Cheese, Brandy, and Tabaco, with a
Fortnight's Subsistence given them by Adjutant-General Wythers, who never can
be sufficiently commended for the Care and Pains he has taken during the whole
War of Ireland.

The General was resolved to do all things possible to prevent the Irish going
in so great Numbers out of the Kingdom, as being a strengthening our
Adversaries, and a weakening of our selves; and therefore he orders the
following Declaration to be Published.

By Lieut. General Ginckel, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces.
SInce it has pleased God to bless Their Majesty's Arms with that Success as to
reduce this Kingdom to their Obedience; to the end that all the Inhabitants of
it may enjoy the Benefit of that Peace which has cost so much Blood, and the
effusion of it for the future may be stopped, I think fit to make it public, and
declare, That all Persons of what Quality or Condition soever, have free
liberty and permission to return to their several Homes with their Goods,
Stocks, and Families, and there live quietly and peaceably under the Protection
of the Government.

And whereas several straggling People remain still in Arms, and daily infest
the Roads, committing Robberies and Murders upon Their Majesty's Subjects; I do
hereby require all such, whether known by the Name of Rapparies, Volunteers,
Creights, or others, to return quietly to their respective Parishes, deliver up
their Arms, and enter their Names with some of their Majesty's Justices of the
Peace in the Counties to which they belong, within the time limited by the
Lords-Justices Proclamation, upon pain of being exempted from all manner of
Quarter. And all Justices of the Peace are hereby directed to make Entry and
Register of all the Names of all such Persons as aforesaid. And I command all
Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and other Persons whatsoever, to forbear
committing any Act of Violence or Hostility, as they will answer the contrary
at their utmost Perils.

Given at the Camp by Lymerick, this 6th. of October, 1691. Baron De Ginckel.

October ^. Brigadier Levison's Dragoons march from the Camp toward Kerry, and
the Earl of Portland's, with another Regiment of Horse, go toward Green Ann
Castle, to secure the Roads against the Rapparees, especially against Hogan,
and his Party. Several of our Regiments move from beyond the River over the
Bridge again, and many of them being pretty thin by reason of hard Marches and
continual Duty, some Irish were enlisted to strengthen them; an Instance of the
various Scenes in humane Affairs, that those very Men we were so busy
endeavoring to destroy, and they ten times more inveterate against us, should
yet be so far reconciled in so short a time, as to have them on our side, and
eat and sleep amongst us; but Soldiers often think no further than Command;
and we see it in Truces, That the very next moment after the sharpest Conflict,
a Cessation being agreed to, the Men are presently as good Friends as if they
never had fallen out.

October 9. Three more Danish Regiments move toward Quarters, and a great many
of the Irish that came off, laid down their Arms at the Train, and so had
Passes to go home, with Money to bear their Charges, which made it something
scarce amongst our selves, though the poor men did not grudge it.

The 10th. Most of our Army returned from beyond the River, and 1000 Irish
Horse and Dragoons that came over to our side, were mustered by Commissary
Allen.

On the 12th. The Irish Horse that designed for France, marched through the
English Town, and so out at the Watergate, toward Cork, being not one
Thousand in Number as they passed by our Camp,

The 13th. Lieut. Genesis Ginckel with the Army march from The Army march from
Lymerick.
Lymerick toward Quarters, leaving Sir David Collier Governor of Lymerick,
with his own, Col. Venner's, Col. St. John's, and Col. Craighton's, with one
Regiment more in the Irish Town, my Lord Drogheda's, and my Lord Lisburn's
being encamped nigh the Riverside; without the Walls, till the Irish should
march out of the English Town. Major General Talmash staid behind to see good
Order kept, and the Articles observed on both sides, according to the Design of
them.

As Soon as our Army marched away, the Irish Foot-Guards Some of the Irish march
out.
went out toward Cork; they were called 140^ Men the Week before; but now, as
nigh as I could count them, they made only 482: nor was this Number left before
they got to Cork.

The 14th. The Irish make a distribution of Provisions, and some Money amongst
their Men, and are fitting out their Guns and other Tackle in Town for France.

And here it may be enquired by some, what Security our General had for the
Return of so many Ships as must be employed in that Expedition, since they were
to go into the Country of our greatest Enemy, and K. James had a specious
Pretext, as they were his Subjects, to detain them; they having no Power to
make Articles to his prejudice, etc.

But this is no difficult Business to resolve, since they had the public Faith
of the French and Irish Officers, which is seldom or never violated in such
Cases; but all Men, during a Cessation, are commonly treated with the greatest
Civility imaginable: Besides which, my Lord Lucan and Major General Waughop
gave the following Engagement under their Hands, as did also the two French
Lieut. Generals D'Vssone and De Tessee, another in French, to the same purpose;
giving also Hostages for the better performance of all Conditions.

We, the Earl of Lucan, and Major General VVauhop, whose Names are
underwritten, do hereby promise,
1. THat all the Ships that have been furnished by My Lord Lucan and
Major General Wauhop's Engagement for the Shipping.
Lieut. General Ginckel, and that are to transport Troops from Ireland to
France, ^, according to the late Capitulation, shall be sent back, and return
to Cork, Kinsale, or Waterford, without any hinderance or prejudice to the said
Ships by any Men of War, Privateers, or other Ships belonging to the French
King, or having his Commission.

2. That, as soon as the said Ships shall have Landed the Irish Troops in
France, they shall have full liberty to go back for Ireland when they think
fit, without being hindered upon any pretense whatsoever.

3. That, if the said Ships do want some Provisions for their Return here into
Ireland, they shall be supplied with all such as they shall have occasion for
at the same Rates they were furnished in Ireland to the Irish Troops for their
Transportation into France, and what they amount to, shall be deducted out of
the Money that shall be due for the Provisions that were put on Board the Ships
for the said Troops.

4. That the Rates of the Provisions that shall be furnished for Transportation
of the said Troops, shall be paid immediately after their Landing in France, or
in Bills of Exchange payable at London, at 15 days sight.

And if the Contents of this present Agreement should not be put in execution
in all its Particulars, or in any one part, besides Col. Hugh Mac Mahon, Col.
Robert Arthur, Col. O Gara, etc. that shall be left in Ireland for Hostages, we
do engage our Words and Honor, that we shall surrender our selves Prisoners of
War three months after our Landing in case of Contravention, at Whitehall, in
the Hands of the Secretaries of State. In Witness whereof, we have hereunto set
our Hands this 14th. Day of October, 1691.

Jo. Wauhop. Lucan.

The 16th. my Lord Lucan went from Lymerick toward Cork, to see things in a
readiness for the Irish Transportation; and the same day Sir Maurice Eustace
's, Major General Talbot's, Lord Bedloe 's, Prince of Wales 's, my Lore
Clanrichard 's, and Col. Bremingham 's Regiments being joined, they marched
out, and made in all only 618 Men.

As they marched through the Irish-Town, their men run away by dozens, having
the way open for them; nor could their Officers prevent it by all their Care;
for they kept the Gates always fast locked, and yet several from within the
Town made their Escapes by swimming the River.

The 17th. my Lord Iniskillin 's Regiment, that had been for some time in the
County of Clare, was mustered beyond the Town, and so were some others of them
on the 18th. and 19th. During which time, our men were employed in making clean
the Irish Town; Major General Talmash going often amongst them himself, to
encourage them to work.

CHAP. X.
The Campaign ended. Irish Prisoners of War released. some Rapparees lay down
their Arms. Proclamations of Pardon to the rest. The Ulster-Irish return home
with their Cattle. The French Fleet arrives in the Shannon. Sir Ralph Delaval
with a Squadron in those Seas. Two Letters from the General to him. Some
Objections against the Articles of Limerick answered. The last of the Irish
quit the English Town. 120 of them drowned. Their Horse ship off at Cork. The
General goes to Dublin. The Recorder's Speech to him. Orders for mustering our
Army. Major General Talmash leaves Limerick. Orders for the Danes to ship off.
Fortifications at Mullingar and Ballymore demolished. A Proclamation. The
General goes for England. The Transport-Ships return from France. The late
King's Letter to the Irish at their landing. Their Reception in France. Several
desert that were not, as yet, shipped off. My Lord Lucan 's Release to the
General. All the Irish go off, except the Hostages. The Irish that staid very
unruly in their Quarters. Orders and Instructions for breaking of them. The
Oaths taken according to the New Act of Parliament. An Order to turn out all
Irish Papists from our Regiments, Arms, and Ammunition sent for England. The
French Hostages go for France. Lieutenant General Ruvigny lands in Ireland. A
Proclamation declaring the War of Ireland ended.

ANd now the Campaign being ended, so that no continued Thread of Affairs can
be drawn from the Army, any thing that has happened since may possibly not be
so acceptable; yet I hope it may not be amiss to give you some slender account
how things have gone in that Kingdom since the Siege of Limerick to the time of
the Proclamation for the War's being ended; though, before I proceed further,
it will be necessary to look back, and bring the Actions done in several other
parts of the Kingdom, up to the Armies removing from Limerick; which indeed may
be told in few Words, since little of moment could be expected in any other
place, but where the Seat of War was fixed.

In the beginning of October, Sollicitor-General Levinge, and Sir Richard
Reves, being appointed Judges for the Connaught-Circuit; because the Country
was very indifferently inhabited, and not as yet thoroughly settled, Assizes
were appointed to be held for this Province, only at Mullingar, Roscommon, and
Galway, which was done accordingly: About 20 Rapparees were killed in the
Counties of Waterford and Cork, by some small Parties of the Militia; and one
Whitney, with 4 more in his Company, were set upon, and murdered by a Party of
Rapparees, as they were going toward the Queen's County, though they killed
two, and wounded others before they were seized. And now those loose Fellows
seeing how it was like to go with their Party, several of them come in under
Protection, and desire to serve their Majesty's abroad, when they were out of
hopes to plunder their Subjects any longer at home.

All the Irish Prisoners of War that were in Waterford-Gaol, Irish Prisoners of
War released.
being upwards of 200, were set at liberty, as they were afterward at several
other Places; particularly at Carigfergus, where 15 Officers, and about 60
private Men had been Prisoners, ever since the Rout at Cavan: and at Lambay,
where the Prisoners, taken at Ballymore, were kept most of this Summer; but now
were all discharged according to the Capitulation.

And as the Irish grew weary of their former Courses on that side of the
Country toward Dublin, (or rather being forced to it when they could no longer
carry it on,) so they submitted apace in all the Corners of the Kingdom. On the
14th, one whom they termed Colonel Some Rapparees lay down they Arms.
Burk, a popular Man amongst the Rapparees, with a great many of his Followers,
came in and submitted at Loughrea in the County of Galway. On the same Day the
Irish Horse, and some Foot, March from Cashell toward Cork, the Prince of
Hesse going along, as well to prevent the Irish from plundering the Country,
as to hinder any little Quarrels that might happen between them and our own Men
as they met accidentally upon the March.

On the 14th Two Proclamations were Published by the Proclamations of Pardon to
the rest.
Lords Justices and Council, one reciting a former Proclamation, Dated the 18th
of September, promising Pardon and Protection to all Robbers, Thieves, and
Rapparees, who within a Month should surrender up their Arms to any Justice of
the Peace, and take the Oath of Fidelity to Their Majesty's mentioned in the
Articles of Limerick, requiring the Justices of the Peace to make a return
under their Hands, of their Names, places of Abode, their Qualities, and Arms,
but forbidding all protected Persons, and others, to relieve, conceal, or
harbor, the said Robbers, who would not submit; upon pain of forfeiting their
own Protections, and being prosecuted with the utmost severity of Law for such
offense: Promising also a Reward of Forty Shillings to any one that would bring
in the heads of any such Rogues as would not lay hold on this fair opportunity.
By this Proclamation the time for their coming in was protracted till the Fifth
of November.

The other Proclamation was to forbid all Officers and Soldiers of the Army,
or others, to do any harm or injury to any of the Irish, or make any
distinction of Nations, every one that takes the Oath, to be esteemed a
Subject, and equally entitled to the Benefit of Their Majesty's Laws with the
rest, etc. By which means all things became so Calm on a sudden, as if there
had been no Storm at all in that Kingdom.

Our Army are now on their March to their respective Winter Quarters, and those
of the Irish that came over to us had Subsistence and Quarters assigned them
till Their Majesty's pleasure was further known.

On the 19th, Hogan, and most of his Crew, came in at Roscreagh, and had the
benefit of the Proclamation, being afterward allowed Twenty Four Men by the
General to suppress other Rapparees upon occasion, though this was fatal to him,
for some of that sort of People Murdered him afterward. All the Roads and
other places leading The Vlster Irish return home with their Cattle.
from the Counties of Kerry and Clare toward the North, are now full of
nothing but Creights, and vast stocks of Cattle driving homewards, which was a
little odd to see, that they would rather hazard the loss of their Cattle by a
long March into Vlster, where they had formerly robbed and plundered the
Protestants, and were like to be called to an Account for it, at least they
could expect no great encouragement in those places for the future, nor any
assurance of their being received as Tenants to their old Farms at their return
thither: One would have thought, I say, these things considered, that they
would rather have endeavored to stay in the Counties of Kerry, Clare, and
Limerick, where there was Land enough for them, and at easy Rates, than to run
all hazards by going down into the North; but the reason of this is plain, for
there is so great an Antipathy between the Vlster Irish, and those in other
parts of the Kingdom, as nothing can be more, and the Feuds amongst them
greater than between either, and their injured Protestant Neighbors, whose
favor they had hopes of gaining sooner, than the friendship of one another,
neither Party trusting other, or ever desiring it to be otherways; my Lord
Merion, Brigadeer Clifford, Colonel Henry Lutterill, Baron Purcell, and a great
many more of the Irish Nobility and Gentry go toward Dublin.

By the Articles of Limerick you may see, that the The French Fleet arrives in
the Shannon.
French General Officers expected the coming of their Fleet, and what was only
a report before, is now confirmed, that they really did come, being Eighteen
Men of War, Four Fireships, and Twenty Ships of Burden, under Monsieur
Shalterneau, of which Monsieur D'Vssone gives notice to Major General Talmash,
and it was agreed to keep a friendly Correspondence till all matters relating
to the Articles were settled. The French releasing some of our Ships that they
had taken, before they heard of the Cessation. And nigh the same time the
Plymouth, Adventure, and Centurion, Three of our Frigates came into Kinsale,
having brought under their Convoy Two large Pinks with Powder and Ball for that
Fort, and said, they left Sir Ralph Delaval, with a Squadron of Thirty Men Sir
Ralph Delaval with a Squadron in these Seas.
of War under his Command, about Twenty Five Leagues from thence. Which the
General having notice of at Kilkenny, he writes a Letter to him, dated October
25th, giving him an account of the French Fleet's arrival in the Shannon, and
desiring him to Sail that way: And the Day after having received some Accounts
how high the French The General writes Two Letters to him.
carried themselves, and how many Scruples the Irish great Officers made since
their coming, he sent away another Express with the following Letter.

Kilkenny, October the 26th, 1691.
SIR,
SInce the Letter I sent you last Night, I find it more To Sir Ralph Delaval.
and more necessary that your Squadron should come round to the Shannon, for
the French Generals make so many difficulties since the coming of their Fleet,
that they seem to design nothing but delaying of time: I must therefore again
press you to Sail to the River as soon as possible, and place your self so,
that Captain Coal and the Ships he has with him may join you, to the end, that
if the French break the Articles we have made, we may be in a Condition to do
our selves right. I am informed there are several Frigates at Cork and Kinsale,
which you will please to make use of if you think you shall have occasion for
them. The French Fleet is now at Scatterey.


But whether the Wind would not serve our Fleet's, coming about to the Shannon,
or what other reasons there might be, I am a stranger to, though all that the
French and Irish Officers insisted on after the coming of their Fleet, was only
to have a Clause confirmed that was casually omitted in the Articles which the
General promised them, and Their Majesty's were pleased afterward to
Condescend to.

For it being late at Night when the Articles were agreed to, and they
Engrossed in haste this Clause, And all such as are under their protection in
the said Counties, was omitted by the Engrosser, though it was certainly inserted
in the foul Draught. This was what the Irish Officers desired might be made
good after the coming of the French Fleet: And first it was but reasonable,
seeing it was within the intent of the Articles. Secondly, It was Prudence not
to deny it, since the French Fleet being Eighteen Men of War, Four Fireships,
and Twenty Ships of Burden were certainly too hard for Captain Coal and his
Squadron then in the Shannon, and might have put what Men and Provisions they
pleased into the English Town, our Army also being gone to Quarters, we had
only Five Regiments in the Irish Town, with my Lord Drogheda's, and my Lord
Lisburn's, Encamped without the Walls. Provisions also were so scarce with us,
that our Men had only a Pint of Meal a Day allowed them, and the Irish in the
other Town were not only more in number, but better provided, so that if
Justice could not have obliged the General to the Confirmation of that Clause,
yet discretion at that Juncture would.

In a Day or Two after the Articles were Signed, we had News that the French
Fleet was come to Dingle Bay, with Ammunition and all sorts of Provisions for
the Relief of the Town, this made the Irish Great Officers hang their Heads, to
think they should so easily part with a place of that importance, or rather,
how they could Answer it to the French King, who had been at all that expense
and hazard in order to their Relief, but the opportunity was lost in doing it
no sooner, which some have looked upon since as one of the falsest steps made
in France of a long time, our King being now at leisure to visit them, instead
of their supporting his Enemies in Ireland.

And though the French Fleet came too late to Relieve the Some Objections against
the Articles of Limerick Answered.
Town, yet I hope it may not be impertinent to endeavor the Answering some
Objections that have been since made against the Capitulations of Limerick: As
if the Lords Justices and the General had condescended too far in granting the
Irish any Terms at all, at least such as they did, which put them into a
Condition of Revolting again whenever an opportunity offered it self. That
therefore Providence seemed now to have given the Irish up, as the Barbarous
Nations were formerly to the Jews, and that if this occasion was neglected, of
putting it out of their power for ever hereafter to endanger the English
Interest: Or if it was not made a right use of, (by which they understood
destroying of them Root and Branch,) then we might certainly expect, that all
the Expense and Blood it has cost England in their Reduction, will in a small
time signify nothing; since it is observed, that the Irish of themselves are a
sloathful People, naturally inclined to Spoil, Rapine, Stealth, and Oppression,
bred in no Trades, Manufactures, or other ways of Civil Industry, to live by in
times of Peace, wherein they never did, nor can endure to continue long, loving
always a savage and unbridled kind of Life: And therefore when one opportunity
is neglected of destroying them, it will be the Justice of God to make them
afterward the Instruments of our punishment, as they have been hitherto. And
thus Argue a great many People of that Country, who pretend good experience,
and that very lately, for what they say.

But as to those Comparisons between us and the Jews, the Irish, and the
Barbarous Nations formerly Inhabiting Judea, there can be no just proportion
made to draw any reasonable Conclusions from, since the Irish are Christians as
well as we, though misled and abused in a great many points, and have a natural
right to their Country, which several of them have never forfeited by any
Rebellions, how forward soever others may have been. And for my own part I must
own my self of the Opinion, that any Policy that is founded in Blood, and tends
to the destruction of Mankind, is not so warrantable by the Law of God, as some
people endeavor to make it, excepting that one Instance of the Jews which is
no precedent to any other People: And what means soever may be used for the
procuring of Unity, or Settlement, in a Country, Men must at the same time be
careful not to deface and dissolve the Bonds of Christian Charity; nay, of
humane Society, since acting the contrary, is but to dash the second Table
against the first; and so to consider others as of this or that Persuasion, and
treat them ill upon that account, is to forget that they are Men (as my Lord
Bacon has formerly observed;) And indeed to me it seems full as unreasonable to
destroy other People, purely because they cannot think as we do, as it is for
one man to ruin another, because the outward Figure and Shape of his Body is
not the same with his own.

Nor can I imagine that the destruction of those men, if they really had been
in our power, could any way have contributed either to the profit or further
advancement of the Interest of that Country, since the Act of Settlement of the
Crown of England upon their present Majesty's, very deliberately provides, That
no Papist, or any one marrying a Papist, shall for ever hereafter be capable to
inherit the Imperial Crowns of these Kingdoms. And the late swearing Act
relating to Ireland, entitled, An Act for abrogating the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy in Ireland, and appointing other new ones, are both very
considerable Advantages to the Protestant Interest in that Kingdom; and no
doubt, it will be easier for the Government to observe, and keep their part of
those Articles, than for the Irish themselves to do their duty; which will be
seen in time; and there are other convenient Maxims to be observed; which,
being things out of my way, I do not pretend to consider them; what I have to
offer upon this Head, being rather Matter of Fact than Argument, and that by
comparing the state of the Irish at Lymerick, and other Places of the Kingdom,
at the making of these Articles; with their Condition at their surrendering up
all in the former Wars.

In the former Wars of Ireland, the City of Lymerick was surrendered to Ireton
on the 29th. of October 1651, upon severe Articles; the Governor, the Titular
Bishop of Lymerick, and twelve more being excepted by name, and some of these
were afterward executed; but during the Siege, the Irish lost 5000 men, of
whom the Plague destroyed many more than the Sword; 1300 only marched out, and
about 4000 Irish remained within. Cox, Vol. 2. p. 69.

Then Galway was surrendered on the 12th. of May following, to Sir Charles
Coot; and on the 27th. of June, Major General Ludlow frighted the Garrison of
Ross in Kerry, into a Surrender, by a small Vessel that he was bringing over
the Hills to put into the Lough that surrounds Ross-Castle. Rosscommon and
James-Town had surrendered to Col. Reynolds on the 27th. of April before, and
Inchylough surrendered to Col. Zanchy on the first of August, at what time the
Lords of Westmeath and Muskery, O Connor Roe, Sir Francis Talbot, Sir William
Dungan, and, several others submitted upon those Conditions, That they should
abide a Trial for the Murders committed in the beginning of the Rebellion, and
those that only assisted in the War, were to forfeit two Thirds of their
Estates, and to be banished.

And what I would further observe, is this, That when the General Assembly of
the Popish Clergy, and others, at Loughreagh, desired the then Marquess of
Ormend's leave to treat with the Enemy for the Nation in general, at the
Surrender of Galway, Cromwell's Army positively refused it; being resolved not
to admit of any Treaty for the whole; but those that would capitulate, should
do it only for themselves, or the Towns and Places they respectively belonged
to: By which means though the Town of Galway was the last considerable one that
was surrendered; being on the 12th. of May 1652. yet it was the 26th. of
September 1653. before it was declared That the Rebels were subdued, and the
Rebellion appeased and ended. And though His Majesty's Proclamation about the
ending of this present War, was nigh six Months after the Surrender of
Lymerick, yet this was deferred, only with respect to the poverty of the
Country, in forgiving the Kingdom half a years Quit-Rents, and had not the
least relation to any appearance of a further Disturbance, as appears by the
Proclamation it self.

Now if Lymerick had been no stronger Town when we last besieged it, than it
was some time after the first Conquest of Ireland, when Earl Reymond,
Son-in-Law to Strongbow, and General of the Army, with David Walsh, and others,
swam into the King's Island; who taking the City (without any sort of Cannon)
and plundering it, they left a Garrison of their own men there; or indeed if it
had been in no better condition than in the former Wars, when there appeared
nothing like Works without the Walls themselves; or if the Irish People were no
better skilled in Arms now, than they have been heretofore, even in the late
times, being most of them rather a confused Rabble, than any thing that
deserved the Name of an Army; then it had been a Reflection upon an Army so
well disciplined, and in so good order as ours was, not to have humbled them
without any Terms: But besides the natural strength of its Situation, Lymerick
is now improved by Art to that degree, that it is very much stronger than it
was when we laid Siege to it the former year, the Enemy with extraordinary
diligence and industry having since that, cast up very strong new Works round
the Irish Town with great Improvements in the King's Island, and elsewhere. And
the Irish had not only the Advantages of being trained up to the use of Arms by
my Lord Tyrconnel, and serving in an Army for some years past, but several of
them have been abroad in foreign Service, besides the being for the most part
in Action during the three Campagnes in Ireland; and Custom it self, is, no
doubt of it, one Point of Courage. But those who ever read the Story of
Noteburg, will not wonder at this Capitulation; this (they say) is a Town built
in an Island at the Entrance of the Lake Lagoda, made by the Muscovites, and
encompassed with a strong W^ll against the Attempts of the Suedes; it standing
upon their Frontiers: This the Suedes took under the Command of James De la
Guard, but not till the Extremities of the Siege; and a contageous Disease had
consumed the whole Garrison to two Men, who yet made a very advantageous
Capitulation. vid. Ambassadors of Hollands Travels into Muscovy and Russia.

And as to the Irish, it must needs be acknowledged that they never had
formerly so fair a Pretext as now; nor had they ever been so unanimous (since
in the late Wars they had at least three different Armies on Foot at the same
time) they had now also the Assistance and Encouragement of France, which is
without question at present one of the most powerful Interests in the World;
and if they had held out till the following Winter, they must needs have much
fatigued our Army, by continual Alarms and Watchings, besides other
Difficulties that would have attended us in a Blockade, in which there is no
subsisting without continual Supplies of Money, Ammunition, and Victuals; and
especially near such a place as Limerick then was, the Country thereabouts
being ruined and exhausted in continuing the Seat of War for two Campaigns; so
that abstracting from the deepness of the Soil, and the sharpness of the
Winter, as it afterward proved, unless we had been full as carefully supplied
with Necessaries as ever we had been formerly, the whole Design had been still
in hazard, besides the loss of Time and Treasure.

And though we had passed the River; yet we were still as far from entering the
Town as ever. What might have been done some time before, I am no competent
Judge of; but since the Irish had it still in their Power to give us the Town,
or keep it to themselves, I see no Reason why they ought not to make a Bargain
for it, and expect the performance of their Contract, which Their Majesty's
have been graciously pleased to ratify under the Great Seal of England.

It may rationally be here demanded, why the Irish would treat with us for the
Town, since they had full as many Foot within as we had in our Army without;
and and notwithstanding all the Stories told us by Deserters about the scarcity
of Provisions, they had a quantity of the finest French Biscuit I ever tasted,
sufficient for the whole Garrison for two Months; some of which I saw; and
Commissary-General Aspole assured my self and some other Friends, that they had
the rest: Upon which I asked him the reason of giving us the Town? And his
Reply was, That if they had been driven by necessity to yield, they must then
have accepted what Terms we had pleased to give them; but since they were not,
they had stood upon such as were for the Advantage of their whole Party. But
the Truth of it is, the Irish were either weary of the War, or jealous of one
another, or it may be both; it being no ill Policy on our side to foment their
differences, and make their private Quarrels advance our Public Service. And
as for what happened at this Juncture, it is certain that the French
Lieutenant-Generals were jealous of the Irish betraying, or, at least,
forsaking them: And it is without question they used their Interest, in
persuading the Irish to hold out till Relief came; for they knew, considering
all things, it had been very improper for us to endeavor the forcing the Town
by a Breach. But I imagine Monsieur D'Vssone's Case now was much the same, as
that of Don John de Aquila at Kinsale, in the Year, 1601. who finding the Town
was like to be lost; and that instead of conquering a Kingdom, his Men and
himself were like to become a Prey to the Enemy: He then desires a parley with
the Lord-Deputy, wherein he mentions, that having found his Lordship, though a
sharp and powerful Antagonist, yet an honorable and generous Enemy; and the
Irish not only weak and barbarous, but (as he feared) perfidious Friends, he
therefore desired to depart upon such Terms, befitting such Men of War, as are
not by necessity enforced to receive Conditions, but willingly induced for just
Respects to disengage themselves, and to relinquish a People by whom their King
and Master had been so notoriously abused, if not betrayed. Pacata Hib. p. 241.
And its probable, that upon some such Motives as those, Monsieur D'Vssone
consented to the Irish Capitulations, though we heard afterward that the
French King was so far from thanking him for it, that after some public
Indignities he sent him to the Bastile.

I humbly therefore am of Opinion, that the Lords-Justices and the General did
nothing in this Affair without Command, or, at least, Instructions from Their
Majesty's; and that it was neither inconsistent with the Rules of Prudence or
Policy, to grant the Irish what Terms they did, which for the future may help
to moderate the Passions of some sort of People.

Nor were the Lords-Justices Proclamations for the bringing in of the Rapparees
and others, not included in the Articles less seasonable, since by this means
the Kingdom became so calm and quiet all on a sudden, that within one Fortnight
after our Army was removed from Limerick, a Man might have traveled alone
through that whole Kingdom, and that with as great Safety as through any part
of England; but if this had been delayed, and the reducing those Scamperers
attempted altogether by force, pray let it be remembered how securely the
Banditto's of Italy have November 1691.
lived between the Power of the King of Spain, and that of the Pope, and how
many Men in all Countries have prospered in doing mischief; but especially in
Ireland where there are so many Difficulties to march an Army, and the Irish so
well acquainted with the Boggs and other Fastnesses, that it is impossible to
beat them sooner out of one place than they will outstrip you to another, being
by constant practice extremely well skilled in making use of those Advantages;
but the aforesaid Articles, and Proclamations have remedied all those
Inconveniences, and that Kingdom never enjoyed a more profound Peace than at
present, since every Insurrection when it is subdued, makes an Addition to the
Power of the Government.

But I Am afraid a good Cause may suffer by ill management; and therefore as to
my business. Toward the latter end of October, we had an Account of his
Majesty's safe Arrival in England from Flanders, and that the English
Parliament met on the 22 d. according to their Prorogation.

November the first, all the Irish march out of the English Town of Limerick,
and our Men take possession of it. The last of the Irish quit the English Town.
A great many of the Irish were shipped in the River, some on Board the French
Fleet, and others in some of our Transport-Ships: The number shipped in the
River, and that marched toward Cork this last time, is said to be 5650. But
those that marched by Land, several of them deserted upon the Road,
notwithstanding the care of the Irish Officers to secure them; for they begun
to be sensible of the kind Treatment of those that were already returned home,
and were sorry to quit a Country they saw already so peaceable. The Rose of
Chester going down the Shannon with 120 of them drowned.
120 Irish on Board, was overset amongst the Rocks, and all the Irish drowned
though the Seamen were most of them saved. The French Lieutenant General took
this very ill, as if done on purpose by the Master, and would needs have him
tried for his Life for it; but it appearing to be a perfect Accident, he was
satisfied.

And now the Irish Horse, as many as were left, were Their Horse shipped at Cork.
shipped off at Cork, and with them Daniel Butts, Esquire Deputy Commissary-General
of the Danish Forces, to receive their Bills of Exchange, and to see the
Transport-Ships returned. November the 3 d. the General came from Kilkenny The
General goes to Dublin.
to Dublin, being met and complemented on the Road by the Nobility, Judges and
Gentry, Col. Byerley's Horse, and the Prince of Hesse's Foot, with the
City-Militia, both Horse and Foot, being in Arms to receive him. The Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs and Citizens being all in their Formalities, the
Canons discharged several times, and all the Demonstrations of Joy that could
be made upon such an extraordinary Occasion.

Next Morning His Excellency was waited upon by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen,
and the other Citizens, the Recorder Tho. Coote, Esquire in the Name of the City
making a Speech to this effect.

That the City thoroughly sensible of the Dangers that lately The Recorder's
Speech to him.
threatened them from an implacable Enemy, that aimed at nothing less than the
total Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and English Interest in this
Kingdom to the tyrannical and slavish Government of the French King. And
finding themselves by your Excellencies Courage and Conduct, not only delivered
from those their just Fears, but placed in view of a lasting Peace and
Security. And being zealous to express as much of their Gratitude as their
present Circumstances will permit, they are unanimously come to congratulate
your Excellency on your great Success; and to assure your Excellency, that though
they have many Grievances to place to the Account of that Enemy you have so
gloriously subdued; yet there are none they resent more, than the having
rendered them unable to raise to your Excellencies Memory those Monuments your
Merits and their Obligations challenge; yet what will be wanting in Brass and
Marble, they will endeavor to make up by their perpetual Applications to serve
your Excellency. And should the rest of the World be so far ungrateful, as to
forget what your Excellency has done for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and public Liberty of Europe, this City will, while one stone stands
upon another in it, perpetuate to Posterity the glorious Actions you have
performed this Campaign.

To which the General made return, that he was extremely sensible of the
Honors and Kindness the City had tendered him, which he would upon all
occasions acknowledge.

Next Day, being the Anniversary of His Majesty's Birth, it was observed with
all the Splendor and Greatness imaginable, my Lord Justice Conningsby
entertaining the General with most of the Nobility at the Castle of Dublin. And
the Day following being Gunpowder Treason, had its usual Observations; where,
at the end of the Service appointed for the Day, the Baron de Ronsill, a
Flemish Lord, who has lived these five or six years past in this Kingdom, made
a solemn Renunciation of the Romish, and Profession of the Protestant Religion,
and was received at Christ-Church by the Archbishop of Dublin. After Sermon,
the General and State being entertained by my Lord Chancellor Porter, the Night
concluding with Bonefires, and other Demonstrations of Joy.

An Order was directed to Abraham Tarner, Esquire Commissary-General Orders for
Mustering ou^ Army.
of the Musters, to take a Muster of all their Majesty's Forces, both English
and Foreign, now in their Majesty's Pay in this Kingdom, dated November. 5th. by
which Muster all their Accounts were to be stated, and satisfaction given them
for their Arrears of Pay due to them since their first coming into that
Country. November the 9th, Major General Talmash who had full Power and
Authority to transact all things necessary for the Transporting the Irish, and
now having seen them all from Limerick, Major General Talmash leaves Limerick.
and the Town put into as good a Condition as the shortness of the time would
allow, he left the place and went to Dublin, and from thence to England,
Lieutenant General Mackay being shipped off some Days before.

And now greatest part of Their Majesty's Forces in this Kingdom being at
liberty to be employed elsewhere, Orders for the Danes to Ship off.
as there was occasion, and His Majesty giving directions to that purpose, the
General sent the following Letter.

To the Duke of Wirtenberg Commander in Chief of the Danish Forces.
HAving received His Majesty's directions for the Embarking with the first
opportunity the Danish Forces employed in Their Service, within this Kingdom,
under your Grace's Command, I desire that your Grace will please to cause the
several Battalions of Foot of the said Forces to March forthwith from their
respective Quarters to Cork and Kinsale, and Embark there upon such Ships of
War, and Vessels of Burden, as shall be appointed to take them on Board, and
Sail with them for the Downs, where they will receive further Orders from Their
Majesty's as to their Transportation to Ostend: And of this your Grace will
please not to fail.

Given at the Castle of Dublin the 10th. of November, 1691. Bar. de Ginckell.


November the 16th, my Lord Lisburn's and my Lord Drogheda's Regiments Marched
from Limerick, lying Encamped without the Town ever since the Army lest that
place, the former went toward Ross, and the other toward the North, the poor
Men enduring a great deal of Hunger and Hardship in so long a March.

November the 21st, Colonel Byerley's and Colonel Boucour's Regiments of Horse
were Shipped off at Dublin for England, and near this time Colonel Gordon O
Neal's, and Colonel Phelim O Neal's Regiments being Encamped in the County of
Kerry, as part of the Irish designed for France, they came over to our side, as
several others did daily, being every Day more and more satisfied with the
Indulgence of the Government toward them.

The 23 d the Barbados and Virginia Fleets which came in August and September
last, Sailed from Kinsale for England, under the Convoy of Twelve Men of War,
but whether they wanted a Wind all this while, (which seldom happens in that
Country,) or that they now took this opportunity of a Cessation, others are
more Competent Judges than I shall pretend to. Colonel Brewer's and Colonel
Herbert's Regiments Marched from Galway to Kinsale there to be Embarked. And
Two French Men of War, with some of their Ships of Burden, and the last of our
Transport Ships in the River, being in all Thirty Sail, went thence for France.

November the 25th, An Order was Signed for the Demolishing Fortifications at
Mullingar and Ballymore demolished.
the Fortifications at Mullingar and Ballymore, the Irish Soldiers Quartered
in the Neighboring Garrisons being ordered to assist when required. And
several Complaints being made to the Lords Justices, and the General, of the
Irregular and Arbitrary Proceedings of some Officers and Soldiers in their
Quarters, another Order was Signed for the holding frequent Court-Martials at
Limerick, Galway, and Athlone, for the Redressing of such Inconveniences, and
satisfying the Parties aggrieved.

Another Order was likewise Signed to break Six of the youngest Troops of
Colonel Woolsley's Regiment, according to directions from England.

The 28th. Col. Hales's Regiment of Foot, and Col. Langston's Horse came to
Dublin in order to be shipped for England: And now the Danes are got to Cork
and Kinsale to be embarked also, according to the former Order sent to the Duke
of Wirtenberg. In their March they committed some Irregularities, knowing they
were to leave the Kingdom without hopes of ever seeing of it more; though, to do
them Justice, they behaved themselves more mildly than Northern Soldiers
generally do; especially at their going off, who often prove the Ruin of that
Country who employ them. And toward the Close of this Month, some Ships arrive
from England at Sligo with Supplies of Provisions, and other Necessaries very
much wanted before in that part of the Country.

December, 1691.
Tuesday, December the 1st. Colonel Monopovillon's Regiment of Horse came to
Dublin; and on the 3 d. Colonel Hales's Regiment set sail for the North of
England.

The Lords Justices, and the General, being sensible that both the Country and
the Soldiers were at a loss, by reason a good part of the Money designed for
the Armies Subsistence, was forced to be given to the Danes, the Irish, and
other Public Uses; they therefore Order a Proclamation to be Published to the
effect following.

Charles Porter, Tho. Coningesby, Baron De Ginckel.
WHereas there are several Sums due from the Army A Proclamation.
to Persons in this Kingdom, for their Subsistence in their Quarters, as also
from the said Persons to Their Majesty's for Excise, and other Branches of the
Revenue, which Debts or Arrears the said Persons are not able to pay, by reason
of the Debts due to them from the Army; We do therefore require and authorize
the several Collectors of Their Majesty's Revenue, to give Discharges to all
such Persons as are indebted to Their Majesty's upon any Branch of the Revenue,
or to their Assigns, for so much of their Arrears respectively as shall be
equal to the Sums hereafter certified to them by the Commissioners of Their
Majesty's Revenue, to be deducted and stopped for the said Persons from the Pay
of the Army: And We do hereby direct the Commissioners for stating the Accounts
of the Army, to transmit Certificates to the said Commissioners of the Revenue,
of all such Sums as they have stopped, or shall stop from the Pay of the Army,
writing therein each Person's Name and Place of Abode, for whom any part of the
said Deductions have been made, and particular Sums stopped for him: And for so
doing, this shall be to the said Collectors a sufficient Warrant and Discharge
on their Accounts, as also to the said Commissioners appointed for stating the
Accounts of the Army, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Their Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Third of December 1691. By
Command of the Lords-Justices, and the Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's
Forces. Geo. Clarke.

December the 5th. Lieut. General Ginckel, being accompanied The General goes
for England.
with the Lords Justices, and most of the Nobility and Gentry in and about
Dublin, went to Ringsend, and there taking leave, he went on board the
Monmouth-Yacht, which sailed next Morning for England.

The 6th. several of the Transport-Ships that went with The Transport-Ships
return from France.
the first of the Irish Forces to France, returned to Cork, having Landed the
Men at Breast; and the Week following about Twenty more came back to Dublin;
they all spoke well of the French Treatment of them in accommodating them with
several Necessaries which they extremely wanted; but that the Irish did not
find themselves so very welcome as they expected to have been; though at their
Landing an Express was sent to the late King to St. Germains, to give him an
Account of it; he seemed to be very well pleased with their coming, and sent
the following Letter to Lieut. General Sheldon, then the Officer in Chief with
the Irish.

JAMES Rex.

HAving been informed of the Capitulation and Surrender of Limerick, and of the
other Places which Remained King James's Letter to the Irish.
to us in our Kingdom of Ireland; and of the necessities which forced the Lords
Justices, and the General Officers of our Forces thereunto: We will not defer
to let you know, and the rest of the Officers that came along with you, that we
are extremely Satisfied with your and their Conduct, and of the Valor of the
Soldiers during the Siege, but most Particularly, of your and their
Declaration and Resolution to come and Serve where we are: And we assure you,
and Order you, to assure both Officers and Soldiers that are come along with
you, that we shall never forget this Act of Loyalty, nor fail, when in a
Capacity, to give them, above others, Particular Marks of our Favor. In the
mean time, you are to Inform them, that they are to Serve under our Command,
and by our Commissions; and if we find that a Considerable number is come with
the Fleet, it will induce Us to go Personally to see them, and Regiment them;
Our Brother the King of France, has already given Orders to Cloth them, and
furnish them with all necessaries, and to give them Quarters of Refreshment: So
We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at St. German the 27th. of November, 1691.

But how good soever the Late King's Intentions toward Their Reception in
France.
his Irish might be, yet it was, and is, the French King who Orders every thing
in his own Dominions as he Pleases; nor had the French any good opinion of the
Irish at their Landing, as appeared by the Quarters of Refreshment assigned
them, which were at first only the Lanes and Hedges about Breast, not admitting
any of them into the City; and at the same time this Letter was sent from the
Late King, there came Orders from his Brother of France, to Reduce all or most
of the Irish Officers, the Colonels to Captains, and the Captains to
Lieutenants, and Ensigns and the Subalterns, to Sergeants or private Sentinels;
and no wonder, for, what ever the Irish might hope for before their departure,
yet it was very improbable, that they, who only were put into such Posts in
Ireland upon point of necessity, because they could get no better, should be
continued so in France, which is one of the most Warlike and Refined Nations in
the World; however, this ill Treatment (as the Irish took it to be) did so
exasperate them, that several would gladly have returned into Ireland, and
offered largely for their Passage, but were prevented by the strict Guards that
were set upon them: But they wrote to several of their Friends in Ireland,
giving an Account of their severe usage, which made several Desert from my Lord
Lucan that were not as yet gone, as more would have done, had he not soon after
this Advice put them on Shipboard.

One of those Letters sent from France after their first Landing; since it
gives a full Account of their Reception and Usage, I think it worth my Pains to
Transcribe.

SIR,
NEver People that left their All, to come hither to Serve, were so meanly
received, as those miserable Irish were here; they have been much longer than
necessary in Disimbarking them, and will be at least Three days more, though
the Intendant has been pressed with great earnestness to take them a Shore;
when they are Landed they lie in the Fields a Night or two at least, before
they are sent into their Quarters, and then they get neither Money nor Clothes,
and but little of any thing else. The Major Generals are made Colonels, the
Colonels Captains, the Majors Lieutenants, and the Captains Sergeants, and many
of them but Private Men, insomuch, that as I pass along the Streets, the
Soldiers wish they had died in Ireland before they came here, and many of the
Officers express themselves to the same purpose, and are extremely dejected and
melancholy; some of them hope this will be Regulated, though I see no great
reason for it, for this day there came a frivolous Complaint against some of
Colonel Nugent 's Men, and the Intendant threatened to break him for it; and I
do not doubt but he will be as good as his word in a short time. For upon all
occasions he uses their Officers with the greatest Insolence and Contempt
imaginable. Some of them having complained and told him they hoped to have been
advanced here, rather than thus reformed; he told them, if they did not like
it, they might go back, the Ships were in the Harbor that brought them; though
at the same time the Owners on Board the Transport Ships were ordered not to
take any of them on Board again, upon pain of Death. This is all matter of
Fact, and a great deal more such usages they meet with, too tedious to relate,
etc.


This News spreading abroad in the Country, on Several desert that were not yet
Shipped off.
Tuesday the 8th of December Colonel Mackdermot's and Colonol Brian Oneal's
Regiments, and a day or two after, Colonel Foelix Oneal's, who were part of the
Irish Forces designed for France, they quitted their design, and refused to go
on Board, returning to Clare, where some of them delivered up their Arms to
Colonel Tiffin, and went homewards, in order to their living peaceably in the
Country, and the rest were subsisted as the other Irish Forces were.

Those that were now Embarquing had not much The Irish severely dealt withal at
their Embarquing.
better usage on this side the Water, for a great many of them having Wives and
Children, they made what shift they could to desert, rather than leave their
Families behind to starve, which my Lord Lucan and Major General Waughop
perceiving, they Publish a Declaration, That as many of the Irish as had a mind
to it, should have Liberty to Transport their Families along with themselves.
And accordingly a vast Rabble of all sorts were brought to the Waterside, when
the Major General, pretending to Ship the Soldiers in order, according to
their Lists, they first carried all the Men on Board, and many of the Women, at
the second return of the Boat for the Officers, catching hold to be carried on
Board, were dragged off, and through fearfulness, losing their hold, were
drowned; but others who held faster had their fingers cut off, and so perished
in sight of their Husbands, or Relations, though those of them that did get over
would make but a sad Figure, if they were admitted to go to the late Queen's
Court at St. German.

The Sheriffs for the several Counties in Ireland were pricked, and the same
day all the Irish Prisoners that were in Newgate in Dublin, were released; and
my Lord Lucan finding that he had Ships enough for all the Irish that were like
to go with him, the Number that went before, and these Shipped at this time,
being according to the best computation about 12000 of all sorts, he Signs the
following Releasement.

WHereas, by the Articles of Limerick, Lieutenant My Lord Lucan 's Release to
the General.
General Ginckell, Commander in Chief of the English Army, did engage himself
to furnish ten thousand Tun of Shipping for the Transporting of such of the
Irish Forces to France, as were willing to go thither; and to facilitate their
passage, to add four thousand Tun more in case the French Fleet did not come to
this Kingdom to take off part of those Forces; and whereas the French Fleet has
been upon the Coast, and carried away some of the said Forces, and the
Lieutenant General has provided Ships for as many of the rest as are willing to
go as aforesaid. I do hereby delare that the said Lieutenant General is
released from any Obligation he lay under from the said Articles, to provide
Vessels for that purpose; and do quit and renounce all farther Claim and
Pretension on this Account, etc. Witness my Hand, this 8th of December, 1691.

Witnesses, Lucan. Mark Talbot. F. H. de la Forest Susannel.


December the 20th, Colonel Langston's, and Colonel Monopouillon's Horse, and
the Prince of Hess's Foot Shipped at Dublin, for England; and Colonel
Neuhewson's Horse, and the Brandeuburgh Foot marched into Dublin. The 22 d my
Lord Lucan, and the rest of the Irish Great Officers went on Board the
Transport Ships, leaving Hostages at Cork for the return of the said All the
Irish go off, except the Hostages.
Ships. And at the same time, Colonel Hasting's, Sir David Collier's, Colonel
Brewer's, and Colonel Herbert's Regiments were Shipped for England; the
Government taking all possible Care to Discharge the Kingdom of both Armies,
who had already brought it into a very low Condition,

December the 24th, an Order was given out to the Comissary General of the
Musters, or his Deputies, to An Order for Mustering all the Irish that came
over to us.
take an exact Muster of all the Irish Forces now in Arms, that had come over
to our side since the beginning of the Truce at Limerick, and they had Quarters
allotted them in several places of the Kingdom; but behaved themselves after
their usual rate; for though they had Changed their King, yet not their Customs;
for they Taxed the People where they Quartered, as they pleased themselves;
Imprisoned several, and Released others as they saw good; forced The Irish very
unruly in their Quarters.
the Markets, and did a great many other Illegal Tricks: Insomuch, that
Complaint being made to the Lords Justices of those Disorders, they writ a
Letter to my Lord Kingston, December 31. Desiring his Lordship to do them, the
Country, and His Majesty what Service he could, in suppressing those
Irregularities, and to have the Court Martials that were Ordered in several
Places, put in Execution.

January the 6th, there being no further use of a Marching Hospital in this
Kingdom, and the same The Marching-Hospital broke.
being expensive to the Government, an Order was given out for the discharging
several Physicians, and others, that attended on the same. And now Their
Majesty's Pleasure being known about the Irish, Orders and Instructions were
directed to Colonel Foulk, Colonel St. John's, and Brigadeer Villers, to view
and discharge all the Irish Forces, except 1400 Choice Men, the form of their
Commissions for it, ran thus.

By the Lords Justices of Ireland.
WHEREAS Their Majesty's are pleased to Direct, Orders, and Instructions for
breaking the Irish Forces.
that there be an immediate Regulation of such of the Regiments, whether Horse,
Foot, or Dragoons, of the late Irish Army as came in, and submitted to Their
Obedience. And We being well assured of the Care, Diligence, and
Circumspection, as well as of the Loyalty, and Readiness of Colonel John Foulks
to do Their Majesty's good and faithful Service, do hereby appoint him to make
the said Regulation, and Reform, etc.

The Irish being by the said Instrument commanded January. 1692.
to obey him, and our own Troops and Militia to observe his Directions in their
Marching from place to place, as he saw occasion. The said Colonel Foulk and
the other Officers aforesaid, had Directions to assure the Irish, both Officers
and Soldiers, of Their Majesty's Gracious Disposition toward them, though the
present State of their Affairs would not admit of any more than 1400 Men to be
employed at this time, and those to be divided into two Battalions, Commanded
by Colonel Wilson and Balderock O Donnel. And that the Officers that were not
willing to go home, might attend those two Battalions, where they would have
Subsistence till better provided for. As for those that returned to their
Habitations, and desired to live peaceably at home, if they were Soldiers, and
had their Arms, nine Shillings a piece was ordered them; but if without Arms,
they had six Shillings. The Officers had a Fortnights Subsistence each, to bear
their Charges home. These Orders and Instructions bore Date the 11th and 12th
of January, pursuant to which, as soon as it could conveniently be done,
Colonel Wilson's, Colonel O Ryley's, Colonel Nugent's, Lord Iveigh's, Lord
Dillon's, Colonel Cormack Oneal's, Colonel Foelix Oneal's, Colonel Geoghagan's,
Colonel O Donnel's, Colonel Rourk's, Colonel Oxborough's, Colonel Lutteril's
Horse; Colonel Tho. Burk's Troop of Horse, Sir Colonel John Burk's Troop
Briggadier Clifford's Draggoons, Colonel Mackgenni's Draggons, were all broke
by Colonel Foulk. In Munster also Colonel Corbet's Horse were broke by
Brigadier Villers. And Colonel Mackdermot's Foot, Colonel Bryan Oneal's,
Colonel Rob. Purcel's, and Lieutenant Colonel Cahan's were broke by Colonel St.
John's, only two Battalions being drawn out of the whole, as is said, and had
Quarters assigned them in the Barrony of Muskerry. These Irish had the Name of
a great many January. 1692.
Regiments, but scarce an hundred Men in each, one with another, for they were
thin at best; and several of them were gone into France, having the Names of
Regiments there also. But after some time, all the Irish not laying down their
Arms, an Order was directed to Sir Francis Hambleton, Governor of Donegal, to
break some of O Donnel's Men then in that Country, which was done accordingly.

There happened about this time two Violent Flashes of Lightning and Claps of
Thunder at Kinsale; by the latter of which the Portsmouth Frigatt suffered
great damage, having her Main To and Main Yard broke to pieces, and the Main
Mast split for twelve foot downwards, breaking throw the Larboard side of the
Ship twelve foot in length, and did some other mischief, tho only one Man was
hurt by it.

Nigh the same time the Officers belonging to the Train of Artillery. The
Waggoners and others of that Society were broke, as being no farther useful in
this Kingdom. And

January 23, being the first day of the Term, the The Oaths taken according to
the new Act of Parliament.
Lords Justices came to the Court of King's Bench, and there took the Oaths to
Their Majesty's, and Subscribed the Declaration required by the late Act of
Parliament in England, as did also several of the Nobility: Whence the Lord
Chancellor returned to his High Court of Chancery, where the Judges of the
several Courts, Masters of Chancery, King's Council, the Lawyers, and several
other Persons of different Qualities, and Employments, took the prescribed
Oaths, etc. For the Act of Parliament being Reprinted at Dublin, and spread
abroad by the Lords Justices Order, and requiring all Persons whatever, in any
Employment, within Thirty Miles of that City, to take the said Oath, and
subscribe the Declaration before the end of Hillary Term, January. 1692.
and no exception being made, or excuse allowed for Men's being Sick, or
otherwise disabled, several were brought up to Town with great difficulty, and
the Courts daily thronged, 'till the Term was over.

Great quantities of Wheat, and other Grain, were ordered from Cork, and
Kingsale, to furnish the Stores of Limerick, that part of the Country being
now very much put to it for want of Bread, as being the seat of War this two
years past. The 25th Colonel Mathew's Dragoons were Shipped at Belfast, as Sir
John Lanier's Horse had been some time before; and on the 27th, my Lord
Portland's Horse were Shipped at Passage, near Waterford.

A Declaration was Published by the Lords Justices, A Declaration, forbidding
the buying Debenters, or Arrears
forbidding any Officer, Clerk, or other Person whatever, belonging to,
employed in, or depending on their Majesty's Treasury, either by himself, or
any other, directly, or indirectly, to buy any Arrears, or Debenters due to any
Officer, or Soldier, or any other Persons who have been employed in Their
Majesty's Service during this present War, upon pain of losing the benefit of
such Contract, or Agreement, as also of being dismissed their Employments, and
of being declared incapable of being Employed in the Treasury for the future:
The buying of such Debenters being adjudged dishonorable to Their Majesty's
Service, and Government, and to the loss of the persons to whom the same are
payable.

And nigh the same time, another Order was sent Another Order to turn out all
the Irish Papists out of our Regiments.
out, Commanding all Colonels, and others in Their Majesty's Army, who had
entertained any Irish in their respective Regiments, Troops, or Companies,
forthwith to dismiss them, and not to keep any one Irish Papist under their
Command, upon pain of having January. 1692.
such Regiments broke, where any such were found.

A great Frost began January the 19th, and is now so violent, that Multitudes
of the poor People, (and especially of the Irish) perish for Cold: The Lords
Justices, and Council, very Charitably order all the Poor then in and about the
City of Dublin, to be taken up, and put into sveral Convenient Houses, being in
all 640 odd, who were provided for with Meat, and Fire; without which Care,
several hundreds must have perished in the Streets: And yet a great many of
them had been so used to that Trade of Begging, that the being provided for
with Necessaries, and Confined to a Place, was uneasy to them; so that several
stole out, and fell to Begging again. But this Charitable Care was not taken in
other parts of the Kingdom; so that a Man might every where see a great many
Objects of Pity, and Misery, and they continue so to this very day.

Some time before this, the Danes were Shipped, as is said, having four Men of
War, and 46 other Vessels to Transport them; but being driven back by contrary
Winds, and kept in the Harbor by stress of weather, a new supply of Provisions
was Ordered them. Two Proclamations were Published at Dublin; one Commanding
all Persons that were not qualified by the Articles of Limerick, and Galway,
(which were Noblemen, and Gentlemen, who were Housekeepers, and have Estates
of Freehold, of one Hundred Pounds a year; which by the said Proclamation was
declared to be the qualification of the Persons Comprised in the said
Articles.) to deliver up their Arms of all sorts, before the Tenth of March,
and if they failed therein, to be prosecuted with the utmost severity of Law.
And whosoever should discover any Fire Arms so detained, after the 10th of
March, should have Ten Shillings Reward, February. 1692.
and Five Shillings for every discovery of other Arms, to be paid him by the
Sheriff of the City, or Justice of the Peace, to whom such Discovery should be
made; the same to be repaid by the Sheriff of the County, and allowed in his
Accounts in the Exchequer.

And the Persons in whose Custody such Arms are found, shall lose the benefit
of the said Articles, and be bound over to the next Assizes, or Sessions which
shall first happen. And all Persons who had Arms before the first day of
November last, being not qualified to keep them, and shall not give a
satisfactory Account how they have disposed of them, shall be looked upon as
guilty of a Contempt against the said Proclamation. And the Sheriffs of the
respective Counties were to give an Account from time to time of what Arms were
brought in to the Clerk of the Council, or his Deputy. And that all Persons
that were qualified to keep Arms, might wear the same, without being affronted,
or have the same taken from them on any pretense; each Person was to apply
himself to the Lords Justices for a License for that purpose, which was to be
granted without any Fee or Reward whatever.

Which Proclamation was to be published three Market-days successsively, in
each Town in Ireland, and then affixed.

Dated the 4th of February. 1691/2.
The other Proclamation was to forbid all Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, and other Magistrates whatever to presume so far upon their
Authority, as to meddle with the Property, Right, Title, or Possession of the
Estate or Goods of any of Their Majesty's Subjects, other than as by due Course
of Law they are required, or can justify. By which Proclamation, some of the
Irish that had been wronged, were set to rights, and satisfied; though they were
not so forward in obeying February. 1692.
the former, in delivering up their Arms, a very small return being made
through the whole Kingdom, they keeping as yet some thousands of all sorts of
Arms still concealed, which I hope will effectually be taken care of in time.

The weather was now so violent, that the Adventure of London was cast away
going to Dublin, and several other Ships lost in and about that Bay. And the
Swallow, one of Their Majesty's Ships, was forced a ground nigh Charles-Fort at
Kingsale, and there foundred, though all the Men were saved, except two.

February the 12th, John Stone Esquire being dead, and Captain South employed
elsewhere in the Army, a new Commission was granted, putting in their Places
Colonel Foulks, and William Palmer Esquires, Commissioners, for stating the
Accounts of the Army. And nigh the same time, the Commissary General was sent
into England, with all the Muster Rolls.

February 16. the weather breaking up, part of my Lord Oxford's Horse driven
back by stress of weather, Lieutenant General Ginckel's, and Major General
Ruvigney's Horse, with the Princess Anns Foot, were all Shipped for England.
The same day Lieutenant General Scravemore went on Board, as did Brigadier
Leveson in a day or two after. Colonel Coy's Horse also are Shipped off at
Belfast, and the Garrison of Athlone, that had been very uneasy to the Officers
and Soldiers all Winter, by reason they had no shelter, except some small
Hutts of their own making, was now relieved.

February the 20th, the Commissioners of the Ordnance Arms and Ammunition sent
for England.
had an Order directed to them, to send all the Stores of Ammunition, and other
Stores of War that could be spared out of the Magazines for England, to be
employed elsewhere in Their Majesty's Service; and accordingly March. 1692.
a vast quantity of Arms and other Utensils of War were Shipped off.

February 28, Captain Townsend of the Earl of Meath's Regiment, took eight or
ten French Men Prisoners, who had come a Shore from a Privateer nigh
Castle-Haven; and we had an Account from England that His Majesty had Created
Lieutenant General Ginckel Baron of Aghrim, and Earl of Athlone.

February 26, An Order was directed to Colonel Foulk to break my Lord George
Hambleton's Regiment which was done accordingly in some days after; 150 'of the
Men being sent for England, and the rest entertained in the Earl of Drogheda's,
Brigadier Stuart's, Sir Henry Ballasis, and Colonel Foulk's Regiments.

March the first, a Pass was given out for a Ship to The Hostages go from Cork
to France.
go to France with the Hostages left at Cork, and other sick Officers and
Soldiers, according to the Articles of Limerick. And on the third, another
Order was granted to Colonel Foulk for the raising five Companies of 100 Men in
each, of the Irish, all the subaltern Officers to be of those Reformed in
Colonel Wilson's and O Donnel's Battalions; and the whole to be commanded by my
Lord Iveigh, and employed in the Emperor's Service. And March the fifth, an
Order was directed to Mr. Foliot Sherigly, chief Deputy Commissary, to Disband
the Troop of Provoes, which was done accordingly.

March the 17th. Lieutenant General Ruvigny Landed Lieutenant General Ruvigny
lands in Ireland.
from England, being made Commander in chief of the Army left in Ireland, and
Created by his Majesty, Lord Viscount Galway: and two days after, his Lordship
and the Lord Viscount Blessington were Sworn of Their Majesty's Privy Council,
as the Bishop of Kildare had been some time before.

And March the 23 d. the following Proclamation was Published, declaring the
War of Ireland to be at an end. 1692,


WILLIAM REX.
WHEREAS by An Act made in Our Parliament A Proclamation declaring the Wars of
Ireland ended.
at Westminster, in the First Year of Our Reign, Entitled, An Act for the
better Security and Relief of Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland,
it was (among other things) Enacted, that all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever of the Protestant Religion, should be absolutely Discharged and
Acquitted of, and from the Payment of all Quit-Rents, Crown-Rents,
Composition-Rents, Hearth-Money, Twentieth Parts, Payments, and other Chief
Rents arising or Payable out of any Houses, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Rectories, Tyths, or Church Livings, incurring or becoming due to us at any
time after the Five and Twentieth Day of December in the Year of Our Lord, One
Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Eight, until the said Kingdom of Ireland should be
by us declared to be reduced, and the War and Rebellion there ended. We have
now, pursuant to the said Act of Parliament, thought fit (by, and with the
Advice of Our Privy Council) to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby
Declaring that the said Kingdom of Ireland is reduced to Our Obedience, and the
War and Rebellion there ended. And We do hereby Will and Require that all and
Singular such Rents and Payments, and all other Duties payable to the Crown,
which shall henceforth grow, incur, and become due, be duly answered and paid
to us in such manner, and under such Penalties and Forfeitures as if the said
Act had not been made.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Third Day of March, 1691/2. in the
Fourth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King and Queen.
After which time little of moment happened, save March. 1692.
that the Lords Justices, by Directions from Their Majesty's, appointed a time
for those that pretended to the Benefit of the Articles of Limerick or Galway,
to give in their Names, and make good their claims by the 20th of February,
which time was, by Proclamation, enlarged to the first of April, and afterward
to the 15th. Wednesday the sixth of April was appointed the first Day to begin
upon those Claims, all those concerned being to enter their Names sometime
before, with the Clerk of the Council; which Names were to be posted up, at
least, ten Days before their Cause was to be heard, their Claims being to be
made out by at least three Credible Witnesses, one of which was to be a
Protestant. Accordingly on the sixth of April the Council met upon this Affair,
and continued every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, so to do; which was a much
easier way, and more to the Interest and Advantage of the Irish, than any Court
of Claims erected only for that purpose, could have been.

CHAP. XI.
A brief Account of the former and present Circumstances of Ireland. The
Division of it into Provinces and Counties, Bishoprics and Parishes. The Soil
of Ireland. Sir John Davis his Reasons why Ireland was so long in being
entirely subj^cted to the Crown of England. What Tanistry is. This a reason why
the Irish did not improve their Country. Of Fosterings and Cosherings. A Brief
Estimate of the Expense of the former Wars of Ireland. An Essay toward the
reckoning the Charge of this last. The former evils still remain. The Interest
of the King and People of England in general to advance the Power and Trade of
the English in Ireland. The Interest also of the Roman Catholics themselves,
whether of English or Irish Extraction, to advance the Power of England in that
Kingdom. Two main Objections answered. Religion in the first place to be taken
care of. An Invasion from France upon that Kingdom, England or Scotland, at
this juncture very improbable. A Remark upon the last that endeavored it.

I Have now given you all that I know of this last unhappy Irish Wars, that is
fit at this juncture to be sent to the Press. And it is more possibly than some
Men will thank me for, or yet the following Remarks that I am going to make
upon the Affairs of that Kingdom, and its present Circumstances; upon which, if
any please to throw away another half Hour, though they find nothing worth taking
notice of: Yet I hope they will have no Reason to be angry, since Opinion in
things indifferent is free to all Men: And we have no better way to conjecture
what may be hereafter, than by comparing our thoughts of it with what now is,
and formerly has been.

Ireland, next to Great Britain, is the greatest Island The Circumference of
Ireland.
in Europe, esteemed by Sir William Petty at Ten Millions Five Hundred Thousand
Irish Acres, and by others at Ten Millions Eight Hundred and Sixty Eight
Thousand Acres, which they reckon to be above 17 Millions of English Measure
(121 Irish Acres making about 196 English) and yet Sir William Petty computes
the Irish Acres to make not above 14 Millions of English; accounting nigh two
Millions of Acres in Mountains, Bogs, Strands, and other unprofitable Land, a
great part of which, however, is capable of improvement, and makes Ireland in
circumference almost equal to England; Wales excepted.

The Latitude of Ireland North is said to be parallel with Dumfrese in
Scotland; and South to St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall; its Longitude West to
the utmost point of Ire Conaght in the County of Galway; and East to the head
of Houth.

The Kingdom for many Ages past has been divided It^ Division into Provinces
and Counties.
into four Provinces, three of which before that Division, were commonly
distinct Monarchies, and sometimes the fourth, which by degrees, as the English
Interest prevailed, were subdivided into Counties, of which there are thirty
two at this day in all the Kingdom. The Provinces are Leinster, Munster,
Conaght, and Vlster.

Leinster has eleven Counties, Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford on the Seaside,
East-Meath, West-Meath, and Carlow within Land (though with a corner reaching to
the Sea,) Kilkenny, Kildare, Kings-County, Queens-County and Longford, are
Inland Counties also.

Munster has six Counties, two within Land, as Tipperary and Limerick; but
Waterford, Cork, Kerry, and Clare all on the Coast.

Conaght has Galway, Mayo, and Sligo toward the Sea, with Roscomon and Letrim
within Land.

Vlster has six Counties on the Seaside, Fermanagh, Donegal, Londonderry,
Antrim, Down, and Louth; and four within Land, as Cavan, Monohan, Armagh, and
Tyrone.

In the Year 1151, (according to Cambden) Christianus, Into Arch-Bishopricks
and Bishoprics.
Bishop of Lismore, Legate of all Ireland; and Johannes Paperon Cardinal Priest
(according to Sir James Ware) brought four Palls from Eugenius the third, and
held a Synod, or Council, at Kells, as some say, or at Mellefort, according to
others; whereat were present the Bishops, Abbots, Kings, Captains, and Elders
of Ireland, when by General consent four Arch-Bishopricks were Constituted,
Armagh, Dublin, Cashel, and Tuam; under whom there were 34 other Bishoprics,
viz. ten subordinate to Armagh, five to Dublin, twelve to Cashel, and seven to
Tuam. But now they are reduced to 21 in all, and those divided into 2278
Parishes, and those in a political capacity have eight that are called Cities,
Dublin, Kilkenny, Waterford, Cork, Cashel, Clogher, Limerick, and Londonderry;
besides about ninety Boroughs and Corporations.

As to the Natural Advantages of Ireland, many People The Soil of Ireland.
can confirm what Sir John Davis, a Man of Wit, Learning, and Prudence, has
writ several Years ago, viz. That having been in all the Provinces of that
Kingdom, he had observed the good Temperature of the Air, the fruitfulness of
the Soil, the pleasant and commodious Seats for Habitation, the safe and large
Ports and Havens lying open for Traffic unto all the West parts of the World,
the long Inlets of many Navigable Rivers; and so many great Lakes, and fresh
Ponds within Land, as the like are not to be seen in any part of Europe; the
rich Fishings and Wild Fowl of all Kinds. And lastly, the Bodies and Minds of
the People Endowed with extraordinary Abilities of Nature.

And however it has become a Proverb in England, The Irish no such Fools as the
World Commonly makes them.
to call a dull unthinking Fellow, a Man of an Irish Understanding, yet for any
thing appears to the contrary, they have acted a Prudent part for at least
these Five Hundred Years; nor is their crafty insinuating wheedling way as yet
any thing abated; and whosoever will look amongst the Natives of that Country
at this juncture, will probably find some Knaves, but as few Folls as in any
other Kingdom of the World.

But since I have mentioned so Judicious an Author, Sir John Davis his Reasons
why Ireland has been so long in reducing to the Crown of England.
as Sir John Davis, I suppose it will not be unpleasant to hear some of his
Reasons why it has been so long a time before Ireland was entirely subject to
the Crown of England, and why the English were more apt to run into the Irish
Barbarous Customs, and imitate their way of living, than on the Contrary: As to
the first of these, he mentions four main defects of the Armies, that at
different times were sent out of England, to Conquer Ireland. 1. They were for
the most part too weak for a Conquest. 2. When otherwise (as in both the
Journies of Richard the Second,) they were too soon broken up, and dissolved.
3. They were ill paid; and, 4. They were ill Governed; a necessary Consequence
of the former. Which Inconveniences happened, because the King's of England for
many Ages together were generally otherwise employed; either in the Holy Land,
or in France, or in their Wars with Scotland, or else in that unhappy fewd
between the two Houses of Lancaster, and York: So that they could neither
attend the Irish War in their own Persons, nor spare a Competency either of
Men, or Money, to complete the Work, which was only begun in King Henry the
Second's days, rather by a few private Adventurers, than by any thing that had
the face of a Royal Army. And besides, the standing Forces were seldom or never
reinforced out of England (that is in the times toward the beginning of the
English Government) only the King's Treasure there was spent, and wholly spent
in the King's service; so that in the Reigns of four successive Kings, Viz.
Henry III. Edward I. Edward II. and Edward III. between the Receipts and
Allowances, this Entry is commonly found in the Pipe-Rolls, In Thesauro nihil;
for the Affairs of the State, and those of the Army spent all, and that all was
not sufficient. In the Reign therefore of King Edward II. Maurice Fitz Thomas
Earl of Desmond, as his Ancestor was the first of English Race that took part
with the Irish against his Native Country Men, he being now Commander in Chief
of the Army against the Scots then Invading Ireland, he only changed the name
of the Ancient Irish Custom called Bonaught, but began to practice the thing it
self under the names of Coigne and Livery and Pay, that is, he and his Army
took Horse Meat, and Man's Meat, and also Money at their pleasure, without any
satisfaction, so much as of a Bill. And this afterward proved the general
fault of all the Chief Commanders in this Kingdom, for finding the advantage of
this way of proceeding, they begun to oppress the Poor English heavily, who
rather than endure it, would give them a part of their Land to have the rest
free, which Land so given the Lords put Irish Tenants upon, and encouraged them
in several particulars, that so they might pay their Rent. And then the Kings
of England not being at leisure to attend the War in their own Persons, they
could do no less in Honor, than give a great part of the Land to those that
Conquered it. But those Scopes of Land given at first to the English
Adventurers were generally too large, and the Privileges so great, that they
begun to set up for themselves, no fealty being reserved to the Crown by the
Tenants, but only to their Lords, which first made them Proud, and then
Contentious. Upon which account to strengthen their Parties, they Allied
themselves with the Irish, and drew them in to dwell amongst them, and not
having English Tenants enough for their Lands, they were obliged to take Irish:
By living amongst whom, and having their Servants and Nurses generally of such;
they, and their Children, by degrees became of the same stamp; and having no
other means to pay or reward the Irish that were of their Faction, they
suffered them to take Coygne, and Livery from the English Freeholders, which
Oppression was so intolerable, as that the better sort were forced to quit
their Free-holds, and fly into England, never returning more, though Laws were
made in both Kingdoms to remand them, and the rest that remained, soon became
degenerate, and mere Irish.

Then the English Lords finding the Irish Exactions to be more profitable than
the English Rents and Services, and loving the Irish Tyranny which was tied to
no Rules of Law, or Honor, better than a just and lawful Seigniory, did reject
and cast off the English Laws and Government, and some with the Irish Customs
assuming their very Names also; which Customs of theirs, were all Enemies to
the English Interest in this Country. Whether it was that called Tanistry,
What Tanistry signifies.
that is, when any of their Chieftains, or Heads of Factions died; then the
Goods of the whole Sept or Family were to be divided anew; nor did the Sons
always succeed, but such of the Kindred as could purchase the Election by
strong hand; by which, there could be no encouragement, either to Build, or
Plant, or indeed to have any thing but from hand to mouth, since they knew not
who might reap the fruits of their Labor. For though it is said the Irish
received the Christian Faith above twelve hundred years ago, and were lovers of
Music, Poetry, and all kinds of Learning; Possessing also a Country abounding
with all things necessary for the life of Man, yet did they never build Reasons
why the Irish did not improve their Country formerly.
Houses of Brick, or Stone, before the time of King Henry II. (some few poor
Religious Houses excepted) and when afterward they saw the English build
Castles, they only did it for their Chiefs, and not for themselves; nor
endeavored they to imitate the English in any sort of Improvements, which
being against all common Sense and Reason, must needs be imputed to their
Customs, in making all their Possessions uncertain, and would have hindered the
improvement of their Country to the Worlds end, if those Customs had not been
abolished by the Law of England.

The Irish had also Cosherings, Visitations, and Progresses Cosherings.
made by their Chief, and his Followers, among his Tenants. Sessings for his
Horses, Dogs, and Boys; Cuttings, Tallages, and spendings at his pleasure,
which made him an absolute Tyrant, and his Vassals poor Slaves. Add to these
their Fosterings, the Irish of all Fosterings.
People having the greatest inclination to Nurse other Men's Children, because
Fostering amongst them, is always reputed a stronger alliance than Blood; and
when once they have Nursed a Child in any Family, they think themselves so near
Related thereto, that they are obliged to perform whilst they live, all the
faithful Services in their Power, and from whence ever after they expect a
Supply of what Necessaries they have occasion for, and as often as they have a
mind to call for them. Then they had Gossipred, or Compaternity; which, though by
the Canon Law a Spiritual affinity, yet no Nation ever made so Religious
account of it as the Irish. Now these, and many other such like Customs, made
strong Parties, and Factions, whereby the Great Men were enabled to oppress
their Inferiors, and to oppose their Equals. Besides which, their frequent
Divorces, their Promiscuous Begetting of Children, and neglect of Lawful
Matrimony, were no small Temptations for vicious Minds to degenerate, and fall
into the like Extremes.

Those were the Irish Customs which the English Collonies did embrace, after
they had rejected the Civil and Honorable Laws of England, which especially
fell out in the later end of King Edward the Second, and the beginning of King
Edward the Third, proving of very Fatal Consequence to the English Interest in
that Kingdom; the degenerate English being always harder to subdue, than the
Natives; for though their Minds and Manners were altered, yet they had so much
English Blood left in their Veins, as gave them English Courage, and
Resolution; whereby the Fitz Geralds, and Earl of Desmond's Rebellions were
worse than those of mere Irish.

Then Sir John Davis proves out of several Records, that in former times most
of the Inhabitants were not the King's Tenants, but derived their Titles from
the Irish and English Noblemen, who kept an awe and dependence upon them; for
though the Kings of England were formerly owned as Lords of Ireland, yet the
Lords of Irish Lords formerly styled Kings.
Ireland Ruled as Kings, and were so styled by the Kings of England themselves,
as appears by the Concord made between Henry 2. and Rotherick O Connor King of
Conaght in the Year 1175, Recorded by Hoveden in this Form, Hic est finis and
Concordia inter Dominum Regem Angliae Henricum filium imperatricis and
Rodoricum Regem Conactae, scilicet, quod Rex Angliae concessit praedicto
Roderico Legeo Homini suo ut sit Rex sub eo, paratus ad servitium suum, ut homo
suus, etc. And King Henry the II. making William Fitz Audelm his Lieutenant of
Ireland, he has it thus in his Commission; Archiepiscopis Episcopis, Regibus,
Baronibus, and omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia salutem. King John also
granted diverse Characters unto the Irish Lords, under the Title of Kings; and
so did Henry the III d. unto a Petty-King of Thoumond, Rex Regi Thoumond,
Salutem, etc. Those Governed the People by their Brehon Laws; they made their
own Magistrates, and Officers; they Pardoned, and Punished all Malefactors, and
made War and Peace one with another, without Controulment.

After which several Attempts were made, and Rebellions, more or less, broke
out in every King's Reign. And to omit those of Perkin Warbeck and others, in
the Reign of Henry 7. The Rebellion of Fitz Gerald and the rest of that Faction
in King Henry 8th's time, in the Year 1535. cost England Forty Thousand Pounds,
a Sum reputed so great in those days, and so much disturbed that blustering
Prince, that he called the appeasing this Rebellion a New Conquest, and put the
Question to his Council, how Ireland should be managed to bear the Charge of
its own preservation, and whether by Act of Parliament every Man's Estate
should not be made liable to contribute its proportion? or wehther by Virtue of
this New Conquest, the King might not seize on all the Estates of that Kingdom
Temporal and Spiritual? Cox 242.

But though this would not do, yet he found out another A Statute against
Absentees.
way to make a Statute against Absentees, whereby a great part of the County of
Carlow was taken from the Duke of Norfolk, and other Lands from other great
Men, and from some Monasteries in England that held Land in Ireland, for that
by the absence of these, and the neglecting their own private Estates (whereby
the Irish daily gained ground) they brought the Public into danger. However
this Rebellious Spirit continued in Ireland all Queen Elizabeth's time, even to
the ninth of King James the First, as Sir John Davis observes; but if he had
lived in our days, he would have seen good reasons to say it was always the
Genius of the People. And one Mr. Lawrence has since that, endeavored to prove
that Ireland was never entirely subjected to the Crown of England, nor the
Lands properly called the King's Lands, until the Act of Settlement passed in
the 12th Year of King Charles the Second; for before this, the Chief
Inhabitants in all Cities and Towns were Papists, as Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, etc, by which means that Party was wonderfully encouraged and
strengthened; and besides, the Irish before the late Rebellion, were by far the
greatest Proprietors, though afterward they enjoyed not much above a fifth part
of the whole (that is in propriety) by which means, and the industrious
Management of some of the Chief Governors, the English Interest was very far
advanced in this Country before the death of King Charles the Second; for though
some Clouds arose before, yet the Sun shone pretty clear, till the Death of
that Monarch made it more than Twilight with the English of that Country; and
then the late dark Night of Confusion approached so suddenly, that it gave them
no time to set things in Order, till they could not in a manner see where they
were a going: This put a full stop to the Carreer of all their Prosperity, for
a great many considerable Buildings, and other Improvements in and about
Dublin, and other places in the Kingdom, being pretty far advanced at that
Juncture, they were left off very abruptly, the Workman throwing away his
Tools, and the Husbandman neglecting his Plow at the News, as if they had then
foreseen their approaching Misery, and were amazed to find the Irish arm so
fast on all hands, by which they were assured that other sorts of Weapons than
they had used for the Country's improving, were soon like to grow more in
fashion, and that to the undoing of what themselves had so honestly endeavored
to make up. So that the Irish were not then, nor indeed are as yet so subdued,
as that no further Storm may ever be feared to arise from that corner.

And certainly the not thoroughly endeavoring to make Ireland bear the Charge of
its own preservation, has in all Ages been very much to the disadvantage of
Ireland should be put into a Condition to bear its own Burden.
England. But to carry this no higher than the Year 1595, the time of Tyrone's
Rebellion, which Cambden in his Annals tells us cost 1198717 l. to suppress. Or
if we compute the Charge of its first Conquest, and the suppressing the several
Rebellions from that time till this of Tyrone's, to cost but double as much as
this did, (as they needs must, since before that, Ireland never enjoyed seven
Years peace at one time.) Then, I say, long e're this, all those Rebellions had
been forgot, and the Trade and Product of Ireland more than trebly recompensed
England for her former Blood and Treasure: But as the Degenerate English grew
more and more in love with the Irish and their Customs, and so took their part
against England: The Charges increased to more prodigious Sums; and they
generally make use of it as a great Argument for what they did of late, that it
was the Blood and Treasure of their Ancestors that first gained that Kingdom to
the English Interest, and therefore though they differed in Opinion, yet it was
very unreasonable that they should be quite excluded from sharing in the
Government with those that were of a much later Date. But this Objection is of
an older standing than either the former War, or this last; for we are told
that so great Heats have arose formerly between the English of Birth, and the
English of Blood in Ireland; that they held different Parliaments, and
endeavored by all means Possible to ruin one another: But it is observed by
very Learned Men in this Kingdom, that though the English have often fallen out
amongst themselves, and there were generally found in many places of the
Kingdom such of English extraction, as would join with the Irish against
England; yet the People of the Pale were always firm, and Loyal to the Crown,
and the greatest strength that England had against the Irish Nation (for which
they were often plentifully Rewarded) 'till in the Year 1641, they all broke
loose, which they say was occasioned thus.

Tho since the first Conquest of Ireland, there have been continued feuds in
that Kingdom, between the People of both Nations, upon the account, of
Interest; yet when the Reformation was once set on foot, the Breach was widned
upon that account, it being what the Natives of that Country have always
endeavored to destroy, and with it the English Interest there; but finding
this a very difficult Task, by reason that the old English of the Pale, though
many of them were of the same Religion with the Irish, yet they could never be
persuaded to stand up for a mere Irish Interest, till the Irish (in the What
Methods the Irish first took to make the old English join with them.
Province of Vlster especially) found out the two following Expedients; first
to intermarry with the English of the Pale, and to seek all opportunities of
making alliance with them; and secondly, to persuade the English Gentry always
to breed up one of their Sons a Priest, by whom, and their Irish Wives, the
English were managed to that degree, that though at the first breaking out of the
Rebellion in 1641. they seemed to detest the Irish ways of proceeding, yet in a
few Months after, a great part of them openly joined with the Irish, and this
with the constant troubles in England, were the Reasons why that Rebellion was
the longest in suppressing, A Brief Account of the Expenses of the former War.
and also the most expensive of any before it, being on foot 12 Years, viz.
from the 23 d. of October, 1641. until the 26th. of September, 1653. The Charge
to England in suppressing of which, and the loss that the Protestant Party in
Ireland sustained during this War, being computed by Sir John Burlace in his
History, to amount to Twenty two Millions One Hundred and Ninety One Thousand
Two Hundred and Fifty Eight Pounds, Three Shillings, and Three Pence. And
others compute the whole Loss, Cost and Charges of the King and Protestant
Party to suppress the said Rebellion, to amount to 34480000 l. And that the
English Adventurers who advanced Money upon the Credit of two Acts of
Parliament in the Years 41 and 42, paid 70 Years Purchase for that which was
not worth above eight, and that the Soldiers paid 115 Years purchase for their
Debenters, but those People have a mad way of reckoning in the multiplying
several of their particulars.

However, as to this last War that we have all seen, An Essay toward this.
I pretend not to so great Skill as to know the Expenses of it, only thus far
is easily computed,

1. The Army that Landed with Duke Schonberg, and that came some time after
into Ireland, with those of the Derry and Inniskillin Troops, received into Pay
under his Grace's Command in the Year 1689. being 9 Regiments and 2 Troops of
Horse, 4 Regiments of Dragoons, and 30 Regiments of Foot; the whole pay for
which in one Year comes to -- 869410 l. 7 s. 06 d.

2. His Majesty's Royal Army in that Kingdom in the Year 1690, Consisting of 2
Troops of Guards, 23 Regiments of Horse, 5 Regiments of Dragoons, and 46
Regiments of Foot; the Pay of which, considering the difference between the
Numbers in the Foreign Regiments and our own, amounts to -- 1287630 l. 02 s. 00
d.

3, The Army in that Kingdom in the Year 1691. Commanded by Lieutenant General
Ginckel, being 20 Regiments of Horse, 5 of Dragoons, and 42 Regiments of Foot;
whose Pay for that Year came to --

-- 1161830 l. 12 s. 10 d.

Then the General Officers Pay, the Train, Bread, Wagons, Transport Ships, and
other Contingencies, make at least as much more, which is

-- 6637742 l. 05 s. 00 d.

And the Irish Army living for the most part upon the product of the Country,
could not cost much less. Besides the farther Destruction of the Protestant
Interest in that Kingdom, by cutting down Improvements, burning of Houses,
destroying of Sheep and Cattle, taking away of Horses; with Infinite other
Extortions and Robberies, as also the loss of People on both sides; most of
which, however disaffected, yet they were Subjects to the Crown of England.

As to the particulars of our and their losses of People A modest Conjecture at
the Numbers lost on both sides during the War.
in both Armies since the Landing of Duke Schonberg in Ireland, the best
Computation I have been able to make by comparing Accounts, and conferring on
both sides with those that have made some Observations on that matter, the
thing runs thus.

Irish Officers killed -- 00617

Soldiers killed, belonging to the Irish Army -- 12676

Rapparees killed by the Army and Militia -- 01928

Rapparees hanged by Legal Process, or Court-Marshal -- 00112

Rapparees killed and hanged by Soldiers and others, without any Ceremony --
600

Officers killed in the English Army -- 00140

Soldiers killed in the Field -- 02037

Murdered privately by the Rapparees that we had no account where they died --
00800

English and Foreign Officers died during the three Campaigns -- 00320

Soldiers dead in the English Army since our Landing in Ireland -- 7000

Though its to be observed that in the two last Campaigns there died very few
except Recruits, and such as died of their Wounds: Nor are we to believe that
the Irish did not lose a great many by Sickness also, but no doubt the
Destruction of the People in the Country would do more than double all these
Numbers; so that by the Sword, Famine, and all other accidents, there has
perished, since first the Irish began to play their mad Pranks, there have
died, I say, in that Kingdom, of one sort and another, at least One Hundred
Thousand, Young and Old, besides treble the Number that are Ruined and undone.

All which being considered, it is certainly most expedient to find out an
Eternal Remedy that the like may never happen again. And this I humbly suppose
must not be any endeavor to root out and destroy the Irish, but in the
advancing the English Interest both in Church and State in that Kingdom, so as
to make the Irish themselves in love with it.

And though it has been the Ruining Fate of that Kingdom The Interest of England
to advance the Power of the English in Ireland.
to have some great Men, both in Court, and Parliament, Judge it the Interest
of England to keep Ireland poor and low; and it may seem strange to hear an
English Man by Birth (and a mere Stranger to the having any Interest in
Ireland) to endeavor the contradicting of it: But in my humble Opinion,
whatsoever may be allowed in this, as to the promoting the private Advantages
of a great many Trading People, and even Men of Estates in England, which all
would suffer by the advancing of these in Ireland, yet it is so far from being
the real Interest, either of the Kingdom of England, to cramp Ireland in its
Prosperity, that the Wealth and Greatness of Ireland in Trade and Manufactures
is to be promoted both by the King and People of England as much as possibly it
can. And first, as to the Kings of England, it is the same thing to them
whether they have their Customs from Bristol, or Dublin, from Cork, or
Newcastle, etc. or whether their Levies of Men, when occasion offers, are made
in the Counties of Wickloe, and Waterford, Cumberland, or Yorkshire, provided
the Interest were one and the same in both Kingdoms: And as to the People of
England in general, one should think it is their business to promote and
encourage the Trade and Prosperity of Ireland, that thereby it might not only
support it self in time of Peace, but defend and maintain it self in War, which
nothing but promoting its Trade and Wealth will do: For what Ireland cannot do
in order to its safety, England must supply to prevent its own danger; since if
ever a Foreign Enemy Surprise and Possess Ireland, especially the French, then
England must maintain a greater Standing Force to secure themselves, than would
have secured Ireland, if employed in its defense; it being no groundless Saying
of some Old-fashioned Poet.

He that would England win,
Must with Ireland first begin.
For though in former times, when little or no Shipping appeared upon these
narrow Seas, and France, and other Countries knew not what it was to have a
Fleet, and there was but small Commerce, even between England and Ireland
themselves; yet in this active Age of the World, it would go very hard with
England, if the French should possess Ireland, who have all the Harbors from
Dunkirk, to Breast; and if they had Cork, Baltimire, and Bantry, where would our
Western Trade be? Besides, by the possessing the Eastern Coasts of Ireland,
they would surround three parts in four of England, and a great part of
Scotland, and could Invade either when they pleased; which would necessitate
England to be always at the Charge of a Considerable Standing Army, and then
farewell both their Wealth, and long enjoyed Liberty.

And so sensible have our Ancestors been of something or other to be done in
this Affair, that Sir Henry Sidney, that most excellent Governor, who had
spent great part of his time in that Kingdom, holding a Parliament Our
Ancestors sensible of this.
there, for a Subsidy, in the Eleventh Year of Queen Elizabeth, He, with the
Lords, and Commons in the Preamble to the Act of Parliament, thus express
themselves to the Queen. Considering the infinite masses of Treasure able to
purchase a Kingdom, that your Noble Progenitors have exhausted, for the
Government, Defense, and Preservation of Your Majesty's Realm of Ireland, etc.

Which Evils still remaining, the Remedies are as yet The former Evil^ still
remain.
to be found out, at least to be put in practice; for though the War be now
happily ended, yet there are at this day at least three differnt Interests on
Foot in that Kingdom; the English, Irish, and Scots; the first of which, seem
to be the least concerned in their own advancement; but the last gain ground
daily in the North, there being at least Ten Thousand People come thither out
of Scotland within these Twelve Months; which in time will make their Party
Considerable; for the People of England live better than the Scots at home, and
so are not so easily invited to look abroad. Whereas the Scots their part of
Ireland by this means in a few Years is like to be more than it has been. And
as to the Irish, every one sees their indefatigable Industry in promoting the
Interest of their own Party, no discouragements being able to blunt, but rather
serve to sharpen their endeavors for the effecting of what they believe may be
some steps toward their future Prosperity, making every particular Man's Case
a general Grievance, and each assisting other, as being all concerned in the
same general cause, whilst the English, even in that Country, who still feel
the smart of their former Calamities, will yet rather set their Lands to an
Irish Man or a Scot, that shall give them Sixpence in an Acre more, and never
improve it further than to an English Farmer, that, if he had Encouragement,
would in a few Years make good Improvements, which will still continue one
great reason why Ireland will not easily be made an English Country.

But I can carry the matter yet higher, and affirm, that The Interest of the
Irish Papists themselves to Advance the Power of England.
it is the real Interest of the Roman Catholics of Ireland themselves, whether
of Irish or English Extraction, to promote that of England as much as they can
in their Country, if they will but consult the future safety of themselves and
their Posterity; since without the support of some other Nation they can never
hope of themselves to be an Independent Kingdom; and if they were, we scarcely
can find out how they would agree amongst themselves, who should Command, or
who Obey, which they never could yet from the beginning do; and what did the
Irish ever get by accompanying either their Lords or Followers into Rebellion?
Or what should they have gotten if the late Attempt had absolutely succeeded,
but a more absolute Servitude under the French? And therefore it is better for
them to have their old English Friends they have been so long acquainted with,
than run the hazard of either setting up new Tyrants of their own, or having
them come to 'em from abroad.

Besides, if the English Interest were strong and powerful in Ireland, this
would cut off the hopes of all disaffected People for ever thinking to
withstand it, and would make them reject all Tenders from abroad, and
Inticements from their Jesuited Priests at home, and never would they more run
such desperate Risks which still fall upon their own heads at last; so that if
the English Interest were so fortified, that all hopes of removing it were cut
off, the Irish would not be prevailed upon to make such destructive attempts to
themselves and Posterities, as they often have done hitherto by the
Insinuations of their Priests, who have nothing to lose, nor Families to
provide for, but only hazard the Lives and Fortunes of others that have both.
Since (as Sir William Petty observes) there are, and ever will be in England
Men ready for any Exploit and Change, either by being discontented with their
present Condition, or otherways well inclined to the service, more than are
sufficient to quell any Insurrection which the Irish can make and abide by:
Which would spare both the Blood and Treasure of England, if those of that
Nation in Ireland, could do it of themselves.

There are only two Objections that I know of, which Two Objections answered.
seem to be considerable against this Opinion of promoting the Trade and Wealth
of Ireland: The first, that if Ireland should be encouraged so far as to make
it altogether an English Country, it would drain the wealth and Inhabitants of
England to that degree, that we should impoverish our selves, by putting our
Trade into their hands, who would be equal, if not Superior to us in a small
time, since their Country lies as Convenient in all respects for Trade as ours,
and has several Advantages above it. Answer. This would rather encourage
England to be more industrious in Trade and Manufactures, when they saw their
younger Sister of Ireland, by having the same privileges of Trade with her
self, begin to contend with her in this particular, and would create a
profitable emulation amongst the People of both Kingdoms; since I have not that
Opinion of Trade, that some People have of Motion; that there is a determinate
quantity, and when it fails in one place, it increases in another. There is
Trade enough no doubt abroad in the World for them all, if they will but be
Industrious; however, there can no disadvantage accrue either to the King of
England, or his People in general, by having this effected, nay, this would
soon be more for the advantage of the Crown of England, than any poor Customs
that are got by dividing the Nations can ever amount to; for who sees not the
good effects of the Union between England, and Wales?

But then those who are so hardy as to leave England, and venture their Lives
and Fortunes at any time, for the reducing of Ireland, if they survive it, and
once come to settle there, they are so far from having Encouragement to Trade
and grow Rich, that by several Laws made on the account of Trade, they are
under the same Circumstances with the Conquered Irish themselves, as all the
English of that Kingdom really are in the point of all the Western Trade
especially.

The other Objection is, That if Ireland were so far encouraged in Trade and
other Advantages, as to become absolutely an English Country, and equally
Entitled to the Benefit of its Laws, etc. the People there, after some time
would grow Rich, and consequently Proud, so that they would then set up for
themselves, and deny all manner of dependence upon England, which would soon
create a more dangerous Civil War than ever. Answer, There can be no fear of
this, since nothing could be got by such a Revolt, but their own destruction;
and it is as probable, that the English on the North of Trent, should upon any
disgust endeavor to set up for themselves, which they are sensible could bring
nothing but Ruin to the whole: Besides, since the Royal Seats of the Kings, the
Principal Courts of Judicature, and also the Royal Navy are always on this side
the Water, all Attempts of this kind would prove vain and fruitless, and the
rest of the World laugh at such a Destructive folly and madness.

I pretend not to meddle with any particular Methods, Religion in the first
Place to be taken care of.
for the promoting the English Interest in Ireland, only it is worth the
Knowledge, and Care of every one, especially those in places of Authority and
Trust; what was in my Lord Barkley's Instructions (Dated May 21 (1670.)
relating to Matters of Religion. That forasmuch as all good Success does rest
upon the Service of God, above all things you are to settle good Orders in the
Church, that God may be better served in the True Established Religion, and the
People by that means reduced from their Errors. But whilst the Irish are in the
Power of the Romish Clergy, they keep them in such Awe and Ignorance, that they
scarce dare, or can enquire into the differences in Religion, nor Read the
Scriptures, or yet confer with any Protestant Divine, so that all they
generally know of Religion (I speak of the Vulgar Sort) is some Fabulous
Legends of the Priests Invention, or that their Fathers or Families were of
that Persuasion, and so must they be also: But though they be much given to
Lying, yet they are not in the main so ill-natured as some People make them,
since they own our Baptism and other Institutions to be Essential, and will of
their own accords come to us, when they have not the convenience of a Priest,
several instances of which, I could give of my own Knowledge.

There are a great many very Learned, Pious, and Devout Clergymen of the
Protestant Church in Ireland, discharging the Duties of their Function, with
such Religious and Godly Sincerity, as becomes the Messengers of Christ: But
there being a great many Impropriations in that Kingdom; and by this means,
half a score Parishes in some places, not able to afford one Hundred Pounds per
Annum to a Minister, this has given occasion for the Union of several Parishes,
and not only so, but for frequent Pluralities, and that in several places, very
much to the disadvantage of the Church, by which means there are a great many
Parishes Inhabited only with Papists, which for that Reason are generally
called Sine Cures, as if the Minister had no Business there at all. But this I
can by no means Subscribe unto, since to me they seem to be the clean contrary,
and not impossible to remedy, by finding out some means to allow each Minister
a Competency, and then oblige him to reside upon it, whether his Parishioners
be Papists or Protestants; since the Living among those People, and the
frequent Conversation with them, would be of more force than all the Penal Laws
in Christendom.

There was a view of Ireland, writ by Spencer, as I take it, toward the latter
end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and amongst other things, he has this Remarque.
Several Irish Families (says he) are already become English, and more would, if
the English would do their parts, in supplying the Country with Learned, Pious,
and painful Preachers, who could Out-Preach, and Outlive the Irish Priests:
For Religion must not be forcibly imposed upon them with Terrors and sharp
Penalties (as now is the manner) but rather delivered and intimated with
Mildness and Gentleness, so as it may not be hated before it be understood,
which yet is not so difficult a Task as some People make it, for if the Ancient
Godly Fathers, who first Converted them, when they were Infidels, to the Faith,
were able to pull them from Idolatry and Paganism, to the true Belief of Christ
(as St. Patrick and St. Columb) how much more easily shall Godly Teachers bring
them to the Understanding of that, which they already Profess; if they did but
show as much Zeal in dissuading them from their Errors, as the Priests do Care
and Industry to keep them in them.

However, thus far Spencer seems to be in the right of it; That True Religion
is not to be planted by Penal Laws, or the Terror of Punishment, which may
fill a Church with Temporizing Hypocrites, but never with Sincere Professors;
for though Humane Laws are a good Hedge about Religion, and an Encouragement to
Virtue, yet that which is solely founded upon such, binds the Conscience no
longer than those Laws are in force.

But what I am sorry to see so true, is, that Idleness is the malus Genius of
that Kingdom, and except you can persuade the People to be Industrious too, as
well as Religious, you are not much nearer the matter, for they are Naturally a
lazy Crew, and love nothing so much as their ease, and if an Irishman has but a
Cow and a Potatoe Garden, it is all the Wealth he commonly aspires to; which way
of Feeding, a great many give for the Reason, that they are generally so mean
spirited, for you will see them in Companies lie loytering in the Streets of any
Country Village, or by the Highway sides, enquiring after, and telling News to
one another, but not one in twenty, either at work in the Fields, or otherways
Honestly employed, which is the Reason, that at this very day, most of the
Goals of the Kingdom are filled with Thieves, and the Streets with incredible
numbers of importunate houling Beggars, who yet most of them had rather Live so
than otherways.

But I Am afraid, a great many People will think I have been too busy, and
therefore I have only this to say further; that notwithstanding all the Wagers,
that have been proffered of late, whether Ireland would not be in the French
King's Hands by such a time; I dare freely venture one of as great value as I
am able, that though he begin to morrow, it will not be in his Power, with all
the Force he can spare to take it, from that handful of Men left in that
Kingdom for its security, these Seven Years, for if the Irish, who were but
indifferently provided for at best, were able to hold it out so long, against
all the Power and Strength of England; what can Men that have better Supplies,
and full as good Hearts do?

And as for those vain hopes of that unhappy Party, An Invasion from France
upon any of the three Kingdoms not very practicable at this time.
who are still buoyed up with the Fancy of the French King's Greatness, and
that he will at some time or other, certainly make an Invasion, either upon
England, Scotland, or Ireland; any who know what War means, can assure them,
that it is much sooner said than done. For if his present Majesty of England,
was obliged to employ nigh 600 Vessels, when at his first coming he Transported
only 14000 Men into this Kingdom; and if the Irish War has for Three Years
past, employed such a considerable number of Transport Ships in that narrow
Channel, between England and Ireland, which lie so convenisently and contiguous
one to another; what Provision must needs be made in France for such an
Attempt, as an Invasion upon any of the Three Kingdoms, which if it miscarries,
they are certainly undone? For suppose the French still a match for our Fleet
(which I hope they will never be now whilst the World stands) and the French
Invasion designed upon England, though there be a Factious and unnaturally
discontented Party there, that are no well wishers to the present Government,
vet there are so many Loyal and True Hearted Englishmen still left at home,
that all the Ships in France are not able to Transport Men enough from thence
to subdue them, since we know their affection to both the French and Irish that
are with them, should they once endeavor to look into England, whose Strength
is in the Hearts and Affections of the People, entirely devoted to Their
Majesty's Service.

I allow that 20000 well Disciplined and Experienced Men are able to beat four
times the number of Raw unexperienced Country People, but then I leave the
English standing Army, and a well Disciplined Militia, especially in and about
the City of London, to show how unwelcome the French would be to them.

And as for Scotland, its Soil in most places is Naturally poor and barren, and
an Army of Foreigners Landed there, must either eat Heath or one another in a
small time, if once they leave the Coast; for admit they have Provisions
brought by Sea into their Harbors, yet the Country in few places is so level
as to admit of either a marching Train of Artillery, or of Provision Wagons,
which an Army has no Business any where without, and soon would look very
foolish for want of, suppose but an indifferent Enemy to oppose them.

Then as for an Invasion to be made upon Ireland; the Country is already so
destroyed by being the Seat of War, that whosoever attempts it, must bring all
from abroad likewise, as well Horses as Provisions, which is no easy Task of
it self, suppose no opposition either at Sea or in the Country; but then our
Garrisons especially upon the Coasts, are made so strong to our Hands by the
Irish themselves by the help and directions of the best French Ingineers, and
are Manned with part of an Experienced and Victorious Army, that it will not be
the work of a few days to pick any of them out of our hands, since there is
Ammunition, Artillery, and Provisions suitable to each Garrison's Necessities.

And as an advantage to the established standing Army now in Ireland,
consisting of Colonel Woolsley's Horse, Colonel Wynns, and Colonel Eiklin's
Dragoons, Sir Jo. Hanmer's, Briggadeer Stuart's, Colonel Gustavus Hambleton's,
Earl of Drogheda's, Sir Henry Bellisis, Colonel Roe's, Colonel Coot's, Colonel
St. John's, Colonel Muthelburms, and Colonel Creighton's Foot, besides Colonel
Frederick Hambleton's, and three French Regiments, all upon the Irish
Establishment, as also the Earl of Donegal's Foot, and Colonel Cunningham's
Dragoons now raising; besides all these, I say, what deserves no mean
Character, is the Militia of Ireland, being formerly at least Twenty Five
Thousand Men, and though they cannot make so many now, this War having destroyed
a great many Protestants, yet whoever serve now upon that account, are all well
Armed and Experienced Active Men, which circumstances being all known to
France, they will scarce hazard all upon such uncertainties (suppose they were
really at leisure to do it,) as an Invasion upon any of their Majesty's
Dominions must needs prove.

It may also be remembered, that the Spaniards in the A Remark upon the last
that endeavored it.
Year 1588, had not only a great mind to Ireland, but with a powerful Army
endeavored also to Invade England; in which Attempt, their loss was so
considerable, that they have not as yet recovered it: And the disappointment
that the French King met withal the very last Year, in such another
undertaking, gives us more than ordinary hopes, that through God's Blessing, it
will always so be done to the Enemies of England.

FINIS.

