The Right Reverend EDW. STILLING FLEET D.D. Lord Bishop of Worcester.


TWELVE SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions. By the Right Reverend Father in
God EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The First VOLUME.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

THE CONTENTS.
A SERMON I. AMos IV. 11. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plukt out of the burning: yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord. Page 1 SERMON II. Prove. XIV. 9. Fools
make a mock at sin. p. 48 SERMON III. Luke VII. 35. But Wisdom is justified of
all her Children. P. 88 SERMON IV. Romans I. 16. For I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. p. 131 SERMON V. Heb. II. 3.
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? p. 169 SERMON VI. Heb.
XII. 3. For, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds. p. 209 SERMON VII. Jude, V.
11. And perished in the gainsaying of Corah. P. 261 SERMON VIII. Matthew. XXI.
43. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. p. 306 SERMON IX. John
VII. 39. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. p. 353 SERMON X. Isa. LVII. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to
the Wicked. p. 387 SERMON XI. 2 Corinthians. V. 2. Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men. P. 431 SERMON XII. Matthew. XVI. 26. For what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall
he give in exchange for his soul? p. 469
Advertisement.
THERE will speedily be Published, a Second Volume of Sermons by the same
Author.

SERMON I.
Preached at St. Margarets Westminster, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
October. 10. 1666.
Amos IV. XI. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord.


IT is but a very little time since you met together in this place to lament
the remainders of a raging pestilence, which the last year destroyed so many
thousand Inhabitants of the late great and famous City: and now God has given
us another sad occasion for our fasting and humiliation, by suffering a
devouring fire to break forth and consume so many of her habitations. As though
the infected air had been too kind and partial, and like Saul to the
Amalekites, had only destroyed the vile and refuse, and spared the greatest of
the people; as though the grave had surfeited with the bodies of the dead, and
were loath to go in the execution of God's displeasure; he has employed a more
furious Element, which by its merciless and devouring flames might in a more
lively manner represent unto us the kindling of his wrath against us. And that
by a Fire, which began with that violence, and spread with that horror, and
raged with that fury, and continued for so long a time with that irre^^stible
force; that it might justly fill the beholders with confusion, the hearers of
it with amazement, and all of us with a deep and humble sense of those sins
which have brought down the judgments of God in so severe a manner in the midst
of us.

For whatever arguments or reasons we can imagine that should compose the minds
of men to a sense of their own or others calamities, or excite them to an
apprehension of the wrath of God as the cause of them, or quicken them to an
earnest supplication to him for mercy, they do all eminently concur in the sad
occasion of this days solemnity. For if either compassion would move, or fear
awaken, or interest engage us to any of these, it is hard to conceive there
should be an instance of a more efficacious nature, than that is which we this
day bewail: For who can behold the ruins of so great a City, and not have his
bowels of compassion moved toward it? Who can have any sense of the anger of
God discovered in it, and not have his fear awakened by it? Who can (as we
ought all) look upon it as a judgment of universal influence on the whole
Nation, and not think himself concerned to implo^e the mercy of Heaven toward
us? For certainly, howsoever we may vainly flatter and deceive our selves,
these are no common indications of the frowns of Heaven; nor are they merely
intended as the expressions of God's severity toward that City which has
suffered so much by them; but the strokes which fall upon the head (though they
light upon that only) are designed for the punishment of the whole body.

Were there nothing else but a bare permission of Divine Providence as to these
things, we could not reasonably think, but that God must needs be very angry
with us, when he suffers two such dreadful calamities to ^read almost upon each
others heels; that no sooner had death taken away such multitudes of our
Inhabitants, but a Fire ^ollows it to consume our Habitations. A Fire, so
dreadful in its appearance, in its rage and fury, and in all the dismal
consequences of it (which we cannot yet be sufficiently apprehensive of) that
on that very account we may justly Lam. 2.1.
lie down in our shame, and our confusion cover us: because God has Covered
the daughter of Sion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven to
earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
anger. For such was the violence and fury of the flames, that they have not
only defaced the beauty of the City, and humbled the pride and grandeur of it;
not only stained its glory, and consumed its Palaces; but have made the Houses
of God themselves a heap of ruins, and a spectacle of desolation.

And what then can we propose to our selves as arguments of God's severe
displeasure against us, which we have not either already felt, or have just
cause to fear are coming upon us without a speedy and sincere amendment? If a
Sword abroad and Pestilence at home, if Fire in our Houses and Death in our
Streets, if Foreign Wars and Domestic Factions, if a languishing State and a
discontented People, if the ruins of the City and poverty of the Country, may
make us sensible how sad our condition at present is, how much worse it may be
(if God in his mercy prevent it not) we shall a^l surely think we have reason
enough this day to lay to heart the evil of our doings which have brought all
these things upon us, and abhor our selves, repenting in dust and ashes. That
would seem indeed to bear some analogy with the present ruins of the City, and
the calamities we lie under at this time; but God will more easily dispense
with the pompous shows, and solemn garbs of our humiliation; if our hearts
bleed within ^or our ^ormer impietie^, and our repentance discovers its
sincerity, by bringing us to that temper; that, though we have done iniquity,
we will do so no more. That is the true and proper end, which Almighty God aims
at, in all his Judgments: he takes no delight in hurling the World into
confusions, and turning Cities into ruinous heaps, and making whole Countries a
desolation: but when he sees it necessary to vindicate the honor of his
Justice to the World, he does it with that severity that may make us apprehend
his displeasure, and yet with that mercy which may encourage us to repent and
return unto the Lord. Thus we find in the instances recorded in the Text, when
some Cities were consumed by him; so that as far as concerned them, they were
made like to Sodom and Gomorrah: yet he does it with that kindness to the
Inhabitants, that they are plucked as firebrands out of the burning: and
therefore he looks upon it as a ^rustrating the design both of his Justice, and
of his Mercy, when he is sain to conclude with that sad reflection on their
incorrigibleness; Yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Thus ye see
what the design and scope of the words is, which I have read unto you, wherein
we may consider,

1. The severity of the Judgment which God was pleased to execute upon them. I
have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

2. The mixture of his mercy in the midst of his severity, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning.

3. The incorrigibleness of the people notwithstanding both. Yet have ye not,
etc. In the first we have God^s Rod li^ted up to strike, in the second we have
Gods Hand stretched out to save, yet neither of these would make them sensible
of their disobedience; though their Cities were overthrown for their sakes,
though they themselves escaped not for their own sakes, but for his mercies
sake only whom they had so highly provoked; yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. I am sure I may say of the two former parts of the Text. as our
Savior does in another case* This day has this Scripture been fulfilled among
you: we have seen a sad instance of God's severity, a City almost wholly
consumed as Sodom and Gomorrah, and a great expression of his kindn^ss, the
Inhabitants saved, as firebrands plucked out of the burning: O let it never be
said that the l^st part of the words is ^ulfill^d too, Yet have ye not returned
unto me, etc. which, that it may not be, I shall first con^^der the severity of
God in his judgment ^h^s day and then discover the mixture of his kindness with
it, and the r^sult of both will ^e the unreasonableness of obstinate
disobedience after them.

1. The severity of the judgment here expressed: which, though we take it not
in reference to the persons of men, but to the Cities wherein they dwelt: as it
seems to be understood not only by the Original wherein the words relating to
persons are left out; but by the ^ollowing cl^use, expressing their
preservation: yet we shall ^ind the Judgment to be severe enough, in regard, 1.
Of the nature and kind of it. 2. The series and order of it. 3. The causes
moving to it. 4. The Author of it. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew, etc.

1. The nature and kind of it: We can imagine nothing more severe when we
consider what it is set forth by, the most unparrallel'd Judgment we read of,
viz. the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a fire from Heaven. Although in
all circumstances the instance might not come up to the parallel, yet in
several respects there might be so sad a desolation, that any other example but
that might fall beneath the greatness and severity of it. And we may better
understand of how sad and dreadful a nature such a Judgment must be, if we
consider it with relation to the suddenness and unexpectedness of it, to the
force and violence of it, and to all that sad train of circumstances which
attend and follow it.

1. The suddenness and unexpectedness of it; as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, i. e. when they least of all looked for such a desolation. For thus
it was in the days of Lot (as our Savior tells us) Luke. 17.28, 26.
they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;
but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from
Heaven, and destroyed them all. They were all immersed either in their
pleasures or in their business, they little thought of destruction being so
near them as it proved to be: Thus it was with the Jews in their first and
latter destruction both of their City and Country, they were as high and as
confident of the contrary, as might be to the very last; nothing could persuade
them that their Temple or their City should be burnt with Fire; till they saw
them flaming before their eyes. Thus Josephus observes of his Countrymen, that
in the midst of all their miseries they had no kind of sense at all of their
sins, but were as proud, (...). de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 14.
presumptuous and arrogant, as if all things went well with them; and were like
to do so. They thought God could not possibly punish such a people as they were
in such a manner; they could easily have believed it of any other people but
themselves: but that God should punish his own people in Covenant with him,
that Judgment should begin at the house of God, that they who had loved to be
called by his Name, should be made examples to all other Nations; this seemed
so harsh and incredible that by no means could they entertain it. But God and
wise men too thought otherwise of them than they did of themselves: they could
not but see an outward show of Religion joined with a deep and subtle
hypocrisy; there being among them an heap of pride and luxury, of fraud and
injustice, of sedition and faction gilded over with a fair show of greater zeal
for God and his Glory: which that impartial Historian (as one who knew them
well) has described at large: and although they could not believe that such
heavy Judgments should befall them, yet others did not only believe, but
tremble at the apprehensions of them.

Who among all the Citizens of London could have been persuaded, but the day
before the Fire brake out, nay when they saw the Flames for near a day
together, that ever in four days time, not a fourth part of the City should be
left standing? For when were they ever more secure and inapprehensive of their
danger than at this time? they had not been long returned to their Houses,
which the Plague had driven them from, and now they hoped to make some amends
for the loss of their Trade before; but they returned home with the same sins
they carried away with them; like new Moons, they had a new ^ace and
appearance, but the same spots remained still: or it may be, increased by that
scumm they had gathered in the Countries where they had been. Like Beasts of
prey that had been chained up so long till they were hunger-bitten, when they
once got loose they ran with that violence and greediness to their ways of
gain, as though nothing could ever satisfy them. But that which betrayed them
to so much security, was their late deliverance from so sweeping a Judgment as
the Plague had been to the City and Suburbs of it: they could by no means
think, when they had all so lately escaped the Grave, that the City it sel^
should be so near being buried in its own ruins; that the Fire which had
missed their blood, should seize upon their houses; that there should be no
other way to purge the infected air, but by the Flames of the whole City. Thus
when the Mariners have newly escaped a wreck at Sea, the fears of which have a
long time deprived them of their wonted rest, they think they may securely lie
down and sleep, till it may be another storm overtake and sink them. We see
then there is neither piety nor wisdom in so much security when a great danger
is over, ^or for we know not but that very security it self may provoke God to
send a greater. And no kind of Judgments are so dreadful and amazing, as those
which come most unexpectedly upon men; for these betray the succors which
reason offers, they infatuate men's councils, weaken their courage, and deprive
them of that presence of mind which is necessary at such a time for their own
and the public interest. And there needs no more to let us know how severe
such a Judgment must be, when it comes upon men in so sudden and unexpected a
manner; but that is not all, for the severiry of it lies further,

2. In the force and violence of it: and surely that was very great which
consumed four Cities to nothing in so short a time, when God did pluere
Gehennam de Coelo, as one expresses it, rained down Hellfire upon Sodom and
Gomorrah. And this is that which some think is called the Jude 7.
vengeance of eternal fire, which all those in Sodom and Gomorrah are said to
suffer; i. e. a Fire which comsumed, till there was nothing left to be consumed
by it. Not but that those wicked persons did justly suffer the vengeance of an
eternal fire in another life, but the Apostle seems to set out and paint forth
to us that in the life to come, by the force and violence of that fire which
destroyed those Cities; and it would be harsh to say, that all who were
involved in that common calamity (who yet were innocent as to the great
abominations of those places, viz. the Infants there destroyed) must be
immediately sentenced to eternal misery. But although God since that perpetual
monument of his justice in the destruction of those Cities has not by such an
immediate fire from Heaven consumed and razed out the very foundations of other
Cities; yet at sometimes there are fires which break out and rage with a more
than ordinary violence, and will not yield to those attempts for quenching
them, which at other times may be attended with great success. Such might that
great fire in Rome be in Nero's time, which whether begun casually, or by
design (which was disputed then, as it has been about others since) did
presently spread it self with greater speed over the Cirque (as the Tacit. An.
15.
Historian tells us) than the Wind it self, and never left burning, till of
fourteen Regions in Rome, but ^our were left entire. Such might that be in the
Emperor Titus his time, which lasted three days and nights, and was so
irresistible in its fury, (...). Xiphil. in Epit. Dion. in Tito. p. 227.
that the Historian tells us, it was certainly more than an ordinary fire. Such
might that be in the same City in the time of Commodus, which though all the
art and industry imaginable were used for the quenching it, yet it burnt, till
it had consumed besides the Temple of Peace, the fairest Houses and Palaces of
the City, which on that account, the Historians attribute to more than natural
causes. Such might that be (which comes the nearest of any I have met with,
(...). Herodian in Commod. hist. l. 1. p. 22. v. Xiphil. ad fin. Commodi.
to that Fire we this day lament the effec^s of) I mean that at Constantinople,
which happened Niceph. l. 15. c. 21.
A. D. 465. in the beginning of September; it brake forth by the water side,
and raged with that horrible fury for four days together, that it burnt down
the greatest part of the City, and was so little capable of resistance that as
Evagr. l. 2. cap. 13.
Evagrius tells us, the strongest Houses were but (...), like so much dried
stubble before it; by which means the whole City was, as he calls it, (...), a
most miserable and doleful spectacle; so that as Baron. Tom. 5. A. 465.1.
Baronius expresses it, that City which before was accounted the wonder of the
world, was made like unto Sodom and Gomorrah. Such likewise might those two
great Fires have been which have formerly burnt down great part of the then
City of London; but neither of them come near to the dreadfulness of this,
considering how much bigger the habitations of the City were now, and how much
greater the riches of it than could be imagined at those times. How great must
we conceive the force of this Fire to have been, which having at first gotten a
head where there was little means of resisting it, and much fuel to increase
it; from thence it spread it self both with and against the wind; till it had
ga^ned so considerable a force, that it despised all the resistance could be
made by the strength of the buildings which stood in its way; and when it had
once subdued the strongest and the tallest of them, it then roared like the
waves of the Sea, and made its way through all the lesser obstacles, and might
have gone on so far, till it had laid this City level with the ruins of the
other, had not he who sets the bounds to the Ocean, and says, Thus far shall
thou go and no farther, put a stop to it in those places which were as ready to
have yielded up themselves to the rage of it, as any which had been consumed
before.

3. The severity of it will yet more appear from all the dreadful
circumstances which attend and follow it. Could you suppose your selves in the
midst of those Cities which were consumed by Fire from Heaven, when it had
seized upon their dwellings, O what cries and lamentations, what yellings and
shriekings might ye then have heard among them! We may well think how dreadful
those were, when we do but consider how sad the circumstances were of the Fire
we mourn for this day. When it began like Sampson to break in pieces all the
means of resisting it, and carried before it not only the Gates, but the
Churches and most magnificent Structures of the City, what horror and confusion
may we then imagine had seized upon the spirits of the Citizens; what
destraction in their Councils, what paleness in their Countenances, what
pantings at their Hearts, what an universal consternation might have been then
seen upon the Minds of men? But O the sighs and tears, the frights and
amazements, the miscarriages, nay the deaths of some of the weaker Sex at the
terror and apprehension of it! O the hurry and useless pains, the alarms and
tumults, the mutual hindrances of each other that were among men at the
beholding the rage and fury of it! There we might have seen Women weeping for
their Children, for fear of their being trod down in the press, or lost in the
crowd of people, or exposed to the violence of the flames; Husbands more
solicitous for the safety of their Wives and Children, than their own; the
Soldiers running to their Swords, when there was more need of Buckets; the
Tradesmen loading their backs with that which had gotten possession of their
hearts before. Then we might have heard some complaining thus of themselves: O
that I had been as careful of laying up treasures in Heaven, as I have been
upon Earth, I had not been under such fears of losing them as now I am! If I
had served God as faithfully as I have done the world, he would never have left
me as now that is like to do. What a fool have I been which have spent all my
precious time for the gaining of that which may now be lost in an hours time!
If these flames be so dreadful, what are those which we reserved for them who
love the world more than God! If none can come near the heat of this Fire, who
can dwell with everlasting burnings! O what madness then will it be to sin any
more wilfully against that God who is a consuming fire, infinitely more
dreadful than this can be! Farewell then all ye deceitful vanities: now I
understand thee and my self better, O bewitching world, than to fix my
happiness in thee any more. I will henceforth learn so much wisdom to lay up my
treasures there where neither moths can corrupt them, not Thieves steal them,
nor fire consume them. O how happy would London be, if this were the effect
other flames on the minds of all her Inhabitants! She might then rise with a
greater glory, and her inward beauty would outshine her outward splendor, let
it be as great as we can wish or imagine.

But in the mean time who can behold her present ruins, without paying some
tears as due to the sadness of the spectacle, and more to the sins which caused
them? If that City were able to speak out of its ruins, what sad complaints
would it make of all those impieties which have made her so miserable. If it
had not been (might she say) for the pride and luxury, the ease and delicacy of
some of my Inhabitants, the covetousness, the fraud, the injustice of others,
the debaucheries of the profane, the open factions and secret hypocrisy of
too many pretending to greater sanctity, my beauty had not been thus turned
into ashes, nor my glory into those ruins which make my enemies rejoice, my
friends to mourn, and all stand amazed at the beholding of them. Look now upon
me, you who so lately admired the greatness of my Trade, the riches of my
Merchants, the number of my People, the convenience of my Churches, the
multitude of my Streets, and see what desolations sin has made in the earth.
Look upon me, and then tell me whether it be nothing to dally with Heaven, to
make a mock at sin, to slight the judgments of God, and abuse his mercies, and
after all the attempts of Heaven to reclaim a people from their sins, to remain
still the same that ever they were? Was there no way to expiate your guilt but
by my misery? Had the Leprosy of your sins so fretted in my Walls, that there
was no cleansing them, but by the flames which consume them? Must I mourn in my
dust and ashes for your iniquities, while you are so ready to return to the
practice of them? Have I suffered so much by reason of them, and do you think
to escape your selves? Can you then look upon my ruins with hearts as hard and
unconcerned as the stones which lie in them? If you have any kindness for me,
or for your selves; if you ever hope to see my breaches repaired, my beauty
restored, my glory advanced, look on Londons ruins and repent. Thus would she
bid her Inhabitants not weep for her miseries, but for their own sins; for if
never any sorrow was like to her sorrow, it is because never any sins were like
to their sins. Not as though they were only the sins of the City, which have
brought this evil upon her, no, but as far as the judgment reaches, so great
has the compass of the sins been, which have provoked God to make her an
example of his justice. And I fear the effects of Londons calamity will be felt
all the Nation over. For, considering the present languishing condition of this
Nation, it will be no easy matter to recover the blood and spirits which have
been lost by this Fire. So that whether we consider the sadness of those
circumstances which accompained the rage of the fire, or those which respect
the present miseries of the City, or the general influence those will have upon
the Nation, we cannot easily conceive what judgment could in so critical a time
have befallen us, which had been more severe for the kind and nature of it,
than this has been.

2. We consider it in the series and order of it. We see by the Text, this
comes i^ the last place, as a reserve, when nothing else would do any good upon
them: It is extrema medicina, as Hieron in loc.
St. Hierom, says, the last attempt that God uses to reclaim a people by, and
if these Causticks will not do, it is to be feared he looks upon the wounds as
incurable. He had sent a famine before, v. 6. a drought, v. 7, 8. blasting and
mildew, v. 9. the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, v. 10. the miseries of
War, in the same verse. And when none of these would work that effect upon
them, which they were designed for, then he comes to this last way of punishing
before a final destruction, he overthrew some of their Cities as he had
overthrown Sodom and Gomorrah. God forbid, we should be so near a final
subversion, and utter desolation, as the ^en Tribes were, when none of these
things would bring them to repentance; but yet the method God has used with us
seems to bode very ill in case we do not at last return to the Lord. For it is
not only agreeable to what is here delivered as the course God used to reclaim
the Israelites, but to what is ^eported by the most faithful Historian of those
times of the degrees and steps that God made before the ruins of the British
Nation. For Gildas de Excid. Brit.
Gildas tells us the decay of it began by Civil Wars among themselves, and high
discontents remaining as the consequents of them; after this an universal decay
and poverty among them; after that, nay during the continuance of it, Wars with
the Picts and Scots their inveterate enemies; but no sooner had they a little
breathing space, but they return to their luxury and other sins again; then God
sends among them a consuming Pestilence, which destroyed an incredible number
of people. When all this would not do, those whom they trusted most to,
betrayed them, and rebelled against them, by whose means, not only the Cities
were burnt with Fire, but the whole Island was turned almost into one continued
flame. The issue of all which at last was, that their Country was turned to a
desolation, the ancient Inhabitants driven out, or destroyed, and their former
servants, but now their bitter enemies, possessing their habitations. May God
avert the Omen from us at this day. We have smarted by Civil wars, and the
dreadful effects of them; we yet complain of great discontents and poverty as
great as them, we have inveterate enemies combined abroad against us, we have
very lately suffered under a Pestilence as great almost as any we read of, and
now the great City of our Nation burnt down by a dreadful Fire. And what do all
these things mean? and what will the issue of them be? though that be locked up
in the Councils of Heaven, yet we have just cause to fear, if it be not our
speedy amendment, it may be our ruin. And they who think that incredible, let
them tell me whether two years since, they did not think it altogether as
improbable, that in the compass of the two succeeding years, above a hundred
thousand persons should be destroyed by the Plague in London and other places,
and the City it self should be burnt to the Ground? And if our fears do not, I
am sure our sins may tell us, that these are but the forerunners of greater
calamities, in case there be not a timely reformation of our selves. And
although God may give us some intermissions of punishments, yet at last he may,
as the Roman Consul expressed it, pay us intercalatoe poenoe usuram, that which
may make amends for all his abatements, and give us full measure according to
that of our sins, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. Which leads
to the third particular.

3. The Causes moving God to so much severity in his Judgments, which are the
greatness of the sins committed against him. So this Prophet tells us, that the
true account of all Gods punishments is to be fetched from the sins of the
people, Amos 1.3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four I will not
turn away the punishment thereof: so it is said of Gaza, v. 6. of Tyrus, v. 9.
of Edom, v. 11. of Ammon, v. 13. Moab, chapter 2. 1. Judah, v. 4. and at last
Israel, v. 6. And it is observable of every one of these, that when God
threatens to punish them for the greatness of their iniquities, and the
multitude of their transgression, (which is generally supposed to be meant by
the three transgressions and the four) he does particularly threaten to send a
fire among them to consume the Houses and the Palaces of their Cities. So to
Damascus, chap. 1.4. to Gaza, v. 7. to Tyrus, v. 10. to Edom, v. 12. to Ammon,
v. 14. to Moab, chapter 2. v. 2. to Judah, v. 5. I will send a fire upon Judah, and
it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem: and Israel in the words of the text.
This is a Judgment then, which when it comes in its fury, gives us notice to
how great a height our sins are risen: especially when it has so many dreadful
forerunners, as it had in Israel, and has had among our selves. When the red
horse has marched furiously before it all bloody with the effects of a Civil
War, and the pale horse has followed after the other with Death upon his back,
and the Grave at his heels, and after both these, those come, out of whose
mouth issues fire, and smoke, and brimstone, it is then time for the
inhabitants of the earth, to repent of the work of their hands. But it is our
great unhappiness, that we are apt to impute these great calamities to any
thing rather than to our sins; and thereby we hinder our selves from the true
remedy, because we will not understand the cause of our distemper. Though God
has not sent Prophets among us, to tell us for such and such sins, I will send
such and such judgments upon you, yet where we observe the parallel between the
sins and the punishments agreeable with what we find recorded in Scripture, we
have reason to say, that those sins were not only the antecedents, but the
causes of those punishments which followed after them. And that because the
reason of punishment was not built upon any particular relation between God and
the people of Israel, but upon reasons common to all mankind: yet with this
difference, that the greater the mercies were which any people enjoyed, the
sooner was the measure of their iniquities filled up, and the severer were the
judgments when they came upon them. This our Prophet gives an account of,
Chap. 3.2. You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth, therefore
will I punish you for your iniquities. So did God punish Tire and Damascus, as
well as Israel and Judah; but his meaning is, he would punish them sooner, he
would punish them more severely. I wish we could be brought once to consider
what influence piety and virtue has upon the good of a Nation, if we did, we
should not only live better our selves, but our Kingdom and Nation might
flourish more than otherwise we are like to see it do. Which is a truth has
been so universally received among the wise Men of all ages, that one of the
Roman Historians, though of no very severe life himself, yet imputes the decay
of the Roman State, not to Chance or Fortune, or some unhidden causes (which
the Atheism of our Age would presently do) but to the general looseness of men's
lives, and corruption of their manners. And it was the grave Observation of one
of the bravest Scipio apud Aug de Civ. D. l. 1. c. 33.
Captains ever the Roman State had, that it was impossible for any State to be
happy, stantibus moenibus, ruentibus moribus, though their walls were firm, if
their manners were decayed. But it is our misery, that our walls and our
manners are fallen together, or rather the latter undermined the former. They
are our sins which have drawn so much of our blood, and infected our air, and
added the greatest fuel to our flames.

But it is not enough in general to declaim against our sins, but we must
search out particularly those predominant vices, which by their boldness and
frequency have provoked God thus to punish us; and as we have hitherto observed
a parallel between the Judgments of Israel in this Chapter, and our own: So I
am afraid we shall find too sad a parallel between their sins and ours too.
Three sorts of sins are here spoken of in a peculiar manner, as the causes of
their severe punishments: Their luxury and intemperance, their covetousness and
oppression, and their contempt of God and his Laws, and I doubt we need not
make a very exact scrutiny to find out these in a high degree among our selves:
and I wish it were as easy to reform them, as to find them out.

1. Luxury and intemperance; that we meet with in the first verse, both in the
compellation, Ye Kine of Bashan, and in their behavior, which say to their
Masters, bring and let us drink. Ye Kine of Bashan, Loquitur ad Principes
Israel and Optimates quosque december Tribuum, says St. Hierom, he speaks to the
Princes of Israel, and the chief of all the ten Tribes; Those which are sed in
the richest pastures, such as those of Bashan were. Who are more fully
described by the Prophet in this sixth chapter. They are the men who are at
ease in Sion, v. 1. they put far away from them the evil day, v. 3. they lie
upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the stock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, v. 4.
they chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of
Music like David, v. 5. they drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with
the chief ointments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. The
meaning of all which is, they minded nothing but ease, softness, and pleasure,
but could not endure to hear of the calamities which were so near them. Nothing
but mirth, and jollity, and riot, and feasting, and evil consequences of these
were to be seen or heard among them. Their delicate souls were presently rufled
and disturbed at the discourse of any thing but matters of courtship, address
and entertainment. Any thing that was grave and serious, though never so
necessary, and of the greatest importance, was put off, as Felix put off St.
Paul, to a more convenient time: especially if it threatened miseries to them,
and appeared with a countenance sadder than their own. These were the Kine of
Bashan, who were full of ease and wantonness, and never thought of the day of
slaughter, which the other were the certain forerunner of. Symmachus renders
it, (...), which others apply to the rich Citizens of Samaria; I am afraid we
may take it in either sense without a Soloecism. Bring and let us drink, which
as St. Hierom goes on, Ebrietatem significat in vino and luxuria quoe statum
mentis evertunt, it implies the height of their luxury and intemperance. It is
observed by some, that our Prophet retains still the language of his education
in the bluntness of his expressions, the great men that lived wholly at their
ease, in wantonness and luxury, he styles like the heardsman of Tekoa, the Kine
of Bashan. That he thought was title good enough for such who seemed to have
souls for no other end, than the other had. And has not that delicata insania,
as St Austin calls it, that soft and effeminate kind of madness taken
possession of too many among us, whose birth and education designed them for
more manly employments? Yea, what an age of Luxury do we live in, when instead
of those noble characters of men from their virtue, and wisdom, and courage, it
is looked on among some as a mighty character of a person, that he eats and
drinks well: a character that becomes none so much as the Kine of Bashan in the
literal sense, for surely they did so, or else they had never been in so great
esteem among the heardsmen of Tekoa. A character which those Philosopher; would
have been ashamed of, who looked upon no other end of humane life but pleasure;
But in order to that, they thought nothing more necessary than temperance and
sobriety; but whatever esteem they had then, they have lost all their
reputation among our modern Epicures, who know of no such things as pleasures
of the mind, and would not much value whether they had any faculties of the
mind or no, unless it were for the contrivance of new Oaths and Debaucheries.
But if this were only among some few persons, we hope the whole Nation would
not suffer for their madness: for scarce any Age has been so happy, but it
has had some Monsters in Morality as well as Nature. But I am afraid these
vices are grown too Epidemical; not only in the City, but the Countries too;
what mean else those frequent complaints (and I hope more general than the
causes of them) that the houses of great men in too many places are so near
being public schools of debauchery, rather than of piety and virtue, where men
shall not want instructers to teach them to forget both God and themselves;
wherein sobriety is so far from being accounted a matter of honor, that the
rules of the Persian civility are quite forgotten, and men are forced to unman
themselves. I know nothing would tend more to the honor of our Nation, or the
advantage of it, than if once these public excesses were severely restrained,
I do not mean so much by making new Laws, (for those generally do but exercise
peoples Wits by finding out new evasions) but by excecuting old ones.

2. Covetousness and oppression. You see what these great men in Samaria did
when they had any respite from their excesses and intemperance, then woe be to
the poor who come in their way; Which oppress the poor, and crush the needy: v.
1. either by the hands of violence, or by those arts and devices which either
their honesty or poverty have kept them from the knowledge of. And if there be
not so much of open violence in our days, the thanks are due to the care of
our Magistrates, and the severity of our Laws, but it is hard to say whether
ever any Age produced more studious and skilful to pervert the design of Laws,
without breaking the letter of them, than this of ours has done. Fraud and
injustice is now managed with a great deal of artifice and cunning; and he
thinks himself no body in the understanding of the world, that cannot overreach
his Brother, and not be discovered: or however in the multiplicity and
obscurity of our Laws cannot find out something in pretense at least to
justify his actions by. But i^ appeal be made to the Court of Judicature, what
arts are then used either for concealing or hiring Witnesses, so that if their
Purses be not equal, the adverse party may overswear him by so much as his
Purse is weightier than the others. I heartily wish it may never be said of us,
what the Orator once said of the Greeks, Gicer pro Flacco.
Quibus jusjurandum jocus, testimonium ludus, they made it a matter of jest and
drollery to forswear themselves, and give false testimonies. But supposing men
keep within the bounds of justice and common honesty, yet how unsatiable are
the desires of men! they are for adding house to house, and land to land never
contented with what either their Ancestors have left them, or the bountiful
hand of Heaven has bestowed upon them. Till at last it may be in the Prophets
expression for their covetousness, H^b. 2.21.
the stone cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber answer it; i. e.
provoke God to give a severe check to the exorbitant and boundless desire of
men, as he has done by this days calamity. Thus while the City thought with
Isa. 47.7, 8, 11.
Babylon to sit as a Lady for ever, while she dwelt carelessly, and said I am,
and there is none else beside me; evil is come upon her, and she knows not from
whence it comes, and mischief is ^allen upon her, and she has not been able to
put it off, and desolation is come upon her suddenly, which she did not foresee.

3. Contempt of God and his Laws. That we read of v. 4. where the Prophet
speaks by an Irony to them, Come to Bethel and transgress, etc. he knew well
enough they were resolved to do it, let God or the Prophet say what they
pleased. For these Kine of Bashan were all ^or the Calves of Dan and Bethel,
and some think that is the reason of the title that is given them. These great
men of Samaria thought it beneath them to o^n Religion any further than it was
subservient to their civil interests. They were all of Ieroboams Religion, who
looked on it as a mear politic thing, and sit to advance his own designs by. I
am afraid there are too many at this day who are secretly of his mind, and
think it a piece of wisdom to be so: Blessed God, that men should be so wise to
deceive themselves, and go down with so much discretion to Hell! These are the
grave and retired Atheists, who, though they secretly love not Religion, yet
their caution hinders them from talking much against it. But there is a sort of
men much more common than the other; the faculties of whose minds are so thin
and aerie, that they will not bear the consideration of any thing, much less of
Religion; these throw out their bitter sco^fs, and profane jests against it. A
thing never permitted that I know of in any civilized Nation in the world;
whatsoever their Religion was, the reputation of Religion was always preserved
sacred: God himself (says Josephus) would not suffer the Jews to speak evil of
other Gods, though they were to destroy all those who tempted them to the
worship of them. And shall we suffer the most excellent and reasonable Religion
in the world, viz. the Christian, to be profaned by the unhallowed mouths of
any who will venture to be damned, to be accounted witty? if their enquiries
were deeper, their reason stronger, or their arguments more persuasive, than of
those who have made it their utmost care and business to search into these
things, they ought to be allowed a fair hearing; bu^ for men who pretend to
none of these things, yet still to make Religion the object of their sco^fs and
raillery, does not become the gravity of a Nation professing wisdom to permit
it, much less the sobriety of a people professing Christianity. In the mean
time such persons may know, that wise men may be argued out of a Religion they
own, but none but Fools and madmen will be droll'd out of it. Let them first
try whether they can laugh men out of their Estates, before they attempt to do
it out of their hopes of an Eternal happiness. And I am sure it will be no
comfort to them in another world, that they were accounted Wits for deriding
those miseries which they then feel and smart under the severity of: it will be
no mitigation of their flames that they go laughing into them; nor will they
endure them the better because they would not believe them. But while this is
so prevailing a humor among the vain men of this Age and Nation, what can we
expect but that God should be remarkable, and severe judgments seek to make
men more serious in Religion; or else make their hearts to ache, and the^r
joints to tremble, as he did Belshazzars, when he could find nothing else to
carouse in but the Vessels of the Temple. And when men said in the Prophet
Zephany, chap. 1.12. that God neither did good nor evil, presently it follows,
Zeph. 1.13, 14, 1^.
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: the
day of the Lord is near, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wastness and desolation; as it is with us at this time. Thus we see how sad
the parallel has been not only in the judgments of Isreal, but in the sins
likewise which have made those judgments so severe.

4. The severity of the Judgment appears not only from the Causes, but from the
Author of it. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. God challenges the execution of his Justice to himself, not only in
the great day, but in his judgment here in the world. Amos 3 6.
Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? When God is
pleased to punish men for their sins, the excution of his justice is agreeable
to his nature now, as it will be at the end of the world. We all know that he
may do it if he please, and he has told us, that he does and will do it; and
we know withal, that without such remarkable severities, the world will hardly
be kept in any awe of him. We do not ^ind that love does so much in the World
as Fear does, there being so very few persons of tractable and ingenuous
spirits. It is true of too many, what Lact. l. 2. c. 11.
Lactantius ob^erves of the Romans, Nunquam Dei meminerunt, nisi dum in malis
sunt, they seldom think of God, but when they are afraid of him. And there is
not only this reason as to particular persons why God should punish them, but
there is a greater as to Communities, and Bodies of men; for although God
suffers wicked men to escape punishment here, as he often does, yet he is sure
not to do it in the life to come; but Communities of men can never be punished
but in this World; and therefore the Justice o^ God does often discover it self
in these common calamities, to keep the World in subjection to him, and to let
men see that neither the multitude of their Associates, nor the depth of their
Designs, nor the subtilty of their Councils can secure them from the omnipotent
arm of Divine Justice, when he has determined to visit their transgressions
with rods, and their iniquities with stripes. But when he does all this, yet
his loving kindness does he not utterly take from them: for in the midst of all
his Judgments he is pleased to remember Mercy; of which we have a remarkable
instance in the Text, for when God was overthrowing Cities, yet he plucked the
Inhabitants as fire brands out of the burning: and so I come from the severity
of God*

2. To the mixture or his Mercy in it. And ye were as a fire brand plucked out
of the burning. That notes two things, the nearness they were in to the danger,
and the unexpectedness of their deliverance out of it.

1. The nearness they were in to the danger, quasi torris, cujus jam magna pars
absumpta est, as some Paraphrase it; like a brand, the greatest part of which
is already consumed by Fire; which shows the difficulty of their escaping. So
Joshua is said to be a brand plucked out of the ^ire, Zech. 3.2. And to this St.
Hierom upon this place, applies that difficult passage, 1 Cor. 3.15. they shall
be saved, but so as by Fire, noting the greatness of the danger they were in,
and how hardly they should escape. And are not a^l the Inhabitants of this
City, and all of us in the Suburbs of the other, whose houses escaped so near
the flames, as Firebrands plucked out of the burning? When the fire came on in
its rage and fury, as though it would in a short time have devoured all before
it, that not only this whole City, but so great a part of the Suburbs of the
other should escape ununtouched, is (all circumstances considered) a wonderful
expression of the kindness o^ God to us in the midst of so much severity. If he
had suffered the Fire to go on to have consumed the remainder of our Churches
and Houses, and laid this City even with the other in one continued heap of
ruins, we must have said, Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous in all thy
judgments. We ought rather to have admired his patience in f^aring us so long,
than complain of this ^igour of his Justice in punishing us at last; but
in^^ead of that he has given us occasion this day, with the three Children in
the fiery Furnace, to praise him in the midst of the flames. For even the
Inhabitants of London themselves who have suffered most in this calamity, have
cause to acknowledge the mercy of God toward them, that they are escaped
themselves; though it be (as the Jews report of Joshua the High-^riest, when
thrown into the fire by the Chaldeans) with their clothes burnt about them.
Though their habitations be consumed, and their losses otherwise may be too
great, yet that in the midst of so much danger by the flames, and the press of
people, so very few should suffer the loss of their lives, ought to be owned by
them and us as a miraculous Providence of God toward them. And therefore not
unto us, not unto us, but to his holy Name be the praise of so great a
preservation in the midst of so heavy a Judgment.

2. The unexpectedness of such a deliverance; they are not saved by their own
skill and counsel, nor by their strength and industry, but by him who by his
mighty hand did pluck them as fire brands out of the burning. Though we own the
justice of God in the calamities of this day, let us not forget his mercy in
what he has unexpectedly rescued from the fury of the flames; that the Royal
Palaces of our Gracious Sovereign, the residence of the Nobility, the Houses of
Parliament, the Courts of Judicature, the place where we are now assembled, and
^everal others of the same nature, with other places and habitations to receive
those who were burnt out of their own, stand at this day untouched with the
fire (and long may they continue so) ought chiefly to be ascribed to the power
and goodness of that God, who not only commands the raging of the Sea, and the
madness of the People, but whom the winds and the flames obey. Although enough
in a due subordination to Divine Providence can never be attributed to the
mighty care and industry of our most Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal
Highness, who by their presence and encouragement inspired a new life and
vigor into the sinking spirits of the Citizens, whereby God was pleased so far
to succeed their endeavors, that a stop was put to the fury of the fire in
such places where it was as likely to have prevailed, as in any parts of the
City consumed by it.

O let us not then frustrate the design of so much severity mixed with so great
mercy: let it never be said, that neither Judgments nor Kindness will work upon
us: that neither our deliverance from the Pestilence which walks in darkness,
nor from the flames which shine as the noonday, will awaken us from that
Lethargy and security we are in by our sins: but let God take what course he
pleases with us, we are the same incorrigible people still that ever we were.
For we have cause enough for our mourning and lamentation this day, (if God had
not sent new calamities upon us) that we were no better for those we had
undergone before. We have surfeited with mercies, and grown sick of the
kindness of Heaven to us, and when God has made us smart for ou^ fullness and
wantonness, then we grew sullen and murmured and disputed against providence,
and were willing to do any thing but repent of our sins, and reform our lives.
It is not many years since God blessed us with great and undeserved blessings,
which we then thought our selves very thankful for; but if we had been really
so, we should never have provoked him who bestowed those favors upon us in so
great a degree as we have done since. Was this our requital to him for
restoring our Sovereign, to rebel the more against Heaven? Was this our
thankfulness, for removing the disorders of Church and State, to bring them
into our lives? Had we no other way of trying the continuance of Gods goodness
to us, but by exercising his patience by our greater provocations? As though we
had resolved to let the world see, there could be a more unthankful and
disobedient people than the Jews had been. Thus we sinned with as much security
and confidence, as though we had blinded the eyes, or bribed the justice, or
commanded the power of Heaven. When God of a sudden like one highly provoked
drew forth the sword of his destroying Angel, and by it cut off so many
thousands in the midst of us: Then we fell upon our knees, and begged the mercy
of Heaven, that our lives might be spared, that we might have time to amend
them: but no sooner did our fears abate, but our devotion did so too, we had
soon forgotten the promises we made in the day of our distress, and I am afraid
it is at this day too true of us which is said in the Revelations of those who
had escaped the several plagues which so many had been destroyed by. Rev. 9.20.
And the rest of the men which were not killed by these Plagues, yet repented
not of the work of their hands. For if we had not greedily sucked in again the
poison we had only laid down while we were begging for our lives, if we had not
returned with as great fury and violence as ever to our former lusts, the
removing of one Judgment had not been as it were only to make way for the
coming on of another. For the grave seemed to close up her mouth, and death by
degrees to withdraw himself, that the Fire might come upon the Stage, to act
its part too in the Tragedy our sins have made among us: and I pray God this
may be the last Act of it. Let us not then provoke God to find out new methods
of vengeance, and make experiments upon us of what other unheard of severities
may do for our cure. But let us rather meet God now by our repentance, and
returning to him, by our serious humiliation for our former sins, and our
steadfast resolutions to return no more to the practice of them. That, that much
more dangerous infection of our souls may be cured as well as that of our
bodies, that the impure flames which burn within may be extinguished, that all
our luxuries may be retrenched, our debaucheries punished, our vanities taken
away, our careless indifferency in Religion turned into a greater seriousness
both in the profession and the practice of it. So will God make us a happy and
prosperous, when he finds us a more righteous and holy Nation. So will God
succeed all your endeavors for the honor and interest of that people whom you
represent. So may he add that other Title to the rest of those you have
deserved for your Countries good, to make you Repairers of the breaches of the
City as well as of the Nation, and Restorers of paths to dwell in: So may that
City which now sits solitary like a Widow, have her tears wiped off, and her
beauty and comeliness restored unto her. Yea, so may her present ruins, in
which she now lies buried, be only the forerunners of a more joyful
resurrection. In which, though the body may remain the same, the qualities may
be so altered, that its present desolation may be the only putting off its
former inconveniences, weakness, and deformities, that it may rise with greater
glory, strength and proportion: and to all her other qualities, may that of
incorruption be added too, at least till the general Conflagration. And I know
your great Wisdom and Justice will take care, that those who have suffered by
the ruins, may not likewise suffer by the rising of it, that the glory of the
City may not be laid upon the tears of the Orphans and Widows, but that its
foundations may be settled upon Justice and Piety. That there be no complaining
in the Streets for want of Righteousness, nor in the City for want of Churches,
nor in the Churches for want of a settled maintenance. That those who attend
upon the se^vice or God in them may never be tempted to betray their
Consciences to gain a livelihood, nor to comply with the factious humors of
men, that they may be able to live among them. And thus when the City through
the blessing of Heaven shall be built again, may it be a Habitation of Holiness
toward God, of Loyalty toward our Gracious King and his Successors, of
Justice and Righteousness toward Men, of Sobriety, and Peace, and Unity among
all the Inhabitants, till not Cities and Countries only, but the world and time
it self shall be no more. Which God of his infinite mercy grant through the
merits and mediation of his Son, to whom with the Father and Eternal Spirit, be
all Honor and Glory for evermore.

SERMON II.
Preached before the KING, MARCH. 13. 1666/7.
Prove. XIV. IX. Fools make a mock at Sin.


WHEN God by his infinite Wisdom had contrived, and by a Power and Goodness, as
infinite as his Wisdom, had perfected the the creation of the visible world,
there seemed to be nothing wanting to the glory of it, but a creature endued
with reason and understanding, which might comprehend the design of his wisdom,
enjoy the benefits of his goodness, and employ it self in the celebration of
his power. The Beings purely intellectual were too highly raised by their own
order and creation, to be the Lords of this inferior world: and those whose
natures could reach no higher than the objects of sense, were not capable of
discovering the glorious perfections of the great Creator: and therefore could
not be the fit Instruments of his praise and service. But a conjunction of both
these together was thought necessary to make up such a sort of Being, which
might at once command this lower world, and be the servants of him who made it.
Not as though this great fabric of the world were merely raised for man to to
please his fancy in the contemplation of it, or to exercise his dominion over
the creatures designed for his use and service: but that by frequent
reflections on the Author of his being, and the effects of his power and
goodness he might be brought to the greatest love and admiration of him. So
that the most natural part of Religion lies in the grateful acknowledgements we
owe to that excellent and supreme Being, who has showed so particular a
kindness to man in the Creation and Government of the world. Which was so great
and unexpressible, that some have thought, it was not so much pride and
affectation of a greater height, as envy at the felicity and power of mankind,
which was the occasion of the fall of the Apostate spirits. But whether or no
the state of man were occasion enough for the envy of the Spirits above; we are
sure the kindness of Heaven was so great in it, as could not but lay an
indispensable obligation on all mankind to perpetual gratitude and obedience.
For it is as easy to suppose, that affronts and injuries are the most suitable
returns for the most obliging favors, that the first duty of a Child should be
to destroy his Parents; that to be thankful for kindnesses received, were to
commit the unpardonable sin; as that man should receive his being and all the
the blessings which attend it from God, and not be bound to the most universal
obedience to him.

And as the reflection on the Author of his being, leads him to the
acknowledgment of his duty toward God, so the consideration of the design of
it, will more easily acquaint him with the nature of that duty which is
expected from him. Had man been designed only to act a short part here in the
world, all that had been required of him, had been only to express his
thankfulness to God for his being, and the comforts of it: the using all means
for the due preservation of himself; the doing nothing beneath the dignity of
humane nature, nothing injurious to those who were of the same nature with
himself; but since he is designed for greater and nobler ends, and his present
state, is but a state of trial, in order to future happiness and misery; the
reason of good and evil is not to be taken merely from his present, but from
the respect, which things have to that eternal state he is designed for. From
whence it follows, that the differences of good and evil are rooted in the
nature of our beings, and are the necessary consequents of our relation to God,
and each other, and our expectations of a future life. And therefore according
to these measures, the estimation of men in the world has been while they did
preserve any veneration for God or themselves. Wisdom and folly was not
measured so much by the subtilty and and curiosity of men's speculations, by the
fineness of their thoughts, or the depth of their designs, as by their
endeavors to hold up the dignity of mankind; by their piety and devotion
toward God; by their sobriety and due Government of their actions; by the
equality and justice, the charity and kindness of their dealings to one
another. Wisdom was but another name for goodness, and folly for sin; then it
was a man's glory to be religious; and to be profane and vicious, was to be
base and mean: then there were no Gods worshipped because they were bad, nor
any men disgraced because they were good. Then there were no Temples erected to
the meanest passions of humane nature, nor men became Idolaters to their own
infirmities. Then to be betrayed into sin, was accounted weakness; to contrive
it, dishonor and baseness; to justify and defend it, infamy and reproach; to
make a mock at it, a mark of the highest folly and incorrigibleness. So the
Wise man in the words of the Text assures us, that they are Fools, and those of
the highest rank and degree of folly, who make a mock at sin.

It is well for us in the Age we live in, that we have the judgment of former
ages to appeal to, and of those persons in them whose reputation for wisdom is
yet unquestionable. For otherwise we might be born down by that spightful enemy
to all virtue and goodness, the impudence of such, who it is hard to say,
whether they show it more in commiting sin, or in defending it. Men whose
manners are so bad, that scarce any thing can be imagined worse, unless it be
the wit they use to excuse them with. Such who take the measure of man's
perfections downwards, and the nearer they approach to beasts, the more they
think themselves to act like men. No wonder then, if among such as these the
differences of good and evil be laughed at, and no sin be thought so
unpardonable, as the thinking that there is any at all. Nay, the utmost they
will allow in the description of Sin, is, that it is a thing that some live by
declaiming against, and others cannot live without the practice of.

But is the Chair of Scorners at last proved the only chair of Infallibility?
Must those be the standard of mankind, who seem to have little left of humane
nature, but laughter and the shape of men? Do they think that we are all become
such fools to take scoffs for arguments, and raillery for demonstrations? He
knows nothing at all of goodness, that knows not that it is much more easy to
laugh at it, than to practice it; and it were worth the while to make a mock at
sin, if the doing so would make nothing of it. But the nature of things does
not vary with the humors of men; sin becomes not at all the less dangerous
because men have so little Wit to think it so; nor Religion the less excellent
and adantagious to the world, because the greatest enemies of that are so much
to themselves too, that they have learnt to despise it. But although that
scorns to be defended by such weapons whereby her enemies assault her, (nothing
more unbecoming the Majesty of Religion, than to make it self cheap, by making
others laugh) yet if they can but obtain so much of themselves to attend with
patience to what is serious, there may be yet a possibility of persuading them,
that no fools are so great as those who laugh themselves into misery, and none
so certainly do so, as those who make a mock at sin.

But if our authority be too mean and contemptible to be relied on, in a matter
wherein they think us so much concerned (and so I hope we are to prevent the
ruin of men's souls) we dare with confidence appeal to the general sense of
mankind in the matter of our present debate. Let them name but any one person
in all the monuments of former ages, to whom but the bare suspicion of Vice was
not a diminution to an esteem that might otherwise have been great in the
world. And if the bare suspicion would do so much among even the more rude and
barbarous Nations, what would open and professed wickedness do among the more
knowing and civil? Humane nature retains an abhorrency of sin, so far that it
is impossible for men to have the same esteem of those who are given over to
all manner of wickedness, though otherwise of great sharpness of wit, and of
such whose natural abilities may not exceed the other, but yet do govern their
actions according to the strict rules of Religion and Virtue. And the general
sense of mankind cannot be by any thing better known, than by an universal
consent of men, as to the wa^s whereby they express their value and esteem of
others. What they all agree on as the best character of a person worthy to be
loved and honored, we may well think is the most agreeable to humane nature;
and what is universally thought a disparagement to the highest accomplishments,
ought to be looked on as the disgrace and imperfection of it. Did ever any yet,
though never so wicked and profane themselves, seriously commend another person
for his rudeness and debaucheries? Was any man's lust or intemperance ever
reckoned among the Titles of his honor? Who ever yet raised Trophies to his
vices, or thought to perpetuate his memory by the glory of them? Where was it
ever known, that sobriety and temperance, justice and charity were thought the
marks of reproach and infamy? Who ever suffered in their reputation by being
thought to be really good? Nay, it is so far from it, that the most wicked
persons do inwardly esteem them whether they will or no. By which we see, that
even in this lapsed and degenerate condition of mankind, it is only goodness
which gains true honor and esteem, and nothing does so effectually blast a
growing reputation, as wickedness and vice.

But if it be thus with the generality of men, who were never yet thought to
have too much partiality toward goodness, we may much more easily find it
among those, who have had a better ground for the reputation of their wisdom,
than the mere vogue of the people. He who was pronounced by the Heathen Oracle,
to be the wisest among the Greeks, was the person who brought down Philosophy
from the obscure and uncertain speculations of Nature, and in all his
discourses recommended Virtue as the truest Wisdom. And he among the Jews,
whose 1 Kin. 4.29, 30, 31.
soul was as large as the sand on the Seashore, whose wisdom out-went that of
all the persons of his own or future Ages, writes a Book on purpose to persuade
men, that there is no real wisdom, but to fear God and keep his Commandments:
that sin is the greatest folly, and the meaner apprehensions men have of it,
the more they are infatuated by the temptations to it. But as there are degrees
of sinning, so there are of folly in it. Some sin with a blushing Countenance,
and a trembling Conscience; they sin, but yet they are afraid to sin, but in
the act of it they condemn themselves for what they do; they sin, but with
confusion in their faces, with horror in their minds, and an earthquake in
their Consciences: though the condition of such persons be dangerous, and their
unquietness shows the greatness of their folly, yet because these twitches of
Conscience argue there are some quick touches left of the sense of good and
evil, their case is not desperate, nor their condition incurable: But there are
others who despise these as the reproach of the School of Wickedness, because
they are not yet attained to those heights of impiety which they glory in: such
who have subdued their Consciences much easier than others do their sins; who
have almost worn out all the impressions of the work of the Law written in
their hearts; who not only make a practice, but a boast of sin, and defend it
with as much greediness as they commit it: these are the men, whose folly is
manifest to all men but themselves; and surely, since these are the men, whom
Solomon in the words of the Text describes,

(1.) By their character, as Fools, and,

(2.) By the instance of their folly, in making a mock at sin; We may have not
only the liberty to use, but (1.) To prove, that Name of reproach to be due
unto them; and (2.) To show the reasonableness of fastening it upon them,
because they make a mock at sin.

But before I come more closely to pursue that, it will be necessary to
consider another sense of these words caused by the ambiguity of the Hebrew
Verb, which sometimes signifies to deride and scorn, sometimes to plead for,
and excuse a thing with all the arts of Rhetoric (thence the word for
Rhetoric is derived from the Verb here used) according to which sense, it
notes all the plausible pretenses and subtle extenuations which wicked men use
in defense of their evil actions. For as if men intended to make some
recompense for the folly they betray in the acts of sin, by the wit they employ
in the pleading for them, there is nothing they show more industry and care in,
than in endeavoring to baffle their own Consciences, and please themselves in
their folly, till death and eternal ^lames awaken them. That we may not
therefore seem to beg all wicked men for Fools, till we have heard what they
have to say for themselves, we shall first examine the reasonableness of their
fairest Pleas for their evil actions, before we make good the particular
impeachment of folly against them. There are three ways especially whereby they
seek to jus^ifie themselves; by laying the blame of all their evil actions,
either upon the fatal necessity of all events, the unavoidable frailty of
humane nature, or the impossibility of keeping the Laws of Heaven: But that
none of these will serve to excuse them from the just imputation of folly, is
our present business to discover.

1. The fatal necessity of all humane actions. Those who upon any other terms
are unwilling willing enough to own either God or Providence, yet if they can
but make these serve their turn to justify their sins by, their quarrel
against them then cease, as being much more willing that God should bear the
blame of their sins, than themselves. But yet the very fears of a Deity suggest
so many dreadful thoughts of his Majesty, Justice, and Power, that they are
very well contented to have him wholly left out: and then to suppose Man to be
a mere Engine, that is necessarily moved by such a train and series of causes,
that there is no action how bad soever that is done by him, which it was any
more possible for him not to have done, than for the fire not to burn when it
pleases. If this be true, farewell all the differences of good and evil in men's
actions; farewell all expectations of future rewards and punishments; Religion
becomes but a mere name, and righteousness but an art to live by. But it is
with this, as it is with the other arguments they use against Religion; there
is something within, which checks and controlls them in what they say: and that
inward remorse of Conscience, which such men sometimes feel in their evil
actions (when conscience is forced to recoil by the foulness of them) does
effectually confute their own hypothesis; and makes them not believe those
actions to be necessary, for which they suffer so much in themselves because
they knew they did them freely. Or it is as fatal for man to believe himself
free when he is not so, as it is for him to act when his choice is determined?
but what series of causes is there that does so necessarily impose upon the
common sense of all mankind; It seems very strange, that man should have so
little sense of his own interest to be still necessitated to the worst of
actions, and yet torment himself with the thoughts that he did them freely. Or
is it only the freedom of action, and not of choice, that men have an
experience of within themselves? But surely, however men may subtly dispute
of the difference between these two, no man would ever believe himself to be
free in what he does, unless he first thought himself to be so, in what he
determines? And if we suppose man to have as great a freedom of choice in all
his evil actions (which is the liberty we are now speaking of) as any persons
assert or contend for, we cannot suppose that he should have a greater
experience of it, than now he has. So that either it is impossible for man to
know when his choice is free; or if it may be known, the constant experience of
all evil men in the world will testify, that it is so now. Is it possible for
the most intemperate person to believe, when the most pleasing temptations to
lust or gluttony are presented to him, that no consideration whatever could
restrain his appetite, or keep him from the satisfaction of his brutish
inclinations? Will not the sudden, though groundless apprehension of poison in
the Cup, make the Drunkards heart to ache, and hand to tremble, and to let fall
the supposed fatal mixture in the midst of all his jollity and excess? How
often have persons who have designed the greatest mischief to the lives and
fortunes of others, when all opportunities have fallen out beyond their
expectation for accomplishing their ends, through some sudden thoughts which
have surprised them, almost in the very act, been diverted from their intended
purposes? Did ever any yet imagine that the charms of beauty and allurements of
lust were so irresistible, that if men knew beforehand they should surely dye
in the embraces of an adulterous bed, they could not yet withstand the
temptations to it? If then some considerations, which are quite of another
nature from all the objects which are presented to him, may quite hinder the
force and efficacy of them upon the mind of man (as we see in Ioseph's
resisting the importunate Caresses of his Mistress) what reason can there be to
imagine that man is a mere machine moved only as outward objects determine him?
And if the considerations of present fear and danger may divert men from the
practice of evil actions, shall not the far more weighty considerations of
eternity have at least an equal, if not a far greater power and efficacy upon
men's minds, to keep them from everlasting misery? Is an immortal soul and the
eternal happiness of it so mean a thing in our esteem and value, that we will
not deny our selves those sensual pleasures for the sake of that which we would
renounce for some present danger? Are the flames of another world such painted
fires, that they deserve only to be laughed at, and not seriously considered by
us? Fond man! art thou only free to ruin and destroy thy self? a strange
fatality indeed, when nothing but what is mean and trivial shall determine thy
choice! when matters of the highest moment are therefore less regarded, because
they are such. Have thou no other plea for thy self, but that thy sins were
fatal? thou have no reason then to believe but that thy misery shall be so too.
But if thou ownest a God and Providence, assure thy self that justice and
righteousness are not mere Titles of his Honor, but the real properties of his
nature. And he who has appointed the rewards and punishments of the great day,
will then call the sinner to account, not only for all his other sins, but for
offering to lay the imputation of them upon himself. For if the greater
abhorrency of men's evil ways, the rigor of his laws, the severity of his
judgments, the exactness of his justice, the greatest care used to reclaim men
from their sins, and the highest assurance, that he is not the cause of their
ruin, may be any vindication of the holiness of God now, and his justice in
the life to come; we have the greatest reason to lay the blame of all our evil
actions upon our selves, as to attribute the glory of all our good unto himself
alone.

2. The frailty of humane Nature: those who find themselves to be free enough
to do their souls mischief, and yet continue still in the doing of it, find
nothing more ready to plead for themselves, than the unhappiness of man's
composition, and the degenerate state of the world. If God had designed (they
are ready to say) that man should lead a life free from sin, why did he confine
the soul of man to a body so apt to taint and pollute it? But who art thou O
man, that thus find fault with thy Maker? Was not his kindness the greater,
in not only giving thee a soul capable of enjoying himself, but such an
habitation for it here, which by the curiosity of its contrivance, the number
and usefulness of its parts, might be a perpetual and domestic testimony of
the wisdom of its Maker? Was not such a conjunction of soul and body necessary
for the exercise of that dominion which God designed man for, over the
creatures endued only with sense and motion? And if we suppose this life to be
a state of trial in order to a better, (as in all reason we ought to do) what
can be imagined more proper to such a state, than to have the soul constantly
employed in the Government of those sensual inclinations which arise from the
body? In the doing of which, the proper exercise of that virtue consists, which
is made the condition of future happiness. Had it not been for such a
composition, the differenc^ could never have been seen between good and bad
men; i. e. between those who maintain the Empire of reason, assisted by the
motives of Religion, over all the inferior faculties, and such who dethrone
their souls and make them slaves to every lust that will command them. And if
men willingly subject themselves to that which they were born to rule, they
have none to blame but themselves for it. Neither is it any excuse at all, that
this, through the degeneracy of mankind, is grown the common custom of the
world; unless that be in it self so great a Tyrant, that there is no resisting
the power of it. If God had commanded us to comply with all the customs of the
world, and at the same time to be sober, righteous, and good, we must have
lived in another age than we live in, to have excused these two commands from a
palpable contradiction. But instead of this, he has forewarned us of the
danger of being led aside by the soft and easy compliances of the world; and
if we are sensible of our own infirmities, (as we have all reason to be) he
has offered us the assistance of his Grace and of that Spirit of his, 1 John
4.4.
which is greater than the Spirit that is in the World. He has promised us
those weapons whereby we may withstand the torrent of wickedness in the world,
with far greater success than the old Nicol. Damascen. de moribus gent. p. 9.
Ed. Cragii.
Gauls were wont to do in the inundations of their Country, whose custom was to
be drowned with their arms in their hands. But it will be the greater folly in
us to be so, because we have not only sufficient means of resistance, but we
understand the danger beforehand. If we once forsake the strict rules of
Religion and Goodness, and are ready to yield our selves to whatever has got
retainers enough to set up for a custom, we may know where we begin, but we
cannot where we shall make an end. For every fresh assault makes the breach
wider, at which more enemies may come in still; so that when we find our selves
under their power, we are contented for our own ease to call them Friends.
Which is the unhappy consequence of too easy yielding at first, till at last
the greatest slavery to sin be accounted but good humor, and a gentile
compliance with the fashions of the world. So that when men are persuaded,
eith^r through fear, or too great easiness to disuse that strict eye which they
had before to their actions, it oft-times falls out with them, as it did with
the Soldier in the Geta in Appiano.
Roman History, who blinded his eye so long in the time of the Civil Wars, that
when he would have used it again, he could not. And when custom has by degrees
taken away the sense of sin from their Consciences, they grow as hard as Herod.
Thal. v Synes. de laud. Calvivitii. p. 77.
Herodotus tells us the heads of the old Egyptians were by the heat of the Sun,
that nothing would ever enter them. If men will with Nebuchadnezzar herd with
the beasts of the field, no wonder if their reas^n departs from them, and by
degrees they grow as savage as the company they keep. So powerful a thing is
Custom to debauch mankind, and so easily do the greatest vices by degrees
obtain admission into the souls of men, under pretense of being retainers to
the common infirmities of humane nature. Which is a phrase, through the power
of self-flattery, and men's ignorance in the nature of moral actions, made to be
of so large and comprehensive a sense that the most wilful violations of the
Laws of Heaven, and such which the Scripture tells us do exclude from the
Kingdom of it, do find (rather than make) friends enough to shelter themselves
under the protection of them. But such a protection it is, which is neither
allowed in the Court of Heaven, nor will ever secure the souls of men without a
hearty and sincere repentance, from the arrest of divine justice; which when it
comes to call the world to an account of their actions will make no
defalcations at all for the power of custom, or common practice of the world.

3. The Impossibility of the Command, or rather of obedience to it. When
neither of the former pleas will ef^ect their design, but notwithstanding the
pretended necessity of humane actions, and the more than pretended common
practice of the World, their Consciences still fly in their faces, and rebuke
them sharply for their sins, then in a mighty rage and fury they charge God
himself with Tyranny in laying impossible Laws upon the sons of men. But if we
either consider the nature of the command, or the promises which accompany it,
or the large experience of the world to the contrary, we shall easily discover
that this pretense is altogether as unreasonable as either of the foregoing.
For what is it that God requires of men as the condition of their future
happiness which in its own nature is judged impossible? Is it for men to Tit.
2.12.
live soberly, righteously and godly in this world? for that was the end of
Christian Religion to persuade men to do so: but who thinks it impossible to
avoid the occasions of intemperance, not to defraud, or injure his neighbors,
or to pay that reverence and sincere devotion to God which we owe unto him? Is
it to do as we would be done by? yet that has been judged by strangers to the
Christian Religion a most exact measure of humane conversation; Is it to
maintain an universal kindness and good will to men? that indeed is the great
excellency of our Religion, that it so strictly requires it; but if this be
impossible, farewell all good nature in the world; and I suppose few will own
this charge, lest theirs be suspected. Is it to be patient under sufferings,
moderate in our desires, circumspect in our actions, contented in all
conditions? yet these are things which those have pretended to who never owned
Christianity, and therefore surely they never thought them impossible. Is it to
be charitable to the poor, compassionate to those in misery? is it to be
frequent in Prayer, to love God above all things, to forgive our enemies as we
hope God will forgive us, to believe the Gospel, and be ready to suffer for the
sake of Christ? the^e are very few among us but will say they do all these
things already, and therefore surely they do not think them impossible. The
like answer I might give to all the other precepts of the Gospel till we come
to the denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and as to these too, if we charge
men with them, they either deny their committing them, and then say they have
kept the command: or if they confess it, they promise amendment for the future;
but in neither respect can they be said to think the command impossible. Thus
we see their own mouths will condemn them when they charge God with laying
impossible Laws on mankind. But if we enquire further than into the judgments
of those (who it may be never concerned themselves so much about the precepts
of Christian Religion, as to try whether they had any power to observe them or
not); nay, if we yield them more (than, it may be, they are willing to enquire
after, though they ought to do it) viz. that without the assistance of divine
grace, they can never do it: yet such is the unlimited nature of divine
goodness and the exceeding riches of Gods Grace, that (knowing the weakness and
degeneracy of humane Nature when he gave these commands to men) he makes a
large and free offer of assistance to all those who are so sensible of their
own infirmity as to beg it of him. And can men then say the command is
impossible when he has promi^ed an assistance suitable to the nature of the
duty and the in^irmities of men? If it be ackowledged that some of the duties
of Christianity are very difficult to us now; let us consider by what means he
has sweetened the performance of them. Will not the proposal of so excellent a
reward, make us swallow some more than ordinary hardships that we might enjoy
it? has he not made use of the most obliging motives to persuade ^s to the
practice of what he requires by the infinite discovery of his own love, the
death of his Son, and the promise of his Spirit? And what then is wanting, but
only setting our selves to the serious obedience of them, to make his commands
not only not impossible, but easy to us? But our grand fault is, we make
impossibilities our selves where we find none, and then we complain of them: we
are first resolved not to practice the commands, and then nothing more easy
than to find fault with them: we first pass sentence, and then examine
evidences; first condemn, and then enquire into the merits of the Cause. Yet
surely none of these things can be accounted impossible, which have been done
by all those who have been sincere and hearty Christians; and God forbid we
should think all guilty of hypocrisy, who have professed the Christian
Religion from the beginning of it to this day. Nay more than so, they have not
only done them, but professed to have that joy and satisfaction of mind in the
doing of them, which they would not exchange for all the pleasures and delights
of the world. These were the men, who not only were patient, but rejoiced in
sufferings; who accounted it their honor and glory to endure any thing for the
sake of so excellent a Religion; who were so assured of a future happiness by
it, that they valued Martyrdoms above Crowns and Scepters. But God be thanked,
we may hope to come to Heaven on easier terms than these, or else many others
might never come thither, besides those who think to make this a pretense for
their sin, that now when with encouragement and honor we may practice our
Religion, the commands of it are thought impossible by them. Thus we have made
good the general Charge here employed against wicked men in that they are called
Fools, by examining the most plausible pretenses they bring for themselves.

I now come to the particular impeachment of their folly, because they make a
mock at sin. And that I shall prove especially by two things: 1. Because this
argues the highest degree of wickedness. 2. Because it betrays the greatest
weakness of judgment and want of consideration.

1. Because it argues the highest degree of wickedness. If to sin be folly, to
make a mock at it is little short of madness. It is such a height of impiety
that few but those who are of very proffigate consciences can attain to,
without a long custom in sinning. For Conscience is at first modest, and starts
and boggles at the appearance of a great wickedness, till it be used to it and
grown familiar with it. It is no such easy matter for a man to get the mastery
of his conscience; a great deal of force and violence must be used to ones self
before he does it. The natural impressions of good and evil, the fears of a
Deity, and the apprehensions of a future state are such curbs and checks in a
sinners way, that he must first sin himself beyond all ^eeling of these, before
he can attain to the seat of the scorners. And we may justly wonder how any
should ever come thither, when they must break through all that is ingenuous
and modest, all that is virtuous and good, all that is tender and apprehensive
in humane nature, before they can arrive at it. They must first deny a God, and
despise an immortal soul, they must conquer their own reason, and cancel the
Law written in their hearts, they must hate all that is serious, and yet
soberly believe themselves to be no better than the beasts that perish, before
men can come to make a scoff at religion, and a mock at sin.

And who now could ever imagine that in a Nation professing Christianity, among
a people whose genius enclines them to civility and religion, yea among those
who have the greatest advantages of behavior and education, and who are to
give the Laws of civility to the rest of the Nation, there should any be found
who should deride religion, make sport with their own profaneness, and make so
light of nothing, as being damned? I come not here to accuse any, and least of
all those who show so much regard of religion as to be present in the places
devoted to sacred purposes; but if there be any such here, whose consciences
accuse themselves for any degrees of so great impiety, I beseech them by all
that is dear and precious to them, by all that is sacred and serious, by the
vows of their Baptism, and their participation of the Holy Eucharist, by all
the kindness of Heaven which they either enjoy or hope for, by the death and
sufferings of the Son of God, that they would now consider how great folly and
wickedness they betray in it, and what the dreadful consequence of it will be,
if they do not timely repent of it. If it were a doubt (as I hope it is not
among any here) whether the matters of Religion be true or no, they are surely
things which ought to be seriously thought and spoken of. It is certainly no
jesting matter to affront a God of infinite Majesty and Power, (and he judges
every wilful sinner to do so) nor can any one in his wits think it a thing not
to be regarded, whether he be eternally happy or miserable. Methinks then among
persons of civility and honor, above all others, Religion might at least be
treated with the respect and reverence due to the concernments of it; that it
be not made the sport of Entertainments, nor the common subject of Plays and
Comedies. For is there nothing to trifle with, but God and his Service? Is wit
grown so schismatical and sacrilegious, that it can please it self with nothing
but holy ground? Are profaneness and wit grown such inseparable companions,
that none shall be allowed to pretend to the one, but such as dare be highly
guilty of the other? Far be it from those who have but the name of Christians,
either to do these things themselves, or to be pleased with them that do them:
especially in such times as ours of late have been, when God has used to many
ways to make us serious if any thing would ever do it. If men had only slighted
God and Religion, and made a mock at sin, when they had grown wanton through
the abundance of peace and plenty, and saw no severities of God's justice used
upon such who did it; yet the fault had been so great, as might have done
enough to have interrupted their peace and destroyed that plenty, which made
them out of the greatness of their pride and wantonn^ss to kick against Heaven:
but to do it in despite of all God's judgments, to laugh in his face when his
rod is upon our backs, when neither Pestilence nor Fire can make us more afraid
of him, exceedingly aggravates the impiety, and makes it more unpardonable.
When like the old Tacit. de moribus German.
Germans we dance among naked swords, when men shall defy and reproach Heaven
in the midst of a Cities ruins, and over the graves of those whom the arrows
of the Almighty have heaped together, what can be thought of such but that
nothing will make them serious, but eternal misery? And are they so sure there
is no such rising to be feared, that they never think of it, but when by their
execrable oaths they call upon God to damn them, for fear he should not do it
time enough for them? Thus will men abuse his patience, and provoke his
justice, while they trample upon his kindness, and slight his severities, while
they despise his Laws and mock at the breaches of them, what can be added more
to their impiety? or what can be expected by such who are guilty of it, but
that God should quickly discover their mighty folly by letting them see how
much they have deceived themselves, since Gal. 6.7.
God will not be mocked, but Ephesians 5.6.
because of these things the wrath of God will most certainly come upon, the
children of disobedience. Which leads to the second thing, wherein this folly
is seen.

2. Which is in the weakness of judgment and want of consideration, which this
betrays in men. Folly is the great unsteadiness of the mind in the thoughts of
what is good and fitting to be done. It were happy for many in the world, if
none should suffer in their reputation for want of wisdom, but such whom nature
or some violent distemper have wholly deprived of the use of their reason and
understandings: But wisdom does not lie in the rambling imaginations of men's
minds ( for fools may think of the same things which wise men practice) but in
a due consideration and choice of things which are most agreeable to the end
they design, supposing the end in the first place to be worthy a wise man's
choice; for I cannot yet see why the end may not be chosen as well as the
means, when there are many stand in competition for our choice, and men first
deliberate, and then determine which is the fittest to be pursued. But when the
actions of men discover, that either they understand or regard not the most
excellent end o^ their beings, or do those things which directly cross and
thwart their own. designs, or else pursue those which are mean and ignoble in
themselves, we need not any further evidence of their folly, than these things
discover.

Now that those who make a mock at sin are guilty of all these, will appear, if
we consider whom they provoke by doing so, whom they most injure, and upon what
reasonable consideration they are moved to what they do.

1. Whom they provoke by their making a mock at sin; Supposing that there is a
Governor of the world, who has established Laws for us to be guided by, we
may easily understand, whose honor and authority is reflected on, when the
violations of his Laws are made nothing of* For surely if they had a just
esteem of his Power and Sovereignty, they never durst make so bold with him, as
all those do who not only commit sin themselves, but laugh at the scrupulosity
of those who dare not. When Dionysius changed Apollo's Cloak, and took off the
Golden Beard of Aesculapius, with those solemn jeers of the unsuitableness of
the one to the Son of a beardless Father, and the much greater convenience of a
cheaper garment to the other: it was a sign he stood not much in awe of the
severity of their looks, nor had any dread at all of the greatness of their
power. But although there be so infinite a disproportion between the artificial
Deities of the Heathens and the Majesty of him who made and governs the whole
world; yet as little reverence to his power and authority is showed by all such
who dare affront him with such a mighty confidence, and bid the greatest
defiance to his Laws by scoffing at them. What is there the Sovereigns and
Princes of the earth do more justly resent, and express the highest indignation
against, than to have their Laws despised, their Persons affronted, and there
Authority contemned? And can we then imagine, that a God of infinite Power and
Majesty, the honor of whose Laws is as dear to him as his own is, should sit
still unconcerned, when so many indignities are continually offered them, and
never take any notice at all of them? It is true, his patience is not to be
measured by our fretful and peevish natures, (and it is happy for us all that
it is not) he knows the sinner can never escape his power, and therefore bears
the longer with him: but yet his lenity is always joined with his wisdom and
justice, and the time is coming when patience it self shall be no more. Is it
not then the highest madness and folly to provoke one whose power is infinitely
greater than our own is, and from the severity of whose wrath we cannot secure
our selves one minute of an hour? How know thou, O vain man, but that in the
midst of all thy mirth and jollity, while thou art boasting of thy sins, and
think thou can never fill up fast enough the measure of thy iniquities, a
sudden fit of an Apoplexy, or the breaking of an Aposteme, or any of the
innumerable instruments of death, may dispatch thee hence, and consign thee
into the hands of divine Justice? And wherewithal then will thou be able to
dispute with God? Will thou then charge his Providence with folly, and his Laws
with unreasonableness? when his greatness shall affright thee, his Majesty
astonish thee, his Power disarm thee, and his Justice proceed against thee:
when notwithstanding all thy bravado's here, they own Conscience shall be not
only thy accuser and witness, but thy judge and executioner too: when it shall
revenge it self upon thee for all the rapes and violences thou have committed
upon it here: when horror and confusion shall be thy portion, and the
unspeakable anguish of a racked and tormented mind shall too late convince thee
of thy folly in making a mock at that which stings with an everlasting venom.
Art thou then resolved to put all these things to the adventure, and live as
securely as if the terrors of the Almighty were but the dreams of men awake,
or the fancies of weak and distempered brains? But I had rather believe that in
the heat and fury of thy lusts thou would seem to others to think so, than
thou either do or can persuade thy self to such unreasonable folly. Is it
not then far better to consult the tranquillity of thy mind here, and the
eternal happiness of it hereafter, by a serious repentance and speedy amendment
of thy life, than to expose thy self for the sake of thy sensual pleasures to
the fury of that God whose justice is infinite, and power irresistible? Shall
not the apprehension of his excellency make thee now afraid of him? Never then
make any mock at sin more, unless thou art able to contend with the Almighty,
or to dwell with everlasting burnings.

2. The folly of it is seen in considering whom the injury redounds to by men's
making themselves so pleasant with their sins. Do they think by their rude
attempts to dethrone the Majesty of Heaven, or by standing at the greatest
defiance, to make him willing to come to terms of composition with them? Do
they hope to slip beyond the bounds of his power, by falling into nothing when
they die, or to sue out prohibitions in the Court of Heaven, to hinder the
effects of Justice there? Do they design to out-wit infinite Wisdom, or to find
such flaws in God's government of the World, that he shall be contented to let
them go unpunished? All which imaginations are alike vain and foolish, and only
show how easily wickedness baffles the reason of mankind, and makes them rather
hope or wish for the most impossible things than believe they shall ever be
punished for their impieties. If the Apostate Spirits can by reason of their
present restraint and expectation of future punishments be as pleasant in
beholding the follies of men as they are malicious to suggest them, it maybe
one of the greatest diversions of their misery, to see how active and witty men
are in contriving their own ruin. To see with what greediness they catch at
every bait that is offered them, and when they are swallowing the most deadly
poison, what arts they use to persuade themselves that it is a healthful
potion. No doubt, nothing can more gratify them than to see men sport
themselves into their own destruction, and go down so pleasantly to Hell: when
eternal flames become their first awakeners, and then men begin to be wise,
when it is too late to be so: when nothing but insupportable torments can
convince them that God was in earnest with them, and that he would not always
bear the affronts of evil men, and that those who derided the miseries of
another life, shall have leisure enough to repent their folly, when their
repentance shall only increase their sorrow without hopes of pardon by it.

3. But if there were any present felicity, or any considerable advantage to be
gained by this mocking at sin, and undervaluing Religion, there would seem to
be some kind of pretense, though nothing of true reason for it. Yet that which
heightens this folly to the highest degree in the last place is, that there can
be no imaginable consideration thought on which might look like a plausible
temptation to it. The covetous man, when he has defrauded his neighbor, and
used all kinds of arts to compass an Estate, has the ^ulness of his bags to
answer for him* and whatever they may do in another world, he is sure they will
do much in this. The voluptuous man has the strong propensities of his Nature,
the force of temptation which lies in the charms of beauty, to excuse his
unlawful pleasures by. The ambitious man, has the greatness of his mind, the
advantage of authority, the examples of those who have been great before him,
and the envy of those who condemn him, to plead for the heights he aims at. But
what is it which the persons who despises Religion, and laughs at every thing
that is serious, proposes to himself as the reason of what he does? But alas!
this were to suppose him to be much more serious than he is, if he did propound
any thing to himself as the ground of his actions. But it may be a great
kindness to others, though none to himself; I cannot imagine any unless it may
be, to make them thankful they are not arrived to that height of folly; or out
of perfect good nature, lest they should take him to be wiser than he is. The
Psalmists fool despises him as much as he does Religion: for he only says it
in his heart, there is no God; but this though he dares not think there is
none, yet shows him not near so much outward respect and reverence as the other
does. Even the Atheist himself thinks him a Fool, and the greatest of all
other, who believes a God, and yet affronts him and trifles with him. And
although the Athiests folly be unaccountable, in resisting the clearest
evidence of reason, yet so far he is to be commended for what he says, that if
there be such a thing as Religion, men ought to be serious in it. So that of
all hands the scoffer at Religion is looked on as one forsaken of that little
reason, which might serve to uphold a slender reputation of being above the
beasts that perish: nay, therein his condition is worse than theirs, that as
they understand not Religion, they shall never be punished for despising it:
which such a person can never secure himself from, considering the power, the
justice, the severity of that God, whom he has so highly provoked. God grant
that the apprehension of this danger may make us so serious in the profession
and practice of our Religion, that we may not by slighting that, and mocking at
sin, provoke him to laugh at our calamities, and mock when our fear comes; but
that by beholding the sincerity of our repentance, and the heartiness of our
devotion to him, he may turn his anger away from us, and rejoice over us to do
us good.

SERMON III.
Preached at WHITE HALL.
Luke VII. XXXV. But Wisdom is justified of all her Children.


OF all the Circumstances of our Blessed Saviors appearance and preaching in
the World, there is none which to our first view and apprehension of things,
seems more strange and unaccountable, than that those persons who were then
thought of all others to be most conversant in the Law and the Prophets, should
be the most obstinate opposers of him. For since he came to fulfill all the
Prophesies which had gone before concerning him, and was himself the great
Prophet foretold by all the rest, none might in humane probability have been
judged more likely to have received and honored him, than those to whom the
judgment of those things did peculiarly belong; and who were as much concerned
in the truth of them as any else could be. Thus indeed it might have been
reasonably expe^^ed; and doubtless it had been so, if interest and prejudice
had not had a far more absolute power and dominion over them, than they had
over the rest of the people. If Miracles, and Prophesies, if Reason and
Religion; nay, if the interest of another World could have prevailed over the
interest of this among them; the Jewish Sanhedrin might have been some of the
first Converts to Christianity, the Scribes and Pharisees had been all
Proselytes to Christ, and the Temple at Jerusalem had been the first Christian
Church. But to let us see with what a jealous eye Power and Interest looks on
every thing that seems to of^er at any disturbance of it, how much greater sway
partiality and prejudice has upon the m^nds of men than true Reason and
Religion; and how hard a matter it is to convince those who have no mind to be
convinced; we find none more furious in their opposition to the person of
Christ, none more obstinate in their infidelity as to this Doctrine, than those
who were at that time in the greatest reputation among them for their
authority, wisdom, and knowledge. These are they, whom our Savior, as often as
he meets with, either checks for their ignorance, or rebukes for their pride,
or denounces woes against for their malice and hypocrisy: These are they who
instead of believing in Christ persecute him; instead of following him seek to
destroy him: and that they might the better compass it, they reproach and
defame him, as if he had been really as bad as themselves. And although the
people might not presently believe what they said concerning him, yet that they
might at least be kept in suspense by it, they endeavor to fasten the blackest
calumnies upon him? and suit them with all imaginable arts to the tempers of
those they had to deal with.

If any appeared zealous for the present peace and prosperity of the Nation;
and for paying the duty and obedience they owed to the Roman Power, which then
governed them: to them he is represented as a factious and seditious person, as
an enemy to Caesar, as one that intended to set up a Kingdom of his own, though
to the ruin of his Country: That it was nothing but ambition and vainglory,
which made him gather Disciples, and preach to multitudes; that none could
foretell what the dangerous consequences of such new Doctrines might be, if not
timely suppressed, and the Author of them severely punished. Thus to the
prudent and cautious, reason of State is pretended as the ground of their
enmity to Christ. But to those who are impatient of the Roman yoke, and watched
for any opportunity to cast it off; they suggest the mighty improbabilities of
ever obtaining any deliverance by a person so mean and inconsiderable as our
Savior appeared among them: and that surely God who delivered their
Forefathers of old from a bondage not greater than theirs, by a mighty hand and
outstretched arm, did never intend the redemption of his people by one of
obscure Parentage, mean Education, and of no interest in the world. To the
great men, they need no more than bid them, behold the train of his followers,
who being generally poor, the more numerous they were, the more mouths they
might see open, and ready to devour the Estates of those who were above them.
The Priests and Levites they bid consider what would become of them all, if the
Law of Moses was abrogated, by which their interest was upheld? for if the
Temple fell, it was impossible for them to stand. But the grand difficulty was
among the people, who began to be possessed with so high an opinion of him by
the greatness of his Miracles, the excellency of his Doctrine, and the
innocence of his Conversation, that unless they could insinuate into their
minds some effectual prejudices against these, a^^ their other attempts were
like to be vain and unsucces^ful. If therefore they meet with any who were
surprised by his Mi^acles, as well as ravished by his Doctrine; when they saw
him raise the dead, restore sight to the blind, cure the deaf and the lame, and
cast out Devils out of possessed persons, they tell them presently that these
were the common arts of Impostors, and the practice of those who go about to
deceive the people; that such things were easily done by the power of Magic,
and assistance of the evil Spirits. If any were admirers of the Pharisaical
rigours and austerities (as the people generally were) when men's Religion was
measured by the sowerness of their Countenances, the length of their Prayers,
and the distance they kept from other persons; these they bid especially beware
of our Saviors Doctrine; for he condemned all zeal and devotion, all
mortification and strictness of life, under the pretense of Pharisaical
hypocrisy; that he sunk all Religion into short Prayers and dull Morality;
that his conversation was not among the persons of any reputation for piety,
but among Publicans and Sinners; that nothing extraordinary appeared in his
Life; that his actions were like other men's, and his company none of the best,
and his behavior among them with too great a freedom for a person who
pretended to so high a degree o^ holiness.

Thus we see the most perfect innocence could not escape the venom of malicious
tongues; but the less it entered, the more they were enraged, and made up what
wanted in the truth of their calumnies, by their diligence in spreading them.
As though their mouths indeed had been open Sepulchers by the noysom vapors
which came out of them; and we may well think no less a poison than that of
Asps could be under their lips, which so secretly and yet so mischievously
conveyed it self into the hearts of the people. The only advantage which malice
has against the greatest Virtue, is, that the greater it is, the less it takes
notice of all the petty arts which are used against it; and will not bring its
own innocence so much into suspicion as to make any long Apologies for it self.
For, to a noble and generous spirit, assaulted rather by noise and clamor,
than any solid reason or force of argument, neglect and disdain are the most
proper weapons of defense: for where malice is only impertinent and
troublesome, a punctual answer seems next to a confession. But although
innocence needs no defense as to it self, yet it is necessary for all the
advantages it has of doing good to mankind, that it appear to be what it
really is; which cannot be done, unless its reputation be cleared from the
malicious aspersions which are cast upon it. And from hence it was that our
blessed Savior, though he thought it not worth the while to use the same
diligence in the vindication of himself, which his enemies did in the
defamation of him; yet when he saw it necessary in order to the reception of
his Doctrine among the more ingenious and tractable part of his auditors, he
sometimes by the quickness of his replies, sometimes by the suddenness and
sharpness of his questions, and sometimes by the plain force of argument and
reason, baffles his adversaries, so that though they were resolved not to be
convinced, they thought it best for the time to be quiet. This was to let them
see how easy it was for him to throw off their reproaches as fast as their
malice could invent them; and that it was as impossible for them by such weak
attempts to obscure the reputation of his innocence, as for the spots which
Astronomers descern near the body of the Sun, ever to eclipse the light of it.
So that all those thinner mists which envy and detraction raised at his first
appearance, and those grosser vapors which arose from their open enmity when
he came to a greater height, did but add a brighter luster to his glory, when
it was seen that notwithstanding all the machinations of his enemies, his
innocence brake forth like the light, which shines more and more to the
perfect day.

But it pleased God, for the trial of men's minds so to order the matters of our
Religion, that as they are never so clear, but men of obstinate and perverse
spirits will find something to cavil at; so they were never so dark and obscure
in the most difficult circumstances of them, but men of unprejudiced and
ingenuous minds might find enough to satisfy themselves about them. Which is
the main scope of our Savior in the words of the Text, (and shall be of our
present discourse upon them) but wisdom is justified of all her Children. Where
without any further Explication, by Wisdom we understand the method which God
uses in order to the salvation of mankind; by the Children of Wisdom, all
those who were willing to attain the end by the means which God affords, and
by justifying not only the bare approving it, but the declaring of that
approbation to the World by a just vindication of it from the cavils and
exceptions of men. Although the words are capable of various senses, yet this
is the most natural, and agreeable to the scope of what goes before. For there
our Savior speaks of the different ways wherein John Baptist and himself
appeared among the Jews, in order to the same end, v. 32. For John Baptist came
neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and ye say, he has a Devil. A very
severe Devil surely, and one of the strictest order among them, that was so far
from being cast out by fasting and prayer, that these were his continual
employment! But what could we have sooner thought than that those persons who
made the Devil the author of so much mortification and severity of life, should
presently have entertained Religion in a more free and pleasing humor; but
this would not take neither, for the Son of Man comes eating and drinking; i.
e. was remarkable for none of those rigours and austerities which they
condemned in John, and applauded in the Pharisees; and then presently they
censure him, as a gluttonous man, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
Sinners, v. 34. i. e. the utmost excess that any course of life was capable of
they presently apply to those who had no other design in all their actions,
than to recommend true piety and goodness to them. So impossible it was by any
means which the wisdom of Heaven thought fit to use, to persuade them into any
good opinion of the persons who brought the glad tidings of Salvation to them:
and therefore our Savior, when he sees how refractory and perverse they were,
in interpreting every thing to the worse, and censuring the ways which infinite
Wisdom thought fittest to reclaim them by, he tells them that it was nothing
but malice and obstinacy which was the cause of it; but if they were men of
teachable spirits (who by an usual Hebraism are called the Children of Wisdom)
they would see reason enough to admire, approve and justify all the methods of
divine Providence for the good of Mankind. For Wisdom is justified of all her
Children.

That which I mainly design to speak to from hence is, That although the wisest
Contrivances of Heaven for the good of Mankind are liable to the unjust cavils
and exceptions of unreasonable men, yet there is enough to satisfy any
teachable and ingenuous Minds concerning the wisdom of them. Before I come more
particularly to examine those which concern our present subject, viz. the life
and appearance of our Lord and Savior, it will take very much off from the
force of them, if we consider, that thus it has always been, and supposing
humane nature to be as it is, it is scarce conceivable that it should be
otherwise. Not that it is necessary or reasonable it should be so at all, any
more than it is necessary that men should act foolishly or inconsiderately; but
as long as we must never expect to see all men either wise or pious, either to
have a true judgment of things, or a love of Religion; so long we shall always
find there will be some, who will be quarrelling with Religion when they have
no mind to practice it. I speak not now of those who make a mere jest and scoff
at Religion (of which our Age has so many Instances) but of a sort of men who
are of a degree above the other, though far enough short of any true and solid
wisdom; who yet are the more to be considered, because they seem to make a
slender offer at reason in what they say. Some pretend they are not only
unsatisfied with the particular ways of instituted Religion, any further than
they are subservient to their present interest (which is the only God they
worship) but to make all sure, the foundations even of Natural Religion it self
cannot escape their cavils and exceptions. They have found out an Index
Expurgatorius for those impressions of a Deity which are in the hearts of men;
and use their utmost arts to obscure, since they cannot extinguish, those
lively characters of the power, wisdom and goodness of God, which are every
where to be seen in the large volume of the Creation. Religion is no more to
them but an unaccountable fear; and the very notion of a spiritual substance
(even of that without which we could never know what a contradiction meant) is
said to imply one. But if for quietness sake, and it may be to content their
own minds as well as the World, they are willing to admit of a Deity, (which is
a mighty concession from those who have so much cause to be afraid of him) then
to ease their minds of such troublesome companions as their fears are, they seek
by all means to dispossess him of his Government of the World, by denying his
Providence, and care of humane affairs. They are contented he should be called
an excellent Being, that should do nothing, and therefore signify nothing in
the World; or rather, then he might be styled an Almighty Sardanapalus, that is
so fond of ease and pleasure, that the least thought of business would quite
spoil his happiness. Or if the activity of their own spirits may make them
think that such an excellent Being may sometimes draw the Curtains and look
abroad into the World, then every advantage which another has got above them,
and every cross accident which befalls themselves (which by the power of
self-flattery most men have learnt to call the Prosperity of the wicked, and
the Sufferings of good men) serve them for mighty charges against the justice
of Divine Providence. Thus either God shall not govern the World at all, or if
he do, it must be upon such terms as they please and approve of, or else they
will erect an High Court of Justice upon him, and condemn the Sovereign of the
World, because he could not please his discontented Subjects. And as if he were
indeed arraigned at such a bar, every weak and peevish exception shall be cried
up for evidence; when the fullest and clearest vindications of him shall be
scorned and contemned. But this does not in the least argue the obnoxiousness
of him who is so accused, but the great injustice of those who dare pass
sentence; where it is neither in their power to understand the reason of his
actions, nor if it were, to call him in question for his proceedings with men.
But so great is the pride and arrogance of humane Nature, that it loves to be
condemning what it cannot comprehend; and there needs be no greater reason
given concerning the many disputes in the world about Divine Providence, than
that God is wise, and we are not but would fain seem to be so. While men are in
the dark they will be always quarrelling; and those who contend the most, do it
that they might seem to others to see, when they know themselves they do not.
Nay, there is nothing so plain and evident, but the reason of some men is more
apt to be imposed upon in it, than their senses are; as it appeared in him who
could not otherwise confute the Philosophers argument against motion, but by
moving before him. So that we see the most certain things in the world are
liable to the cavils of men who employ their wits to do it; and certainly those
ought not to stagger men's faith in matters of the highe^t nature and
consequence, which would not at all move them in other things.

But at last it is acknowledged by the men who love to be called the men of wit
in this Age of ours, that there is a God and Providence, a future state, and
the differences of good and evil, but the Christian Religion they will see no
further reason to embrace than as it is the Religion of the State they live in.
But if we demand what mighty reasons they are able to bring forth against a
Religion so holy and innocent in its design, so agreeable to the Nature of God
and Man, so well contrived for the advantages of this and another life, so
fully attested to come from God by the Miracles wrought in confirmation of it,
by the death of the Son of God, and of such multitudes of Martyrs, so certainly
conveyed to us, by the unquestionable Tradition of all Ages since the first
delivery of it; the utmost they can pretend against it is, that it is built
upon such an appearance of the Son of God which was too mean and contemptible,
that the Doctrine of it is inconsistent with the Civil Interests of men, and
the design ineffectual for the Reformation of the World. For the removal
therefore of these cavils against our Religion, I shall show,

1. That there were no circumstances in our Saviors appearance or course of
life, which were unbecoming the Son of God, and the design he came upon.

2. That the Doctrine delivered by him is so far from being contrary to the
Civil Interests of the World, that it tends highly to the preservation of them.

3. That the design he came upon was very agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom of
God, and most effectual for the reformation of Mankind.

For clearing the first of these, I shall consider, (1.) The Manner of our
Saviors appearance. (2.) The Course of his Li^e; and what it was which his
enemies did most object against him.

1. The manner of our Saviors Appearance; which has been always the great
offense to the admirers of the pomp and greatness of this World. For when they
heard of the Son of God coming down from Heaven, and making his Progress into
this lower world, they could imagine nothing less, than that an innumerable
company of Angels must have been dispatched before, to have prepared a place
for his reception; that all the Sovereigns and Princes of the World must have
been summoned to give their attendance and pay their homage to him: that their
Scepters must have been immediately laid at his feet, and all the Kingdoms of
the earth been united into one universal Monarchy under the Empire of the Son
of God: That the Heavens should bow down at his presence to show their
obeisance to him, the Earth tremble and shake for fear at the near approaches
of his Majesty; that all the Clouds should clap together in one universal
Thunder, to welcome his appearance, and tell the Inhabitants of the World what
cause they had to fear him whom the Powers of the Heavens obey: that the Sea
should run out of its wonted course with amazement and horror; and if it were
possible, hide it self in the hollow places of the earth: that the Mountains
should shrink in their heads, to fill up the vast places of the deep; so that
all that should be fulfilled in a literal sense, which was foretold of the
coming of the Messiah, Luke 3.5, 6.
That every Valley should be filled, and every Mountain and Hill brought low;
the crooked made straight, and the rough ways smooth, and all flesh see the
salvation of God. Yea, that the Son for a time should be darkened, and the Moon
withdraw her light, to let the Nations of the Earth understand that a Glory
infinitely greater than theirs did now appear to the World. In a word, they
could not imagine the Son of God could be born without the pangs and throws of
the whole Creation; that it was as impossible for him to appear, as for the Son
in the Firmament to disappear, without the notice of the whole World. But when
instead of all his pomp and grandeur he comes incognito into the World, instead
of giving notice of his appearance to the Potentates of the Earth, he is only
discovered to a few silly Shepherds and three Wise men of the East; instead of
choosing either Rome or Jerusalem for the place of his Nativity, he is born at
Bethleem, a mean and obscure Village: instead of the glorious and magnificent
Palaces of the East or West, which were at that time so famous; he is brought
forth in a Stable, where the Manger was his Cradle, and his Mother the only
attendant about him: who was her self none of the great persons of the Court,
nor of any same in the Country; but was only rich in her Genealogy, and
honorable in her Pedigree. And according to the obscurity of his Birth was his
Education too: his Youth was not spent in the Imperial Court at Rome, nor in
the Schools of Philosophers at Athens, nor at the feet of the great Rabbis at
Jerusalem: but at Nazareth, a place of mean esteem among the Jews, where he was
remarkable for nothing so much as the Virtues proper to his Age, Modesty,
Humility and Obedience. All which he exercises to so high a degree, that his
greatest kindred and acquaintance were mightily surprised when at 30 years of
age, he began to discover himself by the Miracles which he wrought, and the
Authority which he spoke with. And although the rays of his Divinity began to
break forth through the Clouds he had hitherto disguised himself in, yet he
persisted still in the same course of humility and self-denial: taking care of
others to the neg^ect of himself; feeding others by a Miracle, and fasting
himself, to one: showing his power in working miraculous Cures, and his
humility in concealing them: Conversing with the meanest of the people, and
choosing such for his Apostles, who brought nothing to recommend them but
innocence and simplicity. Who by their heats and ignorance were continual
exercises of his patience in bearing with them, and of his care and tenderness
in instructing them. And after a life thus led with such unparalled humility,
when he could add nothing more to it by his actions, he does it by his
sufferings; and compleats the sad Tragedy of his Life by a most shameful and
ignominious Death. This is the short and true account of all those things which
the admirers of the greatness of this world think mean and contemptible in our
Saviors appearance here on earth. But we are now to consider whether so great
humility were not more agreeable with the design of his coming into the World,
than all that pomp and state would have been which the Son of God might have
more easily commanded than we can imagine. He came not upon so mean an errand,
as to dazzle the eyes of Mankind with the brightness of his Glory, to amaze them
by the terribleness of his Majesty, much less to make a show of the riches and
gallantry of the World to them: But he came upon far more noble and excellent
designs, to bring life and immortality to light, to give men the highest
assurance of an eternal happiness and misery in the World to come, and the most
certain directions for obtaining the one, and avoiding the other: and in order
to that, nothing was judged more necessary by him, than to bring the vanities
of this World out of that credit and reputation they had gained among foolish
men. Which he could never have done, if he had declaimed never so much against
the vanity of worldly greatness, riches and honors, if in the mean time
himself had lived in the greatest splendor and bravery. For the enjoining then
the contempt of this world to his Disciples in hopes of a better, would have
looked like the commendation of the excellency of fasting at a full meal, and
of the conveniences of poverty by one who makes the greatest have to be rich.
That he might not therefore seem to offer so great a contradiction to his
Doctrine by his own example, he makes choice of a life so remote from all
suspicion of designs upon this world, that though the foxes had holes, and the
birds of the air had nests, yet the Son of Man, who was the Lord and Heir of
all things, had not whereon to lay his head. And as he showed by his life how
little he valued the great things of the World, so he discovered by his death
how little he feared the evil things of it: all which he did with a purpose and
intention to rectify the great mistakes of men as to these things: That they
might no longer venture an eternal happiness for the splendid and glorious
vanities of this present life; nor expose themselves to the utmost miseries of
another world, to avoid the frowns of this. From hence proceeded that generous
contempt of the World, which not only our Savior himself, but all his true
Disciples of the first Ages of Christianity were so remarkable for; to let
others see they had greater things in their eye than any here, the hopes of
which they would not part with for all that this world thinks great or
desirable. So that considering the great danger most men are in, by too
passionate a love of these things, and that universal and infinite kindness
which our Savior had to the Souls of men; there was nothing he could discover
it more in as to his appearance in the world, than by putting such an affront
upon the greatness and honor of it, as he did by so open a neglect of it in
his life, and despising it in his death and sufferings. And who now upon any
pretense of reason dare entertain the meaner apprehensions of our Blessed
Savior because he appeared without the pomp and greatness of the world, when
the reason of his doing so was, that by his own humility and self-denial he
might show us the way to an eternal happiness? Which he well knew how very hard
it would be for men to attain to, who measure things not according to their
inward worth and excellency, but the splendor and appearance which they make
to the world: who think nothing great but what makes them gazed upon; nothing
desirable but what makes them flattered. But if they could be once persuaded
how incomparably valuable the glories of the life to come are above all the
gayeties and shows of this; they would think no condition mean or contemptible,
which led to so great an end; none happy or honorable which must so soon end
in the grave, or be changed to eternal misery. And that we might entertain such
thoughts as these are, not as the melancholy effects of discontent and
disappointments, but as the serious result of our most deliberate enquiry into
the value of things, was the design of our Savior in the humility of his
appearance, and of that excellent Doctrine which he recommended to the World by
it. Were I to argue the case with Philosophers, I might then at large show from
the free acknowledgments of the best and most experienced of them, that nothing
becomes so much one who designs to recommend Virtue to the World, as a real and
hearty contempt of all the pomp of it, and that the meanest condition
proceeding from such a principle is truly and in it self more honorable, than
living in the greatest splendor imaginable. Were I to deal with the Jews, I
might then prove, that as the Prophecies concerning the Messiah speak of great
and wonderful effects of his coming, so that they should be accomplished in a
way of suffering and humility. But since I speak to Christians, and therefore
to those who were persuaded of the great kindness and love of our Savior in
coming into the World, to reform it, and that by convincing men of the truth
and excellency of a future state, no more need to be said to vindicate the
appearance of him from that meanness and contempt, which the pride and ambition
of vain men is apt to cast upon it.

2. But not only our Saviors manner of Appearance, but the manner of his
Conversation gave great offense to his enemies, viz. That it was too free and
familiar among persons who had the meanest reputation, the Publicans and
Sinners; and in the mean time declaimed against the strictest observers of the
greatest rigours and austerities of life. And this no doubt was one great cause
of the mortal hatred of the Pharisees against him, though least pretended, that
even thereby they might make good that charge of hypocrisy which our Savior
so often draws up against them. And no wonder, if such severe rebukes did
highly provoke them, since they found this so gainful and withal so easy a
trade among the people, when with a demure look and a sower countenance they
could cheat and defraud their Brethren; and under a specious show of devotion
could break their fasts by devouring Widows houses, and end their long Prayers
to God with acts of the highest injustice to their Neighbors. As though all
that while, they had been only begging leave of God to do all the mischief they
could to their Brethren. It is true, such as these were, our Savior upon all
occasions speaks against with the greatest sharpness, as being the most
dangerous enemies to true Religion: and that which made men whose passion was
too strong for their reason abhor the very name of Religion, when such baseness
was practiced under the profession of it. When they saw men offer to compound
with Heaven for all their injustice and oppression, with not a twentieth part
of what God challenges as his due; they either thought Religion to be a mere
device of men, or that these men's hypocrisy ought to be discovered to the
World. And therefore our Blessed Savior, who came with a design to retrieve a
true spirit of Religion among men, finds it first of all necessary to unmask
those notorious hypocrites, that their deformities being discovered, their ways
as well as their persons might be the better understood and avoided. And when
he saw by the mighty opinion they had of themselves, and their uncharitableness
toward all others, how little good was to be done upon them, he seldom
vouchsafes them his presence; but rather converses with those who being more
openly wicked were more easily convinced of their wickedness, and persuaded to
reform. For which end alone it was that he so freely conversed with them, to
let them see there were none so bad, but his kindness was so great to them,
that he was willing to do them all the good he could: And therefore this could
be no more a just reproach to Christ, that he kept company sometimes with
these, than it is to a Chyrurgion to visit Hospitals, or to a Physician to
converse with the sick.

2. But when they saw that his Greatness did appear in another way, by the
authority of his Doctrine, and the power of his Miracles, then these wise and
subtle men apprehend a further reach and design in all his actions: Viz. That
his low condition was a piece of Popularity, and a mere disguise to ensnare the
people, the better to make them in love with his Doctrine, and so by degrees to
season them with Principles of Rebellion and Disobedience: Hence came all the
clamours of his being an Enemy to Caesar, and calling himself the King of the
Jews, and of his design to erect a Kingdom of his own, all which they interpret
in the most malicious though most unreasonable sense. For nothing is so
politic as malice and ill will, for that finds designs in every thing; and the
more contrary they are to all the Protestations of the persons concerned, the
deeper that suggests presently they are laid, and that there is the more cause
to be afraid of them. Thus it was in our Blessed Savior's case; it was not the
greatest care used by him to show his obedience to the Authority he lived
under, it was not his most solemn disavowing having any thing to do with their
civil Interests, not the severe checks he gave his own Disciples for any
ambitious thoughts among them, not the recommending the doctrine of Obedience
to them, nor the rebuke he gave one of his most forward Disciples for offering
to draw his sword in the rescue of himself, could abate the fury and rage of
his enemies, but at last they condemn the greatest Teacher of the duty of
Obedience as a Traitor, and the most unparalled example of innocence as a
Malefactor. But though there could be nothing objected against the life and
actions of our Blessed Savior, as tending to sedition and disturbance of the
Civil Peace, yet that, these men (who were inspired by malice, and prophesied
according to their own interest) would say, was because he was taken away in
time, before his designs could be ripe for action, but if his doctrine tended
that way, it was enough to justify their proceedings against him. So then, it
was not what he did, but what he might have done: not Treason but Convenience
which made them take away the life of the most innocent person: but if there
had been any tain^ in his doctrine that way, there had been reason enough in
such an Age of faction and sedition to have used the utmost care to prevent the
spreading it. But so far is this from the least ground of probability that it
is not possible to imagine a Religion which aims less at the present particular
interests of the embracers of it, and more at the public interests of Princes
than Christianity does, as it was both preached and practiced by our Savior
and his Apostles.

And here we have cause to lament the unhappy fate of Religion when it falls
under the censure of such who think themselves the Masters of all the little
arts whereby this world is governed. If it teaches the duty of Subjects, and
the authority of Princes, if it requires obedience to Laws, and makes men's
happiness or misery in another life in any measure to depend upon it; then
Religion is suspected to be a mere trick of Sta^e, and an invention to keep the
world in awe, whereby men might the better be molded into Societies, and
preserved in them. But if it appear to enforce any thing indispensably on the
Consciences of men, though humane Laws require the contrary; if they must not
^orswear their Religion, and deny him whom they hope to be saved by, when the
Magistrate calls them to it, then such half-witted men think that Religion is
nothing but a pretense to Rebellion, and Conscience only an obs^inate plea for
Disobedience. But this is to take it for granted that there is no such thing as
Religion in the World; for if there be, there must be some inviolable Rights of
Divine Sovereignty acknowledged, which must not vary according to the diversity
of the Edicts and Laws of men. But supposing the profession and practice of the
Christian Religion to be allowed inviolable, there was never any Religion, nay,
never any inventions of the greatest Politicians, which might compare with that
for the preservation of civil Societies. For this in plain and express words
tells all the owners of it, that they mu^t live in subjection and obedience;
Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake; that they who do resist receive
unto themselves damnation, and that because whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God. Than which it is impossible to conceive
arguments of greater force to keep men in obedience to Authority; for he that
only obeys because it is his inter^st to do so, will have the same reason to
disobey when there is an apprehension that may make more for his advantage. But
when the reason of obedience is derived from the concernments of another life,
no hopes of interest in this world can be thought to balance the loss which
may come by such a breach of duty in that to come. So that no persons do so
dangerously undermine the foundations of civil Government, as those who
magnify that to the contempt of Religion; none so effectually secure them as
those who give to God the things that are Gods, and by doing so, are obliged to
give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. This was the Doctrine of
Christianity as it was delivered by the first author of it; and the practice
was agreeable, as long as Christianity preserved its primitive honor in the
world. For, so far were men then from making their zeal for Religion a pretense
to Rebellion, that though Christianity were directly contrary to the Religions
then in vogue in the world, yet they knew of no other way of promoting it, but
by patience, humility, meekness, prayers ^or their persecutors, and tears when
they saw them obstinate. So far were they then from fomenting suspicions and
jealousies concerning the Princes and Governors they lived under, that though
they were generally known to be some of the worst of men as well as of Princes,
yet they charge all Christians in the strictest manner, as they loved their
Religion and the honor of it, as they valued their ^ouls and the salvation of
them, that they should be subject to them. So far were they then from giving
the least encouragement to the usurpations of the rights of Princes under the
pretense of any power given to a Head of the Church: that there is no way for
any to think they meant it, unless we suppose the Apostles such mighty
Politicians, that it is because they say nothing at all of it; but on the
contrary, bid every soul be subject to the higher powers; though an Apostle,
Evangelist, Prophet, whatever he be, as the Fathers interpret it. Yea so
constant and uniform was the doctrine and practice of Obedience in all the
first and purest ages of the Christian Church, that no one instance can be
produced of any usurpation of the rights of Princes under the pretense of any
title from Christ, or any disobedience to their authority, under the pretense
of promoting Christianity, through all those times wherein Christianity the
most flourished, or the Christians were the most persecuted. And happy had it
been for us in these last ages of the World, if we had been Christians on the
same terms which they were in the Primitive times; then there had been no such
scandals raised by the degeneracy of men upon the most excellent and peaceable
Religion in the World, as though that were unquiet and troublesome, because so
many have been so who have made show of it. But let their pretenses be never so
great to Infallibility on one side, and to the Spirit on the other, so far as
men ^ncourage faction and disobedience, so far they have not the Spirit of
Christ and Christianity, and therefore are none of his. For he showed his great
wisdom in contriving such a method of saving men's souls in another World, as
tended most to the preservation of the peace and quietness of this; and though
this wisdom may be evil spoken of by men of restless and unpeaceable minds, yet
it will be still justified by all who have heartily embraced the Wisdom which
is from above, who are pure and peaceable as that Wisdom is, and such, and only
such are the Children of it.

3. I come to show, That the design of Christ's appearance was very agreeable
to the infinite Wisdom of God; and that the means were very suitable and
effectual for carrying on of that design for the reformation of Mankind.

1. That the design it self was very agreeable to the infinite Wisdom of God.
What could we imagine more becoming the Wisdom of God, than to contrive a way
for the recovery of lapsed and degenerate Mankind? who more fit to employ upon
such a message as this, than the Son of God? for his coming gives the greatest
assurance to the minds of men, that God was serious in the management of this
design, than which nothing could be of greater importance in order to the
success of it. And how was it possible he should give a greater testimony of
himself, and withal of the purpose he came about, than he did when he was in
the world? The accomplishment of Prophesies, and power of Miracles showed who
he was; the nature of his Doctrine, the manner of his Conversation, the
greatness of his Sufferings, showed what his design was in appearing among men:
for they were all managed with a peculiar respect to the convincing mankind,
that God was upon terms of mercy with them, and had therefore sent his Son into
the world, that he might not only obtain the pardon of sin for those who
repent, but eternal life for all them that obey him. And what is there now we
can imagine so great and desirable as this, for God to manifest his wisdom in?
It is true, we see a great discovery of it in the works of Nature, and might do
in the methods of Divine Providence if partiality and interest did not blind
our eyes; but both these, though great in themselves, yet fall short of the
contrivance of bringing to an eternal happiness man who had fallen from his
Maker, and was perishing in his own folly. Yet this is that which men in the
pride and vanity of their own imaginations either think not worth considering,
or consider as little as if they thought so; and in the mean time think
themselves very wise too. The Jews had the wisdom of their Traditions which
they gloried in, and despised the Son of God himself when he came to alter
them. The Greeks had the wisdom of their Philosophy which they so passionately
admired, that whatever did not agree with that, though infinitely more certain
and useful, was on that account rejected by them. The Romans, after the
conquest of so great a part of the World, were grown all such Politicians and
Statesmen, that few of them could have leisure to think of another world, who
were so busy in the management of this. And some of all these sorts do yet
remain in the World, which makes so many so little think of, or admire this
infinite discovery of divine Wisdom: nay, there are some who can mix all these
together, joining a Jewish obstinacy, with the pride and self-opinion of the
Greeks, to a Roman unconcernedness about the matters of another life. And yet
upon a true and just enquiry never any Religion could be found, which could
more fully satisfy the expectation of the Jews, the reason of the Greeks, or
the wisdom of the Romans, than that which was made known by Christ, who was the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. Here the Jew might find his Messiah come,
and the Promises fulfilled which related to him; here the Greek might find his
long and vainly looked for certainty of a life to come, and the way which leads
to it; here the Roman might see a Religion serviceable to another world and
this together. Here are Precepts more holy, Promises more certain, Rewards more
desirable than ever the Wit or Invention of Men could have attained to. Here
are Institutions far more pious, u^eful and serviceable to mankind, than the
most admired Laws of the famous Legislators of Greece or Rome. Here are no
popular designs carried on, no vices indulged for the public interest, which
Solon, Lycurgus and Plato are charged with. Here is no making Religion a mere
trick of State, and a thing only useful for governing the people, which Numa
and the great men at Rome are liable to the suspicion of. Here is no wrapping
up Religion in strange figures and mysterious nonsense, which the Egyptians
were so much given to. Here is no inhumanity and cruelty in the Sacrifices
offered, no looseness and profaneness allowed in the most solemn mysteries, no
worshipping of such for Gods who had not been fit to live if they had been Men,
which were all things so commonly practiced in the Idolatries of the Heathens.
but the nature of the Worship is such as the minds of those who come to it
ought to be, and as becomes that God whom we profess to serve, pure and holy,
grave and serious, solemn and devout, without the mixtures of superstition,
vanity or ostentation. The precepts of our Religion are plain and easy to be
known, very suitable to the nature of Mankind, and highly tending to the
advantage of those who practice them, both in this and a better life. The
arguments to persuade men are the most weighty and powerful, and of as great
importance as the love of God, the death of his Son, the hopes of happiness,
and the fears of eternal misery, can be to men. And wherein is the contrivance
of our Religion defective, when the end is so desirable, the means so effectual
for the obtaining of it?

2. Which is the next thing to be considered. There are two things which in
this degenerate estate of man are necessary in order to the recovery of his
happiness; and those are Repentance for sins past, and sincere Obedience for
the future: now both these the Gospel gives men the greatest encouragements to,
and therefore is the most likely to effect the design it was intended for.

1. For Repentance for sins past. What more powerful motives can there be to
persuade men to repent, than for God to let men know that he is willing to
pardon their sins upon the sincerity of their Repentance, but without that,
there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation? that their sins are their follies, and therefore to repent is to
grow wise: that he requires no more from men, but what every considerative man
knows is fitting to be done whenever he reflects upon his actions: that there
can be no greater ingratitude or disingenuity toward the Son of God than to
stand at defiance with God when he has shed his blood to reconcile God and Man
to each other: that every step of his humiliation, every part of the Tragedy of
his life, every wound at his death, every groan and sigh which he uttered upon
the Cross, were designed by him as the most prevailing Rhetoric, to persuade
men to forsake their sins, and be happy: that there cannot be a more
unaccountable folly, than by impenitency to lose the hopes of a certain and
eternal happiness for the sake of those pleasures which every wise man is
ashamed to think of: that to continue in sin with the hopes to repent, is to
^tab a man's self with the hopes of a cure: that the sooner men do it, the
sooner they will find their minds at ease, and that the pleasures they enjoy in
forsaking their sins, are far more noble and manly than ever they had in
committing them: but if none of these arguments will prevail with them, perish
they must, and that unavoidably, insupportably, and irrecoverably: And if such
arguments as these will not prevail with men to leave their sins, it is
impossible that any should.

2. For Holiness of Li^e: For Christ did not come into the World, and dye for
us, merely that we should repent of what is past, Titus 2.12.
by denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, but that we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. And what he does expect, he has
given the greatest encouragements to perform: by the clearness of his precepts,
the excellency of his own example, the promise of his Grace, and the
proposition of eternal rewards and punishments, whereby he takes o^f all the
objections men are apt to make against obedience to the Commands of Christ: the
pretense of ignorance, because his Laws are so clear; the pretense of
impossibility by his own example; the pretense of infirmity by the assistance
of his Grace; the pretense of the unnecessariness of so great care of our
actions by making eternal rewards and punishments to depend upon it. Let us
then reflect upon the whole design of the Gospel, and see how admirably it is
suited to the end it was intended for, to the condition of those whose good was
designed by it, and to the whole honor of the great contriver and manager of
it. And let not us by our impenitency and the unholiness of our lives,
dishonor God and our Savior, reproach our Religion, and condemn that by our
lives which we justify by our words. For when we have said all we can, the
best and most effectual vindication of Christian Religion is to live according
to it: But oh then how unhappy are we that live in such an Age wherein it were
hard to know that men were Christians, unless we are bound to believe their
words against the tenor and course of their actions! What is become of the
purity, the innocence, the candor, the peaceableness, the sincerity and
devotion of the Primitive Christians! What is become of their zeal for the
honor of Christ and Christian Religion! If it were the design of men, to make
our Religion a dishonor and reproach to the Jews, Mahumetans, and Heathens,
could they do it by more effectual means than they have done? Who is there that
looks into the present state of the Christian World, could ever think that the
Christian Religion was so incomparably beyond all others in the world? Is the
now Christian Rome so much beyond what it was while it was Heathen? Nay, was it
not then remarkable in its first times for justice, sincerity, contempt of
riches, and a kind of generous honesty, and who does not (though of the same
Religion, if he has any ingenuity left) lament the want of all those things
there now? Will not the sobriety of the very Turks upbraid our excesses and
debaucheries? and the obstinacy of the Jews in defense and practice of their
Religion, condemn our coldness and indifferency in ours? If we have then any
tenderness for the honor of our Religion, or any kindness for our own Souls,
let us not only have the Name, but let us lead the lives of Christians; let us
make amends for all the reproaches which our Religion has suffered by the
faction and disobedience of some, by the Oaths and Blasphemies, the impieties
and profaneness of others, by the too great negligence and carelessness of all
that if it be possible, Christianity may appear in its true glory, which will
thee only be, when those who name the Nam^ of Christ depart from iniquity, and
live i^ all manner of holy conversation and godliness.

SERMON IV.
Preached at WHITE HALL.
Romans I. XVI. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the
Power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek.


THese words are uttered by one who was himself a remarkable instance of the
truth of the Doctrine contained in them, viz. of that divine Power which did
accompany the Gospel of Christ. For what can we imagine else should make him
now not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, who not long before was not ashamed to
persecute all those who professed it? One, whose spirit was fermented with the
leaven of the Pharisees, and enraged with fury against all who owned the name
of Christ, is of a sudden turned quite into another temper, to the confusion of
those who employed him, and the amazement of them whom he designed to
persecute. Nay, so great was the change which was wrought in him, that from a
Bigot of the Jewish Religion he becomes an Apostle of the Christian, and from
breathing flames against the Christians, none more ready than he to undergo
them for Christ. If he had only given over his persecution, it might have been
thought, that he had merely run himself out of breath, and grown weary of his
former fury, (as greater persons than he did afterward) but to retain the same
fervor of spirit in preaching Christ, which he had before in opposing him, to
have as great zeal for making Christians, as he had for destroying them, must
needs proceed from some great and unusual cause. Whilst the Jews thought he had
too much learning and interest to become their enemy, and the Christians found
he had too much rage and fury to be their friend, even then when they least
expected it, instead of continuing an Instrument of the Sanhedrin for punishing
the Christians, he declared himself an Apostle and Servant of Jesus Christ. And
that no ordinary one neither: for such was the efficacy of those divine words,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, that they not only presently allay his
former heat, but quicken and animate him to a greater zeal for the honor of
him whom he had persecuted before. And the faster he had run when he was out of
his way, the greater diligence he used when he found it, there being none of
all the followers of Christ who outstrip him in his constant endeavors to
advance the Christian Religion in the World. And if an unwearied diligence to
promote it, an uncessant care for preserving it, an universal concern for all
who owned it, and an undaunted spirit in bearing the affronts and injuries he
underwent for it, be any persuasive arguments of the love a man bears to his
Religion, there was never any person who made a clearer demonstration than St.
Paul did of the truth of his Religion, and his sincerity in embracing it. For
his endeavors were suitable to the greatness of his spirit, his care as large
as the Horizon of the Sun of righteousness, his courage as great as the malice
of his enemies. For he was neither afraid of the Malice of the Jews, or of the
Wisdom of the Greeks, or of the Power of the Romans, but he goes up and down
preaching the Gospel in a sphere as large as his mind was, and with a zeal only
parallel with his former fury. He encountered the Jews in their Synagogues, he
disputed with the Greeks in their most famous Cities, at Athens, Corinth,
Ephesus, and elsewhere, and everywhere raising some Trophies to the honor of
the Gospel: nothing now remained but that he should do the same at Rome also.
And for this he wants not spirit and resolution, for he even longed to be
there, verse. 11. nay, he had often purposed to go thither, but waited for a
convenient opportunity, v. 13. But while God was pleased otherwise to dispose
of him, he could not conceal the joy which he had for the ready entertainment
of the Christian Religion by those to whom he writes, and that their faith was
grown as famous as the City wherein they dwelt, v. 8. First, I thank my God
through Jesus Christ, for you all, that your Faith is spoken of throughout the
whole world: and he further manifests the greatness of his affection to them,
that without ceasing he made mention of them always in his Prayers, v. 9. And
among the rest of the blessings he prayed for, for himself and them; he was
sure not to forget his coming to them, v. 10. Not out of an ambitious and
vainglorious humor that he might be taken notice of in that great and
imperial City, but that he might be ^nstrumental in doing them service as he
had done others, v. 11.13. And to this end he tells them, what an obligation
lay upon him to spread the Doctrine of Christ in all places and to all persons,
v. 14. I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to
the unwise. So that neither the wisdom of the Greeks, nor the ignorance of the
Barbarians could hinder St. Paul from discovering to them the contrivances of
infinite wisdom; and the excellent methods of divine Goodness in order to men's
eternal welfare. And although Rome now thought it self to be the seat of
Wisdom, as well as Empire and Power, yet our Apostle declares his readiness to
preach the Gospel there too, v. 15. for which he gives a sufficient reason in
the words of the Text; for I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the power of God to Salvation, etc. Wherein we have considerable these two
things, 1. The Apostle's boldness and freeness in declaring the Doctrine of
Christ, For I am not ashamed, etc. 2. The ground of it in the following words,
for it is the power of God to Salvation, etc.

1. The Apostles boldness and freeness in declaring the Doctrine of Christ. It
was neither the gallantry of the Roman Court, nor the splendour of the City, not
the greatness of her Power, or wisdom of her Statesmen could make St. Paul
entertain the meaner opinion of the doctrine he hoped to preach among them. Had
Christ come (...), with a great deal of pomp and state into the World, subduing
Kingdoms and Nations under him; had St. Paul been a General for the Gospel
instead of being an Apostle of it, the great men of the World would then allow
he had no cause to be ashamed either of his Master, or of his employment. But
to preach a crucified Savior among the glories and triumphs of Rome, and a
Doctrine of so much simplicity and contempt of the world among those who were
the Masters of it, and managed it with so much art and cunning; to persuade
them to be followers of Christ in a holy life, who could not be like the gods
they worshipped, unless they were guilty of the greatest debaucheries, seems to
be an employment so liable to the greatest scorn and contempt, that none but a
great and resolved spirit would ever undertake it. For when we consider after
so many hundred years profession of Christianity, how apt the greatness of the
world is to make men ashamed of the practice of it; and that men aim at a
reputation for wit by being able to abuse the Religion they own; what
entertainment might we then think our Religion met with among the great men of
the Age it was first preached in, when it not only encountered those weaker
weapons of scoffs and raillery, but the strong holds of interest and education?
If our Religion now can hardly escape the bitter scoffs, and profane jests of
men who pawn their souls to be accounted witty, what may we think it suffered
then, when it was accounted a part of their own Religion to despise and
reproach ours? If in the Age we live in, a man may be reproached for his piety
and virtue, that is, for being really a Christian, when all profess themselves
to be so, what contempt did they undergo in the first Ages of the Christian
World, when the very name of Christian was thought a sufficient brand of
infamy? And yet such was the courage and magnanimity of the Primitive
Christians, that what was accounted most mean and contemptible in their
Religion, viz. their believing in a crucified Savior, was by them accounted
the matter of their greatest honor and glory. For though St. Paul only says
here that he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, yet elsewhere he explains
that (...) which is contained in these words, when he says, God forbid that I
should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ, by whom the World is
crucified to me, and I unto the World, Gal. 6.14. i. e. Although he could not
but be sensible how much the world despised him, and his Religion together, yet
that was the great satisfaction of his mind, that his Religion had enabled him
to despise the World as much. For neither the pomp and grandeur of the World,
nor the smiles and flatteries of it, no nor its frowns and severities could
abate any thing of that mighty esteem and value which he had for the Christian
Religion. For in his own expression, he accounted all things else but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3.8. Which
words are not spoken by one who was in despair of being taken notice of for any
thing else, and therefore magnifies the Profession he was engaged in; but by a
person as considerable as most of the Time and Nation he lived in both for his
birth and education. So that his contempt of the World was no sullen and
affected severity, but the issue of a sober and impartial judgment; and the
high esteem he professed of Christianity was no fanatic whimsey, but the
effect of a diligent enquiry, and the most serious consideration. And that will
appear,

2. By the grounds and reasons which St. Paul here gives why he was not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, 1. From the excellent end it was designed for, and
that is no less than salvation. 2 From the effectualness of it in order to that
end, it is the power of God to Salvation. 3. From the necessity of believing
the Gospel by all who would attain that end; to every one that believes, the
Jew first, and also to the Greek.

1. From the excellent End it was designed for, the recovery and happiness of
the souls of men, both which are employed in the term salvation. For,
considering the present condition of humane Nature, as it is so far sunk
beneath it self, and kept under the power of unruly passions; whatever tends to
make it happy, must do it by delivering it from all those things which are the
occasions of its misery. So that whatever Religion should promise to make men
happy, without first making them virtuous and good, might on that very account
be justly suspected of imposture. For the same reasons which make the the acts
of any Religion necessary, viz. that we may please that God, who commands and
governs the World, must make it necessary for men to do it, in those things
which are far more acceptable to him than all our sacrifices of what kind
soever, which are the actions of true virtue and goodness. If then that
accusation had been true, which Celsus and Julian charged Christianity with,
viz. that it indulged men in the practice of vice, with the promise of a future
happiness notwithstanding; I know nothing could have rendered it more suspicious
to be a design to deceive Mankind. But so far is it from having the least
foundation of truth in it, that as there never was any Religion which gave men
such certain hopes of a future felicity, and consequently more encouragement to
be good, so there was none ever required it on those strict and severe terms
which Christianity does. For there being two grand duties of men in this world,
either toward God in the holiness of their hearts and lives, or toward their
Brethren, in a peaceable carriage among men (which cannot be without justice
and sobriety) both these are enforced upon all Christians, upon no meaner terms
than the unavoidable loss of all the happiness our Religion promises. Follow
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. This is then the grand design of Christianity, to make men happy in
another world, by making them good and virtuous in this: It came to reform this
world, that it might people another; so to purify the souls of men, as to make
them meet to enjoy the happiness designed for them. This is that great
Salvation which the Gospel brings to the world, Heb. 2.3. and thence it is
called the Word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. the way of Salvation, Acts 16.17. the
Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. So that though Christianity be of unspeakable
advantage to this world, there being no Religion that tends so much to the
peace of men's minds, and the preservation of civil Societies as this does; yet
all this it does by way of subordination to the great end of it, which is the
promoting men's eternal happiness. And the more we consider the vast consequence
and importance of this end to Mankind, the greater reason we shall find that
St. Paul had, why he should not be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. For can we
imagine any end more noble that any doctrine can aim at than this? Supposing
the common principles of all Religion to be true, viz. the Being of God, and
Immortality of our Souls, there can be nothing more becoming that God to
discover, or those Souls to be employed about, than the way to a blessed
immortality. And if we admire those discourses of the Heathen Philosophers,
wherein they speak more darkly and obscurely concerning those things, what
admiration does the Gospel deserve, which has brought life and immortality to
light? If we commend the virtuous Heathens, who according to those short and
obscure notices which they had of God and themselves, sought to make the world
any thing the better for their being in it, what infinitely greater esteem do
those blessed Apostles deserve, who accounted not their own lives dear to them
that they might make even their enemies happy? If those men's memories be dear
to us who sacrifice their lives and fortunes for the sake of the Country they
belong to, shall not those be much more so who have done it for the good of the
whole world? Such who cheerfully suffered death while they were teaching men
the way to an eternal life, and who patiently endured the flames, if they might
but give the greater light to the world by them. Such who did as far out-go any
of the admired Heroes of the Heathens, as the purging the World from sin is of
greater consequence than cleansing an Augoean Stable from the filth of it, and
rescuing men from eternal flames is a more noble design than clearing a Country
from Pirates and Robbers. Nay, most of the Heathen Gods who were so solemnly
worshipped in Greece and at Rome, owed their (...) to such slender benefits to
Mankind; that sure the world was very barbarous or hugely grateful, when they
could think them no less than Gods who found out such things for men: If a
Smith's forge, and a Woman's distaffe, if teaching men the noble arts of
fighting and cheating one another were such rare inventions, that they only
became some of the most celebrated Deities, which the grave and demure Romans
thought fit to worship; sure St. Paul had no cause to be ashamed of his
Religion among them, who had so much reason to be ashamed of their own; since
his design was to persuade them out of all the vanities and fooleries of their
Idolatrous Worship, and to bring them to the service of the true and
ever-living God, who had discovered so much goodness to the world in making his
Son a propitiation for the sins of it. And was not this a discovery infinitely
greater and more suitable to the nature of God, than any which the subtilty of
the Greeks, or wisdom of the Romans could ever pretend to concerning any of
their Deities? Thus we see the excellent end of our Religion was that which
made St. Paul so far from being ashamed of it; and so it would do all us too,
if we did understand and value it as St. Paul did. But it is the great
dishonor of too many among us, that they are more ashamed of their Religion
than they are of their sins. If to talk boldly against Heaven, to affront God
in calling him to witness their great impieties by frequent oaths, to sin
bravely and with the highest confidence, to mock at such who are yet more
modest in their debaucheries, were not to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
we might find St. Paul's enough in the Age we live in, and it would be a piece
of gallantry to be Apostles. But this is rather the utmost endeavor to put
Religion out of countenance, and make the Gospel it self blush and be ashamed,
that ever such boldfaced impieties should be committed by men under the
profession of it, as though they believed nothing so damnable as Repentance and
a Holy life, and no sin so unpardonable as Modesty in committing it. But to use
St. Paul's language when he had been describing such persons himself, Heb. 6.9.
We are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany that salvation
the Gospel was designed for, though we thus speak. For certainly nothing can
argue a greater meanness of spirit, than while wicked and profane persons are
not ashamed of that which unavoidably tends to their ruin, and should be shy
of the profession and practice of that which conduces to their eternal
happiness. What is become of all that magnanimity and generous spirit which the
Primitive Christistians were so remarkable for, if while some are impudent in
sinning, others are ashamed of being or doing good? If we have that value for
our immortal souls, and a future life, which we ought to have, we shall not
trouble our selves much with the Atheistical scoffs and drollery of profane
persons, who while they deride and despise Religion, do but laugh themselves
into eternal misery. And thus much for the first ground of St. Paul's
confidence, viz. The excellent end the Gospel was designed for.

2. The effectualness of it in order to that end. It is the Power of God to
salvation. Wherein two things are implied. 1. The inefficacy of any other
doctrine for that end. 2. The effectualness of the Gospel in order to it.


1. The inefficacy of any other Doctrine for this end of promoting the eternal
salvation of Mankind. If the world had been acquainted with any doctrine before
which had been sufficient for the purposes the Gospel was designed for, there
would have been no such necessity of propagating it among men; nor had there
been reason enough to have justified the Apostles in exposing themselves to so
great hazards for the preaching of it. If the notion of an eternal God and
Providence, without the knowledge of a Savior, had been sufficient to reform
the World, and make men happy; it had not been consistent with the wisdom or
goodness of God to have employed so many persons, with the loss of their lives,
to declare the doctrine of Christ to the World. So that if Christianity be
true, it must be thought necessary to salvation, for the necessity of it was
declared by those who were the instruments of confirming the truth of it. I
meddle not with the case of those particular persons who had no means or
opportunity to know God's revealed will, and yet from the Principles of Natural
Religion did reform their lives, in hopes of a future felicity (if any such
there were) but whether there were not a necessity of such a Doctrine as the
Gospel is to be discovered to the world, in order to the reformation of it? For
some very few persons either through the goodness of their natures, the
advantage of their education, or some cause of a higher nature, may have led
more virtuous lives than others did; but it is necessary, that what aims at the
general good of Mankind, must be suited to the capacities of all, and enforced
with arguments which may prevail on any but the most obstinate and wilful
persons. But when we consider the state of the World at that time when
Christianity was first made known to it, we may easily see how insufficient the
common Principles of Religion were from working a reformation in it, when
notwithstanding them mankind was so generally lapsed into Idolatry and Vice,
that hardly any can be instanced in in the Heathen World, who had escaped both
of them. And there was so near an affinity between both these, that they who
were engaged in the rites of their Idolatry, could hardly keep themselves free
from the intanglements of vice; not only because many of their villainies were
practiced as part of their Religion, (and there was little hopes certainly of
their being good, who could not be Religious without being bad but because the
very Gods they worship were represented to be as bad as themselves. And could
they take any better measure of Virtue, than from the actions of those whom
they supposed to have so divine an excellency in them, as to deserve their
adoration? So that if there were a design of planting wickedness in the world
(which need not be, for it grows fast enough without it) it could not be done
more successfully than by worshipping those for Gods, who did such things which
good men would abhor to think of. And yet this was the state of the world
then, when the Gospel was preached, and not only of the more rude and barbarous
Nations, but of the most civiliz^d and knowing people, as the Romans
themselves; as our Apostle at large proves in the remainder of this chap^er,
wherein he shows, that though they had means enough of knowing the Eternal God
and Providence, yet they were so fallen into Idolatry, and the most vicious
practices, that there was no means of recovering them, but by a fuller
discovery both of the justice and goodness of God.

I know it will be here objected, that though the generality of men were bad
then (as when were they otherwise) yet the Heathens had a kind of Apostles
among them, viz. the Philosophers, who sought to amend the manners of men by
the moral instructions they gave them; so that if men were bad, it was not for
want of good counsel, but for not observing it, which is all (they say) we have
to say for our selves, when we are charged with the great debaucheries of the
Christian world.

To which I answer, That our business is not now to enquire whether there has
not been an incomparably greater advantage to the world by Christianity, in the
reforming men's lives, than ever was by any of the Heathen Morals; but whether
these, taking them in the fairest dress, were so sufficient for the bringing
men to eternal happiness, that there needed not any such Doctrine as
Christianity, be published for that end? And there are two great things we may
charge the best of their discourses with an insufficiency in, for the
accomplishment of this end, which are Certainty, and Motives, or the want of
Arguments to believe, and Encouragements to practice.

1. They were destitute of sufficient certainty; for what a man ventures his
eternal state upon, he ought to be well assured of the truth of it. But how was
it possible for the World to be reformed by such wise Apostles (if they must be
called so) who are perpetually disputing among themselves about those things
which were the most necessary ^oundations of all Virtue and Religion? As though
the best Arguments they had to prove their Souls immortal, was because their
Disputes about them were so. And those seemed among them to gain the greatest
reputation for Wit, who were best able to dispute against common Principles;
and they managed their business with greatest advantage, who only showed the
weakness of others principles, but established none of their own; which was an
unavoidable consequence of the way they proceeded in, for offering at no such
way of proof as Christianity does, they rather taught Men to dispute, than to
live eternally. Besides, their discourses were too subtle and intricate for
the common capacities of Men; how long might a Man live before an Entelechia
would make him know the nature of his soul the better, or an (...) persuade him
to believe its immortality? Insomuch that it is hard to determine, whether the
arguments used by them, did not rather hinder assent, than persuade to it? and
it seems probable that the honest minded illiterate Heathens believed those
things more firmly than the greatest Philosophers. For plain truths lose much
of their weight, when they are rarified into subtilties, and their strength is
impaired when they are spun into too fine a thread. The arguments which must
prevail with Mankind, must be plain and evident, easy and yet powerful. The
natural sense of good and evil in Men is o^ttimes dulled by disputes, and only
awakned by a powerful representation of an infinite Being, and a future
Judgment: and that by such a way of proof as all persons are equal Judges of
the truth and validity of it; such as the Resurrection of Christ is in the
Gospel.

2. But let us suppose the arguments certain and suitable, yet what sufficient
motives or encouragements could they give to lead a holy and virtuous life, who
after all their endeavors to persuade others, remained so uncertain themselves
as to a future happiness? So Tully tells us of Socrates himself when he was
just dying, That he told his friends, that only the Gods knew whether it was
fitter for men to live or die, but he thought no man did. And although some
would excuse this as his usual way of disputing, yet of all times one would
think it was fittest for him then to declare his mind in the most express
terms, not only for the full vindication of himself, but for the comfort and
encouragement of his friends. We are sure, Christianity proceeds on those
terms, that if a future happiness be supposed uncertain, it declares expressly
there can be no sufficient reason given for men to part with the conveniences
of this present life; nay, it supposes the best men to be the most miserable of
all others, if there be not a future reward, 1 Cor. 15.19. -- 32. Again, what
probability was there they should ever persuade the World to virtue and
goodness, when the severest of the Philosophers, made it lie in things so
repugnant to humane nature, as goodness is agreeable to it. As when they made
it an equal fault for a man to be angry, and to murder his Sovereign; and that
all passions are to be destroyed, that pain and grief are nothing, that virtue
in all conditions is a sufficient reward to it self: Which are so contrary to
the common sense of Mankind, that the only way to persuade men to believe them,
is first to persuade them they are not men. So that he was certainly the wisest
man among the Heathens, who concluded, that we ought to expect a higher Master
to teach us these things, and to acquaint us with the happiness of a future
life. And hereby an answer may be given to Porphyries grand objection against
Christian Religion, viz. If it were so necessary for the good of Mankind, why
was it so long before it was discovered? Because God would thereby discover the
insufficiency of all the means the wit of man could find out to reform the
world, without this. That not only the Jews might see the weakness of that
dispensation they were under, but the Gentile world might groan with an
expectation of some more powerful means to goodness than were yet among them.
For when Philosophy had been so long in its height, and had so little influence
upon Mankind, it was time for the Son of righteousness to arise, and with the
softning and healing influence of his beams to bring the World to a more
virtuous temper.

And that leads to the Second thing employed, which is the peculiar efficacy of
the Gospel for promoting men's salvation, for it is the power of God to
Salvation, and that will appear, by considering how many ways the power of God
is engaged in it. These three especially. 1. In confirmation of the Truth of
it. 2. In the admirable Effects of it in the World. 3. In the divine Assistance
which is promised to those who embrace it.

1. In confirmation of the Truth of it. For the World was grown so uncertain,
as to the grand foundations of Religion, that the same power was requisite now
to settle the World, which was at first for the framing of it. For though the
Precepts of Christian Religion be pure and easy, holy and suitable to the
sense of Mankind, though the Promises be great and excellent, proportionable to
our wants and the weight of our business, though the reward be such that it is
easier to desire than comprehend it, yet all these would but seem to baffle the
more the expectations of men, unless they were built on some extraordinary
evidence of divine power. And such we assert there was in the confirmation of
these things to us, not only in the miraculous birth of our Savior, and that
continual series of unparalled miracles in his life, not only in the most
obliging circumstances of his death; not only in the large effusion of divine
gifts upon his Apostles, and the strange propagation of Christian Religion by
them against all humane power; but that which I shall particularly instance in,
as the great effect of divine power, and confirmation of our Religion, was his
Resurrection from the dead. For, as our Apostle says, Romans 1.4. Christ was
declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead. No way of evidence could be more suitable to
the capacities of all, than this, it being a plain matter of fact; none ever
better attested than this was, not only by the unanimous consent of all the
witnesses, but by their constant adhering to the truth of it, though it cost
almost all of them their lives; and no greater evidence could be given to the
World of a divine power, since both Jews and Gentiles agreed in this, that such
a thing could not be effected but by an immediate hand of God. So far were they
then from thinking a resurrection possible by the juice of herbs, or an
infusion of warm blood into the veins, or by the breath of living Creatures, as
the great Martyr for Atheism would seem from Pliny to persuade us; when yet
certainly nothing can be o^ higher concernment to those who believe not another
life, than to have tried this experiment long ere now; and since nothing of
that nature has ever happened since our Savior's resurrection, it only lets
us know what credulous men in other things the greatest infidels as to Religion
are. But so far were they at that time from so fond an imagination, that they
readily yielded, that none but God could do it, though they seemed to question
whether God himself could do it or no. As appears by the Apostle's
Interrogation, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead? Act. 26.8. This was therefore judged on both sides to be
a matter of so great importance, that all the disputes concerning Christian
Religion were resolved into this. Whether Christ were risen from the dead? And
this the Apo^tles urge and insist on, upon all occasions, as the great evidence
of the truth of his Doctrine, and this was the main part of their Commission,
for they were sent abroad to be witnesses of his Resurrection. Which was not
designed by God as a thing strange and incredible to puzzle Mankind with, but
to give the highest assurance imaginable to the World of the truth and
importance of Christianity. Since God was pleased to employ his power in so
high a manner to confirm the certainty of it.

2. God's power was seen in the admirable effects of Christian Religion upon
the minds of men: which was most discernable by the strange alteration it soon
made in the state of the world. In Iudoea soon after the death of Christ, some
of his Crucifiers become Christians, 3000 Converts made at one Sermon of St.
Peter's, and great accessions made afterward both in Jerusalem and other
places. Yea in all parts of the Roman Empire, where the Christians came, they
so increased and multiplied, that thereby it appeared that God had given a
Benediction to his new Creation suitable to what he gave to the first. So that
within the compass of not a hundred years after our Savior's death, the World
might admire to see it self so strangely changed from what it was. The Temple
at Jerusalem destroyed, and the Jews under a sadder dispersion than ever, and
rendered incapable of continuing their former Worship of God there: the Heathen
Temples unfrequented, the Gods derided, the Oracles ceased, the Philosophers
puzzled, the Magistrates disheartened by their fruitless cruelties, and all this
done by a few Christians who came and preached to the World Righteousness,
Temperance, and a Judgment to come, whereof God had given assurance to the
World, by raising one Jesus from the dead. And all this effected not by the
power of Wit and Eloquence, not by the force and violence of rebellious
subjects, not by men of hot and giddy brains, but by men sober, just, humble
and meek in all their carriages, but withal such as might never have been heard
of in the world, had not this Doctrine made them famous. What could this then
be imputed to less than a Divine Power, which by effectual and secret ways
carries on its own design against all the force and wit of men. So that the
wise Gamaliel, at whose feet St. Paul was bred, seemed to have the truest
apprehensions of these things at that time, when he told the Sanhedrin, If this
counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God. Act. 5.38,
39.

3. In the Divine Assistance which is promised to those who embrace it: in
which respect it is properly the power of God to salvation; and therein far
beyond what the Philosophers could promise to any who embraced their opinions.
For, the Gospel does not only discover the necessity of a Principle superior
to Nature, which we call Grace, in order to the fitting our souls for their
future happiness, but likewise shows on what terms God is pleased to bestow it
on men, viz. on the consideration of the death and passion of our Lord and
Savior. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Christ our Savior, Titus 3.5.
There being nothing in humane nature which could oblige God, to give to Mankind
that assistance of his grace whereby they are enabled to work out this
salvation the Gospel is designed for, with fear and trembling. The whole tenor
of the Gospel importing a divine power which does accompany the preaching of
it, which is designed on purpose to heal the wounds, and help the weakness of
our depraved and degenerate nature. Through which we may be kept to salvation:
but it must be through Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5.

3. Which is the last particular of the words; the necessity of believing the
Gospel in order to the partaking of the salvation promised in it; it is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek. An easy way of salvation, if no more were required to men's
happiness but a fancy and strong opinion which they will easily call Believing.
So there were some in St. Augustin's time, I could wish there were none in
ours, who thought nothing necessary to salvation but a strong Faith, let their
lives be what they pleased. But this is so repugnant to the main design of
Christian Religion, that they who think themselves the strongest Believers, are
certainly the weakest, and most ungrounded. For they believe scarce any other
proposition in the new Testament, but that whosoever believes shall be saved.
If they did believe that Christ came into the world to reform it, and make it
better, that the wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against all
unrighteousness, as well as that the just by Faith shall live, that the design
of all that love of Christ, which is shown to the World, is to deliver them
from the hand of their enemies, that they might serve him in righteousness and
holiness all the days of their lives, they could never imagine, that salvation
is entailed by the Gospel on a mighty confidence or vehement persuasion of what
Christ has done and suffered for them. And so far is St. Paul from asserting
this, that as far as I can see, he never meddles with a matter of that nicety,
whether a single act of Faith be the condition of our justification as it is
distinguished from Evangelical obedience, but his discourse runs upon this
subject; whether God will pardon the sins of men upon any other terms than
those which are declared in the Christian Religion, the former he calls Works,
and the latter Faith.

I know, the subtilty of later times has made St. Paul dispute in the matter
of justification, not as one bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, but of the Master
of the Sentences; but men did not then understand their Religion at all the
worse because it was plain and easy; and, it may be, if others since had
understood their Religion better, there would never have needed so much
subtilty to explain it, nor so many distinctions to defend it. The Apostle
makes the same terms of justification and of salvation, for as he says
elsewhere, Romans 5.1.
We are justified by Faith, he says here, the Gospel is the power of God to
Salvation to every one that believes; if therefore a single act of Faith be
sufficient for one, why not for the other also? But if believing here be taken
in a more large and comprehensive sense, as a complex act relating to our
undertaking the conditions of the Gosspel; why should it not be taken so in the
subsequent discourse of the Apostle? For we are to observe that St. Paul in
this Epistle is not disputing against any sort of Christians that thought to be
saved by their obedience to the Gospel from the assistance of divine grace; but
against those who thought the Grace and indulgence of the Gospel by no means
necessary in order to the pardon of their sins, and their eternal happiness.
Two things therefore the Apostle mainly designs to prove in the beginning of
it: First, the insufficiency of any other way of salvation besides that offered
by the Gospel; whether it were the light of Nature which the Gentiles contended
for, but were far from living according to it; or that imaginary Covenant of
Works, which the Jews fancied to themselves (for it will be a very hard matter
to prove that ever God entered into a Covenant of Works with fallen Man, which
he knew it was impossible for him to observe) but they were so highly
opinionated of themselves, and of those legal observations which were among
them, that they thought by virtue of them they could merit so much favor at
God's hands, that there was no need of any other sacrifice, but what was among
themselves to expiate the guilt of all their sins. And on that account they
rejected the Gospel, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 10.3.
that they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God. Against these therefore the Apostle proves, that if they hoped for
happiness upon such strict terms, they laid only a foundation of Romans 3.27.
boasting if they did all which God required, but of misery if they did not;
for then Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing written in the Law to do
it, i. e. if they failed in any one thing, then they must fail of all their
hopes; but such a state of perfection being impossible to humane Nature, he
shows, that either all Mankind must unavoidably perish, or they must be saved
by the Grace and Favor of God, which he proves to be discovered by the Gospel:
and that God will now accept of a hearty and sincere obedience to his will
declared by his Son; so that all those who perform that, though they live not
in the nice observance of the Law of Moses, shall not need to fear the penalty
of their sins in another life. Which is the second thing he designs to prove,
viz. That those who obeyed the Gospel, whether Jew or Greek, were equally
capable of salvation by it. Romans 3.29.
For, says he, is God the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the
Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: because both Jew and Gentile were to be
justified upon the same terms, as he proves afterward. So that Gods justifying
of us by the Gospel, is the solemn declaration of himself upon what terms he
will pardon the sins of men; that is, deliver them from the penalties they have
deserved by them. For the actual discharge of the person is reserved to the
great day; all the justification we have here is only declarative from God, but
so as to give a right to us, by virtue whereof we are assured, that God will
not only not exercise his utmost rigor, but show all favor and kindness to
those, who by belief of the Gospel do repent and obey. God does now remit sin
as he forbears to punish it; he remits the sinner as he assures him by the
death of Christ he will not punish upon his rerepentance; but he fully remits
both, when he delivers the person upon the trial of the great day, from all the
penalties which he has deserved by his sins. So that our complete
justification and salvation go both upon the same terms, and the same Faith
which is sufficient for one, must be sufficient for the other also.

What care then ought men to take, lest by misunderstanding the notion of
Believing, so much spoken of as the condition of our salvation, they live in a
neglect of that holy obedience which the Gospel requires, and so believe
themselves into eternal misery. But as long as men make their obedience
necessary, though but as the fruit and effect of Faith, it shall not want its
reward: for those, whose hearts are purified by Faith shall never be condemned
for mistaking the notion of it; and they who live as those that are to be
judged according to their works, shall not miss their reward, though they do
not think they shall receive it for them. But such who make no other condition
of the Gospel but Believing, and will scarce allow that to be called a
Condition, ought to have a great care to keep their hearts sounder than their
heads, for their only security will lie in this, that they are good though they
see no necessity of being so. And such of all others, I grant, have reason to
acknowledge the irresistible power of Divine Grace, which enables them to obey
the will of God against the dictates of their own judgments. But thanks be to
God, who has so abundantly provided for all the infirmities of humane Nature,
by the large offers of his Grace, and assistance of his Spirit, that though we
meet with so much opposition without, and so much weakness within, and so many
discouragements on every side of us; yet if we sincerely apply our selves to do
the will of God, we have as great assurance as may be, that we shall be kept by
the power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

SERMON V.
Preached at WHITE HALL.
Hebrews II. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?


WHen the wise and eternal Counsels of Heaven concerning the salvation of
Mankind by the death of the Son of God, were first declared to the World by his
own appearance and preaching in it* nothing could be more reasonably expected,
than that the dignity of his Person, the authority of his Doctrine, and the
excellency of his Life, should have persuaded those whom he appeared among, to
such an admiration of his Person, and belief of his Doctrine, as might have led
them to an imitation of him in the holiness of his life and conversation. For
if either the worth of the Person, or the Importance of the Message might
prevail any thing toward a kind and honorable reception among men; there was
never any person appeared in any degree comparable to him, never any Message
declared which might challenge so welcome an entertainment from men, as that
was which he came upon. If to give Mankind the highest assurance of a state of
life and immortality, if to offer the pardon of sin, and reconciliation with
God upon the most easy and reasonable terms, if to purge the degenerate World
from all its impurities by a Doctrine as holy as the Author of it; were things
as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the Sons of men to receive: nothing
can be more unaccountable than that his Person should be despised, his
Authority slighted, and his Doctrine contemned. And that by those whose
interest was more concerned in the consequence of these things, than himself
could be in all the affronts and injuries he underwent from men: For the more
the indignities, the greater the shame, the sharper the su^ferings which he did
undergo, the higher was the honor and glory which he was advanced to: but the
more obliging the instances of his kindness were, the greater the salvation
that was tendered by him, the more prevailing the motives were for the
entertainment of his Doctrine, the more exemplary and severe will the
punishment be of all those who reject it. For it is very agreeable to those
eternal Laws of Justice by which God governs the world, that the punishment
should arise proportionably to the greatness of the mercies despised: and
therefore although the Scripture be very sparing in telling us what the state
of those persons shall be in another life who never heard of the Gospel; yet
for those who do, and despise it, it tells us plainly, that an eternal misery
is the just desert of those to whom an eternal happiness was offered, and yet
neglected by them. And we are the rather told of it, that men may not think it
a surprise in the life to come; or that if they had known the danger, they
would have escaped it; and therefore our Blessed Savior, who never mentioned
punishment but with a design to keep men from it, declares it frequently, that
the punishment of those persons and places would be most intolerable, who have
received, but not improved the light of the Gospel: and that it would be more
Matthew. ^1.23.
tolerable for the persons who had offered violence to Nature, and had
Hellfire burning in their hearts by their horrid impurities, than for those
who heard the Doctrine, and saw the Miracles of Christ, and were much the
worse, rather than any thing the better for it. But lest we should think that
all this black scene of misery was only designed for those who were the Actors
in that doleful Tragedy of our Savior's sufferings: we are told by those who
were best able to assure us of it, that the same dismal consequences will
attend all the affronts of his Doctrine, as if they had been offered to his own
person. For it is nothing but the common flattery and self-deceit of humane
nature, which makes any imagine, that though they do not now either believe or
obey the Gospel; they should have done both, if they had heard our Savior
speak as never man spoke, and seen him do what never man did: For the same
disposition of mind which makes them now slight that Doctrine which is
delivered to them by them that heard him, would have made them slight the
Person as well as the Doctrine, if they had heard it from himself. And
therefore it is but reasonable that the same punishment should belong to both;
especially since God has provided so abundantly for the assurance of our
Faith, by the miraculous and powerful demonstration of that divine spirit
which did accompany those who were the first publishers of this Doctrine to the
world. And therefore the Author of this Epistle, after he has in the words of
the Text declared, that it is impossible to escape, if we neglect the great
salvation offered us by the Gospel; in the following words he gives us that
account of it, that at first it began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed to us by them that heard him: God also bearing them witness both with
signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according
to his own will. So that the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, falling upon
the Apostles, and the many signs and wonders which were wrought by them, were
the great testimony of God to the world, that these were the persons employed
by himself to decla^e that Doctrine whereon the eternal salvation of Mankind
did depend. And since we have so lately acknowledged the truth of this
testimony which God gave to the Apostles, by the solemn celebration of that
glorious descent of the Holy Ghost upon them on the day of Pentecost, that
which naturally follows from it is, the great care we ought to take, lest we be
found guilty of neglecting that great salvation which is offered to us in that
Doctrine which was attested in so eminent a manner by God himself; and that
from the consideration of our own danger; for how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? wherein are three things considerable:

1. The care God has taken to make us happy, by offering so great salvation to
us.

2. The care we ought to take in order to our own happiness, not to neglect the
offers which God has made us.

3. The unavoidable punishment which those do incur who are guilty of this
neglect. How shall we escape?

I need not tell this Auditory how forcible the Negative is, which is expressed
by such an interrogation which appeals to the judgment of all who hear it, and
so relies not upon the bare authority of the speaker, but upon the plain
evidence of the thing, which others were judges of as well as himself. As
though he had said, if you slight and disesteem the Gospel of Christ, upon
whatever grounds ye do it, if either through too great an opinion of the wisdom
of this world you despise it as vain and useless, if through too mean an
opinion of the excellency of Christianity, you reject it either as uncertain in
its Theory, or impossible in its Practice; or if through too great a love of
the pleasures of sin, or a secure and careless temper of mind, you regard not
the doing what Christianity requires to make you happy; think with your selves,
what way you can find to escape the wrath of God; for my part, I know of none;
for if God were so severe against the violation of a far meaner institution,
viz. of the Law of Moses, insomuch that every contempt and disobedience did
receive a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape who neglect so great
salvation? or as the Apostle elsewhere argues to the same purpose. Heb. 10.28,
29.
He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or three witnesses;
of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? This is a sad subject, but I am afraid too necessary to be
spoken to in the Age we live in; wherein men seem to be in apprehensive of the
danger of inwardly despising the Religion they profess to own, and the
neglecting of that which they hope to be saved by. It is strange that it should
be so, but much more strange that men should think to do so, and not be called
to an account for it. It is not only the gross and open sinner, that defies
Heaven, and by his oaths and blasphemies dares God to show his Power and
Justice upon him; but the sly and self-deceiving hypocrite, that hates
Religion while he thinks he loves it; that in his heart contemns it, but is
afraid to know that he does so, that ought to be possessed with a truer sense
of Religion, and a greater dread of the issue of the contempt or neglect of it.
There is some appearance of ingenuity in an open enmity; but none so dangerous
as that which hides it self under the disguise of friendship. In our Saviors
time there were several ^orts of those who showed their dis-esteem of him, some
that were so enraged against him, that they contrive all ways for his disgrace
and punishment, others could hear him with patience, Mark 4.19.
but the cares of this World, the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lust of
other things choked and stifled all good apprehensions of him, that they
became weak and ineffectual. And those were guilty of making light of the
marriage feast because of other business which they had to mind, Matthew. 22.5.
as well as those who offered all the injuries and affronts to his servants that
invited them, v. 6. And as it was in the days of our Savior, so it is now;
some were eating and drinking, minding nothing but the vain and sensual
pleasures of the world; some were buying and selling, so busy in this world,
that they had no leisure to think of being happy in another; some were deriding
and blaspheming; but all these too wise, or too vain, or too profane to mind
the offers of eternal salvation. I wish we could say it were otherwise now,
that a sensual and voluptuous, an easy and a careless life in some, that
ambition and the restless pursuit after the honor and riches of the world in
others, that a profane wit, and a contempt of all that is serious in those that
think themselves too great to be Religious, did not enervate the force of
Christianity upon their minds, and make them all, though upon different
grounds, agree in the neglect of their own salvation. But is the case of such
men grown so desperate that no remedy can work upon them? has the love of sin
and the world so far intoxicated them, that no reason or consideration whatever
can awaken them? have they hardened themselves against all the power of divine
Truths with a resolution as strong as death, and as cruel as the grave whither
they are going? Will neither the love of happiness, nor the fear of misery,
their own interest, and the wisdom of avoiding so great a danger, the dread of
the Majesty and Power of God, and the horror of the great day, prevail at least
so far on men to consider, whether these things be true or no; and if they be,
what unspeakable folly it is to neglect them? And the better to make that
appear, I shall prove these following things:

1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's happiness, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable.

2. That nothing can be more unreasonable, than when God has taken so much
care of it, men should neglect it themselves.

3. That it is very just for God to vindicate himself against so gross a
neglect, by the severe punishments of the life to come.

1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's salvation, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable. For, whatever the mind of
man can imagine necessary in order to its own happiness, in its present fallen
and degenerate condition, is abundantly provided for by the Gospel of Christ.
For, man was so wholly lost as to his own felicity, that among the ruins and
decays of his Nature, he could not pick up so much as the perfect Image and
Idea of his own happiness; when he reflects upon himself, he finds himself such
a confused mass of folly and weakness, that he can never imagine that so noble
a design should have its groundwork laid upon so course a Being. And rather
than believe the foundation of his happiness to be within himself, there is
nothing so vain and trifling without him, but he is ready to fall down before
it, and cry out, Here I place my felicity. Sometimes he admires the brave
shows, and the Pomp and Gallantry of the World, and thinks nothing comparable
to a glorious outside, and a great train of attendants sometimes he raises
himself, and flutters upon the wings of a popular Air, till a cross blast comes
and leaves him in the common rout: sometimes his eyes ar^ dazzled with the glory
of the more refined and solid pieces of that Earth out o^ which he was framed,
and thinks it reasonable, that the softness of flesh and blood, should yield to
the impressions o^ silver and gold; sometimes he even envies the pleasures of
the Brutes, and if i^ were possible would outdo them in their grossest
sensualities: sometimes again he flatters himself, and then adores his own
imperfections, and thinks his Passi^ns, Honor; and his Profaneness, Wit. So
far vain man from making himself happy that the first step to it, is to make
hi^ understand what it is to be so. But supposing that the true image of his
happ^ness should drop down from Heaven and by the place from whence it fel^
should c^nclude where the thing it (...) is to be sound; yet this were only t^
make him more miserable, unless (...) withal knew how to come thither. H^ is
sure not to climb up to it by the top of the highest mountains, nor to be
carried thither upon the wings of a might^ wind, he has no fiery Chariots at
his command to ascend with to the Glories above: b^t only he that makes his
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, is able to preserve the
souls of men from vanishing into the so^t air, and to conduct them to the
Mansions of eternal Bliss. It is he only that can make them capable of the Joys
of another life, by purging them from the stains and the pollutions of this.
And therefore without his grace and favor ever to hope for the happiness of
Heaven, must be by fancying a Heaven to be there, where there is no God. So
that it is necessary, that the Proposals of this salvation must come from the
Author of it, and that with such arguments as may persuade men of the truth of
it, and with such motives as may encourage men to accept of them. Now the
Gospel of Christ affords us all these things which are necessary to our
happiness; there we have the most agreeable and settled notion and Idea of it,
the most large and free offers of divine goodness in order to it, the greatest
assurance that these things did immediately proceed from God, and the most
encouraging motives to accept of these offers in order to that great salvation
which is tendered to us.

1. We have the most agreeable and settled notion of true happiness: not such a
mean and uncertain thing which lies at the mercy of the continual vicissitudes
and contingencies of this present state, but that which is able to bear up the
mind of man against all the troubles of this life, and to carry him to a Region
beyond them all, where there is a fullness of joy without an allay of sadness
after it, and ever-flowing rivers of pleasures that need no dams to make them
rise higher, nor falls to make their motion perceived. Our Blessed Savior
never flatters his followers with the expectation of a felicity in this life;
Contentment is the most he has promised them, and that they may enjoy, if they
follow his directions, let this world be what it will, and do what it pleases
with them. He never tells his Disciples they may have satisfaction here if they
lie upon their beds of Down with their heads full of tormenting cares, that the
pleasure of humane life lies in the gratifications of the senses, and in making
what use they can of the world; he never deceives them with the promise of so
poor a happiness as that which depends upon health, friends, prosperity, and
having our own wills. No, but he tells them of a more noble and generous
felicity, that will preserve its own state and grandeur in spite of the world;
a happiness consistent with loss of Estate, loss of Friends, with affronts and
injuries, with persecutions, and death it self. For when our Savior begins to
discourse of happiness, what another kind of strain does he speak of it in,
than any of those Philosophers who have so much ob^^ructed the happiness of
man's life by their voluminous writings and contentions about it. Here we meet
with no Epicurean softness, which the sense of true Virtue carried the minds of
the more noble Heathens above; no rigid and incredible Stoical Paradoxes, that
make men only happy by the change of names; no Aristotelian supposition of a
prosperous life for Virtue to show its power in; but here the only supposition
made, is that which lies in a man's own breast, viz true goodness; and then let
his condition be what it will, his happiness is consistent with it. For those
above all other persons whom our Savior calls Blessed, in the beginning of
that excellent Abstract of Christianity, his Sermon on the Mount, are, not the
rich and great men of the world, but those who to the poverty of their
condition add that Matthew. 5.3.
of their spirits too, by being contented with the state they are in; not
those, who are full of mirth and jollity, that laugh away one half of their
time, and sleep the rest; but they who are V. 4.
in a mournful condition, either by reason of their own sorrows, or out of
compassion to others, or out of a general sense of their own imperfections, or
the inconstancy of our present state: Not those, who are ready enough to give,
but unable to bear affronts, that think the lives of men a sacrifice small
enough for any words of disgrace which they have given them; but V. 5.
the meek and patient spirit, that is neither apt to provoke, nor in a rage and
madness when it is; that values the rules of Christianity above all the
barbarous Punctilioes of Honor. Not those, who are as impetuous in the pursuit
of their designs, and as eager of tasting the fruits of them, as the thirsty
Traveller in the sands of Arabia is of drinking the waters of a pleasant
Spring: but such who make V. 6.
righteousness and goodness their meat and drink, that which they hunger and
thirst after, and take as much pleasure in as the most voluptuous Epicure in
his greatest dainties: Not those, whose malice goes beyond their power, and
want only enough of that to make the whole World a Slaughterhouse, and account
racks and torments among the necessary instruments of governing the World; V. 7.
but such, who when their enemies are in their power, will not torment
themselves by cruelty to them, but have such a sense of common humanity, as not
only to commend pity and good nature to those above them, but to use it to
those who are under them. Not those whose hearts are as full of dissimulation
and hypocrisy, as the others hands are of blood and violence, that care not
what they are, so they may but seem to be good: but such whose inward integrity
and V. 8.
purity of heart, far exceeds the outward show and profession of it: who honor
Goodness for it self, and not for the Glory which is about the head of it. Not
those, who never think the breaches of the world wide enough till there be a
door large enough for their own interests to go in at by them; that would
rather see the world burning, than one peg be taken out of their
Chariot-wheels: But such who would sacrifice themselves, like the brave V. 9.
Roman, to fill up the wide gulf which men's contentions have made in the world;
and think no Legacy ought to be preserved more inviolable than that of Peace,
which our Savior lest to his Disciples. Lastly, not those, who will do any
thing rather than suffer, or if they suffer it shall be for any thing rather
than V. 10, 11, 12.
righteousness, to uphold a party, or maintain a discontented faction; but
such, who never complain of the hardness of their way, as long as they are sure
it is that of Righteousness; but if they meet with reproaches and persecutions
in it, they welcome them, as the harbingers of their future reward, the
expectation of which makes the worst condition not only tolerable but easy to
them. Thus we see what kind of happiness it is, which the Gospel promises; not
such a one as rises out of the dust, or is tossed up and down with the motion of
it; but such whose never-failing fountain is above, and whither those small
rivulets return, which fall down upon Earth to refresh the minds of men in
their passage thither; but while they continue here, as the Jews say of the
water that came out of the rock, it follows them while they travel through this
wilderness below. So that the foundation of a Christians happiness is the
expectation of a life to come, which expectation having so firm a bottom, as
the assurance which Christ has given us by his death and sufferings, it has
power and influence sufficient to bear up the minds of men, against all the
vicissitudes of this present state.

2. We have the most large and free offers of divine Goodness in order to it.
Were it as easy for Man to govern his own passions, as to know that he ought
to do it; were the impressions of Reason and Religion as powerful with Mankind
as those of Folly and Wickedness are, we should never need complain much of the
misery of our present state, or have any cause to fear a worse to come. There
would then be no condition here but what might be born with satisfaction to
ones own mind; and the life one day led according to the principles of virtue
and goodness would be preferred before a sinning Immortality. But we have lost
the command of our selves, and therefore our passions govern us; and as long as
such furies drive us, no wonder if our ease be little. When men began first to
leave the uncertain speculations of Nature, and found themselves so out of
order, that they thought the great care ought to be to regulate their own
actions; how soon did their passions discover themselves about the way to
govern them! And they all agreed in this, that there was great need to do it,
and that it was impossible to do it without the principles of Virtue; V. Lud.
Viv. ad S. Aug de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 1.
for never was there any Philosopher so bad, as to think any man could be happy
without Virtue; even the Epicureans themselves acknowledged it for one of their
established Maxims, that no man could live a pleasant life without being good:
and supposing the multiplication of Sects of Philosophers about these things as
far as Varro thought it possible to 288. (although there never were so many,
nor really could be upon his own grounds) yet not one of all these but made it
necessary to be virtuous, in order to being happy; and those who did not think
virtue to be desired for it self, yet made it a necessary means for the true
pleasure and happiness of our lives. But when they were agreed in this, that it
was impossible for a vicious man to enjoy any true contentment of mind; they
fell into nice and subtle disputes about the names and order of things to be
chosen; and so lost the great effect of all their common principles. They
pretended great cures for the disorders of men's lives, and excellent remedies
against the common distempers of humane nature, but still the disease grew
under the remedy, and their applications were too weak to allay the fury of
their passions. It was neither the order and good of the Universe, nor the
necessity of events, nor the things being out of our power, nor the common
condition of humanity, no nor that comfort of ill natured men, as Carneades
called it, the many companions we have in misery, that could keep their
passions from breaking out when a great occasion was presented them. For he who
had read all their discourses carefully, and was a great man himself, I mean
Cicero, upon the death of his beloved daughter, was so far from being comforted
by them, that he was fain to write a consolation for himself, in which the
greatest cure (it may be) was the diversion he found in writing it. But
supposing these things had gone much farther, and that all wise men could have
governed their passions as to the troubles of this life (and certainly the
truest wisdom lies in that) yet what had all this been to a prepararation for
an eternal state, which they knew little of, and minded less? All their
discourses about a happy life here, were vain, and contradicted by themselves;
when, after all their rants about their wise man being happy in the bull of
Phalaris, etc. they yet allowed him to dispatch himself if he saw cause, which
a wise man would never do, if he thought himself happy when he did it. So that
unless God himself had given assurance of a life to come, by the greatest
demonstrations of it in the death and resurrection of his Son; all the
considerations whatever could never have made mankind happy. But by the Gospel
he has taken away all suspicions and doubts concerning another state, and has
declared his own readiness to be reconciled to us upon our repentance, to
pardon what has been done amiss, and to give that divine assistance whereby
our wills may be governed, and our passions subdued, and upon a submission of
our selves to his wise Providence, and a sincere obedience to his Laws, he has
promised eternal salvation in the life to come.

3. God has given us the greatest assurance that these offers came from
himself; which the Apostle gives an account of here, saying, that this
salvation began at first to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him, God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders, etc.
Wherein we have all the satisfaction which the minds of reasonable men could
desire as to these things: It might be justly expected, that the messenger of
so great news to the World should be no mean and ordinary person; neither was
he, for the honor was as great in the person who brought it, as the importance
was in the thing it self: No less than the Eternal Son of God came down from
the Bosom of his Father, to rectify the mistakes of Mankind, and not only to
show them the way to be happy, but by the most powerful arguments to persuade
them to be so. Nay, we find all the three persons of the Trinity here engaged
in the great work of man's salvation; it was first spoken by our Lord, God also
bearing them witness, and that with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost. So that not only the first revelation was from God, but the testimony to
confirm that it was so, was from him too; there being never so clear an
attestation of any divine truths as was of the Gospel. From whence it follows,
that the foundation whereon our Faith stands, is nothing short of a divine
testimony, which God gave to the truth of that revelation of his will; so vain
are the cavils of those who say, we have nothing but mere probabilities for our
Faith, and do interpret that manner of proof which matters of fact are capable
of, in a sense derogatory to the firmness of our Christian Faith. As though we
made the Spirit of God a Paraclete or Advocate in the worst sense, which might
as well plead a bad as a good cause. No, we acknowledge, that God himself did
bear witness to that doctrine delivered by our Lord, and that in a most signal
and effectual manner, for the conviction of the world, by those demon^^rations
of a divine power which accompanied the first Preachers of salvation by the
Gospel of Christ. So that here the Apostle briefly and clearly resolves our
Faith; if you ask, Why we believe that great salvation which the Gospel of^ers?
the an^wer is, Because it was declared by our Lord, who neither could nor would
deceive us: if it be asked, How we know that this was delivered by our Lord? he
answers, because this was the constant Doctrine of all his Disciples, of those
who constantly heard him, and conversed with him. But if you ask again, how can
we know, that their testimony was infallible, since they were but men? he then
resolves all into that, that God bare witness to them by signs and wonders, and
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost. And those persons whom these
arguments will not convince, none other will. Who are we, that should not think
that sufficient which God himself thought so! who are we, that dare question
the certainty of that which has had the Broad Seal of Heaven to attest it! Can
any thing make it surer than God himself has done? and can there be any other
way more effectual for that end, than those demonstrations of a divine power
and presence which the Apostles were acted by? Those that cavil at this way of
proof, would have done so at any other, if God had made choice of it: and those
who will cavil at any thing, are resolved to be convinced by nothing; and such
are not fit to be discoursed with.

4. Here are the most prevailing motives to persuade them to accept of these
offers of salvation. There are two passions, which are the great hinges of
Government, viz. men's Hopes and Fears, and therefore all Laws have had their
sanctions suitable to these two in Rewards and Punishments: now there was never
any reward which gave greater encouragement to hope, never any punishment which
made fear more reasonable than those are which the Gospel proposes. Will ever
that man be good, whom the hopes of Heaven will not make so? or will ever that
man leave his sins whom the fears of Hell will not make to do it? What other
arguments can we imagine should ever have that power and influence on mankind,
which these may be reasonably supposed to have? Would you have God alter the
methods of his Providence, and give his rewards and punishments in this life?
but if so, what exercise would there be of the patience, forbearance and
goodness of God toward wicked men? must he do it as soon as ever men sin? then
he would never try whether they would repent and grow better: or must he stay
till they have come to such a height of sin? then no persons would have cause
to fear him, but such who are arrived at that pitch of wickedness: but how then
should he punish them? must it be by continuing their lives, and making them
miserable? but let them live, and they will sin yet further: must it be by
utterly destroying them? that to persons, who might have time to sin the mean
while, (supposing annihilation were all to be feared) would never have power
enough to deter men from the height of their wickedness. So that nothing but
the misery of a life to come, can be of force enough to make men fear God, and
regard themselves; and this is that which the Gospel threatens to those that
neglect their salvation, which it sometimes calls Mat. 25.41.
everlasting fire, sometimes Mark 9.44.
the Worm that never dies, sometimes 1 These. 1.10.
the wrath to come, sometimes 2 These. 1.9.
everlasting destruction, all enough to fill the minds of men with horror at
the apprehension; and what then will the undergoing it do? Thence our Savior
reasonably bids men, Mat. 10.28.
not fear them that can only kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul;
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Thus
the Gospel suggests the most proper object of fear, to keep men from sin, and
as it does that, so it presents likewise the most desirable object of hope to
encourage men to be good; which is no less than a happiness that is easier to
hope to enjoy than to comprehend; a happiness infinitely above the most
ambitious hopes and glories of this world; wherein greatness is added to glory,
weight to greatness, and eternity to them all; therefore called 2 Cor. 4.17.
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Wherein the Joys shall be
full and constant, the perception clear and undisturbed, the fruition with
continual delight and continual desire. Where there shall be no fears to
disquiet, no enemies to allarm, no dangers to conquer, nothing shall then be,
but an uninterrupted peace, an unexpressible Joy, and pleasures for evermore.
And what could be ever imagined more satisfactory to minds tired out with the
vanities of this world, than such a repose as that is? What more agreeable to
the minds and desires of good men, than to be eased of this clog of flesh, and
to spend eternity with the fountain of all goodness, and the spirits of just
men made perfect? What more ravishing delight to the souls that are purged, and
Rev. 7.14.
made glorious by the blood of the Lamb, than to be singing Hallelujahs to him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever? How poor and low
things are those which men hope for in this world, compared with that great
salvation, which the Gospel makes so free a tender of? What a mean thing is it
to be great in this world, to be honorable and rich, i. e. to be made the
object of the envy of some, the malice of others, and at last it may be, an
instance of this world's vanity; and after all this to be for ever miserable?
But O the wisdom of a well-chosen happiness, that carries a man with
contentment and peace through this life, and at last rewards him with a Crown
of everlasting felicity. Thus we see the Gospel proposes the most excellent
means to make men happy, if they be not guilty of a gross neglect of it; and if
they be, that is their own act, and they must thank none but themselves if they
be miserable.

2. But I pray, what reason can be given, since God is so tender of our
happiness, that we should neglect it our selves? which is the next thing to be
spoken to. There are three sorts of things we think we have reason to neglect:
Such as are too mean, and unworthy our care, such as are so uncertain, that
they will not recompense it, such as our own Interest is not at all concerned
in; but I hope there are none who have an immortal soul, and the use of their
understandings, can ever reckon their salvation under one of these.

1. Is it too mean an employment for you to mind the matters of your eternal
welfare? Is Religion a beggarly and contemptible thing, that it does not become
the greatness of your minds to stoop to take any notice of it? Has God lost
his honor so much with you, that his service should be the object of men's
scorn and contempt? But what is it which these brave spirits think a fit
emplo^ment for themselves, while they despise God and his Worship? Is it to be
curiously dressed, and make a fine show, to think the time better spent at the
Glass than at their Devotions? These indeed are weighty employments, and fit in
the first place to be minded, if we were made only to be gazed upon. Is it
merely to see Plays, and read Romances, and to be great admirers of that vain
and frothy discourse which all persons account wit but those which have it?
This is such an end of man's life which no Philosopher ever thought of. Or is
it to spend time in excesses and debaucheries, and to be slaves to as many
lusts as will command them? This were something indeed, if we had any other
name given us but that of Men. Or lastly, is it to have their minds taken up
with the great affairs of the World, to be wise in considering, careful in
managing the public interest of a Nation? This is an employment, I grant, fit
for the greatest minds, but not such which need at all to take them off from
minding their eternal salvation. For the greatest wisdom is consistent with
that, else Religion would be accounted folly, and I take it for granted, that
it is never the truly wise man but the pretender that entertains any mean
thoughts of Religion. And such a one uses the public Interest no better than
he does Religion, only for a show to the world, that he may carry on his own
designs the better. And is this really such a valuable thing for a man to be
contented to cheat himself of his eternal happiness, that he may be able to
cheat the world, and abuse his trust? I appeal then to the Consciences of all
such who have any sense of humanity, and the common interest of Mankind,
setting aside the considerations of a life to come, whether to be just and
sober, virtuous and good, be not more suitable to the design of humane Nature,
than all the vanities and excesses, all the little arts and designs which men
art apt to please themselves with? And if so, shall the eternal happiness which
follows upon being good, make it less desirable to be so? No surely, but if God
had required any thing to make us happy, which had been as contrary to our
present Interest as the Precepts of Christianity are agreeable to it; yet the
end would have made the severest commands easy, and those things pleasant
which tend to make us happy.

2. Are these things so uncertain, that they are not fit for a wise man to be
solicitous about them? if they will come with ^ little care, they will say,
they are desirable but too much will unfit them for greater bus^ness? But do
men believe these things to be true or not, when they say thus? if they be
true, why need they fear their uncertainty? if they be certain, what pain^ and
care can be too great about them since a little will never serve to obtai^
them? Let but the care and diligence be proportionable to the greatness of the
end, and the weight of the things, and you never need fear the want of a
recompense for all your labor. But suppose you say, if you were fully
convinced of their certainty, you would look more after them. What hinders you
from being so convinced? Is it not a bad disposition of mind which makes you
unwilling to enquire into them? examine things with a mind as free as you would
have it, judge seriously according to the reason of things, and you will easily
find the interests of a life to come are far more certain, as well as more
desirable than those of this present life. And yet the great uncertainty of all
the honors and riches of this world, never hinder the covetous or ambitious
person from their great earnestness in pursuit of them. And shall not then all
the mighty arguments which God himself has made use of to confirm to us the
certainty of a life to come, prevail upon us to look more seriously after it?
Shall the unexpressible love of the Father, the unconceivable sufferings of the
Son of God, and the miraculous descent and powerful assistance of the Holy
Ghost have no more impression on our minds, than to leave us uncertain of a
future state? What mighty doubts and suspicions of God, what distrusts of
humane Nature, what unspeakable ingratitude, and unaccountable folly lies at
the bottom of all this uncertainty? O fools, and slow of heart to believe, not
only what the Prophets have spoken, but what our Lord has declared, God
himself has given testimony to, and the Holy Ghost has confirmed!

3. But is not your Interest concerned in these things? Is it all one to you
whether your souls be immortal or no? whether they live in eternal felicity, or
unchangeable misery? Is it no more to you than to know what kind of Baubles are
in request at the Indies, or whether the Customs of China or Iapan are the
wiser, i. e. than the most trifling things, and the remotest from our
knowledge. But this is to absurd and unreasonable to suppose, that men should
not think themselves concerned in their own eternal happiness and misery, that
I shall not show so much distrust of their understandings to speak any longer
to it.

3. But if notwithstanding all these things our neglect still continues, then
Heb. 10.27.
there remains nothing but a fearful looking for of judgment, and the fiery
indignation of God. For there is no possibility of escaping if we continue to
neglect so great salvation. All hopes of escaping are taken away, which are
only in that, which men neglect; and those who neglect their only way to
salvation, must needs be miserable. How can that man ever hope to be saved by
him whose blood he despises and tramples under foot? What grace and favor can
he expect from God, who has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? That has
cast away with reproach and contempt the greatest kindness and offers of
Heaven. What can save him that resolves to be damned, and every one does so,
who knows he shall be damned, if he lives in his sins, and yet continues to do
so? God himself, in whose only pity our hopes are, has irreversibly decreed
that he will have no pity upon those, who despise his goodness, slight his
threatenings, abuse his patience, and sin the more because he offers to pardon.
It is not any delight that God takes in the miseries of his Creatures, which
makes him punish them; but shall not God vindicate his own honor against
obstinate and impenitent sinners? He declares beforehand, that he is far from
delighting in their ruin, and that is the reason he has made such large
offers, and used so many means to make them happy; but if men resolve to
despise his offers, and slight the means of their salvation, shall not God be
just without being thought to be cruel? And we may assure our selves, none
shall ever suffer beyond the just desert of their sins, for punishment, as the
Apostle tells us in the words before the Text, is nothing but a just recompense
of reward. And if there were such a one proportionable to the violation of the
Law delivered by Angels; how shall we think to escape who neglect a more
excellent means of happiness, which was delivered by our Lord himself? If God
did not hate sin, and there were not a punishment belonging to it, why did the
Son of God die for the expiation of it? and if his death were the only means of
expiation, how is it possible that those who neglect that, should escape the
punishment not only of their other sins, but of that great contempt of the
means of our salvation by him? Let us not then think to trifle with God, as
though it were impossible a Being so merciful and kind, should ever punish his
Creatures with the miseries of another life: For, however we may deceive our
selves, Gal. 6.7, 8.
God will not be mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap; for
he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

I shall only propound some few Considerations, to prevent so great a neglect
as that of your salvation is.

1. Consider what it is you neglect, the offer of Eternal Happiness, the
greatest kindness that ever was expressed to the World, the foundation of your
present peace, the end of your beings, the stay of your minds, the great desire
of your Souls, the utmost felicity that humane Nature is capable of. Is it
nothing to neglect the favor of a Prince, the kindness of Great Men, the
offers of a large and plentiful Estate; but these are nothing to the neglect of
the favor of God, the love of his Son, and that salvation which he has
purchased for you. Nay, it is not a bare neglect, but it implies in it a mighty
contempt not only of the things offered, but of the kindness of him who offers
them. If men had any due regard for God or themselves, if they had any esteem
for his love, or their own welfare, they would be much more serious in Religion
than they are. When I see a person wholly immersed in affairs of the World, or
spending his time in luxury and vanity, can I possibly think that man has any
esteem of God or of his own Soul? When I find one very serious in the pursuit
of his Designs in the World, thoughtful and busy, subtle in contriving them,
careful in managing them; but very formal, remiss and negligent in all affairs
of Religion, neither inquisitive about them, nor serious in minding them; what
can we otherwise think, but that such a one does really think the things of the
World better worth looking after, than those which concern his eternal
salvation. But consider, before it be too late, and repent of so great folly.
Value an immortal Soul as you ought to do, think what Reconciliation with God,
and the Pardon of sin is worth, slight not the dear Purchase which was bought
at no meaner a rate than the Blood of the Son of God, and then you cannot but
mind the great salvation which God has tendered you.

2. Consider on what terms you neglect it, or what the things are for whose
sake you are so great enemies to your own salvation. Have you ever found that
contentment in sin or the vanities of the World, that for the sake of them, you
are willing to be for ever miserable? What will you think of all your
debaucheries, and your neglects of God and your selves, when you come to die?
what would you then (if it were in your power to redeem your lost time) that
you had spent your time less to the satisfaction of your sensual desires, and
more in seeking to please God? How uncomfortable will the remembrance be of all
your excesses, oaths, injustice and profaneness, when death approaches, and
judgment follows it? What peace of mind will there then be to those who have
served God with faithfulness, and have endeavored to work out their salvation,
though it has been with fear and trembling? But what would it then profit a
man to have gained the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? Nay, what
unspeakable losers must they then be, that lose their Souls for that which has
no value at all, if compared with the World.

3. Consider what follows upon this neglect, not only the loss of great
salvation, but the incurring as great damnation for it. The Scripture describes
the miseries of the life to come, not merely by negatives, but by the most
sensible and painful things. If destruction be dreadful, what is everlasting
destruction? if the anguish of the soul, and the pains of the body be so
troublesome, what will the destruction be both of Body and Soul in Hell? If a
Serpent gnawing in our bowels be a representation of an insupportable misery
here, what will that be of the Worm that never dies? if a raging and devouring
fire, which can last but till it has consumed a fading substance, be in its
appearance so amazing, and in its pain so violent, what then will the enduring
be of that wrath of God, which shall burn like fire, and yet be everlasting?
Consider then of these things, while God gives you time to consider of them;
and think it an inestimable mercy that you have yet time to repent of your
sins, to beg mercy at the hands of God, to redeem your time, to depart from
iniquity, to be frequent in Prayer, careful of your Actions, and in all things
obedient to the will of God, and so God will pardon your former neglects, and
grant you this great salvation.

SERMON VI.
Preached on GOOD FRIDAY before the Lord Mayor, etc.
Hebrews XII. 3. For, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.


IT has never yet been so well with the World, and we have no great reason to
hope it ever will be so; that the best of things, or of men, should meet with
entertainment in it, suitable to their own worth and excellency. If it were
once to be hoped, that all Mankind would be wise and sober, that their
judgments would be according to the truth of things, and their actions suitable
to their judgments; we might then reasonably expect that nothing would be
valued so much as true goodness, nothing so much in contempt and disgrace as
impiety and profaneness. But if we find it much otherwise in the Age we live
in, we have so much the less cause to wonder at it; because it has been thus,
in those times we might have thought would have been far better than our own. I
mean those times and ages, wherein there were not only great things first
spoken and delivered to Mankind, but examples as great as the things
themselves; but these did so little prevail on the stupid and unthankful world,
that they among whom the Son of God did first manifest himself, seemed only
solicitous to make good one Prophecy concerning him, viz. That he should be
despised and rejected of men. And they who suffered their malice to live as
long he did, were not contented to let it dye with him; but their fury
increases as the Gospel does: and wherever it had spread it self, they pursue
it with all the rude clamours, and violent persecutions which themselves or
their factors could raise against it. This we have a large testimony of, in
those Jewish Christians to whom this Epistle was written; who had no sooner
embraced the Christian Religion, but they were set upon by a whole army of
persecutors, Heb. 10.32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which
after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. As though
the great enemy of souls, and therefore of Christians, had watched the first
opportunity to make the strongest impression upon them, while they were yet
young and unexperienced; and therefore less able to resist so sharp an
encounte^. He had found how unsuccessful the offer of the good things of this
World had been with their Lord and Master; and therefore was resolved to try
what a severer course would do with all his followers. But the same spirit by
which he despised all the Glories of the World, which the Tempter would have
made him believe he was the disposer of, enabled them with a mighty courage,
and strange transports of joy, not only to bear their own share of reproaches
and afflictions, but a part of theirs who suffered with them, v. 33, 34. But
lest through continual duty, occasioned by the hatred of their persecutors, and
the multitude of their afflictions; their courage should abate, and their
spirits faint; the Apostle finds it necessary, not only to put them in mind of
their former magnanimity; but to make use of all arguments that might be
powerful with them, to keep up the same vigor and constancy of mind in bearing
their sufferings, which they had at first. For he well knew, how much it would
tend to the dishonor of the Gospel, as well as to their own discomfort; if
after such an early proof of a great and undaunted spirit, it should be said of
them, as was once of a great Roman Captain, Vltima Primis cedebant; that they
should decline in their reputation as they did in their years; and at last sink
under that weight of duty which they had born with so much honor before.
Therefore, as a General in the Field, after a sharp and fierce encounter at
first, with a mighty resolution by his Soldiers; when he finds by the number
and fresh recruits of the enemy, that his smaller forces are like to be born
down before them; and through mee^ weariness of fighting are ready to turn
their backs, or yield themselves up to the enemies mercy; he conjures them by
the honor they have gained, and the courage they had already expressed, by
their own interest, and the example of their Leaders, by the hopes of glory,
and the fears of punishment, that they would bear the last shock of their
enemies force, and rather be the Trophies of their Courage than of their
Triumphs: so does our Apostle, when he finds some among them begin to debate,
whether they had best to stand it out or no; he conjures them, 1. By the
remembrance of their own former courage, whereby they did bear as sharp trials
as these could be, with the greatest cheerfulness and constancy; and what could
they gain by yielding at last, but great dishonor to themselves, that they had
suffered so long to no purpose, unless it were to discover their own weakness
and inconstancy. 2. By the hopes of a reward which would surely follow their
faithfulness; v. 35, 36. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has
great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have
done the will of God, ye might receive the promise: and the time will not be
long ere ye come to enjoy it, v. 37. but if ye draw back, you lose all your
former labors, for he who alone is able to recompense you, has said, that if
any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, v. 38. and then from
the example of himself, and all the genuine followers of Christ, but we are not
of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of
the soul, v. 39. But lest these examples should not be enough to persuade them;
he conjures them by the name of all those who were as eminent ^or the greatness
of their minds as the strength of their Faith; who have despised the frowns as
well as the ^miles of the world; and were not discouraged by the severest
trials from placing their confidence in God, and their hopes in a life to come;
and all this done by persons who had not received the Promise: Heb. 11.39. And
could there be a greater disparagement to the clearness of that light we enjoy
above them, if we only grew fainter by it? And therefore in the beginning of
this Chapter he encourages them by that army of Martyrs which had gone before
them, by that Cloud of witnesses which did both direct and refresh them, that
they would lay aside every thing which was apt to oppress or dishearten them,
but especially their sinful fears, which they were so easily betrayed by, and
so run with patience the race that was set before them, v. 1. But, says he, if
none of these will prevail with you, there is an example yet behind, that ought
above all others to heighten your courage, and that is, of the Captain of your
salvation, the author and finisher of your faith, under whom you serve, and
from whom you expect your reward; and as Caesar once said to his Soldiers,
when he saw them ready to retreat out of the field, Videte quem, and quo loco
Imperatorem deserturi estis. Remember what kind of General you forsake, and in
what place you leave him: one whom you have vowed your lives and your service
to, one who has thought nothing too dear, which was to be done for your good,
one that will be ready to reward the least service you can do for him, one that
is ready to assist you to the utmost in what you undertake, one that has
already undergone far more for your sakes, than ever you can do for his;
therefore, Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.

In which words we have represented to us, the unparalled example of courage
and patience under sufferings, in our Lord and Savior; and the great influence
that it ought to have on all those who are called by his Name, that they would
not dishonor so excellent a pattern of enduring sufferings, by weakness or
dejection of mind. Christianity is a Religion which above all others does arm
men against all the contingencies and miseries of the life of man: yea, it
makes them serviceable to the most advantageous purposes that the greatest
blessings can be designed for. It raises the minds of men higher than barely to
consider the common condition of humane nature, the unavoidableness of such
things which are out of our own power, and the unreasonableness of tormenting
our selves about the things which are so, and that most men's conditions in the
world as to their contentment, depends more upon their minds, than their
outward circumstances; though these are things very fit for us as men to
consider and make use of; yet they dot not reach to that height, which the
consideration of a life to come, and the tendency of all our sufferings here to
the inhancement of our future glory may raise us to. Especially considering not
only the weight of the arguments in themselves, but the force they receive from
the example of him, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
By which mighty instance we find, that the sufferings of this life are so far
from being inconsistent with the joys of another, that he who is Heb. 2.10.
the Captain of salvation, was made perfect through sufferings, and therefore
none of his followers have cause to be dejected under them. But that we may the
better understand the force of this argument, we shall consider,

1. What those things were which he endured.

2. From whom he suffered them; it was the contradiction of sinners against
himself.

3. In what way and manner he underwent them.

4. For what ends he did it. And when we have considered these, we shall see
the influence this example of Christ's sufferings ought to have upon our
constancy and patience: which will be the most useful improvement of it to us.

1. What those things were which Christ endured; which are here comprehended
under those words, the contradiction of sinners. It is agreed by the best
Expositors, both Greek and Latin, that under this phrase of the contradictio^
of sinners, the whole History of our Savior's sufferings is comprehended. All
the injuries, reproaches, false accusations, all the cruelties, indignities,
and violence, which were offered him, from the time of his public appearance
to his expiring upon the Cross, being undergone by him, by the malice of
unreasonable men, may be called the contradiction of sinners. For the sense of
this word extends as well to actions as words* and the sum of all that which
our Savior suffered from them, may be reduced under these heads. 1. The ill
entertainment of his Doctrine. 2. The disparagement of his Miracles. 3. The
violence offered to his Person.

1. The ill entertainment of his Doctrine; which must needs seem very strange
to those who do not consider what a difficult access the clearest reason has
to the minds of such who are governed by interest and prejudice. Though all the
the Prophesies concerning the Messiah were fulfilled in him; though the
expectations of the people were great at that time concerning the appearance of
him that was to redeem his people; though all the characters of time, place, and
person, did fully agree to what was foretold by the Prophets; though his
Doctrine were as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the sons of men to
receive; though the unspotted innocence of his life was so great, as made him
weary of his own that betrayed him: yet because he came not with the pomp and
splendour which they expected, they despise his Person, revile his Doctrine,
persecute his Followers, and contrive his ruin. What could have been imagined
more probable, than that the Jewish Nation, which had waited long in
expectation of the Messiah coming, should have welcomed his approach with the
greatest joy, and received the Message he brought with a kindness only short of
that which he showed in coming among them? Was it nothing to be eased of that
heavy burden of the Ceremonial Law, which neither they nor their Fathers were
able to bear? and that God was willing to exchange the chargeable and
troublesome service of the Temple, for the more reasonable and spiritual
Worship of himself? Was it nothing to have the Promises of a Land which now
groaned under the weight of its oppressions, turned into those of an eternal
state of bliss and immortality? and to change the Lamps of the Temple, for the
glorious appearance of the Son of Righteousness? Was it nothing to have an
offer of Peace and Reconciliation with God made them, after they had suffered
so much under the fury of his displeasure? Was a mere temporal deliverance by
some mighty Conqueror from the subjection they were in to the Roman Power, so
much more valuable a thing, than an eternal redemption from the powers of Hell
and the Grave? Are the pomps and vanities of this present life, such great
things in God's account, that it was not possible for his Son to appear without
them? Nay, how unsuitable had it been for one who came to preach humility,
patience, self-denial, and contempt of the world, to have made ostentation of
the State and Grandeur of it? So that either he must have changed his Doctrine,
or rendered himself liable to the suspicion of seeking to get this world by the
preaching of another. And if his Doctrine had been of another kind, he might
have been esteemed a great person among the Jews, but not the Son of God, or
the promised Messiah, in whom all Nations of the Earth should be blessed. Which
surely they would never have thought themselves to have been, in one, who must
have subdued the neighbor Nations to advance the honor of his own. But since
the Son of God thought fit to appear in another manner than they expected him,
they thought themselves too great to be saved by so mean a Savior. If he had
made all the Kingdoms of the Earth to have bowed under him, and the Nations
about them to have been all tributaries to them; if Jerusalem had been made the
Seat of an Empire as great as the World it self, they would then have gloried
in his Name, and entertained whatever he had said, whether true or false, with
a wonderful Veneration. But Truth in an humble dress meets with few admirers;
they could not imagine so much Power and Majesty could ever shroud it self
under so plain a disguise. Thus Christ 1 John 11.
came to his own, and his own received him not. Yea, those that should have
known him the best of all others; those who frequently conversed with him, and
heard him speak as never man spoke, and saw him do what never man did, were yet
so blinded by the meanness of his Parentage and Education, that they baffle
their own Reason, and persist in their Infidelity, because they knew the place
and manner of his breeding; the names of his Mother and his Brethren and
Sisters; Matt. 3.55, 56.
Are they not all with us? whence then has this man all these things? As
though, Is not this the Carpenters Son, had been sufficient answer to all he
could say or do.

2. The disparagement of his Miracles. Since the bare proposal of his Doctrine,
though never so reasonable, could not prevail with them to believe him to be
the Son of God, he offers them a further proof of it by the mighty works which
were wrought by him. And though the more ingenuous among them were ready to
acknowledge, John 3.^.
that no man could do the things which he did, unless God were with him: yet
they who were resolved to hear and see, and not understand; when they found it
not for their credit, to deny matters of fact so universally known attested,
they seek all the means to blast the reputation of them that may be. Sometimes
raising popular insinuations against him, that he was a man of no austere life,
a friend of Publicans and Sinners, one that could choose no other day to do his
works on, but that very day wherein God himself did rest from his; and
therefore no great regard was to be had to what such a one did. When these arts
would not take, but the people found the benefit of his Miracles, in healing
the sick, curing the blind and the lame, feeding the hungry; then they
undervalue all these in comparison with the wonders that were wrought by Moses
in the Wilderness. If he would have made the Earth to open her mouth, and
swallow up the City and the power of Rome; if he would have fed a mighty Army
with bread from Heaven, in stead of feeding some few thousands with very small
Provisions; if in stead of raising one Lazarus from the Grave, he would have
raised up their Sampson's, and their David's, their men of spirit and conduct,
whose very presence would have put a new life into the hearts of the people; if
in stead of casting out Devils, he would have cast out the Romans, whom they
hated the worse of the two: if he would have set himself to the cure of a
distempered State, instead of healing the maladies of some few inconsiderable
persons: if instead of being at the expense of a Miracle to pay tribute, he
would have hindered them from paying any at all; then a Second Moses would have
been too mean a title for him, he could have been no less than the promised
Messiah, the Son of God. But while he employed his power another way, the
demonstration of it made them hate him the more; since they thought with
themselves what strange things they would have done with it for the benefit of
their Country; and therefore express the greatest malice against him, because
he would not employ it as they would have him. From thence, they condemn his
Miracles as only some effects of a Magical skill; and say, he dispossessed the
lesser Devils by the power of him that was the Prince among them. So unworthy a
requital did they make for all the mighty works which had been done among them;
Which, as our Savior says, Mat. 11.21.
if they had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes.

3. But although all this argued a strange spirit of contradiction in them to all
the designs for their own good; yet the malice from whence that rose, would not
s^op here; for as they had long contrived his ruin, so they watched only an
opportunity to effect it. Which his frequent presence at Jerusalem seemed to
put into their hands, but his reputation with the people made them fearful of
embracing it. Therefore they employ their Agents to deal privately with one of
h^s Disciples who might be fittest for their design; and to work upon his
covetous humor by the promise of a reward, to bring him to betray his Mas^er
with the greatest privacy into their hands. This Judas undertakes, knowing the
place and season of his Masters retirements, not far from the City, where they
might with the greatest secrecy and safety seize upon his person. Which
contrivance of theirs our Savior was not at all ignorant of; but prepares
himself and his Disciples for this great encounter. He institutes his solemn
Supper, to be perpetually observed in remembrance of his death and sufferings,
after which he discourses admirably with his Disciples, to arm them against
their future sufferings; and prays that most divine Prayer, St. John 17. which
he had no sooner finished, but he goes with his Disciples to the usual place of
his retirement in a Garden at the foot of the Mount of Olives. And now begins
the blackest Scene of sufferings that ever was acted upon humane Nature. Which
was so great, that the Son of God himself expresses a more than usual
apprehension of it; which he discovered by the Agony he was in, in which he
sweat Luke 22.44.
drops of blood; by the earnestness of his Prayer, falling upon his knees, and
praying thrice, saying, Mat. 26.39.
O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou will. Surely, this Cup must needs have a great deal of
bitterness in it, which the Son of God was so earnest to be freed from. If
there had been nothing in it but what is commonly incident to humane Nature, as
to the apprehensions of death or pain, it seems strange, that he who had the
greatest innocence, the most perfect charity, the freest resignation of
himself, the fullest assurance of the reward to come, should express a greater
sense of the horror of his sufferings, than thousands did, who suffered for his
sake. But now was the hour come wherein the Son of God was to be made a
Sacrifice for the sins of men wherein he was to bear our griefs, and carry our
sorrows, when he was Isa. 53.4, 5.
to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; now Mat.
26.38.
his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death; for now Luke 2^.53.
the hour of his enemies was come, and the power of darkness. And accordingly
they improve it; they came out against him as a Malefactor, with swords and
staves, and having seized his Person, being betrayed into their hands by one of
his Disciples, they carry him to the High Priests house, where his professed
enemies presently condemn him of Mat. 26.66, 67.
Blasphemy, and not content with this, they express the greatest contempt of
him, for they spit in his face, they buffet him, and smite him with the Palms
of their hands, they mock him, and bid him prophecy who it was that smote him;
so insolent was their malice grown, and so spightful was their indignation
against him. And so fearful were they, lest he should escape their hands, that
the very next morning early, they send him bound to the Roman Governor, to
have the sentence pronounced against him, to whom they accuse him of Seditition
and Treason; but Pilate upon examination of him declares, Luke 23.4.
he found no fault in him; which made them heap more unreasonable calumnies
upon him, being resolved by what means soever to take away his life. Nay, the
price of the Blood of the Son of God was fallen so low with them, that they
preferred the life of a known seditious person, and a Murderer before him. And
when Pilate being unsatisfied, asked sti^l, Mat. 2^.^3.
what evil has he done? they continue their importunity without any other
answer but Crucify him, and making up what wanted in Justice and Reason in the
loudness of their clamours. And at last seeing the fury and madness of the
people, with the protestation of his own innocence as to his blood, he delivers
him up to the people; and now he is stripped, and scourged, and mocked, with a
Crown of Thorns, a Scarlet Robe, and a Reed in his hand: all the indignities
they could think of, they put upon him. But though it pleased them, to have him
exposed to all the ignominies imaginable, yet nothing would satisfy them but
his blood; and therefore he is led forth to be crucified, and though so lately
scourged and weakened by his sorrows, yet he is made to carry his own Cross (at
least through the City) for no other death could satisfy them, but the most
ignominious, and painful. And when he was brought to the place of Crucifixion,
they nail h^s hands and feet to the Cross, and while he was hanging there, they
deride and mock him still, they divide his garments before his face, give him
Gall and Vinegar to drink, and the last act of violence committed upon him, was
the piercing of his side, so that out of his Pericardium issued Joh 19.34.
both water and blood. Thus did the Son of God suffer at the hands of
unreasonable men; thus was the blood of that immaculate Lamb spilt by the hands
of violence; and he who left the bosom of his Father, to bring us to glory, was
here treated as if he had been unworthy to live upon the Earth.

2. But that which yet heightens these sufferings of Christ, is to consider*
from whom he suffered these things, it was from sinners; which is as much as to
say, from men, if the word were taken in the largest sense of it; for all have
sinned; but being taken by us in opposition to other men, so it implies a
greater height of wickedness in these th^n in other persons. But this is not
h^re to be considered absolutely, as denoting what kind of persons he su^fer'd
from, but with a particular respect to the nature of their proceedings with
him, and the obligations that lay upon them to the contrary. So that the first
shows the injustice and unreasonableness of them; the second, their great
ingratitude, considering the kindness and good will which he expressed toward
them.

1. The injustice and unreasonableness of their proceedings against him. It is
true indeed, (what Socrates said to his wife, when she complained that he
suffer^d unjustly, What, says he, and would you have me suffer justly?) it is
much greater comfort to the person who does suffer, when he does it unjustly,
but it is a far greater reflection on those who were the causes of it. And that
our Blessed Savior did suffer with the greatest injustice from these men, is
apparent from the falseness and weakness of all the accusations which were
brought against him. To accuse the Son of God for Blasphemy, in saying, he was
so, is as unjust as to condemn a King for treason, because he says he is a
King: they ought to have examined the grounds on which he called himself so;
and if he had not given pregnant evidences of it, then to have passed sentence
upon him as an Impostor and Blasphemer. If the thing were true, that he was
what he said, the Son of God, what horrible guilt was it in them, to imbrue
their hands in his blood* and they found he always attested it, and now was
willing to lay down his life to confirm the truth of what he said. This surely
ought at least to have made them more inquisitive into what he had affirmed;
but they allow him not the liberty of a fair trial, they hasten and precipitate
the sentence, that they might do so the execution. If he were condemned as a
false Prophet; (for that seems to be the occasion of the Sanhedrim meeting to
do it, to whom the cognizance of that did particularly belong) why do they not
mention what it was he had foretold, which had not come to pass; or what reason
do they give why he had usurped such an Office to himself? If no liberty were
allowed under pain of death for any to say, that they were sent from God, how
was it possible for the Messiah ever to appear, and not be condemned? for the
expectation of him was, that he should be a great person immediately sent from
God, for the delivery of his people. And should he be sent from God, and not
say that he was so? for how then could men know that he was? So that their way
of proceeding with him, discovers it self to be manifestly unjust, and contrary
to their own avowed expectations. Neither were they more successf^l in the
accusation of him before Pilate; why did not the witness appear to make good
the charge of sedition and treason against him? where were the proo^s of any
thing tending that way? Nay, that which a^undantly testified the innocence of
our Savior, as to all the matters he was accused of, was that the Roman
Governor, after a full examination of the cause, declares him innocent, and
that not only once but several times; and was fully satisfied in the
Vindication he made of himself, so that nothing but the fear of what the Jews
threatened, viz accusing him to Caesar (a thing he had cause enough otherwise to
be afraid of) which made him at last yield to their importunity. But there was
one circumstance more which did highly discover the innoc^ncy of Christ, and
the injustice of his sufferings, which was Iudas's confession and end; the man
who had betrayed his Lord, and had received the wages of his iniquity; but was
so unquiet with it, that in the time when his other Disciples durst not own
him, he with a great impetus returns to them with his Money, throws it among
them with that sad farewell to them all, Mat. ^7.4.
I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. What could have
been said more for his Vindication at this time than this was, by such a person
as Judas, one who had known our Savior long, and had been the fittest
instrument, if any guilt could have been ^asten'd upon him, to have managed the
accusation against him; but the anxiety of his mind was too great for what he
had done already, to live to do them any longer service; for either his grief
suffocated him, or his guilt made him hang himself; for the words will signify
either. Neither can it be said by any modern Jews, that all the testimony we
have of these things is from his own Disciples; but that certainly they had
some greater matter to accuse him of; which we now have lost. For how is it
^ossible to conceive, that a matter so important as that was, should be lost by
those of their own Nation, who were to highly concerned to vindicate themselves
in all places, as soon as the Gospel was spread abroad in the World? For the
guilt of th^s blood was every where by the Christians charged upon them; and
their pr^digious sufferings afterward were imputed who^ly by them to the
shedding of that blood of Christ, which by a most solemn imprecation they had
said, should be upon them and their Children. Besides, how comes Celsus, who
personates a Jew, opposing Christianity, to mention no other accusations
against him but those recorded in the Gospel; and Orig. c. Cells. l. 3. p. 123.
Origin ^ challenges him or any other person to charge him with any action
which might deserve punishment. And which is very observable, Porphyrie, one of
the most inveterate enemies of Christianity, and that took as much pains to
write against it as any, and had more learning to do it with, yet in his Book
of the Philosophy of Oracles, as August. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 23.
St. Augustine tells us, quotes an Oracle wherein were these words concerning
Christ, And what became of him after his death? it says, that his Soul was
immortal, Cur ergo damnatus est? respondit Dea: corpus quidem debilitantibus
tormentis semper oppositum est, anima autem piorum coelesti sedi insidet.
Viri pietate proestantissimi est illa anima, and that it was the soul of a
most excellent person for piety; and being then asked, why he was condemned?
the answer only is, that the Body (of the best) is exposed to weakening
torments, but the Soul rests in heavenly habitations. So that on no account can
this contradiction appear to be otherwise than an act of great injustice and
cruelty, and therefore must needs be the contradiction of sinners.

2. This contradiction of theirs to Christ was an act of high Ingratitude. It
was a sharp but very just rebuke which the Jews received from our Savior, when
they were once ready to stone him; John 10.32.
Many good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of those works do
you stone me? The very same might have been applied to his Judges and accusers;
when they were about to crucify him. For what was his whole Life after he
appeared publicly, but a constant design of doing good? His presence had far
more virtue for the curing all bodily distempers, than the Pool of Bethesda
among the Jews, or the Temples of Aesculapius among the Gentiles. What wonders
were made of very small things done by other persons, as the cure of a blind
Man by Vespasian! when such multitudes of far more certain and c^nsiderable
cures, can hardly keep up the reputation of any thing extraordinary in him. But
though his kindness was great to the bodies of men, where they were fit objects
of pity and compassion; yet it was far greater to their souls, that being more
agreeable to the design of his coming into the World; for the other tended to
raise such an esteem of him as might make him the more successful in the cure
of their Souls. And to show, that this was his great business, wherever he
comes, he discourses about these things, takes every opportunity that might be
improved for that end, refuses no company he might do good upon, and converses
not with them with the pride and arrogance of either the Pharisees or
Philosophers, but with the greatest meekness, humility and patience. How
admirable are his more solemn discourses, especially that upon the Mount, and
that wherein he takes leave of his Disciples! How dry and insipid are the most
sublime discourses of the Philosophers compared with these! how clearly does he
state our Duties, and what mighty encouragements does he give to practice them!
how forcibly does he persuade men to self-denial and contempt of the world! how
excellent and holy are all his Precepts! how serviceable to the best interest
of men in this life and that to come! how suitable and desirable to the souls
of good men are the rewards he promises! what exact rule of Righteousness has
he prescribed to men, in doing as they would be done by! with what vehemence
does he rebuke all hypocrisy and Pharisaism! with what tenderness and kindness
does he treat those that have any real inclinations to true goodness! with what
earnestness does he invite, and with what love does he embrace all repenting
sinners! with what care does he instruct, with what mildness does he reprove,
with what patience does he bear with his own disciples! Lastly, with what
authority did he both speak and live, such as commanded a reverence, where it
did not beget a love! And yet after a life thus spent, all the requital he met
with, was to be reproached, despised, and at last crucified. O the dreadful
effects of malice and hyprocrisie! for these were the two great enemies which
he always proclaimed open war with; and these at first contrived, and at last
effected his cruel death. What baseness, ingratitude, cruelty, and injustice,
(and what not?) will those two sins betray men to, when they have on^e taken
possession of the hearts of men! for we can find nothing else at the bottom of
all that wretched conspiracy against our Savior; but that his doctrine and
design was too pure and holy for them; and therefore they study to take him
away who was the author of them.

3. We consider, in what way and manner, our Savior underwent all these
sufferings; and this as much as any thing is here propounded to our
consideration. For it is not only who, or what, but in what manner he endured
the contradiction of sinners, that we ought to consider, to prevent sainting
and dejection of mind. So another Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.
That Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judged righteously. He uses none of those ranting
expressions which none of the patientest persons in the world were accustomed
to; of bidding them laugh in Phalaris his Bull; and when they were racked with
pains, to cry out, Nil agis dolor: he tells them not, that it is their duty to
have no sense of torments, and to be jocund and pleasant when their flesh is
torn from them, or nailed to a Cross; if this be any kind of fortitude, it is
rather that of a Gladiator than of a wise man or a Christian. The worst of men
either through a natural temper of body, or having hardened themselves by
custom, have born the greatest torments with the least expression of grief
under them. And Panoetius, one of the wisest of the Stoics, is so far from
making insensibleness of pain the property of a wise man, that he makes it not
the property of a man. The inferior Creatures are called Brutes from their
dullness and insensibleness, and not merely from want of reason, any further
than that one follows from the other: Plin. Not. Hist. l. 11.37.
Bruta existimantur animalium quibus cor durum riget, says Pliny, those
animals are called Brutes which have the hardest hearts: and the nearer any of
them approach to the nature of man, the more apprehensive they are of danger,
and the more sensible of pain; thence Scalig. hist. anim. l. 2. sect. 13^.
Scaliger says of the Elephant, that it is maxima bellua, sed non maxim
bruta, though it be the greatest beast, it is the least a Brute. Stupidity then
under sufferings can be no part of the excellency of a man; which in its
greatest height is in the Beings the most beneath him. But when danger is
understood, and pain felt, and Nature groans under it, then with patience and
submission to undergo it, and to conquer all the strugglings of Nature against
it, that is the duty and excellency of a Christian. If to express the least
sense of grief and pain, be the highest excellency of suffering, the Macedonian
Boy that suffered his flesh to be burnt by a Coal, till it grew o^fensive to
all about him, without al^ering the posture of his arm, lest he should disturb
Alexanders sacrifice, out-did the greatest Philosophers of them all.
Possidonius his pitiful rant over a fit of the Gout, so highly commended by
Pompey and Tull T^sculan. l 2.
Tully; O pain, it is to no purpose; though thou be troublesome, I will
never confess thou art evil; falls extremely short of the resolution of the
Macedonian Boy, or any of the Spartan Youths, who would not in the midst of
torments so much as confess them troublesome. And what a mighty revenge was
that, that he would not confess it to be evil, when his complaint that it was
troublesome, was a plain argument that he thought it so. It is not then the
example of Zeno or Cleanthes, or the rules of Stoicism, which Dionysius
Heracleotes, in a fit of the Stone complained of the folly of, that are to be
the measures of patience, and courage in bearing sufferings; but the example
and Precepts of our Lord and Savior, who expressed a great sense of his
sufferings but withal the greatest submission under them. When Aub. Miraeus in
vit a Lipsii. p. 60.
Lipsius lay a dying, and one of the bystanders knowing how conversant he had
been in the Stoics writings, began to suggest some of their Precepts to him,
Vana sunt ista, said he, I find all those but vain things; and beholding the
Picture of our Savior near his bed, he pointed to that, and cried, haec vera
est patientia: there is the true pattern of Patience. For, notwithstanding that
Agony he was in immediately before his being betrayed, when he sees the
Officers coming toward him, he asks them whom they seek for? and tells them, I
am he; which words so astonished them, Joh. 18 6.
that they went back, and fell upon the ground: thereby letting them understand
how easy a matter it was for him to have escaped their hands; and that it was
his own free consent, that he went to suffer, for he knew certainly before
hand, the utmost that he was to undergo, and therefore it was no unreasonable
impetus, but a settled resolution of his mind to endure all the contradictions
of sinners. When he was spit upon, mocked, reproached and scourged, none of all
these could draw one impatient expression from him. The malice and rage of his
enemies did not at all provoke him; unless it were to pity and pray for them.
And that he did, with great earnestness in the midst of all his pains: and
though he would not plead for himself to them, yet he pleads for them to God;
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. How much more divine was
this, than the admired Theramenes among the Greeks, who being condemned to die
by the thirty Tyrants, when he was drinking off his cup of Poison, said, he
drank that to Critias, one of his most bitter enemies, and hoped he would
pledge it shortly. Socrates seemed not to express seriousness enough at least,
when he bid one of his friends, when he was dying, offer up a Cock to
Aesculapius for his deliverance. Aristides and Phocion among the Greeks came
the nearest to our Savior's tempe^, when one prayed, That his Country might
have no cause to remember him when he was gone, and the other charged his Son,
to forget the injuries they had done him; but yet by how much the greater the
Person and Office was of our Blessed Savior, than of either of them, by how
much the cruelty and ignominy, as well as pain was greater which they exposed
him to, by how much greater concernment there is to have such an offense
pardoned by one that can punish it with eternal misery, than not revenged by
those, who though they may have will, have not always power to execute; so much
greater was the kindness of our Savior to his enemies, in his Prayer upon the
Cross, than of either of the other, in their concernment for that ungrateful
City, that had so ill requited their services to it. Thus when the Son of God
was oppressed, and afflicted, Isa. 53.7.
He opened not his mouth, but only in Prayer for them, who were his bitter
enemies; and though nothing had been more easy than for him to have cleared
himself from all their accusations, who had so often baffled them before; yet
he would not now give them that suspicion of his innocence, as to make any
Apology for himself; but committed himself to God that judges righteously, and
was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers was
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. And the reason thereof was, he knew what
further design for the good of mankind was carrying on by the bitterness of his
passion, and that all the cruel usage he underwent, was that he might be a
sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the World. Which leads to the last thing
propounded to our consideration.

4. Which is, the causes why God was pl^ased to suffer his Son to endure such
contradiction of sinners against himself. I know it is an easy answer to say,
that God had determined it should be so, and that we ought to enquire no
further: but sure such an answer can satisfy none who consider, how much our
salvation depends upon the knowledge of it, and how clear and express the
Scripture is in assigning the causes of the Sufferings of Christ. Which though
as far as the instruments were concerned in it, we have given an account of
already; yet considering the particular management of this grand affair by the
care of divine Providence, a higher account must be given of it, why so divine
and excellent a Person should be exposed to all the contempt and reproach
imaginable, and after being made a Sacrifice to the tongues and rods of the
people, then to dye a painful and ignominious death? So that allowing but that
common care of divine Providence, which all sober Heathens acknowledged, so
transcendent Sufferings as these were, of so holy and innocent a person, ought
to be accounted for, in a more than ordinary manner; when they thought
themselves concerned to vindicate the Justice of God's Providence in the common
calamities of those who are reputed to be better than the generality of
Mankind. But the reasons assigned in that common case will not hold here, since
this was a person immediately sent from God upon a particular message to the
World, and therefore might plead an exemption by virtue of his Embassage from
the common arrests and troubles of humane nature. But it was so far otherwise,
as though God had designed him on purpose to let us see how much mi^ery humane
nature can undergo. Some think themselves to go as far as their reason will
permit them; when they tell us, that he suffered all these things to confirm
the truth of what he had said, and particularly the Promise of Remission of
sins, and that he might be an example to others, who should go to Heaven by
suffering afterward, and that he might, being touched with the feeling of our
infirmities here, have the greater pity upon us now he is in Heaven. All these
I grant to have been true and weighty reasons of the Sufferings of Christ, in
subordination to greater ends; but if there had been nothing beyond all this, I
can neither understand why he should suffer so deeply as he did, nor why the
Scripture should insist upon a far greater reason more than upon any of these?
I grant, the death of Christ did confirm the truth of his Doctrine, as far as
it is unreasonable to believe that any one who knew his Doctrine to be false,
would make himself miserable to make others believe it; but if this had been
all intended, why would not an easier and less ignominious death have served?
since he who would be willing to dye to confirm a falsehood, would not be
thought to confirm a truth by his death, because it was painful and shameful.
Why, if all his Sufferings were designed as a testimony to others, of the truth
of what he spoke, were the greatest of his Sufferings, such as none could know
the anguish of them but himself, I mean his Agony in the Garden, and that which
made him cry out upon the Cross; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why
were not his Miracles enough to confirm the truth of his Doctrine? since the
Law of Moses was received without his death, by the evidence his Miracles gave
that he was sent from God; since the Doctrine of remission of sins had been
already delivered by the Prophets, and received by the People of the Jews;
since those who would not believe for his Miracles sake, neither would they
believe though they should have seen him ri^e from the Grave, and therefore not
surely because they saw him put into it. But of all things, the manner of our
Savior's sufferings seems least designed to bring the World to the belief of
his Doctrine, which was the main obstacle to the entertainment of it among the
men of greatest reputation for wisdom and knowledge. For it was 1 Cor. 1.23.
Christ crucified, which was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness. Had the Apostles only preached that the Son of God had appeared
from Heaven, and discovered the only way to bring men thither, that he assumed
our Nature for a time to render himself capable of conversing with us, and
therein had wrought many strange and stupendous miracles; but after he had
sufficiently acquainted the World with the nature of his Doctrine, he was again
assumed up into Heaven; in all probability, the Doctrine might have been so
easily received by the World, as might have saved the lives of many thousand
persons, who dyed as Martyrs for it. And if it had been necessary that some
must have dyed to confirm it, why must the Son of God himself do it? when he
had so many Disciples who willingly sacrificed their lives for him, and whose
death would on that account have been as great a confirmation of the truth of
it as his own. But if it be alleged further, Quod caetera etiam foedera c. so
animali aliquo sanciri, and sanguine ejus confirmari solerent. Crell. c. Grot.
ad Cap. 1. p. 29.
that God now entering into a Covenant with man for the pardon of sin, the
shedding of the blood of Christ was necessary as a federal rite to confirm it.
I answer, if only as a federal rite, why no cheaper blood would serve to
confirm it but that of the Son God? We never read that any Covenant was
confirmed by the death of one of the contracting parties; and we cannot think
that God was so prodigal of the blood of his Son, to have it shed only in
allusion to some ancient customs. But if there were such a necessity of
alluding to them, why might not the blood of any other person have done it?
when yet all that custom was no more, but that a sacrifice should be offered,
and upon the parts of the sacrifice divided, they did solemnly swear and and
ratify their Covenant. V. Heins. not. ad Sil. p. 9, 10.
And if this be yielded them, it then follows from this custom, that Christ
must be considered as a sacrifice in his death; and so the ratification of the
Covenant must be consequent to that oblation which he made of himself upon the
Cross. Besides, how incongruous must this needs be, that the death of Christ
the most innocent person in the World, without any respect to the guilt of sin,
should suffer so much on purpose to assure us, that God will pardon those who
are guilty of it? May we not much rather infer the contrary, considering the
holiness and justice of God's nature; if he dealt so severely with the green
tree, how much more will he with the dry? If one so innocent suffered so much,
what then may the guilty expect? If a Prince should suffer the best subject he
has to be severely punished, could ever any imagine that it was with a design
to assure them that he would pardon the most rebellious? No; but would it not
rather make men afraid of being too innocent, for fear of suffering too much
for it? And those who seem very careful to preserve the honor of God's
Justice, in not punishing one for another's faults, ought likewise to maintain
it in the punishing of one who had no fault at all to answer for. And to think
to escape this by saying, That to such a person such things are calamities, but
no punishments, is to revive the ancient exploded Stoicism, which thought to
reform the diseases of Mankind by mere changing the names of things, though
never so contrary to the common sense of humane nature: which judges of the
nature of punishments by the evils men undergo, and the ends they are designed
for. And by the very same reason that God might exercise his dominion on so
innocent a person as our Savior was, without any respect to sin as the moving
cause to it, he might lay eternal torments on a most innocent Creature (for
degrees and continuance do not alter the reason of things) and then escape with
the same evasion, that this was no act of injustice in God, because it was a
mere exercise of Dominion. And when once a sinner comes to be persuaded by this
that God will pardon him, it must be by the hopes that God will show kindness
to the guilty, because he shows so little to the innocent; and if this be
agreeable to the Justice and Holiness of God's nature, it is hard to say what
is repugnant to it. If to this it be said, That Christ's consent made it no
unjust exercise of Dominion in God toward him: it is easily answered, that the
same consent will make it less injustice in God to lay the punishment of our
sins upon Christ, upon his undertaking to satisfy for us; for then the consent
supposes a meritorious cause of punishment; but in this case the consent
implies none at all. And we are now enquiring into the reasons of such
sufferings, and consequently of such a consent; which cannot be imagined but
upon very weighty motives, such as might make it just in him to consent, as
well as in God to inflict.

Neither can it be thought that all the design of the sufferings of Christ, was
to give us an example and an encouragement to suffer our selves; though it does
so in a very great measure, as appears by the Text it self. For the hopes of an
eternal reward for these short and light afflictions, ought to be encouragement
enough, to go through the miseries of of this life in expectation of a better
to come. And the Cloud of Witnesses both under the Law and the Gospel, of those
who have suffered for righteousness sake, ought to make no one think it
strange, if he must endure that, which so many have done before him, and been
crowned for it. And lastly, to question whether Christ could have pity enough
upon us in our sufferings, unless he had suffered so deeply himself; will lead
men to distrust the pity and compassion of Almighty God, because he was never
capable of suffering, as we do. But the Scripture is very plain and full (to
all those who rack not their minds to pervert it) in assigning a higher reason
than all these of the sufferings of Christ, viz. That 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust; that Isa. 53.10.
his soul was made an offering for sin, and that the Lord therefore as on a
sacrifice of atonement, V. 6.
laid on him the iniquities of us all: That, through the eternal Spirit, Heb
9.14.

V. 27.


He offered himself without spot to God, and did appear to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself; that he was made a propitiation for our sins; that, 1 John 2.2, 4, 10.
He laid down his life as a price of Redemption for Mankind; that, 1 Timothy 6.2.
through his blood we obtain Redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, which in
a more particular manner is attributed 1 Cor. 6.20.

Ephesians. 1.7.


to the blood of Christ, as the procuring cause of it. That he dyed Col. 1.14.
to reconcile God and us together; and that Romans 3.24, 25.
the Ministry of Reconciliation, is founded Romans 5.10.
on God's making him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him: and that we may not think that all this
Reconciliation respects us and not God; he is said 2 Cor. 5.19, 21.
To offer up himself to God; and for this cause to be a Mediator of the New
Testament, and Heb 9.14, 15.
to be a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people Heb. 2.17.
and every High Priest, taken from among men is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God; not appointed by God in things merely tending to the good of
men; which is rather the Office of a Prophet than a Priest. So that from all
these places it may easily appear, 5.1.
that the blood of Christ is to be looked on as a sacrifice of Atonement for
the sins of the World. Not as though Christ did suffer the very same which we
should have suffered, for that was eternal death as the consequent of guilt in
the person of the Offender, and then the discharge must have been immediately
consequent upon the payment, and no room had been left for the freeness of
remission, or for the conditions required on our parts; But that God was
pleased to accept of the death of his Son, as a full, perfect, sufficient
sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the World; as our Church
expresses it; and in consideration of the sufferings of his Son, is pleased to
offer pardon of sin upon sincere repentance, and eternal life upon a holy
obedience to his will. Thus much for the things we are to consider concerning
the contradiction of sinners which Christ endured against himself.

Nothing now remains, but the influence that ought to have upon us, lest we be
weary and faint in our minds. For which end I shall suggest two things.

1. The vast disproportion between Christ's sufferings and ours.

2. The great encouragement we have from his sufferings, to bear our own the
better.

1. The vast Disproportion between Christ's sufferings and our own. Our lot is
fallen into suffering times; and we are apt enough to complain of it. I will
not say it is wholly true of us, what the Moralist says generally of the
complaints of men, Non quia dura sed quia molles patimur; that it is not the
hardness of our conditions so much as the softness of our spirits which makes
us complain of them. For I must needs say, this City has smarted by such a
series and succession of judgments which few Cities in the World could parallel
in so short a time. The Plague has emptied its houses, and the fire consumed
them; the War exhausted our spirits, and it were well if Peace recovered them.
But still these are but the common calamities of humane nature, things that we
ought to make account of in the World, and to grow the better by them. And it
were happy for this City, if our thankfulness and obedience were but answerable
to the mercies we yet enjoy: let us not make our condition worse by our fears;
nor our fears greater than they need to be: for no enemy can be so bad as they.
Thanks be to God our condition is much better at present than it has been; let
us not make it worse by fearing it may be so. Complaints will never end till
the World does; and we may imagine that will not last much longer; when the
City thinks it has trade enough, and the Country riches enough. But I will not
go about to persuade you that your condition is better than it is, for I know
it is to no purpose to do so; all men will believe as they feel. But suppose
our condition were much worse than it is; yet what were all our sufferings
compared with those of our Savior for us? the sins that make us smart, wounded
him much deeper; they pierced his side, which only touch our skin, we have no
cause to complain of the bitterness of that Cup which he has drunk off the
dregs of already. We lament over the ruins of a City, and are revived with any
hopes of seeing it rise out of the dust; but Christ saw the ruins that sin
caused in all mankind, he undertook the repairing them, and putting men into a
better condition than before: And we may easily think what a difficult task he
had of it; when he came to restore them who were delighted in their ruins, and
thought themselves too good to be mended. It is the comfort of our miseries,
(if they be only in this life) that we know they cannot last long; but that is
the great aggravation of our Savior's sufferings, that the contradiction of
sinners continues against him still. Witness, the Atheism, I cannot so properly
call it, as the Antichristianism of this present Age; wherein so many profane
persons act over again the part of the Scribes and Pharisees; they slight his
Doctrine, despise his Person, disparage his Miracles, contemn his Precepts, and
undervalue his Sufferings. Men live as if it were in defiance to his holy Laws;
as though they feared not what God can do, so much as to need a Mediator
between him and them. If ever men tread under foot the Son of God, it is when
they think themselves to be above the need of him; if ever they count the blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing, it is not only when they do not value it as
they ought, but when they exercise their profane wits upon it. Blessed Savior!
was it not enough for thee to bear the contradiction of sinners upon Earth; but
thou must still suffer so much at the hands of those whom thou diedst for, that
thou might bring them to Heaven? was it not enough for thee to be betrayed
on Earth, but thou must be defied in Heaven? was it not enough for thee to
stoop so low for our sakes, but that thou should be trampled on because thou
did it? was the ignominious death upon the Cross too small a thing for thee
to suffer in thy Person, unless thy Religion be contemned, and exposed to as
much shame and mockery as thy self was? Unhappy we, that live to hear of such
things! but much more unhappy if any of our sins have been the occasion of
them: If our unsuitable lives to the Gospel have opened the mouths of any
against so excellent a Religion. If any malice and revenge, any humor and
peevishness, any pride or hypocrisy, any sensuality and voluptuousness, any
injustice, or too much love of gain, have made others despise that Religion
which so many pretend to, and so few practice. If we have been in any measure
guilty of this, as we love our Religion, and the honor of our Savior, let us
endeavor by the holiness and meekness of our spirits, the temperance and
justice of our actions, the patience and contentedness of our minds, to recover
the honor of that Religion which only can make us happy, and our Posterity
after us.

2. What Encouragement we have from the sufferings of Christ, to bear our own
the better; because we see by his example that God deals no more hardly with
us, than he did with his own Son, if he lays heavy things upon us. Why should
we think to escape, when his own Son underwent so much? if we meet with
reproaches, and ill usage, with hard measure, and a mean condition, with
injuries and violence, with mockings and affronts, nay, with a shameful and a
painful death, what cause have we to complain, for did not the Son of God
undergo all these things before us? If any of your Habitations have been
consumed, that you have been put to your shifts where to lodge your selves, or
your Families; consider, that Mat. 8.20.
though the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, yet the Son
of Man had not whereon to lay his head. If your condition be mean and low,
think of him, Phil 2.6, 7.
who being in the form of God, took upon him the form of a servant; and 2 Cor.
8.9.
though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that through his
poverty ye might be made rich. If you are unjustly defamed and reproached,
consider what contumelies and disgraces the Son of God underwent for you. If
you are in pain and trouble, think of his Agony and bloody sweat, the nailing
of his hands and feet to the Cross, to be a sacrifice for the expiation of your
sins. Never think much of undergoing any thing, whereby Romans 8.29.
you may be conformable to the Image of the Son of God, knowing this, V. 17.
that if ye suffer with him ye shall also be glorified together. And you have
never yet set a true estimate and value upon things, if you V. 18.
reckon the sufferings of this present life worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed. Which Glory ought always to bear up our minds
under our greatest afflictions here; and the thoughts of that, will easily
bring us to the thoughts of his sufferings, who Heb. 9.12.
by his own blood purchased an eternal redemption for us. Therefore, consider
him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be
weary, and faint in your minds.

SERMON VII.
Preached before the KING, JANUARY 30. 1668/9.
JUDE, V. 11. And perished in the gainsaying of Corah.


AMong all the dismal consequences of that fatal day wherein the Honor of our
Nation suffered together with our Martyred Sovereign, there is none which in
this Place we ought to be more concerned for, ^han the Dishonor which was done
to Religion by it. For if those things which were then acted among us, had been
done among the most rude and barbarous Nations, though that had been enough to
have made them for ever thought so; yet they might have been imputed to their
ignorance in matters of Civility and Religion: but when they are committed not
only by men who were called Christians, but under a pretense of a mighty zeal
for their Religion too, Men will either think that Religion bad, which did give
encouragement to such actions, or those persons extremely wicked, who could
make use of a pretense of it for things so contrary to its nature and design.
And on which of these two the blame will fall, may be soon discovered, when we
consider that the Christian Religion, above all others, has taken care to
preserve the Rights of Sovereignty, by Mat. 22.21.
giving unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to make resistance
unlawful by declaring Romans 13.2.
that those who are guilty of it shall receive to themselves damnation. But as
though bare resistance had been too mean and low a thing for them
(notwithstanding what Christ and his Apostles had said) to show themselves to
be Christians of a higher rank than others; they imbrue their hands in the
Blood of their Sovereign for a demonstration of their Piety, by the same figure
by which they had destroyed Men's Rights to defend their Liberties, and fought
against the King for preservation of his Person. But the actions of such Men
could not have been so bad as they were, unless their pretenses had been so
great; for there can be no highter aggravation of a wicked action, than for Men
to seem to be Religious in the doing of it. If the Devil himself were to preach
sedition to the world, he would never appear otherwise than as an Angel of
Light: his pretense would be Unity, when he designed the greatest Divisions;
and the preservation of Authority, when he laid the seeds of Rebellion. But we
might as well imagine that the God of this World (as the Devil is sometime
called) should advance nothing but Peace and Holiness in it, as that
Christianity should give the least countenance to what is contrary to either of
them. Yet the wickedness of Men has been so great upon earth, as to call down
Heaven it self to justify their impieties, and when they have found themselves
unable to bear the burden of them, they would fain make Religion do it.

Such as these we have a description of in this short, but smart Epistle, viz
Men who pretend inspirations and impulses for the greatest villainies; who
believed it a part of their Saintship to despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities; who thought the Grace of God signified very little, unless it served
to justify their most wicked actions. These in all probability were the
followers of Simon Magus the Leviathan of the Primitive Church, (...). Epiphan.
haeres. 27. p. 105. ed. Petav.
who destroyed all the natural differences of good and evil, (...). Epiph.
haeres. 24. s. 5. p. 72.
and made it lawful for Men in case of Persecution, to forswear their Religion.
(...). Theodoret. haeret. fab. l. 1. p. 193.
The great part of his Doctrine being that his Disciples need not be afraid of
the terrors of the Law, for they were free to do what they pleased themselves,
because Salvation was not to be expected by good works, but only by the Grace
of God: No wonder then, that such as these did turn the Grace of God into
lasciviousness: And when it proved dangerous not to do it, would deny their
Religion, to save themselves. For they had so high opinions of themselves, that
they were the only Saints, that as (...). Epiph. haer. 24 sect. 5.
Epiphanius tells us, they thought it the casting Pearls before Swine, to
expose themselves to danger before the Heathen Governors; by which they not
only discovered what a mighty value they set upon themselves, but what mean and
contemptible thoughts they had of that Authority which God had established in
the world.

But this they would by no means allow, for they thought all the Governments of
the world to be nothing else Ad utilitatem ergo gentium, terrenum regnum
positum est a Deo: sed non a Diabolo, qui nunquam omnimo quietus est, immo qui
nec ipsas quidem gentes vult in tranquillo agere. Iren. advers. haer. l. 5. c.
24.
but the contrivance of some evil spirits to abridge men of that liberty which
God and nature had given them: And this is that speaking evil of Dignities
which they are charged with, not only by our Apostle here, but by St. Peter
before him. Although the phra^e used by 2 Pet. 2.10.
St. Peter, (...) may be taken (by the use of the word (...) in the first of 1
Mac 2.6.
Maccabees) not for the bare contempt of Authority, expressed by reviling
language, but for an open resistance of it; which the other is so natural an
introduction to, that those who think and speak contemptibly of Government, do
but want an occasion to manifest that their actions would be as bad as their
thoughts and expressions are. And from hence (...) here in the words of the
Text is made use of to express one of the most remarkable seditions we ever
read of: viz. that of Corah and his Company against Moses and Aaron; whose
punishment for it did not deter these persons who went under the name of
Christian, from joining in seditious practices to the great dishonor of
Christianity, and their own ruin. For therefore the Apostle denounces a Woe
against them in the beginning of the verse, and speaks of their ruin as
certain as if they had been consumed by fire, or swallowed up by the earth, as
Corah and his accomplices were; And they perished in the gainsaying of Corah.
In the verb (...), the Aorist, says Grotius, is taken for the future, or
present, and so implying that these courses did tend to their misery and ruin,
and would unavoidably bring it upon them. If the evidence in history had been
clear of the Carpocratians joining with the Jews in the famous rebellion of
Barchochebas, wherein such multitudes of Christians as well as Heathens were
destroyed in Africa, V. David Canz. Chronol p. 101.
Egypt, and other places, and the time of it had agreed with the time of
writing this Epistle, I should then have thought that this had been the
Rebellion here spoken of; for all the Actors in it were destroyed by the Roman
Power, and some of the chief of them made public examples of Justice for the
deterring of others from the like practices. But however this be, we find these
persons here charged with a sin of the same nature, with the gainsaying of
Corah, and a judgment of the same nature, as the consequent of the sin; for
they perished in the gainsaying, etc. And therefore we shall consider the words,

1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company.

2. As implying as great displeasure of God under the Gospel against the same
kind of sin, as he discovered in the immediate destruction of those persons who
were then guilty of it.

1. As relating to the fact of Corah and his company; and so the words lead us
to the handling

1. The nature of the Faction which was raised by them.

2. The Judgment that was inflicted upon them for it.

1. For understanding the nature of the Faction, we must enquire into the
design that was laid, the persons that were engaged in it, the pretenses that
were made use of for it.

1. The design that was laid for that, and all other circumstances of the
story, we must have resort to the account that is given of it, Numb. 16. where
we shall find that the bottom of the design was the sharing of the Government
among themselves, which it was impossible for them to hope for, as long as
Moses continued as a King in Iesurun, for so he is called, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Him
therefore they intend to lay aside, but this they knew to be a very difficult
task, considering what wonders God had wrought by him in their deliverance out
of Egypt, what wisdom he had hitherto showed in the conduct of them, what care
for their preservation, what integrity in the management of his power, what
reverence the people did bear toward him, and what solemn vows and promises
they had made of obedience to him. But ambitious and factious Men are never
discouraged by such an appearance of difficulties; for they know they must
address themselves to the people, and in the first place persuade them that
they manage their interest against the usurpation of their Governors. For by
that means they gain upon the peoples affections, who are ready to cry them up
presently as the true Patriots and Defenders of their Liberties against the
encroachment of Princes: and when they have thus insinuated themselves into the
good opinion of the people, groundless suspicions, and unreasonable fears and
jealousies will pass for arguments and demonstrations. Then they who can invent
the most popular lies against the Government are accounted the Men of
integrity, and they who most diligently spread the most infamous reports, are
the Men of honesty, because they are farthest from being Flatterers of the
Court. The people take a strange pride, as well as pleasure, in hearing and
telling all the ^aults of their Governors; for in doing so they flatter
themselves in thinking they deserve to rule much better than those which do it.
And the willingness they have to think so of themselves, makes them misconstrue
all the actions of their Superiors to the worse sense, and then they find out
plots in every thing, upon the people. Whatever is done for the necessary
maintenance of Government, is suspected to be a design merely to exhaust the
people to make them more unable to resist. If good Laws be made, these are said
by factious men to be only intended for snares for the good people, but others
may break them and go unpunished. If Government be strict and severe, then it
is cruel and tyrannical; if mild and indulgent, then it is remiss and
negligent. If Laws be executed, then the peoples Liberties be oppressed; if
not, then it were better not to make Laws, than not to see them executed. If
there be Wars, the people are undone by Taxes; if there be Peace, they are
undone by Plenty. If extraordinary Judgments befall them, then they lament the
sins of their Governors, and of the Times, and scarce think of their own. If
miscarriages happen (as it is impossible always to prevent them) they charge
the form of Government with them, which all sorts are subject to. Nay, it is
seldom that Governors escape with their own faults, the peoples are often laid
upon them too. So here, Numb. 16.14. Moses is charged with not carrying them
into Canaan, when it was their own sins which kept them thence. Yea, so partial
have the people generally been against their Rulers, when swayed by the power
of Faction, that this has made Government very difficult and unpleasing; for
what ever the actions of Princes are, they are liable to the censures of the
people. Their bad actions being more public, and their good therefore
suspected of design; and the wiser Governors are, the more jealous the people
are of them. For always the weakest part of mankind are the most suspicious;
the less they understand things, the more designs they imagine are laid for
them, and the best counsels are the soonest rejected by them. So that the
wisest Government can never be secure from the jealousies of the people, and
they that will raise a Faction against it will never want a party to side with
them. For when could we ever have imagined a Government more likely to be free
from this, than that which Moses had over the people of Israel? He being an
extraordinary person for all the abilities of Government; one bred up in the
Egyptian Court, and in no mean degree of honor, being called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter; one of great experience in the management of affairs, of
great zeal for the good of his Country, as appeared by the tenderness of his
peoples interest in their deliverance out of Egypt; one of great temper and
meekness above all men of the earth; one who took all imaginable care for the
good establishment of Laws among them; but above all these, one particularly
chosen by God for this end, and therefore furnished with all the requisites of
a good man, and an excellent Prince: yet for all these things a dangerous
sedition is here raised against him, and that upon the common grounds of such
things, viz. usurpation upon the peoples rights, arbitrary Government, and ill
management of affairs; Usurpation upon the peoples rights, v. 4. the Faction
makes a Remonstrance asserting the Privileges of the people against Moses and
Aaron; Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy every
one of them, and the Lord is among them: Wherefore then lift you up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord. As though they had said, we appear only in
behalf of the Fundamental Liberties of the people both Civil and Spiritual; we
only seek to retrench the exorbitances of power, and some late innovations
which have been among us; if you are content to lay aside your power which is
so dangerous and offensive to Gods holy people, we shall then sit down in
quietness; for alas it is not for our selves that we seek these things (what
are we?) but the cause of Gods people is dearer to us than our lives, and we
shall willingly sacrifice them in so good a Cause. And when Moses afterward
sends for the Sons of Eliab to come to him they peremptorily refuse all
Messages of Peace, and with their V. 12, 13.
men of the sword mentioned, v. 2. They make votes of non-Addresses, and break
off all Treaties with him, and declare these for their reasons, that he did
dominando dominari, as some render it, exercise an arbitrary and tyrannical
power over the people, that he was guilty of breach of the trust committed to
him, for he promised V. 14.
to bring them into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, or give them
inheritance of fields and vineyards, but he had not done it, and instead of
that only, deceives the people still with fair prom^ses, and so puts out their
eyes that they cannot see into the depth of his designs. So that now by the ill
management of his Trust, the power was again devolved into the hands of the
people, and they ought to take account of his actions. By which we see the
design was under very fair and popular pretenses to divest Moses of his
Government, and then they doubted not but such zealous Patriots as they had
showed themselves, should come to have the greatest share in it; but this which
they most aimed at, must appear least in view, and only Necessity and
Providence must seem to cast that upon them, which was the first true motive
they had to rebel against Moses and Aaron.

2. The Persons who were engaged in it. At first they were only some
discontented Levites who murmured against Moses and Aaron, because they were
not preferred to the Priesthood, and of these Corah was the chief. R. Solomon
observes, That the reason of Corahs discontent, was, That Elizaphan the Son of
Vzziel, of the younger house to Izhar from whom Corah descended, was preferred
before him by Moses to be Prince over the Sons of Numb. 3.30.
Kohath, Corah being active and busy in his discontents, had the opportunity
of drawing in some of the Sons of Reuben, for they pitched their tents near
each other, Number. 2.10.3.29.
both on the South side of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and these were
discontentented on the account of their Tribe having lost the privilege of
Primogeniture. Thus what ever the pretenses are, how fair and popular soever in
the opposition men make to Authority, ambition and private discontents are the
true beginners of them: but these must be covered over with the deepest
dissimulation, with most vehement Protestations to the contrary, nothing must
be talked of but a mighty zeal for Religion, and the public interest. So
Joseph. antiq. Iud. l. 4. c. 2.
Josephus tells us concerning Corah, that while he carried on his own ambitious
designs, with all the arts of sedition and a popular eloquence, insinuating
into the peoples minds strange suggestions against Moses his Government, as
being a mere politic design of his to enslave the people of God, and advance
his own family and interest, (...), he would seem to regard nothing but the
public good. If fair pretenses, and glorious Titles will serve to cheat the
people into their own miseries, and ^he sad effects of Rebellion; they shall
never want those who will enslave them ^or the sake of Liberty, undo them for
^he public good, and destroy them with designs of Reformation. For nothing is
^ore popular than Rebellion in the beginning; nothing less in the issue of it.
And the only true reason that it is ever (...), is from the want of wisdom and
judgment in the generality of mankind, who seldom see to the end of things, and
hardly distinguish between the names and nature of them, till their own dea^
bought experience has taught them the difference. Sedition is of the nature,
and has the inseparable properties o^ Sin; for it is conceived with pleasure,
brought forth with pain, and ends in death and misery. Nothing enters upon the
stage with a braver show and appearance, but however prosperous for a time it
may continue, it commonly meets with a fatal end. But it is with this sin as to
this world, as it is with others as to the next; Men when they are betrayed
into them, are carried away and transported with the pleasing temptations, not
considering the unspeakable misery that follows after them. So that what the
Devils advantage is in order to the ruin o^ men's souls, is the advantage of
seditious persons over the less understanding people; they both tempt with an
appearance of good, and equally deceive the^ which hearken to them. But as we
st^^ find, that notwithstanding all the grav^ admonitions, the sober councels,
the rational discourses, the persuasive arg^ments which are used to deter men
from the practice of sin, they will still be such Fools to yield to the Devils
temptations against their own welfare: So, neither the blessings of a continued
Peace, nor the miseries of an intestine War, neither the security of a settled
Government, nor the constant danger of Innovations will hinder men of fiery and
restless spirits from raising combustions in a Nation, though themselves perish
in the Flames of them. This we find here was the case of Corah and his company;
they had forgotten the groans of their captivity in Egypt, and the Miracles of
their deliverance out of it, and all the faithful services of Moses, and Aaron;
they considered not the difficulties of Government, nor the impossibilities of
satisfying the ambitious desires of all pretenders; they regarded not that God
from whom their power was derived, nor the account they m^st give to him for
their resistance of it: nothing but a full Revenge upon the Government can
satisfy them, by leaving no means unattempted for its overthrow, though
themselves be consumed by the fall of it. It were happy for Government if these
turbulent spirits could be singled out from the rest in their first attempts;
but that is the usual subtilty of such men, when they find themselves aimed at,
they run into the common herd, and persuade the people that they are equally
concerned with themselves in the present danger, that though the pretense be
only against faction and sedition, the design is the slavery and oppression of
the People. This they manage at first by grave nods, and secret whispers, by
deep sighs, and extatick motions, by far fetched discourses, and tragical
stories, till they find the people capable of receiving their impressions, and
then seem most unwilling to mention that which it was at first their design to
discover. By such arts as these Corah had prepared, as Joseph antiq. l. 4. ^. 2.
Josephus tells us, almost the whole Camp of Israel for a popular tumult, so
that they were like to have stoned Moses before he was aware of it; and it
seems the Faction had gained a mighty interest among the people, when although
God so severely and remarkably punished the heads of it, yet the very next day
all the Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and
Aaron, saying, Numb. 16.41.
Ye have killed the people of the Lord. What a mark of God's people was
sedition grown among them! When these men were accounted Saints in spite of
Heaven, and Martyrs, though God himself destroyed them. They were men who were
only sanctified by Rebellion: and showed no other fruits of their piety but
disobedience to Authority. But the danger had not been so great, how loud
soever the complaints had been, if only the ruder multitude had been gained to
the Favor of Corah and his party: for these wanted heads to manage them, and
some Countenance of Authority to appear under; and for this purpose they had
drawn to their Faction 250 Princes of the Assembly, V. 2.
famous in the Congregation, men of Renown, i. e. Members of the great Council
of the Nation. Whom Moses was wont to call and advise with about the public
Affairs of it; such who sa^e in Comitiis Senatorum, as Paul. Eagius tells us,
therefore said to be (...) such as were called to the great Assembly which sat
in Numb. 10.2.
Parliament at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which was the
place where they m^t together. These were the Heads of the Tribes, and the
Captains of thousands, and the men of the greatest Fame and Authority among the
People, who Moses assembled together for advice and counsel, as often as he saw
just occasion for it. And as far as I can find were distinct from the great
Sanhedrin, which seemed to be rather a constant Court of Judicature which sat
to receive Appeals from Inferior Courts, and to determine such difficult
causes which were reserved peculiarly for it, as about Apostasy of a whole
Tribe, the case of false Prophets, and the like. But these 250 men did far
exceed the whole number of the Sanhedrin; and the Heads of the Tribes, and the
Elders of Israel were summoned together upon any very weighty occasion, by
Moses both before and after the institution of the Sanhedrin. And now since the
Faction had gained so great strength by the accession of so great a number of
the most leading men among the People, we may expect they should soon declare
their intentions, and publish the grounds of their entering into such a
combination against Moses.

3. Which is the next thing to be spoken to, viz. the colors and pretenses
under which these persons sought to justify the proceedings of the Faction.
Which were these two.

1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses.

2. The freeing themselves from the encroachments upon their spiritual
Privileges, which were made by the Usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood.

1. The asserting the Rights and Liberties of the people in opposition to the
Government of Moses. Numb. 13.
Is it a small thing, say they, that thou have brought us up out of a Land that
flows with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy
self altogether a Prince over us? And before, their charge was, V. 3.
that Moses and Aaron took too much upon them, in lifting up themselves above
the Congregation of the Lord. Which Joseph. l. 4.1, 2.
Josephus more at large explains, telling us that the great accusation of Moses
was, that out of his ambition and affectation of Power, he had taken upon
himself the Government of the people without their consent, that he made use of
his pretense o^ Familiarity with God only for a Politic end, that by this
means he debarred the people of that Liberty which God had given them, and no
man ought to take from them, that they were all a (...). Josephus Ant. l. 4. c.
2. p. 104.
Freeborn people, and equally the Children of Abraham, and therefore there was
no reason they should depend upon the will of a single Person, who by his
Politic Arts had brought them to the greatest necessities, that he might rule
them the better; Wherefore Corah, as though he had been already President of a
High Court of Justice upon Moses their King, determines, That it was necessary
for the Common wealth, that such enemies to the Public Interest should be
discovered and punished; lest if they be let alone in their Usurpations of
Power, they declare themselves open enemies when it will be too late to oppose
them. There were then two great Principles among them by which they thought to
defend themselves.

1. That Liberty and a right to Power is so inherent in the People, that it
cannot be taken from them.

2. That in case of Usurpation upon that Liberty of the people, they may resume
the exercise of Power, by punishing those who are guilty of it.

1. That Liberty, and a right to Power, is inseparable from the people;
libertatis patrocinium suscipiunt, says Calvin, upon Corah and his company;
and I believe they will be found to be the first ass^rtors of this kind of
Liberty that ever were in the world. And happy had it been for us in this
Nation, if Corah had never found any Disciples in it. For what a blessed
Liberty was this which Corah aimed at, viz. to change one excellent Prince, as
Moses was, for 250 Tyrants, besides Corah and the Sons of Reuben? What just and
equal liberty was it which Moses did deprive them of? It was only the Liberty
of destroying themselves, which all the power he had could hardly keep them
from. Could there be any greater Liberty than delivering them out of the house
of bondage? and was not Moses the great Instrument in effecting it? Could there
be greater Liberty than for their whole Nation to be preserved from all the
designs of their enemies to enjoy their own Laws, and matters of Justice to be
duly administered amongst them? and had they not all these under the Government
of Moses? What means then this Outcry for Liberty? Is it that they would have
had no Government at all among them, but that every one might have done what he
pleased himself? This indeed were a desirable Liberty, if a man could have it
alone: but when every one thinks that he is but one, though he be free; and
every one else is as free as he, but though their freedom be equal to his, his
Power is not equal to theirs; and therefore to bring things to a more just
proportion, every one must part with some power for a great deal of security.
If any man can imagine himself in such a state of confusion, which some
improperly call a state of nature; let him consider, whether the contentment he
could take in his own liberty and power to defend himself, would balance the
fears he would have of the injury which others in the same state might be able
to do him. Not that I think mere fear made men at first enter into Societies,
for there is a natural inclination in mankind to it, and one of the greatest
pleasures of humane life lies in the enjoyment of it. But what other
considerations incline men to, fear makes reasonable, though men part with some
supposed liberty for the enjoyment of it. So that the utmost liberty is
destroyed by the very nature of Government, and nothing can be more
unreasonable than for men to quarrel with Government for that, which they
cannot enjoy and the preservation of themselves together. Which alone makes the
desire of Power reasonable, and if the preservation of our selves in our rights
and properties may be had without it, all that the want of Liberty signifies,
is, that men have all the conveniences of Power without the trouble and the
cares of it. And if this be not a more desirable Liberty than the other, let
any rational man judge. The pretense of Liberty then in this sense against
Government, is, that men are Fools in taking the best care to preserve
themselves, that Laws are but instruments of Slavery, and every single man is
better able to defend himself, than the united strength of a people in Society
is to defend him. And this kind of Liberty we may justly think will be desired
by none but madmen, and beasts of prey. It follows then, that what Liberty is
inconsistent with all Government, must never be pleaded against one sort of it.
But is there then so great a degree of Liberty in one mode of Government more
than another, that it should be thought reasonable to disturb Government,
merely to alter the form of it? Would it have been so much better for the
people of Israel to have been governed by the 250 men here mentioned, than by
Moses? Would not they have required the same subjection and obedience to
themselves, though their commands had been much more unreasonable than his?
What security can there be that every one of these shall not be worse in all
respects than him whom they were so willing to lay aside; and if one be thought
troublesome, what Liberty and ease is there when their name is Legion? So that
the folly of these popular pretenses is as great as the sin in being persuaded
by them.

And it may be they have not thought amiss who have attributed a great part of
that disturbance of the Peace of Kingdoms, under a pretense of popular
Government, to an unjust admiration of those Greek and Roman Writers, who have
unreasonably set up Liberty in opposition to Monarchy. But some of the wisest
of them have given us a truer account of these things, and have told us, that
it was impossible the Roman State could have been preserved longer, unless it
had submitted to an Dio Romans Hist. l. 54.
Imperial Power; for the popular heats and factions were so great, that the
annual election of Magistrates, was but another name for a tumult; and as Dio
goes on L. 44. init.
the name of popular Government is far more plausible, but the benefits of
Monarchy are far greater; it being much easier to find one good than many; and
though one be accounted difficult, the other is almost impossible. And as he
elsewhere well observes, the flourishing of a Commonwealth depends upon its
poverty; that being alone able to unite the minds of the Governors, who in a
plentiful state, not set about with enemies, will be grasping at their own
private interests, and fall naturally from thence into divisions and
animosities; but the flourishing of the Monarchy lies in the riches of it, the
Prince and the People having the same interest, and being rich or poor
together. So that we see the notion of Liberty, and the exercise of power in
Government, is so far from being an inseparable property of the people, that
the proper notion of it is inconsistent with Government, and that which lies in
the enjoyments of our Rights and Properties, is so far from being inconsistent
with Monarchy, that they are more advanced by that, than by any other way of
Government.

2. Another principle which tends to the subverting Government under a pretense
of Liberty, is, that in case of Usurpation upon the Rights of the People, they
may resume the exercise of Power, and punish the Supreme Magistrate himself, if
he be guilty of it. Than which there can be no principle imagined more
destructive to civil Societies, and repugnant to the very nature of Government.
For it destroys all the obligations of Oaths and Compacts; it makes the
solemnest bonds of obedience signify nothing when the people shall think fit
to declare it: it makes every prosperous Rebellion just; for no doubt when the
power is in the Rebels hands, they will justify themselves, and condemn their
Sovereign. (And if Corah, Dathan and Abiram had succeeded in their Rebellion
against Moses, no doubt they would have been called the Keepers of the
Liberties of Israel.) It makes all Government dangerous to the persons in whom
it is, considering the unavoidable infirmities of it, and the readiness of
people to misconstrue the actions of their Princes, and their incapacity to
judge of them; it not being fit that the reasons of all counsels of Princes
should be divulged by Proclamations. So that there can be nothing wanting to
make Princes miserable, but that the people want Power to make them so. And the
supposition of this principle will unavoidably keep up a constant jealousy
between the Prince and his people: for if he knows their minds, he will think
it reasonable to secure himself by all means against their Power, and endeavor
to keep them as unable to resist as may be: whereby all mutual confidence
between a Prince and his People will be destroyed: and there can be no such way
to bring in an arbitrary Government into a Nation, as that which such Men
pretend, to be the only means to keep it out. Besides, this must necessarily
engage a Nation in endless disputes about the forfeiture of Power into whose
hands it falls: whether into the people in common, or some persons particularly
chosen by the people for that purpose: for in an established Government
according to their principles, the ^ing himself is the true representative of
the people; others may be chosen for some particular purposes, as proposing
Laws, etc. but these cannot pretend by virtue of that choice, to have the full
power of the people; and withal, whatever they do against the consent of the
people is unlawful; and their power is forfeited by attempting it.

But on the other side, what mighty danger can there be in supposing the
persons of Princes to be so sacred, that no sons of violence ought to come near
to hurt them? Have not all the ancient Kingdoms and Empires of the world
flourished under the supposition of an unaccountable power in Princes? That
has been thought by those who did not own a derivation of their power from
God, but a just security to their persons, considering the hazards, and the
care of Government which they undergo? Have not the people who have been most
jealous of their Liberties, been fain to have recourse to an unaccountable
power, as their last refuge in case of their greatest necessities? I mean the
Romans in their Dictators. And if it were thought not only reasonable, but
necessary then, ought it not to be preserved inviolable, where the same Laws do
give it by which Men have any right to challenge any power at all? Neither does
this give Princes the liberty to do what they list; for the Laws by which they
Govern, do fence in the rights and properties of Men; and Princes do find so
great convenience, ease and security in their Government by Law, that the sense
of that will keep them far better within the compass of Laws, than the Peoples
holding a Rod over them, which the best Princes are like to suffer the most by,
and bad will but grow desperate by it. Good Princes will never need such a
curb, because their oaths and promises, their love and tenderness toward their
people, the sense they have of a Power infinitely greater than theirs, to which
they must give an account of all their actions, will make them govern as the
Fathers of their Country; and bad Princes will never value it, but will
endeavor by all possible means to secure themselves against it. So that no
inconveniency can be possibly so great on the supposition of this unaccountable
Power in Sovereign Princes, taking it in the general, and merely on the account
of reason, as the unavoidable mischiefs of that Hypotheses, which places all
power originally in the people, and notwithstanding all oaths and bonds
whatsoever to obedience, gives them the liberty to resume it when they please:
which will always be when that Spirit of Faction and Sedition shall prevail
among them, which ruled here in Corah and his company.

2. Another pretense of this Rebellion of Corah, was, the freeing themselves
from the encroachments upon their spiritual privileges which were made by the
usurpations of Aaron and the Priesthood. This served ^or a very popular
pretense, for they knew no reason that one Tribe should engross so much of the
wealth of the Nation to themselves, and have nothing to do but to attend the
service of God for it. What, say they, are not all the Lord's people holy? Why
may not then all they offer up incense to the Lord, as well as the Sons of
Aaron? How many public uses might those Revenues serve for, which are now to
maintain Aaron, and all the Sons of Levi? But if there must be some to attend
the service of God, why may not the meanest of the people serve for that
purpose, those who can be serviceable for nothing else? Why must there be an
order of Priesthood distinct from that of Levites? why a High Priest above all
the Priests? what is there in all their office which one of the common people
may not do as well as they? cannot they slay the sacrifices, and offer incense,
and d^ all other parts of the Priestly Office? So that at last they make all
this to be a Politic design of Moses only to advance his own Family by making
his Brother High Priest, and to have all the Priests and Levites at his
devotion, to keep the people the better in awe. This has always bee^ the
quarrel at Religion, by those who seldom pretend to it, but with a design t^
destroy it. For who would ever have minded the constant attendance at the
Temple, if no encouragements had been given to those who were employed in it?
Or is not Religion apt enough to be despised of it self, by Men of profane
minds, unless it be rendered more mean and contemptible by the Poverty of those
who are devoted to it? Shall not God be allowed the privilege of every Master
of a Family, to appoint the ranks and orders of his own servants, and to take
care they be provided for, as becomes those who wait upon him? What a dishonor
had this been to the true God, when those who worshipped false Gods thought
nothing too great for those who were employed in the service of them? But never
any yet cried, but he that had a mind to betray his Master, to what purpose is
all this waste? Let God be honored as he ought to be, let Religion come in for
its share among all the things which deserve encouragement, and those who are
employed in the offices of it, enjoy but what God, and Reason, and the Laws of
their Country give them, and then we shall see it was nothing, but the
discontent and faction of Corah and his company which made any encroachment of
Aaron and the Priesthood any pretense for Rebellion.

But all these pretenses would not serve to make them escape the severe hand of
divine justice; for in an extraordinary and remarkable manner he made them
suffer the just desert of their sin, for they perished in their contradiction:
which is the next thing to be considered, viz.

2. The Judgment which was inflicted upon them for it. They had provoked Heaven
by their sin, and disturbed the earth by their Faction; and the earth, as if it
were moved with indignation against them, trembled and shook, as Josephus
says, like waves that are tossed with a mighty wind, and then with a horrid
noise it rends asunder, and opens its mouth to swallow those in its bowels who
were unfit to live upon the face of it. They had been dividing the people, and
the earth to their amazement and ruin divides it self under their feet, as
though it had been designed on purpose, that in their punishment themselves
might feel, and others see the mischief of their sin. Their seditious
principles seemed to have infected the ground they stood upon; the earth of a
sudden proves as unquiet and troublesome as they; but to rebuke their madness,
it was only in obedience to him who made it the executioner of his wrath
against them; and when it had done its office, it is said, Number. 16.33.
that the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the
Congregation. Thus the earth having revenged it self against the disturbers of
its peace, Heaven presently appears with a flaming fire, taking vengeance upon
the 250 Men, who in opposition to V. 35.
Aaron, had usurped the Priestly office, in offering incense before the Lord.
Such a Fire, if we believe the same Historian, which far outwent the most
dreadful eruptions of Aetna or Vesuvius, which neither the art of Man, nor the
power of the wind could raise; which neither the burning of Woods nor Cities
could parallel; but such a Fire which the wrath of God alone could kindle,
whose light could be outdone by nothing but the heat of it. Thus Heaven and
Earth agree in the punishment of such disturbers of Government, and God by this
remarkable judgment upon them has left it upon record to all ages, that all
the world may be convinced how displeasing to him the sin of faction and
sedition is. For God takes all this that was done against Moses and Aaron, as
done against himself. For they are said to be gathered together against the
Lord, v. 11. to provoke the Lord, v. 30. And the fire is said to come out from
the Lord: v. 35. And a^terwards it is said of them; Number. 16.9.
This is that Moses and Dathan and Abiram, who strove against Moses and against
Aaron in the company of Corah, when they strove against the Lord. By which we
see God interprets striving against the Authority appointed by him, to be a
striving against himself. God looks upon himself as immediately concerned in
the Government of the world; for by him Princes reign, and they are his
Vicegerents upon earth; and they who resist, resist not a mere appointment of
the people, but Romans 13.1, 2.
an Ordinance of God; and they who do so shall in the mildest sense receive a
severe punishment from him. Let the pretenses be never so popular, the persons
never so great and famous; nay, though they were of the great Council of the
Nation, yet we see God does not abate of his severity upon any of these
considerations.

This was the first formed sedition that we read of against Moses, the people
had been murmuring before, but they wanted heads to manage them: Now all things
concur to a most dangerous Rebellion upon the most popular pretenses of
Religion and Liberty; and now God takes the first opportunity of declaring his
hatred of such actions; that others might hear, and fear, and do no more so
presumptuously. This has been the usual method of divine Judgments; the first
of the kind has been most remarkably punished in this life, that by it they
may see how hateful such things are to God; but if Men will venture upon them
notwithstanding, God does not always punish them so much in this world, (though
he sometimes does) but reserves them, without repentance, to his Justice in the
world to come. The first man that sinned was made an example of God's Justice;
The first world; the first public attempt against Heaven at Babel after the
plantation of the world again; the first Cities which were so generally
corrupted after the flood; the first breaker of the Sabbath after the Law; the
first o^^erers with strange fire; the first lookers into the Ark, and here the
first popular Rebellion and Usurpers of the office of Priesthood God does
hereby intend to preserve the honor of his Laws; he gives men warning enough
by ore exemplary punishment, and if notwithstanding that, they will commit the
same sin, they may thank themselves if they suffer for it, if not in this life,
yet in that to come. And that good effect this Judgment had upon that people,
that although the next day 14000 suffered for murmuring at the destruction of
these men, yet we do not find that any Rebellion was raised among them
afterward upon these popular pretenses of Religion, and the Power of the
People. While their Judges continued (who were Kings, without the state and
title of Kings) they were observed with reverence, and obeyed with diligence.
When afterward they desired a King, with all the Pomp and Grandeur which other
Nations had (which Samuel acquaints them with, viz. 1 Samuel 8.11.
the Officers and Soldiers, the large Revenues he must have) though their King
was disowned by God, yet the people held firm in their obedience to him, and
David himself, though anointed to be King, persecuted by Saul, and though he
might have pleaded Necessity and Providence as much as any ever could, (when
Saul was strangely delivered into his hands,) yet we see what an opinion he had
of the person of a bad King, 1 Samuel 26.9.
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing against my Master the Lord's
Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of
the Lord. And lest we should think it was only his Modesty or his Policy which
kept him from doing it, he afterward, upon a like occasion declares, it was
only the sin of doing it, which kept him from it. 1 Samuel 26.9.
For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? Not as though David could not do it without the power of the
Sanhedrin, as it has been pretended by the Sons of Corah in our age; for he
excepts none; he never seizes upon him to carry him prisoner to be tried by the
Sanhedrin, nor is there any foundation for any such power in the Sanhedrin over
the persons of their Sovereigns. It neither being contained in the grounds of
its institution, nor any precedent occurring in the whole story of the Bible,
which gives the least countenance to it: Nay, several passages of Scripture
utterly overthrow it, for how could Solomon have said, Eccles. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him, what
do thou? If by the constitution of their Government, the Sanhedrin might have
controlled him in what he said or did. But have not several of the modern Jews
said so? Granting that some have; yet so they have spoken many unreasonable and
foolish things besides; but yet none of these have said, that it was in the
power of the Sanhedrin to depose their Kings, or put them to death; all that
they say is, that in the cases expressed by the Law, if the Kings do
transgress, the Sanhedrin had the power of inflicting the penalty of scourging,
which yet they deny to have had any infamy in it among them. But did not David
transgress the Law in his murder and adultery? did not Solomon in the multitude
of his wives and Idolatry, yet where do we read that the Sanhedrin ever took
cognizance of these things? And the more ancient Jews do say, Tit. Sanhed. c. 2.
That the King was not to be judged, as is plain in the Text of the Misna,
however the Expositors have taken a liberty to contradict it; but as far as we
can find, without any foundation of reason: and R. Jeremiah in Nachman. in
Lieut. p. 196.
Nachmanides, says expressly, That no creature may judge the King, but the holy
and blessed God alone. But we have an Authority far greater than his, viz. of
David's in this case, who after he has denied that any man can stretch forth
his hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless; in the very next words
he submits the judgment of him only to God himself, saying, 1 Samuel 26.10.
As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or
he shall descend into battle and perish. He thought it sufficient to leave the
judgment of those things to God, whose power over Princes he knew was enough,
if well considered by them, to keep them in awe. We have now dispatched the
first consideration of the words of the Text, as they relate to the fact of
Corah and his company.

2. We ought now to enquire, whether the Christian Doctrine has made any
alteration in these things; or whether that gives any greater encouragement to
faction and sedition than the Law did, when it is masked under a pretense of
zeal for Religion and Liberty. But it is so far from it, that what God then
declared to be displeasing to him by such remarkable judgments, has been now
more fully manifested by frequent precepts, and vehement exhortations, by the
most weighty arguments, and the constant practice of the first and the best of
Christians, and by the black character which is set upon those who under a
pretense of Christian Liberty did despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities, and follow Corah in his Rebellion, however they may please
themselves with greater light, than former ages had in this matter, they are
said to be such Jude v. 13.
for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. It would take up too
much time to examine the frivolous evasions, and ridiculous distinctions by
which they would make the case of the Primitive Christians in not resisting
Authority, so much different from theirs, who have not only done it, but in
spite of Christianity have pleaded for it. Either they said they wanted
strength, or courage, or the countenance of the Senate, or did not understand
their own Liberty; when all their obedience was only due to those precepts of
the Gospel, which make it so great a part of Christianity to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and which the Teachers of the Gospel had
particularly given them in charge Tit. 3.1.
to put the people in mind of.

And happy had it been for us if this Doctrine had been more sincerely
preached, and duly practiced in this Nation; for we should then never have seen
those sad times, which we can now no otherwi^e think of, than of the devouring
Fire, and raging Pestilence, i. e. of such dreadful judgments which we have
smarted so much by, that we heartily pray we may never feel them again: For
then fears and jealousies began our miseries, and the curse so often denounced
against Meroz, fell upon the whole Nation; When the Sons of Corah managed their
own ambitious designs against Moses and Aaron (the King and the Church) under
the same pretenses of Religion and Liberty. And when the pretense of Religion
was broken into Schisms, and Liberty into oppression of the people, it pleased
God out of his secret and unsearchable judgments to suffer the Sons of Violence
to prevail against the Lord's Anointed; and then they would know no difference
between his being conquered and guilty. They could find no way to justify
their former wickedness, but by adding more: The consciousness of their own
guilt, and the fears of the punishment due to it, made them unquiet and
thoughtful, as long as his life and presence did upbraid them with the one, and
made them fearful of the other. And when they found the greatness and constancy
of his mind, the firmness of his piety, the zeal he had for the true interest
of the people, would not suffer him to betray his Trust for the saving of his
life; they charge him with their own guilt, and make him suffer because they
had deserved to do it. And as if it had not been enough to have abused the
names of Religion and Liberty before, they resolve to make the very name of
Justice to suffer together with their King: by calling that infamous company,
who condemned their Sovereign, A High Court of Justice, which trampled under
foot the Laws both of God and men. But lest the world should imagine they had
any shame left in their sins, they make the people witnesses of his Murder;
and pretend the Power of the People for doing that, which they did detest and
abhor. Thus fell our Royal Martyr a sacrifice to the fury of unreasonable men;
who either were so blind as not to see his worth, or rather so bad as to hate
him for it. And as God gave once to the people of the Jews a King in his Anger,
being provoked to it by their sins, we have cause to say, that upon the same
account he took away one of the best of Kings from us in his wrath. But blessed
be that God, who in the midst of judgment was pleased to remember mercy, in the
miraculous preservation, and glorious restoration of our Gracious Sovereign;
let us have a care then of abusing the mercies of so great a deliverance to
quite other ends than God intended it for; lest he be provoked to say to us, as
he did of old to the Jews, 1 Samuel 12.25.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. And if we look on this as a dreadful judgment, let us endeavor to
prevent it by a timely and sincere reformation of our lives, and by our hearty
supplications to God that he would preserve the person of our Sovereign from
all the attempts of violence, that he would so direct his counsels, and prosper
his affairs, that His Government may be a long and public Blessing to these
Nations.

SERMON VIII.
Preached at Guild Hall Chapel. JUNE 9 th. 1671.
Matthew XXI. 43. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.


THE time was now very near approaching, wherein the Son of God was to suffer
an accursed death by the hands of ungrateful men: and to let them see that he
laid no impossible command upon men when he bid them Matthew. 5.44.
love their enemies, he expresses the truest kindness himself toward those who
designed his destruction. For what can be imagined greater toward such, whose
malice was like to end in nothing short of their own ruin, than by
representing to them the evils they must suffer, to dissuade them from that,
which they intended to do? But if neither the sense of their future miseries,
nor their present sins will at all abate their fury or assuage their malice,
nothing is then lest for kindness to show it self by, but by lamenting their
folly, bemoaning their obstinacy, and praying God to have pity upon them, who
have so little upon themselves. And all these were very remarkable in the
carriage of our Blessed Savior toward his most implacable enemies: he had
taken care to instruct them by his doctrine; to convince them by his miracles,
to oblige them by the first offers of the greatest mercy; but all these things
had no other effect upon them, than to heighten their malice, increase their
rage, and make them more impatient till they had destroyed him. But their
stupidity made him more sensible of their folly, and their obstinacy stirred up
his compassion toward them, insomuch that the nearer he approached to his own
sufferings, the greater sense he expressed of theirs. For he was no sooner come
within view of that bloody City, wherein he was within few days to suffer by,
as well as for the sins of men; but his compassion breaks forth, not only by
his weeping over it; but by that passionate expression, which is abrupt only by
the force of his grief: Luke 19.41, 42.
If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day the things which
belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. And when he was
within the City, he could not mention the desolation which was to come upon it
for all the righteous blood which had been spilt there, but he presently
subjoyns, Matthew. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings and ye would not?
what words could more emphatically expres^ the love and tenderness of Christ
toward his greatest enemies than these do* especially considering that he knew
how busy they were in contriving his sufferings, while he was so passionately
lame^ting theirs. And when their malice ha^ done its utmost upon him, and they
sa^^ him hanging upon the Cross and read^ to yield up his last breath, he
imploys the remainder of it in begging pardon for them, in those pathetical
words Luke 21.34.
Father, forgive them for they know not what they do. By all which we see, that
what punishments soever the Jewish Nation underwent afterward for the great
sin of crucifying the Lord of life, were no effect of mere revenge from him
upon them, but the just judgment of God which they had drawn upon themselves by
their own obstinacy and wilful blindness.

And that they might not think themselves surprised, when the dreadful effects
of God's anger should seize upon them, our Savior as he drew nearer to the
time of his sufferings gives them more frequent and serious warnings of the sad
consequence of their incorrgibleness under all the means of cure which had been
used among them. For they were so far from being amended by them, that they not
only despised the remedy, but the Physicians too; (as though that were a small
thing) they beat, they wound, they kill those who came to cure them: but as if
it had not been enough to have done these things to servants, (to let the world
see how dangerous it is to attempt the cure of incorrigible sinners) when God
sent his own Son to them, expecting they should reverence him, they find a
peculiar reason for taking him out of the way, V. 38.
for then the inheritance would be their own. But so miserably do sinners
miscarry in their designs for their advantage, that those things which they
build their hopes the most upon prove the most fatal and pernicious to them:
When these persons thought themselves sure of the inheritance by killing the
Son, that very sin of theirs, not only put them out of possession, but out of
the hopes of recovering what interest they had in it before. For upon this it
is that our Savior here says in the words of the Text, Therefore say I unto
you, that the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof.

Which words, are the application which our Savior makes of the foregoing
parable concerning the vineyard, which it seems the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, did not apprehend themselves to be concerned in, till he brought the
application of it so close to them; so that then they find they had condemned
themselves, when they so readily passed so severe a sentence upon those
husbandmen, who had so ill requited the Lord of the Vineyard for all the care
he had taken about it, that instead of sending him the fruits of it, they abuse
his messengers, and at last murder his Son. When therefore Christ asks them,
V. 40.
When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he do unto those
husbandmen? They thought the case so plain, that they never take time to
consider, or go forth ^o advise upon it, but bring in a present answer upon the
evidence of the fact. V. 41.
They say unto him, he will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let
out his Vineyard to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in
their seasons. Little did they think what a dreadful sentence they passed upon
themselves and their own nation in these words; little did they think that
hereby they condemned their Temple to be burned, their City to be destroyed,
their Coun^ry to be ruined; their Nation to be Vagabonds over the face of the
earth; little did they think that herein they justified God in all the miseries
which they suffered afterward, for in these words they vindicate God and
condemn themselves, they acknowledge God's Justice in the severest punishments
he should inflict upon such obstinate wretches. Our Savior having gained this
confession from them, and so made it impossible for them to start back in
charging God with injustice in punishing them; he now applies it to themselves
in these words, which I suppose, ought immediately to follow the 41. verse,
Therefore say I unto you the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, etc.
Wherein we have,

1. The greatest judgment which can ever befall a people, which is the taking
away the Kingdom of God from them.

2. The greatest mercy can ever be vouchsafed to a nation, which is God's
giving his Kingdom to it. And give it to a nation, etc.

In the Judgment we consider the cause of it, therefore say I unto you, etc.
which is either, more general as referring to all going before, and so it makes
the taking away the Kingdom of God to be the just punishment of an incorrigible
people; or more particular as referring to the sin of the Jews in crucifying
Christ, and so it makes the guilt of that sin to be the cause of all the
miseries, which that nation has undergone since that time.

In the latter part we may consider the terms upon which God either gives or
continues his Kingdom to a Nation, and that is, bringing forth the fruits
thereof.

We consider the former with a particular respect to the state of the Jewish
Nation. And therein, 1. The greatness of their judgment employed in those words
the Kingdom of God, etc. 2. The particular reason of that judgment, which was
crucifying the Son of God.

1. The greatness of the judgment which be^el the Jewish Nation after imbruing
their hands in the blood of Christ. And that will appear if we take the Kingdom
of God in that double notion in which it was taken at that time. 1. It was
taken by the Jews themselves for some peculiar and temporal blessings, which
those who enjoyed it had above all other people. 2. It was taken by our Savior
for a clearer manifestation of the will of God to the world, and the
consequence of that in the hearts of good men; and all the spiritual blessings
which do attend it. So that the taking away the Kingdom of God from them must
needs be the heaviest judgment which could befall a people, since it implies in
it, the taking away all the greatest temporal and spiritual blessings.

1. We take it in the notion the Jews themselves had of it; and in this sense
we shall make it evident that the Kingdom of God has been taken from that
people in accomplishment of this prediction of our Savior. For they imagined
the Kingdom of God among them to consist in these things especially,
Deliverance from their enemies, a flourishing state, the upholding their
Religion in Honor, chiefly in the pompous worship of the Temple, Now if
instead of these things, they were exposed to the fury of their enemies so as
never any nation besides them were, if their whole Poli^y was destroyed so as
the very face of Government has ever since been taken from them, if their
Religion has been so far from being upheld, that the practice of it has been
rendered impossible by the destruction of the Temple, and the consequences of
it, then the Jews themselves cannot but say, that in their own sense the
Kingdom of God has been taken from them.

1. They make the Kingdom of God to consist in a deliverance of them from their
enemies. For this was their great quarrel at our Savior that he should pretend
to bring the Kingdom of God among them, and do nothing in order to their
deliverance from the Roman Power. They either were such great admirers of the
Pomp and Splendour of the world, or so sensible of their own burdens and the
yoke that was upon them, that they could not be persuaded that God should
design to send his Kingdom among them for any other end but their ease and
liberty. They apprehended the Crown of Thorns which was put upon our Savior's
head was the fittest representation of the nature of his Kingdom; for they
looked upon it as the mere show of a Kingdom, but the reality was nothing but
affliction and tribulation; and this was a doctrine they thought of all others
the least needful to be preached to them, who complained so much of what they
underwent already. They took it for the greatest contradiction to talk of a
Kingdom among them, as long as they were in subjection to the Roman Governors.
But if Jesus of Nazareth had raised an army in defense of their liberty, and
had destroyed the Romans, they would never have enquired farther concerning
Prophecies, or Miracles, this had been instead of all others to them, and then
they would willingly have given him that title, which was set up only in
derision as the Elogium of his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews: But
we see how justly God dealt with them soon after, when they crucified the Son
of God because he preached another Kingdom than they dreamed of, God suffers
this very pretense of a temporal Kingdom to be the occasion of the ruin of the
whole Nation. For upon that it was that they denied subjection to the Romans,
for they were for no other Kingdom but only God's, (...), to acknowledge no
other King but God, was the pretense of the War:) upon which arose that
desperate Faction of the Zealots, who like so many Firebrands scattered up and
down among them, soon put the whole Nation into Flames. And from this time
there never was a more Tragical story either acted or written than that is of
the miseries which this people underwent. For if ever there were the marks of
divine vengeance seen in the ruin of a Nation, they were in that. For they
were so far from hearkening to the counsel of their wisest men, that the first
thing they made sure of, was the destruction of them. Wisdom was but another
name for Treason among them: and there needed no other evidence to take away
the lives of any, but to say that they were rich and wise. When they had thus
secured themselves (as they thought) against the danger of too much Wisdom, by
the removal of all such, who at least did not counterfeit madness and folly by
joining with them; then they began to suspect one another, and three Factions
at once break forth at Jerusalem, who seemed to be afraid the Romans should
not destroy them fast enough, for in the several parts of the City where they
were, they were continually killing one another: and never joined together but
when they saw the Romans approaching their Walls, least they should take that
work out of each others hands. By all means they were resolved to endure a
seige, and as a preparative for that, they burnt up almost all the stores of
provision which were among them: Ios. (...). l. 6. c. 11. p. 932.
whence ensued a most dreadful famine, so great, that it was thought reason
enough to take away the life of a man, because he looked better than his
neighbors, they thereby suspecting he had some concealed provisions. They
brake into the houses of such whom they imagined to be eating, and if they
found them so, they either forced the meat out of their mouths, or choked them
with attempting to do it. It was no news then for a Woman to forget her sucking
Child, so as not to have compassion upon the Son of her Womb: for the story is
remarkable in Lib. ^. c. 28.
Josephus, of a Mother that not only eat part of her Son, who sucked at her
breast, but when the smell had tempted some to break in upon her and take part
with her, and were struck with horror at the sight of it, What, says she, will
you show your selves more tender than a Woman, or more compassionate than a
Mother! It was no news to see Parents and Children destroying one another for a
piece of bread, to see the streets and tops of houses covered with the bodies
of those who dropped down for want of food, in-so-much that the stench of their
carcases soon brought a Plague among them: which and the Famine raged together
with that violence, that when there was no possibility of burying their dead,
they threw them over the Walls of the City, and Titus beholding the incredible
numbers of them lift up his hands to Heaven and cried, (...), that it was none
of his doing. For he used all possible means to prevent the ruin of the City
and Temple as well as the destruction of the People: but all to no purpose, for
now the time of God's vengeance was come, yea the full time of his wrath was
come. So that Titus often confessed, he never saw such an instance of divine
vengeance upon a people, that when their enemies designed to save them, they
were resolved to destroy themselves. And Philost. v. Apollon. l. 6. cap. 14.
Philostratus tells us, that when the neighbor Provinces offered Titus a
Crown, in token of his conquest of Iudaea, he utterly refused it with this
saying, That he had nothing to do in the glory of that action, for he was only
the instrument of God's vengeance upon the Jews. Which we may easily believe,
if we consider almost the incredible number of those who were destroyed at that
time, 1100000 reckoned in that number in the time of eight months siege, and
90000 carried away captive, which might have been thought incredible, but for
one circumstance, which is mentioned by their own Historian, that at the time
of the siege Jerusalem was filled with Jews coming from all parts to the
solemnity of the Passover, where they were shut up as in a Prison: and their
Prison made their place of Execution. Yea so prodigious were the calamities
which befell this people not only at Jerusalem, but at Caesarea, Antioch,
Scythopolis, Alexandria, and almost all the Cities of Syria, that Eliazer, one
of the heads of the Faction, when he saw they could not hold out against the
Romans at Massada, persuaded them all to kill one another by this argument,
Ios. p. 990.
That it was now apparent that God from the beginning of the War had designed
their destruction* and they had better be the executioners of his vengeance
themselves than suffer the Romans to be so. Upon which they all miserably
destroyed each other: who were the last that opposed the Roman Power.

What shall we say then to these things* Have we any ground to suspect the
truth of the story as either made by Christians in hatred of the Jews, or
improved mightil^ to their disadvantage? Not so certainly, when all the
circumstances are related by Jewish and Roman Writers, who had no kindness at
all for Christians. Or shall we say there was nothing extraordinary in all
this, but that the Jews were a wild and seditious people that destroyed
themselves and their nation? but it is evident they were not always so; they
had been a people that had flourished with the reputation of wisdom and
conduct, and had great success against their enemies. And the Romans themselves
at this time acknowledged they never saw a people of a more invincible spirit
and less afraid of dying than these were* But all this turned to their great
prejudice; and they who had been so famous in former ages for miraculous
deliverances from the power of their enemies, were now not only given up into
their hands, but into those which were far more cruel, which were their own.
What then can we imagine should make so great an alteration in the State of
their affairs now, but that God was their friend then and their enemy now? He
gave then success beyond their Counsels, and without preparation; now he blasts
all their des^gns, divides their counsels, and makes their contrivances end in
their speedier ruin. Now they felt the effect of what God had threatened long
before, Hos 9.12.
Woe he unto you when I depart from you. Now their strength, their wisdom,
their peace, their honor, their safety were all departed from them. Whereby we
see how much the welfare of a Nation dep^nds upon God's Favor, and that no
other security is comparable to that of true Religion. The Nation of the Jews,
was for all that we know never more numerous than at this time, never more
resolute and courageous to venture their lives, never better provided of
fortified Towns and strong places of retreat and all provisions for War; but
there was a handwriting upon the Wall against them, Mean, Tekel, Peers, God
had weighed them in the balance and found them too light, he divides their
Nation and removes his Kingdom from them and leaves them to an utter
desolation. Neither can we say, this was some present infatuation upon them,
for ever since all their attempts for recovering their own land, have but
increased their miseries and made their condition worse than before. Witness
that great attempt under Barchocebas in the time of Adrian, in which the Jews
themselves say, there perished double the number of what came out of Egypt, i.
e. above 1200000 men. After which they were not only wholly banished their
land, but forbid so much as to look on the place where the Temple had stood,
and were fain to purchase at a dear rate, the liberty of weeping over it;
Hieron. in Zeph. 1.
ut qui quondam emerant sanguinem Christi, eman^ lachrymas su^s; as St. Hierom
seaks; i. e. that they who had bought the blood of Christ were now fain to buy
their own tears. It would be endless to pursue the miseries of this wretched
people in all ages ever since; the slavery, disgrace, universal contempt, the
frequent banishments, confiscations of estates, constant oppressions which they
have labored under. So that from that time to this, they have scarce had any
Estates, but never any Country which they could call their own. So that St.
Augustine has truly said, Aug. in Psalm. 58.
the curse of Cain is upon them, for they are vagabonds in the earth, they have
a mark upon them, so that they are not destroyed and yet are in continual fear
of being so. God seems to preserve that miserable Nation in being, to be a
constant war^ing to all others, to let them see what a difference in the same
people the Favor or Displeasure of God can make, and how severe the Judgments
of God are upon those who are obstinate and disobedient.

2. They make the Kingdom of God to consist in the flourishing of their State,
or that Polity which God established among them. He was himself once their
immediate Governor and therefor it might be properly called his Kingdom: and
after they had Kings of their own their plenty and prosperity did so much
depend on the kindness of Heaven to them, that all the days of their
flourishing condition migh be justly attributed to a more than ordinary
providence that watched over them. For if we consider how small in comparison
the extent and compass of the whole land of Judea was, being as Saint Hierom
says, (who knew it well) but 160 miles in length from Dan to Beersheba, and 46
in breadth from Ioppa to Bethlehem; if we consider likewise the vast number of
its inhabitants, there being at 1 Chr. 15, 15, 6.
David's numbering the people 1500000 fighting men who ought not to be reckoned
above a fourth part of the whole, and Benjamin and Levi not taken in; if we add
to these, the many rocks, mountains and deserts in this small country, and that
every seven years the most fertile places must lie fallow, we may justly wonder
how all this number of people should prosper so much in so narrow a territory.
For although we ought not to measure the rules of Eastern diet by those of our
Northern Climates, and it be withal true, that the number of people add both
to the riches and plenty of it, and that the fertile places of that land were
so almost to a miracle, yet considering their scarcity of rain and their
Sabbatical years, we must have recourse to an immediate care of heaven which
provided for all their necessities, and filled their stores to so great
abundance that 1 Kings 5.11.
Solomon gave to King Hiram every year 20000 measures of wheat, and twenty
measures of oil; every one of which contained about 30 bushels. And God himself
had particularly promised to give them the former and the latter rain, and that
they might have no occasion to complain of their Sabbatical years Lev. 25.21.
every sixth year should afford them fruit for 3 years. By which we see their
plenty depended not so much upon the fat of their land, as upon the dew and
blessing of heaven. And if we farther consider them as environed about with
enemies on every side, such as were numerous and powerful, implacable and
subtle, it is a perpetual wonder (considering the constitution of the Jewish
Nation) that they should not be destroyed by them. For all the males being
obliged strictly by the Law to go up three times a year to Jerusalem (we
should think against all rules of Policy to leave the country naked) it seems
incredible that their enemies should not overrun the Country, and destroy
their Wives and Children at that time. But all their security was in the
promise which God had made; Exodus 34.24.
neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the Lord thy God thrice in the year. And to let us see that obedience to God is
the best security against the greatest dangers, we never read of an^ invasion
of that Coun^ry in one of t^ose times, nor of any miseries they suf^er'd th^n;
till the last and fatal d^^^ruction of Jerusalem when God had taken away his
Kingdom from them. And with that, their whole Polity fell; for never since have
they been able to maintain so much as the face of Government, living in
subjection, if not in slavery in all parts of the world. So that whether we
mean the succession of power in Judah's tribe, or the seat of power in the
whole Nation, or the distinction and superiority of that tribe above the rest,
^y the Scepter which was not Genesis 49.10.
to depart from Judah till Shiloh came; we are sure in every one of these
senses, it is long since d^parted from it. For neither have any of the
Posterity of David had any power over them, nor was it possi^le they should,
considering that all Government is taken from them, and the very distinction of
tribes is lost among them* they having never had any certa^n Genealogies since
the destruction of the Temple I know what vain hopes, and foolish fancies, and
incredible stories they have among them; of some supreme power, which they have
in some part of the world but they know not where. Sometimes, they talk of
their mighty numbers at Bagdad, and the officers of their own Nation which are
set over them: but had they not so in Egypt, and were they ever the less in
captivity there? Sometimes they boast of their Schools in those Eastern parts,
such as Pombeditha, Sura, and Neharda, and the authority the Rabbis have over
them; but this is just as the Orator said of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse,
that he loved Government so well, that when he was not suffered to govern men
there, he went to govern Boys at Corinth, Cic. T^sc. 3.
usque eo imperio carere non poterat. But these are tolerable in comparison
with the incredible fictions of the four Tribes in the East, hemmed in by a vast
and unpassable ridge of mountains on every side, but when the famous Sabbatical
River runs, which ^or six days bears all before it with a mighty torrent, and
carries stones of such incredible bigness that there is no passing over it: but
because the admirable nature of that River is Eldad. Da^^^a apud B^xcers ^
Sabbat^^n. Praef. in Ces. l' Empereur in Benjam p. 206, 207.
That it keeps the Sabbath and rests all that day, we might have thought it had
been possible to have had some intercourse with them on that day; but to
prevent this they tell us, That as the water goes off, flames of fire come in
the place of it and hinder all access to them. But these are things which a man
must be a Jew first before he can believe: and what will not they believe
rather than Christ is the Son of God! For Spes Israel. sect. 19. p. 64.
Mana^se ben Israel has had the confidence in this age to say, That the sand
taken out of the Sabbatical River and preserved in a Tube does constantly move
^or six days, and rests punctually from the beginning of the Sabbath to the end
of it. Which is the less to be wondered at since in all his Book of the hope of
Israel, he eagerly contends for the incredible fiction of Montezini of the
flourishing condition of the Jews at this day in some parts of America; but the
Salvo is translated thither too* for there is a mighty River which hinders any
from access to them. By all which we see how vain all their attempts are to
preserve any reputation of that power and Government wherein they made so great
a part of the Kingdom of God among them to consist.

3. That which they thought gave them the greatest Title to the being God's
peculiar people, was the solemn worship of him at the Temple. But what is
become of all the glory of that now? where are all the pompous Ceremonies, the
numerous Sacrifices, the magnificent and solemn Feasts, which were to be
constantly observed there? how is it then possible for them to observe the
Religion now which God commanded them; since he likewise forbid the doing these
things any where, but in the Place which himself should appoint? So that they
are under an unavoidable necessity of breaking their Law; if they do them not,
they break the Law which commands them to be done; if they do them, they break
the Law which forbids the doing them in any other place but at the Temple at
Jerusalem. And this I am apt to think, was one of the greatest grounds among
them, after the destruction of the Temple, of their setting up Traditions above
the written Law; for finding it impossible to keep the written Law, if they
could gain to themselves the Authority of interpreting it, they were not much
concerned for the Law it self. And this is one of the strongest holds of their
infidelity at this day. For otherwise we might in reason have thought, that
their infidelity would have been buried in the ashes of their Temple; when they
had such plain predictions that the Messiah was to come during the second
Temple, that the prediction of Christ concerning the destruction of this Temple
was so exactly fulfilled, that all attempts for the rebuilding of it were vain
and fruitless. Of all which none promised so fair as that in Iulians time, who
out of spite to the Christians, and particularly with a design to contradict
the prophecy of our Savior gave all encouragement to the Jews to build it, he
provided at his own charge all materials for it, and gave command to the
Governor of the Province to take particular care in it; and the Jews with
great joy and readiness set about it; but when they began to search the ground
in order to the laying the Foundations, the earth round about trembles with a
horrible earthquake, and the flames of a sudden break out, which not only
consumed the undertakers but a great multitude of spectators, and the materials
prepared for the building: Insomuch that an universal astonishment seized upon
them, and the rest had rather leave their work, than be consumed by it. This we
have delivered to us; not by persons at a great distance of time from it, but
by such who lived in the same age: Orat. 2. c. Iud.
(...), we are all witness (says St. Chrysostom.) of the truth of these things;
not by one or two, but the concurrent Testimony of the writers of that age. Not
only by Chrysostom. (...) c. ^8.^9. Socrat. l ^ c. ^0 Sozem. l 5. c 22. Theod. l. 2.
c 17. Amm Marcell H^^t. l. 23. in^t.
St. Chrysostom but Gregorius Nazianzenus, Ambrose, Ruffi^^s, Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret. And le^t all these should be suspected of partiality because
Christians, we desire no more to be believed concerning it, than what is
recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen Historian of that time, who was a
Soldier under Julian in his last ex^edition, and he asser^s the substance of
what I have said before. And what a strange difference do we now find in the
building of a third and a second Temp^e? In the former, though they met with
many troubles and difficulties, yet God carried them through all and prospered
their endeavors with great success. Now they had all humane encouragements and
God only opposes them, and makes them desist with the loss of their workmen and
materials, and perpetual dishonor to themselves, for attempting to fight
against God in building him a Temple against his will. From which we see that
in all the senses the Jews unde^stood the Kingdom of God, it was rema^kably
taken from them within so many years after Christ the true Passover was slain
by them, as had passed from their first Passover after their going out of
Egypt to their entrance into Canaan.

The Difficulty will be far less, and the concernment not so great as to the
Jews, to prove that the Kingdom of God in the sense our Savior meant it for
the Power of the Gospel, was taken from them. For the event it self is a clear
proof of it. Instead of that therefore I shall now prove that this taking away
the Kingdom of God from them, was the effect of their sin in crucifying Christ.
Therefore I say, etc. To make this clear I shall proceed by these following
steps.

1. That it is acknowledged by the Jews themselves that these great calamities
have happened to them for some extraordinary sins. For to these they impute the
destruction of the City and Temple, their oppressions and miseries ever since,
and the deferring the coming of the Messiah. For some of them have confessed
Tit: Sanhed. c. 11. sect. 31.
That all the terms prefixed for the coming of the Messiah are past long ago,
but that God provoked by their great sins has thus long deserred his
appearance, and suffered them in the mean while to lie under such great
calamities.

2. The sin ought to be looked on as so much greater by how much heavier and
longer this punishment has been, than any inflicted upon them before. For if
God did in former captivities punish them for their sins, when they were
brought back again into their own land after 70 years; we must conclude that
this is a sin of a higher nature which has not been expiated by 1600 years
captivity and dispersion.

3. The Jews have not suffered these calamities for the same sins for which
they suffered before. For then God charged them with Idolatry as the great
provoking sin; and it is very observable that the Jews were never freer from
the suspicion of this sin than under the second Temple, and particularly near
their destruction. They generally pretended a mighty zeal for their Law, and
especially opposed the least tendency to Idolatry; insomuch that they would not
suffer the Roman Ensigns to be advanced among them because of the Images that
were upon them; and all the History of that time tells us of the frequent
contests they had with the Roman Governors about these things: and ever since
that time they have been perfect haters of Idolatry, and none of the least
hindrances of their embracing Christianity has been the infinite scandal which
has been given them by the Roman Church in that particular.

4. It must be some sin, which their Fathers committed and continues yet
unrepented of by them to this day. Their Fathers committing it, was the
meritorious cause of the first punishment; their Ch^ldren not repenting of it,
is the cause why that judgment lies still so heavy upon them. And now what sin
can we imag^ne this to be, but putting to death the true Messiah, which they
will acknowledge themselves to be a sin that deserves all the miseries they
have undergone; and it is apparent that in all this long captivity they never
have had the heart to repent of the Sin of crucifying Christ; other sins they
confess and say they hear^ily repent of, but why then has not God accepted of
their repentance and brought them back into their own Land; according to the
promises he long since made unto their Fathers? Which is a certain argument it
is some sin, as yet unrepented of by them, which continues them under all their
sufferings; and what can this be but that horrid sin of putting to death the
Son of God, with that dreadful imprecation which to this day has its force
upon them, His blood be upon us and our Children? and this sin they are so far
from repenting of, that they still justify their Fathers in what they did, and
blaspheme Christ to this day in their prayers, where they think they may do it
with safety. And to all this we may add that the ensuing calamities were
exactly foretold by that Christ whom they crucified, and if no other argument
would convince them that he was at least a Prophet, yet the punctual
accomplishment of all his predictions ought to do it: as will appear by
comparing Matthew. 24.3.
Matthew. 24. with the series of the story. And it is observable that the very
place where our Savior foretold these things, viz. the Mount of Olives, was
the first wherein the Roman Army encamped before Jerusalem. And as they had
crucified the Son of God, and put the Lord of glory to open shame, mocking and
deriding him in his sufferings; so when the Romans came to revenge his quarrel
upon them, they took the captive Jews and crucified them openly in the view of
the City, 500. oft-times in a day, (...), in different forms for sport sake, as
Joseph. (...). l. 6. c. 12.
Josephus tells us, who was then in the Roman camp; and withal adds, their
numbers were so great that there was no room left for the crosses to stand, or
wood enough to make crosses of. And they who had bought the blood of the Son of
God for Thirty pieces of silver had this sin of theirs severely punished, when
such multitudes of the Jews (2000 in one one night) had their bowels ripped up by
the Roman Soldiers in hopes to have found the gold and silver there, which
they were supposed to have swallowed. And what greater argument can we have to
believe that such judgments fell upon them upon the account of their sin in
crucifying Christ, than that they were so punctually foretold so long before,
and had all things so exactly answering in the accomplishment of them? For when
Christ spoke those things the Jews thought their destruction as incredible as
that he was the Messiah; but what greater evidence could there be to them that
he was so, than that God did so severely avenge his blood upon them, and
continues to do it for their unbelief and impenitency to this very day.

But it may be some will say, What are all these things to us, we are none of
those who crucified Christ or justify the doing it; Thanks be to God, the
Kingdom of God is not taken from us, but we enjoy what was taken from them? To
which I answer; If we really were what we pretend to be, these things are of
great consequence to be considered by us.

1. For is it nothing to us to have so great an argument of the truth of our
Religion, as the sufferings of the Jews to this day is for the sin of
crucifying Christ? As often as we think of them we ought to consider the danger
of infidelity, and the heavy judgments which that brings upon a people. We may
take some estimate of the wrath of God against that sin, by the desolation of
the Country, and the miseries of the inhabitants of it. When you think it a
small sin to despise the Son of God, to revile his doctrine, and reproach his
miracles, consider then what the Jews have suffered for these sins. As long as
they continue a people in the world, they are the living monuments of the
Vengeance of God upon an incorrigible and unbelieving Nation. And it may be one
of the ends of God's dispersing them almost among all nations, that as often as
they see and despise them, they may have a care of those sins which have made
them a byword and reproach among men, who were once a nation beloved of God and
feared by men. See what it is to despise the offers of grace, to reproach and
ill use the Messengers of it who have no other errand but to persuade men to
accept that Grace and bring forth the fruits thereof. See what it is for men to
be slaves to their own lusts, which makes them not only neglect their own
truest interest but that of their nation too. If that had not been the
fundamental miscarriage of the Rulers of the Jewish Nation at the time of our
Savior, they would most readily have entertained him and saved their land from
ruin. See what it is for a people to be high in conceit of themselves and to
presume upon God's favor toward them. For there never was a nation more
self-opinionated as to their wisdom, goodness, and interest with God than the
Jews were when they began their war: and the confidence of this made them think
it long till they had destroyed themselves. See what it is to be once engaged
too far in a bad cause, how hard it is though they suffer never so much for it
afterward, for them to repent of it. We might have thought the Jews when they
had seen the destruction of Jerusalem would have come off from their obstinacy;
but how very few in comparison from that time to this, have sincerely repented
of the sins of their Forefathers in the death of Christ. See how hard a matter
it is to conquer the prejudices of education, and to condemn the most unjust
actions of those when we come to understanding, whom from our infancy we had in
veneration. For it is in great measure because they were their Ancestors, that
the Jews to this day are so hardly convin^ed they could be guilty of so soul a
sin as crucifying the Messiah.

2. Is it nothing to us what they have suffered, who enjoy the greatest
blessings we have, by their means, and upon the same terms which they did? For
to them at first were committed the Oracles of God, we enjoy all the excellent
and sacred records of ancient times from them, all the prophecies of the men
whom God raised up and inspired from time to time among them. By their means we
converse with those great persons, Moses, David, Solomon and others, and
understand their wisdom and piety by the writings which at this day we enjoy.
By them we have conveyed to us, all the particular prophesies which relate to
the Messiah, which point out the Tribe, the place, the time, the very person he
was to be born of. By their means we are able to confute their infidelity, and
to confirm our own faith. Therefore we have some common concernment with them*
and ought on that account to be sensible of their miseries. Is it nothing then
to you that God has dealt so severely with them, from whom you derive so great
a part of your Religion? But if that be nothing, consider the terms upon which
you enjoy these mercies you have; and they are as the latter clause of the Text
assures us, no other than the bringing forth the fruits thereof. If we prove as
obs^inate and incorrigible as they, God may justly punish us, as he has done
them. It is but a Vineyard that God lets us, it is no inheritance; God expects
our improvement and giving him the fruits of it, or else he may just^y take it
away from us and give it to other Husbandmen. Let us never flatter our selves
in thinking it impossible God should make us as miserable and contemptible a
people as he has done the Jews; but we may be miserable enough and yet fall
short of them. Have we any such promises of his favor as they had? how great
were their privileges while they stood in favor with G^d above all other
nations in the world? Romans 9.4, 5.
But we see, though they were the first and the natural branches, they are
broken off by unbelief, and we stand by faith. Nothing then can be more
reasonable than the exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 11.20.
be not high minded but fear. B^ast not of your present privileges; despise
not those who are broken off for cons^der, V. 21.
if God spared not the natural branches, we ought to take heed, lest he also
spare not us.

3. Is it nothing to us what the Jews suffer, since our sins are in some senses
more agg^avated than theirs were? For though there can be no just excuse made
for their wilful blindness, yet there may be much less made for ours. For what
they did against him was when he appeared in the weakness of humane flesh, in a
very mean and low condition, before the great confirmation of our faith, by his
resurrection from the dead: But our contempt of Christ is much more
unpardonable, not only after that, but the miraculous consequences of it, and
the spreading and continuance of his Doctrine in the world, after the
multitudes of Martyrs and the glorious Triumphs of our Religion over all the
attempts of the persecutors and betrayers of it; after the solemn Vows of our
Baptism in his Name, and frequent addresses to God by him, and celebrating the
memory of his death and passion. What can be more mean, and ungrateful, what
can show more folly and weakness than after all these to esteem the blood of
Christ no otherwise than as of a common malefactor, or at least to live as if
we so esteemed it: Nay, we may add to all this, after so severe an instance of
God's vengeance already upon the Jews; which ought to increase our care, and
will therefore aggravate our sin. What the Jews did they did as open and
professed enemies, what we do we do as false and perfidious friends, and let
any man judge which is the greater crime, to assault an Enemy, or to betray a
Friend.

4. Can this be nothing to us who have so many of those Symptoms upon us which
were the forerunners of their desolation? Not as though I came hither like the
son of Anani in the Jewish story, who of a sudden, four years before the war,
cried out in the Temple, a voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice
from the four Winds, Woe to Jerusalem, Woe to the Temple, Woe to all this
People; and this he continued crying, says Josephus, for seven years and five
months, till at last being upon the Walls of the City, he cried, Woe to my self
also, and immediately a stone came out from one of the Roman Engines and
dispatched him. God forbid we should be so near a desolation as they were then;
but yet our Symptoms are bad, and without our Repentance and amendment God
knows what they may end in. There were these following remarkable forerunners
of desolation in the Jewish state, I am afraid we are too much concerned in.

1. A strange degeneracy of all sorts of men from the virtues of their
Ancestors. This Josephus often mentions and complains of, and that there was no
sort of men free; from the highest to the meanest, they had all degenerated not
only from what they ought to be, but from what their Ancestors were. And there
can be nothing which bodes worse to a people than this does; for the decay of
virtue is really the loss of strength and interest. And if this be not among us
at this day in one sense, it must be in another, or else there would never be
such general complaints of it as there are. It is hard to say that there has
ever been an Age, wherein vice, such as the very Heathens abhorred, has been
more confident and daring than in this; wherein so many have not bare^y lest
virtue, but have bid defiance to it; and are ashamed of the^r Baptism for
nothing so much as because therein they renounced the Devil and all his works;
These are the Zealots in wickedness as the Jews were in faction. The flaming
sword, the voice in the Temple, the terrible Earthquakes, were not greater
Prodigies in nature among them, than men are in Morality among us, nor sadder
presages of future miseries.

2. A general stupidity and inapprehensiveness of common danger: every one had
a mighty zeal for his little party and faction he was engaged in, and wou^d
venture his life for that, never considering that by this means there was no
more left to do, for the Romans, but to stand by and see them destroy one
another. I pray God that may be never said of the Romans in another sense
concerning this Church of ours. We cannot but be sensible how much they are
pleased at our divisions, and they have always hay and stubble enough, not only
to build with, but thereby to add fuel to our flames. How happy should we be if
we could once lay aside our petty animosities, and all mind the true interest
of our Church and the ^ecurity o^ the Protestant Religion by it, which ought to
be dearer to us than our lives! But that is our misery, that our divisions in
Religion have made us not more contemptible, than ridiculous to foreign
nations, and it puzleth the wisest among our selves to find out expedients to
keep us from ruining one of the best Churches of the Christian world.

3. An At^eistical contempt of Religigion: for Josephus who was apt enough ^o
flatter his Countrymen, tel^s us there never was L. 5. c. 16.
(...), a more Atheistical Generation of men than at that time the leaders of
the factions were; for they contemned the Laws of men and mocked at the Laws of
God; L. 5. c. 2. P. 887.
and de^ided the Prophetic Oracles as fabulous impostures: they would allow no
difference of sacred and profane, for they would drink the wine of the
sacrifices promiscuously, and anoint their heads commonly with the sacred oil;
in a word they owned no distinction of good and evil, P 986.
but thought the greatest wickedness to be good to them. To say there is such a
Generation of men among us, is to foretell our ruin more certainly than Comets
and the most dreadful presages do: For this is a sort of madness which seldom
seizes upon a people, but when they are past cure, and therefore are near their
end.

4. Spiritual pride. This was very remarkable in the people of the Jews in a
time when they had as little reason for it, as any people in the world. They
still looked on themselves as God's chosen and peculiar People, his Darlings
and his delight, and thought that God's honor and interest in the world were
mightily concerned in their preservation. If they should be destroyed, they
could not imagine what God would do for a people to serve him; for all but
themselves they looked on with a very scornful pity, and thought that God hated
them because they did. They had the purity of his ordinances, in his house of
prayer; and the society of the faithful among themselves: whereas all others
they thought, served God only with their own inventions, or placed their
Religion in dull morality. They were the people who maintained his cause, and
ventured their lives and estates for it, and therefore God was bound in
faithfulness to defend them, and he must deny himself if he did destroy them.
It seems strange to us, that a people rejected by God for their horrible
Hypocrisy, should claim such an in^erest in him, when they were marked out for
destruction by him; but such is the bewitching nature of spiritual Pride and
Hypocrisy, that it infatuates the minds of men to their ruin; and flatters
them with their interest in the Promises, till God makes good his threatenings
and destroys them. Never any people thought they had a richer stock of Promises
to live on, than they; ancient promises to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, full
promises, of favor, protection, and deliverance from enemies; particular
promises made to them and to no other people in the world. Besides these, they
had mighty experiences of God's kindness toward them, undoubted experiences,
not depending on the deceitful workings of fancy; but seen in very strange and
wonderful deliverances; frequent experiences, throughout the whole History of
their Nation: and peculiar experiences being such vouchsafements to them, which
God communicated to none but his chosen people. Add to these, that they had at
this time a wonderful zeal for the true worship of God as they thought; they
regarded no persecution or opposition, but thought it their glory and honor to
sacrifice themselves for the cause of God and his people. And yet all this
while, God was the greatest enemy they had; and all their pretenses signified
nothing to him who saw their unsufferable pride and loathsome hypocrisy
through those thin vails they had drawn over them, to deceive the less
observing sort of men by. Other sins that ar^ open and public God preserves
the Authority of his Laws by punishing of them, but these spiritual sins of
pride and hypocrisy, he not only vindicates his Authority over the consciences
of men, but the infiniteness of his wisdom and knowledge in their discovery,
and his love to Integrity and and inward holiness in the punishment of them.
And therefore these sins are more especially odious to God as incroaching upon
his highest and most peculiar attributes; thence he is said to resist the
proud, as though he made an attempt upon God himself; and he loathes the
Hypocrite in heart, as one that mocks God as well as deceives men. The first
tendency to the destruction of this Nation of the Jews was the prevalency of
the Pharisaical temper among them, which was a compound of Pride and
Hypocrisy; and when the field was overrun with these tares, it was then time
for God to put in his sickle and cut them down. God forbid, that our Church and
the Protestant Religion in it should be in danger of destruction, for that
would be a judgment beyond fire and sword and plague, and any thing we have yet
smarted by; that would be the taking away the Kingdom of God from us, and
setting up the Kingdom of darkness; that would be not only a punishment to our
own Age, but the heaviest curse next to renouncing Christianity, we could
entail upon posterity. But however though God in mercy may design better things
for us, we cannot be sufficiently apprehensive of our danger, not so much from
the business of our enemies, as those bad Symtoms we find among our selves.
When there is such monstrous pride and ingratitude among many who pretend to a
purer worship of God than is established by Law, as though there were little or
no difference between the Government of Moses and Aaron and the bondage of
Egypt. O England, England, what will the Pride and unthankfulness of those who
profess Religion bring thee to! Will men still prefer their own reputation, or
the interest of a small party of Zealots, before the common concernments of our
Faith and Religion? O that we did know at least in this our day, the things
that belong it our peace! but let it never be said, That they are hid from our
eyes. But if our common enemy should enter in at the breaches we have made
among our selves, then men may wish they had sooner known the difference
between the reasonable commands of our own Church, and the intolerable Tyranny
of a foraign and usurped power: between the soft and gentle hands of a Mother,
and the Iron sinews of an Executioner; between the utmost rigor of our Laws,
and the least of an inquisition. If ingratitude were all, yet that were a sin
high enough to provoke God to make ou^ condition worse than it is, but to wha^
a strange height of spiritual pride are those arrived, who ingross all true
godliness to themselves? as though it were not possible among us to go to
Heaven and to Church together. As though Christ had no Church for 1500 years
and more, wherein not one person can be named who thought it unlawful to pray
by a prescribed form. As though men could not love God and pray sinsincerely to
him, that valued the peace and order of the Church above the heats and
conceptions of their own brains. Where differences proceed merely from
ignorance and weakness, they are less dangerous to themselves or others: but
where there is so much impatience of reproof, such contempt of superiors, such
uncharitable censures of other men, such invincible prejudices and stiffness of
humor, such scorn and reproach cast upon the public worship among us; What
can such things spring from but a root of bitterness and spiritual pride? I
speak not these things to widen our differences, or increase our animosities,
they are too large and too great already, nor to condemn any humble and modest
dissenters from us; but I despair ever to see our divisions healed, till
Religion be brought from the fancies to the hearts of men; and till men instead
of mystical notions and unaccountable experiences, instead of misapplying
promises and misunderstanding the spirit of prayer, instead of judging of
themselves by mistaken signs of Grace, set themselves to the practice of
humility, self-denial, meekness, patience, charity, obedience and a holy life,
and look on these as the greatest duties and most distinguishing characters of
true Christianity. And in doing of these there shall not only be a great reward
in the li^e to come; but in spite of all opposition from Atheism, Profaneness,
or Superstition, we may see our divisions cured, and the Kingdom of God, which
is a Kingdom of peace and holiness, to abide and flourish among us.

SERMON IX.
Preached at WHITE HALL. WHITSUNDAY 1669.
JOHN VII. 39. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive: For the Holy Ghost was no^ yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.


WHat was said of old conce^ning the first Creation of the World that in order
to the accomplishment of it (...)
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, is in a sense agreeable
to the nature of it as true of the renovation of the World by the doctrine of
Christ. For whether by that we understand a great and veh^ment Mind, as the
Jews generally do; or rather the Divine power manifesting it self in giving
motion to the otherwise dull and unactive parts of matter; we have it fully
represented to us in the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles on the day
of Pentecost: For that came upon them, Act. 2.2.
as a rushing mighty Wind, and inspired them with a new life and motion,
whereby they became the most active instruments of bringing the World out of
that state of confusion and darkness it lay in before, by causing the glorious
light of the Gospel to shine upon it. And lest any part should be wanting to
make up the parallel, in the verse before the text, we read of the Waters too
which the Spirit of God did move upon, and therefore called not a dark Abyss,
but flowing rivers of living water. V. 38.
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water: Not as though the Apostles like some in the
ancient Fables were to be turned into Fountains and pleasant Springs; but the
great and constant benefit which the Church of God enjoys by the plentiful
effusion of the Holy Spirit upon them, could not be better set forth than by
rivers of living water flowing from them. And this the Evangelist in these
words, to prevent all cavils and mistakes, tells us was our Savior's meaning;
But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.
And lest any should think that our Blessed Savior purposely affected to speak
in strange metaphors, we shall find a very just occasion given him for using
this way of expression from a custom practiced among the Jews at that time. For
in the solemnity of the feast of Tabernacles, especially in the last and great
day of the Feast mentioned v. 37. after the Sacrifices were offered upon the
Altar, L' Emperu^r in Middoth. p. 67. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. v. (...) Hackspan.
disp. Philolog p. 488. Tremel. in not. ad Sir. N.
one of the Priests was to go with a large Golden Tankard to the Fountain of
Siloam, and having filled it with water, he brings it up to the watergate over
against the Altar, where it was received with a great deal of pomp and
ceremony, with the sounding of the Trumpets and rejoicing of the People, which
continued during the libation or pouring it out before the Altar; after which
followed the highest expressions of joy that were ever used among that people;
insomuch that they have a saying among them, That he that never saw the
rejoicing of the drawing of water, never saw rejoicing in all his life. Of
which several accounts are given by the Jews, some say it had a respect to the
later rain which God gave them about this time, others to the keeping of the
Law; but that which is most to our purpose is, that the reason assigned by one
of the Rabbis in the Jerusalem v. Buxtorf.
Talmud is, Esai. 12.3.
because of the drawing or pouring out of the Holy Ghost according to what is
said, with joy shall ye draw water out of the Wells of Salvation. By which we
see that no fairer advantage could be given to our Savior to discourse
concerning the effusion of the Holy Ghost, and the mighty joy which should be
in the Christian Church by reason of that, than in the time of this solemnity;
and so lets them know that the Holy Ghost represented by their pouring out of
water was not to be expected by their rites and ceremonies, but by believing
the doctrine which he preached: and that this should not be in so scant and
narrow a measure as that which was taken out of Siloam, which was soon poured
out and carried away but out of them on whom the Holy Ghost should come, rivers
of living waters should flow; whose effect and benefit should never cease as
long as the World it self should continue. So that in the words of the Text we
have these particulars offered to our consideration.

1. The effusion of the Spirit under the times of the Gospel: But this spoke he
of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.

2. The nature of that effusion represented to us by rivers of living waters
flowing out of them.

3. The time that was reserved for it; which was after the glorious ascension
of Christ to Heaven: For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified.

1. The effusion of the Spirit under the times of the Gospel; by which we mean
those extraordinary gifts and abilities which the Apostles had after the Holy
Ghost is said to descend upon them. Which are therefore called Heb. 2.4.
signs and wonders, and diverse gifts of the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12.6.11.
and the operations of the Spirit; of which we have a large enumeration given
us in that place.

The two most remarkable which I shall insist upon and do comprehend under them
most of the rest, are, the power of working Miracles, whether in Healing
diseases or any other way; and the gift of tongues either in speaking or
interpreting; they who will acknowledge that the Apostles had these, will not
have reason to question any of the rest. And concerning these I shall endeavor
to prove,

1. That the things attributed to the Apostles concerning them, could not arise
from any ordinary, or natural causes.

2. That they could not be the effects of an evil, but of a holy and divine
spirit; and therefore that there was really such a pouring out of the spirit as
is here mentioned.

1. That the things attributed to the Apostles could not arise from any merely
natural causes. It is not my present business to prove the truth of the matters
of fact, viz. that the Apostles did those things which were accounted Miracles
by those who saw them or heard of them; and that on the day of Pentecost they
did speak with strange tongues; for these things are so universally attested by
the most competent witnesses, viz. persons of the same age, whose testimony we
can have no reason to suspect; and not only by those who were the friends to
this Religion, but the greatest enemies Jews and Heathens; and by all the
utmost endeavors of Atheistical men, who have not set themselves to disprove
the testimony, but the consequence of it, (by saying that granting them true
they do not infer the concurrence of a divine spirit) that on the same grounds
any person would question the truth of these things, he must question the truth
of some other things, which himself believes on the same or weaker grounds than
these are. Supposing then the matters of fact to be true, we now enquire
whether these things might proceed from any merely natural causes, which will
be the best done by examining the most plausible accounts which are pretended
to be given of them. And thus some have had the confidence to say, That
whatever is said to be done by the power of miracles in the Apostles might be
effected by a natural temperament of body, or the great power of imagination;
and that their speaking with strange tongues might be the effect only of a
natural Enthusiasm, or some distemper of brain.

1. That the power of miracles might be nothing but a natural temperament or
the strength of imagination.

1. An excellent natural temper of body they say may do strange and wonder^ul
things, so that such a one who has an exact temperament may walk upon the
waters, stand in the air, and quench the violence of the fire; and by a strange
kind of sanative contagion may communicate healthful spirits, as persons that
are infected do noisome and pestilential. These are things spoken with as much
case and as little reason, as any of the calumnies against Religion, which are
so boldly uttered by men who dare speak any thing as to these things but
reason, and do any thing but what is good.

But can these men after all their confidence produce any one person in the
World, who by the exquisiteness of his natural temper has ever walked upon the
waters, or poised himself in the air, or kept himself from being singed in the
fire? If these things be natural, how comes it to pass that no other instances
can be given but such as we urge for miraculous? We say indeed that Matthew.
14.29.
Christ walked on the Sea, but withal we say this was an argument of that
divine power in him, which, as Job says, Job 9.8.
alone spreads out the heavens and treads upon the waves of the Sea: We say
that 2 Kings 2.11.
Elijah was carried up into Heaven by a Chariot of fire and a whirlwind; but it
was only by his power, Psalm. 104.4.
who makes the winds his Messengers, and flames of fire his Ministers, as some
render those words of the Psalmist: We say that the three Children were
preserved Dan. 5.25, 26.
in the fiery furnace, that they had no hurt; and even Nebuchadnezzar was
hereby convinced, that he was the true God, which was able to preserve his
servants from the force of that devouring element which was therefore so much
worshipped by those Eastern people, because it destroyed not only the men but
the Gods of other nations. But is this enough to satisfy any reasonable men
that these things were done by natural causes; because they were done at all?
For that is to suppose it impossible there should be miracles; which is to say
it is impossible there should be a God; which is an attempt somewhat beyond
what the most impudent Atheists pretended. But in this case nothing can be
reasonably urged but common experience to the contrary; if these were things
which were usually done by other causes, there would be no reason to pretend a
miraculous power: but we say it is impossible that such things should be
produced by mere natural causes, and in this case there can be no confutation
but by contrary experience. As we see the opinion of the Ancients concerning
the uninhabitableness of the torrid Zone, and that there were no Antipodes, are
disproved by the mani^est experience to the contrary of all modern discoverers.
Let such plain experience be produced, and we shall then yield the possibility
of the things by some natural causes, although not by such an exact temperament
of body, which is only an instance of the strong power of imagination in those
who think so whatever that may have on others. Such a temperament of body as
these persons imagine, considering the great inequality of the mixture of the
earthly and aerial parts in us, being it may be as great a miracle it self, as
any they would disprove by it.

2. But supposing such a temperament of body to be possible, how comes it to be
so beneficial to others, as to prop^gate its virtue to the cure of disease^
persons? We may as well think that a great beauty may change a Black by often
viewing him, or a skilful Musician make another so by sitting near him, as one
man heal another because he is healthful himself. Unless we can suppose it in
the power of a man to send forth the best spirits of his own body and transfuse
them into the body of another; but by this means that which must cure another
must destroy himself. Besides the healthfulness of a person lies much in the
freedom of perspiration of all the noxious vapors to the body; by which it
will appear incredible that a man should preserve his own health by sending out
the worst vapors, and at the same time cure another, by sending out the best.

3. Supposing we should grant that a vigorous heat and a strong arm may by a
violent friction discuss some tumor of a distempered body; yet what would all
this signify to the mighty cures which were wrought so easily and with a word
speaking and at such great distance as were by Christ and his Apostles?
Supposing our Savior had the most exact natural temper that ever any person in
the world had; yet what could this do to the cure of a person above twenty
miles distance? for so our Savior cured the Son of a Nobleman who lay sick at
Capernaum, when himself was at Joh. 4.46, 53.
Cana in Galilee? So at Matthew. 8.6, 13.
Capernaum he cured the Centurion's servant at his own house without going
thither. Thus we find the Apostles curing, though Acts 5.15.

19.12.


they did not touch them; and that not one or two but multitudes of diseased
persons. And nothing can be more absurd than to imagine that so many men should
at the same time work so many miraculous cures by virtue of a temperament
peculiar to themselves? for how come they only to happen to have this
temperament and none of the Jews who had all equal advantages with them for it?
Why did none of the enemies of Christ do as strange things as they did? How
come they never to do it before they were Christians, nor in such an
extraordinary manner till after the day of Pentecost? Did the being Christians
alter their natural temper and infuse a ^anative virtue into them which they
never had before? Or rather was not their Christianity like to have spoiled it
if ever they had it before; by their frequent watchings, fastings, hunger and
thirst, cold and nakedness, stripes and imprisonments, racks and torments? Are
these the improvers of an excellent constitution? if they be, I doubt not but
those who magnify it in them, would rather want the virtue of it, than be at
the pains to obtain it.

2. But what a natural temper cannot do, they think the power of imagination
may: and therefore in order to the enervating the power of miracles, they
mightily advance that of imagination: which is the Idol of those who are as
little Friends to reason in it as they are to Religion. Any thing shall be able
to effect that, which they will not allow God to do: nay the most extravagant
thing which belongs to humane nature shall have a greater power than the most
holy and divine spirit. But do not we see, say they, strange effects of the
power of imagination upon mankind? I grant we do, and in nothing more than when
men set it up against the power of God: yet surely we see far greater effects
of that in the world than we do of the other. The power of imagination can
never be supposed to give a being to the things we see in the world? but we
have the greatest reason to attribute that to a divine and infinite power; and
is it not far more rational that that which gave a Being to the course of
nature should alter it when it pleases, than that which had nothing to do in
the making of it? So that in general, there can be no competition between the
power of God and the strength of imagination as to any extraordinary effects
which happen in the world. But this is not all; for there is a repugnancy in
the very nature of the thing that the power of imagination should do all those
miracles which were wrought by Christ or his Apostles. For either they must be
wrought by the imagination of the Agent or of the Patient: if of the Agent,
then there can be no more necessary to do the same things than to have the same
strength o^ imagination which they had; What is the reason then that never
since or before that time were so many signs, and wonders wrought as there were
then by the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord? If Peter and John cured the
lame man by the strength of imagination; why have no persons ever since cured
those whose welfare they have as heartily desired as ever they could do his?
Certainly if imagination could kill men's enemies, there would never need Duels
to destroy them, nor Authority to punish such as do it: and if it could cure
Friends, there would need no Physicians to heal and recover them, and death
would have nothing to do, but with persons that were wholly Friendless. If they
say, that persons are not sufficiently persuaded of their own power, and
therefore they do see little good; let any of those who contend the most for it
attempt the cure when they please of any the most common infirmity of mankind;
and if they cannot do that, let them then persuade us they can do miracles by
that, which they cannot cure the toothache by. But here they will say, the
imagination of the Patient is necessary in order to a miracle being wrought
upon him: not such I am sure as Christ and his Apostles wrought, who not only
healed the lame and the blind, but raised the dead; and what power of
imagination do they suppose in Lazarus when he had lain four days in the Grave?
and however they think of the soul they must in this case allow this power of
imagination to be immortal. So that were there no other arguments but that of
raising the dead that demonstrates it impossible that what Christ or his
Apostles did, did depend on the strength of Fancy in those on whom they wrought
their miracles.

Object. But, say they, did not Christ and his Apostles require believing first
in all persons that had miracles wrought upon them; and why should this be, but
because the strength of imagination was required to it? And is it not expressly
said, that Christ could not do any mighty works among his own countrymen
because of their unbelief? by which it appears that the efficacy of his
miracles did depend on the Faith of the Persons. To which I answer,

Answ. 1. That Christ did not always require faith in the person on whom he
wrought his miracles; for then it had been impossible he should ever have
raised any from the dead? which we are sure he did. And did not Act. 10.9, 12.
St. Paul raise Eutychius from the dead? and can any think so absurdly as that
faith was required from a dead man in order to his resurrection? So that the
greatest miracles of all others were wrought, where there was no possibility of
believing in those on whom they were wrought.

2. When in miraculous cures believing was required, it was to show for what
end those miracles were wrought, viz. to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel by
them: they did not work miracles to be admired by the people as Simon Magus
would have done; the Apostles had no such intolerable vanity to be cried up for
Gods, though they did such great things; not like that Caesar of the Atheists
as some call him, who concludes one of his Dialog. 54. de. Doemoniacis.
Dialogues with that horrible piece of vanity (to say no more of it) aut Deus
es aut Vaninus, and Pomponatius his Master before him had said Pomponat. de
Incantat. c. 4. p. 53.
Philosophi sunt Dii terrestres, (and you must be sure to reckon him in the
number;) but how was it possible for these men to discover more their mean
thoughts of a Deity than by making him to be as de^picable as themselves? What
boasting and ostentation would these men have made of themselves, if they could
have done but the thousand part of what the Apostles did? But they were men did
as far excel all such in all true virtue and real excellency as they did in
that miraculous power which God had given them. If they required men to believe
whom they cured, it was that they might cure both body and soul together: but
sometimes they cured persons whom they saw not. as the Acts 19.11, 12.
handkerchiefs from S^. Paul at Ephesus cured the diseased when they were
carried to them. But generally they took all opportunities to convey the
Doctrine of Christianity into the minds of those, out of whose bodies they cast
either Diseases or Devils. But is it not said that Christ could do no mighty
works among them because of their unbelief, and the power of his disciples
could not be greater than his own? To which I answer,

1. It is nowhere said in the Scripture that Christ could do no miracles at
all among them because of their unbelief: for in one place it is said, Mark
13.58.
And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief. He did
miracles enough to convince them; but when he saw their obstinacy, he would not
cast away any more upon them. And in that other place where it is said, Matthew.
6.5.
that he could there do no mighty work, it is presently added, save that he
laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them. And what absurdity is
there that Christ should do no extraordinary miracle among them, among whom he
saw that himself and his miracles were both equally contemned. It is not the
method of divine goodness to bestow the largest kindnesses at first; those who
improve the beginnings of favor shall have more, but those who despise the
first may justly be rejected from any farther kindness.

2. When it is said that he could not, that expression does not imply any
impossibility in the thing but a deliberate resolution to the contrary, so it
is used Acts 4.20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard. Who questions but there was a possibility in the thing, that they might
have held their peace? but it was a thing which upon great deliberation they
had resolved not to do. So Revel. 2.2.
thou can not bear them which are evil; and 2 Cor. 13.8.
we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. From which it appears
that this can be no prejudice to the power of Christ in working miracles, but
only shows his just resolution not to do it, considering the contempt wherewith
he had been entertained among them.

3. It is pretended by those men who set themselves to undervalue those
miraculous gifts which the Apostles had, that the gift of tongues might be only
the effect of an Enthusiastic heat, or some distemper of their brains, as men
in a high Fever are apt to speak such things and words, which while they are in
health they could never do. But that such unreasonable imaginations do more
argue a distempered brain, than any thing we assert concerning these divine
persons will easily appear from these considerations.

1. That no violent heat whatsoever can form a new language to a man which he
never knew before. If language had been natural to man, there might have been
some reason for it; but that we all know to be an arbitrary thing: and as well
might a blind man paint with an exact difference of colors, or one write
plainly who could never read, as any person by the mere heat of his Fancy
speak suddenly in a tongue which he never learnt. There have been some who have
said Vanin. Dial. 54. p. 407.
that the mind of man has naturally all kinds of languages within it self, and
it wants nothing but some mighty heat to stir men up to speak in any kind of
them. But we are to take notice that those things are accounted wit when spoken
against Religion, which would have been nonsense and contradictions if spoken
for it. And certainly nothing could be more absurdly said, than for the same
men to make all the imaginations (...) have of things to come in by our senses
and yet to say that the mind of man can have those things in it, which he never
learnt or heard. If this supposition were true, we might invert that saying of
Ac^. 6.24.
Festus to St. Paul, Much learning has made thee mad; for then madness, or
that which is the next to it, a great heat of brain, would make men the most
learned. If this were true, there would be a much easier way of attaining to
speak in the languages of all nations than that which many take to gain a very
few of them: for the heightening of Fancy either by Wine, or a degree of
madness would inspire men with skill in tongues to a miracle.

2. But supposing such a thing possible, which is far from being so, yet it is
very remote from our present case; for the Apostles made it manifest to all
persons that they were far enough from being inspired with the vapors of wine,
or touched with any Enthusiastic madness. They spoke with strange tongues, but
in such a manner as convinced great numbers of their hearers of the excellency
of that doctrine which was delivered by them. As St. Paul* answered Festus,
Act. 26.25.
I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and
soberness; so they did not speak incoherent and insignificant words which
madness makes men do, nor any mean and trivial things, merely for ostentation
of their gifts, but they spoke though with diverse tongues, Act. 2 11.
the great or wonderful things of God: So their Auditors confessed with
admiration. These are not the e^^ects of Wine or Madness, as St. Peter at large
proves, against the unreasonable cavils of some V. 13.

V. 41.


who mocked and said they were full of new wine. Which he does with so great
success, that the same day 3000 persons disowned their former course of life
and embraced Christianity. Surely, madness was never more infectious, never
made men more wise and sober, than this did, if the Apostl^s were acted only by
that. When was there ever better and more weighty sense spoken by any, than by
the Apostles after the day of Pentecost? With what reason do they argue, with
what strength do they discourse, with what a sedate and manly courage do they
withstand the opposition of the Sanhedrin against them? they never fly out into
any extravagant passion, never betray any weakness or fear: but speak the truth
with boldness, and rejoice when they suffer for it. It could be no sudden heat
which acted them on the day of Pentecost, for the same Spirit and power
continued with them afterward: they lived and acted by virtue of it, so that
their life was as great a miracle, as any that was wrought by them. Their zeal
was great but regular, their devotion fervent and constant, their conversation
honest and prudent, their discourses inflaming and convincing, and the whole
course of their lives breathed nothing but glory to God, and good will toward
Men. If they are called to suffer for their Religion, with what constancy do
they own the truth, with what submission do they yield to their persecutors,
with what meekness and patience do they bear their sufferings! If differences
arise among Christians, with what care do they advise, with what caution do
they direct, with what gentleness do they instruct, with what tenderness do
they bear with dissenters, with what earnestness do they endeavor to preserve
the peace of the Christian Church! When they are to plant Churches, how ready
to go about it, how diligent in attending it, how watchful to prevent all
miscarriages among them! When they write Epistles to those already planted,
with what Authority do they teach, with what Majesty do they command, with what
severity do they rebuke, with what pity do they chastise, with what vehemence
do they exhort, and with what weighty arguments do they persuade all Christians
to adorn the doctrine of God their Savior in all things! So that such persons
who after all these things can believe that the Apostles were acted only by
some extravagant heats, may as easily persuade themselves that men may be drunk
with sobriety, and mad with reason, and debauched with goodness. But such are
fit only to be treated in a dark room, if any can be found darker than their
understandings are.

2. But yet there may be imagined a higher sort of madness than these men are
guilty of, viz. That when men are convinced that these things could not be done
by mere Mechanical causes, then they attribute them to the assistance of
Spirits, but not to the holy and divine, but such as are evil and impure. A
madness so great and extravagant, that we could hardly imagine that it were
incident to humane nature, unless the Scripture had told us that some had thus
blasphemed the son of man, and either had or were in danger of blaspheming the
Holy Ghost too. And this is properly blaspheming the Holy Ghost, (which was not
given, as our text tells us, till after Christ's ascension) when men attribute
all those miraculous gifts which were poured out upon the Apostles in
confirmation of the Christian doctrine to the power of an unclean Spirit. For
so the Evangelist St. Luke, when he mentions the Luke 12.10.
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost which shall not be forgiven, immediately
subjoyns, their bringing in the Apostles to the Synagogues and Magistrates and
Powers; and adds, that the Holy Ghost, (even that which they so blasphemed in
them) should teach them in that same hour what they ought to say. I deny not
but the attributing the miraculous works of Christ, who had the Holy Spirit
without measure, to an evil Spirit was the same kind of sin; but it received a
greater aggravation after the resurrection of Christ from the dead, and the
miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. For now the great
confirmation was given to the truth of all that Christ had said before; he had
sometimes concealed his miracles and forbid the publishing of them: and to such
he appeared but as the son of man, of whom it is said 1 Cor. 2.8.
that had they known him they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: and
St. Peter more expressly; Act. 3.17.
and now Brethren I wrote that through ignorance you did it as did also your
Rulers. But now since his resurrection and ascension, when God by the effusion
of the Holy Ghost has given the largest and fullest Testimony to the doctrine
of the Gospel; if men after all this shall go on to blaspheme the Holy Ghost,
by attributing all these miracles to a Diabolical power, then there is no
forgiveness to be expected either in this world, or the world to come; because
this argues the greatest obstinacy of mind, the highest contempt of God, and
the greatest affront that can be put upon the Testimony of the Holy Spirit; for
it is charging the Spirit of truth to be an evil and a lying Spirit. By which
we see what great weight and moment the Scripture lays upon this pouring out of
the Holy Ghost on the Apostles, and what care men ought to have how they
undervalue and despise it, and much more how they do reproach and blaspheme it.
They might as well imagine that light and darkness may meet and embrace each
other, as that the infernal Spirits should employ their power in promoting a
doctrine so contrary to their interest? For Heaven and Hell cannot be more
distant, than the whole design of Christianity is from all the contrivances of
wicked Spirits. How soon was the Devil's Kingdom broken, his Temples
demolished, his Oracles silenced, himself baffled in his great design of
deceiving mankind when Christianity prevailed in the world? Having thus far
asserted the truth of the thing, viz. that there was such an effusion of the
Holy Spirit, we now come to consider,

2. The nature of it as it is represented to us by Rivers of living waters
flowing out of them that believe: by which we may understand 1. The plenty of
it, called Rivers of waters. 2. The benefit and usefulness of it to the Church.


1. The plentifulness of this effusion of the Spirit; there had been some
drops, as it were, of this Spirit which had fallen upon some of the Jewish
nation before; but those were no more to be compared with these Rivers of
waters, than the waters of Siloam which run softly, with the mighty River
Euphrates. What was the Spirit which Bezaleel had to build the Exodus 31.3.
Tabernacle with, if compared with that Spirit which the Apostles were inspired
with for building up the Church of God? What was that Exodus 28.3.
Spirit of Wisdom which some were filled with to make garments for Aaron, if
compared with that Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation which led the Apostles into
the knowledge of all Truth? What was that Spirit of Courage which was given to
the Judges of old, if compared with that Spirit which did convince the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment? What was that Spirit of Moses which was
communicated to the 70 Elders, if compared with that Spirit of his Son, which
God has shed abroad in the hearts of his people? What was that Spirit of
Prophecy, which inspired some Prophets in several Ages, with that Act. 2.16,
17.
pouring out of the Spirit upon all flesh; which the Apostle tells us was
accomplished on the day of Pentecost? But these Rivers of Waters, though they
began their course at Jerusalem upon that day, yet they soon overflowed the
Christian Church in other parts of the world. The sound of that rushing mighty
Wind was soon heard in the most distant places: and the fiery tongues inflamed
the hearts of many who never saw them. These gifts being propagated into other
Churches, and many other tongues were kindled from them, as we see how much
this gift of tongues obtained in the Church of Corinth: And so in the History
of the Acts of the Apostles, we find after this day how the Holy Ghost fell
upon them which believed, and what mighty signs and wonders were done by them.

2. The benefit and usefulness of this effusion of the Spirit; like the Rivers
of Waters that both refresh and enrich, and thereby make glad the City of God.
The coming down of the Spirit was like Isa. 44.3.
the pouring water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground:
Now Isa. 41.18.
God opened the Rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the
valleys; that the poor and needy who seek water might be refreshed, and they
whose tongues failed for, thirst might satisfy themselves with living wa^er.
These are some of the lo^ty expressions whereby the Courtly Prophet Isaiah sets
sorth the great promise of the spirit; none better befitting the mighty
advantages the Church of God has ever since enjoyed by the pouring out of the
spirit than these. For the fountain was opened in the Apostles, but the streams
of those Rivers of living water have run down to our Age: not confined within
the banks of Tiber, nor mixing with the impure waters of it; but preserved pure
and unmixed in that sacred doctrine contained in the Holy Scripture. Within
those bounds we confine our faith, and are not moved by the vain discourses of
any who pretend to discover a new Fountainhead to these waters at Rome; and
would make it impossible for them to come down to us through any other Channel
but theirs. But supposing they had come to us through them, have they thereby
gotten the sole disposal of them, that none shall taste but what and how much
they please? and must we needs drink down the filth and mud of their Channel
too? As long as they suffer us to do what Christ has commanded us to do, viz.
John 7.37.
to take of these waters of life freely we do our own duty and quarrel not with
them. Revel. 22.17.
But if they go about to stop the passage of them, or adulterate them with some
foreign mixture, or strive with us as the Herdsmen of Gerar did with Isaac's
Herdsmen saying the Genesis 26.20.
Water is ours, then if the name of the Well be Esek, if contentions do arise,
the blame is not ours; we assert but our own just right against all their
encroachments. For as Isaac pleaded V. 18.
that he only dug again the wells of water which they had dug in the days
of Abraham his Father; and although the Philistines had stopped them after the
death of Abraham, yet that could be no hindrance to his right, but he might
open them again, and call their names after the names by which his Father had
called them: So that is the substance of our Plea, we pretend to nothing but to
clear the passage which they have stopped up, and was left free and open for us
in the time of the Apostles and Fathers; we desire not to be imposed upon by
their later usurpations: we plead for no more but that the Church of God may
have the same purity and integrity which it had in the primitive times, and
that things may not only be called by the names by which the Fathers have
called them; but that they may be such as the Fathers have left them. But
otherwise let them boast never so much of the largeness of their Stream, of the
Antiquity of their Channel, of the holiness of their Waters, of the number of
their Ports, and the riches of their Trading; nay and let them call their
stream by the name of the Ocean too (if they please,) yet we envy them not
their Admah and Pharpar and all the Rivers of Damascus, so we may sit down
quietly by these living waters of Jordan. We are contented with the miracles
which the Apostles wrought without forging or believing new ones; we are
satisfied with the gift of strange tongues which they had; we know no necessity
now of speaking much less of praying in an unknown tongue: we believe that
Spirit infallible which inspired the Apostles in their holy Writings; and those
we acknowledge, embrace, and I hope are willing to die for: But if any upstart
Spirit pretend to sit in an infallible Chair, we desire not to be brought under
bondage to it, till we see the same miracles wrought by virtue of it, which
were wrought by the Apostles to attest their infallibility.

3. The last thing to be spoken to, is, the season that this effusion of the
Spirit was reserved for, which was after the glorious ascension of Christ to
Heaven. This was reserved as the great Donative after his Triumph over
Principalities and Powers; when he was ascended up on high, he sends down the
greatest gift that ever was bestowed upon mankind, viz. this gift of his Holy
Spirit. Hereby Christ discovered the greatness of his Purchase, the height of
his Glory, the exercise of his Power, the assurance of his Resurrection and
Ascension: and the care he took of his Church and People; by letting them see
that he made good his last promise to them of sending them another Comforter
who should be with them to assist them in all their undertakings, to direct
them in their doubts, to plead their cause for them against all the vain
oppo^itions of men. And he should not continue with them for a little time as
Christ had done, but he should abide with them for ever, i. e. so as not to be
taken from them as himself was, but should remain with them, as a pledge of his
love, as a testimony of his truth, as an earnest of God's favor to them now,
and their future inheritance in heaven; for he should comfort them by his
presence, guide them by his counsel, and at last bring them to glory.

Nothing now remains but that as the occasion of our rejoicing on this day does
so much exceed that of the Jews at their ceremony of pouring out the ^ater; so
our joy should as much exceed in the nature and kind of it the mirth and
jollity which was then used by them. With what joy did the Israelites when they
were almost burnt up with thirst in the Wilderness taste of the pleasant streams
which issued out of the rock? 1 Cor. 10.4.
that rock, says the Apostle, was Christ, and the gifts of the Spirit are that
stream of living water which flows from him, and shall not we express our
thankfulness for so great and unvaluable a mercy? Ou^ joy cannot be too great
for such a gift as this so it be of the nature of it, i. e. a spiritual joy.
The Holy Ghost ought to be the Fountain of that joy which we express for God's
giving him to his Church. Let us not then affront that good Spirit, while we
pretend to bless God for him; let us not grieve him by our presumptuous sins,
nor resist his motions in our hearts by our wilful continuance in them. The
best way we can express our thankfulness is by yielding up our selves to be
guided by him in a holy life, and then we may be sure our joy shall never end
with our lives, but shall be continued with a greater fullness for ever more.

SERMON X.
Preached at WHITE HALL. MARCH 2. 1669.
ISAIAH LVII. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked.


IF we were bound to judge of things only by appearance, and to esteem all
persons happy who are made the object of the envy of some and the flattery of
others, this text would seem to be a strange Paradox, and inconsistent with
what daily happens in the world. For what complaint has been more frequent
among men almost in all Ages, than that peace and prosperity has been the
portion of the wicked, that their troubles have not been like other men's, that
none seem to enjoy greater pleasures in this world than they who live as if
there were no other? The consideration of which has been a matter of great
offense to the weak, and of surprise to the wisest; till they have searched
more deeply into the nature of these things (which the more men have done the
better esteem they have always had of divine providence) and from thence have
understood that the true felicity of a man's life lies in the contentment of
his own mind, which can never arise from any thing without himself, nor be
enjoyed till all be well within. For when we compare the state of humane nature
with that of the beings inferior to it, we shall easily find that as man was
designed for a greater happiness than they are capable of; so that cannot lie
in any thing which he enjoys in common with them, (such as the pleasures of our
senses are) but must consist in some peculiar excellencies of his being. And as
the capacity of misery is always proportionable to that of happiness; so the
measure and the kind of that must be taken in the same manner that we do the
other. Where there is no sense of pleasure, there can be none of pain; where
all pleasure is confined to sense, the pain must be so too; but where the
greatest pleasures are intellectual, the greatest torments must be those of the
mind. From whence it follows that nothing does so much conduce to the proper
happiness of man, as that which does the most promote the peace and serenity of
his mind: nothing can make him more miserable than that which causes the
greatest disturbance in it. If we can then make it appear that the highest
honors, the greatest riches, and the softest pleasures can never satisfy the
desires, conquer the fears, nor allay the passions of an ungoverned mind, we
must search beyond these things for the foundations of its peace. And if
notwithstanding them there may be such a sting in the conscience of a wicked
man, that may inflame his mind to so great a height of rage and fury, which the
diversions of the World cannot prevent, nor all its pleasures cure: we are
especially concerned to fix such motion of man's happiness, which either
supposes a sound mind or else makes it so; without which all the other things
^o much admired can no more contribute toward any true contentment than a
magnificent Palace, or a curiously wrought bed to the cure of the Gout or
Stone. All which I speak, (not as though I imagined any state of perfect
tranquillity or complete happiness were attainable by any man in this present
life: for as long as the causes are imperfect, the effect must be so too: and
those Philosophers who discoursed so much of a happy state of life, did but
frame Ideas in Morals as they did in Politics, not as though it were possible
for any to reach to the exactness of them, but those were to be accounted best
which came the nearest to them:) but I therefore speak concerning a happy state
of life for these two reasons.

1. That though none can be perfectly happy, yet that some may be much more so
than others are, i. e. they may enjoy far greater contentment of mind in any
condition than others can do; they can bear crosses, and suffer injuries with a
more equal temper; and when they meet with vicissitudes in the world they
wonder no more at it, than to see that the Wind changes its quarter, or tha^
the Sea proves rough and tempestuous which but a little before was very eve^
and calm. They who understand humane nature, have few things left t^ wonder at;
and they who do the least wonder, are the least surprised; and they who are the
least surprised, are the least troubled; and those are the happiest men as this
world goes, who meet with fewest troubles in it. The Italians have a shrewd
Proverb, that there is less money, less wisdom, less honesty in the world than
men generally make account of; I will not stand to maintain the truth of it,
but the less men believe of these things, the less they are deceived, and the
less they are deceived the less they are troubled. For no troubles are greater
than those which are the most unexpected; none are so unexpected as those which
come upon men who are only undeceived by their own experience: For they undergo
a great deal of trouble to gain a little wisdom, whereas a true judgment and
consideration of these things beforehand, keeps the mind of man more steady and
fixed amidst all the contingencies of humane affairs. By which we see that
wisdom of it self has a great influence upon the quiet and peace of man's
mind, and the happiness of his life: But if we add to that the inseparable
property of true wisdom, viz. patience and submission to the Will of God upon
the consideration of his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, he must be strangely
blind that cannot discern a greater peace and serenity following these two in
the minds of men, than where folly and irreligion reign. Thus far then we have
gained, that Wisdom and Piety tend very much to the lessening the troubles of a
man's life; and therein lies the far greatest part of the happiness of this
imperfect State. For it is a vain thing to expect in so open a condition as we
live in here, that no cross Winds should blow upon us; but if they only shake
our branches and make our leaves fall, as long as the root holds firm and the
body entire, the former beauty and glory will return again. It can be no
disparagement to the most skilful Pilot, to have his Vessel tossed upon a
tempestuous Sea, but to escape with little damage when he sees others sink down
and perish, shows the great difference which wisdom gives in the success, where
the dangers are equal and common. So that not only some men may meet with fewer
troubles in the world than others do; but supposing they meet with the same,
some are far more happy in passing through them than others are. And this is
the fairest sense I know can be given of those otherwise extravagant speeches
of the Philosophers of old, concerning the Wise man being happy in the Bull of
Phalaris, or under the greatest racks and torments; not as though they could be
so senseless to imagine that any man could be as happy in his torments as out
of them; but that taking him in the same State with another man who wants that
constancy of mind which he has, he may be said to be happy in respect of the
other. By which we see, that although no state of life can be said to be
completely happy, yet some may be much nearer than others can be. Which was
necessary to be premised in order to the right understanding the design of our
following discourse: which is to show,

2. That some course of life to any man who considers what he does, is utterly
inconsistent with a state of Peace and Tranquillity; I mean the course of Sin
and Wickedness. So the Prophet assures us from the mouth of God himself in the
words of the text. There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked. Which words
are spoken on purpose by the Prophet, to show how much the wickedness of men
does hinder them from enjoying that peace and happiness which they might have
had without it; for in the foregoing words he represents God as showing great
pity to the scattered remainders of a broken and distressed people; though he
had punished them severely for their sins, and banished them out of their
native country, yet he promises them, that those who put their trust in him
should possess the land, and again inherit his holy mountain, v. 13. and
therefore speaks that the way might be cast up and prepared for their return,
and every impediment taken out of the way, v. 14. for the high and lofty one
who inhabits eternity, will again dwell in his high and holy place, viz. at
Jerusalem; (so the words may be understood, for the Hebrew verb is future) but
especially with those who were humbled for their sins, who are here called the
humble and contrite ones, v. 15. For God would not always contend with them,
for he knew they were not able to stand before him; v. 16. and although his
punishment of them was just for their sins, v. 17. yet God took notice of their
repentance, and would therefore heal their breaches, and conduct them back
again to their own land, and thereby give so great an occasion of joy and
triumph, that by it he is said to restore comforts to those who mourned for the
calamities they lay under, v. 18. yea he would grant them so much inward peace
and outward prosperity, that they should far and near join in their praises to
God for it; and therefore he is said to create the fruit of the lips peace,
peace, etc. But all this while they must have a care of deceiving themselves
though God did restore them to their own land with abundance of joy and peace,
in expectation that the remembrance of their former calamities and the present
blessings they enjoyed would make them abhor the sins which had provoked God to
punish them; yet if they should return to their wickedness again, or continue
in it after so great mercies, they would soon find that their wickedness would
overthrow their peace, and nothing but discontent and trouble would follow upon
it, as the natural product of it. For like the troubled Sea that is tossed up
and down with violent and impetuous winds, fomes and rages, one wave beating
against another, and the effect of all this commotion is nothing but casting
upon the neighbor shore a greater burden of unprofitable mire and dirt: such
would the effect of their wickedness be among them, v. 20. it would make them
restless and unquiet in themselves, having no one certain motion but tossed up
and down with every contrary blast of wind, and producing nothing by all these
various agitations but unprofitable counsels and unsuccessful designs. But lest
the Prophet should be supposed to speak all this out of discontent and passion,
he confirms what he had said from the mouth of God in these few but smart words
of the Text. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

The words we see are general and indefinite, both as to the nature of the
peace here mentioned, and the notion of Wickedness employed; and therefore I
shall handle them in their due extent by showing that no one kind of true peace
is consistent with any sort of prevailing wickedness: whether by peace we mean
the peace a man has with himself in the tranquillity of his mind; or the peace
which men have in society with one another. In either of these senses it will
appear true, that there is no peace to the wicked.

1. Taking peace, for the tranquillity of a man's mind; in order to which it is
necessary for a man to have some certain foundation to build his peace upon,
and that he be secured from those things which will overthrow it: both which
show it impossible for a wicked man to have any true peace in his mind, because
he can have no certain grounds to build it upon; and those things do accompany
his wickedness, which will certainly overthrow it:

1. A Wicked man can have no certain foundations for his peace. By which I do
not mean any contracted dullness, or brutish stupidity, which if we will call
peace the most insensible parts of the creation do infinitely exceed us in it,
but such a composure and settlement of our minds, which arises from a due
consideration of things; and differs as much from the former temper as a
vigorous and healthful state of body does from the dull effects of a Lethargy.
And such a peace as this no wicked man can ever have but upon one of these
suppositions.

Either (1.) That Wickedness is but a mere name of disgrace set upon some kind
of actions, but that really there is no such a thing as sin, or the differences
of good and evil; or else,

(2.) Supposing there is such a thing as sin, it is ridiculous to believe there
ever should be such a punishment of it as men are affrighted with;

(3.) Or Lastly, supposing there be a punishment of sin to come, it is madness
to abstain from the present pleasures of sin for the fear of it. These being
only the imaginable grounds a wicked man can have any peace in his mind from; I
shall particularly show the falseness and the folly of them.

1. That there is no such thing as Sin or Wickedness in the world, and that the
differences of good and evil are merely arbitrary things, and that those are
names only imposed upon things by the more cunning sort of men to affright men
from the doing some actions, and to encourage them to do others. But what a
miserable case are those in, who can never enjoy any contentment in themselves
unless all the differences of good and evil be utterly destroyed! We should
conclude that man's condition desparate, who believes it impossible for him to
have any ease in his mind, unless he could be transformed into the shape of a
beast, or petrified into the hardness of a rock. These are things not utterly
impossible, but yet they are possible in so remote a degree, that it is all one
to say, he can have no ease, as to say, that he expects it only upon those
terms: But it is utterly inconsistent with the supposition of humane nature, or
a being endued and acting with reason, to make all things equally good or evil.
For what does reason signify as it respects the actions of men, but a faculty
of discerning what is good and fitting to be done, from what is evil and ought
to be avoided? And to what purpose is such a faculty given us, if there be no
such difference in the nature of things? Might not men with equal probability
argue that there is no such thing as a difference in the things about which
life and sense are conversant, as in those wherein reason is employed? With
what impatience would those men be heard who should assert that there is no
such thing as a difference in the qualities of meats and drinks, but that they
do all equally tend to the preservation of life, that it is pedantical and
beneath a Gentleman to talk of any such thing as Poisons, that will so suddenly
and certainly destroy men's lives, and that these are things which none talk of
or believe besides those whose trade is either to kill or cure men? With how
much wit and subtilty might a man argue upon these things, that it is
impossible for any man to define what the nature of poison is, or in what
manner it destroys the life of man, that men have conquered the malignity of it
by use, and that the same things which have been poison to some, have been food
and nourishment to others? But notwithstanding all these plausible arguments,
none of these brave spirits dare venture the experiment upon themselves: and
yet these (only changing the terms) are the very same arguments used against
the natural differences of good and evil; viz. the difficulty of defining or
setting the exact bounds of them, and the different customs or apprehensions of
men in the world concerning the things which are called good and evil. If we
proceed farther to the objects of sense, how ridiculous would those persons
appear that should with a mighty confidence go about to persuade men, that the
differences between light and darkness, between pleasure and pain, between
smells and tastes and noises are but fantastic and imaginary things? Who would
ever believe that those are men of the most excellent sight to whom light and
darkness are equal? (for others who pretend not to so much wit, are wont to
call such persons blind.) Or that those have the most exquisite sense, that
feel no difference of pain and pleasure, (which was wont to be thought the sign
of no sense at all.) And surely the persons I am now arguing against, love
their palats too well, to admire those who can discern no difference of tastes;
and would be well enough contented to be thought deaf if they could put no
distinction between the pleasant sound of vocal or instrumental Mu^ick, and the
harsh jarring of two Saws drawn cross each other. Thus it appears that nothing
would make m^n more ridiculous than to explore and laugh at the difference that
there is in the means of life and the objects of sense. Let us now proceed
higher: Dare any man say there is no such thing as Reason in Man, because there
appears so little of the truth of it in Men, and so much of the counterfeit of
it in Bruits? or that there is no such thing as a difference of Truth and
Falsehood, because they are so commonly mistaken for one another? What reason
then imaginable can there be, that there should not be as wide a distance in
the matters of our choice, as in the objects of our sense and understanding? Is
it that we have natural faculties of sense and perception, but not of choice?
that, every one is able to refute by his constant experience, that finds a
greater liberty in his choice, than in his perception. The reason of which is
wholly unintelligible, unless a difference be found in the nature of the things
proposed to his choice; that some have a greater excellency and commendableness
in them, more agreeable to humane nature, more satisfactory to the minds of
those who choose them, than others are. And must all this difference be
destroyed, merely because all men are not agreed, what things are good and what
evil? We call goodness the beauty of the soul; and do men question whether
there be such a thing as beauty at all, because there are so many different
opinions in the world about it? Or is deformity ever the less real, because the
several nations of the world represent it in a color different from their own?
Those arguments then against the natural differences of good and evil must
needs appear ridiculous, which will be granted to hold in nothing else but only
the thing in question. And yet in the midst of all the ruins and decays of
humane nature, we find such evident footsteps and impressions of the
differences of good and evil in the minds of men, which no force could
extinguish, no time could deface, no customs could alter. Let us search the
records of ancient times, and enquire into the later discoveries of nations, we
shall find none so barbarous and brutish as not to allow the differences of
good and evil; so far as to acknowledge, that there are some things which
naturally deserve to be praised, and others which deserve to be punished.
Whereas if good and evil were merely names of things, there can be no reason
assigned, why praise and honor should necessarily belong to some things, and
infamy and disgrace to follow others. If the things themselves be arbitrary,
the consequences of them would be so too. But is it possible to imagine that
any man should deserve to be punished as much for being true to his trust, as
for betraying it; for honoring his Parents, as for destroying them; for giving
to every one their due, as for all the arts of injustice and oppression? Is it
possible for men to suffer as much in their esteem, for their fidelity,
temperance, and chastity, as they always do for their falseness, intemperance,
and lasciviousness? How comes the very name of a lie to be a matter of so much
reproach and dishonor, that the giving of it is thought an injury so great as
cannot be expiated without the satisfaction of the giver's blood, if it be in
it sel^ so indifferent a thing? Nay, I dare appeal to the consciences of the
most wicked persons, whether they are so well pleased with themselves, when
they come reeking from the satisfaction o^ their lusts, and sodden with the
continuance of their debaucheries, as when they have been paying their
devotions to God, or their duties to their Parents, or their respects to their
Country or Friends? Is there not (whether they will or no) an inward shame, and
secret regret and disquiet following the one, and nothing but ease and
contentment the other? What should make this difference in those persons who
love their vices far more than they do the other? and if it were possible for
them, would bring virtue more out of countenance than sin is: yet after all
their endeavors, though vice has the stronger Interest, virtue has the
greater Reve^ence. Thus considering humane nature as it is, we find indelible
characters rema^ning upon it of the natural differences of good and evil; but
then if we consider it with a respect to the Maker of it, that will cast a
clearer light upon them, and make those characters appear more discernible. For
nothing can be more absurd than to imagine a creature owing its being, and all
it has to the bounty of a Being infinite in all Perfect^ons, and yet not to be
obliged to give all honor, worship and service to it. To rip up the bowels of
a Mother to whom a man owes his coming into the world; to assassinate a Prince,
to whom he owes all the honors and riches he has in it, are crimes of so
black a nature, that the worst of Men can hardly be supposed to commit them,
nor the worst of Devils to defend them: But to blaspheme God and to deride his
service, seems to have a much greater malignity in it, in as much, as our
obligations to his honor and service, are much greater than they can be to any
created Being. But if there be no natural differences of good and evil, even
this must be accounted an ind^fferent thing, as well as the former: and what
safety can there be in conversing with those men, whom no bonds of Religion,
Nature, or Gratitude can tie? Let us, if it were possible, suppose a Society of
men constituted of such who make all things equally good and evil in their own
nature, what a monstrous Leviathan would they make among them? no Religion, no
Law, no Kindness, no Promises, no Trust, no Contracts could ever oblige them
not to do any thing which they thought might be done with safety. By which it
appears that these principles are so inconsistent with humane Nature, and all
the bonds of Religion and Duty, that whoever owns them must suppose mankind
more savage than the beasts of prey, he must renounce his Reason, destroy all
Religion, and disown a Deity. For if there be a God, we must be inviolably
bound to observe and obey him; and the very notion of a God implies a Being
infinitely perfect; and if there be such perfections in God, they cannot but be
so in their own nature, and if they be so in their own nature, they must in
their degree be so in us as well as in him; so that if Goodness, Holiness and
Righteousness be absolute perfections as they are in God, they must be
perfections so far as they are in us; and the contrary must be imperfections;
which makes the differences of good and evil so far from being arbitrary, that
those things which agree to the perfections of God as well as his will must
needs be good, and those which are repugnant to them must needs be evil. The
result of all is, that if a wicked man can have no peace in his mind, without
overthrowing the differences of good and evil, he can have no peace without the
greatest violence offered to God, to nature, and himself; and if this be the
way to Peace, let his Reason judge.

2. The second foundation which a wicked man must build his peace upon is, that
supposing there be such a thing as sin, yet that men have no cause to disturb
themselves with the fears of so great a punishment to follow after, as that
which sinners are afrighted with. But what security can a sinner have against
the fears of punishment when his conscience condemns him for the guilt of his
sins? Is it that God takes no notice at all of the actions of men, that he will
not disturb his own eternal peace and happiness by observing all their follies?
So some of old imagined, who pretended that out of mere kindness to the Deity
they gave him his Quietus est, and took from him as much as in them lay, the
care and government of the world: but it was really a greater kindness to their
lusts which made them do it, and makes many nowadays so willing upon the same
frivolous pretenses to exclude the providence of God out of the world; ^or can
any man who considers what God is, think his providence inconsistent with his
happiness? If we speak of such weak and imperfect Beings as the wises^ of
mankind are, it might not a little contribute to their peace to be eased of the
cares of Government. But the reason of that is, because a^l things cannot be
foreseen by them before they happen, nor well managed when they do; whence come
oversights and disappoi^ments, and consequently all their e^sie e^fects of
^he^e. But when we ^peak o^ God, we speak of a Being infi^^^ely Wise and
Power^ul, from whom nothing can b^ ^id, and whom nothing can (...) and what can
be imagined more easy than for a conjunction of infinite W^sdom and Power, to
contrive and (...) all the (...) of the world? I^ therefore w^ck^^ men could
suppose that God could not know what they did, or could not punish them if he
knew it, they might indulge themselves in greater security: but to suppose his
Wisdom so great that he cannot but know their actions; and his Power so
irresistible, that it is impossible for them to stand before him when he
designs to punish; to flatter themselves with the hopes of impunity is an
extravagant piece of folly and madness. Or is it then, that though God does
take notice of their actions, he will not be so much displeased as to punish
them? but this is as repugnant to the Justice and Holiness of God, as the other
was to his Wisdom and Power. Will not the righteous God, who has made Laws to
govern mankind, see to the execution of them? for if he did not hate sin, why
did he so strictly forbid it? if he does hate sin, he will severely punish it.
Nay has he not been severe already in the execution of his judgments upon the
world for sin? what did Adam and his posterity suffer for the first sin? what
did the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, the people of the Jews suffer for their
wickedness? And is not he the same God still? Is his hand shortened that he
cannot strike, or does his heart fail that he dare not punish? Surely of all
nations we have no cause to think so, and of all Ages, not in this of ours;
wherein we have smarted so much by ^he ju^t displeasure of God against our
sins. But where then lies the sinner's hope? Is it at last, that though God may
sometimes punish men in this life for their sins, he will never do it in that
to come? If he could have said it was impossible he should do it, and proved it
sufficiently, there might have been some ground for his security, but that is
impossible he should ever do; but to hope he will not do it when he has
declared that he will, is instead of bringing peace to his own mind to set God
at variance with himself. For nothing can be more plainly revealed, more
frequently inculcated, more earnestly pressed than Romans 2.5, 6, 8, 9.
that there is a day of wrath to come, wherein the righteous judgment of God
shall be revealed; and wherein God will render to every man according to his
deeds: wherein tribulation, and anguish, and wrath shall be upon every soul of
man that does evil; wherein the secrets of all hearts and actions shall be
disclosed, when the graves shall be opened, Joh. 5.29.
and they that have done good shall come forth to the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation. For the Lord Jesus
himself, even he who died for the salvation of all penitent sinners, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7, 8, 9.
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel of Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power. Then shall that dreadful sentence be passed upon
all impenitent sinners, Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Which words are so full of horror and astonishment as might not only
disturb the sinner's peace and security, but awaken him to such a sense of his
sins, as to loath, abhor and forsake them, and thereby fly from the wrath to
come.

3. But after all this, is it possible to suppose, that any should think their
present pleasures would countervail all the miseries of another life? which is
the last imaginable foundation for a sinner's peace, while he continues in his
wickedness. The most professed Epicureans that ever were, made this one of
their fundamental maxims, That no pleasure was to be chosen, which brought
after it a pain greater than it self: on which account they made temperance and
sobriety necessary to a pleasant life, because excesses and debaucheries leave
far more of burden than of ease behind them. But what would these men have
said, if they had believed the intolerable anguish of a tormented mind, the
racks of an enraged conscience, the fire of everlasting vengeance to be the
consequent of all the pleasures of sin? they mu^t upon their own principles
have concluded that none but madmen and fools would ever venture upon them.
And that not only because the after-pain would so much exceed the present
pleasure; but because the fears of that pain to come must abate proportionably
of the pleasure which might otherwise be enjoined. Suppose a man certainly knew
that upon the pleasing his palate with the most excellent wine, and gratifying
his appetite with the most delicate food, he must be racked with the Stone, and
tormented with the Gout as long as he should live; can we imagine such a person
could have any pleasure in his mind (whatever his palate had) in the enjoyment
of them while he did consider the consequent of them. But what are these
miseries compared with the insupportable horror of a conscience laden with
guilt, ^unk under despair, having a gnawing worm and unquenchable flames? the
wrath of an almighty God, and the fury of his vengeance to encounter with,
without the least hopes of conquering? I do not now ask, what the sinner will
then think of all his Atheism and Infidelity when the greatness of his misery
shall convince him that it is an Almighty hand which lays it upon him; nor what
pleasure he can have in the thoughts of his former excesses, when not one drop
can be procured for the mitigation of his flames? nor what satisfaction those
lusts have given him, the very thoughts of which pie^ce his soul, and if it
were possible would rend him in pieces with the torment of them? but that which
I demand is, what peace of mind a sinner can have in this world who knows not
how soon he may be dispatched to that place of torment? can he bind the hands
of the Almighty, that he shall not snatch him away till he does repent? or can
he reverse the decrees of heaven, or suspend the execution of them? can he
abrogate the force of his Laws, and make his own terms with God? can he
dissolve the chains of darkness with a few deathbed tears, and quench the
flames of another world with them? O foolish sinners, who has bewitched them
with these deceitful dreams! will heaven-gates fly open with the strength of a
few dying groans? will the mouth of hell be stopped with the bare lamentation of
a sinner? Are there such charms in some penitent words extorted from the fear
of approaching misery, that God himself is not able to resi^^ them? Certainly
there is no deceit more dangerous, nor I fear more common in the world, than
for men to think that God is so easy to pardon sin, that though they spend
their lives in satisfying their lusts; they shall make amends for all by a
dying sorrow and a gasping repentance. As though the unsaying what we had done,
or wishing we had done otherwise since we can do it no longer, (for that is the
bottom of all putting off repentance to the last) were abundant compensation to
the justice of God, for the affronts of his Majesty, contempt of his Laws,
abuse of his Patience, and all the large indictments of wilful and presumptuous
sins, which the whole course of our lives is charged with. The supposal of
which makes the whole design of Religion signify very little in the world.

Thus we have examined the foundations of a sinner's peace, and found them very
false and fallacious.

2. We are now to show that those things do accompany a sinner's course of
life, which certainly overthrow his peace; which are these two. 1. The
reflections of his Mind. 2. The violence of his Passions.

1. The reflections of his Mind, which he can neither hinder nor be pleased
with. No doubt if it were possible for him to deprive himself of the greatest
excellency of his being, it would be the first work he would do, to break the
glass which shows him his deformity. For as our Savior said, John 3.20.
Every one that does evil hates the light, lest his deeds should be reproved;
not only the light without which discovers them, but that light of conscience
within, which not only shines but burns too. Hence proceeds that great
uneasiness which a sinner feels within as often as he considers what he has
done amiss, which we call the remorse of conscience; and is the natural
consequent of the violence a man offers to his reason in his evil actions. It
was thought a sufficient vindication of the innocence of two Brothers by the
Roman Judges, when they were accused for Parricide; that although their Father
was murdered in the same room where they lay, and no other person was found on
whom they could fasten the suspicion of it, yet in the morning the door was
open and they fast asleep. For as the Orator says, Pro Sextioc. 23.
No man can imagine, that those who had broken all the Laws of God and nature
by so great an act of wickedness, could presently sleep upon it: for they who
do such things can neither rest without care, nor breathe without fear. We are
not to believe, says he, the fables of the Poets, as though wicked men were
haunted and terrified with the burning torches of the furies; but every man's
wickedness is the greatest terror to himself, and the evil thoughts which
pursue wicked men are their constant and domestic furies. It would be endless
to repeat what force the more civil Heathens have given to conscience either
way, as to the peace which follows innocence, and the disquiet which follows
guilt. Which they looked on as the great thing which governed the world, De N.
Deorum, l. 3.
Qua sublata jacent omnia, as the Orator speaks, without which all things would
be in great disorder; for these punishments they are sure not to escape, De
leg. l. 1.
though they may do others; and these they thought so great and weighty that
upon this ground they vindicated divine providence as to the seeming prosperity
of wicked men, thinking it the most unreasonable thing in the world, to call
those persons happy who suffered under the severe lashes of their own
consciences. If there were such a force in the consciences of those who had
nothing but the light of nature to direct them, how much greater weight mu^t
there be when 2 Cor. 5.11.
the terrors of the Lord are made known by himself, Romans 1.18.
and the wrath of God revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men?
I know that wicked men in the height of their debaucheries pretend to be above
these things, and are ready to laugh at them as the effects of a strong spleen
and a weak brain: but I appeal to their most sober thoughts, when the streams
of wine are evaporated, and the intoxication of evil company is removed from
them, when in the deep and silent night, they revolve in their minds the
actions of the foregoing day; what satisfaction they then take in all the
sinful pleasures they have pursued so eagerly? but especially, when either
their lusts have consumed their bodies, or the vengeance of God has overtaken
them; when death begins to seize upon their vitals, and themselves not wholly
stupefied through the power of their sins or their disease, let then, if it
were possible, any rep^esent the fears, the horror and astonishment which the
consciences of wicked men labor under in remembrance of their evil actions.
How mean and poor would they leave themselves if with all their honors and
riches they could purchase to themselves, a reprieve from death and from the
miseries which follow after it? what would they then give for the comfort of a
good conscience, and the fruit of a holy, righteous, and sober life? with what
another sense of Religion do men whose minds are awakened speak then, in
comparison of what they did in the days of their mirth and jollity? Neither is
this to take them at the greatest disadvantage, as some of them have been ready
to say; for I suppose their minds as clear then as at any time, and so much the
clearer, because freed from the impediments of such freedom of their thoughts
at another time; for the same thoughts would have possessed them before, only
the pleasures and the hopes of life diverted their minds from them; but now the
nearness of the things they feared, and the weight and consequence of them make
them more diligently examine and impartially consider them. But that
demonstrates the great misery of a sinner's State; that what cures the other
greatest troubles of our life, does the most increase his, which is the
exercise of reason and consideration, that allays the power of griefs, that
eases the mind of vain fears, that prevents many troubles and cures others,
that governs other passions and keeps them in their due bounds; but this is it
which of all things does the most increase the trouble of a wicked man's mind;
for the more he considers, the worse he finds his condition; and while he finds
his condition so bad, he can never enjoy any peace in his mind.

2. The violence of his Passions: those a wicked man has lost the command of,
or else he could never be a wicked man; and whosoever is under the power of any
unruly passion, forfeits all his peace by it. For what peace can ever be
expected in such a State of violence and usurpation, where the calm government
of reason is cast off as an unnecessary burden, and every passion under the
pretense of liberty sets up for an arbitrary power? Nay what confusion and
disorder must needs follow, where the powers of the mind, which ought to keep
all in order, are themselves in subjection to their own slaves: and none ever
govern so ill as those which ought to obey. How serene and quiet is the mind of
a man where the superior faculties preserve their just authority? How composed
is his temper, how moderate his desires, how well governed his fears! But where
once that authority is lost, how extravagant is the rage of men, how unruly
their lusts, how predominant their fears! What peace had Xerxes in his mind,
when in stead of conquering his foolish passion, he challenged Mount Athos into
the field, and no doubt would have run fast enough if he had seen it moving?
What pleasure was it to see that mighty Monarch whip the Sea in a rage, as
though the Waves had been under his discipline, and would run the faster for
the fear of his rod? What harm had the hair of h^s head done to that man who
pulled it off with the violence of his passion, as though, as the Philosopher
told him, baldness would assuage his grief? Was ever Varus the nearer to
restoring his Legions for Augustus knocking his head against the wall in a rage
about the loss of them? What injury did Neptune suffer, when he displaced his
image in the Circensian games, because he had an ill Voyage at Sea? What height
of madness and folly did that modern Prince's rage betray him to, who, as the
French Moralist says, Montagne. Ess. l. 1. c. 4.
having received a blow from heaven, swear to be revenged on Almighty God, and
for ten years space forbid all public exercise of devotion toward him? I
instance in these things to let us see there is nothing so ridiculous, nothing
so absurd, nothing so irreligious but a violent passion may betray men to. And
if such things ever break forth into actions, what may we conceive the inward
disturbance is, where the outward show (which usually dissembles the inward
passion,) betrayed so much rage and disorder; for where such flames break out,
what combustion may we conceive within? But it is not only this kind of passion
which is so great an enemy to the peace of a man's mind, but when his desires
are restless, and his fears unconquerable; and this is the case of every wicked
man. His lusts inflame him and the means he uses to quench them inrage them
more; his ambition grows greater as his honor does; and there is no hopes of a
cure, where the disease thrives under the remedy; his love of riches is
necessary to maintain his honor and feed his lusts; and where passions so
great, so many, so different, all increase by being gratified, what disturbance
and confusion follows? But supposing that vices in men may agree (as the Devils
in Hell do) to the destruction of men's souls; yet what security can a wicked
man have against the power of his fears? and we all know no passion disquiets
more than that does? And how many sorts of fears possess a sinner's mind? fears
of disappointments, ^ears of discovery, and fears of punishm^nt; but supposing
he could master all the rest, and the fears of punishment as to this life too;
yet the fears of that to come is sufficient to rob him of any peace in his
mind, and impossible to be overcome by him. For no sound reason can be given
against his fears, but the strongest arguments in the world to confirm them.
Nay the greatest grounds of others comforts are the strongest ^oundations for
his fears, as the belief of a God, and Providence, and a life to come: And what
can give that man peace, whom the very thoughts of the God of peace does
disturb so much? That is the first kind of Peace we have showed to be
inconsistent with a course of wickedness, which is the peace and tranquillity
of a man's own mind.

2. Taking this peace for an outward peace, and so these words not in respect
of every person in particular, and that peace which belongs to him as such, but
as they are joined together in community; so they imply that nothing undermines
our civil peace and the prosperity of a nation so much as prevailing wickedness
does. So that although mighty deliverances were given the people of the Jews in
a very st^ange and unexpected manner, when God raised up Cyrus his servant, a
man from whom no kindness was expected, and made him the great instrument of
settling the people in their land under their own lawful Princes, and re^^ored
the true worship of God among them; yet if they grew wanton in the days of
their prosperity, and forgot the God who delivered them, they must expect a
return of Calamities again upon them; for there is no Peace, says my God, to
the wicked, i. e. This is the method of his providence, and the way he uses in
governing the world; while Religion and Virtue flourish among them, they may
hope for peace and prosperity; but if those decay, and sin, and wickedness
prevail, no other arts imaginable will secure a lasting peace, or an abiding
tranquillity. All other ways are but tricks and devices, and there are many of
them in the hearts of men, but the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand against
them all; and that Counsel he has declared himself by the mouth of another
Prophet, Jer. 18.9, 10.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom to
build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then will I repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. Thus we
find it was in this people of the Jews, upon their first return from captivity
they showed some zeal toward the rebuilding the Temple and settling the worship
of God there; but this fit did not hold them long, they soon fell back to their
forme^ sins and disobedience to the Laws of God; upon this they brake out into
greater schisms and factions in matters of Religion than ever were known among
them before; for then the Pharisees fell into a separation under a pretense of
greater sanctity and severity of life, and these by their show of zeal gained a
mighty interest among the people, so great that the Princes stood in awe of
them: then the Sadducees, (who were most part Courtiers, as Josephus tells us)
out of opposition to the other, looked on Religion as a mere political
institution, cried out against faction and popularity, and questioned at least
whether there were any Spirits or life to come. And what peace followed upon
these things? very little among themselves we may be sure by the heats and
animosities that were continually among them; the issue of which was, the
Temple was profaned by Antiochus, rifled by Pompey; their own Princes deposed,
and Usurpers ruled over them; and when the Son of God himself could not reclaim
them, their Temple, Nation, and Government were all involved in one common
ruin. Thus we see how these words of the Prophet were fulfilled upon this
people.

But some have been ready to say that God's proceedings with the Jews ought not
to be drawn into an example to any other nations, because his dealings with
them were peculiar, and by virtue of a particular Covenant which God made with
them, which he has not done with any other nation in the world. This objection
were of great force, if God himself had not in the words before mentioned,
declared the same concerning any other Nation or Kingdom, and if the instances
were not as remarkable in other people as in that of the Jews. If we search the
Monuments of former Ages, and consider the strange revolutions which have
happened in the mighty Empires and Kingdoms of the World; we shall find no one
circumstance more considerable in them than this, That the Nations which God
has made use of for a scourge to others, have been remarkable for nothing so
much, as for the virtues opposite to the most prevailing vices among those who
were overcome by them. Thus when the Chaldean Monarchy fell, the Persians who
were the sword in God's right hand, were eminent for nothing more than their
great temperance and frugality, while the Babylonians perished by their luxury
and effeminacy. And when the Persian Monarchy degenerated into the same vices,
the Macedonians were raised up to be the executioners of God's wrath upon them,
because they were at that time freer than any other people from those softening
and destroying vices. And when the Persian luxury had infected their
Conquerours, the severe Discipline and Virtue of the Romans made them more
successful in subduing the rema^nders of the Groecian Empire, than their
courage and number could. And when the Romans themselves (after a long time of
God's forbearance with them, and several respites from punishment by the virtue
and conduct of such excellent Princes as Antoninus and Alexander Severus in the
Heathen, and Constantine and Theodosius in the Christian Empire) fell into as
great a degeneracy of manners as any we ever read of, then did God let loose
(as it were) the Goths and Vandals and other barbarous Nations out of their
several Dens, who seemed to be designed rather to destroy than to conquer. So
sudden, so numerous, so irresistible in most places were the incur^ions they
made. But what was it which gave them so strange success? was it their long
practice and skill in military affairs? No, they were rude and unexperinced:
was it their mighty courage? No, they were despised by the Romans as great
Cowards, and begged for peace when it was denied them. But as Sal. l. 7. p.
161. etc.
Salvian tells us who lived in those times and knew the manners of both sides,
the Goths and Vandals were of a very severe chastity, among whom fornication
was punished sharply, and adultery a crime scarce heard of; whereas all manner
of uncleanness and licentiousness did abound among the Romans, who yet were
then called Christians. The Goths were devout and pious, acknowledging divine
providence, making their solemn supplications to God before their victories,
and returning him the praise of them afterward; but the Romans were fallen
into that degree of Irreligion and Atheism, that nothing was more common among
them than to droll upon Religion. P. 166.
A nostris omnia ferme religiosa ridentur, as Salvian speaks: they thought all
things managed by chance or fate, and ascribed very little to God. And where
these sins abounded most, they were carried up and down as by a divine
instinct, as they confessed themselves, and where they conquered, P. 168.
as he particularly speaks of the Vandals in Africa, they purged all the stews
of uncleanness, and made so great a reformation by the severity of their Laws,
that even the Romans themselves were chaste among them. Thus we see how those
great and mighty Empires have been broken to pieces by the weight of their
impieties falling upon them.

May the consideration then of these things move us in time to a reformation of
our lives, before our iniquities grow full and ripe for vengeance. We have seen
many revolutions, and God knows how many more we may see; if that should be
true of us, which the same Author says of the Romans in the midst of all their
changes, Sola tantum vitia perdurant, their vices remained the same still.
Thanks be to God, that things have a fairer appearance at present than they
have had, and never so good a time to amend as now: but if men flatter
themselves with present security, and their sins increase as their fears abate,
the clouds which seem dispersed may soon gather again, and the face of the
Heavens will change if we do not.

And if it be not in our power to reclaim others from their sins, let us
endeavor to preserve the honor of our Church by amending our own, and
convince our enemies by living better than they. And give me leave to say, and
so I conclude, that among all the expedients which have been thought of for the
peace of this Church and Nation, that of leaving off our sins, and leading
virtuous and exemplary lives, will at last prove to be the most successful.

SERMON XI.
Preached at WHITE HALL. MARCH 27. 1672.
2 CORINTHIANS. V. 2. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.


IF ever any Religion was in all respects accomplished for so noble a design as
the reformation of mankind, it was the Christian, whether we consider the
Authority of those who first delivered it, or the weight of the arguments
contained in it, and their agreeableness to the most prevailing passions of
humane nature. Although the world was strangely degenerated before the coming
of Christ; yet not to so great a degree, but that there were some who not only
saw the necessity of a cure, but offered their assistance in order to it; whose
attempts proved the more vain and fruitless, because they labored under the
same distempers themselves which they offered to cure in others; or the method
they prescribed was mean and trivial, doubtful and uncertain, or else too nice
and subtle to do any great good upon the world. But Christianity had not only a
mighty advantage by the great holiness of those who preached it; but by the
clearness and evidence, the strength and efficacy of those arguments which they
used to persuade men. The nature of them is such, that none who understand them
can deny them to be great; their clearness such, that none that hear them can
choose but understand them; the manner of recommending them such, as all who
understood themselves could not but desire to hear them. No arguments can be
more proper to mankind than those which work upon their reason and
consideration; no motives can stir up more to the exercise of this than their
own happiness and misery; no happiness and misery can deserve to be so much
considered as that which is eternal. And this eternal state is that which above
all other things the Christian Religion delivers with the greatest plainness,
confirms with the strongest evidence, and enforces upon the consciences of men
with the most powerful and persuasive Rhetoric. I need not go beyond my text
for the proof of this, wherein we see that the Apostles design was to persuade
men, i.e. to convince their judgments, to gain their affections, to reform
their lives; that the argument they used for this end was no less than the
terror of the Lord, not the frowns of the World, nor the fear of Men, nor the
malice of Devils; but the terror of the Almighty, whose Majesty makes even the
Devils tremble, whose Power is irresistible, and whose Wrath is insupportable.
But it is not the terror of the Lord in this world, which he here speaks of,
although that be great enough to make us as miserable as we can be in this
State: but the terror of the Lord which shall appear at the dreadful day of
judgment, of which he speaks in the verse before the text. V. 1^.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. This is the terror here meant which relates to our final and
eternal State in another world, when we must appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, etc. And of this he speaks, not out of Poetical Fables, ancient
Traditions, uncertain Conjectures, or probable Arguments, but from full
assurance of the truth of what he delivers; Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men. In which words we shall consider these particulars.

1. The argument which the Apostle makes choice of to persuade men, which is,
the terror of the Lord.

2. The great assurance he expresses of the truth of it, Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord.

3. The efficacy of it in order to the convincing and reforming mankind;
Knowing therefore, etc. we persuade men.

1. The argument the Apostle makes choice of to persuade men by, viz. the
terror of the Lord. In the Gospel we find a mixture of the highest clemency
and the greatest severity, the richest mercy and the strictest justice, the
most glorious rewards and intolerable punishments; accordingly we find God
therein described as a tender Father, and as a terrible Judge, as a God of
peace, and as a God of vengeance, as an everlasting happiness and a consuming
fire; and the Son of God as coming once with great humility, and again with
Majesty and great glory; once, with all the infirmities of humane nature, and
again with all the demonstrations of a Divine power and presence; once, as the
Son of God to take away the sins of the world by his death and passion; and
again, as Judge of the world with flaming fire to execute vengeance on all
impenitent sinners. The intermixing of these in the doctrine of the Gospel was
necessary in order to the benefit of mankind by it, that such whom the
condescension of his first appearance could not oblige to leave off their sins,
the terror of his second may astonish when they foresee the account that will
be taken of their ingratitude and disobedience; that such who are apt to
despise the meanness of his birth, the poverty of his life, and the shame of
his death, may be filled with horror and amazement when they consider the
Majesty of his second coming in the clouds Jud. v. 15.
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly, not only
of their ungodly deeds, but of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners
have spoken against him. And we shall easily see what great reason there is
that this second coming of Christ to judgment should be called the terror of
the Lord, if we consider, 1. The terror of the preparation for it. 2. The
terror of the appearance in it. 3. The terror of the proceedings upon it. 4.
The terror of the sentence which shall then be passed.


1. The terror of the preparation for it; which is particularly described by
St. Peter in these words, 2 Pet. 3.10.
But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
This day will come as a Thief in the night by way of surprise, when it is not
looked for, and that makes it so much the more dreadful. A lesser calamity
coming suddenly does astonish more, than a far greater which has been long
expected; for, surprisals con^ound men's thoughts, daunt their spirits, and
betray all the succors which reason offers. But when the surprise shall be one
of the least astonishing circumstances of the misery men fall into, what
unconceivable horror will possess their minds at the apprehension of it? what
confusion and amazement may we imagine the soul of that man in, whom our
Savior speaks of in his parable, who being pleased with the fullness of his
condition, Luke 12.19, 20.
said to his soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry: but God said to him, Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be repaired of thee; then whose shall those things be that thou
have provided? Had God only said, This night shall thy barns be burnt, and thy
substance consumed to ashes, which thou have laid up for so many years, that
would have caused a strange consternation in him for the present, but he might
have comforted himself with the hopes of living and getting more. But, this
night shall thy soul be required of thee: O dreadful words! O the tremblings of
body, the anguish of mind, the pangs and convulsions of conscience which such a
one is tormented with at the hearing of them! What sad reflections does he
presently make upon his own folly? And must all the mirth and case I promised
my self for so many years, be at an end now in a very few hours? Nay, must my
mirth be so suddenly turned into bitter howlings, and my ease into a bed of
flames? Must my soul be thus torn away from the things it loved, and go where
it will hate to live and can never die? O miserable creature! to be thus
deceived by my own folly, to be surprised after so many warnings, to betray my
self into everlasting misery? Fear, horror and despair have already taken hold
on me, and are carrying me, where they will never leave me.

These are the Agonies but of one single person whom death snatches away in the
midst of his years, his pleasures and his hopes: but such as these the greatest
part of the world will fall into when that terrible day of the Lord shall come.
Luke 17.26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
For as it was in the days of Noe; so shall it be also in the day of the Son of
Man; they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage,
until the day that Noe entered into the Ark; and the flood came and destroyed
them all: Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank,
they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven and destroyed them
all: Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man is revealed. Chapter
21.35.
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
Earth. If some of these expressions seem to relate to the unexpected coming of
Christ to judgment upon Jerusalem, we are to consider that was not only a
forerunner, but a figure of Christ's coming to judge the World. And that may
be the great reason why our Savior mixeth his discourses of both these so much
together as he does: for not only the judgment upon that nation was a draught,
as it were, in little of the great day, but the symptoms and forerunners of
the one were to bear a proportion with the other: among which the strange
security of that people before their destruction was none of the least. And the
surprise shall be so much the more astonishing when the day of the Lord shall
come upon the whole World, as the terror and consequents of that universal
judgment shall exceed the overthrow of the Jewish Polity.

But supposing men were aware of its approach and prepared for it; the burning
of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, though so frightful a spectacle to the
beholders of it, was but a mean representation of the terror that shall be at
the conflagration of the whole World. When the Heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, or with a mighty force, as some interpret it, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent beat; i. e. when all the fiery bodies in the upper
regions of this World, which have been kept so long in an even and regular
course within their several limits, shall then be let loose again, and by a
more rapid and violent motion shall put the World into confusion and a flame
together. For then the present frame of things shall be dissolved, and the
bounds set to the more subtle and active parts of matter shall be taken away;
which mixing with the more gross and earthy, shall sever them from each other,
and by their whirling and agitation set them all on fire. And if Rev. 6.13.
the Stars falling to the Earth, were to be understood in a literal sense, none
seems so probable as this, That those ethereal fires shall then be scattered
and dispersed throughout the Universe, so that the Earth and all the works that
are therein shall be turned into one funeral Pile. Then the foundations of the
Earth shall be shaken, and all the combustible matter which lies hid in the
bowels of it shall break forth into prodigious flames; which while it rouls up
and down within, making it self a passage out, will cause an universal quaking
in all parts of the Earth, and make the Sea to roar with a mighty noise, which
will either by the violent heat spend it self in vapor and smoke, or be
swallowed up in the hollow places of the deep. Neither are we to imagine that
only the sulphurous matter within the Earth shall by its kindling produce so
general a conflagration, (although some Philosophers of old thought that
sufficient for so great an effect) but as it was in the deluge of water, Genesis
7.11.
the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of Heaven were
opened; so shall it be in this deluge of fire, as one of the ancients calls it,
not only mighty streams and rivers of Fire shall issue out of the bowels of the
earth; but the cataracts above shall discharge such abundance of thunder and
lightning, wherein God will rain down fire and brimstone from Heaven, that
nothing shall be able to withstand the force of it. Then the Craters or
breaches made in the earth by horrible earthquakes, caused by the violent
eruptions of Fire, shall be wide enough to swallow up not only Cities but whole
Countries too: And what shall remain of the spoils of this devouring enemy
within, shall be consumed by the merciless fury of the thunder and lightning
above. What will then become of all the glories of the world which are now so
much admired and courted by foolish men? What will then become of the most
magnificent piles, the most curious structures, the most stately palaces, the
most lasting monuments, the most pleasant gardens, and the most delightful
countries? they shall be all buried in one common heap of ruins, when the
whole face of the earth shall be like the top of mount Aetna, nothing but
rubbish, and stones, and ashes, which, unskilful travelers have at a distance
mistaken for Snow. What will then become of the pride and gallantry of the vain
persons, the large possessions of the great, or the vast treasures of the rich?
the more they have had of these things only, the more fuel they have made for
this destroying fire, which will have no respect to the honors, the greatness,
or the riches of Men. Nay, what will then become of 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
the wicked and ungodly, who have scoffed at all these things, and walked after
their own lusts, saying, Where is this promise of his coming, because all
things yet continue as they were from the beginning of the creation? When this
great day of his wrath is come, how shall they be able to stand or escape his
fury? Will they fly to the tops of the mountains? that were only to stand more
ready to be destroyed from Heaven. Will they hide themselves in the dens and
the rocks of the mountains? but there they fall into the burning furnaces of
the earth; and the mountains may fall upon them, but can never hide them from
the wrath of the Lamb. Will they go down into the deep and convey themselves to
the uttermost parts of the Sea? but even there the storms and tempests of these
shours of fire shall overtake them, and the vengeance of God shall pursue them
to everlasting flames.

Consider now whether so dreadful a preparation for Christ's coming to judgment
be not one great reason why it should be called the terror of the Lord? For
can any thing be imagined more full of horror and amazement than to see the
whole world in a flame about us? We may remember (and I hope we yet do so) when
the flames of one City filled the minds of all the beholders with astonishment
and fear: but what then would it do, not only to see the earth vomit and cast
forth fire every where about us, and the Sea to boil and swell and froth like
water in a seething pot, but to hear nothing but perpetual claps of thunder,
and to see no light in the Heavens, but what the flashings of lightning give?
Could we imagine our selves at a convenient distance to behold the eruption of
a burning mountain, such as Aetna and Vesuvius are, when the Earth about it
trembles and groans, the Sea foams and rages, and the bowels of the Mountain
roar through impatience of casting forth its burden, and at last gives it self
ease by sending up a mixture of flames, and ashes, and smoke, and a flood of
fire, spreading far and destroying wherever it runs; yet even this, though it
be very apt to put men in apprehensions and fears of this great day, falls very
far short of the terror of it. Could we yet farther suppose that at the same
time we could see fire and brimstone raining from Heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah,
the earth opening to devour Corah and his company, Belshazzar trembling at the
handwriting against the wall, and the Jews destroying themselves in the fire
of their Temple and City, this may somewhat higher advance our imaginations of
the horror of the World's conflagration, but yet we cannot reach the greatness
of it: in as much as the Heavens and the Earth which are now, are kept in
store, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.7.
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men;
even those heavens whose beauty, and order, and motion, and influence we now
admire, and that earth whose fruitful womb and richly adorned surface affords
all the conveniences of the life of man, must either be destroyed or at least
purged and refined by this last and dreadful Fire. The expressions of which in
Scripture being so frequent, so particular, so plain in Writers not affecting
the losty Prophetical style, wherein fire is often used only to express the
wrath of God, make it evident, that their meaning is not barely that the world
shall be destroyed by the anger of God, but that this destruction shall be by
real fire, which adds more to the sensible terror of it, to all that shall
behold it.

2. The terror of Christ's appearance in that day. The design of the Scripture
in setting forth the coming of Christ to judgment is to represent it in such a
manner to us as is most apt to strike us with awe and terror at the
apprehension of it. Now the greatest appearance of Majesty among men is, either
when a mighty Prince marches triumphantly in the midst of a Royal Army, with
all the splendour of a Court and the discipline of a Camp, having his greatest
attendants about him, and sending his Officers before him, who with the sound
of Trumpets give notice of his approach, and is everywhere received with the
shouts and acclamations of the people: or else, of a Prince, sitting upon his
Throne of Majesty, set forth with all the Ornaments of State and Greatness,
with all his Nobles and Courtiers standing about his Throne, and in his own
Person calling Malefactors to account; and both these ways the appearance of
Christ upon his second coming is represented to us, first Matthew. 24.25.
as coming in the clouds of Heaven, i. e. riding triumphantly (as it were upon
a Chariot) on a body of light, brighter than the Son, having 2 These. 1.7.
all the Heavenly host attending upon him, and therefore he is said Matthew.
24.31.
to come with power and great glory; and sending his Angels with a great sound
of a trumpet before him; 1 These. 4.16.
after whom the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
vioce of the Archangel and with the trump of God. Not as though we were to
imagine any material trumpet, as some have grossly done, whose sound could
reach over the whole earth; but the sound of the last trumpet seems to be the
same with John 5.25.
the voice of the Son of God, which the dead are said to hear and live; i. e.
it shall be an effectual power for raising the dead, which may be therefore
called the sound of the Trumpet, because it supplies the use of one in calling
all people together, and does more lively represent to our capacities the
Majesty of Christ's appearance with all the Heavenly host of Angels and Saints.
Thus when God appeared upon Mount Sinai with his Holy Angels about him, we
there read Psalm. 68.17.

Exodus 20.18.


of the noise of the trumpet: and when God showed his glorious presence in the
temple, he is said Psalm. 47.5.
to go up with a shout and the Lord with the sound of a trumpet: and when he
sets himself against his enemies, God himself is said Zach. 9.14.
to blow the trumpet, and to go with the whirlwinds of the South. But besides
this, we find Christ upon his second coming described as Matthew. 25 31.

Rev. 20.11.


sitting on the throne of his glory, and all the Holy Angels about him, and all
nations gathered before him to receive their sentence from him. His Throne is
said to be great and white, i. e. most magnificent and glorious, and to make it
the more dreadful; Chap. 4.5.
from it are said to proceed lightnings and thundrings and voices; and so
terrible is the Majesty of him that sits upon the throne Rev. 20.11.
that the Heaven and Earth are said to fly away from his face; but the dead,
small and great, are to stand before him and to be judged according to their
works. And if the appearance of a common Judge be so dreadful to a guilty
prisoner, if the Majesty of an earthly Prince begets an awe and reverence where
there is no fear of punishment, what may we then imagine when Justice and
Majesty both meet in the person of the Judge, and fear and guilt in the
Conscience of Offenders? Therefore it is said, Rev. 1.7.
Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. We find
the best of men in Scripture seized on with a very unusal consternation at any
extraordinary divine appearance: The sight upon Mount Sinai was so terrible
even to Moses Heb. 12.21.
that he did exceedingly fear and quake: the vision which Isaiah had of the
glory of God made him cry out, Isai. 6.5.
Woe is me for I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts:
When Daniel saw his vision, all his strength and vigor was gone, and though an
Angel raised him from the ground, yet he says of himself Dan. 10.8, 11.
that he stood trembling. If these whom God appeared to in a way of kindness
were so possessed with fear, what horror must needs seize upon the minds of the
wicked when 2 These. 1.7, 8.
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire on purpose to
take vengeance upon them? If in the days of his flesh there appeared so much
Majesty in his Countenance, that when the Officers came to apprehend him, John
18.6.
they went backward and fell to the ground; how unconceivably greater must it
be when his de^ign shall be to manifest that Glory to the world which he then
concealed from it? If in the short time of his transfiguration on the Holy
Mount, his own Disciples were so far from being able to behold the glory of his
presence, that Matthew. 17.2.6.

Mark 9.6.


they fell on their faces and were sore afraid; how shall his enemies abide the
day of his wrath, or how can they stand when he shall appear in the full glory
of his Majesty and Power?

3. The terror of the proceedings upon that day: for then we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, not for any ostentation of his greatness
and power before the whole world, but that every one may receive according to
the things done in his body, whether it be good or bad. How full of terror will
the proceedings of that day be, wherein all secrets shall be disclosed, all
actions examined, and all persons judged? That will be Romans 2.5.
the day of the Revelation of the righteous judgment of God; this is the time
of darkness, and therefore of disputes and quarrels; but then the wisdom and
justice of divine providence shall be made manifest to all, For every one shall
receive according to his works: and none will wonder at the sentence when they
have seen the evidence Then the most secret Impurities, the most subtle
Hypocrisy, the most artificial Fraud, and the most dissembled Malice shall be
laid open to public view. For then 1 Cor. 4.5.
God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts. Then all the intrigues of lust and ambition so much
the talk and business of this world, will be nothing but men's shame and
reproach in the next. With what horror will they then behold all the sins of
their lives set in order before them, when they seemed in this life, next to
the committing them, to design as much as may be to forget them? Happy men! if
their Consciences were like their Table-Books, that they could blot out and put
in what they pleased themselves: Then all the black Catalogue of their sins
would be presently expunged, and they would have nothing to be seen there, but
the Characters of what at least seemed to be good. For though men be never so
vicious they neither care that others should think so of them, nor they of
themselves: of all things they do not love to dispute where they cannot answer,
and that is their case in all their reto^ts of Conscience upon them. They know
there is no drolling with so sour a piece, as that within them is, for that
makes the smartest and and most cutting repartees; which are uneasy to bear,
but impossible to answer. Therefore they study their own quiet, by seeking to
keep that silent; and since they never hope to make Conscience dumb, they would
have it sleep as much as may be: and although the starts it sometimes makes,
show that the most sleepy sinners have some troublesome dreams, yet if it does
not thoroughly awake in this world, it will do it with a vengeance in another.
Then there will be no Music and Dancing which can cure the b^ting of this
Tarantula within; no Opium or stupidity or Atheism will be able to give one
minutes rest. How will men then curse themselves for their own f^lly in being
so easily tempted; and all those who laid traps and snares to betray them by?
what different apprehensions of sin will they have then, from what they have
now, while they are beset with ^^mptations to it? O, will a forsaken sinner
then say, had I ever believed as I ought to have done, that this would have
been the fruit of a sinful life, I should have taken more care to prevent this
misery than I have done! but O the folly of intemperance, the mischief of
ambition, the rage of lust, the unsatiableness of covetousness, the madness of
debauchery, and the dullness of Atheism, what have ye now brought me to, with
all your pleasures and promises and flatteries while I lost my soul in your
service! O that I had time to grow wise again; and once more to try whether I
could withstand the cheats and witchcraft of a deceitful world! Now all my sins
are as fresh before me, as if committed yesterday, and their burden is heavier
than the weight of mountains however l^ght I made of them then; I need no judge
to condemn me but mine own Conscience; O that I could as easily see an end of
my misery, as I do that I have deserved that there should be none. Thus shall
the Book of Conscience be opened at that day in the heart of every impenitent
sinner, wherein like Ezekiels roll he finds written within and without, Ezekiel.
2.10.
Lamentation and Mourning and Woe. Yet this will not be the only terror in the
proceedings o^ that day, that all the sins that ever wicked men comm^tted will
be set in order before them with their several circumstances and aggravations,
although the remembrance of them cannot be without extreme horror and
amazement, but that they must undergo a strict and severe examination of all
their actions by a most powerful, holy and just Judge. And if it be so
troublesome a thing to them in this world to go down into themselves, or to
call to remembrance their own wicked actions which they have loved and
delight^d in; what will it be when they must all be brought forth before the
judgment seat of Christ who hates and abhors them? If men can so hardly endure
to have the deformity of their vices represented to them though very
imperfectly here, how will they bear the dissecting and laying them open in the
view of the whole world? When the smallest fibers and the most subtle threads
in our hearts shall be curiously examined, and the influence they have had upon
our actions fully discovered. When sins that have been despised for their
littleness, or unregarded ^or their frequency, or laughed at as no sins at all,
shall appear to have had a greater venom in them, than men would imagine. What
shall they think then of their great and presumptuous sins; whereby they have
not only offered viol^nce to God and his Laws, but to the dictates of their own
Consciences in committ^^g them? Never think that leng^h of time will abate the
severity of the enquiry, or lessen the displeasure of God against thee for
them. Remember the case of Amalek, how God dealt with that people in this world
for a sin committed 400 years before, and then think whether God be not in
earnest, when he tells us how much he hates sin; and how severe he will be in
the punishment of it? I remember, says God, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3.
what Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came
up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, etc.
What? a whole nation to be destroyed for one sin, and for a sin they thought to
be none at all who committed it, and for a sin at so great a distance of time
from the commission of it? But I forbear. I know not whether there be such
another instance of God's severity in Scripture, but it is such as may justly
make us cry out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 103.3.
If thou Lord should thus mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But
although God in this world so seldom shows his severity, and tempers it with so
much kindness, we have no reason to expect he should do so in another. For here
he has declared that James 2.13.
mercy rejoices against judgment. This being the time Romans 2.4.

2 Pet. 3.9.


of Gods patience and forbearance and goodness toward sinners being not
willing that any should ^erish but that all should come to repentance; but if
men will despise the riches of his goodness, if they will still abuse his
patience, if they will trample under ^oot the means of their own salvation,
then they shall to their unspeakable sorrow find, that there is a day of wrath
to come, wherein their own dreadful experience will tell them, Heb. 10.31.
That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. For that
will be a day of justice without mercy, a day of vengeance without pity, a day
of execution without any further patience. Th^n no vain excuses will be taken,
whereby men seek to palliate their sins and give ease to their minds now. It
will be to no purpose to charge thy wilful sins upon ^he infirmity of thy
nature, the power of temptation, the subtilty of the Dev^l, the allurement of
company, the common practice of the world, the corruption of the age, the
badness of education, the folly of youth; all these and such like excuses will
be too weak to be made then, when it shall appear to thy eternal confusion,
that thy own vicious inclination swayed thee beyond them all. Then there will
be as little place for entreaties, as for vain excuses; God shows his great
pity and indulgence to mankind now, that he is so ready to hear the prayers and
grant the desires of all penitent sinners, but for those who stop their ears to
all his instructions, and will not hearken to the reproofs of his word or the
rebukes of their own consciences, but contemn all sober Counsels and scoff at
Religion; what can they expect from him, but that Prove. 1.25, 26, 27.
when they shall call upon him he will not answer, and when they seek him
earnestly they shall not find him; b^t he will laugh at their calamity and mock
when their fear comes. O blessed Jesus! did thou weep over an incorrigible
people in the days of thy flesh, Luke 19.41.
and will thou laugh at their miseries when thou come to judge the world?
did thou shed thy precious blood to save them, and will thou mock at their
destruction? did thou woo and entreat and beseech sinners to be reconciled,
and will thou not hear them when in the anguish of their souls, they cry unto
thee? See then the mighty difference between Christ's coming as a Savior and
as a Judge, between the day of our salvation and the day of his wrath, between
the joy in Heaven at the conversion of penitent sinners, and at the confusion
of the impenitent and unreclaimable. How terrible is the representation of Gods
wrath in the style of the Prophets, when he punishes a people in this world
for their sins? It is called, Isa. 13.9, 34, 9.
the day of the Lord, cruel with wrath and fierce anger: the day of the Lord's
vengeance. Mal. 4.5.

Joel. 2.31.


The great and dreadful day of the Lord. If it were thus, when his wrath was
kindled but a little, when mercy was mixed with his severity, what will it be,
when he shall stir up all his wrath, and the heavens and the earth shall shake
that never did offend him? what shall they then do that shall to their sorrow
know how much they have displeased him? Then neither power, nor wit, nor
eloquence, nor craft shall stand men in any stead; for the great Judge of that
day can neither be overawed by power, nor overreached by wit, nor moved by
eloquence, nor betrayed by craft, but every man shall receive according to his
deeds. The mighty disturbers of mankind, who have been called Conquerours,
shall not then be attended with their great armies, but must stand alone to
receive their sentence: the greatest wits of the world will then find that a
sincere honest heart will avail them more than the deepest reach or the
greatest subtilty; the most eloquent persons without true goodness will be like
the man in the parable without the wedding garment, Matt. 22.12.
speechless; the most crafty and politic, will then see, that though they may
deceive men and themselves too, yet God will not be mocked, for whatsoever a
man sows, that shall he reap; and they who have spread snares for others and
been hugely pleased to see them caught by them, shall then be convinced that
they have laid the greatest of all for themselves; for Psalm. 9.16, 17.
God will then be fully known by the judgment which he shall execute, and the
wicked shall be snared in the work of their own hands: for, the wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God.

4. The terror of the sentence, which shall then be passed. That the Judge
himself has told us before hand what it shall be, to make us more apprehensive
of it in this State, wherein we are capable to prevent it by sincere repentance
and a holy li^e. The tenor of it is expressed in those dreadful words, Matt.
25.
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. It is impossible to conceive words fuller of horror and amazement than
those are, to such as du^y consider the importance of them. It is true indeed,
wicked men in this world are so little apprehensive of the misery of departing
from God, that they are ready to bid God depart from them, and place no mean
part of their felicity in keeping themselves at a distance from him. The true
reason of which is, that while they pursue their lusts, the th^ughts of God are
disquieting to them; as no man that robs his neighbor loves to think of the
Judge while he does it, not as though his condition were securer by it, but
when men are not wise enough to prevent a danger, they are so great fools to
count it their wisdom not to think of it. But therein lies a great part of the
misery of another world, that men shall not be able to cheat and abuse
themselves with false notions, and shows of happiness. The clouds they have
embraced for Deities shall then vanish into smoke; all the satisfaction they
ever imagined in their lusts shall be wholly gone, and nothing but the sad
remembrance of them, left behind to torment them. All the Philosophy in the
world will never make men understand their true happiness so much, as one hours
experience of another State will do: all men shall know better, but some shall
be more happy and others more miserable by it. The righteous shall not only see
God, but know what the seeing of God means, and that the greatest happiness we
are capable of is employed therein; and the wicked shall not only be bid to
depart from him, but shall then find that the highest misery imaginable is
comprehended in it. It is a great instance of the weakness of our capacities
here, that our discourses concerning the happiness and misery of a future life,
are like those of Children about affairs of State, which they represent to
themselves in a way agreeable to their own Childish fancies; thence the
Poetical dreams of Elysian fields, and turning wheels, and rouling stones, and
such like imaginations. Nay, the Scripture it self sets forth the joys and
torments of another world in a way more suited to our fancy than our
understanding; thence we read of sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to
represent the happiness of that State, and of a gnawing worm, and a devouring
fire and blackness of darkness to set forth the misery of it. But as the
happiness of H^aven does infinitely exceed the most lofty metaphors of
Scripture, so does the misery of Hell the most dreadful representation that can
be made of it. Although a worm gnawing our entrails, and a fire consuming our
outward parts be very sensible and moving metaphors, yet they cannot fully
express the anguish and torment of the soul, which must be so much greater, as
it is more active and sensible, than our bodies can be. Take a man that
afflicts himself under the sense of some intolerable disgrace, or calamity
befallen him; or that is oppressed with the guilt of some horrid wickedness, or
sunk into the depth of despair; the Agonies and Torments of his Mind may make
us apprehend the nature of that misery, although he falls short of the degrees
of it. And were this misery to be of no long continuance, yet the terror of it
must needs be great; but when the worm shall never dye, and the fire shall
never be quenched, when insupportable misery shall be everlasting, nothing can
then be added to the terror of it: and this is as plainly contained in the
sentence of wicked men, as any thing else is. But here men think they may
justly plead with God and talk with him of his judgments; what proportion, say
they, is there between the sins of this short life and the eternal misery of
another? which objection is not so great in it self as it appears to be by the
weak answers, which have been made to it; When to assign a proportion, they
have made a strange kind of infinity in sin, either from the object, which
unavoidably makes all sins equal, or from the wish of a sinner that he might
have an eternity to sin in, which is to make the justice of God's punishments
to be not according to their works, but to their wishes; But we need not strain
things so much beyond what they will bear to vindicate God's Justice in this
matter. Is it not thought just and reasonable among men, for a man to be
confined to perpetual imprisonment for a fault he was not half an hour in
committing? Nay do not all the Laws of the world make death the punishment of
some crimes, which may be very suddenly done? And what is death, but the
eternal depriving a man of all the comforts of life? And shall a thing then so
constantly practiced and universally justified in the world, be thought
unreasonale when it is applied to God? It is true, may some say, if
annihilation were all that was meant by eternal death, there could be no
exception against it: but I ask, whether it would be unjust for the Laws of men
to take away the lives of offenders in case their souls survive their bodies,
and they be for ever sensible of the loss of life? if not, why shall not God
pres^rve the honor of his Laws, and vindicate his Authority in governing the
world, by ^entencing obstinate sinners to the greatest misery, though their
souls live for ever in the appre^ension of it? Especially since God has
declared these things so evidently beforehand, and made them part of his Laws,
and set everlasting life on the other side to balance everlasting misery, and
proposed them to a sinner's choice in such a manner, that nothing but contempt
of God and his Grace, and wil^ul impenitency can ever betray men into this
dreadful State of eternal destruction.

2. Thus much for the Argument used by the Apostle, the terror of the Lord; I
now come to the assurance he expresses of the truth of it; Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord we persuade men. We have two ways of proving Articles
of Faith, such as this concerning Christ's coming to judgment is;

1. By showing, that there is nothing unreasonable in the belief of them.

2. That there is sufficient evidence of the truth and certainty of them.

In the former of these it is of excellent use to produce the common
apprehensions of mankind as to a future judgment, and the several arguments
insisted on to that purpose; for if this were an unreasonable thing to believe,
how come men without Revelation to agree about it as a thing very just and
reasonable? If the conflagration of the world were an impossible thing, how
came it to be so anciently received by the eldest and wisest Philosophers? How
came it to be maintained by those two Sects which were St. Paul's enemies, when
he preached at Athens, and always enemies to each other, the Act. 17.18.
Epicureans and the Stoics? It is true they made these conflagrations to be
periodical and not final: but we do not establish the belief of our doctrine
upon their assertion, but from thence show that is a most unreasonable thing to
reject that as impossible to be done, which they assert has been and may be
often done. But for the truth and certainty of our doctrine, we build that upon
no less a foundation than the word of God himself. We may think a judgment to
come reasonable in general upon the consideration of the goodness and wisdom
and justice of God; but all that depends upon this supposition, that God does
govern the world by Laws and not by Power, but since God himself has declared
it who is the Supreme Judge of the world, Eccles. 12.14.
that he will bring every work into judgment whether it be good or evil, since
the Son of God made this so great a part of his doctrine with all the
circumstances of his own coming for again this end; since he opened the
commission he received from the Father for this purpose when he was upon earth,
by declaring, that John 5.22, 28, 29.
the Father had committed all judgment to the Son, and that the hour is coming
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth,
they that have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Since this was so great a part of the
Apostles doctrine to preach of this judgment to come, and Act. 17.31.
that God has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance to all men in that he has raised him from the dead: No wonder the
Apostle speaks here with so great assurance of it, knowing therefore, etc. And
no persons can have the least ground to question it, but such who wholly reject
the Christian doctrine, upon the pretenses of infidelity, which are so vain and
trifling, that, were not their lusts stronge^ than their arguments men of wit
would be ashamed to produce them; and did not men's pas^ions oversway their
judgments it would be too much honor to them to confute them. But every Sermon
is not intended for the conversion of Turks and Infidels, my design is to speak
to those who acknowledge themselves to be Christians and to believe the truth
of this doctrine upon the Authority of those divine persons who were
particularly sent by God to reveal it to the world. And so I come to the last
particular by way of application of the former, viz.

3. The efficacy of this argument for the persuading men to a reformation of
heart and life; knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men. For as another
Apostle reasons from the same argument, 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought we to
be in all holy conversation and godliness? There is great variety of arguments
in the Christian Religion to persuade men to holiness, but none more sensible
and moving to the generality of mankind than this. Especially considering these
two things;

1. That if this argument does not persuade men, there is no reason to expect
any other should.

2. That the condition of such persons is desperate, who cannot by any
arguments be persuaded to leave off their sins.

1. There is no reason to expect any other argument should persuade men if this
of the terror of the Lord do it not. If an almighty power cannot awaken us, if
infinite justice cannot affright us, if a judgment to come cannot make us
tremble, and eternal misery leave no impression upon us, what other arguments
or methods can we imagine would reclaim us from our sins? We have been too sad
an instance our selves, of the ineffectualness of other means of amendment by
the mercies and judgments of this present life: have ever any people had a
greater mixture of both these, than we have had in the compass of a few years?
If the wisest persons in the world had been to have set down beforehand the
method of reforming a sinful nation, they c^uld have pitched upon none more
effectual than what we have showed not to be so. Fir^^, they would have
imagined, that after enduring many miseries and hardships, when they were
almost quite sunk under despair, if God should give them a sudden and
unexpected deliverance, mere ingenuity and thankfulness would make them afraid
to displease a God of so much kindness. But if so great a flash of joy and
prosperity instead of that should make them grow wanton and extravagant, what
course then so likely to reclaim them, as a series of smart and severe
judgments one upon another, which might sufficiently warn yet not totally
destroy. These we have had experience of, and of worse than all these, viz.
that we are not amended by them. For are the Laws of God less broken, or the
duties of Religion less contemned and despised after all these? What vices have
been forsaken, what lusts have men been reclaimed from, nay what one sort of
sin has been less in fashion than before? Nay, have not their number as well
as their aggravation, increased among us? Is our zeal for our established
Religion greater? Is our faith more firm and settled, our devotion more
constant, our Church less in danger of either of the opposite factions than
ever it was? Nay is it not rather like a neck of land between two rough and
boisterous seas, which rise and swell, and by the breaches they make in upon
us, threaten an inundation? By all which we see what necessity there is that
God should govern this world by the considerations of another; that when
neither judgments nor mercies can make men better in this life; judgment
without mercy should be their portion in another. O the infatuating power of
^in! when neither the pity of an indulgent Father, nor the frowns of a severe
Judge can draw us from it: when neither the bitter passion of the Son of God
for our sins, nor his threatening to come again to take vengeance upon us for
them, can make us hate and abhor them: when neither the shame nor contempt, the
diseases and reproaches which follow sin in this world, nor the intolerable
anguish and misery of another can make men sensible of the folly of them so as
to forsake them. Could we but represent to our minds that State wherein we must
all shortly be, when the bustle and hurry, the pleasures and diversions, the
courtships and entertainments of this world shall be quite at an end with us,
and every one must give an account of himself to God; what another opinion of
these things should we have in our minds, with what abhorrency should we look
upon every temptation to sin, how should we loath the sight of those who either
betrayed us into sin or flattered us when we had committed it? Could men but
ask themselves that reasonable question, why they will defy God by violating
his known Laws, unless they be sure he either cannot or will not punish them
for it? they would be more afraid of doing it than they are, for supposing
both, to do it, is perfect madness: to question his power who is Almighty, or
his will who has declared it and is immutable is the height of folly.

2. The condition of such is desperate whom no arguments can persuade to leave
their sins. For there can be no breaking prison in that other State, no
escaping trial, no corrupting the Judge, no reversing the sentence, no pardon
after judgment, no reprieve from punishment, no abatement or end of misery. How
can thou then hope, O impenitent sinner, either to fly from or to endure that
wrath of God that is coming swiftly upon thee to arrest thee by death, and
convey thee to thy tormenting prison? can thou hope, that God will discharge
thee before that dreadful day comes, when he has confined thee thither in
order to it? Can thou hope that day will never come which the vindication of
God's Justice, the honor of Christ, the happiness of the blessed, as well as
the punishment of the wicked make so necessary that it should come? or can
thou hope to defend thy self against an all-seeing eye, a most righteous Judge
and an accusing conscience when that day does come? when all the mercies thou
have abused, the judgments thou have slighted, the motions of grace thou have
resisted, the checks of conscience thou have stifled, and the sins of all kinds
thou have committed, shall rise up in judgment to condemn thee? O that we had
all the wisdom to consider of these things in time, that the terror of the Lord
may persuade us to break off all our sins by a sincere repentance, and to l^ve
so that we may dye with comfort, and be for ever with the Lord in his eternal
Joy.

SERMON XII.
Preached at WHITE HALL. FEBRUARY 18 th. 1672.
Matthew XVI. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world
and lose his ^wn soul? or what shall he give in exchange for his soul?


IF we look into the twenty fourth verse of this Chapter we shall find our
Savior there laying down such hard conditions of men's being his Disciples, as
were, to all appearance, more likely to have driven away those which he had
already, than to have drawn any others after him: For he requires no less than
the greatest readiness to suffer for his sake, and that to no meaner a degree
than the loss of what is most precious to men in this world, in their lives;
which is employed in those words; If any man will come after me let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me: If our Savior had only designed
to have made himself great by the number of his followers, if he had intended a
Kingdom in this world, as the Jews imagined, he would have made more easy
conditions of being his Disciples; He would have chosen another way to have
attained his end, and made use of more pleasing and popular arguments to have
persuaded the people to follow him. When the Eastern Impostor afterward began
to set up for a new Religion he took a method as contrary to our Saviors as
his Religion and design was: he knew the Greatness and Honor, the pleasure,
and the pomp of this world, were the things most passionately loved and admired
by the generality of mankind; and therefore he fitted his Religion to the
natural inclinations of men, and proposed such means of advancing it as were
most like to make men great by undertaking them. And men are never so willing
to be cheated by any Religion, as that which complies with their present
interests and gratifies their sensual inclinations. In this case there need not
many arguments to court persons to embrace that which they were so strongly
inclined to before; and the very name of Religion does them great service when
it allows what they most desire, and makes them sin with a quiet Conscience.

But that is the peculiar honor of Christianity, that as it can never be
suspected to be a design for this world, so it has risen and spread it self by
ways directly contrary to the Splendour and Greatness of it: For it overcame by
sufferings, increased by persecutions, and prevailed in the world by the
patience and self-denial of its followers. He that was the first Preacher of
it, was the greatest example of suffering himself; and he bids his Disciples
not to think much of following their Lord and Savior though it were to take up
the Cross and lay down their lives for his sake. We may easily imagine how much
startled and surprised his Disciples were at such discourses as these, who
being possessed with the common opinion of the temporal Kingdom of the Messiah,
came to him with great expectations of honor and advancement by him; and no
less would content some of them, than being his highest Favorites and
Ministers of State, sitting at his right hand, and at his left hand in his
Kingdom: they had already in their imaginaons shared the preferments and
dignities of his Kingdom among themselves; and were often contending about
pre-eminence, who should be the greatest among them. Insomuch, that when Christ
now, the time of his suffering approaching, began more plainly to discourse to
them of his own sufferings at Jerusalem, v. 21. St. Peter, either out of his
natural forwardness and heat, or being elevated by the good opinion which our
Lord had expressed of him before, v. 17. takes upon him very solemnly to rebuke
him for ever thinking to submit himself to so mean a condition; Be it far from
thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee, v. 22. upon which, Jesus not only
reproves Peter with great smartness and severity, as savouring more of the pomp
and ease of the world, than of the nature and design of his Kingdom; v. 23. but
takes this occasion to tell his Disciples, that they must no longer dream of
the Glories and Splendour of this world, nor entertain themselves with vain
Fancies of the Pleasures and contentments of this life; but if they would show
themselves to be truly his Disciples they must prepare for Persecutions and
Martyrdoms, they must value their Religion above their lives; for the time was
now coming on, they must part with one or the other; and if they were not
prepared beforehand by self-denial and taking up the Cross, they would run
great hazard of losing their souls for the love of this world: and therefore
our Savior shows,

1. The great advantage that would accrue to them, if they were willing to
suffer for his sake. Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it, v.
25. i. e. instead of this short and uncertain life, which would spend it self
in a little time, he should have one infinitely more valuable; and therefore no
exchange could be better made, than that of laying down such a life as this for
one of eternal Happiness and Glory; for so our Savior elsewhere explains it,
He that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal, St.
Joh. 12.25.

2. The great folly of losing this eternal state of happiness for the
preservation of this present life, or the enjoyment of the things of this
world: which he first lays down a certain truth, v. 25. For whosoever shall
save his life shall lose it, and then discovers the folly of it in the words of
the text, by comparing such a man's gain and his loss together, supposing he
should obtain the utmost that can be hoped for in this world. For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall
a man give in exchange for his soul?

Wherein we may consider these three particulars;

1. The possibility supposed of losing the soul; though a man should gain the
whole world.

2. The hazard implied of the loss of the soul for the sake of the gain of the
world.

3. The folly expressed of losing the soul, though it be for the gain of the
whole world.

1. The possibility supposed of the loss of the soul in another world; For the
force of our Saviors argument depends wholly on the supposition of the
certainty of the souls Being in another state; and its capacity of happiness or
misery therein. For, setting that aside there can be no argument strong enough
to persuade any man to part not only with what he has or hopes for in this
life, but with life it self. He that is so great a Fool to be an Atheist, would
yet be much more so to be a Martyr for his opinion. What is there could
recompense the loss of life, to a man that believes that there is nothing after
it? But supposing there should be a life to come, as it is impossible to give
any demonstration to the contrary, what madness would it be, for a man to run
himself into the miseries of another world with a design to prove there is
none? If all that our Savior had meant, were only to represent the folly of a
person, that would lay down his life for the purchase of an estate, (for so the
soul is often taken for the life) that would not have reached the scope and
design of his discourse. And no instances can be produced of such a kind of
folly, which would be as great as for a man to lose his head for a wager, or to
purchase the lease of his life by destroying himself. But supposing this to be
a Proverbial speech, yet the folly of losing a man's life for the gain of the
whole world is not brought in by our Savior merely for it self: but as it does
much more represent the unspeakable folly of such who for the love of this
world will venture the loss of all eternal life, and enduring all the misery
which is consequent upon it. If that man would gain nothing by his bargain but
the reputation of a Fool, that for the possession of the whole world for one
momen, would be content to be killed in the next; how much greater folly are
they guilty of, that for the sake of this world and the preservation of their
lives here, expose themselves to all the miseries of another life, which God
has threatened or their souls can undergo? It is such a loss of the soul which
is here spoken of, as is consistent with the preservation of this present life;
for whosoever, says Christ, will save his life shall lose it; and to those
words before, those of the text have a particular reference, and therefore must
be understood not of losing this life, but of the loss of the Soul in a future
state.

And this loss cannot be understood of the souls annhilation or ceasing to be,
as soon as the life is gone; for that being supposed, he would be the happiest
man that had the most of this world at his command and enjoyed the greatest
pleasure in it. So St. Paul himself determines, that if there were no future
state, the Epicureans argument would take place, 1 Cor. 15.^2.
Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die: and he reckons those among the most
miserable of all mankind who ventured the loss of all that is accounted
desirable in this world and of their lives too, if there were not a better life
to come. 1 Cor. 15.19.
For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, says he, we are of all men
the most miserable. So that the strength of our Savior's discourse depends
upon the supposition of the immortality of the soul, and its capacity of being
happy or miserable in a future state.

And it is the great commendation of the Christian Religion, that the
particular duties required in it are established on the same Foundations that
natural Religion is, which are the belief of a Deity and the immortality of the
Soul. Heb. 11.6.
For he that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him; which being spoken with a respect to one who for being
good was translated out of this world, must refer to the rewards of a future
life. And we desire no more than these common principles of Religion to make
the most difficul^ duties of Christianity appear reasonable to mankind. For it
is upon the account of this future state of the soul, that it is our most just
and necessary care to look after the welfare of our souls in the first place,
to seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, before the
concernments of this present life, because a state that endures for ever ought
to be preferred before a short and uncertain abode in this world. It is this,
which makes it reasonable to please God, though to the displeasing our selves
and the crossing our natural inclinations; because eternal happiness and misery
depends upon his favor or displeasure. It is this, which obliges men to the
greatest care of their actions, because their future state in another world,
will be according to their lives here, for every man shall then receive
according to his works. It is this, which ought to keep men from all fleshly
lusts, not merely because they are inconvenient for their bodies, but because
they war against their souls. It is this, which makes the love of this world so
dangerous a thing, because it draws away the hearts and affections of men from
things which are above and fixes them upon things below. It is this, which make
it necessary for us to subdue our passions, to conquer temptations, to forgive
injuries, to be patient under afflictions, and to lay down our lives for
Religion, because there will be a reward for the righteous, and the happiness
of another state will make abundant recompense for all the difficulties of this.

So that in the Gospel the doctrine of the souls immortality is not spoken of
as the nice speculation of subtle and contemplative men; nor merely suposed as
a foundation of all Religion, but it is interwoven in the substance of it, and
adds strength to all its parts. For herein we find the immortality of the soul
not barely asserted, nor proved by uncertain arguments, nor depending on the
opinion of Philosophers; but delivered with the greatest authority, revealed
with the clearest light, and confirmed by the strongest evidence. If any one
can make known to mankind the state of souls in another world it must be God
himself; if ever it was made known plainly by him it must be in the Gospel,
whereby 2 Timothy 1.10.
life and immortality are brought to light; if ever any arguments were proper
to convince mankind of it, they are such as are contained therein. For it is
not barely the resurrection of our Lord, which is a manifest evidence of the
truth of the souls subsisting a^^er a real death; but the whole design of his
doctrine and the Christian Religion is built upon it. So that if we suppose the
immortality of the soul the Christian Religion appears more reasonable by it;
but if we suppose the doctrine of Christ to be true there can be no doubt left
of the immortality of the soul; and whatever arguments we have to prove the
truth of this doctrine by, the same do of necessity prove the certainty of the
souls immortality.

I confess many subtle arguments have been used by those who never knew any
thing of divine revelation to prove the soul to be of such a nature, that it
was not capable of dying with the body; and some of them such as none of their
Adversaries were ever able to answer. For the most common acts of sense are
unaccountable in a mere Mechanical way; and after all the attempts of the most
witty and industrious men I despair of ever seeing the powers of mere matter
raised to a capacity of performing the lowest acts of perception; and much more
of those nobler faculties of memory, understanding and will. But although the
arguments from hence are sufficient to justify the belief of the souls
immortality to all considering men; yet the far greatest part of mankind was
never so; and a matter of so great consequence as this is, ought to be proposed
in the most plain, most certain, and most effectual manner.

While these disputes were managed among the Philosophers of old, though those
who asserted the immortality of the soul had the better reason of their side;
yet their Adversaries spoke with greater confidence; and that always bears the
greatest sway among injudicious people. And some men are always fond of a
reputation for wit by opposing common opinions though never so true and useful:
especially when they serve a bad end in it, and do thereby plead for their own
impieties. But it cannot be denied, that those who were in the right did
likewise give too great advantage to their enemies, partly by their own
diffidence and distrust of what they had contended for, partly from the too
great niceness and subtilty of their arguments, partly from the ridiculous
fopperies which they maintained together with that of the souls immortality, as
the transmigration of them into the bodies of Brutes and such like. But the
main disadvantage of all to the world was, that the immortality of the soul was
rather insisted on as a Principle of Philosophy than of Religion. Some of the
best of their arguments were such as made the souls of Brutes immortal as well
as those of men; and those could not be imagined to have any great force on the
lives of men, which would equally hold for such creatures which were not
capable of rewards and punishments in another life. But therein lies the great
excellency of the doctrine of the souls immortality as it is discovered in the
Gospel, not only that it comes from him who best understands the nature of
souls, but is delivered in such a manner as is most effectual for the
reformation of mankind. For the fullest account herein given of it is by the
rewards and punishments of another life; and those not Poetically described by
Fictions and Romances; but delivered with the plainness of truth, the gravity
of a Law, the severity of a Judge, the authority of a Lawgiver, the Majesty of
a Prince, and the wisdom of a Deity. Wherein the happiness described is such as
the most excellent minds think it most desirable; and the misery so great as
all that consider it, must think it most intolerable. And both these are set
forth with so close a respect to the actions of this life, that every one must
expect in another world, according to what he does in this.

How is it then possible that the doctrine of the souls being in another state,
could be recommended with greater advantage to mankind, than it is in the
Gospel? and what is there can be imagined to take off the force of this, but
the proving an absolute incapacity in the soul of subsisting after death? It is
true, indeed in the state of this intimate union and conjunction between the
soul and body, they do suffer mutually from each other. But if the souls
suffering on the account of the body, as in diseases of the brain, be
sufficient to prove there is no soul; why may not the bodies suffering on the
account of the soul, as in violent passions of the mind, as well prove that
there is no body? It is not enough then to prove that the soul does in some
things suffer from the body; (for so does the Child in the Mothers womb from
the distempers of its Mother, yet very capable of living when separated from
her) but it must be showed that the soul is not distinct from the body to prove
it incapable of being without it.

But on the other side, I shall now show that there is nothing unreasonable in
what the Scripture delivers concerning the immortal state of the Souls of men*
as to future rewards and punishments, because there are those things now in
them considered as distinct from their bodies, which make them capable of
either of them. And those are,

1. That they are capable of pleasure and pain distinct from the body.

2. That they have power of determining their own actions.

1. That the souls of men are capable of pleasure and pain distinct from the
pleasure and pain of the body. Wherever pleasure and pain may be, there must
be a capacity of rewards and punishments, for a reward is nothing but the
heightning of pleasure, and punishment an increase of pain; And if there be
both these in men of which no account can be given from their bodies, there
must be a nobler principle within, which we call the Soul, which is both the
cause and the subject of them. We may as easily imagine that a Fox should leave
his prey to find out a demon^tration in Euclid, or a Serpent attempt the
squaring of the circle in the dust, or all the Fables of Aesop to become real
His^ories, and the Birds and Beasts turn Wits and Politicians, as be able to
give an account of those we call pleasures of the mind from the affections of
the body. The transport of joy which Archimedes was in at the finding out his
desired Problem, was a more certain evidence of the real pleasures of the mind,
than the finding it was of the greatness of his wit. Could we ever think that
men who understood themselves would spend so much time in lines, and numbers,
and figures, and examining Problems and Demonstrations which depend upon them,
if they found not a great delight and satisfaction in the doing of it? But
whence does this pleasure arise? not from seeing the figures, or mere drawing
the lines, or calculating the numbers, but by deducing the just and necessary
consequences of one thing from another; which would afford no more pleasure to
a man without his soul, than a Book of Geometry would give to a Herd of Swine.
It is the Soul alone which takes pleasure in the search and finding out such
Truths, which can have no kind of respect to the Body; it is that, which can
put the Body out of order with its own pleasures, by spending so much time in
contemplation as may exhaust the Spirits, abate the vigor of the Body and
hasten its decay. And while that droops and sinks under the burden, the Soul
may be as vigorous and active in such a consumptive state of the Body as ever
it was before; the understanding as clear, the memory as strong, the
entertainments of the mind as great, as if the Body were in perfect health. It
is a greater and more manly pleasure, which some Men take in searching into the
nature of these things in the world than others can take in the most voluptuous
enjoyment of them; the one can only satisfy a brutish appetite, while, it may
be, something within is very unquiet and troublesome; but the other brings a
solid pleasure to the mind without any regret or disturbance from the Body. By
this we see, that setting aside the consideration of Religion, the mind of man
is capable of such pleasures ^eculiar to it self, of which no account could be
given, if there were not a spiritual and therefore immortal Being within us,
not only distinct from the body, but very far above it. But the very capacity
of Religion in mankind does yet further evidence the truth of it. I would fain
understand how men ever came to be abused with the notion of Religion, as some
men are willing to think they are, if there were not some faculties in them
above those of sense and imagination? For where we find nothing else but these,
we see an utter incapacity of any such thing as Religion is; in some brute
creatures we find great subtilty and strange imitations of reason; but we can
find nothing like Religion among them. How should it come to be otherwise among
men, if imagination were the highest faculty in man; since the main principles
of Religion are as remote from the power of imagination as may be? What can be
thought more repugnant to all the conceptions we take in by our senses, than
the conception of a Deity and the future State of Souls is? How then come the
impressions of these things to sink so deep into humane nature, that all the
art and violence in the world can never take them out? The strongest
impressions upon all other Beings are such as are suitable to their natures,
how come those in mankind to be such as must be supposed to be not only above
but contrary to them if an immortal soul be not granted? If men had no
principle within them beyond that of sense, nothing would have been more easy,
than to have shaken off the notion of a Deity and all apprehension of a future
State: But this has been so far from easy, that it is a thing utterly
impossible to be done: all the wit and arts, all the malice and cruelty, all
the racks and torments that could yet be thought on could not alter men's
persuasions of the Christian Religion, much less raze out the Foundations of
Natural Religion in the world. But what imaginable account can be given of the
joys and pleasures, which the Martyrs of old expressed under the most exquisite
torments of their bodies; if their minds were not of a far nobler and diviner
nature than their bodies were? Although a natural stupidity and dullness of
temper may abate the sense of pain, although an obstinate resolution may keep
men from complaining of it; yet, not only to bear the Cross but to embrace it;
to be not only patient but pleasant under tortures; nay, to sing with greater
joy in the flames than others do when they are heated with wine, does not only
show that there is something within us capable of pleasure distinct from the
Body, but that the pleasures of it may be so great as to swallow up the pains
of the body. But I need not have recourse to such great and extraordinary
instances, (although sufficiently attested by such who saw and heard them) for
every good man has that inward pleasure in being and doing good, which he
would not part with for all the greatest Epicurism in the world. And where
there is, or may be so great pleasure, no wonder if there be likewise a sense
of pain proportionable to it; witness those gripes and tortures of Conscience
which wicked men undergo from the reflection upon themselves; when their own
evil actions fill them with horror and amazement, when the cruelties they have
used to others return with greater violence upon their own minds, when the
unlawful pleasures of the body prove the greatest vexation to their souls, and
the weight of their evil actions sinks them under despair and the dreadful
apprehensions of future misery. These are things we need not search Histories,
or cite ancient Authors for; every man's own Conscience will tell him, if he
has not lost all sense of good and evil; that as there is a real pleasure in
doing good, there is the greatest inward pain in doing evil. Having thus showed
that the soul of man is capable of pleasure and pain in this present state
distinct from the body, it thence follows, that it is capable of rewards and
punishments, when it shall be separated from it.

2. That the souls of men have a power of determining their own actions;
without which there could be no reasonable account given of the rewards and
punishments of another life. Were I to prove liberty in man from the
^upposition of Religion I know no argument more plain or more convincing than
that which is drawn from the consideration of future rewards and punishments:
but being now to prove a capacity of rewards and punishments from the
consideration of Liberty, I must make use of other means to do it by. And what
can be imagined greater evidence in Beings capable of reflecting upon
themselves, than the constant sense and experience of all mankind? Not that all
men are agreed in their opinions about these things; (for even herein men show
their liberty, by resisting the clearest evidence to prove it) but that every
man finds himself free in the determining his moral actions. And therefore he
has the same reason to believe this, which he has of his own Being or
Understanding. For what other way has a man to know that he understands
himself or any thing else, but the sense of his own mind? and those who go
about to persuade men that they think themselves free when they are not, may in
the next place persuade them that they think they understand when they do not.
Nay, they might hope in the first place to persuade men out of their
Understandings, for we are not so competent judges of the more necessary and
natural acts, for men understand whether they will or no, as of the more free
and voluntary; for in this case every man can when he pleases put a trial upon
himself, and like the confuting the arguments against motion by moving, can
show the folly of all the pleas for fatal necessity by a freedom of action But
if once this natural liberty be taken away, wisdom and folly as well as vice
and virtue would be names invented to no purpose; no men can be said to be
better or wiser than others, if their actions do not depend on their own choice
and consideration, but on a hidden train of causes which it is no more in a
man's power to hinder than in the earth to hinder the falling of rain upon it.
If therefore sense and reason may prevail upon mankind, not to fancy themselves
under invisible chains and fetters, of which they can have no evidence or
experience; we may thence infer the soul's capacity of rewards and punishments
in another life, since happiness and misery are set before them, and it must be
their own voluntary choice which brings them to either of them: When either by
their own folly they run themselves upon everlasting ruin, or by making use of
the assistance of divine grace they become capable of endless Joy. But since
men have not only a power of gorverning themselves, but are capable of doing it
by considerations as remote from the things of sense as Heaven is from Earth;
it is not conceivable there should be such a power within us, if there were not
an immortal soul which is the subject of it. For what is there that has the
shadow of liberty in mere matter? what is there of these inferior creatures
that can act by consideration of future things, but only man? Whence comes man
to consider but from his reason? or to guide himself by the consideration of
future and eternal things, but from an immortal principle within him; which
alone can make things at a distance to be as present; can represent to it self
the infinite pleasures and unconceivable misery of an eternal state in such a
manner as to direct the course of this present life in order to the obtaining
of the one and avoiding of the other. And thus much concerning the supposition
here made of the loss of the soul, and its immortality implied therein.

I come to consider the hazard of losing the soul for the gain of this world.
For although our Savior puts the utmost supposable case, the better to
represent the folly of losing the soul for the sake of the world; yet he does
imply the danger may be as great, although a man's ambition never comes to be
so extravagant, as to aim at the possession of the whole world. The whole world
can never make amends for the loss of the soul; yet the soul may be lost for a
very inconsiderable part of it; although all the wealth and treasures of the
Indies can never compensate to a man the loss of his life, yet that may he in
as great danger of losing upon far easier terms than those are. It is not to be
thought that those whom our Savior speaks to, could ever propose such vast
designs to themselves as the Empire of the whole world was; but, he tells them,
if that could be supposed, it were far more desirable to save a soul than to
gain the world, yet such is the folly of mankind to lose their souls for a very
small share of this present world. For the temptations of this world are so
many, so great, so pleasing to mankind, and the love of life so natural and so
strong, that inconsiderate men will run any hazard of their souls for the gain
of one or preservation of the other. The highest instance of this kind is that
which our Savior here intends, when men will make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience to escape the danger of their lives; or with Judas will betray
their Savior for some present gain although very far short of that of the
whole world. And if I be not much mistaken, it is upon this account, that our
Savior pronounces it so hard Matthew. 19.23, 24. Mark 10.24, 25. Luke 18.24, 25.
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, because in such difficult
times of persecution on the account of Religion as those were, such men would
be shrewdly tempted to venture the loss of their souls in another world rather
than of their estates in this. For it was the young man's unwillingness to part
with his great possessions to follow Christ, which gave him occasion to utter
that hard saying. It is on this account St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.10.
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after
they have erred from the faith and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows: It was on this account, 2 Timothy 4.10.
that Demas forsook Paul, having loved this present world: and that James 4.4.
the friendship of this world is said to be enmity with God, and that our
Savior says, Matt. 6.24.
no man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one and love the
other; else he will hold to the one and despise the other; ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. which does suppose that these two does require two contrary things
at the same time; for if a hundred Masters did all require the same thing, a
man might, in doing that, be said to serve them all. But when Religion requires
that we must part with all for that, and the world requires that we must part
with Religion to preserve our interest in it, then it is impossible to serve
God and Mammon together; for we must hold to the one and despise the other.

But what then? Is there no danger of the loss of the soul for the sake of this
world, but only in the case of persecution? then, some may say, we hope there
is no fear now of men's being too rich to go to Heaven. Thanks be to God that we
live in times free from such dangerous trials as those of persecution are, and
wherein men may quietly enjoy their Estates, and the best Religion in the world
together: but although there be no danger of splitting upon the rocks, there
may be of sinking with being overcharged or springing too great a leak within
us, whereby we let in more than we can be able to bear. And supposing the most
prosperous and easy condition men can fancy to themselves here; yet the things
of this world are so great occasions of evil, so great hindrances of good, that
on these accounts men always run a mighty hazard of their souls for the sake of
this world. The Devil knew well enough where his greatest strength lay, when he
reserved the Matt. 4.8, 9.
temptation of the glories of this world to the last place in dealing with
Christ himself; when nothing else would prevail upon him, he was yet in hopes
that the Greatness and Splendor of this world would bring him to his terms.
And surely if the Devil had not a mighty opinion of the power of these charms
of the Kingdoms and Glory of this world, he would never have put such hard
terms to them which were no less than falling down and worshipping him: which
we do not find he ever durst so much as mention before till he held this bait
in his hand. And although our Savior baffled him in this his strongest
temptation, yet he still finds, that far less than what he here offered, will
bring men in subjection to him. How small a matter of gain will tempt some men
to all the sins of lying, of fraud and injustice? who pawn their souls and put
them out at interest for a very small present advantage, although they are sure
in a very little time to lose both their Interest and the Principal too.

How many, for the sake of the Honors and Preferments of this World, are
willing to do by their Consciences as the Indian did by his Letter, lay them
aside till their business be done and then expect to hear no more of them! What
poor and trifling things in this World, do men continually venture their souls
for? As though all were clear gains which they could put off so dead a
commodity as the Salvation of their Souls for. How apt are such to applaud
themselves for their own skill, when merely by a little swearing, and lying,
and cheating, things which cost them nothing but a few words, they can defeat
the designs of their Enemies and compass their own! But how low is the rate of
Souls fallen in the esteem of such persons as these are! If they had not been
of any greater value, they had not been worth any ordinary man's, much less,
the Son of God's laying down his life for the redemption of them. Is this all
the requital men make him for the travail of his Soul, the wounds of his Body,
the bitterness of his Passion, to squander away those Souls upon any trifling
advantages of this world, which he shed his most precious blood for the
redemption of? Whenever men are tempted to sin with the hopes of gain, let them
but consider how much they undervalue not only their own Souls, but the eternal
Son of God, and all that he has done and suffered for the sake of the Souls of
men: If there had been no greater worth in our Souls, silver and gold would
have been a sufficient price of redemption for them (for if men lose their
Souls for these things, it is a sign they set a higher value upon them.) But
God's justice was not to be bribed, his wrath against sin was not to be
appeased by the greatest riches of this World, nothing but the inestimable
blood of Christ would be accepted for the purchase of Souls; and when they are
so dearly bought must they be cast away upon such trifles as the riches and
honors of this World are, in comparison with them?

These are men who lose their Souls upon design, but there are others so
prodigal of them, that they can play and sport them away, or lose them only
because it is the custom to do so. With whom all the reasons and arguments in
the world cannot prevail to leave off their sins, if it once be accounted a
^ashion to commit them. Yea, so dangerous things are fashionable vices, that
some will seem to be worse than they are, (although few continue long
Hypocritical in that way) that they might not be out of the fashion, and some
will be sure to follow it (if not outdo it) though to the eternal ruin of
their Souls. But although all damned persons at the great day will be
confounded and ashamed, yet none will be more ridiculously miserable than such
who go to Hell for fashion-sake. What a strange account would this be at the
dreadful day of judgment for any to plead for themselves, that they knew that
chastity, temperance, sobriety and devotion were things more pleasing to God,
but it was grown a Mode to be vicious, and they had rather be damned th^n be
out of the fashion? The most charitable opinion we can have of such persons
now, is, that they do not think they have any Souls at all; for it is
prodigious folly for men to believe they have Souls that are immortal, and yet
be so regardless of them.

Yet these who are vicious out of compliance are not the only persons who show
so little care of their Souls, what shall we say to those who enjoying the good
things of this life, scarce ever do so much as think of another? Who are very
solicitous about every little mode of attire for their bodies, and think no
time long enough to be spent in the grand affairs of dressing and adorning
their outsides; but from one end of the year to the other never spend one
serious thought about eternity, or the future state of their souls. Their
utmost contrivances are how to pass away their days with the greatest ease and
pleasure to themselves; and never consider what will become of their souls when
they come to die. Alas poor immortal souls! are they become the only
contemptible things men have about them? All care is l^ttle enough with some
for the body, for the pampering and indulging of that, and making provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; but any cure is thought too much for the
soul; and no time passes so heavily away, as the hours of devotion do. The very
show of Religion is looked on as a burden, what then do they think of the
practice of it? The Devil himself shows a greater es^eem of the souls of men,
than such persons do; for he has been always very active and industrious in
seeking their ruin, but is ready enough to comply with all the inclinations of
the body, or men's designs in this world; nay he makes the greatest use of these
as the most powerful temptations for the ruin of their souls; by all which it
is evident, that, being our greatest enemy, he aims only at the ruin of that
which is of greatest value and consideration, and that is the thing so much
despised by wicked men, viz. the soul. These do in effect, tell the Devil he
may spare his pains in tempting them; they can do his work fast enough
themselves, and destroy their own souls without any help from him. And if all
men were so bent upon their own ruin, the Devil would have so little to do,
that he must find out some other employment besides that of tempting to divert
himself with, unless it be the greatest diversion of all to him, to see men
turned Devils to themselves. But are the temptations of this world so
infatuating that no reason or consideration can bring men to any care of or
regard to their souls? we have no ground to think so, since there have been and
I hope still are such, who can despise the glittering vanities, the riches and
honors, the pleasures and delights of this world when they stand in
competition with the eternal happiness of their souls in a better world. And
that not out of a sullen humor or a morose temper, or a discontented mind; but
from the most prudent weighing and ballancing the gain of this world and the
loss of the soul together. For what is a man profited if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul or what shall he give in exchange for his soul.

3. Which is the last particular, to represent the folly of losing the soul,
though it were for the gain of the whole world. Which will appear by comparing
the gain and the loss with each other in these Four things.

1. The gain here proposed is at the best but possible to one; but the hazard
of losing the soul is certain to all. And what folly is it for men to run
themselves upon so great and certain danger, for so uncertain gain, which never
any man yet attained to, or is like to do it? our Savior knew how hard a
matter it was to set any bounds to the ambitious thoughts or the covetous
designs of men: every step the ambitious man takes higher gives him the fairer
prospect before him; it raises his thoughts, enlarges his desires, puts new
projects into his mind, which like the circles of water spread still farther
and farther, till his honor and he be both laid in the dust together: The
covetous person is never satisfied with what he enjoys, the more he gets, still
the more he hopes for; and like the grave whither he is going, is always
devouring and always craving: Yet neither of these can be thought so vain as to
propose no less to themselves than the Empire or riches of the whole world. But
our Savior allows them the utmost, that ever can be supposed as to men's
designs for this world; let men be never so ambitious or covetous, they could
desire no more than all the world; though they would have all this, yet this
all would never make amends for the loss of the Soul. It is a thing possible,
that one person might by degrees bring the whole world in subjection to him,
but it is possible in so remote a degree that no man in his wits can be thought
to design it. How small a part of the inhabited world have the greatest
Conquerours been able to subdue! and if the Macedonian Prince was ever so vain
to weep that he had no more worlds to conquer, he gave others a just occasion
to laugh at so much Ignorance which made him think he had conquered this. And
to put a check to such a troublesome ambition of disturbing the world in
others, how early was he taken away in the midst of his vast thoughts and
designs? What a small thing would the compass of the whole earth appear to one
that should behold it at the distance of the fixed stars? and the mighty
Empires which have made the greatest noise in the world have taken up but an
inconsiderable part of the whole earth. What are then those mean designs which
men continually hazard their souls for as much as if they aimed at the whole
world? For we are not to imagine that only Kings and Princes are in any hazard
of losing their souls for the sake of this world; for it is not the greatness
of men's condition, but their immoderate love to the world which ruins and
destroys their souls. And Covetousness and ambition do not always reign in
Courts and Palaces, they can stoop to the meanness of a Cottage, and ruin the
souls of such as want the things of this world as well as those that enjoy
them. So that no state o^ condition of men is exempt from the hazard of losing
the soul for the love of this world, although but one person can be supposed at
once to have the possession of the whole world.

2. The gain of this world brings but an imaginary happiness, but the loss of
the soul a most real misery. It is easy to suppose a person to have the whole
world at his command and not himself; and how can that man be happy that is not
at his own command? The cares of Government in a small part of the earth are so
great and troublesome, that by the consent of mankind the managers of it are
invested with more than ordinary privileges by way of recompense for them; but
what are these to the solicitous thoughts, the continual fears, the restless
employments, the uninterrupted troubles which must attend the gain of the whole
world? So that after all the success of such a man's designs, he may be farther
off from any true contentment than he was at the beginning of them. And in that
respect men's conditions seem to be brought to a greater equality in the world,
because those who enjoy the most of the world do oft-times enjoy the least of
themselves; which has made some great Emperors lay down their Crowns and
Scepters to enjoy themselves in the retirements of a Cloister or a Garden. All
the real happiness of this world lies in a contented mind, and that we plainly
see does not depend upon men's outward circumstances; for some men may be much
farther from it in a higher condition in this world, than others are, or it may
be themselves have been, in a far lower. But if men's happiness did ari^e from
any thing without them, that must be always agreeable to their outward
condition; but we find great difference as to men's contentment in equal
circumstances, and many times much greater in a private State of life, than in
the most public capacity. By which it appears, that whatever looks like
happiness in this world, depends upon a man's soul, and not upon the gain of the
world; nay it is only from thence that ever men are able to abuse themselves
with false notions and Idea's of happiness here. But none of those shall go
into another world with them; farewell then to all imaginary happiness; to the
pleasures of sin, and the cheats of a deceitful world; then nothing but the
dreadful apprehensions of its own misery shall possess that soul which shall
then too late discern its folly, and lament it when it is past recovery. Then
the torments of the mind shall never be imputed to melancholy vapors, or a
disordered fancy. There will be no drinking away sorrows, no jesting with the
sting of conscience, no playing with the flames of another world. God will then
no longer be mocked by wicked men, but they shall find to their own eternal
horror and confusion, that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. He neither wants power to inflict, nor justice to execute, nor
vengeance to pursue, nor wrath to punish; but his power is irresistible, his
justice inflexible, and his wrath is insupportable. Consider now O foolish
sinner that have hitherto been ready to cast away thy soul upon the pleasures
of sin for a season, what a wise exchange thou will make of a poor imaginary
happiness for a most real and intolerable misery. What will all the gain of
this world signify in that State whither we are all hastening apace? What
contentment will it be to thee then to think of all those bewitching vanities,
which have betrayed thy soul into unspeakable misery? Would thou be willing
to be treated with all the ceremonies of State and Greatness for an hour or
two, if thou were sure that immediately after thou must undergo the most
exquisite tortures and be ^acked and tormented to death? When men neglect their
souls and cast them away upon the sinful pleasures and gains of this world, it
is but such a kind of airy and fantastical happiness; but the miseries of a
lost soul are infinitely beyond the racks and torments of the body. It has
sometimes happened that the horror of despair has seized upon men's minds for
some notorious crimes in this life, which has given no rest either to body or
mind, but the violence of the inward pains have forced them to put an end to
this miserable life; as in the case of Judas. But if the expectation of future
misery be so dreadful, what must the enduring of it be? Of all the ways of
dying we can hardly imagine any more painful or full of horror than that of
sacrificing their Children to Molock was among the Canaanites, and Children of
Amon where the Children were put into the body of a Brass Image and a fire made
under it, which by degrees with lamentable shrieks and cryings roasted them to
death; yet this above all others in the New Testament is chosen as the fittest
representation of the miseries of another world, and thence the very name of
Gehenna is taken. But as the joys of heaven will far surpass all the pleasure
which the mind of a good man has in this life; so will the torments of Hell as
much exceed the greatest miseries of this world.

But in the most exquisite pains of the body there is that satisfaction still
left, that death will at last put an end to them; but that is a farther
discovery of the unspeakable folly of losing the soul for the sake of this
world, that

3. The happiness of this world can last but for a little time, but the misery
of the soul will have no end. Suppose a man had all the world at his command,
and enjoyed as much satisfaction in it as it was possible for humane nature to
have; yet the very thoughts of dying and leaving all in a short time, must
needs make his happiness seem much less considerable to him. And every wise man
would provide most for that State wherein he is sure to continue longest. The
shortness of life makes the pleasures of it less desirable, and the miseries
less dreadful: but an endless State makes every thing of moment which belongs
to it. Where there is variety and liberty of change, there is no necessity of
any long deliberation beforehand, but for that which is to continue always the
same the greatest consideration is needful, because the very continuance of
some things is apt to bring weariness and satiety with it. If a man were bound
for his whole lifetime to converse only with one person without so much as
seeing any other, he would desire time and use his best judgment in the choice
of him. If one were bound to lie in the same posture without any motion but for
a month together, how would he employ his wits beforehand to make it as easy
and tolerable as might be? Thus solicitous and careful would men be for any
thing that was to continue the same although but for a short time here: But
what are those things to the endless duration of a soul in a misery, that is a
perpetual destruction, and everlasting death; always intolerable, and yet must
always be endured. A misery that must last when time it self shall be no more,
and the utmost periods we can imagine fall infinitely short of the continuance
of it. O the unfathomable Abyss of Eternity! how are our imaginations lost in
the conceptions of it! But what will it then be to be swallowed up in an Abyss
of misery and eternity together? And I do not know how such an eternal State of
misery could have been represented in Scripture in words more Emphatical than
it is; not only by everlasting fire, and everlasting destruction, but by a worm
that never dies, and a fire that never goes out; and the very same expressions
are used concerning the eternal State of the blessed and the damned; so that if
there were any reason to question the one, there would be the same to question
the other also.

4. The loss of this world may be abundantly recompensed, but the loss of the
Soul can never be. For what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? If a man
runs the hazard of losing all that is valuable or desirable in this world for
the sake of his Soul, heaven and eternal happiness will make him infinite
amends for it. He will have no cause to repent of his bargain that parts with
his share in this evil world for the joys and glories that are above. They who
have done this in the resolution of their minds, have beforehand had so great
satisfaction in it, Romans 5.2, 3.
that they have gloried in tribulations, and rejoiced in hopes of the glory of
God; they have upon casting up their accounts found, 8.18.
that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed; because the afflictions they meet with here
are but light and momentany, but that which they expected in recompense for
them, 2 Cor. 4.17.
was an exceeding and an eternal weight of Glory. O blessed change! what life
can be so desirable as the parting with it is on such terms as these? It was
the hopes of this glorious recompense which inspired so many Martyrs to
adventure for Heaven with so much courage, patience, and constancy in the
primitive times of the Christian Church. How do they look down from Heaven and
despise all the vanities of this World in comparison with what they enjoy! And
if they are sensible of what is done on earth, with what pity do they behold us
miserable creatures, that for the sake of the honors, pleasures, or riches of
this World venture the loss of all which they enjoy and thereby of their Souls
too! Which is a loss so great, that no recompense can ever be made for it, no
price of redemption can ever be accepted for the delivery of it. For even the
Son of God himself who laid down his life for the redemption of Souls, shall
then come from heaven with flaming fire to take vengeance on all those who so
much despise the blood he has shed for them, the warnings he has given to
them, the Spirit he has promised them, the reward he is ready to bestow upon
them, as in spite of all to cast away those precious and immortal Souls which
he has so dearly bought with his own blood.

Methinks the consideration of these things might serve to awaken our security,
to cure our stupidity, to check our immoderate love of this world, and inflame
our desires of a better. Wherein can we show our selves men more than by having
the greatest regard to that which makes us men? which is our souls. Wherein can
we show our selves Christians better, than by abstaining from all those hurtful
lusts which war against our souls, and doing those things which tend to make
them happy? We are all walking upon the shore of eternity, and for all that we
know the next tide may sweep us away; shall we only sport and play or gather
cockle-shells and lay them in heaps like Children, till we are snatched away
past all recovery? It is no such easy matter to prevent the losing our souls
as secure sinners are apt to imagine. It was certainly to very little purpose
that we are bid Phil. 2.12.
to work out our Salvation if lying still would do it; or 2 Pet. 1.10.
to give all diligence about it, if none would serve the turn: Matthew. 7.14.
or to strive to enter in at the straight gate, if it were so wide to receive
all sinners. No: Luke 13.24.
Many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able; what then shall become of
those that run as far from it as they can? Those, I mean, whom no entreaties of
God himself, no kindness of his Son, no not the laying down his life for their
souls, no checks or rebukes of their own consciences can hinder from doing
those things which do without a speedy and sincere repentance exclude men from
the Kingdom of heaven. O that men could at last be persuaded to understand
themselves and set a just value upon their immortal souls! How would they then
despise the vanities, conquer the temptations, and break through the
difficulties of this present world, and by that means fit their souls for the
eternal enjoyment of that blessed State of souls which God the Father has
promised, his Son has purchased, and the Holy Ghost has confirmed. To whom be
rendered, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 36. l. 23. for be r. by. p. 48. l. 10. dele the. p. 100. l. 14. for then
r. that. p. 207. l. 1. r. then give. p. 354. l. 1. for Mind r. Wind. p. 412. l.
16. r. enjoyed. p. 462. l. 13. r. coming again for. p. 474. l. 1. r. as a. p.
501. l. 14. for cure r. care.

Advertisement.
NEwly Printed a Discourse concerning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; or
the true Reason of his Sufferings, with an Answer to the Socinian Objections:
To which is added a Sermon concerning the Mysteries of the Christian Faith,
Preached April 7 th. 1691. with a Preface concerning the true State of the
Controversy about Christ's Satisfaction: By the Right Reverend Father in God
Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester: Sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard.


