Counsel to the Afflicted: OR, INSTRUCTION AND CONSOLATION for such as have
suffered Loss by FIRE. With Advice to such as have escaped that sore JUDGMENT.
Contained in the Resolution of three Questions, occasioned by the Dreadful FIRE
in the City of LONDON, in the Year 1666. Viz. 1. How may such Persons as have
sustained great loss by the said Fire, bear their Affliction with a contented
cheerful Spirit? 2. What use should they make of their Affliction, who have
lost their whole, or any part of their Estates by the said Fire? 3. What use
should they make of Gods Mercy, whose Houses and Goods were preserved from the
said Fire?
In the discussing of which Questions are handled several profitable Cases of
Conscience concerning Self-Murder, preparing for Afflictions, taking up our
rest in God, etc. which are inserted in the Contents.

By O. S.

Isa. 25.15. Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires. --

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, and are to ^e sold by H. Brom, in Little
Britain, 1667

TO THE READER.
WHat the Prophet Joel says of the Famine that came upon Judea, Joel 1.2. The
like may I say of the late deplorable FIRE which the Lord has sent upon
London, the Metropolitan City of this Nation; Hear this ye old men, and give
ear all ye inhabitants of the land, has this been in your days, or even in
the days of your Fathers? God has often contended with this Land by Fire, but
neither in our days, nor in the days of our Fathers has there been any such
dreadful Fire as this, which began in London, Sept. 2.1666. and continued
raging for the space of three or four days together with that fury and
violence that none was able to quench it, until it had consumed the greatest
part of that renowned City, and had made of a City an heap, of a defenced City
a ruin. Elihu speaking of Thunder and Lightning, says, Job 37.1. At this my
heart trembles, and is moved out of his place. And calls to Job to consider
seriously these great works of God, ver. 11. Hearken unto this, O Job, stand
still and consider the wondrous works of God. If Elihu were thus affected at
the sight of Lightning and hearing of Thunder, and would have Job stand still
and consider these wondrous works of God, how should the hearts of all that saw
or heard of this dreadful Fire, tremble, and be as it were moved out of their
places? How should they be awakened to stand still and consider this wondrous
judgment of God? It thunders and lightens every year, these are Gods ordinary
works; but it is very rare and unusual for God to send such great and terrible
Fires. There may be and oft-times are mighty Thunders and Lightnings, and no
man suffers any damage by them; but many thousands have sustained great loss
by this Fire. Now the more unusual and afflicting any judgment is, the more it
ought to be laid to heart, and the more we ought to fear and tremble before
that God that sent it. When the Fire had devoured the pastures of the
Wilderness, and the trees of the Field, this made Joel go and cry before the
Lord, Joel 1.19. O Lord, to thee will I cry, for the Fire has devoured the
pastures of the Wilderness, and the flame has burnt all the trees of the
Field. If the Prophet bemoaned the burning of the pastures of the Wilderness,
and the trees of the Field, how ought we to bemoan the burning of this famous
City? When Hanani told Nehemiah that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and
the gates thereof burnt with Fire, and his Brethren the Jews were in great
affliction, see how he was affected with it, Nehem. 1.3,4. It came to pass when
I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and
fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven. They that are of Nehemiahs
disposition, that is, men fearing God, can do no less upon the sight or hearing
of Londons desolations, then he did at Jerusalems; namely, sit down and mourn,
and fast, and pray to the God of Heaven, that he would turn away from the
fierceness of his anger which is kindled against us, even as the Prophet Isaiah
also did in the like case, Isa. 64.9,10,11,12. As for such as are of a Gallio
like spirit, caring for none of these things, Londons Ruins call out to them
as Jerusalem did in the day of her distress, Lam. 1.12. Is it nothing to you,
all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger? From above has he sent Fire into my bones, and it prevails
against them -- Yea God himself speaks dreadfully to such persons, Psalm.
28.5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

Besides being duly and deeply affected with this sad and solemn providence of
God, it is every man's concernment to make a good use of it. No man should let
such great judgments as this Fire and the late Pestilence pass away, without
being some way bettered in his spiritual Estate by them. The best use that we
can make of this and those other Judgments of God which of late have fallen
upon us, is to turn every one of us from all our sins unto the Lord with all
our hearts, and all our souls. For this is the design of all Gods Judgments to
lead us to repentance. If the fall of the Tower of Siloam, wherein but eighteen
persons suffered, be interpreted by Christ to be a call to all the Inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem, to repent upon pain of eternal damnation, Luke 13.4.5.
With what a loud voice does God call to all the Inhabitants of this Land to
repent of their sins, by the fall of this great City, wherein many thousands
have been great sufferers? The rod calls to repentance, but it seldom works
repentance, unless it be accompanied with the word; but when instruction goes
with correction, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that
are exercised thereby. Whilst Ephraim was only chastised he was like a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; but after he was instructed, he repented, he smote
upon his thigh, he was ashamed, Jer. 31.18,19. The world never beheld such an
amazing sight as when the Lord Jesus, the Lord of life and glory suffered
death, from the sixth to the ninth hour of the day, there was darkness over the
whole earth: the Sun was darkened, and the Vail of the Temple was rent in the
midst, etc. Yet how few were brought to repentance by these things? One of the
Thieves is converted, and a Centurion gives glory to God; but as for the
generality of the people, though they were struck with some amazement and
remorse for the present, they return every one to his own way, Luke 23.48. And
all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which
were done, smote upon their breasts and returned. We read nothing of their
returning to God, till the Apostle Peter came and preached the word to them,
and then follows a great conversion unto the Lord, 3000. are added unto the
Church in one day, Acts 2.41. Wherefore we should esteem it a great blessing
and singular mercy to be taught and instructed by God, when we are under his
correcting hand, according to what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is
the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy law. And we
should readily open our ears to discipline, by what ways soever God shall be
pleased to convey his mind to us. God can, and sometimes does teach us
immediately by his Spirit, but most ordinarily he instructs both those that
are in affliction, and others also in the use of means. When the Apostle Paul
was in great distress, and at a loss to know the mind of Christ, and cried,
Lord, What will thou have me to do? he sent him to Ananias, to be instructed
what he should do, Acts 9.6. God could have taught Cornelius by his Spirit, or
by the Angel that appeared to him, but he chooses rather to send him for
instruction to one of his Ministers, even to Peter, who should tell him what he
ought to do, Acts 10.3.4.5,6. Amongst other means, reading of the Scriptures
and other good Books is one way whereby God seals up instruction to us. Daniel
was a man of singular wisdom, full of the Holy Ghost, greatly beloved of God;
yet he had not all his knowledge by immediate inspiration, but much of it was
given to him by the study of Books, Dan. 9.2. I Daniel understood by Books. --

At the request and for the use of some worthy Friends, who were great
sufferers by the late Fire, I have drawn up an answer to three practical
Questions concerning the said Fire, the design whereof is to instruct and
excite both such as escaped, and such as suffered by this dreadful Fire, to
make an holy use and a Christian improvement of this sad and solemn Providence,
and also to quiet and comfort such as are troubled and cast down at the loss of
their Estates. The resolution of which Questions are here presented to thy
view. Possibly thou may have already something of the like nature from more
able hands; however if the Lord (who works when and by whom he will) shall be
pleased by the reading of this small Treatise to convey the least beam of
light, or breath any quickening influence into thy Soul, or to promote in any
measure thy holiness or consolation, it will be no grief of heart unto thee,
that thou were at the cost to buy, or at the pains to read it.

If thou say, I am not concerned in this Judgment, having been no sufferer
by it, nor any Inhabitant in the City where this Judgment fell, and so
consequently I am not concerned in the matter that is handled in these
questions? I answer. 1. If thou art not a sufferer by this Fire, yet, art thou
not under other sufferings? If so, there are several things hinted concerning
this Affliction, that may be of use to thee under thy Afflictions, of what
nature soever they be. 2. If thou art not a sufferer by this or any other
Judgment, thou have the more need to study what thou shall render to the Lord
for his great mercy in sparing thee when his hand lies so heavy upon so many
thousands at this day* And then the third Question is of great concernment to
thee. 3. Though thou have not suffered hitherto, thou know not how soon thou
may suffer by this very Judgment of Fire. That passage in Isa. 66.15,16. may
awaken thee to prepare for fiery trials. Behold, the Lord will come with Fire,
and with his Chariots like a whirlwinde, to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames of fire; for by fire, and by his sword, will the Lord plead
with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. And as it is our duty
to hear for the time to come, Isa. 42.23. So it will be our prudence to read
for time to come. 4. Not only the places and persons that suffer by Gods
Judgments, but all that hear of them are concerned to make a good use of them.
When the Lord brought a sore Judgment upon Jerusalem, he calls to all people in
all Nations upon the face of the earth, to take notice thereof, and make a good
use of it, Jer. 4.18,19. Hear ye Nations, and know, O Congregation, what is
among them; Hear, O Earth, behold, I will bring evil upon this people --

If any say, this Treatise seems to be born out of due time; it is now
several months since London was burnt, the impression of this Judgment begins
now to wear off from men's spirits, etc. I answer. 1. I hope better things of
the greater part that suffered by this stroke of God, then that they should so
soon forget the hand that has been lifted up against them; but if it should be
so, that the impressions of this Judgment should be wearing off from many men's
spirits, there is the more need of using means to revive them again. It is to
be feared in regard poverty is coming upon many like an armed man, and the sad
effects of this Fire are and will be felt more and more by the poorer sort,
that discontent and trouble of mind will rather grow and increase then wear
off; and therefore to such at least, it will not be unseasonable to minister
something by way of consolation, though it be some months since they were
brought into a suffering condition. 2. Such great Judgments as this was, are to
be kept in remembrance, and to be improved for the promoting of repentance and
the fear of God all our days, and not only as long as we live, but the memory
of them is to be conveyed to the Ages and Generations that are yet to come,
that they may learn to fear this God, who has done such great things amongst
us. When there was a mighty Famine in Judah, the Lord gives Commandment that
the memory thereof should be perpetuated to all Ages, Joel 1.3,4. Tell ye your
children of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children
another generation; That which the palmer worm has left, has the locust
eaten, etc. We think unworthily of Gods Judgments, if we suppose they are to be
regarded for a few days, or for a few years only. They are of larger use.
Judgments upon particular places and persons, are admonitions to the whole
world that hear of them as long as the world shall stand. It is some thousands
of years since Lots Wife was turned into a pillar of Salt, yet this Judgment of
God on a particular person must not be forgotten by us in this generation, nor
by others to the worlds end, Luke 17.32. Remember Lots Wife. It is generally
computed to be above three thousand years since the Israelites came out of
Egypt, and passed through the Wilderness into Canaan, and yet their sufferings
in the Wilderness are ensamples to us, to deter us from sinning as they did,
lest we suffer as they did; and not to us only but to all that shall live
between this and the end of the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. Now all these things
happened to them for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. 3. In some cases where grief is great,
counsel and comfort takes place best, when the sufferers have had a little
space to bemoan their distressed condition. When Jobs Friends came to comfort
him, they forbore speaking a word to him for seven days and seven nights,
because they saw his grief was very great, Job 2.11,12,13.

I shall detain thee no longer with this preface, but commend thee and this
work to the blessing of the Lord, after I have craved one request at thy hands,
which is, if thou reapest any benefit by this ensuing Treatise, give all the
glory to God, and lift up a prayer for him, who is,

Thine to serve the in the work of the Lord O. S.

The Contents.
Quest. 1. How may such as have suffered great loss by the late Fire, bear
their losses with a contented cheerful spirit? NIne Propositions premised
concerning Contentment. page 1. to p. 7 Eleven Considerations to help such as
have been great sufferers by this Fire, to bear their losses contentedly. 8. to
41 Eight Directions by way of practice to help such as are in affliction to
bear their afflictions contentedly. 41. to 69 How a man may take up his rest
and satisfaction in God in all estates and conditions. 57. to 65

When a man may be said to take up his dwelling in God. 63, 64.

Pleas for Discontent removed. 69 1. Plea. My loss is exceeding great. Answered
four ways. 69, 70, 71 2. Plea. I have lost all, and am quite undone. Answered
seven ways. 71. to 75 3. Plea. I know not how to live, now I have lost my
estate. Answered four ways. 75, 76 4. Plea. I am afraid I shall want before I
die. Answered five ways. 77. to 80 5. Plea. I am in debt, and am not able to
pay my debts. Answered five ways. 80 to 84. God has wrought Miracles to help
men to pay their debts. 82

6. Plea. I am already under much misery, and fear I shall soon meet with more.
Answered three ways. 85, 86 7. Plea. My Family is undone by this Fire, and my
losses are so great, that if I die I can leave my Wife and Children nothing.
Answered five ways. 86. to 89 A godly man that can leave his Children no
visible Estate, leaves them comfortably provided for in four respects. 88

8. Plea. I have lived high, and in good repute, and now must fare hardly and
be slighted. Answered six ways. 89. to 93 Four Arguments to persuade us to be
content with course diet. 91, 92

9. Plea. I have lost a commodious Habitation, and am thereby much unsettled,
and know not where to fix my Habitation. Answered five ways. 93, 94, 95 10.
Plea. I am disabled from following my Calling, and am rendered unserviceable.
Answered four ways. 95. to 101 3. Arguments to persuade us to submit our
selves to God, when he will not make use of us to do him service. 96, 97

What we should do to prevail with God, to make use of us to do him service,
answered 3 ways. 97, 98

How to know what calling they should make choice of, who are disabled from
following their former Callings, answered 5 ways. 100, 101

11. Plea. I am afraid this Judgment came in wrath, and that God is angry with
me, answered 4 ways. 101 to 104 What we should do to pacify the Lords anger
when it is kindled against us, answered 3 ways. 102, 103

How may a man know when his Afflictions come in love, answered 3 ways. 104

12. Plea. I am disabled by my losses from giving any thing to the poor,
answered 4 ways. 104, to 108 13. Plea. I lost my goods by my indiscretion,
answered 3 ways. 108, to 110 14. Plea. I have labored hard many years for
what I lost in one day, answered 110, 111 15. Plea. The guilt of my
unrighteousness in my dealings troubles me, answered 112, 113, 114 How such as
are troubled in Conscience for their unrighteousness in their dealings may get
true peace, answered in five particulars, 112, 113, 114

16. Plea. I serve God, and have lost all that I had, many that are regardless
of God and his Service have lost nothing, answered 4 ways. 115, to 118 17.
Plea. The glory and strength of England is much impaired by this Fire,
thousands of Families are ruined, many poor people that lived comfortably in
Hospitals, and Almshouses are like to perish, etc. answered in five
particulars. 118, to 127

Quest. 2. What use should they make of their affliction, who have lost their
whole, or any part of their Estates by this Fire? page 128 Sect. 1. Look upon
this affliction as the rod of God, 128, 129 Sect. 2. This affliction must be
laid to heart, where is showed how this affliction must be laid to heart in 6
partilars. 129, to 132 Sect. 3. Mind the teachings of God in this affliction.
132 What they that have been sufferers should learn by this affliction?
answered in 7 particulars. 133, 134, 135

What the vanity of worldly things should teach us, answered in 4 particulars.
135, to 138

Sect. 4. Search out the sin for which God sent this affliction. 138 How to
find out the sin for which God corrects us? Answered four ways. 139, 145

For what sins God is wont to send this Judgment of Fire. 140, 141, 142

For what sins God is wont to impoverish men. 143, 144

Sect. 5. Look upon this affliction as a loud call to Repentance. 145, 146
Reasons why we should repent and turn unto God when we are under affliction. 147

Six Directions about Repentance. 147 to 150

Very few are brought to Repentance by their afflictions, though they be great.
150, 151

What we should do that we may be brought to Repentance when we are under
afflictions, Answered six ways. 152 to 158

Sect. 6. Comply with Gods ends in afflicting you. 158 where are mentioned five
ends of God on sending this affliction. 159. to 164

Sect. 7. God is to be glorified in the fires. 164, 165 How to glorify God in
our afflictions. Answered six ways. 165. to 168

Sect. 8. Lay up Treasure in Heaven, where is showed what that Treasure is
which we must lay up in Heaven. 168, 169 Sect. 9. Be mindful of and careful to
avoid four other fires more dreadful then the late fire. 170. to 173 Sect. 10.
Trust in God for a livelihood, though all your Estates be gone and you have
nothing left to live upon. 173, 174 What considerations may encourage such as
have nothing to live upon, to trust in God for a livelihood. Answered. 174, 175
Object. 1. I cannot see or think of any way how I should do to live, answered
six ways, 176, to 179 Oject. 2. I am shiftless and friendless, and therefore I
shall not be able to live now my Estate is gone, and my Calling fails,
answered, 179, to 181. Object. 3. I cannot work, therefore I am afraid I shall
perish by want, answered, 181, 182 Object. 4. I begin to be in want already, I
and my family are pinched with hunger, and I am afraid we shall be starved,
answered, 183, to 186 How such as are in danger, or under fear of being starved
to death, may be encouraged to trust in God to relieve them, answered, 186. to
192

Object. I am afraid my unbelief will hinder God from taking care of me,
answered, 192, 193


Sect. 11. Be not dismayed if God bring you into great straits, 193, 194 How
they that are in such great straits that they know not what to do, may be
encouraged to trust in God, answered, 194, to 198

Though we are brought into our straits by our sins, this should not hinder us
from trusting in God, 198, 199

Sect. 13. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, where several
temptations are instanced in, that persons under great afflictions had need to
watch against, 200, to 251 1. Tempt. Satan is wont to tempt such as are under
great afflictions to have hard thoughts of God, and of his ways, 200, 201 How
to keep up good thoughts of God in our greatest afflictions, answered in 6
particulars, 201, to 205

How to keep up good thoughts of the ways of God in our greatest afflictions,
answered, 206, 207

2. Tempt. Satan is wont to tempt such as are in great afflictions to forsake
God, 207 How a man may be kept from forsaking God when he is under affliction,
answered, 207, to 213

3. Tempt. Satan often tempts such as are in affliction to change their
Religion, 213, 214 Eight Arguments to persuade us not to forsake the Protestant
Religion, because of Afflictions that we may meet with for adhering to it, 214,
215.

4. Tempt. Satan is wont to tempt persons under great afflictions to
self-murder, 219, 220 How such as are tempted to self-murder upon the account
of their sins, or their afflictions, may overcome this temptation, 220, to 227

Five Arguments to prove that self-murder is a damnable sin, 220, 221

Three ways of resisting Satan 222, 223

Three encouragements for tempted Souls to flee to Christ, 223, 224

Pleas for self-murder answered, 1. Plea. My troubles are so great that I am
not able to bear them, answered 3 ways, 227, 228 2. Plea. I have lost, or at
least I am likely to lose my reputation, and I had better dye than be slighted
and fall under disgrace, 229, 230 3. Plea. I shall come to want, or be driven
to beg, or live upon, and be a burden to others, answered, 230, to 233
Considerations to persuade such as are brought from an high condition to live
upon Alms, and beg their bread, to comply with this condition, 231, 232

4. Plea. My sins are greater then can be forgiven, and are such an heavy
burden that I cannot bear them, answered, 233, 234 The case of such as are
ready to despair of the pardon of their sins, because they cannot repent,
consisidered, 235, 236

5. Plea. I have committed a shameful sin, which if it come to lighe, I shall
be weary of my life, 236, 237 6. Plea. I am tempted to steal, to kill my
Children and to commit other foul sins, and I had better make away my self then
fall into any scandalous sin, answered, 237, 238 7. Plea. God has cast me off,
and I am sure to go to Hell when I dye; yea, I feel the beginnings of Hell
already: and the longer I live here, the more I shall increase my torments in
the other world; answered 5 ways, 239, 240, 241. 8. Plea. I will confess my
sins, and repent before I murder my self; and if I do so, I hope I may go to
heaven when I dye, answered, 241


Four propositions concerning self-murder, which conduce much to the helping
of the tempted to withstand this temptation, 242, to 248

Five Arguments to prove there is hope of salvation for a man as long as he
lives, though his case seem very desperate, 244, to 247

5. Tempt. In time of distress Satan is wont to tempt us to use sinful and
indirect means to help our selves, 248, 249 Three Argument to dissuade such as
have lost their Estates, from using unrighteous caurses to help themselves,
249, 250


Sect. 13. Temporal losses should put us upon making sure of spiritual and
eternal blessings, 251, 252 Sect. 14. God is to be sought unto to make up our
losses, 252 Four motives to such as have lost their Estates, to seek them of
God, 253, 254

What is the best and surest way to get riches, answered in 10 particulars,
254, 255, 256

Sect. 15. We should get our losses made up in better blessings, 256 How to get
our losses made up in better blessings, 257, 258

Sect. 16. They that have lost their Houses and Estates, should make sure of a
better house, and better substance in heaven, 259 How to make sure of an house
in heaven, 260, 261, 262

Sect. 17. This affliction should be a warning to prepare for other
afflictions, 262, 263 Sect. 18. They that have been sufferers by this Fire,
should comfort and encourage themselves in God, 264 Five grounds of comfort and
encouragement to the servants of God, that have suffered great losses by the
late Fire, 265, to 370

Great calamities are often followed with great mercies, 270, to 274

Sect. 19. Such as purpose to build, should so carry on the work of building,
as to prosper in it, 274 How to prosper in Building, answered, 274, to 292

Four reasons why such as set upon building should give themselves unto prayer,
275, 276

Three encouragements to set upon the work of Building in Faith, 277, to 282

Building of desolate Cities is a good work proved by several arguments, 277,
278

Several promises to encourage Building, 280, 281

How we may be built up a spiritual house unto the Lord, answered in 6
particulars 288, to 291


Quest. 3. What shall they render unto the Lord for his mercy, whose Houses and
Goods were preserved from being consumed by the late dreadful Fire? page 293
Several propositions premised in order to the answering of this question, 293,
to 296 Sect. 1. They must render to God their love, 297 How to express our love
to God, answered three ways. 298

Sect. 2. They must render praise to God, 299, 300 Two motives to praise God,
for sparing us from this Fire, 301, 302

Sect. 3. Gods mercies should lead us to repentance, 302, 303 Three reasons why
Gods mercies should lead us to repentance, 304, 305

Sect. 4. We must not judge them to be the greatest sinners, that are the
greatest sufferers, 305 Four reasons against judging of men's sins by their
sufferings, 306

Sect. 5. They that have escaped this Fire, should put on bowels of Compassion
toward such as be in misery, and do all the good they can for them, 307, to
310 Lending is a duty as well as giving, 308

Sect. 6. They must not deal injuriously or cruelly with those that are
suffererers, 310, to 313 Sect. 7. They whose Houses have been spared should
dedicate their houses unto God, 313, 314 How we should dedicate our Houses to
God, answered 5 ways, 314, to 318

Who are Gods guests and friends that we must entertain in our houses,
answered, 317, 318

Sect. 8. God is to be honored with our substance, 318 How to glorify God
with our Estates, answered 3 ways, 318, 319

How to know whom we should relieve when we have many objects of charity before
us, and are not able to relieve all, answered 5 ways, 320, 321

Sect. 9. We must render our selves to God, 323 Three Arguments to persuade us
to give our bodies and souls unto God, 326, 327

Sect. 10. The sacrifice of righteousness is to be rendered unto God, 328 Sect.
11. They that have escaped this Fire, should trust in God for deliverance from
other troubles, and also for spiritual blessings, 329 Four sorts of spiritual
blessings for which temporal deliverances should encourage us to trust in God,
330, 331, 332

Two grounds why temporal deliverances should cause us to trust in God for
spiritual mercies, 333

Sect. 12. All men should prepare for all sorts of Afflictions, 334 Six Reasons
why all men had need to be prepared for all sorts of afflictions, 334, to 339

What we should do that we may stand prepared for all sorts of afflictions,
answered in 12 particulars, 339, to 360

What we should do to get Gods strength to carry us through the troubles of
this world, answered 7 ways, 345, to 351

Six sorts of promises very useful for them that are in affliction, 360, to 363

Sect. 13. Such as have escaped this Fire should so demean themselves toward
God, as that he may continue to protect their persons and substance, 363 What
we should do that we may have Gods protection continued, answered 5 ways, 363,
to 365

Four Arguments to encourage us to depend upon God for the preservation of our
persons, substance, and habitation, 365, to 368

Sect. 14. We should seek unto God that there may be no more such dreadful
Fires, 368 What we should do that there may be no more such dreadful Fires,
answered, 369, to 371



ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. ult, dele all. p. 32. l. 15. put in, we. p. 47. l. 29. r.
immoderately. p. 53. l. 1. dele, may. p. 67. l. 3. r. Hananiah. p. 71. l. 2. r.
your. p. 81. l. 1. put out, man. l. 22. r. defined. p. 88. l. 21. r. fares. p.
92. l. 16. put out, better. p. 93 l. 13. after servants, put in, of God. p.
101. l. 2. r. minister. p. 103. l. 14. r. is, p. 104. l. ult. r. still. p. 106.
l. 17. r. what. l. 20. r. God. p. 119. l. 18. put in, the. l. 28. r. had been.
p. 122. l. 10. r. among men. p. 131. l. 16. r. affliction. p. 140. l. 19. r.
servile. p. 143. l. 16. r. subsistence. p. 144. l. 4. r. always. p. 153. l. 26.
after of, put out, this. p. 157. l. 15. for his, r. their. p. 160. l. 16. r.
slothful. p. 179. l. 20. for but, r. yet. p. 188. l. 13. for so prove, r. see
prove. p. 192. l. 15. r. endured. p. 196. l. 22. for they, r. the. p. 207. l 9.
r. Lord. p. 221. l. 21. r. the Lord. p. 251. l. 29. r. clean. p. 252. l. ult.
put in, and. p. 266. l. 31. r. lot. p. 277. l. 22. put in, as. p. 303. l. 10.
put out, not. p. 284. l. 27. put in after if, it be. p. 309. l. 8. for wages,
r. ways. p. 366. l. 9. r. him. p. 371. l. 32. after upon, r. us. p. 372. l. 9.
put in, him. p. 313. l. 28. r. tear. p. 325. l. 14. for above, r. alive. p.
350. l. 6. r. interest. p. 352. l. 34. put in, him. p. 356. l. 12. for him, r.
a man.

Instruction and Consolation FOR Such as have suffered Loss by FIRE, WITH
Advice to such as have Escaped that sore Judgment, Held forth in the Resolution
of three Questions.
QUEST. 1. How may such Persons as have sustained great Losses by the late
Fire, bear their Affliction with a contented and a cheerful spirit?
BEfore I give an Answer to this Question, I shall premise these following
Propositions.

1. It is the will of God that we should bear all our losses and all other
afflictions with a patient, contented mind: He would not have us murmur or
repine at any of his dealings, but in every thing, and under every state and
condition submit our wills unto his. That this is the will of God may appear
evidently from such Scriptures as these; Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things
as ye have; Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer; Jam. 4.7. Submit your selves to
God; Luke 22.42. Not my will, but thine be done; Jam. 5.8. Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh; yea, the Lord
would not only have us patient, but cheerful under all our sufferings, Jam.
1.2. My brethren count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations.

2. It is not only our duty, but our interest, it conduces much to our good
and welfare, to bear our afflictions with a peaceable, contented, cheerful
spirit. Eliphaz persuades Job to bear his afflictions quietly, with this
argument, that it was for his good so to do, Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self
with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee. Whatever God has
commanded us, tends to our good as well as his glory, Deuteronomy. 10.13. Keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for
thy good. If all the Commandments of God be for our good, then this command of
being contented in every estate must needs be for our good. When we are
contented in our sufferings, the soul is at rest, though the outward man be
full of trouble, Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Whatever the
Father laid upon Christ he bore it with a meek and quiet spirit, and submitted
his will to the will of his Father; if we follow this example of his, we shall
doubtless find rest to our souls. The man that has learnt how to be content in
every estate, lives a kind of Heaven upon Earth, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation
is in Heaven. If you would know how the Apostle came to enjoy as it were a
heaven while he was in this world, you may see that, Chap. 4.11. I have learned
in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

3. A man under the power of a froward discontented spirit bereaveth himself of
all good: he has no enjoyment of God, no enjoyment of himself, no enjoyment of
any good in any of the creatures. He has no enjoyment of God; for, They that
are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 11.20. Psalm. 18.26.
With the froward thou will show thy self froward. He has no enjoyment of
himself, but is like a man dispossessed of his soul, Luke 21.19. In your
patience possess ye your souls. He has no enjoyment of any good in any of the
creatures, though he be one that has great possessions, Prove. 17.20. He that
has a froward heart, finds no good. He is in continual pain and anguish,
like a man that walks among thorns, Prove. 22.5. Thorns and snares are in the
way of the froward, he that does keep his soul shall be far from them.

4. It is a very hard matter to bear afflictions with a cheerful contented
spirit. When a man is crossed of his will, his heart is ready to fret against
the Lord, even at such times as he brings afflictions upon himself by his own
folly, Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth against the Lord. When God rebukes us, and binds us in the cords of
affliction, we are apt to fret and fume like a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.20.
Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild Bull
in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. Nothing
less than the mighty power of God will quell and keep down all the risings,
frettings and murmurings of the heart, and make a man patient and cheerful in
his afflictions, Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his
glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness. There is
the power the glorious power of God, the power of God put forth in a mighty
manner to enable a Christian to suffer afflictions with patience and joy.

5. No man that is destitute of the grace of God, can bear afflictions with a
contented spirit. There may be stupidity and insensibleness of Gods hand, and
there may be a restraining of murmurings in some natural men, but true
contentment is found only in godly persons, 1 Timothy 6.8. Godliness with
contentment is great gain. As for unregenerate men, when God does not lay a
restraint upon them, they do not only fret inwardly against God, but break out
into open blasphemy, when they meet with great and painful afflictions, Isa.
8.21. They shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry, and it shall come
to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse
their King and their God, and look upward; Rev. 16.10,11. They gnawed their
tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and
their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

6. The Saints and Servants of God, have found it an hard matter to bear their
losses with a quiet contented spirit, when God has taken away from them those
things which have been near and dear to them. When Jacob did but suppose that
he had lost his son Joseph, he was overwhelmed with grief, Genesis 37.34,35.
Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackloth upon his loins, and mourned for his
son many days, and all his sons, and all his daughters rose up to comfort him,
but he refused to be comforted, and he said, for I will go down into the grave
unto my son, mourning, thus his father wept for him. When God took away
Absalom, how was David cast down at his death? 2 Samuel 18.33. The King was much
moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus
he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for
thee, O Absalom, my son, my son. Jonah was a man that feared God, a Type of
Christ, no ordinary man but a Prophet, yet what abundance of discontent, did he
manifest for the loss of a gourd, because it was a refreshment to him by
keeping him from the heat of the Sun? He fell into a great passion, fainted,
was weary of his life, wished that he might die; and when God reasoned with him
about his froward carriage, he stands upon his justification, Jonah 4.8,9. --
He fainted and wished in himself to die, and said, It is better for me to die
than to live. And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd?
And he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death. Yet this gourd came up in
a night, and perished in a night, and Jonah had not labored at all for it,
neither did Jonah, but God made it to grow, Verse. 10. When we find such a man
as Jonah, in such a great passion for such a small loss as a gourd, which grew
up and perished in a night and a day, we may cry out, Lord what is man that
thou art mindful of him! And if we are kept from fretting and discontent at our
losses, we must give glory to God, and say, as the Apostle in another case, Not
I, but the grace of God which is with me, keeps me from being discontented at
my losses.

7. Though it be hard to attain a cheerful, contented spirit in all estates and
conditions, yet it is possible to be attained: The Apostle Paul went through
variety of afflictions, as hunger, thirst, nakedness, shipwreck, imprisonment,
beating with rods, stripes above measure, cold, watchings, etc. 2 Corinthians.
11.23,24,25,26,27. yet he had learned to be content in every estate, Phil.
4.11,13. I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content: I
can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. And as he was
contented, so also cheerful and joyful in all his troubles, 2 Cor. 7.4. I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulation. Now what the Apostle Paul attained to
in this kind, that through the help of Christ we may attain also.

8. A word of counsel and advice suitably and seasonably administered to such as
are in a suffering condition, avails much for the quieting, comforting, and
supporting of their spirits under their greatest afflictions and deepest
sorrows, Prove. 12.25. Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, but a good
word makes it glad; Prove. 27.9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so
does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel; Job 4.3,4. Behold, thou
have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands, thy words have
upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees;
Prove. 15.23. A word spoken in due season, how good is it?

9. No arguments or other means that are made use of, either in preaching,
writing, or private conference, have such force and power to quiet, support and
comfort the hearts of those that faint, and are disquieted, and cast down under
their afflictions, as those that are drawn from, and bottomed upon the Word of
God, Lev. 10.3. Moses said unto Aaron, this is it that the Lord spoke -- And
Aaron held his peace. Aaron's trial was exceeding great, His two eldest sons
were consumed by fire from the Lord, when they were in the act of sin; this
judgment was so great that all Israel are commanded to bewail the burning, ver.
6. yet Aaron who was most nearly concerned in the affliction, held his peace,
and what caused him to do so? Moses put him in remembrance of the Word of God,
This is that the Lord spoke, see also Job 6.25. How forcible are right words?
Now all Gods words are right, Psalm. 33.4. The Word of the Lord is right --
Prove. 8.8,9. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness -- They are all
right to them that find knowledge. And therefore they are of great force to
quiet and comfort such as are in affliction, Psalm. 107.20. He sent his Word and
healed them. Though a man be ready to die with sorrow and grief under his
troubles, the Word of God will revive him; for they of whom the Psalmist
speaks, when he says, He sent his Word and healed them, were such as were
ready to die with their troubles, as you may see, Verse. 18. Gods Word will make
the stoutest heart yield and bow to Gods will, Jer. 23.28,29, -- He that has
my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully, What is the chafe to the wheat
says the Lord? Is not my Word like as a fire, says the Lord, and like a
hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Comfort one another
with these words. No words have such force to comfort the afflicted, as what
are drawn out of the Scriptures. Wherefore I have endeavored to confirm what I
have proposed in answer to these questions, with suitable and pertinent Texts
of Scripture.

These Propositions being premised, I shall now answer the first question, and
shall divide my Answer into three branches. 1. I shall propose some
considerations that may tend to the quieting of their minds, who have sustained
great loss by this fire. 2. I shall propose some things by way of practice to
help the afflicted to bear their afflictions contentedly. 3. I shall endeavor
to remove those pleas and reasonings that hinder those that have been sufferers
by this fire from setting down contented under their affliction.

Considerations to quiet the minds of those that have been great sufferers by
the late fire.
SECT. 1.
1. Consider who it is that has consumed your Houses and taken away your
Estates. It is God has done this thing. Whoever were the instruments of
beginning or promoting and carrying on this dreadful fire, that has destroyed
so many goodly buildings, and so much treasure; you must look beyond all
instruments at the hand of the Lord. There is no evil befalls any City, or
any family, or any particular person, but it is the Lord which sends that
judgment of what nature soever it be, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City,
and the Lord has not done it? There is nothing comes to pass at any time in
any part of the world, but it is brought about by the Providence of God, Romans
11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things. A Sparrow is a bird
of small value, yet not one Sparrow falls to the ground without the concurrence
of Gods Providence, Matthew. 10.29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and
one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father; If not one
Sparrow suffers any thing but by the Providence of God, then surely there is
a Providence that orders all the sufferings of every man, who is of more
value than many Sparrows. There is no loss more inconsiderable than to lose an
hair of our heads, hundreds of our hairs may be taken away and we regard it
not; but God is so careful of our persons, and of all our concernments, that he
numbreth every hair of our heads, and there does not fall off one hairat any
time but by his appointment, Matthew. 10.30. The very hairs of your head are all
numbered. And as to this judgment of Fire, we find it often asserted in the
Scriptures, that when Cities or other places are set on fire, it is the Lord
which kindles those fires, and orders all circumstances belonging to them.
It is the Lord that appoints the place where the fire shall begin, and how
far it shall proceed, and what houses shall be burnt down by it, Amos 2.5. I
will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem; Jer.
50.32. I will kindle a fire in his Cities, and it shall devour all round about
him. When a fire rages with that vehemence that none can quench it, it is God
which rendereth it unquenchable, Jer. 17.27. If ye will not hearken unto me, to
hallow the Sabbath Day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates
of Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates
thereof, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched. When any men do set a City on fire, it is God gives up that City
into their hands, and causes their enterprises to take effect, Jer. 32.28,29.
I will give this City into the hands of the Caldeans -- And the Caldeans shall
come and set fire on this City. -- Now the considering and believing that it is
God which has taken away your Houses and Estates by this Fire, will silence
all murmurings and repinings, and cause you to bear your losses and crosses
with a contented mind. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. When Job had lost all that he had in one day, by looking at
Gods hand in his losses, he bore them very cheerfully, Job 1.21. -- The Lord
has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord; And yet Job lost a very great
Estate, for he was the richest man in the East, Job 1.3. He did not only lose
his Estate, but all his Children were cut off also, ver. 19. and that whilst
they were eating, and drinking wine in their Elder Brothers house, ver. 18. at
which meetings Job was afraid lest his Sons should sin, and curse God in their
hearts, v. 5. which made the affliction the more heavy. Now to make this
Argument the more effectual toward the producing of contentment, consider who
this God is, that has taken away your Estates from you by this Fire.

1. It is that God that gave you all the good things that ever you did enjoy, 1 Chronicles. 29.12,14. Both riches and honor come of thee: -- All things come of
thee; James 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights; Deuteronomy. 8.17,18. Moses bids Israel
beware of saying in their hearts, My power, and the might of my hand has
gotten me this wealth, but thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he
that gives thee power to get wealth. This quieted Jobs mind, when he
considered that the same God who took away his Estate and his Children, did
formerly give them to him, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

2. It is God that is Holy. There is nothing of wrong, no injustice, no
iniquity in this dispensation, as it proceeds out of the hands of God, Psalm
145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. When
God comes forth in fiery dispensations, we should be so far from murmuring,
that we should give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness, because we know
him to be Holy in all his Works, Psalm. 97.3,12. A fire geeth before him, and
burns up his enemies round about. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and give
thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness. The withdrawing of Gods Blessed
Presence from our souls, is a far greater loss, than the losing of our Estates,
or any thing that we enjoy in this world; for there is nothing in the whole
world, yea, there is nothing in heaven it self, which a godly man esteems so
much as he does the enjoyment of God, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. Yet we find
David quieting himself upon the account of Gods Holiness, when he apprehended
himself forsaken of God, and the Lord came not to him, though he cried and
roared after the Lord, Psalm. 22.1,2,3. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? O my
God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season, and
am not silent: But thou art holy. If David was stayed from repining against
God, when he apprehended himself forsaken of God, and thought God rejected his
Prayers, by considering, that God that dealt thus with him, was an holy God;
then surely the consideration of Gods Holiness may quiet your minds under the
loss of any worldly things, what ever they be. When the laborers that had born
the heat of the day, murmured, because others that had wrought but one hour
were made equal to them, the householder stilled their murmurings, by saying to
one of them, Friend I do thee no wrong, Mat. 20.11,12,13. If you find any
murmurings in your minds, at Gods taking away your Estates, when others enjoy
theirs still, endeavor to silence your murmurings, by saying unto your souls,
O my soul, God is a just, and holy, and righteous God; he has done thee no
wrong, why then do thou murmur against him?

3. It is God that has a Sovereign Power over you, to do with you, and all
that belongs unto you, whatsoever seems good in his sight, Job 9.12.
Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, what do
thou? Jer. 18.6. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter, says
the Lord? behold as the clay is in the potters hand, so are ye in mine hand, O
house of Israel. Such is the Sovereign Power of God, that he disposes of all
his Creatures, both those that are in heaven, and all that are in all places of
the world, Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and
in earth, and the seas, and all deep places. If the Lord disposes of all
things in heaven and earth as he pleases, shall any particular person fret,
and think much to have all his concernments disposed of at the pleasure, and by
the order of the great God? When the Lord makes such desolations in any
Nation, as that the report of them goes throughout all the world, this must
still and quiet our minds, that it is the great and Sovereign God that does
these things, Psalm. 46.8,10. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what
desolations he has made in the earth. Be still, and know that I am God. To
murmur at Gods fulfilling his own will, is a practical denying his Sovereignty;
and to deny the Sovereignty of God, is to deny his Deity. He should not be God,
if he were not our Sovereign Lord; his Sovereignty is essential to his Deity.

4. It is God that loves you, and is the best friend that you have in all the
world, that laid these rebukes upon you, and has taken away your Estates by
this Fire. Every godly man has God for his Friend, Cant. 5.16. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend. And when God rebukes any of his Servants in
their Names, Estates, Bodies, or Souls, it is out of love, Rev. 3.19. As many
as I love, I rebuke and chasten; Prove. 3.12. Whom the Lord loves he
corrects, even as a Father the Son, in whom he delights. Will you take any
thing amiss that comes from so good a friend as the Lord is? especially that
which comes from this friend in love? We are wont to take rebukes that come
from friends in good part, though they be such as wound and pierce us to the
soul, Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend; Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindeness, and let him reprove me, and it
shall be an excellent oil which shall not break my head. -- Shall we esteem it
a kindeness to be smitten and reproved by righteous men, and fret, and be angry
when we are smitten and reproved by the righteous God?

5. It is God who is your Father that has done these things. Never any man
drank such a bitter cup as was mingled for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
if we consider all the ingredients that were put into it: yet because it was
his Father that gave him this cup he took it cheerfully, John 18.11. The cup
which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? We submit our selves to
our earthly Parents when they correct us, how much more ought we to be subject
to our heavenly Father when he chastneth us; seeing he has more power over us
than they have, and aims more purely at our good than they do? Heb. 12.9,10.
We have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits,
and live? for they verily for a few days chastned us after their own pleasure,
but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness.

6. It is God who is pleased with all his own works, Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Seas, and all
deep places. God calls the judgments that he executes upon his enemies his
pleasure, Isa. 48.14. He will do his pleasure on Babylon. Yea even those
afflictions which God sends upon his own children, are the good pleasure of
his will. The Prophet, speaking of the sufferings of Christ, says, Isa. 53.10.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him. -- Our sufferings are in some respects said
to grieve the Lord, Judges 10.16. His soul was grieved for the misery of
Israel. But on another account, as they are a fulfilling of his eternal
Councils, as they illustrate his Glory, as they promote our good, etc. they may
be said to please him. Now that which pleases God should not displease us. It
is said of David, who was a wise and a gracious Prince, Whatsoever the King
did, pleased all the people, 2 Samuel 3.36. The Lord our God infinitely
transcendeth David in Wisdom and Goodness; and therefore whatsoever the Lord
does, should please all his people.

7. It is God that made you, who has taken away your Estates from you, and it
is not meet that the Creature should quarrel, murmur at, or find fault with
any thing that his Maker does, Isa. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker; let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth: shall the
clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou?

SECT. 2.
2. Consider what it is which God has taken away from you; and this
Consideration will minister several Arguments for the quieting of your minds
under all your losses, though they have been very great. For,

1. God has taken away nothing but that which was his own. Your Houses, your
Goods, your Silver and Gold, and all that you have, or ever had, is the Lords,
1 Chronicles. 29.11. All that is in the heaven, and in the earth, is thine; Psalm. 24
1. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, the world, and they that
dwell therein; Hos. 2.7. Therefore will I return and take away my corn -- and
my wine -- and my wool -- and my flax. What Benhadad said to Ahab, and Ahab
replied to Benhadad, 1 King 20.3,4. Thy Silver and thy Gold is mine, thy Wives
also, and thy Children, even the goodliest are mine: and the King of Israel
answered and said, My Lord, O King, according to thy saying, I am thine, and
all that I have. The like may God say to us, Thy Silver and thy Gold is mine,
etc. And we may say to the Lord, O my Lord, according to thy saying, I am
thine, and all that I have. Now we take upon us to dispose of those things
which are our own, as we see good, Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own? And shall not we allow unto God that liberty which
we take unto our selves? shall we murmur against him when he takes away
nothing from us but that which is his own?

2. God has taken away nothing from you, but what you were unworthy to enjoy.
Jacob was a great man; the Angel that wrastled with him, says of him, As a
Prince have thou power with God and Men, and have prevailed, Genesis 32.28. Yet he
looked upon himself as unworthy of the least of all the mercies that ever God
bestowed upon him, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies,
and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. As the Woman of
Samaria said to Christ, John 4.12. Art thou greater than our Father Jacob? So
may I say unto you, Are you greater, and better than Jacob? if not, then you
must confess your selves unworthy of the least of all Gods mercies as he did;
and if you are unworthy of the least of all Gods mercies, then you have no
cause to repine at your losses, seeing God has taken nothing from you but what
you were unworthy to enjoy.

3. God has taken nothing from you, but that which you must of necessity have
shortly parted with, though this fire had not consumed any thing of your
Estates. It is but a very little while, and you must leave this world; and
though you have never so much of this worlds goods, you cannot carry one penny
with you out of the world, 1 Timothy 6.7. We brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain, we can carry nothing out: and upon this account the Apostle
urges Christians to be content, though they have never so little, nothing
besides food and raiment, ver. 8. Having food and raiment, let us be therewith
content. And as we can carry nothing with us out of the world, so it is
altogether uncertain, who shall possess what we leave behind us, Luke 12.20.
This night shall thy soul be required of thee; then whose shall those things be
that thou have provided? If we have children to inherit the substance that we
leave behind us, yet who can tell but the Extortioner may catch all that they
have, and Strangers devour their wealth, Psalm. 109.11. Or if they should enjoy
what we leave them, yet who can tell whether they will spend it well or ill?
who can tell whether they will be wise men or fools? Such thoughts as these
weaned Solomon from the world, and made him repent of all the pains he had
taken in erecting stately Buildings, and gathering together much Treasure,
Eccles. 2.18,19. I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun, because
I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me, and who knows whether
he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labor
wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise under the Sun.

4. That which God has taken from you is but vanity, yea more, that which
often proves a vexation to the Soul and Spirit, which is the better part of a
man. Solomon speaking of all worldly things, says of them, Vanity of Vanities,
all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. and afterward reckoning up his outward enjoyments,
he does tell us that his stately Buildings and his great Treasures were vanity
as well as other things. Eccles. 2.4,5,8,17. I made me great works, I builded
me houses -- I made me Gardens and Orchards -- I gathered me also Silver and
Gold, and the peculiar treasures of Kings -- All is vanity and vexation of
Spirit. Should a wise man disquiet himself for the loss of a vanity? or vex
himself because he is deprived of that which is but vexation of Spirit?

5. Riches are not that which most men think them to be. They have less of
good, and more of evil in them than we are aware of. I do not mean that riches
are evil of themselves, they are good blessings of God; yet our corrupt natures
are apt to turn them to an evil use. Wherefore view your riches which you have
lost, not according to that estimation which men of the world have of riches,
but according to the judgment which the Holy Ghost gives of them in the
Scriptures, where they are styled, Deceitful Riches, Mark 4.19. Uncertain
riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. The Mammon of unrighteousness, Luke 16.9. Vanity and
vexation of Spirit, as was hinted before. Thorns, Mat. 13.22. That which is
not. That which should be so far from disquieting our hearts, that they are not
worthy that such a noble creature as man should set his eyes upon them. Prove.
23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly
make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. The
Scriptures inform us, that all that disquiet themselves about riches, disquiet
themselves in vain, Psalm. 39.6. Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely
they are disquieted in vain, he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall
gather them. If this be the nature of riches, if they be like thorns, deceitful
things, not worthy the fixing of the eye upon them, etc. Why should you be
perplexed in your minds for the breach which God has made upon your Estates.

SECT. 3.
3. Consider that God has wise, and gracious, and merciful ends in this
dispensation, and intends you much good by taking away your estates from you.
When David was robbed of all that he had, and his City of refuge was burnt with
fire by the Amalekites, he found that this as well as his other afflictions
wrought for his good, Psalm. 119.61,71. The bands of the wicked have robbed me
-- It is good for me that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.
There is much mercy to the people of God in those paths that carry the greatest
appearance of severity, Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth to such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. It is an unquestionable
truth that God designs the doing his people good in every affliction which he
lays upon them, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good
unto them that love God -- And if all work together for your good, then also
your late losses though very great shall work for your good. And is it not an
unreasonable thing that you should be discontented when God deals mercifully
with you? that you should be discontented when God is doing you good? What
though you cannot see for the present how your losses should work for your
good? you may see it hereafter, Joh. 13.7. What I do, thou know not now, but
thou shall know hereafter. God may have several merciful ends, and design your
good several ways in taking away your estates; I will hint three or four
gracious ends of God in cutting of his people short in outward things, in order
to their spiritual good, and leave it to you, to judge which of these God
designs in your losses.

1. God sometimes diminishes his peoples wealth, because he sees that if he
should have continued them in the enjoyment of their estates it would have been
for their hurt, Eccles. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the
Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Riches may be
hurtful several ways. As 1. when they make us high-minded and rough in our
speeches and carriages toward the poor. This sin is very incident to rich men,
Prove. 18.23. The rich answers roughly. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich
in this world that they be not high-minded. -- 2. When they draw off our hearts
from God, and cause us to set them upon our riches, then they prove hurtful.
Now the more we have of the world, the more apt we are to set our hearts upon
the world, Psalm. 62.10. -- If riches increase set not your heart upon them. 3.
When they hinder our trusting in God, and living by faith, and we by reason of
the multitude of our riches trust in them. Now the more riches we have, the
more apt we are to trust in them, Psalm. 52.7. -- But trusted in the abundance
of his riches. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world that they
trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. 4. When they fill our minds with cares, and disturb our peace;
and this is usual with many rich men, to have their minds disturbed about their
estates both day and night, Eccles. 5.12. The abundance of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep. 5. When they draw a man to, or drown him in any sinful
lusts as idleness, sensuality, pride, security, etc. they become hurtful, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into a temptation and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition.
Now if God foresaw that your estates would have been hurtful to you any of
these ways, or any other way, and thereupon took them away, that they might
not do you hurt, you have no cause to complain, but rather to be thankful. If
you say, there is no fear that a good man should be hurt by his riches. I
answer, Agur was a good man, yet he was afraid lest riches should cause him to
deny the Lord, Prove. 30.8,9. Give me neither poverty nor riches, -- lest I be
full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord. -- Is it not better that God
should deny us the enjoyment of riches, than leave us in process of time to
deny him.

2. God sometimes diminishes our estates, and brings us low, because he
intends to call us to great sufferings, even to forsake all that we have. The
more a man has of the world, the harder it will be to part with all that he
possesses for Christ, Mar. 10.21,22. -- Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have,
and give to the poor -- And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved,
for he had great possessions. The Apostles who were poor, and had but little to
leave at the call of Christ, immediately left all and followed him, Matthew.
4.20. Luke 5.28. This forsaking of all for Christ is so necessary when we are
called to it, that without it we cannot be Christ's Disciples, Luke 14.33.
Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
Disciple. Suppose God foresaw that if he had not brought you into a low
condition, you would rather have forsaken Christ than your Estates; Has he not
dealt mercifully with you in taking away your Estates, which would have hindered
you from becoming Disciples of Christ?

3. Riches often times prove great hindrances to our salvation, and God takes
them away that he may make our passage to Heaven more easy, Matthew. 19.23,24.
Jesus said unto his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again, I say unto you, It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle than for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God. Suppose God saw your riches to be clogs to you,
and that they would have hindered your salvation, Was it not good for you that
God should take them away? Is it not better that you should lose your Estates
than lose the Kingdom of Heaven?

4. God diminishes our Estates that he may increase our Graces, Heb. 12.10. He
chastneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Ordinarily poor men are richer in grace than great men, Jam. 2.5. Has not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith? Grace is better than riches, and
have they then any cause to complain, whom God makes poor, that he may make
them rich in grace and holiness?

5. God diminishes our outward worldly comforts that he may increase our
inward and spiritual comforts, Hos. 2.7,14. I will take away my corn, -- and my
wine, -- and my wool, -- and my flax, -- I will allure her and bring her into
the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. I might mention others of a
like nature, but I forbear; by these you may see that God may intend his people
much good, when he depriveth them of their estates.

SECT. 4.
4. Consider that though God has taken much from you, he might with equity and
justice have taken away a great deal more from you, and therefore you have no
cause to repine that God has taken away so much, but rather to be thankful
that God has taken away no more from you. For

1. God might have taken away your lives as well as your estates. When Sodom
was burnt, Lot lost his house and his goods, as may be gathered from Genesis 19.
It was evening before the Angels came to him, Verse. 1. and in the morning about
the time that the Sun rose God rained fire and brimstone upon the City, Verse.
23. Some time was spent in entertaining the Angels, in going to his sons in law
to acquaint them with the purpose of God to destroy Sodom, in fleeing to Zoar,
so that he saved very little, if any of his goods; for, what could a man, that
had such short warning of Sodom's destruction, and was forced to flee for his
life, carry along with him? Besides the loss of his goods and his house, he
lost his wife, V. 26. and his sons in law, and his daughters that were married
to them, V. 14. only Lot and his two Daughters that were unmarried got to Zoar:
yet he does not murmur at his losses, but looks upon it as a great mercy,
that God had spared his life, Genesis 19.19. Behold now thy servant has found
grace in thy sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed
unto me in that thou have spared my life. -- When the Jews were carried captive
into Babylon, and Jerusalem was burnt with fire, though they had lost their
liberties, and their dwellings were consumed, they did not murmur because of
their losses, but looked upon it as a great mercy that themselves were not
consumed also, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not. And notwithstanding their sufferings were
very great, such as could scarce be paralled by any that lived in former ages,
as we may see, Lam. 1.12. yet they acknowledge that they had no cause of
complaining, seeing God had spared their lives, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a
living man complain? When the Ship in which the Apostle sailed was cast away,
and all the goods were lost, he makes a light matter of their losses seeing
their lives were preserved, Acts 27.22,25. I exhort you to be of good cheer,
for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of the Ship, --
Wherefore Sirs be of good cheer. He calls upon them twice, notwithstanding
their losses, to be of good cheer, because their lives were preserved.

2. God might have taken away your souls and cast them into everlasting
burnings, for you have sinned, and The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. The
Angels are more glorious creatures than man, yet as soon as they had sinned, God
cast them into Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but
cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be
reserved unto judgment. Now if God had dealt thus with you, if instead of
burning your houses, he had taken away your souls and cast them into
everlasting burnings, your loss would have been incomparably greater than now
it is, though you had been owners of the whole world; For what shall it profit
a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Mark 8.36.

5. God might have taken away his loving kindness from you, as he did from the
Jews, Jer. 16.5. I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord,
even loving kindness and mercies. Now that would have been a far greater loss,
than the loss of your estates, yea than the loss of your lives; for Gods loving
kindness is better than life, Ps. 63.3. Because thy loving kindness is better
than life, my lips shall praise thee. David spoke this when he was in the
Wilderness of Judah, as appears from the title of the Psalm, and in this
Wilderness he was destitute of all wordly comforts, as appears by calling this
place, a dry and thirsty land where no water is; yet enjoying Gods love in
this desolate Wilderness, he does not murmur for want of what he enjoyed,
whilst he lived at home with his father, or in Readiness Court, but praises God
for the sweetness and satisfaction which he enjoyed in the sense of Gods love.
And as David did, so may we bless God if he has not taken away his loving
kindness from us, whatever it be which God has taken from us, because his love
is better than all other things.

SECT. V.
5. Consider how you have sinned against the Lord, and what you have deserved
for your sins. The reflecting upon your sins, will make you patient under this
and all other sufferings, Micah 7.9. I will bear he indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, -- Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? The calling to remembrance our
sins may cause us to take patiently and contentedly the greatest afflictions on
several accounts, I will mention two.

1. How great soever our sufferings are, they are far less than our sins have
deserved. God never punishes any man in this world, either the godly or the
wicked, according to the desert of their sins, Psalm. 103.10. He has not dealt
with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Job's
sufferings were very great, he was the greatest man that lived in the Eastern
part of the world, and had all his estate taken from him in one day, he did not
only lose his estate, but his children also; his body was smitten with painful
and noisome boyls and sores, his soul also was full of trouble, as he himself
expresses it, Job 6.4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison
whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array
against me: yet Job's sins had deserved greater things from God, than what God
was pleased to lay upon him, Job 11.6. -- Know that God exacteth of thee less
than thine iniquity deserves. The afflictions which the Jews endured at the
destruction of Jerusalem, and during the time of their captivity in Babylon
(which lasted 70. years) were exceeding great, so great as scarce any people in
the world endured the like, as we may see by these two Texts of Scripture, Lam.
1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. Dan. 9.12. Under the whole Heaven
has not been done, as has been done upon Jerusalem; yet Ezra confesses that
all that they had suffered was far less than they deserved, Ezra 9.13. After
all that is come upon us, for our evil deeds and for our great trespass, seeing
that thou our God have panished us, less than our iniquities deserve. -- Our
sins deserve eternal damnation, Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins shall die.
They deserve to be punished with the loss of God, and the loss of the Kingdom
of Heaven to all eternity, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, -- Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me ye
that work iniquity. Now what are the losses and crosses that we meet with in
this world compared with the eternal loss of God and the Kingdom of Heaven, and
with the torments of Hell, that must be endured to all eternity?

2. What ever we suffer for our sins, we our selves are the causes of those
sufferings, and therefore have no reason to blame the Lord, but our selves for
provoking the Lord to lay such afflictions upon us, Jer. 2.17. Have thou not
procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord that led thee
by the way? Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, -- Jer. 30.15.
Why cryest thou for thine affliction? -- because thy sins were increased have I
done these things unto thee.

SECT. 6.
6. Consider what abundance of mercy you have enjoyed in former times, as well
as what afflictions you under go at present; this was one argument wherewith
Job quieted himself, and wherewith he labored to quiet his wife when she
advised him to curse God and die, Job 2.10. What? shall we receive good at the
hand of God and not evil? As God in the way of his Providence intermingleth
prosperity with our adversity, and sets the one against the other, that no man
may find out any cause of complaining against the Lord, Eccles. 7.14. In the
day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider, God also
has set the one against the other, to the end that man should find nothing
after him. So should we for the taking away of all occasions of murmuring under
our afflictions, set our mercies against our crosses; our former and present
mercies against our present afflictions, and that will convince us that we have
much cause of thankfulness, but no cause to murmur under our greatest
afflictions. For

1. We may wonder more that God bestows one mercy upon us, than at his
sending of a thousand afflictions, for we are altogether unworthy of the least
of all Gods mercies, Genesis 32.10. and have deserved all sorts of judgments, Dan.
9.7. To us belongs confusion of faces, --

2. Though we deserve all kinds of misery, and no mercy, yet they that have met
with most and greatest afflictions, if they take a view of Gods dealings with
them from the day that they were born to this present time, shall find that
their mercies have been far more and greater than their afflictions. Do we meet
with some cross or other every day? if we do, yet the mercies of the day are
greater than the crosses, for God sends new mercies every day, Lam. 3.23. They
are new every morning. We enjoy so many mercies every day, that we are said to
be loaded with them, Psalm. 68.19. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with
his benefits. Have our afflictions lain long upon us? Gods mercies have been of
a longer date than our afflictions, Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him. There are intermissions in
our afflictions, He does not always chide, Psalm. 103.9. but there is no
intermission in Gods mercies, there is not one moment all our life long but he
is conveying some good things to us, Isa. 27.3. I will water it every moment.
Lam. 3.22. His compassions fail not.

3. Every affliction that we meet with in this life, is allayed and tempered
with mercy, yea the bitterest cup that ever Gods people drink of, has more of
mercy than it has of judgment, Psalm. 145.9: His tender mercies are over all
his works. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such
as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. If we consider the sharpest
affliction that God lays upon his servants, in their procuring cause, which is
sin, if with the good intended by them, if in the principle from which they
flow, which is Gods love to their souls, we shall be easily convinced that
there is more of merry than severity in them, and so consequently that we have
much cause in every thing, even in every affliction to give thanks, but no
cause at all to murmur at the hand of the Lord.

SECT. 7.
7. Consider that it is the will and command of God, that we should be content
with such things as we have; Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. It was but little which those persons
possessed, to whom the Apostle wrote this Epistle, for they had suffered much
for Christ, their goods were spoiled and taken from them, as we may see Heb.
10.34. yet he tells them it was the will of God that they should be content
with such things as they had. If we have nothing more than food and raiment, we
ought to be content, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment let us be therewith
content. It is not said, having dainty meat and rich attire, let us be
therewith content; but having food and raiment, though never so plain and mean,
we ought to be therewith content. Though you have lost much, and have very
little left, yet there are weighty reasons that may persuade you to be content
with such things as you have. As

1. Though you have very little left, you have more left than you brought with
you into the world, and more than you can carry with you out of the world, 1 Timothy 6.7. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out. Job 1.21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither.

2. Though you have very little, you have as much, it may be, more than Christ,
or the Apostles of Christ had when they were in the world. Our Lord Jesus
Christ lived in a very poor condition when he was in the world, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your
sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might become rich. He was so
poor that he had not an house to dwell in, Mat. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and
the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his
head. His diet was mean, when he had nothing but barley bread and two small
fishes for himself and his Disciples, and them that came to hear him; he was
not discontented because he had no better provision, but gave God thanks for
what he had, though it was but barley bread, Joh. 6.9,11. He was so poor, that
he received contribution from well disposed persons, Luke 8.2,3. when the
Tax-gatherers came to him for tribute, he had not wherewith all to pay them
without working of a miracle, Mat. 17.24,27. yet this (...), this Tribute money
which was demanded of him, was no great sum, not above fifteen pence of our
money. Now shall we murmur, or be discontented, when we are as well or better
provided for, as to worldly things, than Jesus Christ our Lord and Master was?
The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; It is
enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord.
And as you have as much as Christ had, so you have as much or more of this
worlds goods than the Apostles had, 1 Cor. 4.11. Even to this present hour, we
both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place, and labor, working with our own hands. Paul speaks here of
himself, and the other Apostles, as you may see, v. 9. And though they were so
poor, that they had scarce any thing that they could call their own; yet they
were as well contented as if they had possessed all the world. 2 Cor. 6.10. As
poor, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Phil. 4.11,12. I have
learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to
be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things I am
instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer
need.

3. Though you have very little left, yet you have more than you are worthy of,
as has been hinted already, from Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies, and of all the truth that thou have showed unto thy servant.

4. Though you have but little, you may live as long, and may live as blessed
and comfortable a life, as you might do, if you had all the world. You may live
as long, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness; for a man's life
consists not in the abundance of those things that he does possess. You may
live as blessed and comfortable lives, though you be poor, as they that have
great Estates, Luke 6.20. Blessed be ye poor -- The Apostle Paul, who was so
poor, that he had nothing, was always in a joyful condition, 2 Cor. 6.10.
David had not more satisfaction when he sat upon the Throne, enjoying all the
delights that his Kingdom could afford, than he found when he was in the
Wilderness of Judah; for when he was in this Wilderness, he tells us that his
Soul was satisfied as with marrow and fatness, whilst his thoughts and
meditations were taken up about God, Psalm. 63.5,6. Yet in this Wilderness he
was destitute of all worldly comforts. He calls it a dry and thirsty Land,
where no water was, ver. 1. Many laboring men that work hard all the day to
get their living, enjoy more comfortable days and nights than they that have
great riches. Eccles. 5.12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he
eat little or much; but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

5. Though you have but little, yet it is far better with you, than with those
that want the Grace of God, and enjoy great Estates, Psalm. 37.16. A little that
a righteous man has is better than the riches of many wicked: For what a
righteous man has, he enjoys it with the love and favor of God; but a
wicked man is hated and abhorred of God, Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of
iniquity. Now it is said, Prove. 15.17. Better is a dinner of herbs where love
is, than a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. A righteous man when he has but
little, has that which suffices him, Phil. 4.11,12. But a wicked man is
dissatisfied and straightened in his mind, under his greatest abundance, Job
20.22. In the midst of his sufficiency he shall be in straits.

6. Though you have but little, God can bless your little, that it shall become
a great deal before you die. Jacob had but little when he went to Laban, but
God sent him away with a great Estate, Genesis 32.10. With my staff I passed over
this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. It is the blessing of the Lord
makes rich, Prove. 10.22. And it is all one with God to bless a man that has
little, as him that has much. Bildad tells Job after he had suffered great
losses, that if he would seek unto God, Though thy beginning was small, yet thy
latter and should greatly increase, Job 8.5,7. But if God should continue you
in a low Estate, yet he can so bless that little that he has left you, that
you shall have enough to maintain you as long as you live. As it was with the
Manna that fell in the Wilderness, 2 Cor. 8.15. He that gathered much had
nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack, So it falls out by the
providence of God toward his people, that though they have but little, yet
they have no lack of what is good for them, Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing. It may be some will say, we have so little,
that we have much ado to live, though provision be plentiful and cheap; but
suppose times should grow hard, suppose God should send a Famine, how should we
do then that have so little, that have much ado to live now?

Answ. If God send a Famine, he promises to take care of all such as fear him,
and hope in his mercy, Psalm. 33.18,19. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy to deliver their soul from
death, and to keep them alive in Famine. Psalm. 37.16. and 19. verses compared.
In the 16. verse the Psamist speaks of the happy condition of the righteous,
though they have but little: and whereas some might think, but what shall
become of us that have but little, if a Famine should come? he adds, ver. 19.
They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in the days of Famine they
shall be satisfied. Job 5.20. In famine he shall redeem thee from death. and
ver. 22. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh. When there was a famine in
Israel, God did so bless and multiply the widows handful of meal, and her
little oil in a cruse, that she, and the Prophet, and all her house were
nourished therewith many days, even till God sent plenty in Israel, 1 Kings
17. from ver. 9. to 17.

SECT. 8.
8. Consider that God has left you more and better things then he has taken
from you; and therefore how great soever your losses have been, you may well be
content. I will put you in mind of some things which God has left you, which
are far better than those things which he has taken from you.

1. God has left you his Holy Word, in the reading and meditation whereof, you
may delight your self night and day, Ps. 1.1,2. Now Gods word is more worth
than all the Gold and Silver in the world, Psalm. 119.22. The law of thy mouth
is better unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver. And with this David
comforted himself when he was robbed and spoiled of his goods, by the means of
wicked and ungodly men, ver. 61. You may see also Psalm. 19.10. and Psalm. 119.14.

2. God has left you himself for your portion, and though a man has lost all
that he had in the world, as long as he has God for his portion, he is well
enough. When the Jews who were carried captive into Babylon, were spoiled of
all their goods, and had seen their dwellings burnt with fire, they comforted
themselves with this, that they had God still for their portion, Lam. 3.24. The
Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. All things in
all Nations compared with God are less than nothing and vanity, Isa. 40.17. All
Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity. And why then should a man that enjoys this great God for
his portion not rest satisfied in God, but disquiet himself for that which is
less than nothing and vanity?

3. God has left you his Spirit which is in you, and shall abide with you, to
teach, sanctify, and comfort, you as long as you live. John 14.16,17. I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth -- he dwells with you, and shall
be in you. When David had offended the Lord in the matter of Uriah, he wat more
afraid of having the Spirit of God takenaway, than of losing his Kingdom; and
therefore he does not pray, take not my Kingdom, but take not thy Holy Spirit
from me, Psalm. 51.11. And though he was told by Nathan, that the Sword should
never depart from his house, and that God would raise up evil against him from
his own house, 2 Samuel 12.10,11. Yet he resolves if God would but pardon his
sin, and continue his Holy Spirit with him, his tongue should sing aloud of his
Righteousness, Psalm. 51.12,14.

4. God has left you the true riches which are far better than all the riches
of this world. To be rich in Grace, is better than to be rich in Money, or
Houses, or Lands, or any other worldly thing. He that is rich in worldly
Possessions, but is not rich toward God, is a miserable man, Luke 12.19,20,21.
but he that is rich in Grace, though he be a very poor man as to worldly
things, is an happy man, for he is an heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, James 2.5.
There is not any one Grace of the Holy Spirit, but it is much better than all
the Riches of the world. I will instance in three or four Graces by which a man
may give judgment of the rest. 1. Wisdom and Understanding by which we know
God and the things of God, is of such a precious Nature, that there is nothing
in the world worthy to be compared with it. Prove. 3.13,14,15. Happy is the man
that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding; for the
merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than rubies, and all the things
that thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. 2. Faith is more
precious than all the gold in the world, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your
faith being much more precious than gold that perishes. Faith is not only as
precious, but more, much more precious than Gold. 3. The fear of the Lord that
is precious treasure, Isa. 23.6. The fear of the Lord is his treasure. 4. A
meek and a quiet spirit is a rich ornament far above gold or silver; for these
only commend us to men, but a meek and a quiet spirit is an ornament of great
price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.3,4.

5. God has left you all the promises, he has not taken away one promise from
you. The covenant which comprehends under it all the promises, is in all things
ordered and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. When God makes the greatest alterations in our
conditions, there is no alteration in his covenant. Psalm. 89.34. My covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Isa. 54.10.
The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindeness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Though you should have lost all that you
have, you are as rich in promises as ever, and the promises are more worth than
the whole world; and may you not then quiet your minds with what promises God
has left you, seeing you have promises not only for the life to come, but also
for the supply of all your wants in this present life? 1 Timothy 4.8. Phil. 4.19.

6. God has blessed you with all spiritual blessings in Christ, where they
shall not, where they cannot be taken from you. You have lost only earthly
blessings, you have not lost any one spiritual blessing. Now this may be a
great comfort to you, that notwithstanding what you have lost, yet you are
still blessed with all spiritual blessings. The Apostle Paul who had suffered
the loss of all things for Christ, Phil. 3.8. was not troubled for his losses,
when he considered what God had laid up for him in Christ, but breaks out into
blessing and praise, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ.

SECT. 9.
9. Consider what God has laid up for you in Heaven, and that will quiet and
comfort your hearts, though your goods be spoiled, and your houses burnt, and
you have lost all the estate that you have in the world, Heb. 10.34. Ye took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in
Heaven a better and a more enduring substance. There are such excellent things
treasured up for you in Heaven, that the tongues of men are not able to express
the goodness or the greatness of them, Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? We have seen many desirable
and excellent things with our eyes, and possibly we may have heard of better
things than ever we saw, and we can conceive of better things in our minds than
ever we saw or heard of, but those things which the Lord has prepared for us
in Heaven are far better and more excellent than ever we saw or heard of, or
can conceive in our minds, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. Such is the excellency of those things which God has
laid up in Heaven for us, that the thoughts and hope of enjoying the glory and
joys of heaven, may fill our hearts with joy and comfort under all the losses
and crosses that we meet with in the world, Romans 5.2,3. We rejoice in hope of
the glory of God, and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also. 1 Pet.
1.3,4,6. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us unto a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible,
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, wherein ye
greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness
through manifold temptations. Though a servant of God has lost never such a
fair Inheritance on Earth, yet he has more cause of rejoicing in that
incorruptible Inheritance that fades not away, which is reserved for him in
Heaven, than of being troubled for the loss of his earthly Inheritance,

SECT. 10.
10. Consider what a great evil it is to murmur, and to be discontented at your
losses, and how pleasing and acceptable it is unto the Lord that you should be
content and patient under this affliction, which it has seemed good unto the
Lord to lay upon you. The Israelites went through many difficulties whilst they
wandered up and down by the space of forty years in the Wilderness, and because
they murmured, multitudes of them were destroyed, neither the greatness, nor
the long continuance of the affliction did excuse them from punishment; and
this example of Gods justice on them is set down for an example to us, that we
might for ever be deterred from murmuring under any of our afflictions, 1 Cor.
10.10. Neither murmur ye as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. To murmur because God has taken away our Estates, is the ready way
to provoke God to take away our lives, Psalm. 106.25,26. They murmured in their
Tents, -- Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in
the Wilderness. There is more evil in one repining discontented thought, than
there is in all your losses though they be very great; for the one has only
the evil of punishment, the other has in it the evil of sin. And there is more
of evil in the least sin than in the greatest punishment. All Gods dealings
toward his people are managed with infinite wisdom and infinite love, in order
to the promoting of their good and his own glory; and what an heinous sin, and
how offensive to God is it for a man to murmur when God is doing of him good,
and bringing glory to his Name? seeing also that whatever way God takes to
bring about our good, is contrived with infinite wisdom, and is accompanied
with infinite love.

And as it is is a great evil to be discontented at any of Gods dealings, so it
is an excellent, heavenly frame of spirit, and that which is highly pleasing to
God, for a man in all things to submit himself to God, and to lie at his foot
and to be content with his will, and to say in his heart, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good. That is of great excellency which is an ornament
to a man in the judgment of a wise, holy, judicious man, that may be deemed
more excellent, which is accounted an ornament by the Angels of Heaven; but
that is most excellent which is an ornament in the sight of God, and of this
nature is a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. The ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. When the Lord has brought
us to lie at his foot, he is so pleased with this submissive frame of spirit,
that he is wont to bestow very great blessings on such as are brought to his
foot, and are content that he should do what he pleases with them, Isa. 41.2.
Who raised up the righteous man from the East, called him to his foot, gave the
Nations before him, and made him Ruler over Kings? Contentment under the cross
makes great afflictions to seem but small ones, and small afflictions none at
all. The Apostle went through very great sufferings, as we may see, 1 Cor.
4.9,10,11,12,13. 2 Cor. 11.23,24,25,26,27. yet having learnt in every estate to
be content, Phil. 4.11. he makes a light matter of all his afflictions, 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light affliction, etc. Romans 8.18. I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. But a discontented mind thinks small afflictions great and
intolerable burdens. The loss of a gourd which sprang up in a day, and withered
in a day, was but a small loss, yet Jonah being under a discontented mind, is
so troubled at this loss, that he faints under it, and wishes that he might
die, and is angry with God, and justifies himself in his frowardness, and
says, I do well to be angry even to the death, Jonah 4.7,8,9. Discontent is
like a nail in a yoke which frets and galls, and pains the neck far more than
the yoke it self does. When God lays the yoke of affliction upon us,
discontent troubles and perplexeth the soul far more than any affliction can do.

SECT. 11.
11. Consider how patiently and contentedly others of Gods servants have
endured, and gone through far greater losses and sorer troubles than you have
met withal. Job lost a very great Estate, and seven Sons and three Daughters,
even all that he had in one day, yet all these losses did not provoke Job to
repine, or speak one foolish word against God, or do any other iniquity, but he
bore all with such a quiet spirit, that in stead of fretting and repining, he
blesses God, Job 1.21,22. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed
be the Name of the Lord, in all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly:
When David was driven from Jerusalem by his son Absalom, who conspired against
him, to take away not only his Crown and Kingdom, but his life also; this was a
very great affliction, and it was the more heavy, because it was his own son
that came sorth of his bowels that sought to take away his life, 2 Samuel 16.11.
and this affliction came upon him for his sin in killing Vriah, which he knew
very well, being foretold of it by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.9,10,11. yet
he submits himself to God under all that was come upon him, and is willing that
the Lord should lay whatever else he saw meet, though he should say of David, I
have no delight in him, 2 Samuel 15.26. If he thus say, I have no delight in
thee, Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. It was a sad
message which God sent to Eli by Samuel, it is ushered in with this Preface, 1 Samuel 3.11. Behold! I do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one
that hears it shall tingle; yet Eli upon the hearing of the whole message
lies down at Gods foot, and speaks not one repining word against the Lord;
Verse. 18. Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said it
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. The sufferings of Jesus Christ
were exceeding great, yet how patiently did he bear them, Isa. 53.7. He was
oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth, he is brought as
a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he
opens not his mouth. We are exhorted to take notice of the patience of Gods
servants in their afflictions, in order to the helping us to bear our
afflictions with patience, Jam. 5.8,10,11. Be ye also patient -- Take my
Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example
of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold we count them happy that
endure, ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

Thus much may suffice by way of consideration, I shall now advise you some
things by way of practice for the obtaining and promoting a quiet, cheerful
contented frame of spirit under this affliction, of the loss of your Estates,
which may be useful under other afflictions which the Lord does at present, or
may hereafter try you withal.

SECT. 1.
1. Lay hold on Gods Covenant, wherein he has promised to give his people
contented and satisfied minds under all his dealings with them, even when he
afflicts them most sorely, and takes away their most endeared comforts and
enjoyments from them. I will mention some promises to this purpose, Psalm.
37.19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in the days of famine
they shall be satisfied: Famine is one of the sorest of Gods Judgments, it is
worse than War, which is also a very heavy judgment. David chose the Pestilence
rather than War, as being the lesser evil, but famine is worse than War, Lam.
4.9. They that be slain with the sword, are better than they that are slain
with hunger. Yet in the evil time, in Famine, though the Famine last many
days, God promises that his righteous servants shall be satisfied. Isa.
58.11. The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought
-- or as it is in the Margin, in droughts. The Prophet uses the plural number
to signify that God will satisfy his peoples souls in all droughts, or in the
greatest drought that ever did, or ever shall come upon any place. When God
promises to satisfy our souls in drought, it implies, 1. That he will give us
satisfied minds under the penury and want of all outward comforts; for drought
brings a consumption upon all earthly enjoyments, Hag. 1.10,11. 2. That he will
stay, and support, and satisfy our minds under our greatest sorrows. No
afflictions bring greater sorrows than Famine which is the companion of
drought, Jer. 14.2,3,4,17,18. Lam. 2.11,12,18,19. 3. It implies that God will
give us satisfied minds when we walk in the view of death, when we see our
children and relations dying, and our selves are ready every hour to faint, and
give up the Ghost for want of bread. The Prophet describing the Famine that was
in Jerusalem, says, Lam. 2.11,12. The children and the sucklings swoon in the
streets of the City, they say to their Mothers, where is corn and wine? when
they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the City, when their soul was
poured out into their Mothers bosom. The wilderness which was a land of drought
is called a land of the shadow of death, Jer. 2.6. In times of drought God
takes away that which is the stay and staff of a man's life; Isa. 3.1. The Lord
does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole
stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. Drought consumes our corn, and
wine, and oil, as was hinted before from Hag. 1.11. And of these the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 104.15. Wine makes glad the heart of man, and oil makes his face
to shine, and bread strengthens man's heart. So that when the Lord promises
to satisfy our souls in drought, there is employed in this promise, that when
the joy of our hearts, when our glory and strength is taken away, when all
means of supporting life fail, when we are in the most desolate places, or
desolate conditions imaginable, he will under all our troubles give us
satisfied minds. The Lord has not only promised to give us contented
satisfied minds under all our troubles, but he has promised to continue us
under a contented frame of spirit, that whatever changes or alterations we pass
through, we shall abide satisfied and contented in all estates and conditions.
Prove. 19.23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it shall
abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with evil. The latter clause of this
promise is not to be understood, as though they that fear God should not meet
with any afflictions, but when God does visit them with afflictions, they shall
have such abundant satisfaction in God, and from God, that they shall not feel
any evil in their afflictions. Another promise of the like nature made to such
as fear God, we have Psalm. 25.13. His soul shall dwell at ease -- dwelling
implies the continuance of the ease and quiet that their souls shall enjoy
that fear the Lord, though their outward condition may be full of trouble, yet
their souls shall dwell at ease, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they which
love thy law, and nothing shall offend them. Which promise Junius interprets to
this effect. They that love the Law of God shall enjoy such great peace and
tranquillity of mind, that nothing that does befall them shall take away their
peace. They may, and do fall into troubles and afflictions as well as other
men, but their troubles shall not take away their peace from them. To be
content in all estates and conditions is one way whereby we partake of the
divine nature, and do resemble God; now it is by and through the promises that
we become partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of
the divine nature -- wherefore in order to the obtaining of a contented spirit
under this and all other afflictions, be much in meditation upon the promises
of God, and apply them to your own souls, and plead them daily with God, until
you have obtained all that fullness of grace and peace which is contained in
them.

SECT. 2.
2. When you feel any discontented thoughts arising in your minds, any
fretting or repining against God, labor to subdue all such risings of heart,
and all discontented, troubled thoughts.

1. By calling to mind such Scriptures as these, James 4.7. Submit your selves
unto God -- Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? James 1.2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall
into diverse temptations. Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Psalm. 46.10. Be still and know that I
am God. John 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled, Zech. 2.13. Be silent, O all
flesh before the Lord -- Romans 9.20. Nay, but O man, who art thou that replyest
against God? shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it, why have thou
formed me thus? 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

2. Call off your eyes and your thoughts from your temporal losses, and look
within the veil to those eternal blessings which are prepared and reserved in
heaven for you. Overmuch pondering upon our losses, will stir up grief and
sorrow, and cause dejection. Lam. 1.2. She weepeth sore in the night, and her
tears are on her cheeks; and that which among other things caused her sorrow,
is mentioned, ver. 7. Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction, and
of her miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old --
David also found that the remembrance of his losses stirred his sorrows. Psalm.
42.4. When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me. But the diverting
of our minds and thoughts from those good things which we have lost, and those
evils which we suffer, and looking to those great things that are reserved in
heaven for us, is an excellent means to keep us from fainting and sinking under
our sufferings. 2 Cor. 4.8,9,10,11,16,18. We are troubled on every side -- we
are perplexed -- persecuted -- cast down -- always bearing about the dying of
the Lord Jesus -- are always delivered unto death -- yet in all these
sufferings he adds, ver. 16. We faint not -- He tells us also whence it came
to pass that he did not faint, ver. 18. While we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

3. Chide and rebuke your souls for being cast down and disquieted about
worldly things, and call upon them to hope in God, who is your portion, and is
able to revive you under your greatest troubles and sorrows, Psalm. 42.11. Why
art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenanee, and my
God.

4. Look unto Jesus Christ to quiet your spirits, he can take down all the
risings of the heart, and bring every thought into subjection unto his Holy
Will. 2 Cor. 10.4,5. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Our strength
to resist and overcome sinful motions, does not lie in our selves, but in
Jesus Christ. As we are not sufficient of our selves to think one good thought,
2 Cor. 3.5. So neither can we of our selves cast out one evil thought; but
through Christ Jesus we shall be able to do all things. The Apostle Paul passed
through variety of conditions, he suffered the loss of all things, he was
frequently in prisons, in deaths often, etc. yet he had learned in whatsoever
estate he was, therewith to be content; and how did he attain to this? it was
by Christ, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens
me.

SECT. 3.
3. Trust in the Lord at all times, and for all things; live by faith upon the
promises, and stay your selves continually upon God: this will be an excellent
means to keep your souls in a quiet, peaceable, contented, satisfied frame,
under all the losses and crosses that have befallen you, or may befall you for
the time to come. Isa 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Psalm. 36.7,8. How excellent is thy
loving kindness; O God, therefore the children of men put their trust under the
shadow of thy wings, they (that is, they that trust in thee) shall be
alundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. Though they that trust in God meet with
many bitter and sharp afflictions, yet those draughts which God gives them of
the rivers of his pleasures do so sweeten all their afflictions, that they
remain abundantly satisfied under all Gods dealings with them: See also to this
purpose, Jer. 17.7,8. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose
hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that
spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes; but
her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought,
neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Here the Lord promises those that
trust in him, such a stayed satisfied mind, that they shall be no more
disturbed or disquieted by their afflictions than if they met with none at all
-- And shall not see when heat comes -- though it should be a time of drought,
and the drought should continue not only days, or months; but years, yet God
will keep their minds from being perplexed and disquieted with cares, -- And
shall not be careful in the year of drought.

SECT. 4.
4. Labor daily to mortify all inordinate affections to worldly things. Most
of that disturbance which arises in our minds when we meet with losses or
other afflictions, proceeds from inordinate affection. If neither our desire,
nor fear, nor hope, nor love, nor delight, nor any other affection were carried
out immediately after worldly things, crosses and disappointments would not
create any great trouble to us. The Apostle Paul who was crucified to the
world, was as well content in his wants as in his greatest abundance, and in
his abasements as when most highly honored. Gal. 6.14. compared with Phil.
4.11,12. It was Jacobs immoderate love to his Son Joseph, that did so much
deject him, and cause him to mourn so excessively for his supposed death, that
though all his Sons, and all his Daughters rose up to comfort him, he refused
to be comforted, Genesis 37.3,34,35. It was Baruchs inordinate desire after great
things, that caused him to be so restless in his afflictions, and to faint
under his trials, Jer. 45.3,5. David went through many troubles, yet kept his
heart in a quiet frame; and one great means whereby he quieted himself, was by
getting and keeping his affections weaned from worldly things, Psalm. 131.2.
Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his
Mother, my soul is even as a weaned child.

SECT. 5.
5. Give up your selves to the doing of works of righteousness. Do all the
service that you are able for God, and for your generation. Abound always in
the work of the Lord, and be ready as far as you have opportunity and ability
to do all the good you can for all men; hereby you shall obtain a quiet
peaceable frame of spirit under all your troubles and afflictions. Isa. 32.17.
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. The Prophet had threatened great troubles, and
of many years continuance, ver. 9, 10, 11. and then tells them, how they might
retain quietness under all their troubles, namely by working righteousness, v.
17. and then tells them farther of the blessedness of such as did sow besides
all waters, (that is, who took hold of all opportunities to be doing good) they
should enjoy peace and quietness when Gods judgments came down as thick as
hail round about them, ver. 18, 19, 20. Working of righteousness promotes
contentment in all estates several ways. I will mention one or two. 1. As it
produces the joy of the Lord in our souls. God is wont to put joy and gladness
into the hearts of those that work righteousness, Psalm. 45.7. Thou love
righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore God, thy God has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Now when God puts joy and
gladness into our hearts, we do not much feel the sorrows and troubles that we
meet with in this world, Eccles. 5.20. He shall not much remember the days of
his life, because God answers him in the joy of his heart. What Solomon says
of wine and strong drink, Prove. 30.6,7. Give strong drink unto him that is
ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts; let him drink and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. The like I may say of the
joys of the Holy Ghost, when God has made us to drink of the rivers of his
pleasures, though we be poor, and heavy of heart, and ready to perish, they
will make us forget our poverty, and remember our sorrow no more. 2. Working
righteousness promotes contentment on this account, because they that work
righteousness have many sweet visits from God, and enjoy much of Gods presence,
and the soul is never better at ease, or enjoyes more contentment, than when it
enjoyes God, Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. John 14.23. If a man love
me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him.

SECT. 6.
6. Take up your rest and contentment in God, and and that will keep you from
fretting, and vexing, and being discontented under your losses, and all other
afflictions, Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the Lord -- fret not thy self -- There is no
better way to prevent fretting and vexing at cross providence, than for a man
to take up his rest in God, for he shall find such sweetness in God, that he
shall not feel any great bitterness in affliction. When the Spouse was a Lilly
among Thorns, encompassed with sharp and piercing troubles, when she was
scorched with heat of Persecution, she found such sweetness in solacing her
Soul with Christ, that she makes no complaints of her Sufferings, but makes
her boast of what she found in him, Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. She spoke this, when
Christ resembled her to a Lilly among Thorns, ver. 2. Now in regard it
conduces much to the helping of us to be contented under all the troubles of
this life for a man to take up his rest, and satisfaction, and contentment in
God. I shall enlarge a little upon this Head, and show first, That there is
enough in God to give the soul of a man full satisfaction and contentment in
every state and condition. 2. I shall show how a man may take up his rest and
contentment in God.

1. There is enough in God to give the soul of a man full and complete
satisfaction; how poor, how afflicted, how desolate soever his condition be in
this world: and this may be demonstrated several ways.

1. God is a suitable good; he answers all the wants, all the desires, all the
workings and breathings, and motions of the soul of man. All that the soul
wants, is to be found in God, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need
according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. All that the soul desires is
in God, Isa. 26.8,9. The desire of our soul is to thy name -- with my soul have
I desired thee in the night. Psalm. 73.25. There is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee. Now where there is a supply of all wants, and an
accomplishment of all the desires of the soul, there is full satisfaction. That
which the soul travelleth after, that which it labors for, that which it
mainly pursues and follows after, is, that it may enjoy God, Psalm. 63.8. My
soul follows hard after thee -- which shows, that satisfaction is to be had
in God: for when a man has obtained that which his soul travelleth after, he
is satisfied, Isa. 53.10. He shall see of the travel of his soul and be
satisfied. God is the center to which all the motions of a sanctified soul do
tend. The enquiries of the soul are after God, Cant. 3.3. Saw ye him whom my
soul loves? John 12.21. Sir we would see Jesus. The pantings, and thirstings,
and breathings of the soul are after God, Psalm. 42.1,2. -- My soul pants
after thee, O God, my soul is athirst for God, for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before God? The mournings of the souls are after the Lord,
Zech. 12.10. They shall mourn for him, 1 Samuel 7.2. -- All the house of Israel
lamented after the Lord. The seekings and cries of the soul are after God,
Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. Psalm. 84.2. My
heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. The main thing the soul
hops and waits for, is God, Psalm. 71.5. Thou art my hope -- Psalm. 39.7. Now
Lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee. Psalm. 130,5 6. I wait for the Lord,
my soul does wait, in his word do I hope; my soul waits for the Lord more
than they that watch for the morning; I say more than they that watch for the
morning. The expectations of the soul are from him, Psalm. 62.5. My soul, wait
thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him. The boastings and
triumphings of the soul are in God, Psalm. 34.2. My soul shall make her boast in
the Lord. Isa. 25.9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will
save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice
in his salvation. The like may be proved of all other motions of the soul, they
tend to God as their center; whence it follows, that the souls rest is in
God, for all things are at rest when they come to their proper center.

2. God is an eternal good. If a man be possessed of never such an excellent
portion, if there be fear or danger of losing what he enjoys, this is a
disturbance to his mind, and hinders in some measure, the fullness of his
contentment; but as for God, there is no cause to fear our losing of him when
once we have gotten God for our portion; for when he bestows himself upon a
person, he gives himself for a portion to that person for ever, Psalm. 48.14.
This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death.
Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart
and my portion for ever. The soul of man being of an immortal eternal nature,
no less good than that which is eternal can give it satisfaction.

3. God is an all-sufficient Good. Such is Gods all sufficiency to satisfy all
the desires of the soul, that a man that enjoys God for his portion, need not
desire any thing either in heaven or earth, to add to his happiness besides
God, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire lesides thee. Such is Gods all sufficiency to satisfy the soul,
that if a man may be deprived of all worldly comforts and enjoyments, there is
enough in God to fill his soul with joy, though all his outward comforts be
taken from him, he may still rejoice in God, Hab. 3.17,18. Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of
the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Such is the
all sufficiency of God to satisfy the soul, that the soul may rejoice and
delight it self in God, not only when it wants the good things of this world,
but also when it is surrounded with many evils, Romans 5.3,11. We glory in
tribulations -- we joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
now received the atonement. Psalm. 44.8. In God we boast all the day long -- and
this was spoken under a time of great affliction, as may be seen from the
following verses, especially ver. 22. For thy sake we are killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter. We may boast in God all the
day long, though it be in such a day, wherein we go in danger of our life all
the day long, or wherein we meet with afflictions as hard to be born, and as
bitter as death it self.

4. The Lord is able to satisfy the desire of every creature, Psalm. 145.16.
Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. There
is that in God which does or may satisfy all the Saints and Servants of God
upon the face of the earth, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. --
This was spoken to Paul, when he was in great perplexity, being buffeted with
the messenger of Satan, which was as irksome to his soul, as any thorn can be
to the flesh, and Gods grace that was sufficient for Paul is sufficient for all
that trust in him, not only to give them satisfaction, but such abundant
satisfaction that they need not ask any more, Psalm. 37.8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house -- David was so overjoyed
with what he met with in, and from God, that he could not ask more than God had
given him, 2 Samuel 7.20. And what can David say more unto thee.

5. There is that in God which satisfies all the Saints and Angels in heaven,
Psalm. 17.15. As for me I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. The Saints and Angels in heaven are
of larger capacity than we are, their faculties are more raised than ours, they
can take in far more joy than we are capable of whilst we dwell here below, yet
they are as full of joy as they can hold; and this their joy arises only from
the fruition of God, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy -- for
after they come to heaven, they have no enjoyment of any worldly things,
Eccles. 9.6. Luke 20.35,36. neither do they find any need of any thing that is
under the Sun, to augment their happiness, Rev. 21.23.

6. God is (...) self-sufficient, and therefore he must needs be (...)
all-sufficient for all his creatures. There is no creature on the earth, nor no
Saint or Angel in heaven partaketh of such blessedness, such joy and delight,
as the blessed God; and whence arises that blessedness and contentment which
God enjoys? only from himself, as may be proved by several arguments; I will
mention three. 1. Before ever there were any creatures in being, either Men, or
Angels, or other creatures, he was God blessed in himself, and lived as happy
and blessed a life as he does now, he has an innumerable company of Angels to
wait upon him. He was God, the same God that now he is, before ever the
creatures were produced into being, Psalm. 90.2. He ever was, and ever will be
infinitely and eternally blessed; and therefore being infinitely blessed in
himself, before the world was created, the creatures added nothing to his
blessedness. 2. It is evident that God is self-sufficient, and that his
happiness and blessedness proceeds from himself, and that he needs nothing
that any of his creatures can do, to add to his happiness, because the
creatures have nothing, and can do nothing but what they have from him, and do
by those influences they receive from him. Acts 17.24,25. God that made the
world and all things therein, seeing he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells
not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as
though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all, life and breath, and all
things. 3 If all creatures should be annihilated and reduced to their first
nothing, God would still continue the same that ever he was, and be as blessed
as he is at this day, Psalm. 102.25,26,27. Now seeing there is enough in God to
satisfy every living thing, to satisfy all his servants on earth, and all his
Saints and Angels in Heaven; yea, seeing he is self-sufficient, and has in
himself that which suffices for his own happiness; is it not unreasonable for
any man to doubt, whether there be that in God which may give him full and
complete satisfaction in all estates and conditions whatever?

7. As there is full satisfaction to be had in God, so true rest and
contentment is to be had no where but in God. Take every creature upon the face
of the Earth apart, or take them all together adorned with all their
excellencies, and if you consider them abstracted from God and Christ, they are
all vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, says the
Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Eccles. 2.17. All is vanity and
vexation of spirit. This judgment and determination concerning what is in all
creatures, was given by Solomon, one of the wisest of men that ever lived; it
was given by Solomon that had as much as his heart could wish, of the things of
this world, and made it his work and business to search into, and study what
was in the Creatures that might delight and content the heart of man, Eccl.
2.3. and in this his scrutiny, he tells us, V. 10. Whatsoever mine eyes
desired, I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy -- Yet
after all his diligence and all his experiments to try what was in the
creatures, he gives this account, All is vanity and vexation of spirit: yea
which is more than what has been said, He was a Penman of holy Scripture, he
was inspired by the Holy Ghost when he gave this judgment of the creatures,
that all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Now what wise man would seek for his
rest in that which is vanity and vexation of spirit? As it was with Noah's Dove
when gone out of the Ark, Genesis 8.9. The Dove found no rest for the sole of her
foot, and she returned unto him, into the Ark. So it will be with us, though we
seek for rest every where, we shall find it no where but by returning to God in
Christ. It is said of the Jews, Jer. 50.6. They have gone from Mountain to
Hill, they have forgotten their resting place. If we think to find rest in any
place, or any condition, and do not seek it in God, we do but delude our
selves, with vain hopes, for it is to be found only in him, Mat. 11.28,29. Come
unto me, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Seeing then that satisfaction
is to be had in God, and no where else (...) in God, it is impossible that any
man should have and lasting contentment that does not take up his (...) in God;
and therefore whosoever would learn to be content in all estates, must learn
how to satisfy himself in and with the Lord, and that is the next thing I am
to enquire into, namely,

How we may come to take up our rest and satisfaction in God, in all Estates
and Conditions.
1. We must get acquaintance with God. We must acquaint our selves with his
greatness, his transcendent goodness, his infinite mercy and loving kindeness,
and the rest of his glorious attributes. Raised and right apprehensions of God
lay a good foundation for our taking up our rest in God, Job 22.21. Acquaint
thy self with him and be at peace, and thereby good shall come unto thee. John
14.8. Show us the Father and it suffices us. We can desire no more in order to
our satisfaction, than to be filled with all the fullness of God: Now the
knowledge of Gods loving kindeness conduces much toward the obtaining of this
fullness, Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge,
that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

2. We must oft-times set our selves in a solemn and serious manner to meditate
upon the glorious attributes of God; the more we think and contemplate upon
God, the more sweetness and satisfaction we shall find in him, Psalm. 63.5,6.
My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness -- when I remember thee
upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. Psalm. 17.15. I will
behold thy face -- I shall be satisfied -- Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him
shall be sweet -- Our contemplating on God will change us into the image of
God, and make us like God, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face, beholding as in
a glass, the glory of the Lord are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Now the more of Gods image is found
upon us, the more like we are to God, the more satisfaction we shall find in
him, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. But here it will not
be amiss to mention two or three cautions to be observed when we set our selves
to contemplate on God, as 1. We must not be curious to pry into Gods Essence,
but must content our selves to contemplate on his Attributes. When Moses
desired to see the Glory of God, he tells him, Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see
my face -- which many expound, thou can not see or know my Essence; and in
way of answer to Moses his request, he proclaims his name, and thereby
discovers his Attributes, Exodus 33.19. Exodus 34.5,6,7. which teaches us, that
if we desire a sight of God, the best course that we can take to behold him, is
to take a view of his glorious Attributes, whereby he has discovered and made
known his name to us. 2. We must regulate all our conceptions of the Attributes
of God by the Scriptures. This caution is necessary, because Satan can
transform himself into an Angel of Light, and present false Idea's or
Representations of God to our minds, instead of true ones; he dealt thus with
our Parents in innocence, he misrepresented God to them, as though he had
envied their happiness, and were not a God of his Word, Genesis 3.1,4,5. and he
will much less fear to try us with the like temptation in our fallen estate. It
is necessary also, because of the vanity and corruption of our minds, which
are apt to form strange, idolatrous notions concerning God: diverse instances
might be given of this. Some have thought God to be altogether such an one as
themselves are, Psalm. 50.21. Others have fancied God to be like the Birds or
Beasts, Romans 1.22,23. But when we conceive of God according to that revelation
which he has made of himself in his word, then we may be sure we conceive of
him aright. 3. We must contemplate on God according to that discovery which he
has made of himself in Christ Jesus, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.6.
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ; for we cannot find sweetness in God out of Christ; it will fare with
us when we consider God out of Christ, as it did with the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.3.
I remembered God and was troubled. A man that has been a finner can take no
comfort in God without reflecting upon Christ, for he is in himself a consuming
fire. But when we look upon God, in and through Jesus Christ, then we may see
him to be a reconciled Father, 2 Cor. 5.19. and to be the Father of Mercies,
and the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3.

3. If we would take up our rest in God, we must labor to get and to keep Gods
Presence with our Souls. When we enjoy Gods gracious and blessed presence, we
find that in God that gives us rest and satisfaction under our greatest
troubles, Exodus 33.14. My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee
rest. Moses had been brought up by the space of forty years in Pharaohs Court,
where he had fared deliciously every day, and he was now in a dry, barren,
solitary Wilderness, which afforded nothing that was good, but was attended
with many evils, as Serpents and Scorpions, etc. What manner of place this
Wilderness was, we may see, Jer. 2.6. Deuteronomy. 8.15. Here he was to continue and
wander up and down by the space of forty years, and that in the midst of a
perverse and froward people, that in all their straits did murmur against him
for bringing of them out of the Land of Egypt, his troubles sometimes were so
great, that we find him praying to God to kill him out of hand, and to make a
sudden dispatch of him that he might not see his wretchedness, Numb. 11.15. Yet
though the troubles he met with in the Wilderness were exceeding great, and
many, and of long continuance, viz. forty years his soul had rest in God by
virtue of the Divine Presence that went along with him. We may see also the
virtue and power that is in Gods Presence to quiet and satisfy the Soul in the
times of greatest trouble, in Jer. 46.27,28. Jacob shall return and be in rest,
and at ease, and none shall make him afraid: fear thou not, O Jacob, my
servant, says the Lord, for I am with thee -- In the former part of the
Chapter the Lord had threatened very sore calamities, that they should be
compassed about with fear on every side, ver. 5. that the Sword should devour
round about, and be satiate, and made drunk with blood, ver. 10, 14, etc. and
though these calamities should fall most upon other Nations, Jacob was not to
go wholly unpunished, but was to have a share therein; yet Jacob having a
promise of Gods presence, should thereby have rest and ease in all his troubles.

4. We must maintain and keep our communion with God. The oftener we draw near
unto God, the oftener we shall find him drawing near to our souls, according to
what we find, James 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and God will draw nigh to you --
and the oftener God draws nigh to our souls, the more delight and contentment we
shall find in him. The Psalmist speaking of such as approach unto God, says,
they shall be satisfied with the goodness of Gods House, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is
the man whom thou choosest, and cansest to approach unto thee, that he may
dwell in thy courts, we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even
of thy Holy Temple. There is much in conversing with good men, for the filling
and satisfying the spirit of one that is truly gracious, he has his greatest
delight in the company of the Saints and Servants of God, Rons. 15.24. -- If
first I be somewhat filled with your company. Psalm. 16.2,3. -- My goodness
extends not unto thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight. If there be such delight and satisfaction
in conversing with good men, there must needs be much more in conversing with
the great God. One main cause of the disturbance of our minds when we meet
with crosses, is immoderate thirsting after the things of this world: communion
with God will take off this kind of thirst from the souls, John 4.14.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. The oftener we go to God, the more we shall ask and crave
of him; and the more we ask of God, the more and better things we shall receive
from him in order to the satisfying of our souls, Psalm. 105.40. The people
asked -- and he satisfied them with the bread of heaven. Were but our desires
after God greater, we should find more abundant satisfaction in him; for, He
satisfies the desire of every living thing, Psalm. 145.16.

5. If we would take up our rest and satisfaction in God, we must set our love
upon him. As it is between a man and his Wife, if a man have an entire love to
his Wife, he will be so satisfied in her, that he will have no hankerings after
any other women: so much is employed, Prove. 5.18,19. Rejoice with the wife of
thy youth, let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant roe, let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love. So it is
between a man and God, when a man has an entire love to God, he will be so
abundantly satisfied in God, that he will have no great desire after any other
thing besides God: compare Psalm. 18.1. with Psalm. 73.25. I will love thee O
Lord my strength. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee? When God has set his love upon his people, he
rests satisfied in them, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion -- The
Lord has chosen Zion -- This is my rest for ever -- Psalm. 132.13,14. Zeph.
3.17. He will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy
over thee with singing. So also it will be with us, when we have set our love
upon God, we shall then take up our rest in God.

6. We must labor to get good evidences of Gods love to our souls, and get our
interest in God made clear. Clear and well-grounded apprehensions of our
interest in God, and of Gods love to our souls, do tend much to the bringing of
our souls to take up their rest and satisfaction in God, Deuteronomy. 33.23. O
Naphthali satisfied with favor -- Psalm. 90.13. O satisfy us early with thy
mercy, that we may be glad and rejoice all our days. John 14.8. Show us the
Father and it suffices us. When we know the Father, and know him to be our God
and Father in Christ, we have enough, we have that which suffices us.

7. If we would take up our rest in God, and abide satisfied in him, when ever
any thing disquiets our minds, and we have any load and burden upon our
Spirits, we must repair to Jesus Christ, and cast our selves and our burdens
upon the Lord Jesus, in so doing we shall find grace and virtue coming out of
the Lord Jesus to preserve and sustain our souls in a quiet, peaceable,
satisfied frame, in all our troubles, Psalm. 55.23. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

8. We must take up our dwelling in God. He must needs dwell at ease who dwells
in God, Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight. -- Setting
implies continuance. When we do not only come to Christ's shadow, but sit down
under it, that will bring great delight to our souls. What is said of Gods
dwelling in Zion, Psalm. 132.13,14. The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired
it for his habitation; This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell. The like
may be said of the people of God, when they have chosen God for their
habitation, and taken up their dwelling in God, he will be their rest for ever.
If any say, when may we be said to take up our dwelling in God? I answer, 1.
When we live, and walk, and dwell in love, then we dwell in God, 1 John 4.16.
God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and he in him. 2.
When we believe in Jesus Christ, and confess Christ before men, then God
dwells in us, and we in him, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts
by faith. 1 John 4.15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God,
God dwells in him, and he in God. Understand this of such a confession of
Christ as is accompanied with a hearty belief in him, Romans 10.9,10. And of such
as are not afraid to confess Christ in the face of dangers; for it did expose a
man to great dangers, and sufferings, to confess the Lord Jesus to be the
Christ, in the first breaking forth of the Gospel, as we may see, John 9.22. 3.
We take up our dwelling in God, when we maintain an obediential frame of heart,
and have respect to his Commandments, 1 John 3.24. He that keeps his
Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him. The Commandments which the
Apostle does chiefly hi^ at in this place, are faith and love, as appears from
ver. 23.

9. When we feel our souls wandering from the Lord, and seeking their rest in
other things besides God, we should say to them as the Prophet said to the
Jews, Micha 2.10. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest. And we should
call upon them to return unto God; and seek their rest in him only, Psalm.
116.7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul -- Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the Lord and wait
patiently for him.

10. We must labor after Gods Image and likeness, to be holy as God is holy,
and merciful as God is merciful and pure as God is pure; for the more like we
are to God, the more satisfaction we shall find in God, Psalm. 17.15. I shall
be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

11. Let us urge God with his promises, where he has promised to cause us to
take up our satisfaction in himself. Jer. 31.14. My people shall be satisfied
with my goodness, says the Lord; which promise implies, that when we have the
good things of this world we shall not take up our rest in them; and when we
want them, we shall not be disquieted for the want of them, but our souls shall
rest satisfied with the goodness of the Lord, whether we want or enjoy the good
things of this world, Isa. 65.16. He who blesses himself in the earth, shall
bless himself in the God of truth; which implies, that God will give his
people such a spirit, that they shall not count themselves happy and blessed,
because of their prosperity, or any outward enjoyments, but in their enjoying
the true God for their portion; and if they shall account themselves blessed in
the enjoyment of God, then they may bless themselves in all estates and
conditions, for God is their portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. I might quote more
promises to this purpose, that God will cause his people to take up their
satisfaction not in any creature comforts or enjoyments, but in himself, as
Psalm. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied, with what? with corn, and wine,
and oil? with riches, and preferments? no, but with the fatness of thy house;
thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. Isa. 58.14. Thou
shall delight thy self in the Lord -- But these may suffice.

SECT. 7.
7. Give your selves unto Prayer. When ever you feel any troubles or burdens
upon your minds, repair to the Throne of Grace, and lay open your hearts, and
all your maladies and grievances before the Lord, and crave his assistance,
that will bring speedy relief to your souls, and keep them in a quiet,
peaceable, contented frame in all conditions, Phil. 4.6,7. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing, by prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving,
let your request be made known unto God. And what shall we get by so doing? A
settled abiding peace; as the following words hold forth, And the peace of God
which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus. When we are compassed about with many sorrows, by Prayer we shall
have all our sorrows dispelled, and our hearts shall be filled with joy, John
16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. In the 21. verse,
Christ faith to his Disciples, Ye shall weep and lament, ye shall be sorrowful
-- and then tells them, ver. 24. how they should get their sorrows turned into
joy, Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Much of the
disquietment of our mi^ arises from troubled thoughts. Dan. 5.6. His thoughts
troubled him -- Now committing of our selves and our affairs to God by Prayer,
is a great means of establishing our minds, and quieting all troubled
thoughts, Prove. 16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established.

SECT. 8.
8. When we find any discontent or disquietness arising in our minds, we must
search into the grounds and reasons thereof, and endeavor the removal of those
things which are the causes of our discontent. David took this course to quiet
his spirit when it was in a disturbed condition, he enquireth into the cause
and reason of that dejection which was upon his soul, Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God.
I might here instance in several things which do cause murmurings under
affliction, I will mention two or three.

1. Pride of Spirit. Our contendings with God, and quarrelling at his
Providence, as well as our contention with our fellow creatures come from the
pride of our hearts, Prove. 13.10. Only by pride comes contention. If our
discontent, when God takes away any mercy, or lays any affliction upon us,
do arise from the pride of our hearts; the way to remove it, is to look upon
our selves to be unworthy of the least of all Gods Mercies, and to judge our
selves to have deserved the greatest and severest of all Gods Judgments. We
are not greater than our Father Jacob, yet he says of himself, Genesis 32.10. I
am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth that thou
have showed unto thy servant. We are not better than those Jews that were
captives in Babylon, for there were many of Gods precious Servants, as Ezekiel,
Daniel, Hanniah, Mishael, and Azariah (who chose rather to be cast into a fiery
Furnace, than to fall down before an Image) Nehemiah, Ezra, etc. yet they
acknowledged that they had deserved all the evils that they suffered, and a
great deal more; and that it was merely from the mercy of God, that they were
not consumed. Daniel acknowledged the sufferings they met with to be so great,
as that they could not be paralleled, Dan. 9.12. yet he says, ver. 14. The
Lord our God is righteous in all his works. The Prophet Jeremiah lamenting the
great evils that were come upon the Jews, acknowledges, that though their
sorrows were such as scarce any met with the like, Lam. 1.12. Behold and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow; Yet he says, Lam. 3.22. It is of the
Lords mercies, that we are not consumed. If we were fully convinced that we are
less than the least of all Gods Mercies, we should not repine when God takes
away our Estates, our Health, our Friends, or any other mercies from us. And if
we were fully convinced that we have deserved to be destroyed, and cast into
everlasting burnings, we should not repine when God sends poverty, sickness, or
any other evils upon us.

2. Mis-judging of the nature and quality of Gods Providence, and of the ends
and designs of God in afflicting, causes some to murmur and rep ne at those
Providence; for which if they understood them aright, they would bless and
praise God. Gods bringing Israel out of Egypt by the hand of Moses, was a great
mercy, his leading them through the Wilderness, was to bring them into the Land
of Canaan, and the straits they met with in the Wilderness, were to humble
them, and prove them, and do them good in their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.15,16. Yet
because they judged amiss of this Providence of God, and thought they were
brought into the Wilderness to be slain; when they were in straits they
murmured against the Lord, Numb. 14.2,3. Exodus 16.2,3. If our discontent spring
from this root, the way to remove it, is, 1. To judge nothing before the time,
but to wait with patience till we have seen the end as well as the beginning of
our afflictions. Gods dispensations toward Job were very terrible at the first
coming of his troubles, but the end of them was very comfortable and full of
mercy, Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end
of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. 2. We must
judge of our afflictions by Faith, and not by sense; we must judge of them
according to that sentence which is given of them in the Word of God, and not
according to the opinion of the world, or of our own corrupt minds. Sense
says it is a miserable thing to be in affliction, but the word says, Job
5,17. Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects, James 1.12. Blessed is the
man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown
of life which the Lord has promised to them that love him. Sense looks upon
afflictions as hurtful things, but faith judging according to the word, says,
Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy Statutes. 3. We must look at the wholesome fruit of afflictions as well as
their present smart, Heb. 12.11. No chastening for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby. As the cloud that parted
the Israelites from the Egyptians, had a dark side, and a bright side, Exodus
14.20. so have our afflictions: now if we would not sink under our trials, we
must look at the bright side as well as the dark side of them, at the spiritual
and eternal advantages that we reap by our troubles, as well as the smart and
inconveniences that our outward man sustaineth by them.

3. Unbelief and distrust of God is another cause of murmuring when we are
brought into straits, Ps. 106.24,25. They believed not his word, but murmured
in their tents. If our discontent arise from unbelief, the way to remove it, is
to do what we can to strengthen our Faith in the Attributes, Providence, and
Promises of God; for if we can but stay our minds, and rest our souls upon
God, he will keep them in perfect peace, Isa. 26.3.

I might instance in other grounds and causes of discontent, but because they
will fall more properly under the next head, I shall now proceed to the third
and last branch of my answer to this question, which is, The answering of those
Reasonings and Objections that arise in the minds of those that have suffered
loss in their Estates by the late Fire, which hinder them from sitting down
contented under this hand of God.

Objections that hinder the contentment of those that have suffered loss in
their Estates, removed.
SECT. 1.
Object. 1. My loss is exceeding great, I have lost thousands of pounds, if I
had lost but a small matter I could have born it, but in regard my loss is so
great, it troubles my mind exceedingly, and I know not how to bear it with
patience.

Answ. 1. Your loss is not greater than Jobs, who was the richest man in the
Eastern part of the world, and lost all his Substance, and his Children too in
one day, yet he did not repine at the greatness of his loss, but quietly
submits himself to God, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

2. How much soever it be that you have lost, God is able to give it you again,
and much more also, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. But what shall we do for the hundred
talents? God is able to give thee much more than this. Though God took a great
Estate from Job, yet it is said, Job 42.10,12. The Lord gave Job twice as much
as he had before. -- The Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning. Though you should be brought to poverty, yet God oft-times raises
poor men to such an high degree, that he makes them equal to Princes, Psalm.
113.7,8. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of
the dunghill, that he may set them with Princes, even with the Princes of his
people.

3. It may be God saw that you had too much, and therefore out of his infinite
Wisdom, and Love, he has brought you low. There is danger in having too much,
as well as too little. Agur prays against too great riches, as well as
against poverty, Prove. 30.7,8. Give me not riches lest I be full, and deny
thee, and say, who is the Lord. God brought Gideons Army of two and thirty
thousand to three hundred, and gave this reason, they were too many for him to
give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel should vaunt himself, saying,
Mine hand has saved me, Judges 7.2,3,4,7. Possibly for some such reason God
has lessened your Estates, lest you should vaunt your selves, or think that
you were maintained by your Estates, and not by the Providence of God. It may
be God saw that your Estates were so great, that they would have hindered you
entrance in at the strait gate, Mat. 19.23,24. and therefore he lessened them
that you might have a safer and more easy passage into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Would you be angry with that Physician that should draw away a great quantity
of blood when as it did endanger your lives? you have far less cause of being
angry with God for taking away a great part of your Estates when they did
endanger the salvation of your souls.

4. Though your losses have been very great, yet take heed of murmuring and
repining against God, lest he take away greater things from you. By murmuring
you will provoke God to take away your lives, 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmr
you, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now to lose
life, is a far greater loss, than to lose an Estate. By murmuring you are in
danger to lose the favor of God, Numb. 11.1. When the people complained, it
displeased the Lord, and the Lord heard it, and his anger was kindled. To lose
Gods favor is more than to lose our lives, for Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving
kindeness is better than life.

SECT. 2.
Obj. 2. I have lost all that ever I had, and am quite undone; though my losses
had been great, if I had any thing left I should have been contented; but will
you blame me for being discontented when I have lost all that I was worth in
the world, and am quite undone.

Answ. 1. God saw it was needful and expedient for the accomplishing of his
designs in order to the promoting of your good, to take away all that you had;
for God sends no more of any affliction than we need, 1 Pet. 1.6. -- for a
season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. It may be
God saw nothing less than the taking all that you had would take off your
affections from the world, or lead you to repentance, or put you upon living by
Faith; you may be assured, that upon some account or other God saw it needful
to take away your whole Estates from you, else he would not have dealt thus
with you.

2. By undoing you, God aims at saving of you. He has undone you in your
outward Estates, that he may save your Souls, 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we be
afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual (or as
it is in the Margin, is wrought) in the enduring of the same sufferings which
we also suffer. The Apostle tells us here, that the Corinthians enduring the
same sufferings which he suffered, was an effectual means of working out their
salvation. Now a great part of the Apostles sufferings lay in the suffering the
loss of all things, Phil. 3.8. It is Gods design to prevent our being undone to
all eternity, when he chastneth us in this world, 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are
judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. Has that man any cause to complain whom God undoeth here, to prevent
his being undone to all eternity?

3. If ever you forsook any of your enjoyments for Christ, or gave any thing to
the poor Members of Christ, or any other poor people for Christ's sake, then you
have not lost all; for whatever you have given to the poor, or forsaken upon
the account of Christ or the Gospel, all that is yours still; it is money laid
up in a safe hand, which shall be returned to you with an hundred fold
increase, Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord,
and that which he has given will he pay him again. That which is given to the
poor is not lost, it is but lent, and it is lent to one that will pay what is
lent, with interest. You that could not see the poor lack when you had
wherewithal to relieve them, God will not suffer you to lack any thing that is
good for you, Prove. 28.27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack. And what
is said of that which is given to the poor, the same may be said of that which
has been forsaken upon the account of Christ and the Gospel, it is not lost,
but put out to interest, and shall be rendered to us again with an hundred fold
increase; if not in the same kind, in some other thing as good, or better,
Matthew. 19.29. Every one that has for saken houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. And that this
hundred fold is not meant of the recompense that we shall have in heaven, but
of that reward that we shall have in this present life; besides eternal life in
the other world, is evident from Mark 10.29,30. Luke 18.29,30.

4. Though you have lost all that you had, yet you have not lost any of the
Promises or the Providence of God. You are as rich in promises as ever. You
have God in many Bonds, which are of more value than the whole world. Though
the Fire had consumed all your Goods, yet it has consumed none of your Bonds,
I mean none of the Promises wherein God has bound himself by promise, that you
shall want no good thing, but that he will stand by you all your days, and
supply all your needs. I will put you in mind of two or three of those many
promises that the Lord has made to this purpose, which are more worth than all
the Gold and Silver of the world, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your
need, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have; for he bath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. All these things -- that is, food and raiment, and all
things that are necessary for this life, of which Christ was speaking in the
foregoing verses. And as you have not lost the promises of God, so neither have
you lost his providence; he will take as much care of you now your Estates are
gone, as he did when you enjoyed them, 1 Pet. 5,7. Casting all your care upon
him, for he cares for you. It is not said, who did care for you, but he cares
for you; implying, that God does, and ever will continue his care for his
people.

5. Though you have lost all, yet it is possible for you to be as contented as
if you had all the world. The Apostle Paul suffered the loss of all things for
Christ, Phil. 3.8. yet he was as full of contentment in his greatest wants, as
in his greatest abundance, Phil. 4.11,12,13. When he had nothing, he was as
well content as if he had enjoyed the whole world, 2 Cor. 6.10. As having
nothing, and yet possessing all things.

6. Have you not forfeited all that ever you did enjoy, either by your
unthankfulness, or by not serving God cheerfully for the abundance of all
things, Deuteronomy. 28.47,48. or by some other means? if so, you have no occasion to
complain of God for taking away all that you had from you.

7. Though you have lost all your Estates, say not, we are undone; for if ye be
such as have Faith in Christ, and live godly lives, God is yours, and Christ is
yours, and Heaven is yours, and this world is yours, and things present, and
things to come, are yours, yea, all things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21,22,23. All
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods.

SECT. 3.
Obj. 3: I do not know how I shall do to live, now I have lost my Estate; if I
could but tell how to live, I could be content, though my losses had been very
great; but because I cannot tell how I shall live, now my livelihood is taken
from me, this perplexeth and troubles my mind very sorely.

Answ. 1. You have as much left you as you brought into this world, for 1 Timothy
6.7. We brought nothing into this world -- we brought not so much as a rag to
cover our nakedness withal, Job 1.21. Naked came I out of my Mothers womb. --
And though you came into the world in this poor condition, yet you have lived
comfortably and plentifully, many days, yea many years together; and cannot
God provide comfortably and plentifully many years more, though all that ever
you had be taken from you. If you say, when I was born into the world I had a
Father, and a Mother, and other Friends, that took care of me, to provide food,
and raiment, and all things for me; but now I have no Friends that will take
care for me. I answer, It was not your Parents, or your Friends, that fed you,
and clothed you, but God, by them. Jacob lived many years in his Fathers house,
and afterward with his Uncle Laban, about 20. years; yet he does not say his
Father fed him for so many years; and then his Uncle Laban nourished him; but
he says, it was God that fed him all the days of his life, Genesis 48.15. The
God which fed me all my life long unto this day.

2. How did you live before, by your Estates, or by the Providence of God? not
by your Estates, but by the Providence of God; if you think otherwise, consider
such Scriptures as these, Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have our
being, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man does not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, does man live. Psalm. 66.8,9. O bless
our God, ye people -- which holds our soul in life. Psalm. 36.6. -- O Lord
thou preservest man and beast. Now if it be God, and not your Estates that have
maintained you hitherto, why should you distrust him for the time to come? Is
the Lords hand shortened? Is he not as able to provide for you as ever he was?

3. Remember the counsel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Math. 6.25. Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, nor yet
for your body what ye shall put on: is not the life more than meat, and the
body than raiment? If the life be more than meat, then doubt not but that God
who has given you your lives, will give you meat to maintain your lives, and
he who gave you your bodies will give you raiment to cloth your bodies withal.

4. If all that you have be consumed, and you have nothing to live upon, live
by Faith upon the promise and providence of God, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live
by his Faith. We are not to live by Faith for spiritual blessings only, but
also for temporal. And we ought to trust God as firmly by virtue of his
promises, when we have nothing left, as well as when we enjoy greatest plenty.

SECT. 4.
Obj. 4. I do make a shift to live for the present, but now I have lost my
Estate, I am afraid I shall come to want before I dye, and the fear of want
lies heavy upon me; were it not that I feared I should want, my losses would
not much trouble me.

Answ. 1. If you fear want now your Estates are gone, and did not fear any such
thing while you enjoyed your Estates, this is a sign that you made your riches
your confidence, and not God, and that is a fearful sin, Job 31.24,28. If I
have made gold my hope, or have said unto the fine gold, Thou art my confidence
-- This were an iniquity to be punished by the judge, for I should have denied
the God that is above.

2. Have you not food and raiment sufficient for the day? if so, do the work of
the present day cheerfully, and bear the crosses of the day patiently, and cast
the care of to morrow upon God: By to morrow you may be in heaven, where you
shall need none of these things, Mat. 6.34. Take no thought for the morrow, for
the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self, sufficient unto the
day is the evil thereof.

3. Consider your relation to God. 1. God is your Shepherd, and thereupon you
may be assured that you shall not want, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want. David does not say I am King of Israel, I shall not want, or I
have a great Estate, or I have rich Friends, I shall not want; but he grounds
his confidence that he should not want upon this, that God was his Shepherd.
Now every godly man in his lowest estate has God for his Shepherd, and
thereupon may be confident that he shall never want. 2. God is your Father, and
Fathers will not see their children want when it is in the power of their hands
to relieve their wants, Luke 11.11. If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that
is a Father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish
give him a serpent. When the prodigal Son began to be in want, and goes to his
Father for relief, though he had been an ungracious Son, that had spent all his
substance in riotous courses; yet when he came to his Father, he calls for the
best Robe, and fatted Calf, and entertains him in a very bountiful manner, Luke
15.15,18,19,20,22,23. 3. You are members of Gods household, Ephesians. 2.19. Ye are of
the household of God. Now amongst men it is an infamous thing for a man not to
provide for those that are of his own house, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith,
and is worse than an infidel. Therefore fear not but God will provide for you,
seeing you are of his household.

4. God has given you many precious promises to assure you that you shall not
want, Psalm. 34.9,10. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for there is no want to
them that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and
do good, and verily thou shall be fed. If your money to but in provision should
fail, then God will take care that your bread shall be given you. Isa. 33.16.
He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks,
bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure. More promises to this
purpose you may see, Mat. 6.33. Phil. 4 19. Heb. 13.5.

5. Consider Gods providence toward his creatures, that is a great means to
quiet the heart against the fear of want, as 1. Consider Gods providence
toward the birds, and beasts, and other inferior creatures. There is not one
living creature that flies in the air, or creeps on the face of the earth,
but God takes care of it, and provideth it food, Psalm. 145.15,16. The eyes of
all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season, thou openest
thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Psalm. 104.27,28.
These all (that is, all sorts of creatures spoken of in the foregoing Verses)
wait upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due season, that thou
give them they gather, thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.
There is an innumerable company of these creatures, Psalm. 104.25. yet God
feeds them all, and gives every one its proper food, and that in due season,
and as much in due season as satisfies them; as is employed in the fore-quoted
Scriptures. The birds have no barns, nothing laid up before hand, they have no
body to look after them, they have young ones to provide for; yet God feeds
them in the hardest Winters as well as in the warm Summer, Matthew. 6.26: Behold
the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them, are ye not much better than they?
God values a man much more than any other creatures, Luke 12.7. Ye are of more
value than many sparrows. Mat. 12.12. How much better is a man than a sheep?
The care that God takes for man is far greater than the care that he takes
for his other creatures, 1 Cor. 9.9,10. Does God take care for Oxen? or faith
he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written. Now if
God provideth bountifully for those creatures that are far inferior to man,
and for whom he does not care so much as he does for man, why should we fear he
will not provide for us? 2. Consider Gods providence toward wicked men, he
makes their cup to run over, they are oft-times full of Wealth, Psalm. 17.13,14.
Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy Sword -- whose belly thou fillest
with hid treasure, they are full of children, and leave the rest of their
substance to their babes. Wicked men are Gods enemies, godly men are his
friends: If God fill the bellies of his enemies with his hid treasure, shall we
think that he will let his friends starve? 3. Consider Gods providence toward
the poor, he takes a special charge of such as are poor, and in distress,
Psalm. 146.9. The Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the fatherless,
and widow. Psalm. 132.15. I will abundantly bless her provision, I will satisfy
her poor with bread. The widow that had but an handful of meal, and a little
cruse of oil, was maintained therewith, both her self, and her household, as
comfortably as those that were owners of Olive-yards, and had great Estates, 1
Kings 18.12,14,15. 4. Consider Gods providence toward your selves in
particular, when you hung upon your Mothers breasts, before you knew God, or
had an heart to seek him, he took the care of you, and provided for you, and do
you think that he will forsake you, and cast you off, now that he has made
known himself unto you, and poured out a spirit of grace and supplications upon
you.

SECT. 5.
Obj. 5. I have not only lost all that I had, but I have lost much of other
men's goods, I am greatly in debt, and by my late losses, I am disenabled from
paying my debts, and this troubles me exceedingly when I think how much I am
in debt, and that I see no way how I should be able to pay my debts before I
die.

Answ. 1. We should avoid running into debt what we can, and when we have
contracted any Debts, we should labor to pay them so soon as we can: for this
is according to the Apostles rule, Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love
one another; and therefore in regard of the great uncertainty of all humane
affairs, we should take heed of grasping after too great things beyond what we
can reach with our own stock, and which will necessitate us to borrow great
sums of money, left we should be cut off before we can accomplish the payment
of our debts.

2. A man man may be a just man, and live and die with a good conscience,
though he should not have wherewithal to pay his Debts, provided that he bear
this mind to pay every man his own as far as he is able, and purposes in
himself, that if ever God make him able, he will pay all his debts, and to the
intent that he may be able, he lives frugally, and follows his calling
diligently, and seeks Gods blessing upon his labors, Heb. 13.18. We trust we
have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly. That man that
has a good conscience, who is willing in all things to live honestly. Justice
is desired to be Constans and perpetuavoluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi. So
that he is to be esteemed a just and righteous man, that has a constant and
perpetual will and desire to give unto every man his own, though some
invincible impediments may lie in his way, whereby he may not be able to
perform that which he would do. It is true that the Psalmist gives it for a
character of a wicked man to borrow, and not to pay what is borrowed, Psalm.
37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again. But this is to be understood
of such as fraudulently detain what was borrowed, or disable themselves from
paying their debts by idleness, luxury, prodigality, etc. and not of such as
would pay all that they owe, but are disabled by Gods providence.

3. Cry to God that (...) would find out some way for you, and rai^ up some
supplies whereby you may be able to pay you Debts. When one of the Sons of the
Prophets was felling a beam, and the axe head fell into the water, he cries out
to the Prophet, 2 Kings 6.5. Alas Master, for it was borrowed. And the widow
that was in debt, crie^ ^o Elisha to help her, and he did help both the one and
the other. The God of Elisha is more merciful, and can do greater things than
Elisha; therefore do you that are in debt cry unto the Lord, and see what he
will do for you. The willingness of God to help poor Debtors to get out of
Debt, may be seen several waves. I will mention two, 1. God wrought two
Moracles for this end, to enable those that were in debt to pay their debts.
The one was the multiplying the Widows oil, 1 Kings 4.1. to the 8. verse. The
other was the making iron to swim, that the axe that was borrowed might be
restored to the owner, 1 Kings 6.5,6,7. Now Gods working Miracles to help poor
people pay their debts, may encourage those that are in debt to cry to God to
help them. 2. God commands us to own no man any thing, Romans 13.8. And we need
not doubt but God is willing to help us to keep his Commandments.

And as you should cry to God to help you out of debt, so also humble your
souls for your sins; for sometimes contracting of debts is inflicted as a
judgment for sin, Deuteronomy 28.15,43,44. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of
the Lord thy God to observe to do all his Commandments -- The stranger that is
within thee shall get above thee very high, and thou shall be very low, he
shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him, he shall be the head, and
thou shall be the tail. The Lord has promised concerning such as are careful
to keep his Commandments, that he will not only help them to pay their debts,
but he will so bless them that they shall have no need of borrowing, but shall
be in a capacity to lend to others, Deuteronomy. 15.4,5,6. The Lord thy God shall
greatly bless thee -- Only if thou carefully hearken to the voice of the Lord
thy God -- and thou shall lend unto many Nations, and shall not borrow. The
like is promised, Deuteronomy. 28.12,13. The Lord shall open unto thee his good
treasure, the heaven, to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to
bless all the work of thine hand, and thou shall lend unto many Nations, and
shall not borrow, And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail, and
thou shall be above only, and thou shall not be beneath, if that thou hearken
unto the Commandments of the Lord thy God, which I command thee this day to
observe, and to do them. Plead these promises with God, and encourage your
selves to hope in God to find out some way whereby you may pay your debts. And
if God do answer your Prayers, and raise up means for you whereby to get out of
debt, pay off your debts as fast as you can. When God had multiplied the oil of
the widow that was in debt, the Prophet gives her this advice, 1 Kings 4.7.
Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy Children of the rest.

4. It has been the lot of men, fearing God, to die in debt, and not to leave
wherewithal to pay their debts. We read of one of the Sons of the Prophets who
did fear God, that died in debt, and left no goods behind him, not any thing
in the house but a pot of oil; so that the Creditors came to seize upon his
Children for bondmen, 2 Kings 4.1,2. There cried a certain woman of the Wives
of the Sons of the Prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is
dead, and thou know that thy Servant did fear the Lord, and the Creditor is
come to take unto him my two Sons, for Bondmen; and Elisha said unto her, What
have thou in the house? and she said, thine handmaid has not any thing in the
house, save a pot of oil. So that if after all your endeavors you should not
be able to pay your debts, but should die in debt, and leave nothing behind
you, this may be some comfort, that this has been the condition of some
eminent Servants of God; for such was this widows husband, he was one of the
Sons of the Prophets, he was known to be a man fearing God, Thou know that
thy servant did fear the Lord. Yet he died in debt, and left not any thing to
pay his debts withal.

5. If you should be unable to pay your debts that you owe to men, yet make
sure you get your debts, that you owe to God, blotted out of Gods Book of
Remembrance. Our sins are our debts, Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our debts, compared
with Luke 11.4. Forgive us our sins. We should be more solicitous about getting
these debts paid than any whatever; and because we have nothing of our own to
pay, we should go to the Lord Jesus, who is our surety, and desire him to
undertake for us. What is said of the men of Isreal's resorting to David, 1 Samuel
22.2. Every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every
one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him, and he became a
captain over them. The like should we do, when we have any thing burdens, and
discontents, and troubles our minds, whether it be debt, or any other
distress, we should resort unto Jesus Christ, and he will give us ease, Mat.
11.28, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

SECT. 6.
Obj. 6. I am brought into much misery and great straits already by my losses,
and may in a little time go through a great deal more, and this does much
disquiet my mind.

Answ. 1. Murmuring will not lessen your misery, but increase it; for there is
more evil in the least sin, than in the greatest affliction: murmuring will not
procure you enlargement out of your straits, but rather cause God to lay more
burden upon you, until he has humbled and subdued your spirit, and caused you
to accept of the punishment of your iniquity.

2. Call not your afflictions, wherewith God corrects you for to promote your
spiritual and eternal welfare, your misery; rather account them a part of your
happiness, James 5.11. Behold we count them happy which endure, Job 5.17.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the
chastning of the Almighty. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, O Lord, and teach out of thy law. We should be so far from
disquieting our selves, because of our afflictions, that we should account it a
matter of great joy when God is pleased to exercise us with diverse temptations,
James 1.2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations.

3. Observe in this time of your affliction, what sins God sets before you, as
the ground and cause of your present straits, and be excited by the smart of
the rod to humble your souls, and set upon the work of repentance, and God will
soon turn your adversity into prosperity, and your straits into enlargement,
Job 36.8,9,10,11,16. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work, and their transgression, that they
have exceeded, he opens also their ear to Discipline, and commands that
they return from iniquity. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their
days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure -- Even so would he have
removed thee out of the strait into a broad place, where there is no
straitness, and that which should be set on thy table, should be full of
fatness.

SECT. 7.
Obj. 7. My Family is undone by this loss: if I were a single person, and none
but my self were concerned in it, I could bear it cheer fully; but I have Wife
and Children, and if God should take me away, I can leave them nothing, and
this troubles me.

Answ. 1. It is the duty of Parents to provide for their Children, 2 Cor.
12.14. Children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents for their
Children; and such persons as spend their Estates in Gaming, Drinking, or other
riotous courses, whereby they beggar their Children, are worse than Insiders, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own
house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. But if a man out
of conscience toward God has endeavored to make provision for his Children,
and God does frustrate his endeavors, this is his affliction, but not his sin.

2. Though you can leave your Children little or nothing, yet God may raise
them up to great Estates, and to ^igh Preferments after you are dead and gone,
Job 14.21. His sont come to honor, and he knows it not. Psalm. 113.7,8. He
raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill,
that he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his people, Psalm.
112.1,2,3. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in
his Commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon earth; the generation of the
upright shall be blessed, health and riches shall be in his house.

3. Though you can leave your Children little or nothing, possibly it may be as
well, or better for them, than if you had left them great Estates; for their
Estates might have been temptations to others to have made a prey of them, and
temptations to themselves to have lived in Idleness, Luxury, etc. Children that
are left with great Estates, do as frequently miscarry, as those that are left
with less.

4. If your Family should be undone by this loss, yet seeing it is the Lords
doing, you must submit your selves to God. You must leave all your Family
concernments as well as personal, to Gods disposal. God threatened Eli with the
ruin of his Family, and tells him that his offspring should crouch for a
morsel of bread, 1 Samuel 2.36. There were such heavy things denounced against
his Family, as were enough to make both the ears of every one that heard
thereof to tingle, 1 Samuel 3.11,12,13,14. Yet Eli bears all patiently, because
it was the Lords doing, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. As David comforted himself under his Family afflictions, by virtue of
Gods Covenant, made with his own soul, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things and sure; for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow. The like consolation may every godly man draw from Gods
Covenant, when his Family is, or he foreseeth it is like to be in an afflicted
condition.

5. Say not, your Family is undone, though you have lost all your Estate, so
that you can leave your Wives and Children nothing; for though a godly man can
leave his Children no visible Estate, yet he leaves them that which is far
better than hundreds, yea, than thousands by the year: For,

1. He leaves his Children in Covenant with God, Genesis 17.7. I will establish
my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and thy seed after thee. He
leaves them heirs of the Promises, Acts 2.39. The promise is unto you, and to
your Children, Now to be left an heir of the Promises, to be left in Covenant
with God, is far better than to be leftworth millions of money; for the
blessings of the Covenant are better than all riches, and they are also more
certain and durable blessings.

2. He leaves them a stock of alms. God will recompense upon the children the
alms, that have been given by their Parents, Onesiphorus his house fared the
better for his refreshing of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.16. The Lord give mercy unto the
house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me. And the Psalmist tells us,
that the seed of a godly man fare the better for his acts of mercy, Psalm.
37.26. He is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed.

3. He leaves his Children a stock of Prayers. All the Prayers that he has
put up for his Childrens welfare, either civil or spiritual, are kept in Gods
remembrance, and shall fall down upon their heads and hearts in due time.

4. He leaves them Gods blessing, which is more worth than the whole world,
Prove. 20.7. The just man walks in his integrity, his Children are blessed
after him. The fruit of his holy walking shall fall upon his Children, and
Childrens Children, even to a thousand generations, Exodus 20.6. Showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments. A godly man
leaves his Children better than if he left them as great Estates as any men
have in the world, better than if he left them a Temporal Crown, or an earthly
Kingdom.

SECT. 8.
Obj. 8. I have formerly lived high, and in good credit, and esteem, and have
kept a plentiful and bountiful Table, and now I am brought low, and must fare
hard, and expect to be slighted and dis-regarded, and I know not how to bear
this; had I always lived in a poor mean way, I could have born it better than
to go from a high to a low condition.

Answ. 1. It is God that has brough you low, 1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord makes poor,
and makes rich, he brings low, and lifts up. Psalm. 75.7. God is the judge,
he puts down one, and sets up another. Now no man must find fault with
any of Gods works, Romans 9.20. O man, who art thou that replyest against God?
shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

2. It is for our good to pass through variety of conditions, for thereby God
awakens the fear of his Name in our hearts, and shakes off our security, and
promoteth the holiness of our hearts and lives. A continued course of
prosperity, without some changes, oft-times breeds a great deal of security and
forgetfulness of God, Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they
fear not God. Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has
settled on his lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither
has he gone into captivity; therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent
is not changed. If God by this change beger, or promote the fear of his Name in
your souls, that will be better treasure than any that you lost by the late
Fire, Isa. 33.6. The fear of the Lord is his treasure.

3. The Lord would have us be so far from being dejected at our crosses, that
he would have us esteem them a ground of joy, Jam. 1.2. My brethren, count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. He would have men of high degree
rejoice when they are brought low, as well as men of low degree to rejoice when
they are exalted, James 1.9,10. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that
he is exalted, but the rich in that he is made low.

3. Remember how contentedly our Lord Jesus Christ bore his state of
humiliation. Though he was Lord of all things, yet for our sakes he became
poor, and took upon himself the form of a Servant, and made himself of no
reputation to bring us unto eternal glory, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye know the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be rich, Phil. 2.5,6,7. Let this mind be in
you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a Servant. Yet there never came one discontented word out of
Christ's month, neither did there arise one repining thought in his mind,
throughout all the days of his humiliation. Observe also how contentedly the
servants of God have born their changes, when God has brought them from an
high, to a low condition. When David was driven from his Kingdom, and
necessitated to flee to save his life, he quietly submits himself to God, 2 Samuel 15.26. When he that was honored by all the Princes and Elders of Israel,
had a man of Belial came and cursed him to his face, David puts up all his
railing language with a meek and quiet spirit, 2 Samuel 16.5,6,7,8,9,10,11.

5. Though you be brought very low, and those that were your friends in the day
of your prosperity, should now slight and dis-regard you, yet if you continue
to serve the Lord, he will respect and regard you as much as ever he did, Psalm.
136.26. Who remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy endures for ever,
Psalm. 106.43,44,45. They provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low
for their iniquity, nevertheless he regarded their efftiction, when he heard
their cry, and he remembered for them his Covenant, and repented, according to
the multitude of his mercies. If your hearts be lowly, as well as your
conditions low, the most high God will respect you more than all the great men
upon the face of the earth that are of a proud spirit, Psalm. 138.6. Though the
Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, but the proud he knows afar
off. Whatever account men may have of the Servants of God, the Lord esteems
very highly of them. He counts them his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. It is said of them,
Isa. 62.3. Thou shall be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
Diadem in the hand of thy God. This high esteem that God has of you, may
abundantly satisfy you under all the slights and dis-respect that you meet
with from men.

6. If you be brought to fare hard and meanly by this providence, whereas
before you had a very plentiful table, this should not trouble you: for 1. God
can make a course and mean diet conduce as much to your health and nourishment,
as the richest fare in the world. Daniel and his three companions, who eat
nothing but pulse, and drank water, were of a fairer countenance, and fatter in
flesh, than all the children which did eat the portion of the Kings meat, Dan.
1.12,13,14,15. 2. Though you should be brought to fare very hard, yet as good,
and better men than you are, have fared harder than you, and yet did not murmur
against God. We read of an hundred men that were the Lords Prophets, that lived
in a cave with bread and water, 1 Kings 18.13. John the Baptist was a great
person: Our Savior tells us, that among them that were born of women, there
was not a greater than John the Baptist, Matthew. 11.11. Yet both his habit and
diet were very mean. John had his raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern girdle
about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey, Mat. 3.4. and he
drank neither wine nor strong drink, Luke 1.15. Our Savior himself eat very
course diet, and yet was thankful for it. When many of his friends were about
him, that came to hear his word, he had nothing better to refresh himself after
his labors, and to give to his Disciples and those that followed him, but
Barley Bread and Fish, and they had no seats to sit upon at their meat, but the
grass; yet Jesus Christ lift up his eyes and gave thanks, John 6.9,10,11.
Another time being weary and thirsty, he had nothing better than water to
quench his thirst, and he could not with once asking obtain a draught of water
to quench his thirst, John 4.6,7,9. Jesus being wearied with his journey, sat
on the well. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water; Jesus says unto
her, give me to drink: then says the woman, How is it that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me which am a woman of Samaria? 3. The meaner your diet is, the
less will be your temptation to excess. Such as fare deliciously every day, are
under a great temptation to make their belly their God, which is a fin that
will bring unavoidable destruction, Phil. 3.19. whose end is destruction, whose
belly is their God. 4. God has given such of you as are his servants, his Son
who is the bread of life, the bread that came down from heaven, John 6.48,51.
and the water of life, John 4.10. and why should you be discontented, because
your diet is mean, who have meat to eat that the world knows not of, hidden
Manna? yea, who have the bread of life, and the water of life?

SECT. 9.
Obj. 9. I had a very sweet and commodious dwelling, where I lived very
comfortably, and now I am greatly unsettled; I know not well where to bestow my
self, I cannot light of an house that pleases me, but am put to great straits,
and am much troubled for the loss of my former habitation, and the
inconvenience of my present abode.

Answ. 1. You have as good dwellings still as many servants had, who were too
good to dwell in the world, Heb. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy, they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth. You
are as well provided for as the Apostles of Christ. Paul speaking of himself
and the other Apostles, says, 1 Cor. 4.9,11. Even unto this present hour we
both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place. You are as well, and better provided for in this respect, than
Christ himself was when he was in the world, Mat. 8.20. The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head.

2. Every godly man has God for his habitation, and they that have God for
their habitation, may well be contented, how inconvenient soever their
habitation be in this world. When the Israelites wandered in a desolate
Wilderness, by the space of forty years, where they had no houses to dwell in,
they were abundantly satisfied in this, that God was their dwelling place,
Psalm. 90.1. Lord, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations. That
this Psalm was penned when the Israelites were in a wandering unsettled
condition in the Wilderness, appears both from the Title, and several
passages in the Psalm.

3. When you are troubled at the loss, or for the want of a convenient
habitation here on earth, comfort your selves with the thoughts and hope of
that glorious house which God has prepared for you in heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. We
know if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. The Disciples had
left their houses, and all that they had for Christ, and Christ to comfort
them, tells them of the mansions that were prepared for them in heaven, John
14.1,2. Let not your hearts be troubled -- In my Fathers house are many
mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for
you. The like may I say to you, let not your hearts be troubled at the loss of
your houses, though never so convenient, but comfort your selves with the
expectation of those glorious mansions that are prepared for you in heaven.

4. Had not God unsettled you by this Providence, it may be you would have
settled upon your Lees, Jer. 48.11. It may be you would have said in your
heart, it is good being here, and would have neglected seeking the Kingdom of
God; and therefore God out of mercy to your souls might unsettle you, to cause
you to shake off a worldly spirit, and to stir you up to make sure of an
eternal habitation in heaven.

5. If you seek unto God, though your houses be laid waste, and your selves
much unsettled, and know not where to fix your habitations, God will provide
you as good habitations as ever you had, Psalm. 107.4,6,7. They wandered in the
Wilderness in a solitary way, they found no city to dwell in, then they cried
unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses,
and he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation. Ezekiel. 36.9.10. Behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you --
and the Cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded. But he adds
withal that he expected they should enquire of him to bestow this, and what
other mercies are promised in this Chapter, ver. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I
will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do this for them.

SECT. 10.
Obj. 10. I am by this providence disabled from following my Calling, and
thereby rendered useless and unserviceable in my Generation, and this is that
which most of all troubles and disquiets my mind.

Answ. 1. We should covet earnestly to do God and our Generation much service
those few days we have to live in the world, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord -- It is a sore judgment
when our days are spent unprofitably, and inflicted as a punishment of other
sins, Psalm. 78.32,33. They sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous
works; therefore their days did he consume in vanity. It argues great
displeasure in God, when he suffers us to spend our days in an unprofitable
manner, Psalm. 90.9. Our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our years
as a tale that is told. This Scripture implies that it is a great token of
Gods wrath, when we spend our years as a tale -- Now then we may be said to
spend our years as a tale, when we spend them idly and unprofitably; for there
comes no profit in telling of Tales, 1 Timothy 4.7,8. Tales have this Epithet
given them in the Scripture, Idle Tales, Luke 24.11. what our Translation
renders, At a tale that is told: some Translations, as the Greek, Arabic,
Syriack, and Aethiopick render, As a spider, or, As a spiders web. The sense is
the same, namely when our years are spent in fruitless labors, whereby neither
we our selves, or others are the better for them; this is from the wrath of the
Lord.

2. If we do earnestly desire and endeavor to serve the Lord and our
Generation, and do long for abilities and opportunities of doing service, and
the Lord grant them not; or after he has made use of us awhile, shall lay us
aside, we must in this case submit our selves to God, and say as David did, 2 Samuel 15.26. If he say thus, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let
him do to me as seems good unto him. There is good reason that we should
submit our selves unto God, if he should refuse to employ us in doing him any
farther service, though we have never such strong desires to be serviceable in
our Generation: for 1. We are altogether unworthy to be employed in any service
for God and Christ, though the meanest that can be thought of. What meaner
service could any one have, than to stoop down and unty Christ's shoes, or to
carry his shoes after him. Yet John the Baptist who was a great person, none
that was born of women was greater than he, according as our Savior testifies
of him, Mat. 11.11. He was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb,
Luke 1.15. He was such an holy man, that Herod the King of the Jews stood in
awe of him, Mark 6.20. Yet this great, this holy man thought himself unworthy
to do the least or meanest service for Christ, he thought himself unworthy to
unty, or carry his shoes after him, Luke 3.16. One mightier than I comes, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose, Mat. 3.11. Whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear. 2. When it is in our hearts to do any service for God or
our Generation, God approves of what is in our hearts, though we are not able,
or want opportunity to effect and bring to pass what we desired to do, for the
advancing of the Glory of God, and promoting our own or others good, 2 Cor.
8.12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not. Though God did not permit David to build
him an house, yet God was pleased that there was a desire and purpose in his
heart to have done this thing, and commends him for it, 1 Kings 8.18,19. The
Lord said unto David, whereas it was in thine heart to build an house to my
name, thou did well that it was in thine heart, nevertheless thou shall not
build the house -- 3. God is the Lord and master of the whole world, and it
belongs to the master of the house to take what servants he pleases, and to
set them about what work he pleases, and put them out of his service when he
pleases. We that are masters of Families take this liberty to our selves, and
shall not we grant that to God which we take to our selves?

3. If you are troubled because you are disabled from serving God and your
Generation, use what means you can to prevail with God to call you again into a
way of service, and to render you useful in your Generation, I will commend to
you some means whereby you may prevail with God to make use of you to do him
service in your Generation. 1. Purge out your sins, and labor for sanctified
hearts and lives: Sanctified persons are meet for Gods use, and he delights
to employ them in his Service, 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man purge himself from these,
he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for his masters use, and
prepared unto every good work. 2. Act your faith upon the promises of God,
wherein God has promised to make his people useful in their places, and
serviceable to him in their Generation. I shall name one or two to this
purpose, Deuteronomy. 30.9. The Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand -- for good. Here are two blessings promised, the one is, that we
shall be full of employment; the other is, that good shall come of what we take
in hand. Something of this nature is implied in that promise, Mine Elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands, Isa. 65.22. God has promised to make us
serviceable all the days of our life, Luke 1.72,74,75. To perform the mercy
promised -- that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. 3. Mourn over your
unserviceableness, and cry unto God to admit you into his service, and offer
your selves to undertake any employment that he shall cut out for you, and
promise the Lord, that if he will put you into his service, that you will serve
him with an upright heart, as David did, Psalm. 75.2. When I shall receive the
congregation, I will judge uprightly. When the Lord sees such a spirit as this
in us, he will soon employ us in some way of service, as Deborah said, Judge.
5.9. Mine heart is toward the Governourrs of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people. So is Gods heart toward such persons as freely
offer themselves unto his Service; the Lord ordained it for a Law, that if a
Levite came to minister with all the desire of his mind, he should be admitted
to minister in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.6,7, God will assuredly provide
work for those that do so highly prize his service as to cry and mourn after it.

4. If you are by this providence disabled from following your former Calling,
then follow some other Calling; for God would have no man live without a
Calling. When Adam was in Innocence, God would not permit him to be out of
employment, but gave him a Calling to employ himself in, Genesis 2.15. And the
Lord took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep
it. Choose rather the meanest Calling, than to live without a calling. And if
God so order it, that you must of necessity take a meaner, less honorable, and
more laborious calling than you had before, be not discontented at it, but
comply thereto with a ready and quiet mind. Moses that was delicately brought
up in a Kings Court, by the space of forty years, and was so tenderly nursed up
by Pharaohs Daughter, as if he had been her own Son, did not disdain to serve
his Generation for several years in a very mean Calling, viz. the Calling of a
Shepherd, Exodus 3.1. Now Moses kept the Flock of Jethro his Father-in-law. It
is said of David, that he served his Generation according to the will of God,
Acts 13.36. When it was the will of God that he should serve his Generation as
a Shepherd, he was content to be a Shepherd, and when it was the will of God
that he should serve his Generation as a King, he was content to be a King,
when afterward God drove him from his Kingdom, and put him into the condition
of an Exile, he was content with that condition also, 2 Samuel 15.25,26. It is
probable that our Savior himself wrought in the Calling of a Carpenter some
time before he entered into the Calling of the Ministry (and that is both a
mean and laborious Calling) and this may be gathered from his Countreymens
upbraiding him with this Calling, Mark. 6.2,3. From whence has this man these
things* and what wisdom is this which is given to him, that even such mighty
work are wrought by his hands? Is not this the Carpenter; the Son of Mary?

If you say we would willingly follow some other Calling, now we are disabled
from following our former Callings, but we do not know, what Callings to fix
upon. How shall we come to understand our way, and to know what Callings God
would have us make choice of, now he has disabled us from following our former
Callings?

Answ. 1. Ask counsel of God what Callings he would have you make choice of,
that so you may serve your Generation arcording to the will of God, and not
according to your own will. The Lord has promised to direct you in your
choice, if you seek to him for counsel, Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths. Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears
the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.

2. Consider your own abilities, both in respect of parts and skill, and also
in respect of your stock that you have left to trade withal; and what Calling
you find your self best able to manage, that you may make choice of, and look
upon it as Gods mind that you should embrace it; for Gods distributing of
abilities for an employment is one principal ingredient in those things which
concur to the making out of our call to that employment, 1 Cor. 7.17. As God
has distributed to every man, as God has called every one.

3. Consider how God enclines your heart after you have sought him, for Gods
call to an employment may be gathered by his inclining of the heart unto it, as
in the case of the Levite, Deuteronomy. 18.7,8. The ardent desire of his mind was one
way of evidencing his call to Ministers in the Name of the Lord his God.

4. Observe Gods providence, which way that guides and leads you, whilst you
are waiting upon God for counsel, for that is one way by which God guides and
directs us, namely by his providence, Ps. 32.8. I will instruct, and teach thee
in the way which thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine eye. By the eye of
God, with which he will guide us, we may understand his providence, for so the
eye of God is oft-times used to signify his providence, as Psalm. 34.15. Psalm.
33.18,19. It is true, many men run into great mistakes, by pretending to follow
providence; but this does dot hinder, but that such as regulate their lives by
the word of God, may in many cases receive light and direction from his
Providence.

5. Consider what Calling has least temptations and snares in it, and choose
that rather than a calling where you are like to be exposed to many
temptations. We ought as much as in us lies to avoid temptations, else why do
we pray, Lead us not into temptation: Mat. 6.13.

SECT. 11.
Obj. 11. I am afraid this Judgment came in wrath, and that God is angry with
me, because he has consumed and burnt all my Estate, and that is it which most
of all disquiets and troubles my mind; namely, that I look upon this Judgment
as coming in wrath, and do apprehend God is angry with me.

Answ. 1. When God sends such great and dreadful Judgments upon any place as
the late Fire was, it is a token of his fierce anger, and of his hot
displeasure, Psalm. 78.21. The Lord heard this and was wrath, so a fire was
kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel: Isa. 66.15.
Behold the Lord will come with fire to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames of fire.

2. If this Judgment did come upon you in wrath, yet you must bear it with a
patient submissive spirit, Micha 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him. To free or murmur at the taken of Gods
wrath, is not the way to appease, but to increase the indignation of the Lord.

3. If you conceive that God is angry with you, do what you can to pacify his
anger. Solomon observes, Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of
death, but a wise man will pacify it. The wrath of God is more dreadful th^n
the wrath of all the Kings in the world; and therefore if you do apprehend God
to be angry with you, endeavor to get the Lords anger pacified and turned away
from you. If you ask, How shall we get Gods anger pacified and turned away from
us. I answer, 1. Turn from your sins, and God will turn away his anger from
you; Jonah, 8.9. Let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the
violence that is in their hands, who can tell if God will turn and repent, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Jer. 3.12. Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you. When the people of Israel did at the call of God, turn from their
sins, God says of Israel, Mine anger is turned away from him, Hosea 14.1,2,4.

2. Turn to the Lord Jesus, embrace and lay hold on Christ by a lively Faith,
and then Gods anger shall be turned away from you, and the Lord will be at
peace with you, Isa. 27.5. Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make
peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. By Gods strength here
understand Christ, who is called, 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ, the Power of God, and
the wisdom of God. By taking hold of Gods strength, understand believing in
Christ, if then you desire to make your peace with God, follow the counsel
which God himself gives you to this purpose, namely, take hold of his
strength, for upon so doing, you shall make peace with him. God testifies
concerning Christ, Mat. 3.27. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. If you flee for refuge from the wrath of God, unto Jesus Christ, and
cast your selves into his arms, the Lord will be well pleased with you. 3.
Yield your selves to God to do and suffer his will, what Solomon says, Eccles.
10.4. Yielding pacifieth great offenses. it is true in this case, though you
have greatly offended God, if you yield your selves unto the Lord, he will be
pacified toward you, and turn away his wrath from you, 2 Chr. 30.8. Be ye not
stiff-necked as your fathers were, but yield your selves unto the Lord -- and
serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from
you.

4. Though this Judgment be the effect of Gods wrath, yet there may be much
love in it to many persons that have been great sufferers by this Fire. The
Lord shows love when he takes away our outward comforts and enjoyments, and
chastneth us with his rod, as well as when he loadeth us with his benefits,
Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth. Psalm. 107.39,43. They are
minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow; who so is
wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving
kindeness of the Lord. Now if you would know whether this affliction whereby
you have been deprived of so great a part of your Estates, came in love, I will
mention two or three things whereby you may know this, and they will be of use
to you in other afflictions also. 1. Such afflictions as draw your souls nearer
to God, come from love; for it is Gods love which causes him to draw our souls
to himself, Jer. 31.3. With loving kindeness have I drawn thee -- Hosea 11.4. I
drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love. Now how do you find it with
your selves in this respect? do your losses put you upon seeking reconciliation
with God? do they stir you up to seek communion with God? do they cause you to
live and depend more upon his providence and promises? if in any respect you
find them drawing your souls nearer to God, you may conclude, that God has
taken away your Estates out of love to your souls. 2. Such afflictions as make
us zealous in renewing our repentance, come from love, Rev. 3.19. As many as I
love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. 3. Such afflictions
as make us more humble, more heavenly minded, or any other way promote the
holiness of our hearts and lives come from love, Heb. 12.10. He chastneth us
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. The Apostle
speaks of such as are chastned out of love, as we may see, ver. 6. Whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth; whence it appears that such chastenings as make us
partakers of Gods Holiness come from his Love.

SECT. 12.
Obj. 12. My loss has been so great, that I am thereby disabled from giving
any thing to the poor, and this troubles me very much, that I am by this
providence cut off from exercising Charity, and that I cannot relieve the poor
as I was wont to do heretofore.

Answ. 1. Though you have lost much, yet if you have any thing left, you must
will be doing good, according to your ability, Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. This is
spoken to such as had suffered the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. and
notwithstanding their sufferings, the Apostle tells them, they must not forget
to do good, and communicate to such as were in greater distress than
themselves. Such as have nothing to live upon but their labor, should give
something out of their earnings, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
Acts 20.35.
If any say, but if I that have but little, should give any thing to the poor,
I may come to want my self. I answer, Never fear being brought to want by doing
acts of Charity, Prove. 28.27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack. If any
reply the times are like to prove bad and hard, and therefore I that have but
little, had not need give away any thing, but rather ought to lay up all that I
can against an hard time. Answ. The uncertainty of the times and the evils that
are like to come upon the earth, should not hinder our Charity, but make us
more abundant in works of Mercy, Eccles. 11.2. Give a portion to seven, and
also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. Lo^ here
the Holy Ghost would have us give frequently, and give bountifully, a portion,
and that not to one or two, but to seven, and also to eight, when any evils are
like to come upon the earth.

2. Though you have lost much, and have but little left, you may give as much
as you did before, I mean that which God will count as much. The widow that
gave but two mites, cast more into the Treasury in Christ's account, than those
rich men that cast in abundance, Mark 12.41,42,43. Jesus sat over against the
treasury, and behold how the people cast money into the Treasury, and many that
were rich cast in much, and there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in
two mites which make a farthing; and he called unto him his Disciples, and
says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast more in,
then all they which have cast into the treasury. God looks at the heart more
than the gift, and the more freedom of heart and willingness of mind there is
in our gifts, the better they are accepted with God. A man of a mean estate may
give with as free an heart as a Prince, 2 Samuel 24.23. All these things did
Araunah, as a King, give unto the King. Yet he was but a mean man compared with
David, he called David his Lord, and styles himself David's servant, ver. 21.
both he and his Sons were at hard labor when David came to them, they were
threshing wheat, 1 Chronicles. 21.20. The Churches of Macedonia were very poor, and
under many afflictions, and yet in the depth of their poverty and their
greatest afflictions they abounded in liberality, 2 Cor. 8.1,2. We do you, to
wit of the grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia, how that in a
great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty,
abounded unto the riches of their liberality.

3. Be not discouraged from acts of Charity, because you can give but very
little in comparison of what you did before; for the least and smallest acts of
Charity done in a right spirit, shall have a great and glorious reward. What a
small matter is it to give a cup of cold water, yet such as give a cup of cold
water only, having nothing more or better to bestow, shall in no wise lose
their reward, Mat. 10.42. Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these
little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Our Saviors rule is, Give alms
of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto you, Luke
11.41. They that have much must give much, and they that have but mean things
must not be discouraged, because it is but little and inconsiderable that they
can do, but must give alms of such things as they have. If there be a willing
mind to give much, God accepts of a man's willing mind, though he be able to
give but very little, 2 Cor. 8.12.

4. If your losses be so great that you are able to give nothing to the poor,
yet you are not disabled from exercising of your Charity. You may pity them as
much as ever you did: and it is said, Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the
poor, lends unto the Lord. You may draw out your souls to them, which shall
not go unrewarded, Isa. 58.11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noon day. You may pray for them, you may stir up others to
relieve them. You may give much spiritual alms when you are so low in the
world that you have not one penny of money to give, as Peter said, Acts 3.6.
Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee. So though you have
no silver nor gold to give, yet you may give that which is far better. Though
you be poor you may enrich your Families, and your Relations, and your
Neighbors with spiritual riches, 2 Cor. 6.10. As poor, yet making many rich.
By your godly discourse you may minister grace to those that hear your
discourse, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to
the hearers. To minister grace to any man is a thousand times better than to
minister the good things of this world to him. It is said, Prove. 10.21. The
lips of the righteous feed many, and ver. 20. The tongue of the just is as
choice silver. When you have not bread to feed the hungry withal, feed as many
as you can with the fruit of your lips. When you communicate instruction and
knowledge to any persons, you communicate that which is more worth than all the
silver and gold in the world, Pro^. 3.13,14,15. Prove. 8.10,11.

SECT. 13.
Obj. 13. If it had been purely the hand of God that had taken away my Estate,
I could have born it, but it was my folly and indiscretion to betrust my Goods
in such hazardous places; if I had had my wits about me, and not have left my
Goods where I did, I might have saved all, or most of them; and in regard that
I lost them by my indiscretion in the ordering of my affairs, this is that
which does chiefly trouble me.

Answ. 1. Who is it hides wisdom and counsel from men in time of straits? Is
it not the Lord? Job 12.17,20. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes
the Judges fools. He removes away the speech of the trusty, and takes away
the understanding of the aged. When a wise man's understanding fails him, it
is because God takes it away, 1 Cor. 1.19. I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. What is said
of the Ostrich, she leaves her eggs in the earth, and forgets that the foot
may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them, because God has
deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her understanding, Job
39.14,15,17. The like may be said in your case, if you left your Goods in any
place for security, and did forget, or not consider the hazard and danger that
was in that place, or suffered damage by any other indiscreet action, it was
because God deprived you of wisdom, and did not impart understanding to you to
order your affairs for your outward advantage. The hand of God is not only in
all our afflictions, but in every circumstance of every affliction, Romans 11.36.
Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things, to whom be glory for ever.
If you take not heed, while you fret at your own indiscreet carriage, you will
be found guilty of fretting against the Lord, who withheld wisdom and counsel
from you.

2. Though you managed your affairs indiscreetly, yet God managed every thing
that befell you, and every other person in this dreadful Fire with infinite
wisdom, Ephesians. 1.11. -- Who works all things according to the counsel of his
own will. There is not only the will, but the eternal counsel of God, in all
the acts of his providence. That of the Psalmist, O Lord how manifold are thy
works, in wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 104.24. may be applied to the
works of Gods providence, as well as of creation. Therefore let this satisfy
and quiet your minds, though you carried your selves indiscreetly, God managed
every thing that befell you with infinite and eternal wisdom.

3. If there were any thing of folly and indiscretion in the loss of your
estates, make a spiritual improvement of the hand of God that went out against
you, by reason of your imprudent management of your affairs, and then your loss
will turn to your great gain. I will hint two or three things to you for this
purpose. 1. Do not think your selves sufficient to manage your affairs without
asking counsel of God, Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. Had you asked
guidance of God how to dispose of your Goods, and not gone upon your own heads,
it may be he would have directed you to some other course, whereby your
substance might have been preserved. 2. Dread walking in your own counsels for
the time to come, and be afraid of undertaking any business of moment, how wise
and prudent soever you apprehend your selves to be, until you have asked and
received counsel from God. To walk after our own counsels, is well nigh as bad
as to walk after the lusts of our own hearts, they both speak an evil state,
Psalm. 81.12. I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in
their own counsels. It may be you thought such and such places very secure, and
thereupon you bestowed your Goods there, without asking of God to guide you,
and they were all burnt; if so having smarted for leaning to your own
understanding, learn with the burnt child to dread the fire. Never venture more
upon your own wisdom in any business of moment till you have sought God, and
are directed by him what to do. 3. Learn hence to live by faith for guidance
and direction under all sudden and unexpected emergencies of Gods providence.
We have a promise of being guided continually by God, Isa. 58.11. The Lord
shall guide thee continually. We had need be daily eying this and such like
promises, because we know not what difficulties and unexpected trials every day
may bring forth.

SECT. 14.
Obj. 14. I have been a man very industrious in my Calling, and by Gods
blessing on my labors, I had gotten a very fair Estate, wherewith I and mine
lived comfortably, and it troubles me much that I should lofe in one day what
I have been laboring for many years.

Answ. 1. When God blows upon our labors, and all our earnings are like that
which is put into a bag with holes, he calls upon us to consider our ways,
Hag. 1.6,7. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, he that earneth wages,
earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes, Thus says the Lord of hosts,
consider your ways. If the loss of all that ever you earned do stir you up to
the practice and exercise of repentance, ye will say one day, It is good for me
that I was afflicted.

2. Though you have lost all that ever you earned in your Callings, you have
not lost the reward of your diligence, industry, and faithfulness which you
used in following your Callings, for that shall have an eternal reward in
heaven. As it is with servants, besides, that wages, and temporal reward which
they have from their Masters for their work, they shall have an eternal reward
from Christ in heaven, Col. 3.24. Knowing that of the Lord, ye shall receive
the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. So it is in other
Callings, they that serve Christ faithfully and diligently in any Calling,
though never so mean shall be rewarded for ever in heaven for their service,
besides those temporal blessings which are cast in upon them in this life,
Matthew. 25.23. Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over
a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord. Therefore I may say to you that are mourning, because you have
lost all that you have labored for, as the Prophet Jeremiah did in another
case. Jer. 31.16. Thus says the Lord, refrain thy voice from weeping, and
thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, says the Lord.

SECT. 15.
Obj. 15. I am consci^s to my self of much unrighteousness in the getting of my
Estate, and now my Estate that I get unrighteously is gone, my guilt remains,
and I am full of horror in my conscience, because of my sins, and especially
for this sin of unrighteousness.

Answ. 1. Such as have been guilty of unrighteousness in their dealings, have
great cause of being troubled, for they have committed an heinous fin, which
without repentance will most certainly shut them out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. It is a sin which brings down great wrath from God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That no
man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter, because the Lord is the
avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified. It makes a
man an abomination to God, Deuteronomy. 25.16. All that do unrighteously, are an
abomination to the Lord thy God.

2. If you be troubled in conscience for your unrighteousness in your dealings
with any man, your way to get the trouble of your Conscience removed, and to
get true and solid peace, is to do these things.

1. Confess your sin to God. You have wronged God as well as your neighbor by
your unrighteousness in your dealings, and therefore it is meet that you should
confess your sin to God, and humble your souls in his sight, and if you do
confess your sin to God, he will pardon this sin of unrighteousness as well as
other sins, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

1. Leave off, and cease from all unrighteous courses for the time to come, and
then the Lord will pardon all your former unrighteousness, although your sin in
that kind has been exceeding great, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 1.16,18. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil -- Come now and let us reason together,
says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow,
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

3. Flee to the Lord Jesus Christ, and lay hold on him by a true and lively
Faith. Jesus Christ has satisfied his Father for all our unjust dealings, and
all our other sins, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just
for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. And such is the efficacy of
his death and sufferings, that whatever guilt troubles the Conscience, the
Blood of Christ is able to remove it, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all Sin. And every one that believes in Christ, shall
partake of the virtue and efficacy of his Blood, for they shall be justified
from all things whatsoever they have done, either against God or men, Acts
13.39. By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. The Corinthians were guilty of
unrighteousness in their dealings, 1 Cor. 6.8. You do wrong, and defraud, and
that your brethren. And ver. 11. Such were some of you, that is, unrighteous,
thieves, covetous, extortioners, etc. as is expressed, ver. 9, 10, Yet he adds,
ver. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Whence you may see, that
the Blood of Christ cleanses from all kinds of unrighteousness, as fraud,
theft, extortion, etc.

4. Labor to get into Covenant with God. It is one branch of Gods Covenant to
pardon his peoples unrighteousness, Heb. 8.10,12. This is the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel -- I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.

5. Make restitution to those whom you have wronged, whatever you have taken
from any man, by fraud, or extortion, or any other unjust way, restore it to
him again, Ezekiel. 33.15,16. If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he
had robbed, walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall
surely live, he shall not dye, none of his sins that he has committed shall be
mentioned unto him, he has done that which is lawful and right, he shall live
thereby. Without restitution where God gives ability, and opportunity, there
can be no true peace of Conscience, Job 20.18,19,20. According to his substance
shall the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein, because he has
oppressed and forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken away an house
which he builded not, surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall
not save of that which he desired. Other Scriptures concerning restitution you
may see in Levit. 6.2,3,4,5,6,7. Luke 19.8. If any say, we are not able to make
restitution, the wrongs we have done are so great, and we have so little left
us by the Fire. I answer, 1. The Scripture even now mentioned may give some
direction in this case, According to his substance shall the restitution be. If
you are not able to restore the whole, restore as far as you are able. 2. If
you be not able for the present, resolve as soon as God makes you able, that
you will restore whatever you have gotten unjustly, and perform your
resolution, and God will accept of your willing mind, although you want
ability to perform what your mind stands to, 2 Cor. 8.12.

SECT. 16.
Obj. 16. I am one that serve God, and make conscience of keeping his
Commandments, and both I my self, and many others that walk close with God,
have lost all our Estates, and are undone by this Fire, when as many that have
no fear of God before their eyes, but live profane and dissolute lives, have
suffered nothing at all by this Fire, and this troubles me very much, when I
consider how God has dealt with many of his servants, and let others that
serve him not, go free: I am ready to fret at the prosperity of the wicked, and
to repine at my own afflictions.

Answ. 1. Such a temptation as this did sorely assault David, when he looked
upon his own afflictions, how he was plagued all the day long, and chastened
every morning, and looked also upon the prosperity of the wicked, and saw that
they were not in trouble, or plagued like other men, he was envious at the
foolish, and ready to stumble at this providence, and was almost brought to
say, that all the pains he had taken in Religion was to no purpose, Psalm.
73.2,3,4,5,12,13,14. And if such an eminent servant of God as David was
assaulted with this temptation, we need not wonder if some of Gods servants in
these days meet with the like.

2. When we are puzzled, and ready to stumble at the mysteriousness and
unaccountableness of any of Gods providence, either toward the wicked or the
godly, it is good for us to have recourse to the word of God, which is the best
commentary in the world to explain the nature of Gods Providence. When David
was under the forementioned temptation, he got relief by going into the
sanctuary, Psalm. 73.16,17. The word fully sets forth the miserable estate of
the wicked in the height of their prosperity, and the happy condition of godly
men in their greatest adversity, which may take off the Servants of God from
repining at their own afflictions, or fretting at the prosperity of wicked men.

3. It is not meet that we should take upon us to find any fault with God in
his governing the world. It is enough for us to mind our own duty, we must let
God alone to do what seems him good. Christ rebuked Peter when he having
heard what should befall him, was curious to know what suffering John should
meet with, John 21.21,22. Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what
shall this man do? Jesus says unto him, if I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? follow thou me. You may see enough in your selves to
justify God in all that he has brought upon you, and which if God saw meet to
spare some remarkable sinners, to try if his long-suffering and goodness, and
the riches of his Grace will lead them to repentance? shall your eye be evil
because od is good? It is expressly against the mind of God that you should
fret at the prosperity of wicked men, Psalm. 37.1,7. Fret not thy self because
of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity -- fret
not thy self because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who
brings wicked devices to pass.

4. They that are the servants of God have no cause to repine at their own
afflictions, or the prosperity of wicked men, as may appear on diverse accounts,
as 1. When the servants of God are chastened here, it is that they may not be
condemned hereafter, 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are judged we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. But when wicked men enjoy
a constant course of prosperity, and the goodness of God does not lead them to
repentance, it is a token that God intends to destroy them for ever, Psalm.
92.7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity
do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. 2. The Servants of
God get more good by their afflictions than wicked men do by their prosperity,
for Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of Fools shall destroy them; but the Servants of
God can say with David, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. 3. The blessings of this life are all the portion that God intends
to give unto wicked men, Psalm. 17.13.14. Deliver my soul from the wicked, from
the men of this world, that have their portion in this life; but as for godly
men, God has laid up wonderful great things for them in heaven, Psalm. 31.19. O
how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee. He
has laid up for them such things as we never saw with our eyes, nor ever heard
with our ears, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. He has made godly men heirs of himself and of all that he has, Romans
8.17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. Now
Christ is Heir of all things: Heb. 1.2. and if Christians be joint heirs with
Christ then are they also heirs of all things: As the Father of the Prodigal
Child quieted his eldest Son, when he repined and was discontented with the
bountiful Provision that was made for his Brother, the fatted Calf, and the
best Robe, a Ring, etc. when himself had not a Kid to make merry with his
friends, Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine, Luke 15.31.
The like may be said to such of the servants of God as are under a temptation
to repine and be discontented, because they have but little, and many that
follow the same course that the Prodigal Son did, enjoy abundance, and have
sustained no losses, ye shall ever be with the Lord, and all the blessings of
Heaven are yours, and shall be your portion for ever. And is not this enough to
satisfy you.

SECT. 17.
Object. 17. It is not my own private loss that troubles me, I could have born
that contentedly, if only I and my family had suffered and been undone by this
fire, but I am much afflicted to see London the glory of England, the chief and
principal City of this Nation laid in ashes, and to see so many magnificent
Buildings, so many goodly Churches, stately Halls, fair Houses, useful
Hospitals, etc. demolished, It grieves me to think of the many thousand
families that are ruined by this fire, and of the great difficulties and
hardship that many good people are like to meet with, who lived very
comfortably whilst this City stood in its glory. It troubles me to think of
the decay of Trade, and poverty, and misery, that is like to follow this
dreadful fire. If it had not been such a general, sore, and dreadful judgment I
should not have been so much troubled at it as now I am.

Answ. 1. It is the duty of all the Inhabitants of this Land to lay to heart,
and to be much affected with this solemn hand of God. When the Amalekites had
burnt Ziglag with fire it is said, 1 Samuel 30.1,4. David and the people that
were with him lift up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to
weep. Ziglag was not comparable to London, and if David and his men wept till
they could weep no more for the burning of such a small place as Ziglag, How
ought we to be affected at the burning of this famous City? When but two
persons Nadad and Abihu had suffered by fire that came out from the Lord and
devoured them, God calls to all Israel to lament the burning, Lev. 10.1,2,6.
Let your Brethren the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord
has kindled. How much more are we concerned to bewail this burning wherein so
many thousand families have been sufferers? When Nehemiah heard of the
affliction of the Jews, and that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the
Gates thereof burnt with fire, he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days,
and fasted, and prayed, Neh. 1.2,3,4. yet then Nehemiah was in a very good
condition in respect of his own concernments, he was in great favor at the
Court, he had a great place, he was the Kings Cupbearer, and when the King
demanded of him, why his countenance was so sad, seeing he was not sick, he
replied, Neh. 2.3. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City the
place of my Fathers Sepulchers lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed
with fire? We have many instances of Servants of God, lamenting Gods judgments
on others though they themselves have escaped, Isa. 22.4,5. Look away from me,
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of my People, for it is a day of trouble and of treading down, and of
perplexity, by the Lord God of Hosts in the Valley of Vision. It was not his
own loss or damage that the Prophet thus lamented, but the spoiling of the
Daughter of his people; so Jeremiah bemoans the sufferings of the Jews as if
they been had his own, Jer. 8.21. For the hurt of the Daughter of my People am
I hurt, I am black, astonishment has taken hold on me. He did not only weep
for the miseries of the Jews his Countrymen, but even for the Moabites, when
God was sending great judgments upon them, Jer. 48.31,32. Therefore will I howl
for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab, mine heart shall mourn for the men
of Kirheres. O Vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer.
--

2. Though we may and ought to mourn, yet we must not repine at the desolations
that are come upon this famous City, or at the sufferings that any Persons or
Families, or the Nation in general has sustained, or may sustain by this fire,
but we must all acquiess in the will of God, and to promote our submission to
God under this dreadful judgment. I will suggest some few considerations, and
so conclude my Answer to the first Question.

1. It is God that has done this great work, the hearing whereof makes our
ears to tingle, and therefore though it cause never so much sorrow to our
selves or others, we must not say one word by way of murmuring and complaint
against God, Isa. 38.15 What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it, I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my
soul. Psalm. 46.8,10. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he
has made in the Earth, -- Be still and know that I am God. The reason that
made Eli submit, when God did to his particular family such things as made both
the ears of every one that heard thereof to tingle, It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.11,18. The same should make us submit, when
such things befall a City or Nation, as makes the ears of all that hear
thereof to tingle. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

2. God will bring glory to his Name by this sore judgment which he has
brought upon this great City, Isa. 25.2,3. Thou have made of a City an heap,
and of a defenced City a ruin -- Therefore shall the strong people glorify
thee, the City of the terrible Nations shall fear thee. So also Isa. 5.16. in
some of the former verses the Prophet had been speaking of Gods judgments, as
Verse. 9. Many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without Inhabitant.
And Verse. 13, 15. Their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried
up with thirst; the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be
humbled, -- then he tells us, that all these judgments should make for the
exalting of Gods glory, Verse. 16. But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in
judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. Now the
exalting of Gods glory is of more concernment, than all the Cities, or Kingdoms
of the whole world. All things are and were created for Gods pleasure, and
therefore it is meet that he should glorify himself by, and with all persons
and things, as seems good in his sight, Revel. 4.11. Thou art worthy O Lord
to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were created. We should yield up all that we
have, and are, unto God to be disposed of by him as he pleases, so he will but
glorify his own Name, Joh. 12.27,28. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I
say? Father save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour;
Father glorify thy Name.

3. Though this be a very sore and dreadful judgment, and many persons fearing
God have suffered deeply by it, yet truly God is and still will be good to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. When Jerusalem the chief City of
Judah was ruined, and Judah's fall followed upon Jerusalems ruin, yet God
commands his Prophet to tell the righteous in the midst of these desolations,
it should go well with them, Isa. 3.8,10. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is
fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke
the eyes of his glory. Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with him, for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings. When God visited Ariel with flaming
fire, and other dreadful judgments, he promises to comfort and support his own
people in the midst of those troubles, Isa. 29.6,19. Thou shall be visited of
the Lord of Hosts with Thunder and Earthquake, and great Noise, with Storm and
Tempests, and the Flame of devouring Fire. The meek also shall increase their
joy in the Lord, and the poor men among shall rejoice in the Holy One of
Israel. God will make this dreadful judgment so far from hurting any of his
servants, that it shall conduce to the good of all that love his Name
throughout the whole Land, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

5. Whatever this great City was before its desolation to its own Inhabitants,
or to any of Gods servants in any parts of the Nation, all that God will be to
his own people now that it is laid wast. I shall instance in some particulars.

Was this City the glory of England, the Crown of the Nation, and are we ready
to say with Phinehas his wife, when we behold the ruins of this City, The
glory is departed from England, or with the Jews when Jerusalem was burnt with
fire. The Crown is fallen from our head, Lam. 5.16. yet let us remember what
God promised when he destroyed the glory of Ephraim, Isa. 28.4,5. The glorious
beauty which is on the fat Valley shall be a fading flower, -- In that day
shall the Lord of Hosts be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty
unto the residue of his people; and what is promised, Isa. 60.19. -- The Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, and Isa. 62.3.
Thou shall be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in
the hand of thy God.

Was this City a place of great strength and security, and do we look upon the
strength of the Nation to be much weakened by this dreadful fire? yet remember
God is the strength of his people, Psalm. 28.8. The Lord is their strength, and
he is the saving strength of his anointed, Isa. 25.4. Thou have been a strength
to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm,
a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm
against the wall. When the servants of God have no walled Cities to dwell in,
God will be a wall of defense to them, Zech. 2.5. I, says the Lord, will be
unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.
When they have no Bulwarks to secure them, God will be their strong City, and
his Salvation shall be their Bulwarks, Isa. 26.1. In that day shall this Song
be sung in the land of Judah, we have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint
for Walls and Bulwarks: This Song was composed for a Song of praise after the
Jews were delivered from the Babylonish captivity, and at their return they
found Jerusalem in a broken, ruinous condition; and some might be afraid to
inhabit a City that had no Walls nor Bulwarks, whereupon the Prophet tells
them, their City should be strong, though it wanted outward Fortifications; for
God would appoint Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks.

Was this City a Sanctuary, and a place of refuge to any of the Servants of
God? Though this place of refuge be gone, the Lord continues still to be a
refuge to his people, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour
out your hearts before him, God is a refuge for us. Psalm. 9.9. The Lord also
will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble. Isa. 8.13,14.
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread, And he shall be for a Sanctuary, Psalm. 46.1. God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble. Isa. 32.2. A man shall be as an
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as Rivers of water
in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. This Man is the
Man Christ Jesus, as he is styled, 1 Timothy 2.5. And at this time when the
Prophet Isaiah tells the Jews that Christ should be their hiding place from the
wind, and a covert from the storm, he tells them of the destruction of their
Forts and Strongholds, ver. 14.

Was this City a place of great Traffic, where was vended all kind of
merchandise, and so was a means of enriching many, and is trading now like to
fail, and poverty coming upon multitudes like an armed man? There is a
merchandise which is better than the merchandise of Silver and Gold, of which
we may read, Prove. 3.13,14. Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man
that gets Understanding, for the merchandise of it is better than the
merchandise of Silver, and the gain thereof than the gain of fine Gold. They
that are by this fire disabled from trading, may Trade as freely for the
merchandise of Wisdom as ever. When money fails God will be instead of money to
us, Job 22.25. The Almighty shall be thy Gold. So the words may be rendered, as
is intimated in the margent of our Bibles, and according to this Translation
the sense is, When God does not give his people silver and gold, he will be in
the stead of silver and gold unto them, and they shall be as well by virtue of
what they enjoy in him, as any man that has the greatest plenty of Silver and
Gold in the whole world. When your Treasure that was wont to come in by trade
fails, he will give you better Treasure, Isa. 33.6. The fear of the Lord is
his treasure.

Are many thousand Families undone by this burning? God can as easily provide
for many thousand Families that have nothing to live upon, as for one man. What
had all Israel to live upon when they were in the Wilderness besides the
promise and providence of God? there grew no corn in the Wilderness, neither
were there any Markets to buy provision, yet God fed them forty years together
in that desolate Wilderness in a bountiful manner, although there was a very
great multitude of them. There went about six hundred thousand out of Egypt,
besides children, Exodus 12.37.

Are diverse Hospitals and Almshouses wherein many poor people lived
comfortably, consumed by this Fire, and thereby the poor in danger to perish?
The God of these poor people continues still as mindful of their necessities,
and as able to help them as ever he was. God by his providence takes a special
care of poor distressed persons, especially of such poor people as pray to him.
He has laid up good things in store for them, Psalm. 68.10. O God, thou have
prepared of thy goodness for the poor. When they cry to God, he will hear them,
Psalm. 69.33. The Lord hears the poor. When they are in want, he will provide
bread for them, Psalm. 132.15. I will abundantly bless her provision, I will
satisfy her poor with bread. When they are in affliction, he will deliver
them, Job 36.15. He delivers the poor in their affliction. When any would
deprive them of their right, the Lord will maintain their right, Psalm. 140.12.
I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of
the poor. When they are oppressed, if they do but sigh to him, he will help
them, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy,
now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that
puffs at him. When they have no body that looks after them to relieve them,
God will relieve their necessities, Psalm. 146.9. The Lord preserves the
strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and the widow. When they are in straits
and dangers, if they commit themselves to the Lord, he will be their helper,
Psalm. 10.14. The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the
fatherless.

5. This great and dreadful Judgment shall promote the spiritual and eternal
welfare of all the Servants of God that have been sufferers by it. It shall
promote their spiritual welfare by making them more holy. Heb. 12.10. He
chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. None
of Gods chastenings are for the hurt, but for the profit of his Servants, Psalm.
119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes. Though their afflictions may cause sorrow and grief, yet they tend to
the bettering of their hearts, Eccles. 7.3. By the sadness of the countenance,
the heart is made better. And as this judgment shall promote the spiritual, so
also the eternal welfare of the Servants of God, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us, a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of Glory. James 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life which the
Lord has promised to them that love him.

Thus having laid down some considerations, for the quieting and satisfying
their minds that have been great sufferers by this Fire, and proposed some
things to be practiced in order to the obtaining of contentment, and having
answered the most material pleas, that without being removed, might hinder
those that have been great sufferers from sitting down satisfied under this
hand of God. I shall add no more about the first question, but proceed to the
resolution of the second.

QUEST. 2. What use should they make of their Affliction, who have lost their
whole, or any part of their Estates by the late Dreadful Fire?
SECT. 1.
Answ. 1. LOok upon this rod, as the rod of God. It is both our duty and our
wisdom to eye God in all our afflictions, and to look upon them as coming by
his appointment, Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man
of wisdom shall see thy name, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. There
is no trouble whatever comes of it self or by chance, Job 5.6. Affliction
comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground.
But all afflictions that come either upon Nations or particular Persons are
sent and ordered in all their circumstances by the wisdom and Providence of
God, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.
Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create
evil, I the Lord do all these things. Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things after
the counsel of his own will. When any man is made poor, it is the Lord makes
him poor, 1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, he brings low
and lifts up. When a Fire is kindled in any City, it is God sends it, and
gives it a commission what houses it shall devour after it is kindled, Hosea
8.14. I will send a Fire upon his Cities, and it shall devour the palaces
thereof. Though men or other creatures may be the instruments of conveying our
afflictions to us, yet we must look beyond them to the hand of God; for as
Christ said to Pilate, John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against
me, except it were given thee from above: the same is true of every Christian,
no man or other creature has any power to do him hurt, except it be given them
from God. There is such an hedge about the persons and substance of every godly
man, that the Devils themselves cannot touch any thing that belongs to him,
without leave from God, Job 1.10. When the Sabeans had taken away Jobs Oxen and
Asses, and the Caldeans his Camels, and Satan had caused Fire to consume his
Sheep, and a great Tempest had blown down the house where his Children were
eating and drinking, and had slain them, he looks beyond all these instruments
to the hand of God, and cries, Job 1.21. The Lord has taken away. We wrong and
be-lye the Lord when we do not own him either in his word, or in his works,
Jer. 5.12. They have be-lied the Lord, and said it is not he. --

SECT. 2.
2. Lay to heart this hand of God that has been lifted up against you. To be
stupid and senseless under the hand of God, is a great sin, yet many persons
offend in this kind, Isa. 42.25. He has poured upon him the fury of his
anger, and the strength of Battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet
he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. Jer. 5.3. O
Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have
not grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction. It is mentioned as an aggravation of Pharaohs sin, that he did not
set his heart to the Judgments of God, but made a light matter of them, Exodus
7.23. And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart
to this also. When we do not lay to heart Gods Judgments, either threatened or
executed, this provokes God to curse our very blessings, Mal. 2.2. If ye will
not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your
blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.
When we do not lay to heart the Judgments of God, we despise the chastening of
the Lord, and we must be as careful to avoid that sin, as we are, not to faint
under Gods Correction, Heb. 12.5. My son, despise not thou the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Such as are careless and
regardless under the rebukes of God, do thereby provoke God to destroy them,
Psalm. 28.5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operations
of his hands, he shall destroy them and not build them up.

If any ask, how should we lay this affliction to heart?

I answer, 1. Consider in your hearts, that by this Judgment God testifies
against you, that there is or has been something in your hearts or lives that
is displeasing to him, Ruth 1.21. I went out full, and the Lord has brought me
home again empty -- The Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has
afflicted me: and therefore commune with your hearts, and say, what have I done
to provoke the Lord to deal thus with me?

2. So lay to heart this affliction, as to humble your selves under the mighty
hand of God. The Lord threatened Israel with dreadful Judgments when they
continued stout and proud under former Judgments, Isa. 9.9,10,11,12. All the
people shall know, even Ephraim and the Inhabitants of Samaria, that say in the
pride and stoutness of heart, the bricks are fallen down, but we will build
with hewn stones; the Sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into
Cedars; therefore the Lord will set up the adversaries of Rezin against him,
and join his enemies together; the Syrians before, and the Philistines be
hind, and they shall devour Israel with open mouth, for all this his anger is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. God expects that we
should humble our selves when his hand is lifted up against us, 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time. Lam. 3.19,20. Remembering mine afflictions, and my misery, the wormwood
and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

3. So lay to heart this affliction, as to mourn more for the sin that provoked
God to send this affliction, than for the affliction it self, Lam. 5.16. The
crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned. They bewail
their sin more than the loss of their dignity. They do not say, woe unto us, the
Crown is fallen; but woe unto us that we have sinned, Jer. 3.21. A voice was
heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the Children of
Israel, for they have perverted their way, and forgotten the Lord their God.
Their Cities were burnt, as we may see, Chap. 2.15. Yet they bewail the
perverting of their way, more than the burning of their houses.

4. So lay to heart this affliction, as to be restless until you have gotten
the sins pardoned that brought down this Judgment upon you, Psalm. 25.18. Look
upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins. Psalm, 79.7,8,9. They
have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dewlling place. O remember not against
us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are
brought very low; help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name,
and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy Names sake. When they were
brought low, and their dwellings were laid waste, they beg twice with great
earnestness for the pardon of their sins. O remember not against us former
iniquities -- purge away our sins for thy Names sake.

5. Lay to heart this affliction, till you find your hearts willing, and
resolved by Gods Grace to part with all your sins. This is Gods end and design
in all afflictions to purge out our sins, Isa. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. And this is
our duty when we are corrected by God, to abandon and forsake all our sins, Job
34.31,32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastizement, I
will not offend any more, that which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done
iniquity, I will do no more.

6. So lay to heart this affliction, as to give glory to God, Mal. 2.2. If ye
will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name
-- But of this more afterward.

SECT. 3.
3. Mind the teachings of God under your present afflictions, consider and see
what it is which God would have you to learn from this dreadful Fire, which
has consumed so much of your, and other men's Estates. As God instructed the
Jews out of the midst of the Fire, Deuteronomy. 4.12. The Lord spoke unto you out of
the midst of the Fire. So if your ears were open, you might hear God speaking
to your souls, and instructing you by this Fire. God is wont to teach his
people something or other by every affliction, if so be they listen diligently
to the voice of his rod, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. It is true, that some persons learn
nothing by their afflictions, but the reason is, not because God communicates
no instruction to them, but because they either regard not, or do not
understand the voice of God, Job 33.14. God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man
perceives it not. Prove. 1.24. I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded. We wrong our own souls when we slight the
instruction of the Lord, whether he instruct us by his word, or his rod, Prove.
15.32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul; and do provoke God
to depart from us, Jer. 6.8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate -- If any say, what is it that God
would have us learn by our great losses that we have sustained in the late
Fire? I answer, The way to understand the voice of the rod, is to make use of
the word; by searching into the word, we may come to know the meaning of the
rod, and to understand what it is which God would have us to learn by our
afflictions, as may be gathered from Psalm. 94.12. I shall hint a few things to
you from the word, that God would teach you by this sore affliction.

1. God would have you learn that it is an evil and a bitter thing to sin
against the Lord, Jer. 2.15,19. His Cities are burnt without inhabitants --
Know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of Hosts.

2. God would have you learn to fear and stand in awe of his great and glorious
Majesty, and to be afraid of thinking, speaking, or doing any thing that may
displease him, Zeph. 3.6,7. Their towers are desolate, I made their streets
waste, that none passes by, their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no
man, that there is none inhabitant, I said surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction --

3. God would have you learn righteousness by this judgment, Isa. 26.9. When
thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.

4. God would have you learn obedience by what, you have suffered: It is said
of Christ, Heb. 5.8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the
things which he suffered. This was the lesson that God learned David by his
afflictions, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that
I might learn thy statutes. Wherefore endeavor to obey God more readily and
cheerfully, more exactly, and more sincerely than you have done heretofore.

5. God would have you learn contentation in every condition, both how to want
as well as how to abound, Phil. 4.11.12. I have learned in whatsoever state I
am therewith to be content; I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound, every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. When the Apostle wrote this Epistle,
he was in bonds, Phil. 1.13. and had suffered the loss of all things, chap.
3.8. and under his sufferings God taught him this excellent lesson of being
content in every state.

6. God would teach you by this affliction to pray ofther, and to pray better,
to pray more spiritually, more fervently, more humbly, and more believingly,
James 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. When Gods judgments are
abroad, God stirs up his people to pray early in the morning, and late at
night, and to pour out their souls and spirits in prayer, Isa. 26.8,9. Yea in
the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee? the desire of our
soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I
desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early; for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
will learn righteousness. Our Lord Jesus always prayed fervently, as we may
see, Heb. 5.7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save
him from death, was heard in that he feared. But when he was entered upon his
sufferings, he prayed more earnestly than ever, Luke 22.44. Being in an agony
he prayed more earnestly.

7. Learn hence the vanity and uncertainty of riches, and all worldly
enjoyments. This sudden and unexpected desolation which is come upon this great
City by this dreadful Fire, wherein such a multitude of Houses, and such a
great quantity of Goods have been consumed, and many thousand Families have
been impoverished, does plainly teach us the great uncertainty of worldly
things; and the great uncertainty that is in riches, and all other worldly
things, may teach us several lessons; as,

1. Seeing we have no assurance of worldly things, we should not set our eyes,
or our hearts upon them, we should not desire them inordinately when we want
them, nor delight in them inordinately when we have them, or mourn beyond
measure when we lose them, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which
is not, for riches certainly make themselves wings, they flee away as an Eagle
toward heaven. They should be so far from drawing our hearts, that they should
not draw our eyes after them, 1 Cor. 7.29,30,31. The time is short, it
remains, that both they that have Wives be as though they had none, and they
that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they
rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not, and they that use
this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes away.

2. Seeing riches are uncertain things, we should not trust in them, but in the
ever-living unchangeable God, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy.

3. Seeing we have no certainty that we shall enjoy our Estates one day, we
should not defer doing all the good we can with what God has given us, Eccles.
11.2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth. Luke 16.9. Make to your selves friends of the
mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. We should not slip any opportunity of doing good, Gal.
6.10. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them
who are of the household of faith. We should not defer doing good with our
Estates, so much as one day, when God gives us ability and an opportunity to do
good, Prove. 3.27,28. Withold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is
in the power of thine hand to do it; say not unto thy neighbor, go and come
again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee.

4. Seeing there is such an uncertainty in the things of this world, this
should teach us the vanity and folly of seeking to get the things of this world
by unjust just and unrighteous courses, Prove. 21.6. The getting of treasure by
a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. They
that seek to get riches by lying, or any other sinful means, do seek their own
death and destruction. And what folly is it to cast away an immortal soul, and
to lose an eternal Kingdom (for, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9.) for gaining of that which a man is not
sure to enjoy one day? There is a greater uncertainty in riches that are gotten
unrighteously, than in those that are gained by honest means; for God threatens
such persons with this Judgment, that they shall enjoy what they get
dishonestly but a very little while, Jer. 17.11. As the Partridge sits on
eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Prove.
13.11. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, but he that gathers by
labor shall increase. And as such riches continue but a very little while, so
the Owners have little or no comfort in them while they do enjoy them. The
accusations of a guilty conscience, and the curse of God that goes along with
their Estates, troubles them more then their Estates do them good. Zophar
speaking of a man that is unjust in his dealings, says, he shall have no joy
in his riches, nor quietness in his Conscience, Job 20.17,18,19,20,22. He shall
not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and butter, that which he
labored for, he shall restore, and shall not swallow it down; according to his
substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein, because
he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken
away an house that he builded not, surely he shall not feel quietness in his
belly -- In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, every hand
of the wicked shall come upon him. Diverse other passages there are in that
Chapter, very dreadful to such as get their Estates in a dishonest way, which I
forbear to transcribe. And this is farther to be considered concerning those
riches that are gotten unjustly, that although such riches are of very short
and uncertain continuance, the sin and guilt which is contracted in the getting
of them will remain upon the conscience a long time; and if there be not a
timely, and sincere repentance, a man's sin will accompany him to the Grave, Job
20.11. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with
him in the dust, and fromt hence his sins shall go along with him to the
Judgment Seat of Christ, Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into
judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
And from thence a man's sins shall go along with him to Hell, and there vex and
torment him like fire to all eternity, Jame: 5.3. Your gold and your silver is
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped up treasure together for the last
days.

SECT. 4.
4. Consider your ways that you may find out for what sin or sins God has
laid this affliction upon you. When God blasted the Jews in their Estates, he
called them with great earnestness to consider their ways, Hag. 1.5,6,7. Now
therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways, ye have sown
much, and bring in little -- He that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it
into a bag with holes, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways. When
Job had lost his Estate, and was under other afflictions also, he was very
desirous to find out for what sin it was that God contended with him, Job
13.23. How many are mine iniquities and sins; make me to know my transgression
and my sin. Job 10.2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. If any ask,
How shall we come to find out for what sins God is contending with us;

I answer, 1. Go to God and pray to him as Job did, to show you why he
contendeth with you, Job 10.2. Job 13.23. and after you have sought to God to
discover the cause of his controversy, observe what sins he brings to your
remembrance, and sets before you, and gives you secret intimations from his
Spirit, that for such and such a sin he is now correcting you. In times of
affliction, God is wont by his Spirit to present to the view of our souls the
sins for which he corrects us, Job 36.8,9,10. If they be bound in fetters, and
be holden in cords of affliction, then be shows them their work, and their
transgressions, that they have exceeded, he opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity.

2. Consider what sin your consciences suggested to you when God first sent
your affliction upon you, for oft-times God represents to us by our
consciences, what the sin is for which he contendeth with us, as we may see in
Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 42.21, They said one to another, we are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

3. Search into Gods word, and see for what sins God has been wont to
impoverish men, and bring them low in their Estates; and also for what sins God
has either threatened or inflicted this dreadful judgment of Fire; and if you
find that you have been guilty of the same sins, you may then know for what
sins you have suffered the loss of your Estates by the late Fire. I will give
some instances in both kinds. 1. For what sins God has either threatened or
inflicted this dreadful judgment of Fire, and they are such as these.

1. Unbelief and distrust of the promises and providence of God, Psalm.
78.21,22. A fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against
Israel, because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation.

2. Neglect of prayer and seeking after God, Amos 5.6. Seek ye the Lord, and ye
shall live, lest he break out like Fire in the house of Joseph and devour it,
and there be none to quench it in Bethel.

3. Forsaking of God after we have had much experience of Gods goodness in
guiding us, and delivering us from many dangers, and bestowing many other
mercies upon us, Jer. 2.15,17. His cities are burnt without inhabitant. Have
thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have for saken the Lord thy
God, when he led thee by the way?

4. Neglecting to sanctify the Sabbath in a spiritual manner, or profaning it
by doing service or sinful works, Jer. 17.28. If ye will not hearken to me to
hallow the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates
of Jerusalem, on the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates
thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched.

5. Taking of bribes to pervert justice, Job 15.24. The congregation of
hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the Tabernacles of Bribery.

6. Oppression, and unjust and unrighteous dealings, Job 20.19,26. Because he
has oppressed and forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken away an
house that he builded not, all darkness shall be hid in his secret places, a
fire not blown shall consume him, it shall go ill with him that is left in his
Tabernacle.

7. Pride, Idleness, fullness of Bread, and neglect of the poor, Ezekiel. 16.49,50.
Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of idleness was in her and in her Daughters; neither did she
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, and they were haughty, and committed
abomination before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good. Now the way by
which God took away Sodom for these sins was by fire, Genesis 19.24.

8. Resting in outward Reformation without seeking after a renewed heart, Jer.
4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your
heart, ye men of Judah and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth
like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

9. Murmuring at any of Gods Providence, though they be such as bring us into
straits, Numb. 11.1. When the people complained, it displeased the Lord, and
the Lord heard it, and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt
among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the Camp.

10. Mocking and misusing of Gods Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 36.16,17,19. They mocked
the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until
the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy,
therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young
men with the Sword, -- And they burnt the House of God, and brake down the Wall
of Jerusalem, and burnt all the Palaces thereof with fire.

11. Changing Gods Ordinances, and breaking his Covenant, Isa. 24.5,6. Because
they have transgressed the Laws, and changed the Ordinances, broken the
everlasting Covenant; Therefore has the Curse devoured the Earth, and they
that dwell therein are desolate, therefore the Inhabitants of the Earth are
burned, and few men left.

12. Sins of uncleanness, as Fornication, Adultery, etc. for these God consumed
Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, as we may see, Jude 7.
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them in like manner, giving
themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

13. Idolatry. Deuteronomy. 32.16,21,22,24. They provoked him to jealousy with
strange gods, -- They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God,
they have provoked me to anger with their vanities, -- A fire is kindled in
mine anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell, and shall consume the Earth with
her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the Mountains; They shall be
burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction.

Several other sins for which God has threatened this judgment of fire, you may
see in the first and second chapters of Amos, and also in other Scriptures
which I shall not mention.

Consider also for what sins God has taken away or diminished others estates,
and brought them low and afflicted them with poverty, and that may help you to
find out your sins for which God has impoverished you. It is true, that
sometimes God takes away his Peoples estates to exercise and try their graces,
as we see in the case of Job; but usually when he brings us low and bereaves us
of our Estates, it is for our sins, Psalm. 106.43. They provoked him with their
counsels, and were brought low for their iniquities. Isa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob
for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we
have sinned? Jer. 15.13. Thy Substance and thy Treasure will I give to the
spoil, without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. Now
the sins for which God is wont to take away our Estates and bring us low, and
to send poverty, are such as these;

1. Unthankfulness for what God has given us, and instead of honoring God
with our Substance, abusing it to the dishonor of God, Hos. 2.8,9. She did not
know that I gave her Corn and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold
which they prepared for Baal; Therefore will I return and take away my Corn in
the time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool
and my Flax given to cover her nakedness. Two sins are here mentioned as the
ground why God would take away not only what was for delight and ornament, as
Wine, Oil, Gold, Silver, etc. but what was necessary to their substance, as
Corn, and Wool, and Flax to cover their nakedness; the one was, they did not
know, that is, take notice of, and acknowledge that it was God gave them their
food and raiment, and riches, and so consequently did not give God thanks for
them; the other was, they served their lusts, they prepared that for their
Idols which God gave them for his own service.

2. Pride, When men grow proud of their riches God oft-times takes them away,
Prove. 29.23. A man's pride shall bring him low.

3. Neglect of works of mercy; Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters and yet
increases, and there is that withholds more than is meet, but it tends to
poverty.

4. Making overmuch have to be rich, Prove. 28.22. -- He that hastes to be
rich has an evil Eye, and considers not that poverty shall come upon him.

5. Not heeding the Commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 28.15,33,43,44. If thou will not
hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
Commandments, all these Curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee, -- Thou
shall be only oppressed and crushed away, -- The stranger that is within thee,
shall get up above thee very high, and thou shall come down very low; He shall
lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him, he shall be the head, and thou
shall be the tail.

6. Not serving God cheerfully for the abundance of all those good things which
the Lord has given us, causes him to take them away, and to bring us into
straits, Deuteronomy. 28.47,48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore
shall thou serve thine Enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in
hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things.

7. Rejoicing at the ruin and sufferings of others; He that is glad at
calamities shall not be unpunished, Prove. 17.5. and the punishment which God
sometimes sends on such persons, is the spoiling of their Goods and loss of
their Estates, Ezekiel. 26.2,12. Because that Tyrus has said against Jerusalem,
Aha, She is broken that was the Gates of the People, -- They shall make a spoil
of thy Riches and make a spoil of thy Merchandise, and they shall break down
thy Walls, and destroy thy pleasant Houses.

Following of vain persons; Prove. 28.19. He that follows after vain persons
shall have poverty enough.

9. Gluttony and Drunkenness, Prove. 23.21. The Drunkard and Glutton shall come
to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags.

10. Refusing instruction; Prove. 13.18. Poverty and shame shall be to him that
refuses Instruction.

11. Oppressing the Poor, and giving of bribes to the Rich; Prove. 22.16. He
that oppresses the Poor to increase his Riches, and he that gives to the
Rich, shall surely come to want.

Thus by observing out of the Word of God, for what sins God has either
threatened or inflicted this judgment of Fire; and for what sins God has
impoverished others; and then considering how far you have been guilty of any
of those sins, you may find out for what sins you have suffered loss in your
Estates by the late Fire.

4. Consider for what sins God did oftenest rebuke you either by his Word or
Spirit, or Providence, before this affliction came upon you; and if those sins
were not reformed for which you have been often rebuked, then it is probable,
that they are the sins for which God sent this affliction, Deuteronomy. 8.5. Thou
shall consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord
thy God chasteneth thee. Now Parents first admonish and reprove their Children,
and if reproofs will not make their Children reform, then they take the rod and
correct them. When you have found out the sin for which God is correcting you,
you must confess it to God, and humble your souls for it, and apply your selves
to Christ for the pardon of it, and beg grace from God to help you to leave and
forsake it; and this leads me to the next head.

SECT. 5.
5. Look upon this affliction as a loud call from God to repent of and turn
from all your transgressions; and therefore let this judgment awaken you to set
upon a speedy, zealous, and unfeigned exercise and practice of the duty of
Repentance; for this is one main thing that God aims at when he sends his
judgments upon us, the stirring of us up to a present, and zealous, and incere
repentance, Ezekiel. 18.30. I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one
according to his ways, says the Lord God, repent and turn your selves from
all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Rev. 3.19. As
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore, and repent. When
the Lord contended with the Jews by the Sword and by Fire, his design in these
judgments was to bring them to a speedy and sincere repentance, Joel 2.3,12. A
Fire devoureth before them, and behind them a Flame burns; the Land is as the
Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate Wilderness; yea and
nothing shall escape them, -- Therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye, even
to me, with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning, and rend your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God. When the Cities of Judah were burnt with fire, Isa. 1.7. the design
of God was to wash away the filth of the Daughters of Zion, by the Spirit of
Judgment, and the Spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4. If therefore you would answer
Gods design in this Fire, let this burning put you upon cleanling of your
selves from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the spirit. God sets a
brand upon such persons for notorious sinners, who are not led to repentance by
such an awakening judgment as fire, Amos 4.11. I have overthrown some of you as
God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were us a Fire brand pucked but of the
burning, yet have ye not roturned unto me, faith the Lord. I might give you
several reasons why this judgment should put you upon repentance and reforming
your lives; ponder upon these two or three:

1. If you will not be reformed by this judgment, though this was a great and
sore punishment, God will lay far greater and heavier afflictions upon you,
Lev. 26.23,24. If ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk
contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you
yet seven times for your sin.

2. If this judgment will not lead you to repentance, nor any other means that
God shall use with you to turn you from your iniquities, you will perish
eternally, and be cast both body and soul into Hell fire, and that is a far
more dreadful fire, than that which consumed your houses and goods, Luke 13.3.
Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.

3. God lays his command upon such as are under affliction to depart from
iniquity, Job 36.8,9,10. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work, and their transgression, that they
have exceeded; he opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that
they return from Iniquity. Now it is a contemning of God, to rebel against his
Commandment; and it must needs be a great provocation for a man to go on in his
sins, when God commands him to return from iniquity. Wherefore let this
affliction prevail with you to set upon the work of Repentance and Reformation,
and that you may do it the more effectually take these few directions.

1. See that you turn from, and cast away, not only some, or most of, but all
your transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.30,31. Repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin; Cast away from you all
your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, -- for why will ye die, O
House of Israel?

2. Your affliction should cause you to cast away your sins for ever. Some deal
with their sins as Felix did with Paul, Act. 24.25. Go thy way for this time,
when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. They put away their sins
for a little time, but afterward when their afflictions are removed, and they
have a convenient season for the commission of their sins, they call for them
and embrace them again. When Pharaoh saw the Lightnings, and heard the mighty
Thunderings, he was willing to let Israel go out of Egypt, and humbled himself
for his sin; but when he saw that the Hail, and the Lightnings, and Thunders
were ceased, he hardened his heart and sinned as much or more as ever, Exodus
9.27,28,34,35. But this is not such a repentance as God expects in a time of
affliction, he would have us abandon our sins for ever, Job 34.31,32. Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any
more; that which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do
no more. Hos. 8.14. I will send a Fire upon his Cities, and it shall devour the
Palaces thereof; and what fruit did God expect that this fire should produce?
Such a forsaking of their sins as to return to them no more, Hos. 14.8. Ephraim
shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?

3. Let this affliction cause you to reform your hearts as well as your lives,
Jer. 4.14,15. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? for a voice
declares from Dan, and publishes affliction from Mount Ephraim. Ezekiel. 18.31.
-- Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will ye die, O House of
Israel?

4. Reform your Families as well as your own Souls: If you discern any thing
amiss in your Wives, or in your Children, or in your Servants, or in any that
sojourn with you, endeavor as much as lies in you to reform it; for this God
expects of all those that return to him by true repentance, that they should
put away all iniquity far from their Tabernacles, if they be such as have
Families committed to their charge, Job 22.23. If thou return to the Almighty,
-- thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, Job 11.13,14. If thou
prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him, if iniquity be in
thine hand put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles,
Genesis 35.2. Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, put
away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean. Joshua did not think it
sufficient to serve God himself, but resolves to engage all his family to
serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

5. Set upon the work of Reformation speedily, make no delay, not so much as
one day, Psalm. 119.60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.
Heb. 3.7. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, -- Sin is of that subtle insinuating nature, that
though a man be under convictions of an absolute necessity of reforming his
life, and take up (as he thinks firm and strong) resolutions to repent of his
sins, if he do not presently set upon the work of repentance, if he put it off
but a day, he is in danger of having his heart hardened, and of continuing in an
impenitent condition, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

6. You had need look to your selves that your hearts be sincere and real with
God in the exercise of repentance; for some that seem to be very forward and
zealous in humbling of their souls, and reforming their lives in times of
affliction, do but flatter and dissemble with God, and do not turn to God with
their whole hearts, but only in a feigned manner, Psalm. 78.34,35,36,37. When he
slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after
God, and they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer: Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied
unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant. Jer. 3.10. And yet for all this her
treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
feignedly, says the Lord.

Now you had need take good heed to your selves, that you do not let this
judgment pass away without being brought to a true and unfeigned repentance by
it; for repentance is a very hard work, and few persons are wrought upon by
their afflictions, to forsake their sins and reform their lives, though God
follow them with one affliction after another till he has even consumed and
destroyed them, Rev. 16.10,11. -- They gnawed their tongues for pain, and
blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their pains, and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds, Rev. 9.20,21. The rest of the men which were not
killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold and Silver, -- neither
repented they of their Murders, and of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornication, nor of their Thefts. Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a
Fool in a Mortar with a Pestel, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.
And this is not only the case of profane men, but of most that profess
themselves to be the people of God, many of them when they are corrected for
their sins, do yet go on still in their trespasses: When God sent such heavy
calamities upon the Jews, that they were more bitter than death,
notwithstanding they were by Profession the people of God, and their calamities
were so great; yet scarce any of them were led to repentance by them, Jer.
8.3.6. Death shall be chosen rather than life, by all the residue of them that
remain in this evil family -- But were they bettered by these great
afflictions? Not a man of them are brought to repentance, as you may see, Verse.
6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turns to his course, as the
Horse rusheth into the battle. The like complaint the same Prophet brings
against the Jews, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your children, they
received no correction, -- The Prophet Isaiah complains also of the Jews that
lived in his days that they were not at all reformed by their afflictions, Isa.
1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more; and yet
their afflictions were exceeding great, as the following words show, The whole
head is sick, and the whole heart faint, from the sole of the foot even unto
the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying
sores, -- Your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire, your Land
strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by
strangers. I may add this farther, that it does exceedingly anger the Lord,
when such as are under affliction do not turn to the Lord that smites them,
and provokes God many times to send upon them sudden and utter destruction,
Isa. 9.12,13,14. -- His anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still, for the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they
seek the Lord of Hosts, therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and
tail, branch and rush in one day.

It may be some will say, Seeing it is such an hard matter even for such as are
in affliction to be brought to repent of, and turn from their sins, what means
shall we use that we may be brought to repentance now the afflicting hand of
God is upon us?

I answer; 1. Sit down and consider your ways, that you may see what is amiss
in them, and wherein you have gone astray from God; consider also seriously
with your selves, into what endless and unspeakable misely and torments your
sins will plunge you if you do not repent of them: The Scripture has many
passages to this purpose, Romans 6.21,23. What fruit had ye then in those things,
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death; for the wages
of sin is death. Romans 8.13. If ye live after theflesh, ye shall die, -- Psalm.
9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget
God. When David was in affliction, he was reformed by his afflictions, Psalm.
119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy Word. And
by what means was he brought to a more diligent observation of Gods Word, when
he was afflicted? It was by reflecting upon, and considering his ways; as we
may see, verse. 59. I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto thy
Testimonies. There is a great efficacy in consideration of our ways to produce
Reformation, Prove. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet; and all thy ways shall
be ordered aright; so that Text is rendered in the margent of our Bibles. It
will not only make good men to reform what is amiss in their ways, but if a
man that has lived a wicked and ungodly life, would sit down and seriously
consider his ways, it might be a means of turning even of a wicked man from
his sins, Ezekiel. 18.27,28. When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness
that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save
his soul alive; because he considers and turns away from all his
transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
This Scripture shows plainly, that consideration (because he considers and
turns --) will help a wicked man to turn from all his sins, by such a
repentance as shall surely save his soul; he shall surely live, he shall not
die.

2. Give your selves much to hearing, reading, and meditating upon the Word of
God. The Rod seldom does good without the Word; but when the Word of God is
accompanied with his Rod, when in our afflictions we give our selves to search
into, and meditate upon Gods Word, this will make our afflictions to work
kindly upon us. There is a divine power goes along with the Word, and
therefore it must needs be an effectual means to lead us to repentance, to
converse much with the Word; see some places of this Scripture to this purpose,
Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Joh. 15.3. Now
ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you. Ephesians. 5.26,27.
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word. Who are harder to be
reclaimed then young men who have strong and unruly passions? And who are more
hardly kept from sin than great men who can do what they please, and none can
control them, yet both the one and the other may be brought to repentance and
kept from sin by taking heed to Gods Word. As for young men, we may see the
power of the Word to reclaim them, Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word. David was a King
and stood in awe of no man; yet was he awed by Gods Word, Psalm. 119.161. My
heart stands in awe of thy Word. And though he was a King, yet he was so awed
by the Word, that he durst not sin against God, Psalm. 119.11. Thy Word have I
hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

3. Confess to God and bemoan the refractoriness and incorrigibleness of your
hearts, and pray to the Lord that he would turn you from your sins unto
himself, Jer. 31.18,20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus,
Thou have chastised me and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Is
Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. When Ephraim was in affliction
and found a refractory spirit, -- Thou have chastised me, and I was as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, and went to God and bemoaned the hardness of
his heart, and prayed to be turned, God promises, I will surely have mercy
upon him; that is, out of my mercy toward him, I will both pardon his
rebellious and disobedient carriage under his affliction, and subdue his
refractory and rebellious spirit. That Gods having mercy on him, implies both
the pardoning and subduing his sins, may be gathered from Mic. 7.18,19,20. When
the Jews were carried captive into Babylon, and found, that notwithstanding all
the great things that they suffered during the siege, and at the destruction of
Jerusalem, they were not turned from their sins, they go to God, and pray to
him to turn them; for they were persuaded that though their afflictions had not
turned them, yet if the Lord would put forth his Grace and turn them, then they
should be turned, Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be
turned. Prayer is of that prevalency with God, that no iniquity shall be able
to stand long before a praying Christian, but Prayer will soon subdue the power
and dominion of it, Psalm. 119.2,3. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies,
and that seek him with the whole heart, they also do no iniquity. Prayers and
tears will prevail over God himself, Hos. 12.3,4. -- By his strength he had
power with God, yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and
made supplication unto him. Now if Prayer will prevail over God fear not but it
will prevail over all manner of sin.

4. When you feel any workings and stirrings of the Spirit of God upon your
hearts, take heed of quenching or resisting the Spirit when the Spirit of God
works upon you either in a way of conviction, or by stirring up godly sorrow
for sin, or exciting purposes and resolutions against sin, or working in any
other way upon our souls, and yield your selves to God, join in, and comply
with the motions of the Spirit: all the workings of Gods Spirit upon our
hearts, are in order to the bringing of us to repentance, that he may prevent
our eternal misery, Job 33.16,17. He opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction, that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from
man. See also, ver. 29, 30. Lo, all these things works God often times with
man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living. We had need attend to the workings of the Spirit, because there is
no mortifying of any one sin, but by the help of the Spirit, Romans 8.13. -- If
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. And
though we can overcome no sin but by the help of the Spirit, yet with the
Spirits help we may overcome any sin whatever, Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. What would God
have done for Israel, if they had hearkened to him, Psalm. 81.13,14,15. O that my
people had hearkened unto me -- I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned my hand against their adversaries; the haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto him -- The same will the Spirit of God do for those
that yield up themselves to be led and guided by him, he will soon subdue their
sins, and turn his hand against their iniquities, and make all their spiritual
enemies become subject unto them.

5. Look unto Jesus Christ to give you repentance, and to turn you from your
iniquities. God has exalted Christ to give us repentance, Acts. 5.31. Him has
God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give
repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Because we cannot of our
selves turn from sin, God sent his Son to turn us from our iniquities, Acts
3.26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son: Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. If after you have
applied your selves to Christ in order to his turning of you from your
iniquities, your sins should still prevail over you, yet be not discouraged,
but hope in Christ, that in his own good time, he will redeem you from all your
iniquities, and you shall find that he will not fail your expectation, Psalm
130.7,8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and
with him is plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities. Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me, as for our
transgressions thou shall purge them away.

6. Rest upon God by virtue of his promises, to sanctify your afflictions for
the purging out of your sins, and leading of you to repentance. The Lord has
made many gracious promises of sanctifying those afflictions which he lays
upon his people, and causing of them to purge and refine their souls. I will
mention two or three, Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob
be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Here are two things
remarkable in this Scripture. 1. The end and design of God in afflicting his
people, which is, that he may take away his sins. This is all the fruit to take
away his sin. 2. A promise that the affliction, which God sends upon his
people, shall have this effect upon their souls to purge out their sins. By
this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. Jer. 24 7. I will give them an
heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. This
promise relates to a time of affliction, when the Jews were carried captives
into the Land of the Caldeans, ver. 5. and herein the Lord promises among
other blessings, that this captivity should produce in them an unfeigned
repentance. They shall return unto me with their whole heart. Another promise
to this effect we have, Zach. 13.9. I will bring the third part through the
fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is
tried, they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say it is my
people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God. In the former verse the Prophet
speaks of a time of great mortality. Two parts therein shall be cut off and
die, but the third part shall be left therein; and then he foretells what should
befall the third part that should be left, I will bring the third part through
the fire; and then adds a gracious promise that they should be refined by
passing through the fire; that is, God thereby would purge and purify their
hearts and conversations: urge God daily with these promises, plead them at the
Throne of Grace, and rest upon God for the performance of them.

SECT. 6.
6. Comply with Gods ends and designs in sending this affliction upon you; The
Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. but
when ever he sends any affliction upon any man, he has gracious ends and
designs in those afflictions; and therefore as the Jews made enquiry, when they
were brought into great distress, Wherefore does the Lord our God all these
great things unto us? Jer. 5.19. And as the Apostle Paul when he was struck
blind with the vision that appeared to him as he was going to Dumascus,
enquires of the Lord, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6. So should we
make enquiry when the Lord afflicts us, wherefore it is that he afflicts us,
and what it is that he aims at, what he would have us to do, when his
afflicting hand is upon us. We are enemies to our own good, when we do not
study the mind of God in our afflict ons and labor to comply with his ends,
for he always chastneth us for our profit, Heb. 12.10. and aims at the doing
of us good, Deuteronomy. 8.16. If you ask, what are Gods ends and designs in sending
this affliction upon us? I answer, The resolving of this question concerning
Gods ends in afflicting us, what he aims at, and what he would have us learn
when his rod is upon us, may be gathered from Sect. 3. I shall add a few
things more besides what are mentioned there.

1. Gods design in this affliction is to take away all pride, and to make and
keep you humble, Isa. 2.11. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day. This may refer to the day of affliction spoken of, Isa. 1.7. Your
country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire -- In that day when God
should bring this desolation, the lofty looks of man should be humbled, etc.
When God afflicted the Israelites in the Wilderness with fiery Serpents, that
and all other afflictions were sent for this end to humble them, Deuteronomy. 8.15,16.
-- That he might humble thee, and prove thee, and do thee good in the latter
end. Elihu tells us that when God speaks once and twice to men, It is, that he
may hide pride from man, Job 33.17. When the Apostle Paul was afflicted, he
tells us twice, that the end of God was to prevent his being exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. If then you would comply with Gods design in this
affliction, you must be no more proud of your riches, beauty, parts, duties, or
any other thing, but must put away all pride of spirit, all high conceits of
your selves, and all proud looks, and all pride of life, and you must be of a
lowly heart, and go always clothed with humility.

2. God aims at the making of you more zealous Christians by this affliction;
Lukewarmness is a very odious, detestable sin, Rev. 3.15,16. I know thy works,
that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot; so then
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of
my mouth: this being so odious in Gods sight for a man to be lukewarm in his
Religion. When God finds any whom he loves to be in a lukewarm temper, he
chastens them for this very end to make them more zealous, lous, Rev. 3.19. As
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore -- Now this is one
way, and a very sharp one of rebuking us, when God contends by Fire, Isa.
66.15. The Lord will come with fire -- to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames, of fire. If therefore you were cold, or if not wholly cold,
yet but lukewarm before God sent this Fire, it concerns you now to grow
zealous. If you ask in what your affliction should make you zealous? I answer,
1. Be zealous in all acts of service, and all religious duties which you
perform to God; shake off all drowsiness, and formality, and slightness of
heart in prayer, and in hearing and reading Gods Holy Word, and be fervent in
spirit when you are about these or any other holy duties, Rom 12.11. Not
slothfulness in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. What is said of
the Apostle Paul, Acts 22.3, I was zealous toward God; and of Phinehas, Numb.
25.13. He was zealous for his God. Let the same be true of you, put on an holy
zeal for God, and show your zeal for God in all that you do, either for, or to
the Lord. 2. Be zealous against sin; strive against sin, not in a faint cold
manner, but with all your might. Be zealous and repent, Rev. 3.19. Your zeal
must be manifested in your repentance. When a man is zealous against his sins,
and zealous in his repentance, his zeal will breed indignation against sin, a
vehement desire to be rid of it, a fear and carefulness that he do not commit
it again. See an example of zealous repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11. Behold, this self
same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in
you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear,
yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge. 3. Be zealous of
good works, Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. We should not only do good works, but be zealous of, and in doing good
works. We should be so zealous of good works, as not only to embrace
opportunities of doing good when they come in our way, but we should covet
earnestly, and follow diligently after opportunities of doing good works, 1 Timothy 5.10. -- If she have diligently followed every good work. We should not
only do good works, but be careful to excel and continue constant therein,
whatever difficulties and discouragements we meet with in doing of them, Tit.
3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works. You see, if you would answer Gods design in your affliction, that
you must be zealous, and in what you must be zealous; only let me add here two
or three cautions, 1. Look that your zeal be regulated with knowledge; There
may be a zeal which is not guided by knowledge, Romans 10.2. I bear them record,
that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Zeal without
knowledge is dangerous. Paul in a blind zeal persecuted the people of God,
thinking therein to do God good service, Phil. 3.6. Concerning zeal persecuting
the Church. And Saul out of a blind zeal to the children of Israel and Judah,
slew the Gibeonites; for which sin, though done in zeal, the whole Land was
punished with three years Famine, 2 Samuel 21.1,2. 2. Look that your zeal for God
be true, and real, and not pretended. Jehu pretended great zeal for God, 2
Kings 10.16. Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord -- But it was rather a
zeal to establish the Kingdom to himself, than any true zeal for God. 3. Let
your zeal be chiefly exercised in those things wherein the life and power of
godliness consists, in the essential and fundamental matters of Religion, and
not in circumstantials. Pharisaical zeal that was punctual in tything Mint, and
Cummin, and Annise, and neglected the weightier matters of the Law, as Faith,
and the love of God, Judgment and Mercy, was disallowed and condemned by
Christ. 4. Look that your zeal be not for a fit, while the sense of your
affliction is fresh upon your spirits, but let it be constant, Gal. 4.18. It is
good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.

3. God aims at the making of you partakers of his holiness, by this
affliction, Heb. 12.10. He chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness. These persons to whom the Apostle writes this
Epistle, had been chastned with the loss of their Goods, Heb. 10.34. and this
chastning was for this end, that they might be partakers of Gods Holiness. They
were holy before, the Apostle calls them, chap. 3.1. Holy brethren, partakers
of the heavenly calling -- They were such as had been sufferers for Christ, and
had suffered joyfully, they had attained to assurance of their salvation, chap.
10.32,33,34. Yet these persons were chastned, that they might be made more
holy. Now seeing Gods design in this affliction is to make you partakers of his
holiness, let this affliction stir you up to follow after holiness; if you had
only a form of godliness, a show and appearance of holiness before, now follow
after the power, truth, and reality of godliness; if you had true holiness
before, labor now to be more holy; be more holy in your hearts, in your
thoughts, in your affections, in your speech, and discourse with all men, be
more holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. As he which called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. This exhortation, though it
belong to all Gods called ones, is more especially directed to such as are in
affliction, for to such this Epistle is directed, as you may see, ver. 1, 6.
Let your sufferings excite you to do the works of your Callings in a more godly
sort, and to perform your Closet and Family Duties in a more holy manner, to be
more holy in your relative Duties, to be more holy in your converses with all
sorts of men, and to express more of the power of holiness in all manner of
conversation.

4. God aims at the stirring of you up to a more close and humble walking with
himself, and to deal justly and mercifully with all men, Micah 6.8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? This God
required at such a time as he was pleading a controversy with his people, as
you may see, ver. 2. The Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will
plead with Israel. And while he was pleading his controversy, he destroyed
Jerusalem, the chiefest City of the Jews, chap. 3.12. Zion shall be plowed as a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps. And Samaria (which was one of the
principal Cities belonging to the ten Tribes, Isa. 7.9. The head of Ephraim is
Samaria) Micah 1.6. I will make Samaria as an heap of the field -- I will pour
down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations
thereof. Now when God had a great controversy with Israel and Judah, (for this
Prophet was sent to both Kingdoms, chap. 1.1.) and was laying waste their
chiefest Cities, that which he required from the inhabitants with whom he was
pleading his controversy, was, that they should do justly, and love mercy, and
walk humbly with their God.

5. God aims at making of you more fruitful by this affliction, that you may
bring forth both more and better fruit, John 15.2. Every branch that bears
fruit, he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit. When great wrath was
coming upon the Jews, and the axe was even laid to the root of the tree, John
the Baptist gives them this exhortation, Mat. 3.8. Bring forth therefore
fruits meet for repentance. Now if you would know what it is wherein God would
have you more fruitful in, you may be resolved from such Scriptures as these,
Gal. 5.22,23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Phil. 1.11. Being filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God. Col. 1.10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. If then you would comply with Gods
ends in your present affliction, labor to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness; abound in all the fruits of the Spirit, which are as you heard
before, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, and temperance. Labor to be fruitful in every good work, only
remember in so doing, that you bring forth your fruit to God, and not to your
selves, Romans 7.4. -- That we should bring forth fruit unto God; for what fruit
is brought forth for selfish ends, God accounts next to none, Hos. 10.1. Israel
is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself.

SECT. 7.
7. The losses and other afflictions which you have sustained by this dreadful
Fire, should stir you up to glorify God, Isa. 24.15. Wherefore, glorify ye
the Lord in the Fires, even the name of the Lord God of Israel. In the former
part of the Chapter the Prophet speaks of a time of great desolation, as ver.
1. Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty, and makes it waste, and turns it
up-side down, and scatters abroad the inhabitants thereof: ver. 3. The land
shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled -- ver. 11, 12. All joy is
darkened, the mirth of the land is gone; in the City is left desolation, and the
gate is smitten with destruction -- and then tells them what use they should
make of these sore Judgments, Glorify ye the Lord in the fires. When God is
executing any remarkable Judgments, it should awaken all men to glorify God,
Rev 15.4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thy
judgments are made manifest. We read, Rev. 14.6,7. That when it was an hour
wherein God was executing his Judgments, that an Angel cried, to every nation,
and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, fear God, and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come -- If this judgment
that is come upon you will not prevail with you to give glory to God, God will
curse your blessings, Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it
to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send
a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them
already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

If you ask, how and wherein you should glorify God under this affliction
which he has laid upon you?

I answer, 1. Accept of the punishment of your iniquity, and acknowledge that
the Lord is just and righteous in all that is come upon you. Then we give God
the glory of his Judgments, when we confess him to be just and righteous
therein, Rev. 15.3,4. -- Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints, Who
shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name -- Thus Daniel gave glory to
God when Jerusalem was laid waste, and the Jews spoiled of their goods, and
carried captive into Babylon, Dan. 9.14. The Lord has watched upon the evil,
and brought it upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works that
he does, for we obeyed not his voice. Yea, do not only confess God to be
righteous, but also acknowledge him to be gracious in this dispensation; say,
whereas our Houses and Estates are consumed by this Fire, it is of the Lords
mercies that we our selves are not consumed, even because his compassions fail
not. Thus Lot gave glory to God, when his house and goods were consumed in
Sodom, he looked upon it as a great mercy that he himself was not consumed
also, Genesis 19.19. Behold now, thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and
thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed unto me, in saving my
life.

2. Though your sufferings have been very great, yet give God thanks, and
praise his Holy Name for what he has done for you; by so doing you shall
glorify God, Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me -- Isa. 42.12.
Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands. This
relates to a time of Judgment. I will destroy and devour at once, I will make
waste mountains and hills, -- ver. 14. 15. Even when God is rising up to
judgment, and devouring, and destroying, we must declare his praise, and so
give him the glory of his Judgments. Let not this seem strange to you, that I
exhort you that have suffered great lostes by this Fire, to praise God, and
give him thanks; for 1. Job did thus, when God had taken away all his Estate,
and Children, he blesses God, Job 1.21. -- The Lord has taken away, blessed
be the name of the Lord; and Job did not sin, or act imprudently in blessing
God for his losses, for it is said in the next words, In all this Job sinned
not, nor charged God foolishly. 2. It is the will of God, that in every estate
and condition, and under every dispensation of his providence, we should give
thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God,
in Christ Jesus concerning you. 3. There is much mercy mingled with the
affliction; it is mercy that your Estates were consumed, and not your Lives: it
is mercy that your Houses only were burned, whereas you might have been cast
both body and soul into everlasting burnings; and if you cannot give God thanks
for the affliction it self, yet at least, give him thanks for the mercy that
was mingled with the affliction.

3. Let this affliction put you upon searching and trying your ways, and
renewing your repentance, and returning unto God, of which you heard before;
for in so doing you shall give glory to God, Rev. 16.9. They repented not to
give him glory.

4. Let this Judgment awaken in your souls a more lively fear and dread of God,
let it cause you to stand in such awe of God as to be afraid to offend him; for
then we give glory to God when we are afraid to sin against him, Rev. 14.7.
Fear God, and give glory to him.

5. You shall give glory to God by this Judgment, if you be stirred up by it to
live a more holy and righteous life, Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all
righteous -- that I may be glorified. If also it make you fruitful in good
works, John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.

6. Let this Judgment awaken you to a more diligent practice of what is
commanded, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God. It was your duty ever since you were born, to
make Gods glory the highest and chiefest end of all your actions; if you have
not done so, you have great cause to humble your souls before God; for you have
neglected the great end of your Creation, Isa. 43.7. Every one that is called
by my name, for I have created him for my glory. If you did seek to advance the
glory of God, before this Judgment came upon you, yet now be awakened hereby to
seek Gods glory more zealously, with more singleness of heart; and do all your
works, both the works of your Calling, and your natural Actions, as your eating
and drinking, and your Religious Actions, with more explicit intentions to
glorify God.

SECT. 8.
8. Let the losses which you have sustained by this dreadful Fire, take you off
from laying up your Treasure upon the earth, and put you upon laying up
treasure in heaven. That treasure which you lay up on earth, may be taken from
you several ways; you may lose it all in one day, or if you do not lose it,
you must leave it all behind you when you dye: But that treasure which is laid
up in heaven, can by no means be taken from you, but you shall enjoy the
benefit of it to all eternity. Remember therefore, and follow the counsel and
command of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 6.19,20,21. Lay not up for
your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal; but lay up for your selves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through and steal; for where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also. If you ask, What is that treasure which we should lay up in heaven? I
answer, All the good thoughts which you think, and all the good words that you
speak, are treasure laid up in heaven, Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord,
speak often one to another, and the Lord hearkined, and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name. You see here that God treasureth up in his book of
remembrance, all the good words which we speak when we meet together, and all
the good thoughts which we think. All the tears we shed for our sins, and all
the sighs and groans which we send up to God by reason of our sins, are
treasure laid up in heaven: for God puts such tears into his bottle, and all
sighs and groans that come from a penitent heart ascend up to heaven, Psalm.
38.9. Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.
All the prayers that we put up to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, are treasure
laid up in heaven, Psalm. 18.6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried
unto my God, he heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him,
even into his ears. This is plain from the forementioned Scripture, All my
desire is before thee. All the alms we give to the poor in a right spirit, are
treasure laid up in heaven, Luke 12.33. -- Give alms, provide your selves bags
which wax not old; a treasure in the heavens that fails not -- Matthew. 19.21.
Sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven. Acts 10.4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before
God. All the prayers that we make, and all the alms that we give to the poor,
are recorded in heaven, as precious treasure. All the good works that we do,
are treasure laid up in heaven, Ephesians. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing any man does,
the same he shall receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. All the sins
that wicked men commit, are treasure laid up in Hell to augment their torments,
Romans 2.5. After thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God. If all the sins of wicked men, are treasure laid up against the day of
wrath; then surely all the good actions of good men, are treasure laid up in
heaven.

SECT. 9.
9. Let the losses which you have sustained by the late Fire, put you in mind
of, and make you careful to avoid four other Fires, which are more dreadful
than this great Fire, which consumed many thousand houses in a few days.

1. Take heed of the fire of Sin. Sin is often compared unto fire, Isa. 9.18.
Wickedness burns as the fire, it shall devour the briars and thorns -- Prove.
16.27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil, and in his lips there is as a burning
fire. Hos. 7.6. They have made ready their heart like an oven, whilst they lie
in wait, their baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns as a
flaming fire. James 3.6. The tongue is as a fire, a world of iniquity; so is
the tongue among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on
fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of Hell. Now this fire of sin
is far more mischievous than the late Fire which burnt so great a part of the
City; for though that destroyed many stately buildings, and much Goods, this
destroys men's souls; and the soul of one man, though the poorest man upon the
face of the earth, is more worth than the whole world, Mark 8.36. The late Fire
has burnt up a great part of the City, but sin has set on fire the whole
course of nature; it has fired, more or less, all persons in all parts and
places of the world, For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not, Eccles. 7.20. It has been burning many thousand years together,
even ever since the fall of Adam.

2. Take heed of the Fire of Gods wrath, that burns like fire, Nahum. 1.6. Who
can stand before his indignation, and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is poured out like fire. Psalm. 89.46. Shall thy wrath burn like
fire? The Apostle says of God, Heb. 12.29. Our God is a consuming fire. To
whom is God a consuming fire? To all impenitent persons that refuse to humble
their souls, and to break off their sins, Isa. 27.4. Who would set the briars
and thorns against me in Battle, I would go through them, I would burn them
together. He is a consuming Fire to all that fall off from the ways of God,
after they have been enlightened with the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10.26,27.
If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.

3. Let this fire put you in mind of that fire which shall consume and burn up
the whole world. It was a dreadful sight to see London on fire, but it will be
more dreadful to see the whole world on sire; yet such a time will come, and it
is hastening apace upon us, wherein the heavens and the earth shall be set on
fire, and all persons and things burnt in that fire, 2 Pet. 3.10,11,12. The day
of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heav ns shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat;
the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up: seeing then
that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be
in all holy conversation, and godliness, looking for, and hastening unto the
coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? This fire that shall
burn up the whole world, shall be to all the servants of God like Elijah's
fiery Chariot, a means of conveying them into the Kingdom of Heaven; but it
shall be a day of destruction and perdition to all ungodly men, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7,8,9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels,
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord. 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and the
Earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire,
against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Mal. 4.1. Behold,
the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that
do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says
the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

4. Let this fire put you in mind and make you careful to avoid Hell fire: If
this fire were dreadful, think with your selves how dreadful it will be to be
placed at Christ's left hand, and hear him pronounce that terrible sentence,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. and yet this will be the portion of all the workers
of iniquity, Matthew. 13.41,42. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth. Revel. 21.8. The fearful, and unbelieving, and the
Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars, shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone. Hell fire is so dreadful, that you should be willing to do any
thing, and to suffer any thing, so that you may not be cast into Hell fire when
you die. If you have any sins as profitable to you as your right hand, or as
dear to you as your right eye, you had better a thousand times part with those
sins, and suffer pain and damage, and enter into life than retain your sins,
and be cast into Hell fire when you die, Mar. 9.43,44,45,46,47,48. If thy hand
offend thee, cut it off; for it is better for thee to enter into life maimed,
than having two hands, to go into Hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thy
foot offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter halt into life,
than having two feet to be cast into Hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And if
thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is better for thee to enter into the
Kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into Hell fire;
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

SECT. 10.
10. Trust in God for a livelihood; Though your Estates be gone and Trading
fail, and Times should be hard, yet God will not fail you nor forsake you if
you trust in him; but he will feed you, and clothe you, and provide all things
that are necessary for you, Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so
shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Heb. 13.5. Let your
Conversations be without Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. These Hebrews
(as I have hinted before) had suffered the spoiling of their goods, as we may
see, Chap. 10.34. and now they might be full of fears that they should not be
able to live; but the Apostle bids them be content with such things as they
had, for the Lord would not leave them nor forsake them. Consider

1. God knows that you need food and raiment for your bodies as well as grace
for your souls, Matthew. 6.32. Your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of
all these things; and as he knows what and how great your needs are, so he
will take care to supply all your needs, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all
your need according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus.

2. God made provision for you long before you had a being, the Kingdom of
Heaven was prepared for Gods Saints and Servants before they were born; for it
was made ready for them from the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Yea, before the world began, from all Eternity, God made
preparation for your eternal happiness, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began. Now if God made
provision for your eternal happiness before you had a being, then doubt not but
he will provide for you that little time that you have to continue in this
world.

3. God has given you better, and greater things then food and raiment; he
has given you life, bodies and souls, Matthew. 6.25. Take no thought for your
life, what you shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what
ye shall put on: is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? God
has not withheld his only Son from you, and do you think, that he will
withold food and raiment from you, who gave you his own Son? Romans 8.32. He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things?

4. A good man will give his servants convenient food, though he have never so
many, Luke 15.17. How many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough and
to spare? And do you think our good and gracious God will deny his servants
their necessary food?

Does not God clothe the grass which is but of few days continuance? And do
you think that he will deny you raiment who are made for an eternal state?
Matthew. 6.28,29,30. Why take ye thought for raiment? consider the Lillies of the
field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: and yet I say unto
you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these:
wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
faith? God out of his mercy gives food to all his creatures, Psalm. 136.25. Who
gives food to all flesh, for his mercy endures for ever: He feeds the Birds
and the Beasts, Job 38.41. He provideth for the Raven his food, when his young
ones cry unto God -- Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the Beast his food. And do ye
think that he who is styled The Preserver of Men, Job 7.20. will not provide
food for the sons and daughters of men? If you think that the Lord is, or will
be more mindful of the Birds and Beasts than of Men, you wrong him exceedingly,
Matthew. 6.26. Behold the Fowls of the Air; for they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not
much better than they? But of this you may see more, Quest. 1. page 75, 76, 77,
etc. Sect. 3, 4.

Object. If any say, I could trust God for a livelihood, if I could but see
which way I should be able to live; but when I have considered which way I
should be able to maintain my self and my family, I cannot see or think of any
way whereby I and mine should be maintained, and this makes me that I cannot
tell how to trust in God for a subsistence.

Answ. 1. You have strange thoughts of God, if you will trust him no farther
than you can see him; you will trust a dishonest man as far as you can see him:
And what a reproach is this to the holy God, to trust him no farther than you
will trust a dishonest man?

2. The property of true faith, is to persuade the soul as firmly that those
things which God has promised shall be, although we neither do or can see
them; as we are persuaded of those things which we see evidently with our eye,
Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. Our Lord Jesus pronounces those blessed which believe what they see
not, Joh. 20.29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou
have believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

3. What though you cannot see or think which way you should be maintained? God
is able to do abundantly more than you are able to think, Ephesians. 3.20. To him
that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think,
according to the power that works in us. God has hidden riches, such as no
man knows of to give his servants, when and where he sees good, Isa. 45.3. I
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places,
that thou may know, that I the Lord which call thee by thy name, am the God
of Israel. God oft-times gives wicked men hidden treasure; David speaking of
Gods Providence toward the wicked, says, Psalm. 17.14. -- Whose belly thou
fillest with thy hid treasure, -- And cannot he find out hidden treasure for
his servants, even such as they think not of?

4. What visible maintenance did Jesus Christ give his Disciples when he sent
them on a journey, and bid them Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in
your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor
yet staves, Matthew. 10.9,10. yet he provided so carefully for them, that they
lacked nothing, Luke 22.35. He said unto them, When I sent you, without purse,
and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said, Nothing. What
visible maintenance did God give the children of Israel in the Wilderness? As
for bread they had none but what fell from heaven, and of that, they had but
for the day, excepting on the sixth day wherein they were to gather a double
portion, on other days if they kept any till the morning it bred worms and
stank, and what fell in the morning was dried up when the Sun was hot, Exodus
16.4,19,20,21,22. so that God gave them nothing before hand, but put them upon
living by faith for their daily bread. And as for flesh, though God had given
them a promise, that they should eat flesh a month together, Moses himself was
put to a great stand to think, how such a vast multitude should be fed with
flesh in the Wilderness, Numb. 11.21,22,23. Moses said, the people amongst whom
I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou have said, I will give them
flesh, that they may eat a whole month: Shall the Flocks and the Herds be
slain for them to suffice them? or shall all the Fish of the Sea he gathered
together for them to suffice them? And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords
hand maxed short? thou shall see now whether my words shall come to pass unto
thee or not. Now though God kept this people in such dependence on himself,
that for forty years together he did not give them one days bread before hand
(excepting every sixth day) but they were to expect it a new from heaven every,
day; yet all that forty years he did so carefully and constantly provide for
that great multitude, that they lacked nothing, Dept. 2.7. The Lord thy God,
has blessed thee in all the works of thine hand; he knows thy walking
through this great Wilderness: these forty years the Lord thy God has been
with thee, thou have lacked nothing. Neb. 9.21. Yea forty years did thou
sustain them in the Wilderness, so that they lacked nothing, their clothe waxed
not old, and their feet swelled not.

5. The Birds have nothing before hand, neither do they know one day where they
shall have their food the next, yet God provideth for them every day, Matt.
6.26. And why should not you depend upon God for your daily bread, though you
know not one day, how or which way you shall be provided for the next? If you
say, The Birds have a greater latitude than we have, they may take their meat
where they can get it, they being under no law, are under no transgression, we
are bound up by the Law of God, not to meddle with that which belongs to other
men. I answer, The Birds do not find out or gather any thing but what God gives
them; Psalm. 104.28. That thou give them, they gather, thou openest thine
hand, they are filled with good. Matthew. 6.26. Your heevenly Father feeds them.

6. Consider the examples of Gods servants, who have trusted God at such times
as they could not see how or which way those mercies should be given them,
which they stood in need of. When Isaac said unto Abraham, My-Father, Behold
the fire and wood, but where is the Lamb for a burnt offering? Abraham said, My
son, God will provide himself a Lamb for a burnt offering, Genesis 22.7,8. Abraham
could not tell how or which way God would provide a Lamb for a burnt offering,
yet he did rest upon God that he would do it. If troubled thoughts arise in
your hearts, and you begin to say within your selves, where shall I have bread
for my self, and for my family: answer your selves as Abraham did Isaac, God
will provide bread for me and mine. When Mordecai could not tell, how or which
way deliverance should come to the Jews, there being but one way visible, and
that was by Esther, but she was loath to appear and hazard her self by
interceeding for them; but he for all this rests upon God, that if this means
failed, deliverance should come some other way, Esth. 4.14. If thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance
arise to the Jews from another place.

Object. 2. I am a simple, shiftless person; and besides, I have no friends to
take care of me, or look after me, and now my Estate is gone, and my Calling
fails, I shall not be able to live; I could trust God for a livelihood, if I
could shift for my self in the world as others can do, and had any friends to
look after me, but I and both shiftless and friendless.

Answ. 1. You are not more shiftless now, than you were in your infancy, yet
then God provided for you; when you were a little Infant and could not shift
for your self, God drew you out of your Mothers womb, and fed you, and clothed
you, and defended, and supported you, Psalm. 71.6. By thee have I been holden up
from the womb, thou art he that took me out of my Mothers bowels; my praise
shall be continually of thee.

2. If you had never so much craft and subtilty, yet you could not get a
subsistence, without the help of Gods Providence; for all the devices of the
crafty come to naught, when God succeeds them not, Job 5.12. He disappointeth
the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
Your want of subtilty is no impediment to Gods Providence; he by his wisdom is
able to provide for those that have little or no wisdom to order their affairs,
as well as for those that are endued with greatest discretion.

3. There is a special Providence of God which watches and takes care of such
as are simple and shiftless, Psalm. 116.6. The Lord preserves the simple; I was
brought low and he helped me. Who are more shiftless than strangers, widows and
fatherless children? and we find that God takes a special care of such as
these, Psalm. 146.9. The Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the
fatherless and widow. Were not the Disciples of Christ shiftless, when they
were sent forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, Matthew. 10.16. and yet had
neither money in their purses, nor staves, nor scrip? Verse. 9, 10. but for all
this they wanted nothing, as you heard before from Luke 22.35.

4. Though you are friendless as well as shiftless, let not this discourage
you; as long as you have a God in Heaven that takes the care of you, you are
well enough though you have no friends on earth to look after you, 1 Pet. 5.7.
Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. When David was in
distress, and had no friend that took any care of him, he stayed himself with
this, that he had a God that was his refuge, who would not only give him Heaven
when he died, but also be his portion, and take the care of him in the land of
the living, Psalm. 142.4,5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was
no man that would know me; refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul; I cried
unto thee, O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of
the living. The fewer friends you have in the world, and the less help and
relief you are like to have from men, the more you shall have from God; for he
is wont in an eminent manner to take care of such as are friendless and
helpless, Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord
will take me up. Jer. 30.17. I will restore health uno thee, and I will heal
thee of thy wounds, says the Lord, because they called thee an outcast,
saying, this is Zion, whom no man seeks after. Psalm. 10.14. -- The poor
commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless.

Object. 3. But I cannot work; my age, may one say; my sickness and other
infirmities, may another say, do disable me from working; and how then shall I
be able to live in these hard times, when I cannot work to get my living?

Answ. 1. It is the will of God, that as long as we have ability we should work
for our living, for by that way God is wont to supply our needs, namely, by
industry and diligence in our employments, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11,12. That ye studdy to
be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we
commanded you, that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, that ye
may have lack of nothing. The promise of being fed runs on these terms, Trust
in the Lord, and do good, -- and verily thou shall be fed; it is not said, trust
in the Lord, and then though you live idly, you shall be fed; but, do good and
thou shall be fed. Idleness will bring a man to want, Prove. 19.15. Slothfulness
casts into a deep sleep, and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

2. If you would work, but cannot, because you are disabled by age, or
sickness, or some other infirmity, this should not hinder you from trusting in
God to maintain you. For

1. When you cannot work, you can pray, and if you pray, God will stir up some
or other to relieve you, he will by his Providence send in a supply of your
wants, so that you need not fear want as long as you can pray, Psalm. 34.10.
They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.

2. When you cannot work, God can and will work for you; though God ceased from
the works of Creation on the seventh day, yet he still continues to work for
his people in the way of his Providence, Joh. 5.17. My Father works hitherto
and I work.

3. The Lillies cannot spin, or do any other work, yet the Lord sends upon them
rain in due season, whereby they are nourished, and clotheth them in a very
glorious manner, Matthew. 6.28,29,30. and why should you fear that God will not
nourish and clothe you, though you should be able to do no work? What could you
do, when you lay in your Mothers womb, and for some years after you were born
into the world? If the Lord provided for you when you could do no work for him,
or for your generation, because of your infancy, why should you distrust him
for Provision, when you are disabled from working by sickness or old age?

Object. 4. But I begin to be -- in want already, I that have lived plentifully
heretofore, have not now wherewithal to supply my personal and family
necessities, and it peirceth my heart to see my children orying about me, and I
have not wherewithal to relieve them.

Answ. 1. If it be so that you are sometimes pinched with hunger, yet remember
1. That better men than you are, have been exercised with this trial; the
Apostle Paul speaking of himself, and the other Apostles, says 1 Cor. 4.11.
Even unto this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, -- and
have no certain dwelling place. Yea, Jesus Christ himself was tried with this
affliction of hunger, and when he was hungry, he sought for relief from the
trees of the field, and was disappointed of his expectation, Mar. 11.12,13.
When they were come from Bethany he was hungry, and seeing a Fig Tree a far of,
having leaves, he came, if happily he might find any thing thereon; and when he
came to it, he found nothing but leaves. At another time being weary and
thirsty in his travel, he asked a draught of water of a woman of Samaria, and
was denied it, Joh. 4.6. when he was upon the Cross, full of pain and anguish,
which made him very thirsty, when he cried out to those that stood round about
him, I thirst; No body gave him any thing to drink but Vinegar, which increased
rather than mitigated his torment, Joh. 19.28,29. Jeremiah, one of the Lords
Prophets, was ready to die for hunger; Jer. 38.9. They have cast Jeremiah into
the Dungeon, and he is like to die for hunger. 2. This affliction of hunger as
well as other afflictions, is a fatherly chastisement, and comes from fatherly
love, and is sent with a design to do us good, Deuteronomy. 8.3,5,16. He humbled thee,
and suffered thee to hunger, -- Thou shall consider is thine heart, that as a
man chastneth his son, so the Lord thy God chastneth thee, -- that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.
3. The grace of God will enable a man to suffer hunger, or any other affliction
contentedly, Phil. 4.12,13. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need. I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me.

2. If by this Providence you are brought to want, and are pinched with hunger,
let this affliction put you upon renewing your repentance, and cause you to cry
mightily to the Lord, and he will save you from your distressed condition,
Psalm. 107.4,5,6. They wandered in the Wilderness, -- hungry and thirsty, their
souls fainted in them; then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he
delivered them out of their distresses. Though you are now under great
scarcity, yet if your scarcity put you upon renewing your repentance, the Lord
will turn your scarcity into plenty, Elihu speaking of such as are in
affliction, and having shown how God commands them to return from iniquity,
tells us what God will do for such as at the command of God do return from
their sins, Job. 36.11,16. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their
days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures: Even so would he have
removed thee out of a strait into a broad place, where there is no straitness;
and that which should be set on thy Table should be full of fatness. When the
Prodigal. Son began to be in want, his want brought his sins to remembrance,
and put him upon returning home to his Father, and when he came to his Father,
and confessed his sins to his Father, though he would have been glad of such
husks as Swine eat, and could not get them, he was no sooner returned to his
Father, but he kills the fatted Calf, and calls for thebest Robe, and a Ring,
-- and makes very rich and bountiful provision for him.

3. When your children come about you and cry for bread, and you have it not to
give them, remember that their cries do not only pierce your hearts, but enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. When the water in Hagar's bottle was
spent, and the child cried, and she knew not where to have any more, but
thought, that the child must needs perish, and therefore cast the child under a
shrub, because she could not tell how to see the death of the child; God heard
the cry of the child and sent her relief, Genesis 21.15,16,17,19. The water was
spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs; and she
went, and sat her down over against him, a good way off, as it were a Bow shot;
for she said, Let me not see the death of the child: and she sat over against
him, and lift up her voice and wept. And God heard the voice of the Lad: and
the Angel of God called to Hagar out of Heaven, and said unto her, What aileth
thee, Hagar? fear not, for God has heard the voice of the Lad where he is; and
God opened her eyes and she saw a Well of water. When the young ravens wander
up and down seeking meat and can find none, and cry unto God, he hears them,
Job 38.41. Who provideth for the Ravens his food, when his young ones cry unto
God, they wander for lack of meat. Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the beast his
food, and to the young Ravens which cry. Does God hear the voice of the young
Ravens when they cry, and provide them food? and do you think that he will not
hear the cries of your young children, and provide them food?

4. Though you begin to be in want, and both your selves and families are now
and then pinched with hunger, yet trust still in God, that he will provide for
you and yours such food as he sees to be convenient for you. Our faith must
not flag or fail when we meet with sharp trials; you know what Job says, Job
13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. If your hunger and scarcity
should be such, as that you should think God intended to slay you with hunger,
yet you must trust in him. I will give a few encouragements to such as are
under fear, or in danger of being famished with hunger, to trust in God to
relieve them.

1. Your bodies are members of Christ's Body, 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? and temples of the Holy Ghost, Verse. 19. Know
ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? And do
you think that God will be unmindful of his Sons members, and of the Temple of
the Holy Ghost? The afflictions of the Saints are said to be the afflictions of
Christ, Col. 1.23. That which afflicts them, is an affliction to him, Isa.
63.9. In all their afflictions, he was afflicted. Their hunger and thirst, may
in some sense be said to be his hunger and thirst, Matthew. 25.35. I was an
bungred, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink.

2. Consider what promises God has made to preserve his people from being
famished, and to give them plenty of all such things as are good for them,
Prove. 10.3. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the reghteous to be famisked.
Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of the
Lord your God. Psalm. 33.18,19. Behold, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy: to deliver their soul from death,
and to keep them alive in famine. Psalm. 136.15. I will abundantly bless aer
provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread. When there was such a great
scarcity among the Jews, that they could not see which way they should be
supplied with provision, Joel 1.16. Is not the meat cut off before your eyes?
yet even then God promises his servants such plenty as should satisfy them,
Chap. 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of
the Lord your God, that has dealt wonderfully with you; and my people shall
never be ashamed. Another promise you have, Isa. 41.17,18. When the poor and
needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the
Lord will hear thens, I the God of Israel will not forsake them: I will open
Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys; I will make
the Wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry Land Springs of water. Here God
promises, that when his Servants are destitute of necessary provision, and are
in such straits as they are ready to perish, he will send them in unexpected
supplies, he will alter the very course of Nature, rather than they shall
perish, He will make the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land Springs
of Water. Though this promise be not to be restrained to temporal things, but
includes also many spiritual blessings, yet it may very safely and properly be
applied by such as are in great straits, and ready to perish for want of
provision for their outward man. Let me add this farther, That God is mindful
of every Promise of his Covenant which relates to our temporal as well as our
spiritual welfare, Psalm. 111.5. He has given meat unto them that fear him, he
will ever be mindful of his Covenant.

3. Consider what great a care God has for the satisfying of such as are
hungry: 1. It has been his manner of old to provide good things for the
hungry, Luke 1.53. He has filled the hungry with good things. When the
Israelites were hungry in the Wilderness, he gave them bread from heaven, to
satisfy their hunger, and fetched water out of a Rock, to quench their thirst,
Neb. 9.15. Thou gave them Bread from Heaven, for their hunger; and broughtest
forth Water for them, out of the Rock, for their thirst. He caused the Ravens
to bring bread and flesh to feed Elijah in a time of famine, 1 King. 17.6. The
Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the
evening. The Ravens of their own nature would rather devour and eat a man's
flesh, than bring him bread and flesh to preserve his life, so Prove. 30.17. so
that we see that God has altered the course of Nature, and wrought miracles to
satisfy his peoples hunger. And as he has done great things of old for the
satisfying the hungry, and relieving the poor and needy; so he has promised to
be mindful of them in all ages, and to do wonderful and unusual things rather
than they shall perish for want of necessary food, as you may see in the
fore-quoted Promises, Isa. 41.17,18. Psalm. 111.5. and he will keep his truth
for ever in these as well as in his other Promises, Psalm. 146.6,7. Which
keeps truth for ever, which executes judgment for the oppressed, which
gives foed to the hungry, -- 2. Gods care of hungry persons appears by the
strict charge which he has given to those that have ability to feed the
hungry; they must be so careful hereof, that they must not neglect giving food
to such as are hungry, though they have been their Enemies, Romans 12.20. If
thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. He has not only
commanded us to feed the hungry, but also has promised great rewards to such
as feed the hungry, Isa. 58.20. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noon day. Matthew. 25.34,15. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; for I
was an bungred, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: see
farther, Psalm. 41.1,2,3. yea so careful is God of hungry persons, that he
threatens to condemn those at the day of judgment, who have neglected to feed
the hungry, Matthew. 25.41,42. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink. May not this care that God has
of the hungry, encourage you to trust in God in your greatest straits, when you
fear that you shall perish with hunger?

4. Consider that God is wont to be seen in the Mount: our extremity is Gods
opportunity. When the Widows Provision was all spent to an handful of Meal, and
a little Oil in a Cruse, and she knew not where to have any more, but verily
thought that she and her son must die; then comes Elijah, and multiplyeth her
Provision, so that she and all her family were nourished during the time of the
famine, 1 King. 17.12,13,14,15,16. When all the water that was in Hagars bottle
was spent, and she knew not where to have any more, but thought that she and
her child must die, and had cast the child under a shrub, saying, Let me not
see the death of the child, -- then God opened her eyes and showed her a well
of water by her, Genesis 21.15,16,19. When the Altar was built whereon Isaac was
to be sacrificed, and the wood was laid in order, and Isaac was bound and laid
upon the Altar, and Alraham's hand was stretched out, and he had taken his
knife, then the Angel of God calls to him out of Heaven to spare Isaac, and
shows him a Ram that was provided to be facrificed in Isaac's stead, Genesis
22.9,10,11,12,13. And this act of Gods Providence in refcuing Isaac when he was
at the point of death, was recorded to strengthen the faith of all Gods
servants in all ages, that they may trust in God in their greatest extremities,
as we may see, Verse. 14.

5. Consider how easy a thing it is with God to provide for you, seeing he is
the Lord of the whole world, and has all the times of the Sea, and all the
fowls of the Air, and all the creatures of the Earth at his disposal; Psalm.
24.1. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein. Psalm. 50.10,11. Every Beast of the Forest is mine, and the
Cattle upon a thousand Hills; I know all the Fowls of the Mountains, and the
wild Beasts of the Field are mine; yea, he can, if he please, sustain you by
his Word without giving of you bread, Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he himbled thee, and
suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna, which thou knew not,
neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know, that man does not
live by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of the
Lord does man live. God can send an Angel from Heaven to bring you Provision,
as he did to Elijah, when he fled into the Wilderness to save his life, 1 King.
19.3,4,5,6. God can turn stones into bread, Mat. 3.9. God is able of these
Stones toraise up Children unto Abraham. If God can raise up Children from
Stones, he can also turn stones into Bread, to nourish the Children of Abraham.

6. Consider how willing God is to relieve you, he is not only able, but
willing to feed the hungry. This will appear from what was said concerning the
care that God takes of such as are hungry. Consider 3. However, I shall add
something farther concerning Gods willingness to supply your wants, because it
is no easy matter to trust in God when we come into great straits. 1. Earthly
Parents will not deny their Children Bread, when they are hungry and cry for
it; Mat. 7.9,10. What man is there of you, whom if his Son ask Bread, will he
give him a Stone? or if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? And God our
heavenly Father is more willing to give good things to us when we ask for them,
than Parents are to give good things to their Children, Verse. 11. If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children; how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? 2. God
has regard to the dry ground, though it lie in a desolate place, in a
Wilderness where no man comes, to satisfy it with Rain from Heaven when it is
thirsty, Job 38.25,26,27. Who has divided a watercourse for the overflowing
of waters? or away for the lightning of Thunder, to cause it to rain on the
Earth, where no man is; on the Wilderness, where there is no man? to satisfy
the desolate and wast ground, -- Can it enter into your hearts to think, that
God should forget you in your necessity, when as he remembereth the dry and
thirsty ground, even that which is desolate and lies wast? The Sparrows are
Birds of a small value, yet God does not forget any of them, but gives them
their meat in due season, Luke 12.6, Are not five Sparrows sold for two
farthings? and not one of them is forgotten before God, -- fear not therefore,
you are of mere value than many Sparrows. If God do not forget a Sparrow, you
may certainly conclude, that he will not forget you. 3. God wishes his people
were in such a condition; that he might, without doing them hurt, feed them
with the very best of his Creatures; for, The Lord has pleasure in the
prosperity of his sorvants, Psalm. 35.27. He is very unwilling to afflict them
either with hunger, or any other affliction, Lam. 3.33. He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men. If we would be obedient to his
voice, he would continue our plenty; if after he has taken it away, our
scarcity lead us to repentance, he will restore our plenty again, Psalm.
81.13,15,16. Oh that my people had bearkened unto me; and Israel had walked in
may ways! -- their time should have eddured for for ever, he should have fed
them also with the finest of the wheat; and with boney out of the rock, should
I have satisfied them. 4. The Lord Jesus takes notice who they are that have
nothing to eat, and are in danger of fainting for want of food, and is very
full of compassion toward those that are in such a condition. The Bowels of his
Compassion did so yearn toward the multitude that had been three days without
food, and were in danger to faint, that he wrought a miracle to feed them, Mark
8.1,2,3, etc.

It may be some will say, Since God brought me into distress, I have manifested
much unbelif, and distrust, notwithstanding I have formerly had great
experience of Gods goodness; and therefore I am afraid now he will suffer me to
starve, and look no more after me.

Answ. If you humble your selves for your unbelief, God will both pardon your
sin, and give you a plentiful supply of your wants. The Jews who had seen God
providing for them in a wonderful manner, did in their straits discover a great
deal of distrust, Psalm. 78.19,20. They spoke against God; they said, Can God
furnish a table in the Wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters
gushed out, and the streams over flowed; can he give bread also? can he provide
flesh for his people? Yet God did fully supply all their wants, ver. 25. -- He
sent them meat to the full -- And also passed by their transgressions, ver. 38.
He being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not.
God is wont to chasten his children for their unbelief, but not to break his
promises made to them. Zacharias was struck dumb for his unbelief, yet his sin
did not hinder the fulfilling of the promise, that was accomplished in its
season, Luke 1.20. Behold, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak until the
day that these things shall be performed; because thou believe not my words,
which shall be fulfilled in their season. Romans 3.3,4. Shall their unbelief make
the Faith of God without effect? God forbid.

SECT. 11.
11. If by this affliction you are, or should hereafter be brought into such
great straits as that you know not what to do, but are like a man at his wits
end, that knows not which way to wind or turn himself to get out of his
troubles, be not dismayed at it, but look up unto God, and commit your selves
and all your affairs unto him, cry to the Lord to help you, and though he do
not presently deliver you, yet trust in him that he will deliver you in his own
good time; and wait patiently upon him for his help, how great soever your
straits are, and though it be very long before he send you deliverance. Thus
the servants of God in former times were wont to do, when their condition was
so distressed, they knew not what to do; they looked to the Lord to help them,
2 Chronicles. 20.12. O our God, -- we have no might against this great company that
comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.
Psalm. 22.4,5. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver
them; they cried unto thee, and mere delivered; they trusted in thee, and were
not confounded. Psalm 40.1,2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he ^nclined
unto me, and heard my cry; he brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of
the miry clay; and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings. I will
add some things by way of encourage meant, to encourage you to trust in God,
and to wail patiently upon him, when you are in such great straies that you
know not what to do.

1. When you know not what to do, God knows what to do for you. We read, John
6.5. When Jesus list up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he
said unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat. Philip was at
a loss, he knew not whence they should have bread enough to suffice such a
multitude, as you may see, ver. 7. But though Philip knew not how or which way
such a multitude should be provided for, Christ did, ver. 6. This he said to
prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. When a godly man's temptations
are such as he knows not which way he should be delivered, God knows how to
deliver him, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations -- If such thoughts should arise in your hearts (as through the
suggestion of Satan possibly they may) that your straits are so great, that the
way of your deliverance is not only hid from your eyes, but hid from God also;
and that it is above the wisdom of God to know how to deliver you, abominate
all such wicked and ungodly thoughts, and remember, that Gods Wisdom is
infinite, far above what we can search into, Isa. 40.27,28. Why say thou, O
Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
passed over from my God: Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not,
neither is weary? there is no searching of his under standing, Psalm. 147.5.
Great is our Lord, and of great power, his under standing is infinite. Those
things which seem invincible diffioulties to us, have no difficulty at all in
the account of God, Zech. 8.6. If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant
of this people, in these days, should it also be marvellows in mine eyes,
says the Lord of Hosts? Isa. 55.8,9. My thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord; for as the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are my ways, higher than your ways, and my thoughts than
your thoughts.

2. When you are at that pass, that you know not what to do, as God knows what
to do for you, so he is able to help and deliver you, his Power is equal to his
Wisdom, Genesis 18.14. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Luke 1.37. With God
nothing shall be unpossible. Even such things as men judge impossible, and what
they do not only judge so, but those things which are real impossibilities to
men, are possible with God, Luke 18.27. The things which are unpossible with
mien, are possible with God. When the difficulty of your case discourageth you
from believing, consider what a great and hard work it was to make the heavens
and the earth, and then you will conclnde that nothing can be too hard for God,
Jer. 32.17. Ah, Lord God, behold thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy
great power, and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee.
Suppose there was no way extant, whereby you can be delivered out of your
troubles, God can make away for you to escape, he can create deliverance, 1
Com. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye ars able, but will with the temptation also make a way to efcape, that ye
may be able to bear it. Isa. 4.5. The Lord will create upon every
dewlling place of Mount Zion, and upon hen assemblies, a cloud and smoke by
days, and the shining of a flaming fire by nights for upon all the glory shall
be a defense.

3. The Lord is not only able to help you out of great straits, but he bath
promised, that when you are in such distress that you know not what to do, if
you call upon him, and trust in him, he will deliver you, Psalm. 25.15. Mins
eyes and ever toward the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. When
David's feet were entangled in a net, that he knew not which way to wind and
turn himself, he eyes, and rests upon Gods promise, He shall pluck my feet out
of the net, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. They day of trouble takes in the grearest,
as well as lesses troubles, and the Hebrew word that is used in this place for
trouble, is the same that is used, Daniel 12.2: where the Prophet speaks of
such a time of trouble as never was since the Creation: so that the promise
implies thus much, when it is a day of trouble with you, though your pressures
and troubles be such, as never any person or people met with greater since the
creation of the world, if you call upon God be will deliver you, Job. 5.19. He
shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil touch
thee. The Hebrew word for trouble here, is the same with what was mentioned
before, and is sometimes translated, a strait, 2 Samuel 34.14. I am in a great
strait. So that the promise implies thus much, that when we are in straits, in
great straits, in many straits, God will deliver us, and bring us out of them
all, Psalm 71.20. Thou which have shown me great; and sore troubles, shall
quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth.

4. Though you be in such straits, that you know not what to do, yet trust in
God, for your help does not stand in your own wisdom, or in your own strength,
but in the Lord, Psalm. 124.8. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made
heaven and earth. Your deliverance from trouble, does not come partly from God,
and partly from your selves, but from God only, Psalm. 62.6. He only is my rock,
and my salvation, he is my dofence; I shall not be moved. When all help
fails, he will be a very present help in trouble, Psalm. 46.1. God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Now seeing your help
stands only in the name of the Lord, though your wisdom and your ability to
help your selves fails you, this should not hinder you from trusting in God
to help you.

5. Consider what God has done for others in their straits, when they cried
unto God, he helped them, though their troubles were such as that their souls
melted under them, and they have been at their wits end, Psalm. 107.26,27,28.
They mount up to the heaven; they go down again to the depths; their soul is
melted because of trouble, -- they are at their wits end: Then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their distress. Psalm.
34.6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles. David was delivered out of a great strait, when he penned this Psalm,
as you, may see by the title, compared with 1 Samuel 21.10,11,12,13. David gives
us diverse instances of Gods delivering him out of very great straits, such as
to an eye of fence seemed inextricable and invincible, Psalm. 18.29. By thee I
have run through a troop, and by my God have I leaped over a wall. Psalm. 40.2.
He brought me up out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay. And he tells
us, that it was the will of God, that those deliverances which God had given
him, should encourage others to trust in the Lord, Many shall see it, and fear,
and shall trust in the Lord, ver. 3.

6. The Holy Ghost recommendeth it to us, as that which is very good and
profitable for us, and very acceptable and pleasing to God, that we should
trust and hope in God, in our greatest straits, Lam. 3.26. It is good that a
man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. This was
spoken to those who were in great distress, and saw no way how they should get
out of their troubles, ver. 7. 9. He has hedged me about, that I cannot get
out, he has made my chain heavy, he has enclosed my ways with hewn stone,
he has made my paths crooked. Hereupon they were ready to despair of
deliverance, and to say, ver. 18. My strength and my hope is perished from the
Lord. Yet to them the Holy Ghost says, It is good that a man should both hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. And as it is good for us, so
also it is pleasing to God that we should hope in him under our greatest
troubles, Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in
those that hope in his mercy.

If any say, I have brought my self into my straits, and my troubles, by my
sins, and this keeps me from trusting in God, because my troubles are the
fruit of my sins. Were it purely the hand of God to try my faith and patience,
I could in such a case hope in God.

Ans. Though our troubles do come upon us for our sins, yet if we humble our
souls for our sins and cry to God in our distresses, he will raise up
deliverance for us, Psalm. 107.10,11,12,13,14. Such as sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron; becanse they rebelled
against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the most high; therefore
he brought down their heart with labor, they fell down, and there was none to
help. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of
their distress; he brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death, and
brake their bands in sunder. And again, ver. 17, 19. Fools, because of their
transgression, and because of oheir iniquities, are afflicted; then they cry
unto the Lord in their trouble, he saves them out of their distresses. When
David was under such a great sense of sin as made his heart to fail, he did yet
hope in God for deliverance out of his troubles, Psalm. 40.12,17. Innumerable
evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that
I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my
heart fails me. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me; thou art
my help and my deliverer, make no tarrying, O my God. When Jonah was cast into
the Sea, and swallowed up by a Whale, it was for his sin, in flying from the
presence of the Lord; yet when in his affliction he cried to God, God heard and
delivered him, Jonah 2.2,10. I cried by reason of mine affliction, unto the
Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my
voice. And the Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry
land.

SECT. 12.
12. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Satan uses to be very
busy to tempt us, when we are in affliction. The two seasons wherein the Devil
did in a more eminent manner set upon Christ with his temptations, were, when
he was in the Wilderness, Mark 1.13. He was in the Wilderness forty days,
tempted of Satan; and when he was entering upon his Passion, Luke 22.53. This is
your hour, and the power of darkness. The Devils at that time bestirred
themselves to the utmost of their power, in tempting and afflicting the Lord
Jesus. Now God has stripped you of all or the greatest part of your
enjoyments, and brought you as it were into a Wilderness; now that you must
expect to suffer more hardship and difficulties then formerly, you may look to
meet with more then usual temptations. The Devil is ready to take occasion from
others afflictions to tempt us, 2 Thessalonians. 3.3,4,5. How much more will he take
advantage from our own afflictions to assault us with his temptations? If Satan
be busy to tempt, had you not need to watch and pray that ye enter not into
temptation? I might here caution you against several temptations, I will
instance in four or five.

1. Take heed of entertaining hard thoughts of God, as though God dealt hardly
with you; or of his ways, as if there were no profit in serving of God,
because you have suffered so deeply, notwithstanding you have endeavored to
serve the Lord: Satan has baffled very eminent persons with this temptation.
Job in his haste uttered such an expression as this, Job 30.21. Thou art become
cruel to me -- Jeremiah in his distress lets fall such words as these, Jer.
15.18. -- Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable which refuses to be
healed: will thou be altogether unto me as a lyard and as waters that fail?
David being exercised with many afflictions, said lin his have (though upon
second thoughts he called in his words again) that all the pains that he had
taken in serving God was ladour in vain, Psalm. 73.13,14. Verily, I have
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my bands in innocence; for all the day
long have I been plagued and chastened every morning. To fortify you against
this temptation of calling in question the goodness of God, or thinking there
is no advantage comes by serving God, let me advise you to do these things.

1. Judge of God according to that representation which he makes of himself in
his Word. Now the Scriptures represent God to be a good God, Ps. 86.5. Thou
Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all that call
upon thee. When the Lord proclaimed his Name to Moses, he proclaimed his name
after this manner, Exodus 34.5,6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long suffering, and abundant in goodness -- He is so abundant in goodness, that
his goodness fills the whole earth, Psalm. 33.5. -- The Earth is full of the
goodness of the Lord. He is so good a God, that there are some expressions of
his goodness toward every person, and every creature upon the face of the
earth, Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over
all his works. His goodness is so great, that no words can express it; we may
admire it, but we cannot deciare the greatness of it, Zech. 9.17. How great is
his goodness, and how great is his beauty? Even in his most terrible acts there
is abundance of goodness, Psalm. 145,6,7. Men shall speak of the might of thy
terrible acts, -- they shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness.

2. Consider what good thoughts of God the servants of the Lord have had in
their greatest afflictions: though in time of temptation, some of Gods servants
have uttered some rash expressions derogatory to the good ross of God, yet
afterward they have humbled themselves greatly for such speeches, as we may
see, Job 42.3,6. David calls himself fool, and heast, for speaking
dishonourably of God in his afflictions, Psalm. 73.13,22. Take the servants of
God when they have been freed from, or gotten the victory over temptation, and
you shall find them admiring and speaking highly in the commendation of Gods
goodness in their greatest afflictions, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and do
good -- and this David spoke when he was spoiled of his goods, ver. 61. The
bands of the wicked have robbed me; and when his sorrows were so great that his
soul melted under them, ver. 28. My soul melts for he aviness. Neither his
losses nor his sorrows made him question Gods goodness, but he says under
both, thou art good, and do good. In another Psalm, after he had expressed
the greatness of his sorrows, Psalm. 31.9,10. I am in trouble, mine eye is
consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly; for my life is spent with
grief, and my years with sighing -- He breaks out into admiration of Gods
goodness, ver. 19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee! And Psalm. 73.1,10. Truly God is good to Israel. God is
good to them when they are forced to wander up and down, and are full of
affliction, ver. 10. His people return hither, and waters of a full cup are
wrung out to thems. When Doeg the Edomite had accomplished his mischievous
design in causing the Priests of the Lord to be slain for entertaining of
David, which could not but be a great grief to David, yet still he extols Gods
goodness, Psalm. 52.1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the
goodness of God endures continually. When the Jews that were carried captive
into Babylon, had lost all their substance, and met with such sorrows, that
they thought none ever met with the like; they, notwithstanding all their
afflictions, think honorably of Gods goodness, Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good
unto them that wait for him, unto the soul that seeks him.

3. When you are ready to have hard thoughts of God because of your
afflictions, turn your eyes from looking at Gods Providence, and look upon his
Promises; they represent God to be full of love, when his Providence represent
him to be terrible. There is a thousand times more sweetness in the Promises,
than there is shapness in your afflictions. David viewing his afflictions,
cried out, Psalm. 60.3. Thou have showed thy people hard things, thou have made
us to drink the wine of astonishment. But when he turns his eye to the Promise,
he forgets his sorrow, and is filled with joy, ver. 6. God has spoken in his
holiness, I will rejoice.

4. When hard thoughts of God arise in your minds because of your afflictions,
behold God as he has manifested himself in and through Jesus Christ, and there
you shall see him to be a God of unspeakable love, God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son -- John 3.16. When you look upon God in Christ,
you shall find him without fury toward such as believe in his Son, when he is
executing his greatest judgments, Isa. 26.21. Behold the Lord comes out of his
place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity -- Fury is not
in me: And to whom is it that he says, Fury is not in me? it is to such as
take hold of his Son, who is his strength, ver. 5. When you look upon God in
Christ, you may behold him a reconciled Father, a God pardoning iniquity,
transgression, and sin, 2 Cor. 5.19. a God that has blessed you with all
spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. a God that will deny you nothing that is good,
ont will give you all things freely, Romans 8.32. Did he pass by the fallen
Angels, and look upon you, and yet will you not have good thoughts of him? Can
you harbor any hard thoughts of God, whilst you look upon him in Christ Jesus?
Shall some light and short afflictions, make you overlook all the spiritual and
eternal blessings which God has treasured up in Jesus Christ for you? If you
say this helps me but little, because I cannot make it out, that God has given
Jesus Christ to me; if I could see that God had given Christ to me, I think I
should never entertain an hard thought of God any more? I answer, God has made
a free offer of his Son Jesus Christ, with all his benefits unto your soul, as
well as to any other, ever since you have heard the Gospel; and does still
continue to offer him to you, and calls upon you by his Ministers, and by his
Holy Spirit, to come and take him freely, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel unto every creature: Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride
say, Come; and let him that hears, say, Come; and let him that is a thirst,
come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely: By the water
of life, is meant, Christ and life through him, Christ and all his saving
benefits; and the Spirit of God who searches the deep things of God, and
knows the mind of God, and of Christ, assures us, that whosoever will may
come and take this water of life freely.

5. When you find hard thoughts of God arising in your minds by reason of
your affliction, call to mind what God has been doing for you from all
eternity, and what he will do for you in heaven to all eternity. God has been
setting his wisdom on work from all eternity to make you happy in the enjoyment
of himself; and he has prepared such things for you in heaven, as eye never
saw the like, neither has ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of
man to conceive the worth of them. When David in time of temptation was ready
to think hardly of God, and of his ways, Psalm. 73.13,14. After he had overcome
the temptation, he says, ver. 28. It is good for me to draw near to God; and
what caused him to take up this conclusion? among other things this was one, he
had his eye upon that blessedness he should enjoy with God in heaven to all
eternity, ver. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive
me unto glory.

6. If you would keep up good thoughts of God in your afflictions, observe what
goodness God manifests to you in your affliction, and what good he designs to
you by your afflictions. If you did observe the dealings of God with your
inward, and outward man, you might see much of the love, and meroy, and
goodness of God in your greatest afflictions. The people of Israel met with
variety of afflictions when they were in the Wilderness, yet there was much of
the love and goodness of God in all his dealings with them, Isa. 63.7,9. And as
for the ends and designs of God in out afflictions, if you consider what they
are, you shall find, that in every affliction God aims at your good, Heb.
12.10. He chastneth us for our profit. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God.

And as you should keep up good thoughts of God, so also keep up good thoughts
of his Service; and believe firmly in your greatest sufferings, that it is not
a vain thing to wait upon God; and this you will easily do, if you keep up good
thoughts of God: so that there is little need of adding any thing more
concerning this temptation: I shall therefore but briesly hint two or three
things, and then proceed to the next temptation.

1. It is very unreasonable to think that there is no profit comes by walking
in the ways of God, when as the Scripture assure us, that Godliness is
profitable unto all things having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. God never did stir up any man to seek his face in
vain, Isa. 45.19. I said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. But
whoever they are that seek and serve the Lord, he will give them grace, and
glory, and all good things, Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord, shall not
want any good thing, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord Godiva Sun, and a shield; the Lord
will give grace and glary, and no good thing will to with hold from them that
walk uprightly. He does not only (...), but gives great rewards to every one
that keeps his Commandments, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping of them there is great
reward.

2. When God enyes his servants, or takes from then temporal blessings, he give
them spiritual blessings: When he afflicts their Bodies, the is good to their
Souls, Laius. 3.25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him. The poorest of Gods servants that have least of the things of
this world, are blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. and spiritual
blessings are for better than temponal blessings.

3. The very afflictions and troubles of Gods servants are profitable to them,
as has been before cleared from several Scriptures, as Heb. 12.10. He
chastneth us for our profit, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. It must needs therefore be unreasonable to say, there is no profit
in serving God, because his servants meet with many afflictions.

4. The great day of putting a difference between them that serve God, and them
that serve him not, is the day of Judgment; then it shall evidently appear to
the whole world, even to them that can see no advantage now in godliness, how
much it profits a man to serve the Lord, Mal. 3.14,17,18. Ye have said, It is
vain to serve God; and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Sord of Hosts? -- They (that is, they
that serve me) shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make
up my Jenels, and I will spare them as a man sparrth his own son that serves
him: then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

2. Take heed of being drawn by this affliction to depart from God: Satan has
prevailed with some upon the account of their afflictions to turn afide from
God, and to give over waiting upon him, 2 Kings 6.33. This evil is of the Lord,
what should I wait for the Lord any longer? As some took distaste at Christ's
words and departed from him, John 6.60,66. Many of his Disciples, when they had
heard this, said, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? From that time many
of his Disoiples went back, and walked no more with him. So many take such
offense at the providence of God, that they depart from God, and will walk no
more in his ways. If you should be followed with this temptation, to prevent
your yielding to it, let me suggest to you these following considerations.

1. Consider whom you forsake, when you forsake the Lord: God is your life, and
will you not cleave to your life, Deuteronomy. 30.20. That thou may love the Lord
thy God -- and that thou may cleave unto him, for he is thy life, and the
length of the days. Acts 17.28. In him we live, and (...), and have our being.
And will you forsake that God, without whom you cannot live or continue in your
being one moment. A man will choose rather to part with his Estate, his Friends,
his Liberty; yea, all that he has, rather than part with his life, Joh. 2.4.
Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for his life. If life be
thus dear, should you not rather forsake all that you have, than forsake God
who is your life? God is our glory, Psalm. 3.3. Thou, O Lard, art a shield for
we, my glory -- Now many will choose rather to dye, that to part with their
glory, 1 Gor. 9.15. -- It were better for me to dye, than that any man should
make any glorying void. God is your friend, and has been your Fathers friend:
Now no wise than will readily forsake a true and an ancient friend, Prove.
27.10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend forsake not. God is, orought
to be, your chiefest joy, Psalm. 43.4. I will go unto the Altar of God, unit God
my exceeding jay. Most men are desirous of, and follow after joy; and will you
be so foolish as to forsake your chiefest joy? God is the chefest good, there
is nothing in heaven or in earth comparable to God, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and there it none upon earth that I desire besides thee. There
are many that pretend, at least, to seek after that which is good, Psalm. 4.6.
There be many that say, who will show us any good? And will you be so unwise as
to forsake the chiefest good? Whoever that was in heaven forsook heaven,
excepting the Devils? The best thing in heaven is God, Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and will you forsake the best thing in heaven? Did not God make you,
and has not he maintained you ever since you were in the world? And will you
forsake the God that made you, and has redeemed you out of all your troubles,
and has maintained you to this day, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you thus requite the Lord,
O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father that has bought thee? has
he not made thee, and established thee? Whom have you to go to, if you forsake
God? can any give you eternal life besides God? John 6.67,68. Jesus said unto
the twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, To whom
shall we go? thon have the words of eternal life. Can any forgive your sins
besides God? Mark 2.7. Who can forgive sins, but God only? and what a sad
condition will you be in, if your sins be not forgiven? who can save you in
time of trouble, and who can save you from the torments of Hell besides God?
Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord. You must shortly dye, and unto
whom will you commend your souls when you dye, if you for sake the Lord? Psalm.
31.5. Into thy hand I commit my spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth. In forsaking God you forsake your own mercies, and involve your selves
in unspeakable misery.

2. Consider how contrary this is to the example and practice of the Saints and
Servants of God in all ages, to forsake God because of your afflictions; if you
observe their practice and carriage, you shall find that they have cleaved to
God, and continued constant in their walking with God, in the midst of their
greatest troubles, Psalm. 44.17,18,19. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant; our heart is not
turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way; though thou have
sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death. Jobs afflictions were very great, yet they did not cause him to depart
from God, or cease from serving him, Job 23.2,11,12. Even to day is my
complaint bitter, my stroke is heavier than my groaning -- My foot has held
his steps, his way have I kept and not declined; neither have I gone back from
the Commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then
my necessary food. Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him --
David went through many afflictions, yet none of them caused him to depart from
God, but he continued to serve and walk with God, notwithstanding all his
sufferings, Psalm, 119.83,109,143. I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet
do I not forget thy Statutes -- My soul is continually in mine hand; yet do I
not forget thy law -- Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me; yet thy
Commandments are my delights. Psalm. 31.9,10,14. I am in trouble, mine eye is
consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly: for my life is spent with
grief, and my years with sighing -- But I trusted in thee, O Lord --

3. It is a foolish and vain thing for any man to forsake God by reason of his
afflictions; because by forsaking God, a man brings upon himself more and
greater evils than his present afflictions are, how many or great soever they
be. For, 1. They that forsake God bring upon themselves the guilt of an
horrible sin, such a sin as may astonish the heavens when they hear of it, Jer.
2.12,13. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye
very desolate, says the Lord. For my people have committed two evils; they
have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no water. Now the guilt of sin is a greater evil
than any affliction. 2. They that forsake God lose his favor, Heb. 10.38. If
any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. What loss is
comparable to the loss of Gods favor? 3. They that forsake God, do not only
lose his favor, but incense and stir up his wrath against their souls, Ezra
8.22. The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; but his
power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him. And Gods wrath is far
more dreadful than any affliction. 4. They that forsake God, lose eternal life
and glory, Jer. 17.13. O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall
be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because
they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters. Their names shall
not be written in heaven, all their portion that they shall have shall be here
on the earth. What are worldly losses, compared to the loss of the Kingdom of
Heaven? 5. They that forsake God, shall be cast into Hell when they dye, Psalm.
225.5. As for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity. Now where does God bestow the workers
of iniquity? he casts them into Hell, Matthew. 13.41. The Son of man shall send
forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom, all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire.
What are all the afflictions and troubles of this life, compared with the
torments of Hell? 6. They that forsake God, shall be forsaken of God, 1 Chronicles.
28.9. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, he
will cast thee off for ever. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and
Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he
will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Now what
greater misery can come upon a man, than to be forsaken of God?

4. Your afflictions should be so far from causing you to forsake God, that
they should make you to return to the Lord, and to cleave faster to the Lord,
and to walk more closely with God. For 1. your afflictions are sent for this
very end and purpose, to cause you to return to God, Jer. 18.11. Thus says the
Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you; return
ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good.
The Prophet Joel having mentioned several great calamities which God was
sending upon the Jews, Joel 2.1. to the 12. verse, tells them, ver. 12. that
Gods end in those Jadgments was to turn them to himself, Therefore also now,
says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart -- Now seeing your
afflictions are sent to turn you unto God, and to bring you nearer to God, is
it not horrible perverseness because of your afflictions to depart from God? 2.
You had need to turn to God, and not to forsake him in the day of your
distress, because you will not know what to do without God in a time of
trouble, Isa. 10.3. What will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where
will ye leave your glory? The Prophet speaks to such as did not turn to God
when he was smiting of them, chap. 9.13. David was of another spirit, when he
saw trouble coming, he gets near to God, and labors to get God near to him,
Psalm. 22.11. Be not far from me, for trouble is near, for there is none to
help. Who shall support and comfort you in your troubles, and who shall deliver
you out of your troubles, if you forsake God in your afflictions? If you have
any support in your troubles it must come from God, Isa. 25.4. Thou have been a
strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress. Psalm.
124.1,2,3,4. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel
say; if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against
us: then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us; then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul. If
you have any comfort in your troubles, it must come from God, Micah 7.8. When I
sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. Psalm. 137.8. Though I walk
in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me; and if God do not give some
comfort by his word, your hearts will break, and you will perish under your
afflictions, Psalm. 119.92. Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then
have perished in mine affliction. If God do not help you out of your
afflictions, no man whatseever can help you, Psalm. 60.11. Give us help from
trouble, for vain is the help of man. None can do more for us than Kings; yet
if God be not pleased to help us, they cannot deliver us from our troubles, 2
Kings 6.26,27. As the King of Israel was passing by on the wall, there eryed a
woman unto him, saying, Help, my Lord, O King; and he said, if the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall I help thee? 3. They that forsake God in their
afflictions are worse than Idolaters, for they in their distresses do not run
from, but run to their Idols to help them. The Seamen that carried Jonah were
Idolaters, for they had each man his distinct god; yet when there arose a great
tempest, there was not a man amongst them but went to his god for help, Jonah
1.4,5. There was a mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the Ship was like to be
broken; then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god.

3. It may be Satan will take occasion from your afflictions to tempt you to
change your Religion; He has not only tempted, but prevailed with many in
their distress to change their Religion: see an instance or two of this, 2 Chronicles. 28.22,23. In the time of his distr^ss did he trespass yet more against
the Lord; this is that King Ahaz, for he sacrificed unto the Gods of Damascus
which smote him: and he said, because the gods of the Kings of Assyria help
them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. The feeling of
want, and hope of plenty, made the Jews forsake the Lord, and burn Incense to
the Queen of Heaven, Jer. 44.17,18. We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
forth out of our own mouth, to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour
out Drink Offerings unto her, as we have done; -- for then had we plenty of
Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil; but since we left of to burn Incense
to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings unto her, we have
wanted all things, and have been consumed by the Sword, and by the Famine. If
Satan by his own suggestions, or any of his Instruments, should tempt you,
because of your poor, low and afflicted condition, to forsake the Protestant
Religion, (which is a Religion founded upon the Scriptures, and holds forth
nothing but what is consonant to, and may be clearly proved from the Word of
God) and should solicit you to embrace any other Religion, the Doctrine or
Worship whereof cannot be proved by, but are contrary to the Word of God,
promising you thereby a liberal maintenance; you ought not upon any terms to
yield to this temptation. I will lay before you some Arguments to continue
steadfast in that Doctrine and way of Worship, which is according to the Word of
God, and not forsake the same for any gain or advantage what ever.

1. The Prophets under the Old Testament, and Jesus Christ and his Apostles
under the New Testament, do all with one consent direct us to build our faith,
and to take our directions for worshipping God from the Scriptures. The Prophets
that lived in the times of the Old Testament, they send us to the Scriptures,
and counsel us to embrace no Doctrines but what are according to the
Scriptures, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. Psalm. 119.105.
Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Malachi, who was one
of the last Prophets under the Old Testament, at the conclusion of his
Prophecy, stirs us up to cleave to the Word of God, Mal. 4.4. Remember ye the
Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel,
with the Statutes and Judgments. Jesus Christ also would have us regulate our
faith by the Scriptures, Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me, as the Scripture
that said -- He puts us upon the study of the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures -- he lays the cause of Errors in Judgment, upon ignorance of the
Scriptures, Mar. 12.24. Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the
Scriptures -- His great care after his Resurrection was to help his Disciples
to understand, and to establish them in the belief of the Scriptures, Luke
24.27,44,45. The Apostles of Christ believed in God, and worshipped God,
according as they were directed by the Scriptures, Joh. 2.22. His Disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the Scripture, and
the Word which Jesus had said. Acts 24.14. -- So worship I the God of my
Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets.
And as they believed themselves, so they taught no other Doctrine then what was
according to the Scriptures, Act. 26.22. I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other things, than those which Moses and
the Prophets did say should come, -- see also 1 Cor. 15.3,4. Act. 28.23. yea,
all the members of the true Church, of that Church which is the House of God,
an holy Temple, an habitation of God, do cleave to, and are built upon that
Doctrine which is delivered by the Prophets and the Apostles in the Scriptures,
Ephesians. 2.19,20,21,22.

2. If there should arise a Prophet, which could work wonders; if that Prophet
should persuade us to turn to an Idolatrous Religion, we must not hearken to
him, Deuteronomy. 13.1,2,3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of
Dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a wonder; and the sign, or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee; saying, Let us go after other gods (which
thou have not known) and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet; -- for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether
you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul: yea
farther, if one of the Apostles should rise from the dead; or if an Angel
should come from Heaven, and preach any other Doctrine than what is contained
in the Scriptures, we ought not to receive it, Gal. 1.8,9. Though we, or an
Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again; If any
man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be
accursed. Now if we must entertain no Doctrine contrary to the Scriptures,
though delivered by a Prophet that can work wonders, and foretell things to
come; or by an Apostle, or by an Angel from Heaven; then how great is their
folly, who at the instigation of Satan, or any of his Instruments, do turn
aside from the Truth, and embrace a corrupt Religion, to get, or to prevent the
losing of the good things of this world?

3. If you abide in the true Doctrine of Christ as it is delivered in the
Scriptures, you shall enjoy the favor of God, and have Communion with him both
here and hereafter; but if you abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, you will
lose the favor of God, and shall have no part or portion in his Kingdom, 2 John v. 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ,
has not God; he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the
Father and the Son. 1 John 2.23,24. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father; -- Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from
the beginning; if that which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in
you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. Are the Father and
the Son so low in your esteem, and is the world so high, that you will forgo
the Father and the Son, and deprive your selves for ever of any part or portion
of the blessed God, by departing from the Truth to embrace this present world?

4. It is a sin that will certainly bring damnation, to depart from the Truth,
and to turn aside to corrupt doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.12. Having damnation, because
they have cast of their first faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12. God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned,
who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteouss. Will you damn
your souls to get or keep a little pittance of this world? It is not much that
you can hope for by changing your Religion. But suppose you could gain a
Kingdom, yea, the whole world; yet this will not countervail the loss of your
soul, Mar. 8.36. What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?

5. Consider how firmly our Lord Jesus Christ adhered to the Scriptures. When
he was offered all the Kingdoms of the world, for one act of Idolatrous
worship, he refused it with disdain, giving this reason, it was against the
written Word of God, Matthew. 4.8,9,10. The Devil takes him up into an exceeding
high Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them; and said unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan; for it is
written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
And as the Lord Jesus would not go against the Scriptures, to gain the whole
world; so neither would he do any thing against the Scriptures, to avoid the
greatest sufferings that ever man met with. When Christ's Enemies had
apprehended him, in order to the putting of him to death, he could have called
for twelve Legions of Angels to have rescued him out of his Enemies hands, but
he would not, because it was against the Scriptures, Matthew. 26.53,54. Think
thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and he should presently give me more than
twelve Legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that
thus it must be. Now we ought to have as high a respect unto the Scriptures, as
Christ had; for, He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk,
even as he walked, 1 John 2.6.

6. It is a very rare thing to hear of Idolaters that change their Religion,
they show great firmness to their idol gods, though they are no gods but the
work of men's hands, Jer. 2.10,11. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and see and
send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if their be such a thing.
Has a Nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have
changed their glory, for that which does not profit. Is it not a shame for such
as profess the true God, to set lighter by the true God, than Idolaters do by
their Idols?

7. It never went well with any persons that forsake the true Religion, and
turned to a false one out of worldly respects. Ahaz thought to be much
advantaged by sacrificing to the gods of Damascus; but was he helped at all
thereby? No, It was his ruin and the ruin of all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. He
sacrificed unto the Geds of Damascus, that smote him; and he said, Because the
gods of the Kings of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that
they may help me; but they were the ruin of him and of all Israel. The Jews
that burnt Incense to the Queen of Heaven, hoping thereby to obtain both peace
and plenty, were consumed by the Sword and Famine, Jer. 44.17,18,21,22,25,27.
What did Francis Spira get by denying and departing from the reformed Religion,
but such horror of Conscience, as may make all that shall read his History,
tremble at any thoughts of denying or departing from the Truth.

8. That man's Profession of Religion is worth nothing, who will change his
Religion for wordly advantages: for he is not a servant to the great God that
made all things; but he makes the world his god, and shall after his death have
his part among Idolaters in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
Phil. 3.18,19. Rev. 21.8.

4. It may be Satan will press hard upon some persons that have lived
plentifully heretofore, and in good respect among their neighbors, and now are
brought into apoor low condition by this fire, to make away themselves: It is
usual with the Devil, who is styled a Murderer, to tempt distressed persons
either to strangle, or drown, or stab, or some other way to destroy themselves:
He assaulted Job with this temptation when he was in his troubles; and to
render the temptation the more successful, he makes use of his wife to carry
on his design, Job 2.9. Then said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain
thine integrity, curse God, and die. But Job abhors the motion, and rebukes his
wife for this counsel, Verse. 10. But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of
the foolish women speaks, etc. If any of you are, or should be hereafter
assaulted with this temptation, to prevent your yielding to it, I would advise
you to do these things.

1. Be convinced that it is a damnable sin for any man, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to murder himself: If you doubt of this, whether it be a sin for a
man to take away his own life; I shall endeavor to convince you that it is not
only a sin, but a very heinous and damnable sin, for a man to destroy himself.
1. It is a transgression of that Law, Exodus 20.13. Thou shall not kill; which
is one of the greatest Commandments of the Second Table. That Law, Thou shall
not kill, does as much oblige us not to kill our selves, as it does not to kill
other men. 2. The Word of God tells us plainly, that no murderer shall have
eternal life, but shall be cast into that lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, 1 John 3.15. Ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him: Rev. 21.8. The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Now such as
kill themselves are murderers, as well as they that kill other men. 3. It is an
usurping upon Gods Prerogative for a man to kill himself; for our time of life
and death is only at Gods disposal, Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thine hand;
Deuteronomy, 32.39. I kill, and I make alive: -- Now as it is unlawful for us to avenge
our selves, because it belongs to God to take vengeance, Romans 12.19. Dearly
Beloved, avenge not your selves; -- for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I
will repay, says the Lord: So, because our times are in Gods hands, and it is
his Prerogative to kill and to make alive, it is utterly unlawful for us to
kill our selves. 4. We are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.19,20. -- Ye are not your own,
for you are bought with a price: and therefore we must not take upon us to
dispose of our selves, as we see good; but our lives, and all that we have are
to be at Gods disposal. The Lord Jesus died for this end, that he might be Lord
of our lives and persons; and therefore he that takes upon him to live as he
list, or to die how and when he thinks good himself, sins greatly against
Jesus Christ; for he goes about to make void the death of Christ, Romans
14.7,8,9. None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; for
whether we live, we live unto Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord;
whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords: for to this end Christ both
died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.
5. He that kills himself, breaths out his soul in the very act of sin; and that
not of a small, but of a crying heinous sin. Now we look upon their case to be
very sad, who die when they are drunk, or who are cut off in the act of
Adultery; or who die cursing and blaspheming God, and so it is: But is not
their case as sad, who die in the act of murder? 6. He that kills himself,
tramples under foot one of the choicest of Gods mercies; for what mercy is of
greater value (I mean, what outward mercy) than life? Life is beyond riches, or
honor, etc. and therefore it must needs be a great sin to cast away life.

2. When Satan presses upon you with this temptation to make away your selves,
resist him, and thereby you will overcome him, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil, and
he will flee from you; if you yield, he will trample upon you; but if you
resist him, he will flee from you. If you say, How should we resist the Devil
when he tempts us to destroy our selves? I answer, 1. Resist him by Prayer;
pray to God to take this temptation from you, or to give you grace to overcome
it; and though the temptation continue after you have prayed to have it
removed, be not discouraged, but pray still. The Apostle directing us how to
deal with Satan, after he has set down several pieces of the spiritual armor,
that are useful in our combat with this Adversary, exhorts us to pray always
with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and to watch thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18. If we continne to pray against the temptations of
Satan, either God will remove them, or give us sufficient grace to hold out in
the conflict, 2 Cor. 12.7,8,9. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure: For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me; and he
said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Resist the Devil with the
Word. When he tempted Christ to cast himself down from a Pinnacle, which was in
effect, to destroy himself; Christ resisted this and all his other temptations
with the written Word, Matthew. 4.4,7,10. Three times does Christ repel Satan
with the written Word; to teach us, to make use of the Sword of the Spirit, in
resisting all our temptations. Does Satan tempt thee to destroy thy self,
remember it is written, Thou shall not kill. It is said of Luther, that he was
so violently assaulted with this temptation to destroy himself, that for some
hours together, he was necessitated to press that Scripture upon his heart,
Thou shall not kill. 3. Resist the Devil by Faith. There is a great efficacy in
faith to resist and subdue the temptations of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all,
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. 1 Pet. 5.8,9. Be sober, be vigilant; because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith.

3. When Satan follows you with this temptation to destroy your self, fly for
refuge from this roaring Lion to Jesus Christ; cast your selves into his arms,
commit the keeping of your souls and lives to the Lord Jesus, and rest upon him
to preserve you from being vanquished by this temptation. Take some
encouragements to fly to Christ, and to rest upon him for relief, when you are
persued with this, or any other temptation. 1. The Lord Jesus is able to
succor thee in all thy temptations, Heb. 2.18. In that be himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. He
conquered all the powers of darkness at his death, Col. 2.15. Having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it. He has all the Devils in Hell under a lock, and he keeps the keys of
this lock in his own hands, Rev. 1.18. I have the Keys of Hell and of death.
How easily can he command down any temptation, that has the Keys of Hell, and
that has triumphed over all the powers of darkness, and spoiled them of their
strength? In the days of his humiliatio, he had all the Devils at his command;
he dispossessed them with speaking but a word, Luke 4.36. -- With authority and
power, he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out. If in the days of
his humiliation, when he was in the form of a Servant, he had such power over
the Devils; what power has he in his Exaltation, now that he sits at the
right hand of God in the highest Heavens? 2. Jesus Christ is very pitiful to
such as are under temptation. What God says to the Israelites, Exodus 23.9. Ye
know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt.
The like may be said of Christ, he knows the heart of such as are in
temptation, seeing he himself was tempted, in all points as we are, only he
never sinned under any of his temptations. That Christ's being tempted does
incline him to be pitiful and merciful to us in our temptations, you may see,
Heb. 4.15. We have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. He was tempted to this very sin, to destroy himself by casting himself
down from a pinnacle of the Temple; and therefore knows how to pity those that
are dogged with this temptation. He is so tender over tempted souls, that he
takes them in his arms, and lodges them in his bosom, to prevent their being
devoured by the roaring Lion, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his Flock like at
Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young. Though we be weak like Lambs,
and Satan be strong and cruel like a Lion; yet as long as we lie in the bosom
of Christ, we are safe enough from this roaring Lion. 3. The Lord Jesus is very
vigilant over all Satan's motions; when ever there arises any desire in his
heart to do us mischief, Christ sees what he designs, and prevents his
temptations from ruining of us, Luke 22.31,32. The Lord said, Simon, Simon,
behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Christ takes care of Peter,
before Peter knew his danger, and so consequently before he sought to Christ.
Now if Christ be so careful of persons in temptation, as to prevent them with
mercy, to succor them before they cry; then surely he will succor and relieve
those that cry to him night and day.

4. When you find your selves assaulted with this temptation, and it comes with
that violence and fury, that you are afraid you shall one day fall by it; have
recourse to those Promises which relate to a tempted condition, and urge them
at the Throne of Grace, and hang upon God for the accomplishment of them. I will
put you in remembrance of some Promises that may be of great use to you when
you are in a tempted condition, Romans 16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly. It may be you have had a long conflict with Satan, and
you are afraid at the last he will get you under his feet; but fear not, the
God of Truth has engaged himself by promise, that he will bruise Satan under
your feet, and he will do it shortly, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation
taken you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation
also make away to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Satan is very
desirous to tempt us above what we are able to bear, but God will not suffer
him; and that we may rest satisfied that he will not suffer Satan to tempt us
above what we are able to bear, he has engaged his faithfulness for the
fulfilling of this promise; and he that has made this promise, knows what we
can, and what we cannot bear, Isa. 59.19. When the Enemy shall come in like a
stood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him; or (as it is
in the margent) shall put him to slight. Does Satan come in upon your souls
with his temptations like a flood, in such a violent impetuous manner, that you
are in danger to be born down by them, yet fear not, the Spirit of the Lord
will come into your assistance and put him to slight. The first Promise that
God gave to man after his fall, may be of great use to us in our temptations;
namely, That the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

5. Keep up your hope in the mercy of God by virtue of the merits of Christ,
and the Covenant of Grace. Satan can do little by this temptation of
Selfmurther, until he has brought the Soul into a despaning condition. As long
as we are able to cleave to the blood of Christ, and the Word of God; Satan
shall not be able to prevail against us, but we shall overcome all his
temptations, Rev. 12.11. They overcame him (that is, Satan) by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony.

6. Shun idleness, and always employ your selves either in some religious
exercise, or in the works of your Calling; and if Satan come upon you with his
temptations, either when you are performing any religious duties, or when you
are about the works of your Calling, you need not be afraid of him; for the
good Angels have a charge from God to look after you, and defend you when you
are in Gods way, Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to
keep thee in all thy ways: And by virtue of that assistance which God will
give us, whilst we keep in his ways, we shall overcome the Powers of Darkness,
as we may see, Ver. 13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder; the young
Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot. But by idleness and
neglecting the works of our Calling, we give Satan great advantage against us.

7. Observe what pleas and reasonings Satan makes use of to draw you to this
horrid sin of Self-murder; and upon examination you shall find them to be but
mere delusions, and traps, and snares, that he makes use of to destroy your
souls; and that they are of no force and validity to warrant your Commission of
this unnatural sin, will appear evidently by instancing in, and returning an
answer to some of the most material pleas which he makes use of to draw
persons under distress, to put an end to their own lives.

Plea 1. My misery and my troubles are exceeding great, they are so heavy I
know not how to bear them, and I see no way how I should put an end to my
miseries, but by putting an end to my days; and I had better put an end to my
life, than live in such great and continual misery as I live in.

Answ. 1. It is utterly unlawful for a man to procure his own death, to put an
end to his misery, though his sorrows and his troubles be exceeding great. Jobs
calamities were exceeding great, both in respect of what he suffered in his
inward and outward man. He felt such a load upon his spirit, that he thought if
all the sand on the Seashore had been put into one balance, and his grief into
another, his grief would have been heavier than the sand of the Sea; Job 6.2,3.
he says, Ver. 4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinks up my spirit; the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
His sorrows and troubles were so great that he was weary of his life, and
longed to dye, ver. 8, 9. If he might have had his choice, he would have chosen
strangling, or any other kind of death, rather than to have lived such a
miserable life, Job 7.15,16. yet notwithstanding the case was thus with Job he
durst not attempt any thing to take away his life one day before the time
appointed by God was come, but resolves to wait patiently all his days for his
change, Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my
change come.

2. By making away thy self, thou will not put an end to thy miseries, but wilt
plunge thy self irrecoverably into far greater miseries than those that thou
lie under, how great and many soever thy troubles be; for, Murderers shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8.
Now all the troubles of this life are nothing compared with the torments of
Hell; if it were possible for one man to have all the pains and tortures
inflicted upon him, that have been endured by all the men upon the face of the
earth since the Creation of the World, and he should suffer them a thousand
years, this would be far short of what the damned suffer in hell. What the
Apostle says of the glory that the Saints shall have in heaven, Romans 8.18. I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us: the same is true of the torments
of hell; all the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared
with the torments that the damned in hell shall suffer to all eternity.

3. It is the Devil tempts thee to put an end to thy miseries, by putting an
end to thy days: God counsels thee otherwise, he directs thee to a better way
of getting out of thy troubles, than by destroying thy self; and that is by
calling upon God, and casting thy burdens upon him, and flying for refuge to
his Son Jesus Christ, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee -- Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Satan desires to have thee come unto him, that
he may torment thee, and to that end he moves thee to destroy thy self. Christ
calls thee to come to him, that he may give thee rest. Now whether is it better
to obey the call of Christ which will bring rest, or to follow the counsel of
the Devil, who seeks nothing else but thy eternal destruction?

Plea 2. I lived in good credit heretofore, but now my Estate is gone, I must
look to be despised and disrepected, and slighted; and I cannot tell how to
bear the loss of that esteem and respect which I have had formerly; I had as
good dye as see my self slighted --

Answ. 1. Though you be brought low, yet if you have lowly hearts, God will
respect you as much as ever he did, Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord be high, yet
has he respect unto the lowly. He will not only respect your persons, but your
prayers also, Psalm. 102.17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their prayer. If you live in the fear of God, all good men will honor
you as much as ever they did, Psalm. 15.4. He honors them that fear the Lord.

2. If you should meet with shame, and scorn, and reproach, this is the hand of
the Lord; he is to be eyed in this as well as in other afflictions, Isa. 43.28.
I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the
curse, and Israel to reproaches. Psalm. 44.9,13,14. Thou have cast off, and put
us to shame -- Thou makst us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and division
to them that are round about us. Thou make us a byword among the heathen; a
shaking of the head among the people: and seeing it is the Lords doing, you
must bear it patiently; you must not in anger cast away your lives, because God
has taken away your repute and honor.

3. Suppose you should lose that credit and respect which you have had in the
world, if you continue in well-doing, God will give you immortal honor and
eternal glory in the Kingdom of Heaven, Romans 2.6,7. Who will render to every
man according to his deeds, to them, who by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life; But by destroying
your selves, you deprive your selves of eternal glory; for all murderers shall
be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, Rev. 22.15. Without are dogs, and
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers. --

Plea 3. I am afraid I shall be in want, or be driven to beg my bread, or must
be forced to live upon others; and I had better dye than live in want, or live
to be a burden to my self and others, or beg my bread.

Answ. 1. God has given his Servants many encouragements to hope that they
shall not want, or if they be brought into a necessitous condition, that they
shall have their wants supplied.

2. We should endeavor what we can to maintain our selves without being
burdensome to others, 2 Cor. 11.9. In all things I have kept my self from being
burden some to you, and so will I keep my self. Acts 20.34,35. Yea, you your
selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them
that were with me: I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye
ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he
said, It is more blessed to give, than to receive.

3. If God should bring you so low as to live upon alms, yet this should not
make you weary of your lives: there are many of Gods children that shall reign
with Christ in heaven to all eternity, that received alms whilst they were upon
the earth, as is evident from Matthew. 25.35,36,40. Yea Christ himself when he
was upon earth received alms, Luke 8.1,2,3. Suppose you should be put to beg
for your living, yet know 1. That it is better to beg than to sin, better to
beg than destroy your selves; for the one is but an affliction, the other is a
grievous sin. 2. Lazarus who was an heir of heaven, whose soul was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom, was so poor, that he begged his bread, and
would have been glad to have had the crumbs that fell from the rich man's Table,
Luke 16.20.21,22. There was a certain beggar that was named Lazarus, which was
laid at his gate, full of sores, and desired to be fed with the crumbs which
fell from the rich man's Table; moreover the dogs came and licked his Sores. And
it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom. 3. Our Lord Jesus in his thirst asks a draught of water of a
woman of Samaria, John 4.7. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water:
Jesus says unto her, Give me to drink. 4. If you should be brought to beg your
bread, the Lord will not forsake you in this desolate condition, but will give
you his gracious presence, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old; yet
have I not seen the righteous for saken, nor his seed begging bread. It is not
ordinary for God to bring righteous persons, or their seed, to beg their bread;
but when he does, they are not forsaken of God in that condition. 5. The great
God condescends so low, as to ask and entreat several things of you; he
entreats you to give him your heart, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart.
He beseeches and prays you to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.20. We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. He beseeches you to leave off your
sins, Jer. 44.4. Oh, do not this abominable thing which I hate. He beseeches
you to present your bodies to him, Romans 12.1. Now if the great God condescend
to ask several things of you, why should you be so proud and high-minded, as to
choose rather to starve, or to murder your selves, than to ask relief of your
fellow creatures?

4. Job was a burden to himself, as he himself tells us, Job 7.20. I have
sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men, why have thou set
me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self? He was also by
reason of his sores, and other afflictions, a burden to his friends; so that
neither his wife, nor his servants, nor his friends, cared to come at him, Job
19.14,15,16,17,19. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me; they that dwell in mine own house, and my maidens count me a
stranger; I am an alien in their sight: I called my servant, and he gave me no
answer, I entreated him with my mouth; my breath is strange to my wife, though
I entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body: all my inward friends
abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned against me. Yet though Job was
become a burden to himself, and to all his friends, he durst not put an end to
his life, but resolves, Job 14.14 All the days of mine appointed time will I
wait, till my change come.

5. If you destroy your selves, and thereby provoke God to cast your souls into
hell, you will be in greater want there than ever man was upon the face of the
earth; for there is nothing good in hell: there is nothing to please the eye,
or the ear, or any of the senses; there you shall be tormented with hunger and
thirst for ever, and shall not have so much as a drop of water to cool your
tongue: The rich man that fared deliciously every day, though he begged hard
for but one drop of water to cool his tongue, he could not obtain it, Luke
16.19,23,24,25,26. In your wants here, you may have relief by going to God, you
may have comfort from the word; but there is no relief to be had from God,
neither is there any comfort to be had from the word of God in hell. Your wants
here continue but a little while; if you go on to serve God, you shall shortly
be in heaven, where you shall want no good thing; but if you destroy your
selves, God will cast you into hell, where you shall suffer all sorts of wants
in the utmost extremity to all eternity: and therefore it is great folly for
any man to destroy himself for fear of being brought to want.

Plea 4. My sins lie as a heavy burden upon me, and they are greater then can
be forgiven; and I know not how to be eased of this heavy burden, but by making
away my self.

Answ. 1. Say not, thy sins are greater than can be forgiven; for all sorts of
sins are pardonable by virtue of the Blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin. Mark 3.28. Verily, I say unto
you, all sins shall be forgive; unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith
soever they shall blaspheme. And though it be true, that the sin against the
Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, the reason is not, because the Blood of
Christ is not of sufficient value to wash away that sin, but because such
persons as commit the sin against the Holy Ghost do not repent and believe in
Jesus Christ, but do despise and trample under foot the Blood of the Son of God.

2. Self-murder will not lessen, but increase the number of your sins; it will
not take off the burden which is upon your consciences, but will make your
burden a thousand times heavier: for if a man dye in his sins, all his sins go
down to hell with him, and there will lie as so many mountains of lead,
pressing and loading his conscience to all eternity: and the sense of sin which
men shall have in hell, will torment them a thousand times more than it does in
this life; for then they shall know more of the evil of sin, and more of the
Majesty of that God against whom they have sinned, than they do now: Then they
shall see more sins than they do now, and feel more of Gods wrath for their
sins; here they have some few drops, there they shall have full vials of wrath:
then they shall have certain knowledge that there is no possibility of
obtaining the pardon of any one sin for ever. Here though they may be under
great fears, yet there may be some hope of mercy; at least, as long as they
live, they are not under an impossibility of being pardoned.

3. Though thou art under despair, and ready to say, there is no hope that God
should ever pardon such a great sinner as I have been; yet set upon the work of
repentance, and returning to God, and God will pardon all your sins, Jer. 3.22.
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. These
persons to whom this promise is made had been exceeding great sinners, as you
may see, ver. 5. Behold, thou have spoken and done evil things as thou
could, and were in a despairing condition, chap. 2. v. 25. -- Thou said
there is no hope. Yet to these persons that had done evil things as they could,
and said there was no hope of mercy for them, God promises if they would
return, he would not cause his anger to fall upon them, chapter 3. ver. 12. but
would pardon and forgive their sins, ver. 22. God also by the Prophet Isaiah,
promises pardon to the chiefest of sinners, if they will but forsake their
sins, Isa. 1.16,17,18. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well -- Come now and let
us reason together, though your sins be as searlet, they shall be as white as
snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Obj. It is true, if I could repent; then though my sins were never so great, I
know the Lord would pardon them; but alas, I cannot turn from my sins to God,
repentance is hid from mine eyes.

Answ. Though you cannot repent of your self, yet you should not despair, for
God has exalted his his Son Jesus Christ to give you repentance, Acts 5.31.
Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. It may be you will reply,
Christ is exalted to give repentance unto Israel, but what is that to me? I
answer, 1. This Israel had embrued their hands in the Blood of Christ, Acts
2.36. Let all the house of Israel know affuredly, that God has made that same
Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ; and in the words
immediately foregoing that Scripture, where the Apostle tells them, God had
exalted Carist to give them repentance, he tells them, Acts 5.30. The God of
our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hung upon a tree; him has God
exalted to give repentance unto Israel, etc. Now was Christ exalted to give
repentance to them that crucified him, and do ye think that he will not give
repentance unto you, if you go to him for a penitent heart? have you committed
greater sins than the crucifying of Christ? 2. If you question whether Christ
will give you repentance, you may be satisfied that he will from his own words,
if you go to him for repentance; for he has said, John 6.37. Him that comes
to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Plea 5. I have committed (may some say) a very foul sin, and I am afraid it
should come to light; and if it should, I shall be ashamed to look any man in
the face; and I had better make away my self, than live to be a public shame.

Answ. 1. This will not conceal your sins, to make away your self; for there is
a day of Judgment coming, wherein God will bring to light and publish in the
hearing of the whole world: all your sins even your foulest and most shameful
sins which you have committed with greatest secrecy, Eccles. 12.14. God shall
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil. Luke 12.2,3. There is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known; whatsoever ye have spoken in
darkness, shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear
in closets, shall be proclaimed upon the house tops. 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: And
therefore if you should escape the shame of your sins here, you will at the
resurrection and the day of Judgment, when God shall disclose your sins to the
whole world, be put to everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame and everlasting contempt.

2. The way to get your shameful sins covered, is to confess them to God, and
to humble your souls for them, and to flee to the Blood of Christ; for by so
doing God will pardon them, and cast them behind his back; and when God has
pardoned them, they shall not do you any hurt, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. When God forgives sin, he is said to cover it, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. David
committed a shameful sin, when he murdered Vriah, and committed adultery with
Bersheba; yet upon his confession of these sins, God pardoned him, Psalm. 32.5.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said, I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin.

Plea 6. I am tempted in my straits to steal, and to kill my Children, because
I cannot maintain them; I am tempted also to other sins: Now I am afraid if I
live I shall fall by my temptations into some foul sin, and thereby be a
scandal to Religion, and to the Gospel, and it is better for me to dye than to
scandalize Religion: and therefore I am of the mind, when I can get a
convenient opportunity, to make away my self, that I may not become ascandal to
the Gospel.

Answ. 1. You must not commit one sin to avoid another, Romans 3.8. Not as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil that good
may come, whose damnation is just. It is a good thing to prevent sin, and to
prevent scandalizing of Religion; yet we must not murder our selves, which is a
great evil, to prevent other sins, or scandalizing Religion; because it is in
the judgment of the Apostle, a damnable tenent and practice to do evil that
good may come.

2. What greater sin or scandal to Religion than for a man that professes
Religion, to murder himself? and therefore it is a strange delusion for a man
to design the making away of himself, to avoid other sins, or to avoid
scandalizing of the Gospel.

3. If you be tempted to steal, or destroy your Children, or any other sins,
and are afraid that you shall one day fall by these temptations, there are
better means of avoiding these sins, than by murdering your selves: and they
are such as these, 1. Pray to God to keep you from those sins to which you are
tempted by Satan, or unto which you are inclined by your own hearts, Psalm,
19.12,13. Cleanse thou me from secret faults; keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me. Psalm. 119.133. Order my
steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 2. Hide Gods
Word in your hearts, for there is great efficacy in the Word of God when it is
treasured up in the heart, to keep a man from falling into sin, Psalm. 119.11.
Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. 3. Rest
upon Gods Promises, wherein he has promised you, that he will not suffer sin
to get the dominion over you; but when he sees your sins rising up against
you, and ready to prevail, he will take compassion upon you, and subdue your
iniquities, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. Micah 7.19. He
will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our
iniquities: and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Go
out against your sins in the strength of these promises, and though you be
often soiled, yet renew your combat, hanging and cleaving to the promises of
God, and doubt not but you shall in the conclusion obtain the victory.

Plea 7. I am a man cast off by God, and I am sure to go to Hell when I dye;
yea methinks I feel the beginnings of Hell already in my Conscience, by those
terrors of God that are in my soul, and a seared Conscience; and the longer I
live, the more I shall sin, and the more I shall increase my torments
hereafter; and therefore it is better for me to put an end to my wretched life,
than to live to increase my sins, and my torments; for I do nothing else but
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.

Answ. 1. God would not have any man to say, God has cast me off, and utterly
separated me from his people, Isa. 56.3. Let not the son of the stranger, that
has joined himself unto the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord has utterly
separated me from his people. We are very subject to mistakes, and to think
that God has cast us off, when as we have found grace in his sight, Psalm.
31.22. I said in my haste, I am cut off before thine eyes; nevertheless thou
heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee. Zion thought
and said, God had forgotten and forsaken her, when as she lay near Gods heart,
and was in his thoughts night and day, Isa. 49.14,15,16.

2. Suppose God did cast you off, yet you must not cast him off, but
acknowledge before God, that it is just with God to leave you, and cry to him,
and follow hard after him, and hang upon him, and hope in his word, even at
such a time as he casts off your souls. When Heman complained, Psalm. 88.14.
Lord, why castest thou off my soul? He did not cease calling upon God, Ver. 9.
I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee. Jonah
when he thought God had cast him off, yet resolves still to wait upon him,
Jonah 2.4. I said I, am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward
thy Temple. When David thought himself cast off by God, he encourages his soul
to hope in the Lord, Psalm. 43.2,5. Why do thou cast me off? -- why art thou
cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God:

3. Say not, I am sure to go to Hell when I dye, for it is yet a day of
salvation, and the door of hope stands open; there is yet time and place for
repentance, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted time, behold now is the day
of salvation. Though a man be a perfect slave to sin and Satan, yet there is a
possibility that he may be brought to repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25,26. In meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance -- that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil,
who are taken captive by him at his will: and if God give thee repentance,
though thou have been as wicked a man as lives upon the face of the earth, yet
thou shall surely be saved, Ezekiel. 33.15,16. Prove. 28.13. Isa. 55.7.

4. Suppose thou apprehendest thy self to have as it were the beginnings of
Hell in thy soul, yet thy case is not desperate. Others that have had pains and
horrors in their souls, like the pains of Hell, have found relief from God.
Jonah after he had fled from the presence of the Lord, and was cast into the
Sea, and swallowed up by a Fish, felt himself in such a distressed condition,
that he compares his condition to the belly of hell; yet he crying to God in
this condition, was delivered out of it, Jonah 2.2. I cried by reason of mine
affliction to the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and
thou heardest my voice. When David was in such a state, that he compares his
pains to the pains of Hell, by crying to the Lord he was delivered, Psalm.
116.3,4,6. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold
upon me; I found trouble and sorrow: then called I upon the Name of the Lord, O
Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul -- I was brought low and he helped me.

5. It is true, that all the while a man lives in an impenitent condition, he
treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath; and as he increases his sins, so
also he increases his torments, Romans 2.5. Thou after thy hardness, and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath.
Yet this should not cause any man to destroy himself, it should only make a man
more earnest in seeking unto God to give him repentance. As long as there is
life there is hope, God may give a man repentance: God gave one of the thieves
that was crucified with Christ, repentance but a few hours before he dyed: He
calls some into his vineyard at the last hour of the day. But after death there
is no place for repentance, Eccles. 9.10.

Plea 8. I will repent of my sins, and confess them to God, and pray God to
pardon them, before I make away my self; and if I do so, I hope God will pardon
my sins and receive my soul into his heavenly Kingdom as soon as I am dead.

Answ. As long as you have any bloody designs and purposes in your hearts, your
prayers will avail nothing with God, Isa. 1.15. When ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will
not hear, your hands are full of Blood. Lo here, though you make many prayers,
as long as you have any bloody projects, either against your selves or others,
God will hear none of them, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me. Now so long as you harbor a purpose and resolution to
make away your selves, you do regard iniquity in your hearts. It is said, Prove.
28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them shall find mercy. You mistake the meaning of the Promise, if
you think that you shall find mercy upon your confessing of this sin, when as
you still retain a purpose to commit it.

I might mention other pleas, but I should then enlarge too far upon this head;
I shall therefore only add a few propositions concerning this temptation of
self-murder, that may be useful to those that are exercised with it, and so
dismiss this point.

1. Whenever any man has any suggestions or motions put in his mind to
murder himself, it is not God, but Satan puts those motions into his mind,
how specious pretenses soever do attend those motions. What is said of: the
motion that was in the heart of Judas to betray Christ, John 13.2. The Devil
put into the heart of Judas to betray him; the same may be said of the motions
that come into our hearts to destroy our selves; it is the Devil puts them into
us. If a man be persuaded to make away himself, I may say here as the Apostle
in another case, Gal. 5.8. This persuasion comes not of him that calls you:
That it is not God by his Spirit, but Satan puts these motions into your
hearts, is evident: for 1. God tempts no man to any sin, James. 13. Let no man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempts he any man.

2. The Spirit of God moves no man to do any thing contrary to the word: Now
the word says expressly, Thou shall not kill. The word forbids us doing our
selves any harm, as well as doing harm unto others, Acts 16.27,28. The keeper
of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he
drew out his sword, and would have killed himself -- But Paul cried with a loud
voice, saying, Do thy self no harm. If any say, I have Scriptures brought to my
mind to encourage and put me forward to make away my self; therefore, surely
it is God, and not Satan puts me upon this work. I answer: Though thou have
some portions of Scripture cast into thy mind to put thee forward to destroy
thy self, it is not God, but Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
and wresting and abusing the Scriptures, that puts thee upon this sinful work.
When Satan tempted Christ to cast himself down from a Pinnacle, he brings a
Scripture to him; he quotes a precious promise out of the Book of Psalms to
carry on his temptation the more plausibly, Matthew. 4.5,6, If Satan made use of
Scripture to carry on his temptations wherewith he assaulted Christ, then there
is no doubt but he will try the same way with us also. Now this would be one
good means of resisting this temptation, to be fully persuaded, that all the
motions that are put into our hearts to destroy our selves, come from the Devil.

2. The design of Satan in this temptation is to devour and destroy our souls;
he is our deadly and implacable enemy, and is always designing our hurt; when
he pretends our good, he intends our ruin: and therefore what counsel Solomon
gives us concerning a deceitful adversary, Prove. 26.24,25. He that hates,
dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit within him; when he speaks
fair believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart, is very
seasonable here: when Satan speaks us fair, we should not believe him, for he
hates us, and has abominable designs against us in his heart. That Satan seeks
to devour and destroy our souls by this and all his other temptations, may be
cleared from several Scriptures, as 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant; because
your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. John 10.10. The thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy. John 8.44. He was a murderer from the beginning. Now did they that
are tempted to make away themselves, fully believe that these motions came from
Satan, and that Satan's design in moving them to kill themselves, is to devour
and destroy their precious souls, that he may draw them into the same place of
torment where he himself is, it would be a good help to resist the temptation.

3. There is hope for a man as long as God continues him in the land of the
living, that he may obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, if he repent of his sins,
and believe in Christ, how desolate, and distressed, and desperate soever his
condition seem to be. I add this proposition, because Satan can hardly draw a
man to destroy himself, till he has brought him to despair; and therefore if
the person that is under this temptation could be convinced, that there was
hope of mercy and salvation for such an one as he is, it might be an effectual
means of preventing the temptation from taking place. I shall therefore
endeavor to prove, that no man whatever is to conclude his case desperate, so
long as God permits him to live upon the face of the earth; but there is a
possibility, yea, there is hope that he may obtain salvation, if he will use
the means appointed by God for the saving of his soul: and that I prove by
these arguments.

1. It is the will of God that the Gospel should be preached to every creature
under heaven, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature. Col. 1.23 -- The hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and
which was preached to every creature under heaven. -- As long as a man is out
of Hell, as long as he lives in the world, so long he may have the Gospel
preached to him, and may have salvation tendered to him by Christ; and as long
as the Gospel is preached to a man, so long it is a day of salvation; that is, a
day wherein he may obtain salvation if he seek after it, 2 Cor. 6.2. I have
heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored
thee: Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation.
What time does the Apostle mean, when he says, Now is the accepted time, now
is the day of salvation? I answer, He means the time when we enjoy the ministry
of reconciliation; the time when we have the Gospel preached to us; as you may
see in the former Chapter, ver. 18. 20. He has given to us the ministry of
reconciliation -- Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God: and
then adds, chap. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted time, Behold, now is the day
of salvation. The note of attention is mentioned twice, behold, behold, to
cause us to take the more diligent heed to this truth, that we should account
it a day of salvation as long as we have the Gospel preached to us.

2. We are commanded to account the long-suffering of God to be salvation, 2
Pet. 3.15. Account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation; and
therefore they that conclude all hope of salvation is gone, and that God
suffers them to live only to aggravate their condemnation, wrong God and their
own souls, by harboring such conclusions in their minds: he therefore suffers
us to live that we may have time and space to repent, ver. 9. The Lord is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. Rev. 2.21. I gave her space to repent --

3. The Scripture holds it forth plainly, that as long as a man lives in the
world, he is not to cast away his hope, Eccles. 9.4. To him that is joined to
all the living there is hope. It is true, if once a man be dead, and has not
wrought out his salvation before he dies, the door of hope is for ever shut
against that man; but while he is in the Land of the living, there is hope that
he may obtain mercy.

4. Whilst a man continues upon the face of the earth, Christ calls him to look
to him for salvation, and promises him salvation, if he does look to him, Isa.
45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth. Look unto me
and be ye saved; that is, I will save you, if you look unto me: And whom does
Christ call to look to him for salvation? All the ends of the earth; that is,
all men that live upon the face of the Earth, from one end of the Earth to
another; so that as long as a man is not cast into Hell, but is permitted to
live upon the face of the Earth, he should not conclude his case desperate.

5. We find God has rebuked those that have cast away their hope, and has
encouraged them to seek and hope for salvation, that have thought there was no
hope for such as they were. When some amongst the Jews thought God had done
with them, and given them over, and would look no more after them, God reproves
them for it, Isa. 40.27. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O Israel; my
way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God? And at
another time, when they thought there was no hope, but they must perish in
their sins; and looked upon it as an improbable, if not as an impossible thing,
that such as they were, should obtain life; God swears to them that he did not
delight in their death, but rather did desire that they should repent, that
they might live, Ezekiel. 33.10,11. Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions,
and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them; How should we then live? say
unto them, As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? We find also God
encouraging the Jews when they were in a despairing condition in Babylon, Lam.
3.18,19. I said, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; remembering
mine affliction, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. But though they said
their hope was perished, God says it was good for them to hope still, Ver. 26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord. God may have great mercy in store for them that think there is no
mercy for them. When the house of Israel said, Our bones are dried, and our
hope is lost; we are cut off for our parts: God promises to do great things
for them, to put his Spirit in them, and give them life, etc. Ezekiel.
37,11,12,13,14. And though Satan may make use of some Scriptures to drive us to
despair, yet he perverts the sense and meaning of those Scriptures, for no
passage of Scripture was written to drive us to despair; but the design of the
Scripture is to encourage us to hope in God, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

4. Prop. No man ought to conclude that he is a graceless person, or cast out
of the favor of God, because he is assaulted with this temptation to make away
himself; or because he has often prayed to God to have his temptation removed,
and it continues still in as great violence as ever. The best of men may be
tempted to the foulest of sins. What sin is more hideous than for a man to fall
down and worship the Devil? yet the Lord Jesus was tempted to this sin, Matthew.
4.9. All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.
Do thou think God does not love thee, because he suffers the Devils to tempt
thee to make away thy self? Christ was the beloved Son of God, yet the Devil
tempted him to cast down himself from a pinnacle of the Temple, which was in
effect to have destroyed himself, Matthew. 4.5,6. yea, God suffered the Devil to
do more than barely to tempt Christ; he suffered him to carry him from the
Wilderness into Jerusalem, and to set him upon the pinnacle of the Temple,
Matthew. 4.5. and from thence to carry him to an exceeding high Mountain, Ver. 8.
This is more than God permits the Devil to do to you, yet Christ was the
beloved Son of God. Did not the Devil tempt Job (who was the most upright man
that lived in his days) by the instigation of his wife to destroy himself? Job
2.9. His wife said unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God
and die. And though you pray to have the temptation removed, and still it
continues: so did Paul, who was a chosen Vessel, when he was buffeted with a
temptation from Satan, he prayed often to have it removed, and still it
continued, 2 Cor. 12.7,8,9. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan to buffet me; -- For this thing I besought the Lord thrice,
that it might depart from me; and he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for
thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness. But let thus much suffice
for the preventing of this temptation of Self-murder.

5. It is probable that Satan will tempt such as are brought low by this fire,
to use some unrighteous courses to enrich themselves; especially if they be
brought into great straits, he will be urging of them to help themselves by
some sinful means rather than to continue under their straits. Agur prays,
that God would remove poverty from him, and gives this reason, Prove. 30.9. --
Lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain: which implies,
that Satan does usually tempt such as are brought to poverty, to help
themselves by unlawful and sinful means. I might suggest several things to
prevent your yielding to this temptation. As

1. You will lose more and better things than you will get by unrighteousness
in your dealings, though you should get a vast estate by this means. For 1.
Hereby you will lose the favor of God, Deuteronomy. 25.16. All that do unrighteously,
are an abomination unto the Lord thy God: And what is all this world compared
to the favor of God? 2. All that you get by sinful courses, is the price of
blood, it is gotten with the loss of your souls, Ezekiel. 18.4. -- The soul that
sins it shall die. Now the soul is of that value, that the gaining of the
whole world will not countervail the loss of one soul, Mar. 8.36.3. What you
get unrighteously, is purchased with the loss of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye
not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 4. What is
gotten unrighteously, is gotten with the loss of peace of Conscience, Isa.
59.8. -- They have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not
know peace. Prove. 20.17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his
mouth shall be filled with gravel.

2. You do not only deprive your selves of all good, but you bring upon your
selves woeful misery by seeking to enrich your selves by unjust courses: for 1.
Hereby you bring down the wrath, and curse, and vengeance of God upon your
selves, Jer. 22.13. Woe unto him that builds his House by unrighteousness, and
his Chambers by wrong. 1 These. 4.6. That no man go beyond, and defraud his
Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such. Job
20.23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath
upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating: This is spoken of such
as get their Estates unrighteously, as you may see Ver. 19. 2. Such as seek to
get wealth unrighteously, seek their own damnation, Prove. 21.6. The getting of
Treasure by a lying Tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. Is eternal death such a desirable thing as that we should seek after it?
Does it not come fast enough of it self? Consider what dreadful judgments are
denounced against such as get their Estates by unjust and unrighteous courses,
Job. 20. from ver. the 15. to ver. 29.

3. If you wait upon God, and put your trust in him, and keep your selves
honest, God will be with you, and provide for you a supply of all your needs,
Phil. 4.8,9,19. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just; -- think on these things, -- And the God of peace
shall be with you; -- My God shall supply all your need, according to his
riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. Psalm. 37.3,34. Trust in the Lord, and do
good, -- and verily thou shall be fed. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and
he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land. Isa. 33.15,16. He that walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly; he that despises the gain of oppressions,
that shakes his hands from holding of bribes; -- He shall dwell on high, his
place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks; bread shall be given him, his
waters shall be sure. And know this also, that a little gotten honestly, and in
the fear of God, is better than a great Estate gotten unrighteously, Prove.
16.8. Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues without right.
Prove. 15.16. Better is little with the fear of the Lord, than great treasure,
and trouble therewith.

6. Another temptation, which is like to attend those that have been sufferers
by this fire, is discontent and murmuring at their losses; but I shall need to
add nothing more concerning this, but refer you to what is said in the first
question, to prevent murmuring and discontent, because of the losses you have
sustained by this fire.

SECT. 13.
13. Let the loss of your Estates put you upon seeking after, and making sure
of those mercies and blessings, which shall never be taken from you to all
eternity; I will mind you of some blessings, which if once you can get your
souls possessed of them, they shall be yours for ever.

1. Get an interest in God; if you once get the Lord for your God and portion,
he will be your God and your portion for ever, Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God
for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death. Psalm. 73.26. My flesh
and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for
ever.

2. Get the grace of God implanted in your hearts; when God has bestowed
saving grace upon a man, that shall remain with him for ever, Psalm. 19.9. The
fear of the Lord is clear, enduring for ever, -- Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting
life.

3. Make sure of the favor of God, and labor to get into Covenant with him,
and you shall be possessed of these mercies for ever, Isa. 54.10. The Mountains
shall depart, and the Hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that
has mercy on thee.

4. Seek unto God to give you the Comforter, and when once you have gotten him,
he shall abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
Spirit of Truth; -- he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

Now the way to make sure of these, and all other spiritual blessings, is to
make sure of Christ; close with Christ, cleave to Christ, and abide with him
for ever, and then all spiritual blessings shall be yours for ever; for all
spiritual blessings are treasured up in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ; and if we abide with Christ, he will
abide ours for ever, Joh. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you.

SECT. 14.
14. Seek unto God to restore what he has taken from you, and to make up all
your losses. There are two ways of having your losses made up: 1. When God
shall give you as much riches as he has taken from you. 2. When he shall give
you that which is as good or better, than what you lost by this fire. You may
lawfully seek to God to restore your Estates which he has taken from you, so
you seek them in Gods way: Take your directions from Gods Word for the getting
of riches; and because many that seek after riches, do not seek them in Gods
way, and so either fail of them, or have them not with the blessing of God: I
shall 1. propose some encouragements to stir you up to seek riches from God in
Gods way. 2. I shall lay before you some directions out of Gods Word for the
getting of riches. Now to move you to seek your riches of God, Consider

1. Riches are Gods gift, he gives them to whom he sees good, 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
Both riches and honor come of thee, -- and in thine hand it is to make great,
and to give strength unto all. Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy
God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth.

2. God is able to make up all your losses, though they be never so great, and
to give you as much and more than ever you had. After Job had lost all his
estate, it is said, Job 42.10,12. The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had
before, -- The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more than his beginning. 2 Chronicles. 25.9. What shall we do for the hundred Talents? And the man of God
answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. Though a man be
brought very low, even to beggary; God can easily make him a rich man, 1 Samuel
2.8. He raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the Throne of
Glory.

3. It is usual with God, after he has brought a man low, and humbled him, to
raise him up again, as we see in the case of Job, to whom God gave twice as
much as before; see to this purpose, Psalm. 66.12. We went through fire and
through water; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. 1 Samuel 2.7. The
Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up.

4. Those riches that are obtained in Gods way do us most good, and convey most
comfort to the owners, Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich,
and he adds no sorrow with it.

If you ask, What course should we take that we may obtain riches from God? I
answer,

1. Let your first and principal care be to get heaven, and the grace of God,
that may make you meet to enjoy his Kingdom; and when you do thus, God will not
only give you heaven when you die, but will add also as much of this world as
he sees to be good for you, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. When men are
over-eager in seeking after the world, they oft-times miss both of heaven and
the world also, Prove. 28.18. He that hastes to be rich, has an evil eye, and
considers not that poverty shall come upon him.

2. Embrace by faith, and set your love upon Jesus Christ; he promises to fill
their treasures that love him, Prove. 8.20,21. I lead in the way of
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment; that I may cause those
that love me, to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures.

3. Repent of your sins and turn to the Lord, and then though you be brought
low, he will build you up again, and will give you plenty of such things as he
sees to be good for you, Job 22.23,24,25. If thou return to the Almighty, thou
shall be built up, thou shall put away Iniquity far from thy Tabernacles; then
shall thou lay up Gold as dust, and the Gold of Ophir as the stones of the
Brooks; yea the Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of
silver.

4. Walk in the fear of God, and be careful to keep his Commandments, Prove.
22.4. By humility, and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life.
2 Chronicles. 17.4,5. Jehoshaphat sought to the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked
in his Commandments, and not after the doings of Israel; Therefore the Lord
established the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat
presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance.

5. Follow your employments with diligence: There is a blessing of God goes
along with diligence and industry in our Callings, Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor
that deals with a slack hand; but the hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove.
22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before Kings,
he shall not stand before mean men.

6. Seek after knowledge, and manage all your affairs with wisdom and
discretion, Prove. 24.3,4. Through wisdom is an house builded, and by
understanding it is established; and by knowledge shall the Chamber be filled
with all precious and pleasant riches.

7. Be faithful and upright in all your dealings, Prove. 28.10,20. The upright
shall have good things in possession: A faithful man shall abound in blessings.
Psalm. 112.3,4. Wealth and riches shall be in his house; -- Unto the upright
arises light in darkness.

8. Shun those vices that bring men to poverty and hinder their thriving in the
world, such as prodigality, and love of pleasure, Prove. 21.17. He that loves
Pleasure, shall be a poor man; he that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich.
Idleness, and drowsiness, a negligent and sluggish management of our affairs,
Prove. 6.9,10,11. How long will thou sleep O sluggard! when will thou arise out
of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep; so shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want
as an armed man. Prove. 18.9. He that is slothful in his work, is brother to him
that is a great waster. Gluttony and Drunkenness, Prove. 23.21. The Dunkard and
the Glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.

9. Be liberal to the poor; there may be a liberal soul, where there is but a
small estate; and the more liberal any man is, the more likely he is to be a
rich man, Prove. 11.24,25. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and
there is that withholds more than is meet, but it tends to poverty: The
liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that waters, shall be also watered
himself. He that shows mercy to the poor, honors the Lord with his
substance, Prove. 14.31. And when a man honors the Lord with his substance,
God will multiply it greatly, Prove. 3.9,10. Honor the Lord with thy substance,
and with the first fruits of all thine increase; so shall thy barns be filled
with plenty, and thy Presses shall burst out with new Wine.

10. Be content with what God gives you, and then though you have never so
little, you are a rich man, 1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness with contentment is great
gain.

SECT. 15.
15. If it should not seem good unto the Lord to make up your losses, by giving
you as much riches as he has taken from you: there is a better way of having
your losses made up; and that is, when God shall make his Providence
instrumental to convey those mercies and blessings to your souls, which are of
more worth than all the riches of the world; and this may be done several
ways: As

1. If God by this Providence shall teach you wisdom, that wisdom which is from
above, and bring you into more acquaintance with himself, and into more
acquaintance with the state and condition of your own souls; if you gain any
degree of heavenly wisdom by your losses, then your losses though they have
been very great are abundantly made up; for wisdom is far better than all the
riches of the world, Prove. 16.16. How much better is it to get wisdom than
gold? and to get understanding, rather to be chosen than silver? Prove. 8.11.
Wisdom is better than Rubies; and all the things that may be desired, are not
to be compared to it. Prove. 3.14.

2. If God by your losses shall make you partakers of the fruits and graces of
his Spirit, if he beget or increase in your souls humility, or heavenly
mindedness, or self-denial, or patience, or any other grace, then he does
abundantly make up all your losses; for the fruits and graces of the Spirit of
God, are infinitely better than all the riches of the world, Prove. 8.19. My
fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice
silver: you may see this cleared by instancing in particular graces; as Faith,
1 Pet. 1.7. -- Your faith being much more precious than gold that perishes.
Humility, that also excels all riches, Prove. 16.19. Better it is to be of an
humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud; the like
may be said of all other graces.

3. If God under this affliction shall clear up your right to his Promises; if
he give you an heart to understand, believe, obey, and delight in his Word; if
he gives in Promises to your souls out of his Word, to stay, and comfort, and
support you, then he does make up all your losses in a gracious manner. When
God gave in a suitable promise to David in his distress, he joyed in it as much
as in all riches, Psalm. 119.162. I rejoiced at thy Word as one that finds
great spoil. He esteemed that acquaintance that he got with Gods Word in his
afflictions, more than thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.71,72. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. The
Law of thy mouth is better unto me, than thousands of Gold and Silver. Psalm.
19.9,10. The Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether, more to
be desired are they than Gold; yea, than much fine Gold.

4. If God stir you up to seek after, and make sure of himself for your
portion; now you have lost the portion you had in this world, if you get God
for your portion, your losses will be abundantly made up in God. When David was
robbed and spoiled of his goods, he says, God dealt well with him; and why, he
gave him himself for his portion: Psalm. 119.61. The bands of the wicked have
robbed me; yet he adds, Ver. 65. Thou have dealt well with thy servant; and
what made him say, God dealt well with him, when he was spoiled of all that he
had? you may see the ground was, he had God for his portion, Ver. 57. Thou art
my portion, O Lord.

5. If God shall give you Communion with himself, if he shall be pleased to
lift up the light of his countenance upon you, and give you his blessed and
gracious presence in his affliction, he gives you that which is better than all
this world, Psalm. 73.25. There is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee.
Psalm. 4.6,7. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us; thou have put gladness in my heart,
more than in the time that their Corn and Wine increased. The lowest condition
in this world, with the enjoyment of God, is better than the highest and best
estate without God, Psalm. 84.10. A day in thy Courts is better than a thousand;
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the
tents of wickedness. The Wilderness is an uncomfortable place; Canaan was a
Land flowing with milk and honey, yet Moses Chooses to abide in the Wilderness
with Gods presence, rather than to go into Canaan without the presence of God,
Exodus 33.15. If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

SECT. 16.
16. Let the loss of your substance and habitation stir you up to make sure of
a better house, and better substance in heaven. There is an house and substance
in heaven, as well as here upon earth, Joh. 14.2. In my Fathers House are many
Mansions. Heb. 10.34. Ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Now
when we have lost, or are in danger to lose our houses and substance on earth,
it should put us upon making sure of heaven, Heb. 13.14. Here have we no
continuing City, but we seek one to come. Heb. 11.9,10. By faith he sojourned
in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country -- He looked for a City which
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. The Apostle Paul being
without a certain dwelling place, 1 Cor. 4.11. made sure of heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1.
We know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. It is
very uncomfortable for the body to want an habitation. There was great wailing
in Zion, when the Inhabitants thereof were cast out of their dwellings, Jer.
9.19. A voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled? we are
greatly counfounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings
have cast us out. But it will be far more uncomfortable for our souls, to want
a dwelling place with God in heaven: there will be great weeping and wailing by
all those that shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. If a man's dwelling
here on earth be burnt, or other ways destroyed, he may get as good in another
place; but he that fails of a dwelling in heaven, must dwell with devouring
fire, and with everlasting burnings, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels. Such as shall not be
admitted to dwell with Christ, have another habitation provided for them, and
that is among the Devils in flaming ^ire. If a man be deprived of a convenient
habitation here, it continues but a little while, a few days will put an end
to his misery; but he that fails of a dwelling with God when he dies, is
miserable to all eternity.

If you say, What shall we do that we may be sure of an house in heaven, and go
to dwell with God when we dye? I answer,

1. We must open our souls to Jesus Christ, and receive him into our hearts,
and let him dwell with us, and then we shall surely dwell with him. The Lord
Jesus stands at the door of our hearts, and knocks, and calls to us to open our
hearts to him, Cant. 5.2. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying,
Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled -- Rev. 3.20. Behold, I
stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Now, after we have
opened the door to Christ, and received him into our hearts, we must let him
dwell with us: we should let him dwell in our thoughts, we should let him dwell
in our affections, we should let him dwell in our conversations; which we do,
when we order our conversations by his word, and make Christ the end of our
conversations. Now, if we receive Christ, and let him dwell in our hearts, we
shall surely dwell with him for ever, 1 John 5.11,12. This is the record, that
God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that has
the Son, has life.

2. We must not suffer any sin to dwell either in our hearts or conversations.
Evil motions, and vain and sinful thoughts, will be often coming into our
minds; but we must not let them dwell there, but we must endeavor to cast
them out as ost as they come into our minds. This God expects from all those
that expect salvation, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved: How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? God will not let evil dwell with him, Psalm. 5.4. Thou art not a
God that have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee; and
therefore if we would dwell with God, we must purge our selves from our sins.
They that do not depart from iniquity, Christ will say to them, even to every
one of them, Depart from me, Luke 13.27. Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity.

3. We must devote our selves to the service of Christ; and if we serve the
Lord Jesus whilst we are in this world, we shall dwell with him in heaven to
all eternity, John 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I
am, there shall also my servant be. Col. 3.24. Knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ.

4. We must walk uprightly, whatever we do for God or for men, we must do it
with an upright heart, we must put away all guile, and dissimulation, and
hypocrisy, and speak the truth from our hearts, and be upright and sincere in
all manner of conversation; for such as walk uprightly while they live, shall
dwell with God in heaven to all eternity, Psalm. 140.13. The upright shall dwell
in thy presence. Psalm. 15.1,2. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernncle? Who
shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart. Isa. 57.2. He shall enter
into peace, they shall rest in their beds; each one walking in his uprightness.
Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly.
Matthew. 25.23. His Lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

5. We must persevere in believing and serving Christ, and walking uprightly
with him all our days, Matthew. 24.13. He that shall endure unto the end, the
same shall be saved. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a crown of life. No sufferings whatever must deter us from serving of the
Lord Jesus, though it be the suffering of death it self, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us.
Mark 8.35. Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it.

SECT. 17.
17. Let this affliction put you upon preparing your selves for all other
afflictions that God shall try you withal, whilst you are in this world. When
God had been contending with Israel by Fire, he calls upon them to prepare for
further Judgments, Am. 4.11,12. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet
have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord: therefore thus will I do unto
thee, O Israel; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God,
O Israel. Afflictions oft-times come thick one after another, Job 16.14. He
breaks me with breach upon breach. Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous -- As God dealt with Eli, when he began, he went on, till he had
brought upon him all his pleasure, 1 Samuel 3.12. In that day I will perform
against Eli, all things which I have spoken concerning his house; when I begin
I will also make an end. So it is oft-times in his dealings with others, when
he begins to afflict, he follows on with one affliction after another, until he
has thoroughly humbled them, and made them lie at his foot: therefore one
affliction should warn us to prepare for another; and as Christ advises us in
our sufferings from men, Matthew. 5.39,40. I say unto you, that ye resist not
evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also; and if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also: We should be so far from quarreling and contending with
those that afflict us, that one injury should make us willing and ready to
suffer another. The same advice is very seasonable, when we are under any
affliction from the hand of God; we should be so far from resisting Gods will,
that when he takes one mercy, we should resign up all the rest: When he sends
one affliction, we should be willing and ready to suffer another. We are
exhorted, Heb. 13.3. Remember them which suffer adversity, as being your selves
also in the body. As long as we are in the body, we are liable to all kinds of
adversity, and therefore we should stand prepared for whatever afflictions it
shall seem good unto the Lord to lay upon us. If you desire to know how you
should be prepared for all sorts of afflictions, See Quest. 3. Sect 12.

SECT. 18.
18. Encourage and comfort your selves in the Lord, when any perplexity seizes
upon you, or any sad and troubled thoughts arise in your minds upon the
account of your own losses, or upon the account of the misery and distress that
is like to come upon the Nation by reason of this dreadful Judgment. When
Ziglag, David's City of Refuge, was set on fire by the Amalekites, and both
David and his men had lost their Wives and Children, and their substance, which
made them weep till they could weep no more; and besides all this, David was in
danger of losing his life, (for the people spoke of stoning him) in this great
distress, David encourages himself in the Lord, 1 Samuel 30.6. David was greatly
distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him -- but David encouraged himself
in the Lord his God. You cannot readily be in greater distress, than David was
at this time: and if he in his distress encouraged himself in God, when he had
lost his Habitation, Wives, Substance, etc. and was also like to lose his life,
may not you find that in God which may encourage you in all your distresses
which are not so great as David's? I will propose briefly some grounds of
comfort and encouragement (besides what has been said upon the first Quest.
Sect. 17. page 118, etc.) to such of the Servants of God as are cast down
either at their own losses, or at the distress and misery which is like to
follow in the Nation, upon the account of this sore Judgment.

1. God is all-sufficient to shield and defend you from all those evils which
you fear will come upon you, and to make up whatever good you fear you shall be
deprived of, now you have lost your Estates, Gen 15.1. After these things the
word of the Lord came unto Alram in a vision, saying, Fear not Abram: I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Why should that man fear any evil that
has God for his shield? and why should that man be disquieted for the want or
loss of any worldly good things, who has the great and all-sussicient God for
his exceeding great reward? It may be you will say, It is true, if I knew that
God were my shield, and my exceeding great reward, I think I should be so
comforted, that nothing would trouble me; but I do not know that God is my
shield, and my reward: this is spoken to Abraham, and not to me. I answer, The
same promises and blessings which were given to Abraham, do belong to every one
that believes in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.7,9. Know ye, that they which are of
faith, the same are the children of Abraham -- So then, they which be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham.

2. Though your Estates be gone, and your outward comforts be taken away, God
himself will stand by you: Though your Estates may fail, and your Calling may
fail, and your Friends may fail and forsake you, God will never fail you, nor
forsake you, Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. He has said: Who is that? God, who is a God of truth, a God that cannot
lie, a God that changes not; the Father of mercies, and the God of all
consolation: he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: and why
should that man be cast down that has the God of all consolation continually
with him? yea, though not only Estate, and Calling, and Friends fail, but your
hearts fail you also; yet God will not fail you, but will be yours for ever,
Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. But I am afraid, my trials will be so great,
that my faith will fail me; and what can I expect then but that God should fail
me also? Answer 1. The Lord Jesus will take care of your Faith, that it shall
not totally or finally fail, Luke 22.31,32. Simon, Simon, Behold, Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. 2. Though there may be some partial failings in your
faith, yet God will not fail to fulfill his promise wherein he stands engaged
not to leave nor forsake you, 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself: therefore, when fears and discouragements
begin to seize upon you, remember that God calls to you, Isa. 41.10. Fear
thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness. Isa. 43.1,2. Fear not, for I have redeemed thee --
thou art mine: when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Though
the fire be long since quenched, yet it may be you will feel the sad fruits and
effects of this Fire as long as you live; but if you should, be not cast down,
but look upon God, that he, according to his promise, will be with you to
strengthen and support you when you pass through the fires.

3. You are as dear to God as ever; he loves you now you are poor, as much as
he did when you were rich, Psalm. 40.17. I am poor and needy, yet the Lord
thinks upon me: Though your Estates be gone, yet Gods love remains firm to
your souls, and shall continue steadfast toward you, although you should meet
with greater mutations in your estate and condition, than you have done to this
day, Isa. 54.10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
kindenss shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Whatever dangers or troubles
compass you about, you are, and always shall be compassed about with the
loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 5.12. Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous,
with favor will thou compass him as with a shield. Now this is a ground of
everlasting comfort, and may cause us in all conditions to shout for joy, to
understand that we are in the love and favor of God, as is evident from the
11. verse. Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, let them ever
shout for joy, because thou defendest them; let them also that love thy Name,
be joyful in thee. Three times the Psalmist calls out to the Servants of God to
rejoice, Let them rejoice -- let them be joyful in thee, let them ever shout
for joy: and why? what is it which may be a ground of everlasting joy to them
in all estates and conditions? Many times they are poor, and under great
afflictions, what reason then have they to shout for joy for ever? He renders
the reason why a godly man may, and ought to be always joyful, ver. 12. For
thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him as with a
shield. That Gods love is a ground of everlasting comfort in all estates and
conditions, is evident from 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God even our Father which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation. --

4. Though your Houses and Estates be consumed, and your Trading fail, and your
Friends should turn away from you, and stand aloof from your sore; God will not
turn away from doing of you good as long as you live, Jer. 32.40. I will make
an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do
them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me. When you are in trouble, and have no friend in the world to go to; if
you go to the Lord, he will be your refuge, and succor, and comfort you in all
your straits, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge
in times of trouble. Isa. 66.13. As one whom his mother comfort; so will I
comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. When the Jews were in the
Wilderness, God followed them with a constant supply of all their wants. The
pillar of fire and the cloud never departed from them, Exodus 13.21,22. The Lord
went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by
night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night: He took
not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from
before the people. And though they sinned against God, yet he forsook them not,
as Nehomiah confesses, Nehem. 9.19. Yet thou in thy manifold mercies,
forsockest them not in the Wilderness; the pillar of the cloud departed not
from them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night,
to show them light, and the way wherein they should go. And as God guarded and
guided them by night and by day, so wherever they were, he rained down Manna
upon them, and gave them water to drink; he never failed them of a seasonable
supply of their wants forty years together, Nehem. 9.20,21. Thou gave also
thy good Spirit to instruct them, and with-heldest not thy Manna from their
mouth; and gave them water for their thirst; yea, forty years did thou
sustain them in the Wilderness, so that they lacked nothing, their clothes
waxed not old -- The Manna did not cease till the day that they entered into
Canaan, and did eat of the corn of the land, Josh. 5.12. The Manna ceased on
the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land -- The water also
that came out of the rock followed them up and down in all places wherever
they went to give them drink, 1 Cor. 10.4. Now as it was with the Israelites
whilst they were in the Wilderness, so will God deal with all his servants
whilst they are in the Wilderness of this world; he will guard them and guide
them by night and by day, he will send in a suitable and seasonable supply of
all their wants, Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. Isa. 49.10. They shall
not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor Sun smite them; for he that
has mercy on them, shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he
guide them. When your wants are many, and you know not how or which way they
shall be supplied, remember what is said, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all
your need according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. And be assured of
this, that God who has been good to you, will follow you with goodness and
mercy as long as you live, Psalm. 23.6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life. It may be you will say, I have enough to comfort
me, if I were but sure that goodness and mercy should follow me all the days
of my life: but though David was sure of this, it does not follow, that I may
rest assured that it shall be so with me. I answer, They that come to, and
close with Jesus Christ, shall be blessed with the same mercies that God
bestowed upon David, Isa. 45.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and
your souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David.

5. Great calamities are oft-times followed with great mercies; and this is
true both as to Nations and particular persons, when those Nations and persons
are humbled and brought nearer to God by their afflictions. Jobs afflictons
were exceeding great, both in respect of what he met with in his soul, body,
name, estate, and relations; yet God turned the captivity of Job, and made his
Estate more glorious and prosperous than ever, Job 42.12. The Lord blessed the
latter end of Job more than his beginning. I will instance in some mercies
which God is wont to bestow upon his people, either in, or soon after they come
out of great troubles.

1. God is wont at such times to give his people greater and stronger
consolations than at other times, Psalm. 71.20,21. Thou which have shown me
great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again
from the depths of the earth: Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me
on every side. Psalm. 66.3,5,6. How terrible art thou in thy works -- Come and
see the works of God, he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men;
he turned the Sea into dry land, they went through the flood on foot, there did
we rejoice in him. When God is doing terrible things, he is making way for his
peoples joy. After David had spoken twice of Gods being terrible in his doings,
he adds, there did we rejoice in him. In the night of affliction, God puts such
comforts into his peoples hearts as makes them sing for joy, Job 35.10. None
says, Where is God my maker? who gives songs in the night. When they are
deprived of outward comforts, and are in a solitary straightened condition, he
gives them internal and spiritual comforts, Hos. 2.14,15. I will allure her,
and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her; and I will
give her, her Vineyards from thence, and the Valley of Achor for a door of
hope, and she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and as in the day,
when she came up out of the land of Egypt. When our troubles abound, he causes
our consolations to abound also, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ abound
in us, so our consolation also abounded by Christ.

2. Great troubles are oft-times followed with great pourings out of the
spirit, and great measures of grace. The Prophet Joel having foretold times of
great distress, Chapter 1. and Chapter 2. to the 12. verse, tells us, what God
would do for his people after those great calamities, Joel 2.28. It shall come
to pass afterward, that I will poor out my spirit upon all flesh: -- The
Prophet Zephaniah also, having foretold great judgments, promises that they
should be followed with great measures of grace, Zeph. 3.8,9,13. My
determination is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to
pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the Earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. Observe now what mercies
follow these judgments, Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that
they may all call upon the Name of the Lord to serve him with one consent --
The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a
deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: see also Isa. 32.10,15. Many days
and years shall be troubled -- until the spirit be poured upon us from on high:
-- After the Jews had been under sore troubles by their long captivity in
Babylon, what an increase of grace, and other choice mercies does God promise
them, Ezekiel. 36.25,26,27,28,29.

3. In times of great trouble, God is wont to afford his people more clear
manifestations of his love, and to give them more communion and fellowship with
himself, than at other times, Zech. 13.9. I will bring the third part through
the fire -- they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them; I will say, It is
my people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God. In the day time, the Lord
went before the Israelites in a pillar of a cloud; but in the night, by a
pillar of fire. Diverse of Gods servants that are much clouded in the day of
prosperity, have clear and bright discoveries of Gods love to their souls in
the night of adversity. When the three Children were in the fiery furnace, the
Son of God was so evidently with them, that their adversaries themselves could
not but take notice of it. When the Spouse was as a Lily among Thorns,
compassed about with sharp afflictions, the Lord Jesus conversed with her in a
very familiar manner; He put his left hand under her, and embraced her with his
right hand, Cant. 2.2,6.

And as it is thus with particular persons, so also with Nations; after God
has afflicted them with great judgments, he is wont to bestow upon them great
mercies, when his judgments lead them to repentance. After Judea, which was
like the Garden of Eden, was by Gods judgments made like a Wilderness, Joel
2.3. The Inhabitants of the Land being brought to repentance by these
judgments, the Lord promises to do great things for them, ver. 21. Fear not, O
Land, be glad and rejoice; for the Lord will do great things. The Prophet
Isaiah having set forth the miserable and distressed condition of the Jews,
both in respect of the corruption of all ranks and degrees of men, and of the
sore judgments of God that were upon them, Isa. 1.4,5,6,7,8,9,10. Ah sinful
Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel to anger, they are gone away backward; Why should ye be stricken any
more, ye will revolt more and more, the whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint, from the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in
it -- Your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire, your Land
strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by
strangers; and the Daughter of Zion is left as a Cottage in a Vineyard, as a
lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers: -- Hear the Word of the Lord, ye Rulers of
Sodom; give ear unto the Law of our God, ye People of Gomorrah. After the
rehearsal of their sinful and miserable condition, he promises that if they
would be brought to repentance by these judgments, ver. 16, 17. God would do
great things for them, notwithstanding they were brought very low, ver. 25, 26,
27. I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take
away all thy Tin; and I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning, afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness: Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with
Righteousness: And in several other places of this Prophecy, the Lord
promises, that when he did return with mercy to his afflicted people, he would
make their estate far more glorious than ever it was, Isa. 30.26. The light of
the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shall be
seven fold, as the light of seven days: In the day that the Lord binds up
the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound. Isa. 60.15.
Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I
will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many Generations. Isa, 61.7. For
your shame you shall have double; and for confusion they shall rejoice in their
portion; therefore in their Land they shall possess the double; everlasting joy
shall be unto thee. When the Lord is not only shaking a particular City or
Nation, but all places, and all Nations, we should not be startled at it, God
is but making way for the exalting and setting up of his Sons Kingdom, Hag.
2.6,7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will
shake the Heavens, and the earth, and the Sea; and the dry Land: and I will
shake all Nations, and the desire of Nations shall come. --

SECT. 19.
19. If you purpose to set upon building your Houses which have been consumed
by this fire, so manage this work as that it may prosper under your hands.

If you ask, How should we so manage this work of building, as to have it
prosper under our hands? I answer

1. Seek unto God by Prayer to be with you, and succeed you in this great work,
Psalm. 90.17. Establish thou the works of our hands upon us; yea, the work of
our hands establish thou it. Uzziah built and prospered, 2 Chronicles. 26.9. and how
came he to prosper? ver. 5. He sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had
understanding in the visions of God; and as long as he sought the Lord, God
made him to prosper. By this means Asa prospered in building Cities, and other
places of strength, 2 Chronicles. 14.7. Let us build these Cities, and make about
them Walls and Towers, Gates and Bars, while the Land is yet before us; because
we have sought the Lord our God, we have sought him, and he has given us rest
on every side; so they built and prospered. Now in regard many persons are wont
to neglect seeking God in such undertakings as these, it will not be amiss, if
I add two or three considerations, to show those that are purposed to set upon
building, how much it is their concernment to give themselves unto Prayer,
whilst they are carrying on this work.

1. It is the will of God, that in all our undertakings we should seek unto him
by Prayer, Phil. 4.6. In every thing by Prayer, and Supplication, with
Thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Prove. 3.6. In all thy
ways acknowledge him; and the more difficult and weighty any undertaking is,
the more need there is of Prayer.

2. Such a work as bulding cannot be carried on but by the help of God; and how
should they expect Gods help that do not seek it? Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the
City, the watchman waketh but in vain. When the Lord had promised that their
waste and desolate Cities should be rebuilded, he tells them, he did expect to
be sought to, that he might do this for them, Ezekiel. 36.33,37. -- The wastes
shall be builded -- Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel, to do it for them.

3. The Servants of God have been wont to carry on this work of building, as
well as their other works by Prayer, Psalm. 51.18. Build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. When Nehemiah set upon building Jerusalem, he went through very
great difficulties in carrying on that work; yet by Prayer he overcome them
all, and prosperously effected what he went about, Neh. 4.9. Nevertheless we
made our Prayer unto God -- Neh. 6.9,15. O God, strengthen my hands -- So the
wall was finished.

4. God has oft-times visibly appeared against those persons, and their
undertakings, that have gone upon great works without seeking help and
direction from God, by blasting and confounding them in their undertakings,
Mal. 1.4. Whereas Edom says, We are impoverished; but we will return and build
desolate places; thus says the Lord of Hosts, they shall build, but I will
throw down. When the Inhabitants of Samaria said in the pride and stoutness of
their hearts, The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn Stones;
the Sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars; and did not
seek the Lord, Did they prosper? No, But God threatened to cut them off branch
and rush, head and tail in one day, Isa. 9.9,10,13,14.

2. If you would carry on this work of building successfully, go about it in
faith; believing that God will be with you therein, and rest upon him for his
help and assistance, Neh. 2.20. The God of Heaven he will prosper us; therefore
we his servants will arise and build. To believe and rely on the Lord is the
way to prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be
established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. By the power of faith,
strong Walls and Cities have been demolished, Heb. 11.30. By faith the walls of
Jericho fell down -- ver. 33. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms. -- Now if
faith be instrumental to demolish Walls and Cities, Why may it not also be of
great force to build them up? If any ask, What encouragements can you give us
for our faith, that we may trust and rely on God for his presence and
assistance with us in this work of building? I answer,

1. Building of desolate Cities is a good work, and well-pleasing to God; and
that which conduces unto the glory of God, when it is managed with a right
spirit, and in a right manner. The building of Jerusalem after it had been
wasted by fire and the Sword, is called a good work, Neh. 2.18. They said, let
us rise up and build; so they strengthened their hands for this good work: the
building of Jerusalem is called also the pleasure of the Lord, it being that
which pleased him to see those wast places builded again, Isa. 44.28. That
says of Cyrus, he shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem,
Thou shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy foundations shall be laid. It did
conduce also to Gods glory, Psalm. 102.16. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he
shall appear in his glory. Jer. 33.7,9. I will cause the captivity of Judah,
and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them as at the first: And
it shall be to me a Name of joy, a praise and an honor before all the Nations
of the Earth. That building is a good work, and acceptable to God, when rightly
managed, may be evidenced several ways, besides the forequoted Scriptures: As
1. It is often spoken of a blessing, for God to give a man an house to dwell in,
Exodus 1.21. And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared God, that he made
them houses. 1 Samuel 2.35. I will build him a sure house -- Isa. 65.21. They
shall build houses, and inhabit them. 2. Cohabitation conduces much both to
our civil and spiritual good, Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and how pleasant it
is, for brethren to dwell together in unity. The scattering abroad of persons,
and separating them each from other, is threatened as a judgment, Isa. 24.1.
Behold, the Lord makes the Earth empty, and makes it waste, -- and scatters
abroad the Inhabitants thereof. If cohabitation conduces much to our good, and
scatering abroad be an evil, and a judgment; then building of Cities in order
to cohabitation is a good work. 3. By building of houses we prepare Mansions
and Recepticles for the bodies of Gods servants, which are the Members of
Christ, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and that cannot but be a good work
to provide Mansions for the bodies of Gods servants. The Lord Jesus takes it
kindly when we lodge any of his members but for a night or two, Matthew.
25.34,35. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world; for I was a stranger, and ye took me in. To
provide settled habitations for the servants of God, is more than to take them
in for a night or two. 4. Building of Houses, and desolate Cities, is a means
of delivering those that want habitations from great distress; as being wet
with the dew of heaven, and consumed with cold by night, and the heat by day,
etc. and to provide a refuge for the distressed, is a good work, Neh. 2.17. Ye
see the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lies wast, and the Gates
thereof are burnt with fire; Come and let us build up the Wall of Jerusalem,
that we be no more a reproach. Now if building be a good work, then you may
confidently expect Gods presence with you when you set upon it, if you manage
it with a right spirit, Amos 5.14. Seek good, and not evil, -- and so the Lord,
the God of Hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken: and if God will be with
you in your work, this may greatly encourage you in the management of it, Hag.
2.4. Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong, O Joshua,
-- and be strong all ye people of the Land, and work; for I am with you, says
the Lord of Hosts.

2. God is able to carry on those that rest upon him in this work, how great
and how many dissiculties, and oppositions, and discouragements soever they
meet withal. This is evident from the building of Jerusalem after it was burnt
and laid wast by the Chaldeans: Consider to this purpose, 1. What a great work
the building of Jerusalem was, which had been wasted by Fire and Sword from a
foreign power, and had lain in its desolation seventy years, Neh. 4.19. The
work is great and large. 2. Consider how weak and unfit the Jews were for this
great work, after their strength and treasure was exhausted by seventy years
captivity. Some of them were so discouraged, that they thought they should not
be able to accomplish so great a work, Neh. 4.10. Judah said, The strength of
the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish, so that we are
not able to build the wall. 3. The times in which they set upon building of
Jerusalem, were very troublous times, Dan. 9.25. The street shall be built
again, and the wall in troublous times. 4. The Enemies of the Jews opposed this
work of building Jerusalem with all their might: They scoffed at them, and
derided their work, Neh. 4.2,3. What do these feeble Jews? Will they fortify
themselves? Will they make an end in a day? Will they revive the stones out of
the heap of the rubbish which are burnt? Even that which they build, if a Fox
go up, he will even break down their stone wall. They cast false slanders upon
them, as though they builded out of a design to rebel, Neh. 2.19. What is this
thing that ye do? Will ye rebel against the King? Neh. 6.6. Thou and the Jews
think to rebel; for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou may be
their King: and when these means would not prevail, they attempted by force to
make the work cease, Neh. 4.7,8,11. They were very wroth, and conspired all of
them together, to come and to sight against Jerusalem: And our adversaries
said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst amongst them,
and slay them, and cause the work to cease. And when none of these means would
cause them to leave off building; they hired Counselors to mediate with the
Kings of Persia, and wrote Letters to hinder the building of Jerusalem, Ezra
4.4,5,23,24. And notwithstanding all the attempts of their Adversaries, both by
fraud and violence; though there were some intermissions, yet the work was
completed: And how? by the help and assistance of God, as their Enemies
themselves could not but acknowledge, Neh. 6.15,16. So the wall was finished --
And it came to pass, that when all our Enemies heard thereof -- they were much
cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this work was wrought of
our God. Now that God which helped the Jews to build Jerusalem under all their
difficulties and oppositions that they met withal, is able also to help you,
under what ever difficulties do or may beset you in your work.

3. Consider what promises God has made to his servants to encourage them in
this work of building, when he calls them to it. He has promised to be with
them in building, Ezekiel. 36.9,10. Behold I am for you, and I will turn unto you
-- And the Cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded. Though
their Cities and dwellings have been laid wast a long time, he promises to
help them to build them up again, Isa. 61.4. They shall build the old wastes,
they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair their wast
Cities, the desolations of many generations. He promises that after their
dwellings have been laid wast, they shall be built in the same places, and in as
good a manner as before, Jer. 30.18. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring
again the Captivity of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places, and
the City shall be builded on her old heap, and the Palace shall remain after
the manner thereof. He has promised that after they have laid the foundation,
they shall go on to finish their work, Zech. 4.9. The hands of Zerubbabel have
laid the foundation of this House, his hands shall also finish it. 1 Chronicles.
28.20. David said unto Solomon his son, Be strong, and of good courage, and do
it; fear not, nor be dismayed; for the Lord God, even my God, will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou have finished all the
work for the service of the House of the Lord. Though these two last Promises
relate to the building of the Temple, yet they are applicable by Gods servants
in such works as they are called out to by the Lord. He has promised, that
when they have built them houses, they shall dwell in them, and enjoy them a
long season, Isa. 65.21,22,23. They shall build houses and inhabit them, --
they shall not build and another inhabit; -- for as the days of a tree, are
the days of my people; and mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their
hands; they shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are
the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. The Lord
has promised, that after they have built them houses, they shall dwell in them
with safety and confidence, Ezekiel. 28.26. They shall dwell safely therein, and
shall build Houses, and plant Vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence,
when I have executed judgments on all those that despise them round about them;
and they shall know that I am the Lord their God. He has promised to make
their habitations prosperous, Job 8.5,6. If thou would seek unto God
betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; if thou were pure and
upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous. After Jerusalem was burnt with fire, and laid waste
by the Caldeans, the Lord does not only promise, that it shall be built again;
but, that he would put the Jews into a settled and better estate than they were
in before, Ezekiel. 36.10,11. The Cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall
be builded -- and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better
unto you, than at your beginnings.

3. If you would carry on the work of rebuilding your houses successfully,
humble your selves for your lins, which caused God to lay them desolate, and
get them washed away in the Blood of Christ, and then you may expect success,
and a blessing upon what you take in hand, Ezekiel. 36.33,35,36. Thus says the
Lord God, In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities, I
will also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded. And
they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the Garden of Eden,
and the wast, and desolate, and ruined Cities are become fenced. The Lord
promised also in the 32. verse, that he would give them an heart to loath
themselves for their sins; and after he had humbled and pardoned them, he
promises the re-building of their desolate Cities. And as you must humble your
selves for your sins, so you must put away your sins, and return unto God with
your whole hearts, if you would carry on this work successfully, Jer. 24.6,7. I
will set mine eyes upon them for good -- and I will build them, and not pull
them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up -- for they shall
return unto me with their whole heart. Job 22.23. If thou return to the
Almighty, thou shall be built up.

4. Use no unrighteousness, but deal truly and faithfully with all men, with
whom you have to do in building your houses. Whomsoever you employ in this
work, pay them their full wages; for if you use any fraud or unrighteousness,
you will bring the curse of God upon your persons and habitations, Jer. 22.13.
Woe unto him that builds his house in unrighteousness, and his chambers by
wrong; that uses his neighbors service without wages, and gives him not for
his work, Hab. 2.11,12. The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out
of the timber shall answer it, Woe to him that builds a Town by blood, and
establishes a City by iniquity. And as you must pay all whom you employ their
full wages, so also at the set time for which you make your agreement, Deuteronomy.
24.14,15. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether it be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are within thy land
within thy gates: at his day thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the
Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it, lest he cry
against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. Incroach not upon another
right, but keep within your own bounds and limits, Deuteronomy. 19.14. Thou shall not
remove thy neighbors landmark, which they of old time have set in thine
inheritance -- Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed be he that removes his neighbors
landmark; and all the people shall say, Amen. Prove. 22.28. Remove not thy
ancient landmark which thy fathers have set. Eccles. 10.8.9. Whosoever breaks an
hedge, a Scrpent shall bite him; whosoever removes stones, shall be hurt
therewith. And take this counsel, not only in reference to your equals, that
are able to contend with you, but also be careful that you incroach not upon
the right of the Widows, and the Fatherless, that are not able to plead their
own cause; for God will plead their cause with you, Prove. 23.10,11. Remove not
the old landmark, and enter not into the fields of the fatherless; for their
redeemer is mighty, he shall plead their cause with thee. By managing your work
in truth and righteousness, you shall prosper in what you take in hand, Psalm.
45.4. -- Ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness.

5. Before you enter upon building, sit down and consider your cost and charge;
consider also your own ability, whether you have sufficient to defray the
charge of Building, lest you be necessitated to leave your work imperfect, or
to run your selves into debt, and bring great and unnecessary encumbrances upon
your selves, Luke 14.28,29,30. Which of you intending to build a tower, sits
not down first, and counts the cost; whether he have sufficient to finish it:
lest happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all
that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not
able to finish. Especially be careful that you do not exceed your ability to
build your houses in a more stately and magnificent manner than becomes your
rank and quality. The calamities of the present times, and the many objects of
charity, call for frugality and moderation in this kind. Overmuch curiosity
and expensiveness in Building is taxed as a sin, Jer. 22.14. We may (and many
do) transgress by too much cost, and curiosity in adorning our Bodies, 1 Timothy
2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. If not lawful to bestow too much coft in adorning our Bodies,
then surely we must use moderation in adorning our Houses; for our Bodies are
of more worth and value than our Houses.

6. Follow your work with a willing mind, and with diligence, if you would
have it go on successfully. A willing mind will carry on difficult work with
great ease, Nehem. 4.6. So built we the wall, and all the wall was joined
together unto the half thereof, for the people had a mind to work: Diligence
and industry will effect great things, but slothfulness and negligence will
spoil and bring to naught good undertakings, Eccles. 10.18. By much
slothfulness the building decays, and through idleness of the hands the house
droppeth through. Yet here is need of caution that you do not immerse your
hearts and spirits too much in your worldly business, so as to forget or unfit
your selves for the coming of Christ either by death or judgment. Many men are
so immoderate in their use and management of worldly things, that they fall
into a spirit of slumber and security; so that the day of death and of judgment
will come upon them as a snare, when they neither think of, or are prepared to
meet the Lord, Luke 17.28,29,30. As it was in the days of Lot, they did eat,
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same
day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and
destroyed them all: even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is
revealed. It is not building or planting, any more than eating or drinking, but
the inordinate affections of men, and their worldly spirits; their security and
sensuality in the management of their worldly business, that is here condemned
by our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Aim at Gods glory in this work, and not your own, and so manage the whole
business, that nothing of reproach or dishonor may redound to the name of God,
but that God in all things may be glorified. That general rule, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God,
should take place in this, as well as any other of your works. You should not
look only, or chiefly, at your own conveniences in Building, but at the glory
of God: so the Jews did in building Jerusalem, Ezra 4.3. -- We our selves
together will build unto the Lord God of Israel. If you be tempted from a
vainglorious painciple to be overcostly and curious in building your Houses:
consider, 1. God would not have us do any action whatever, for the procuring of
vainglory, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory: Yea,
God would have us so far from doing any action for vainglory, that he would
not have us so much as desirous of it, Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of
vainglory. 2. With what mean Habitations were our forefathers contented?
Jacob who was a great man, a Prince in the estimation of the Angel that
wrastled with him, Genesis 32.28. contented himself to dwell in a tent, which was
both a mean and a moveable habitation, Genesis 25.27. Jacob was a plain man
dwelling in tents; so did his Father Abraham, Heb. 11.9. By faith he sojourned
in the land of promise, as in a strange Country dwelling in Tabernacles with
Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise: Yet Abraham was a great
man, he was the heir of the world, Romans 4.13. and the father of all the
faithful, ver. 11, 16. 3. If that which is expended by many persons in
superfluous and needless adorning of their houses were given to the poor, how
much good might they do? would it not be much to their comfort at the day of
judgment, wherein they must give an account for all their talents, how they
have used them, and what improvement they have made of them?

8. It is of much concernment to you whilst you are about this work of
Building, or when you are about any other work of moment, to give good heed to
the Word of God; for thereby you will be helped much to carry on your
undertakings successively. When you faint and are discouraged, Gods Word will
put strength into you; when you are under doubts, that will resolve you: when
you turn aside to the right hand, or to the left, Gods Word will restore your
souls, and lead you in paths of righteousness; it is of great use in these and
diverse other resnects, to help you to carry on your civil employments
successfully, Deuteronomy. 29.9. Keep the words of this covenant and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do. That is a remarkable passage which you have,
Ezra 6.14. The elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the
prophesying of Haggai the Prophet, and Zechariah the Son of Iddo, and they
builded and finished it, according to the Commandment of the God of Israel. The
preaching of the word by these two servants of God, was a means of carrying on
this work of building Jerusalem successfully. When God sent forth Joshua about
a great work, he gave him a special charge to take heed to his word, and to
read and meditate therein night and day, which would be a sure way to be
successful, Joshua 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth,
but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein; for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. When Solomon was building
the Temple, it is said, 1 Kings 6.11,14. The word of the Lord came to Solomon
-- so Solomon built the house and finished it. So he built the house and
finished it, that is, he was strengthened and encouraged by the word of the
Lord that came to him, to go on with, and finish the building.

9. While you are busily employed in building your own houses, do not forget or
neglect the building up of Gods House, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to
dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie waste? Solomon setting his
heart to the building of Gods House, prosperously effected what ever came into
his heart for the building of his own house, 2 Chronicles. 7.11. Thus Solomon
finished the house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all that came into
Solomon's heart to make in the house of the Lord, and in his own house he
prosperously effected. When I stir you up to build Gods house, whilst you are
building your own, I do not only, or chiefly mean places for public Worship
(though that also be a very good and laudable undertaking; the Centurian who
erected a Synagogue, was highly respected and extolled by the Jews for this
pious work, Luke 7.4,5. When they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly,
saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this, for he loves our
Nation, and has built us a Synagogue:) but that which I chiesly intend is,
that you build up your selves an habitation of God through the Spirit. Every
true believer is styled Gods house, Heb. 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his own
house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of
the hope firm unto the end. All true Believers are Gods Temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye
are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them. They are Gods habitation, Ephesians. 2.22. In whom you are builded
together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. Now after the foundation
of this spiritual building is laid by the souls being drawn to Christ, there
must be constant and conscientious endeavor to be built up in grace and
holiness, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1.5. Besides this giving all diligence, add to
your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge, etc. If you ask what shall we do
that we may be built up a spiritual house unto the Lord? I answer,

1. You must lay a good and a right foundation. The foundation of this
spiritual building is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man
lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ: see also, Isa. 28.16. Ephesians. 2.20.
The fundamental graces which are wrought in the soul that is built upon Christ,
are faith and repentance, Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God. When God
had given you repentance for your sins, and faith in the Lord Jesus, then the
foundation of this spiritual building is laid in your souls.

2. You must be daily carrying and casting away the rubbish that hinders the
progress of this spiritual building. After faith and repentance are wrought in
truth, there remain several relics of the old man, which we must be daily
purging away: we must make it our work to destroy our sins, if we would be
built up in grace, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises (that is, ye are
the Temples of the living God, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, of which
he had spoken in the former Chapter, ver. 16.) dearly beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God. We cannot go on to perfect holiness, unless we do in good
earnest set upon cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit.

3. You must be daily looking to Christ, and going to him, to carry on, and
finish that work of grace which he has begun in your souls, Heb. 12.2. Looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith -- 1 Per. 2. To whom coming as
unto a living stone -- ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual
house. Do not only go to Christ, but rest upon him for the perfecting and
finishing of what he has begun in your souls; and to that end ponder upon such
Scriptures as these, Psalm. 138.8, The Lord will perfect that which concerns
me -- Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a
good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus
takes a great deal of pleasure, not only in beginning, but in finishing the
work of grace in our souls, John 4.34. Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do
the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

4. After you have received Jesus Christ, you must not only believe in him, but
walk in him; and by so doing you shall come both to be rooted, and to be built
up in him, Col. 2.6,7. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him; rooted and built up in him: By walking in, and with Christ, you shall keep
his presence with your fouls; for he has said, If we abide in him, he will
abide in us. John 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you: and 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord
is with you while ye be with him. Now by keeping Christ's presence with your
souls, they will be built up in grace, Cant. 1.12. While the King sits at
his table, my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. When the owner dwells
in the house, it is kept in good repair; if he leave it, and it stand empty,
all things go to decay: As Martha said unto Christ, John 11.21. Lord, if thou
had been here, my brother had not died. The like may a deserted soul that
finds it self fallen to decay upon Gods withdrawing of himself, say unto
God, Lord, if thou had been here, these ruins and desolations had not come
upon my soul.

5. Prayer performed in a spiritual manner, is a great means of building up our
souls in the grace of God, Jude 20. But ye beloved, building up your selves in
your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. Though praying in a slightly,
dead-hearted, customary, formal manner, avails little; yet praying in the
Holy Ghost, (that is, by the help and assistance of the Holy Ghost, and
stirring up, and exercising the graces of the Holy Ghost in prayer, as faith,
fervency, reverence, humility, etc.) is an effectual means to build up the soul
in the grace of God.

6. Converse much with the word of God, read it frequently, treasure it up in
your hearts, make it your meditation night and day; that is the way to be built
up a spiritual house unto the Lord, 1 Pet. 2.2,5. As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. Meditation on the word
built up David wonderfully in knowledge, Psalm. 119.99. I have more under
standing then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. The
Apostle Paul recommends meditation on Gods word to Timothy, as an excellent
means to promote his growth in grace, 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all: So also
when he took his leave of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, he commends them
to the word of the Lord, as the means whereby they might be built up in that
grace which they had already received, Acts 20.32. And now brethren, I commend
you to God, and to the the word of his grace, which is able to build you up,
and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

I might have added in the tenth place; After God has prospered you in this
work of building, and you have finished your houses, dedicate them to God. It
was a custom among the Jews after they had built a new house, to dedicate it
unto the Lord; as you may see, Deuteronomy. 20.5. but of this I shall have occasion to
speak afterward, Quest. 3. Sect. 7. p. 313. where I shall show, how we should
dedicate our Houses to God; and therefore I shall add no more upon this
Question, but proceed to the third.

QUEST. 3. What shall they render to the Lord for his Mercy, whose Houses and
Goods were preserved from being consumed by the late Dreadful Fire?
BEfore I answer this Question, I shall premise five or six things.

1. It was Gods Providence, not your own prudence, or diligence, or any other
act of yours, that preserved you from sustaining any loss or damage by the late
Fire, Psalm. 16.5. Thou maintainest my lot. Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs to
the Lord. Psalm. 40.17. Thou art my help and my deliverer. When ever a righteous
man is delivered from any trouble, his deliverance proceeds from the Lord,
Psalm. 34.17. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears and delivers them out of
all their troubles. As God orders the rain where it shall fall, and where it
shall not fall, Amos 4.7. I caused it to rain upon one City, and caused it not
to rain upon another: so it is he also that ordered this Fire, what City, and
what Houses, and Goods it should consume, and what it should not consume. The
Fire, the Winds, and all other Creatures do nothing but at Gods appointment,
Psalm. 148.7,8. Praise ye the Lord from the earth, ye Dragons, and all deeps;
fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fullfilling his word. The fire and
the wind are ruled by God, they spare those whom God appoints them to spare;
they afflict those whom God appoints them to afflict; they do nothing but by
commission from God. The same God that sets the bounds of the Sea, and says,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther; and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed, Job 38.11. did set bounds to this raging Fire, and appointed how far it
should proceed, and where its flames should be stayed: wherefore such as were
preserved from suffering damage by this Fire, must not ascribe their safety
partly to Gods Providence, and partly to themselves; but must give all the
glory to God, and say as David did of his deliverances, Psalm. 4.8. Thou Lord
only make me to dwell in safety. Psalm. 62.2. He only is my rock and my
salvation.

2. We ought to look upon it as a great mercy to be spared from Gods judgments,
Neh. 13.22. Spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. Lam. 3.22. It is
of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: especially we should account it
a great mercy to be spared from Gods judgments in a time of common calamity;
when multitudes, as good, or better than we are, have been great sufferers.
When Lot escaped with his life out of Sodom, though he sustained some loss by
the burning of that City, yet he looked upon it as an exceeding great mercy,
that his life was preserved, Genesis 19.19. Be hold now thy servant has found
grace in thy sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy, which thou have showed
unto me in saving my life.

3. When the Lord has given us any remarkable deliverance, or bestowed any
other signal mercy upon us, it should put us upon enquiring, what return we
should make unto God for his benefits. When David had received a great
deliverance, he makes enquiry, what he should render to God for so great a
mercy, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? This is needful, because God expects that when he has done great
things for us, we should be returning something to him, Isa, 5.1,2. My
well-beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and he fenced it -- and
he looked that it should bring forth grapes. -- Luke 17.17,18. Jesus answering,
said, Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There are not found
that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger. Where we may observe,
1. The Lord Jesus expects that when we have received any eminent favor from
him, we should return something for what we receive; else why did he ask, Where
are the nine? 2. The Lord takes notice who they are that do, and who they are
that do not return according to the mercies that they receive from God. The
Samaritan returned to give glory to God, the others did not. 3. There are very
few, scarce one in ten, that make a return according to the mercies that they
receive. There were ten cleansed, and only one returns to give glory to God.

4. When any man fails to return according to the benefits which he has
received, though he be a good man, God is much displeased at it, 2 Chronicles.
32.25. But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him,
for his heart was lifted up; therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah
and Jerusalem. God had in a wonderful manner delivered Hezekiah from death; and
though he was a good man, so eminently good, that he excelled all the Kings
that lived before him, and came after him, according to what we find, 2 Kings
18.5. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him
among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him. Yet this good man
Hezekiah failed to reader again according to the benefit done unto him; and
what followed thereupon? wrath came upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem for
this very thing.

5. It is not every return will answer Gods expectation, but there must be some
suitableness, some proportion between the mercies that we receive from God, and
the returns that we make to God. Hezekiah was not wholly wanting in making
return to God, for he praised God for recovering him from his sickness, Isa.
38.19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: and
after his sickness he composed a Song or Psalm to set forth Gods praise, and
resolved to sing this Song in the house of God all the days of his life, Isa.
38.9,20. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness; then follows the Song it self, to the 20. verse,
where he expresses his resolution by way of gratitude, to sing this Song all
the days of his life, The Lord was ready to save me, therefore we will sing my
Song to the stringed Instruments all the days of our life, in the house of the
Lord. Yet notwithstanding all this, Hezekiah is taxed with not returning
according to the benefit done unto him.

6. They whose Houses and Estates have been preserved from this dreadful Fire,
may know what they ought to return to God for this great deliverance, by
observing what the Servants of God have returned unto the Lord, at such times
as God has vouchsafed unto them any eminent deliverances, though it were not a
deliverance from Fire, but from some other evil; and also by considering what
special duties God calls for in his holy Word from such as have escaped those
judgments that have fallen upon other men, or have received any other signal
mercy from the Lord. These things being premised, I shall now answer the third
Question.

SECT. 1.
1. Render to God your love for his great mercy in preserving your houses and
substance from being consumed by this Fire: God deserves to be loved by all
those whom he preserves from any evils, Ps. 31.23. O love the Lord all ye his
Saints; for the Lord preserves the faithful. When David was in a wonderful
manner delivered from the hands of his enemies, he resolves with himself, that
he would love God with an entire and an endeared love, for the deliverances he
had received from him, Psalm. 18. ver. 1. compared with the title of the Psalm,
A Psalm of David, the Servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of
this Song, in the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his
enemies, and from the hand of Saul; and he said, I will love the Lord my
strength. The Hebrew word that is used in this place, signifies more then
barely to love; it notes an inward, entire, cordial love; it is translated by
Junius, and also by Piscator, Exintimis visceribus diligam te. And at another
time when David was communing with his own heart, about what return he should
make to God for delivering him from the gates of death, upon his crying to him,
Ps. 116.3,4,12. he determins to give God his love, verse 1. I love the Lord,
because he heard my voice. and my supplications. That thing which a Christian
prizeth most, and desires of God above all other things, is his love, Cant.
1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy love is better than
wine. Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life. So it is with God,
that which he prizeth most from us, and that which he desires above all other
things, is, that we should give him our love, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, what
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in
all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul. Cant. 4.10. How fair is thy love! my Sister, my
Spouse, how much better is thy love than wine? and the smell of thine ointment
than all spices? If any ask, which way shall we express our love to God for
this great deliverance? I answer,

1. By hating and abhorring all evil, and endeavoring to root out all manner
of sin, both from your selves, and your families, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil. Sin is an abominable thing in the sight of God, and therefore
he entreats us, that if we love him, we would not do that which his soul
hates, Jer. 44.4. Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate.

2. Express your love to God by being careful to keep his Commandments, John
14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. 2 John 6. This is love, that we
walk after his Commandments. God accounted obedience of his Commandments a
truer token of love, than the offering of a multitude of sacrifices, in those
times when sacrifices were in use, 1 Samuel 15.22. Has the Lord as great delight
in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold,
to obey, is better than sacrifice: and to hearken, than the fat of Rams.

3. Express your love to God by doing all the service you can for his Saints
and Servants: You cannot be any ways beneficial to God, but you may be to his
people, Psalm. 16.2,3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that
are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. And what you
do for them, the Lord will account of it as done unto himself, Math. 25.40.
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Three times our Lord Jesus calls
upon Peter to express his love to him, by doing good to his members, Joh.
21.15,16,17. Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me more
than these? He says unto him, yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee; He
says unto him, Feed my Lambs. He says unto him the second time, Love thou
me? -- He says unto him, yea, Lord; He says unto him, Feed my Sheep. He says
unto him the third time, Love thou me? Feed my Sheep.

SECT. 2.
2. They that have sustained little or no loss by this dreadful fire, wherein
so many thousands of persons and families have suffered very deeply, have great
cause to give thanks unto God for sparing and delivering their substance, and
their houses from this devouring Fire. The Prophet Isaiah having mentioned
altime of great desolation, wherein a little remnant should escape, tells us
what this remnant should render unto the Lord, Isa. 24.13,14. When thus it
shall be in the midst of the Land among the people, there shall be as the
shaking of an Olive Tree, and as the gleaning Grapes when the vintage is done;
they shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord: --
Four times in one Psalm does the Holy Ghost call upon the children of men to
praise the Lord for delivering them out of their distresses, Psalm.
107.8,15,21,31. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men. When David was delivered from the hands
of violent men, he was much affected with the mercy of God, and determines to
give God hearty thanks for it, Psalm. 18.48,49. Thou have delivered me from the
violent man; therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen,
and sing praise unto thy Name. To be delivered from the violence of fire, is as
great a mercy as to be delivered from violent men; and therefore you should
resolve to give God thanks for your deliverance, as David did for his. Be not
only affected with this mercy for the present, but let the sense and
remembrance of it abide with you as long as you live. When the Israelites
escaped safe through the Red Sea, where the Egyptians were drowned, they were
much affected with this mercy for a little while; but in a short time it was as
much forgotten, as if it had never been received, Psalm. 106.12,13. They sang
his praise, they soon forgot his works. David was of another spirit, he charged
his soul never to forget Gods benefits, but to bless God and be thankful for
them all the days of his life, Psalm. 103.2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. Psalm. 34.1. I will bless the Lord at all times;
his praise shall continually be in my mouth. Psalm. 30.12. O Lord my God, I will
give thanks unto thee for ever. Psalm. 104.33. I will sing unto the Lord as long
as I live; I will sing praise unto my God, while I have my being. We please God
exceedingly, when we give him praise and thanks by Jesus Christ, for the
mercies he bestows upon us, Heb. 13.15,16. By him therefore let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips, giving
thanks to his Name -- for with such sacrifice God is well-pleased. Psalm.
69.30,31. I will praise the Name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with
Thanksgiving; this also shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Buliock
that has horns and hoofs. God accounts the praise that his servants offer up
to him in the Name of his Son, melodious and delightful music, Ephesians. 5.19,20.
Making melody in your heart to the Lord, giving thanks always for all things
unto God, and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. To raise up
your thankfulness to God for sparing your houses and substance, and not
suffering them to be destroyed by the late dreadful fire: Consider

1. What a great affliction it is to be destitute of an habitation, and of
necessary food? When David was in a wandering, unsettled condition, he met with
such difficulties as made him shed many a tear, Psalm. 56.8. Thou tellest my
wanderings, put thou my tears into thy bottle: And when God gave him a settled
habitation, he dedicates his house to God, and resolves to be thankful all the
days of his life, Psalm. 30.12. O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for
ever. This purpose of giving thanks for ever, relates to the time that he
dedicated his house to God, as you may see in the title of the Psalm. When the
Israelites were destitute of an habitation, and were tried with hunger and
thirst, it was such an affliction as made their souls faint within them, Psalm.
107.4,5. They wandered in the Wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City
to dwell in; hungry and thirsty, their souls fainted in them. When Jacob was
forced to flee from his fathers house to avoid his brother Esau's fury, and
knew not what straits he might meet with, he looked upon it as such a great
mercy to have food and raiment, that he Covenants with God to become his
servant, if he would but give him bread to eat, and raiment to put on, Genesis
28.20,21. Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me
in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, --
then shall the Lord be my God. To be stricken with hunger, and not to have
wherewith to satisfy our hunger, is a greater misery than to be pierced
through with a Sword, Lam. 4.9. They that be slain with the sword, are better
than they that be slain with hunger; for these pine away, stricken through, for
want of the fruits of the field.

2. Consider how many there are, who lived as plentifully and comfortably as
you do, that were as good, or better than you are, that are brought to want and
exceeding great straits by the losses they have sustained by this Fire. And
have not you cause to admire Gods goodness, and to bless him as long as you
live, for sparing you, when so many have suffered so deeply, who yet it may be
provoked God less than you have done?

SECT. 3.
3. Let the great calamities that are come upon others, and the goodness of God
toward you, lead you to repentance, and cause you to humble your souls before
God for your sins, and to put away far from you all iniquity, and to be more
careful and conscientious in keeping the Commandments of God, Ezra 9.13,14.
After thou have given us such deliverance as this, Should we again break thy
Commandments? Romans 3.4. -- The goodness of God leads thee to repentance. God
expects that we should be led to repentance by others sufferings as well as our
own. Daniel reproves Belshazzar because he did not humble himble his soul
before God, notwithstanding he knew what great things his father had suffered,
Dan. 5.20,21,22. When his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride,
he was deposed from his Kingly Throne, and they took his glory from him, etc.
And thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou
knew all this. When Judah had seen the great judgments which God sent upon
her sister Israel, and was not brought to unseigned repentance by them, God was
much offended at it, and Judah's case was rendered thereby far worse than
Isreal's, Jer. 3.7,8,10,11. I said after she had done all these things, Turn
thou unto me, but she returned not; and her treacherous sister Judah saw it.
And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed
adultery, I had put her way, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her
treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the Harlot also. And
yet for all this, her treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me with her
whole heart, but feignedly, says the Lord: And the Lord said unto me, The
backsliding Israel has not justified her self more than treacherous Judah?
When but eighteen persons suffered by the fall of the Tower of Siloam, Christ
tells us that the meaning of that Providence, was to call all that heard of it
unto repentance Luke 13.4,5. In the time of the Law, when but one person
suffered exemplary punishment, and that not by an immediate stroke from God,
but by the hands of men; all Israel was to take warning from his sufferings,
and to be afraid of sinning against the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13.10,11. Thou shall stone
him with stones, that he die: -- And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall
done more any such wickedness as this is among you. See also Deuteronomy. 17.12,13. --
Even that man shall die, -- And all the people hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuosly. If the suffering of one man, by the hands of the Magistrate, did
strike such terror into the hearts of all Israel, as to make them afraid of
sinning against God; then what a forcible argument should the sufferings of so
many thousand of persons, and families, by the late Fire and Pestilence be to
all the people of this Land, to persuade them to repent of their sins and turn
to the Lord? That you may be awakened both by your own mercies, and others
sufferings, to set upon the serious performance of this duty of repentance, let
me propose to you three or four Considerations.

1. It angereth the Lord exceedingly when we go on in an impenitent condition,
after he has bestowed any eminent deliverances upon us, Ezra 9.13,14. After
all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing
that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have
given us such deliverance as this; Should we again break thy Commandments, and
join in affinity with the people of these abominations? would thou not be
angry with us, till thou have consumed us, so that there should be no remnant
nor escaping? When Israel sinned at the red Sea, where they had been in a
wonderful manner preserved from the hands of Pharaoh, it did mightily provoke
God to displeasure, Psalm. 106.7. -- They provoked him at the Sea, even at the
red Sea.

2. Such as are not led to repentance by Gods goodness, are despisers of the
riches of Gods grace, and do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans
2.4,5. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leads to repentance? But
after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelatirn of the righteous judgment of God.

3. Though God may spare you a while, yet he will not spare you always; but
without repentance, divine vengeance will pursue after you, and over-take you,
and fall upon you, to your utter and eternal destruction, Luke 13.3. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Psalm. 68.21. God shall wound the head of
his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
trespasses. Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. It is neither wisdom, nor
riches, nor honor, nor power, nor any other excellency that shall or can
exempt that man from destruction, that does not repent of his sins. Not
Wisdom: for, He respects not any that are wise of heart, Job 37.24. Nor
Riches, Job 36.19. Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces
of strength. Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. Nor Honor,
Isa. 23.9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory,
and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the Earth. Neither shall
power, or strength avail to keep of Gods wrath from impenitent persons, 1 Samuel
2.9. By strength shall no man prevail. Nah. 1.6. Who can stand before his
indignation? and who can abide the fierceness of his anger? Though a man were
for gifts and other excellencies, equal to the Angels; yet none of his
excellencies or endowments will keep of Gods wrath from him, if be go on in his
sins, 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.

SECT. 4.
4. Do not judge those to be the greatest sinners, who have been the greatest
sufferers by this fire. It is a sin which easily besets those that are in
prosperity, to despise and censure those that are in adversity, Job 12.5. He
that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of
him that is at ease. Job's three friends censured him for a hypocrite, and an
irreligious person, because God laid such great afflictions upon him. When the
Barbarians saw the Viper upon Paul's hand, they said among themselves, No doubt
this man is a murderer, whom though he bath escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance
suffers not to live, Acts 28.4. To prevent this Error. Consider,

1. It is expressly against the mind of Christ, to judge those to be the greatest
sinners that are the greatest sufferers. He cautioneth us twice against this
sin, Luke 13.1,2,3,4,5. There were present at that season, some that told him
of the Galileans, whose blood Pilat had mingled with their sacrifices; and
Jesus answering, said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay;
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Or those eighteen upon whom
the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them; Think ye that they were sinners above
all that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

2. It is the property of humble persons to think better of others than
themselves; Phil. 2.3. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than
themselves. They are wont to account themselves the least of Saints, and the
chiefest of sinners, Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less than the least of all
Saints. 1 Timothy 1.15. -- Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief.

3. It has been the lot of righteous men in all ages of the world, to meet
with many troubles and afflictions, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous; -- yea, their afflictions and troubles are more than what other
men meet withal. David speaking of wicked men, says, Psalm. 73.5. They are not
in troubles as other men; neither are they plagued like other men.

4. We wrong God, and provoke him to anger, when we misjudge his Providence
and dealings with his servants, Job 42.7. My wrath is kindled against thee, and
against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has. And what was it wherein Eliphaz and his two friends
offended in speaking such things of God as were not right? Was is not in
misconstruing of Gods Providence in sending afflictions?

SECT. 5.
5. Put on bowels of compassion toward such as have been sufferers by this
fire, and toward all others that are in an afflicted, distressed condition;
and be ready upon all occasions to do all offices of love for any of them, as
far as it lies in your power to be helpful to them. Pity them, Job 6.14. To
him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend. Mourn over their
afflicted condition, Job 30.25. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? Was
not my soul grieved for the poor? Romans 12.15. Weep with them that weep. There
is a woe pronounced against those that are not affected with their brethrens
miseries, Amos 6.1,6. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion -- That drink Wine in
Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments, but they are not grieved
for the afffliction of Joseph. Pray for them, that God would comfort and
support them under, and bring them out of their distresses, Psalm. 25.22. Redeem
Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. Psalm. 132.1. Lord, remember David, and
all his afflictions. Counsel and help them in the management of their affairs,
and carry your selves like a father to them, Job 29.15,16. I was eyes to the
blind, and feet was I to the lame; I was a father to the poor. Visit them, and
comfort them in their afflicted condition, Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion, and
undefiled before God, and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and the
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.
Relieve them that are in want, Eccles. 11.1,2. Cast thy bread upon the waters,
for thou shall find it after many days: Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight; for thou know not what evil shall be upon the Earth. Job
31.16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or
have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; or have eaten my morsel alone, and
the fatherless has not eaten thereof: (for from my youth he was brought up
with me as with a father, and I have guided her from my mothers womb:) If I
have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering; if his
loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my
sheep: If I have lift up mine hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help
in the gate; then let mine arm fall from mine shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone; for destruction from God was a terror to me, and by
reason of his highness, I could not endue. Lend to them that would borrow any
thing of you in their necessity, Matthew. 5.42. Give to him that asks thee, and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. Lending as well as
giving, is a duty enjoined by God; but both the one as well as the other, must
be managed with discretion, Psalm. 112.5. A good man shows favor, and
lends, he will guide his affairs with discretion. And to make you willing to
lend upon all occasions unto those that come to borrow ought of you, (if they
be such persons as your Conscience tells you, it is your duty and your
discretion, that it is meet to lend to them) consider, that for this very thing
God will greatly bless you in all that you set your hands unto, Deuteronomy.
15.7,8,10. Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother; but thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend
him sufficient for his need, in that which he wants: Thou shall surely give
him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him: because
that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in
all that thou put thine hand unto: yea, God will not only bless you, but
your posterity also for this thing, Psalm. 37.26. He is ever merciful and
lends, and his seed is blessed. In all respects carry your selves toward
those that are in a suffering condition, as you would desire they should have
carried themselves toward you, if they had been in your condition, and you had
been in theirs; for this is according to the rule which is given us by our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.
When you see any in distress, and find your selves backward to relieve them;
say to your own hearts as Mordecai did to Esther in another case, when she was
unwilling to put forth her self for the help of the distressed Jews, Esth.
4.14. Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this?
Who knows whether my Estate was preserved from the fire for such a time as
this?

When therefore you are considering with your selves, what you shall render
unto the Lord for his great mercy toward you, in preserving your substance
from the fire, determine with your selves to do what I have been exhorting you
unto; namely, to put on bowels of compassion toward all that are in distress,
and to do all the good you can for them, according as God shall Minister
ability and opportunity unto you; for God is all-sufficient, and needs not any
thing that you can do for him, Act. 17.25. Neither is worshipped with men's
hands, as though be needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath,
and all things. Your goodness extends not unto him, Psalm. 16.2. neither can
you be profitable to God as you may be profitable to his people, Job 35.7,8. If
thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand?
Thy righteousness may profit the Son of Man. God expects this from us, that
when he has bestowed any eminent mercy upon us, we should express our
gratitude by doing good to others that are in distress, Luke 22.32. When thou
art converted, strengthen thy brethren. As it is in respect of comfort, when
God gives us comfort it is not only for our selves, but also to enable us to
comfort others, 2 Cor. 1.4,6. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we
may be able to comfort them in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God -- Whether we be comforted it is for your
consolation and salvation. So it is with riches, they are not given to us only
for our own use, but also to enable us to relieve the wants and necessities of
others. We are not Lords, but Stewards of our Estates, and must one day give an
account of our stewardship: And it is required in stewards, that a man be found
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Stewards must not dispose of what is committed to their
charge, according to their own, but according to their Lords will.

SECT. 6.
6. Seeing God has so mercifully spared you, beware that you deal not
rigorously, or cruelly with any that have been sufferers by this Fire; do not
speak or do any thing that may add to the affliction of the afflicted, and
instead of oil, pour vinegar into their wounds. God is sorely displeased with
those that add to the affliction of the afflicted, Zech. 115. I am very sore
displeased with the heathen that are at ease, for I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. Psalm. 69.24,25,26. Pour out
thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold of them; let
their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents; for they
persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the grief of those whom
thou have wounded: Therefore do not use any insulting language, or speak any
bitter words to such as are brought low, Romans 11.17.18. If some of the branches
be broken off -- boast not thy self against the branches. Jer. 48.26,27. Moab
shall wallow in his vomit, he also shall be in derision; for was not Israel a
derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou speak of him,
thou skippedst for joy. Do not trample upon those that are under Gods feet; it
is said of God, Lam. 3.33,34. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men, to crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth. If the
great God do not willingly grieve the children of men, or crush under his feet
the meanest sort of men, the prisoners of the earth: then it does not become us
to grieve, or trample upon, or crush under our feet any man, how mean soever he
be. Do not oppress any one in his right, that is become poor by this Fire; in
so doing you will be guilty of reproaching God, Prove. 14.31. He that oppresses
the poor, reproacheth his Maker; it is the ready way to come to want your
selves, Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, shall
surely come to want. It is said of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49,50. She did not
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy -- therefore I took them away as I
saw good. If the men of Sodom were destroyed with fire and brimstone for
neglecting to strengthen the hand of the poor and needy; what shall be done
unto them that weaken the hands of the poor, and endeavor to make them more
poor? Do not exact upon those that are harbourless, when they come to hire
houses of you, by demanding an unreasonable price for your Houses, Shops, or
Warehouses. Nehemiah reproves those Jews very sharply, that did exact upon
their poor brethren after they had suffered great affliction by the Babylonish
captivity, Neh. 5.1. to the 14. verse: By taking advantage of our neighbors
necessity to set unreasonable and excessive rates upon our houses, we may be
guilty of extortion. Our Savior joins these two together, Extortion and
Excess, Matthew. 23.25. -- Within they are full of extortion and excess. Now
Extortion is a great sin, as we may see, 1 Cor. 6.9,10. Ezekiel. 22.12,13. Have
patience toward such as are endebted to you, and are disabled by this Fire
from paying their Debts, and do not deal cruelly with them, by casting them
into prison, or seizing upon that little which God has left them, but wait
with patience till God shall enable them to pay what they owe: God has dealt
mercifully with you, and therefore you should not deal cruelly with your
brethren. Remember the parable of him that dealt cruelly with his fellow
servant after he himself had found great favor with his Lord, Matthew.
18.28,29,30. The same servant went out and found one of his fellow servants,
which ought him an hundred pence; and he laid hands on him, and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe: and his fellow servant fell down at his
feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all:
and he would not; but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the
debt. And what was the issue of this cruel dealing? His Lord was wroth, and
rebukes him sharply, and delivers him over to the tormenters, ver. 32, 33,
34. Then his Lord after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; should
thou not also have had compassion on thy fellow servant, yea, even as I had
pity on thee? and his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. Do not exercise curelty toward
the afflicted any of these forementioned ways, or in any other kind; but let
your hearts stand in awe of such precepts as these, Zech. 7.9,10. Show mercy
and compassions every man to his brother, and oppress not the widow, nor the
fatherless; the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil
against his brother in your heart. Levit. 25.43,46. Thou shall not rule over
him with rigor, but shall fear thy God -- Over your brethren the children of
Israel: ye shall not rule one over another with rigor. Romans 12.10. Be kindly
affectioned one to another with brotherly love. 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your
things be done with charity. If you cast off all pity toward such as are
impoverished by this Fire, who knows but God may send a fire to consume your
houses: This very sin of casting off pity toward the afflicted, is threatened
with fire, Amos 1.11,12. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom,
and for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue
his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity; and his anger did war
continually, and kept his wrath for ever: but I will send a fire upon Teman,
which shall devour the palaces of Bozra.

SECT. 7.
7. Let Gods mercy in preserving your houses from this Fire, cause you to
dedicate your houses unto God. When God gave David a peaceable and settled
habitation, he dedicated his house unto the Lord, and composed the thirtieth
Psalm at the dedication of it, which bears this title, A Psalm, and Song at
the dedication of the house of David. Some conceive this dedication to have
been after God put an end to his wanderings, by reason of Saul's persecuting of
him, and gave him a settled habitation in Jerusalem. Others think it refers to
his returning to his house after he had been driven from it by Absalom.
Whenever the time was that he made this dedication, it may teach us thus
much, that when it pleases God to give us quiet, and settled, and comfortable
habitations, we should by way of gratitude dedicate our houses unto God. Those
mercies which we receive from the Lord, we should return back again unto him:
as Hannah when she had obtained a son, gives him unto God, 1 Samuel 1.28. He
whom I have obtained by petition, shall be returned (so it is rendered in the
Margin) unto the Lord as long as he lives. If any ask, How should we dedicate
our Houses to God? I answer,

1. Reform and cleanse your houses, put away iniquity far from your
Tabernacles, if you be purposed to consecrate them unto God, Job 22.23. We must
not vow and sacrifice to the Lord a corrupt thing, lest we bring a curse upon
our selves rather than a blessing, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver which has
in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.
If there were any thing of fraud and unrighteousness in building or purchasing
your houses, make satisfaction to your neighbor before you give your houses to
God, Isa. 61.8,8. I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery forburnt offering,
Humble your selves for whatever sins either you or your predecessors have
committed in your houses, whereby they have been defiled; for sin defiles not
only a man's person, but the place where he dwells, Lev. 18.27,28. Jer. 2.7.

2. If you would dedicate your houses to God, let holiness to the Lord be
written upon your houses, and upon all persons that dwell in them, and upon all
affairs that are transacted in your houses: You know it is said, Psalm. 93.5.
Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever. If therefore you would give your
houses to God, let those that are the masters of the house in the first place
look unto themselves, that they be holy in all manner of conversation, and
follow the example of David, Psalm. 101.2,3,4. I will walk within my house with
a perfect heart, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes; I hate the work
of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. A froward heart shall
depart from me. Then endeavor to bring your Children, and your Servants, and
all that live in your houses, to serve God in holiness and righteousness, Josh.
24.15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Endeavor to get godly
servants into your houses, or at least to make them such after they are come
under your roof, Psalm. 101.6,7. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the
land, that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me; he that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house; he that
tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Let holiness be written not only
upon all persons, but upon all your household affairs. Be holy in your eating
and drinking, govern your Children and Servants, and follow your Calling in an
holy manner; entertain all that come to your houses in a godly sort: In a word,
be holy in all manner of conversation, and do not think this to be too great
preciseness, for it is no more than what is commanded, 1 Pet. 1.15. As he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. God would
have us so eminently holy in managing our civil employments, that all that
converse with us may see holiness so evidently in what we do, as if it were
written upon our employments, Zech. 14.20,21. In that day shall there be upon
the bells of the horses, holiness unto the Lord; and the pots in the Lords
house shall be like the bouls before the Altar; yea, every pot in Jerusalem and
in Judah shall be holiness to the Lord of Hosts.

3. Suffer none that come to, or dwell in your houses, to speak, or do any
thing that may tend to the dishonor of God; but endeavor as much as in you
lies, to glorify God your selves, and to bring all that live with you; so to
speak, and so to walk, as that God in all things may be glorified, Psalm. 29.9.
In his Temple does every one speak of his glory. If you would have your houses
become as it were Temples of God, you must suffer no cursing, no lying, no
scoffing, no backbiting, no rotten communication in your houses; but every one
must speak and walk, so as God may be glorified. When David dedicated his house
to the Lord, he begins the Psalm that he composed at the dedication thereof,
with a purpose and resolution to extol and glorify God, Psalm. 30.1. I will
extol thee, O Lord. Extol God in your hearts, extol God in all your discourses,
extol God in your conversations, extol God in all your ways. After David had
been delivered from the hands of his enemies, he thought it not enough to give
glory to God himself, but calls upon others also to magnify God with him,
Psalm. 34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. Do
you follow his example, seeing God has so graciously preserved your houses,
and substance from this fire, do not only glorify God your selves, but call
upon your Wives, and Children, and Servants, and all that are in your Families:
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

4. If you would dedicate your houses to God, make them houses of prayer; pray
with your Family every morning, and every evening: and besides praying with
your Family, go into your Closet, and pour out your souls to God in secret, and
call to your Servants and Children to pray in secret, as well as to join in
family prayer, Matthew. 21.13. My house shall be called the house of prayer.

5. Entertain with a willing and cheerful mind all Gods friends and ghests,
that he at any time sends to your houses: After you have dedicated your houses
to God, you should be as willing to entertain Gods friends and Gods ghests as
your own. If you ask who are Gods friends, and who are his ghests? I answer, 1.
All godly men, John 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command
you. When God puts it into the hearts of any of his servants to come to your
houses, you should most gladly receive them; for they leave a blessing behind
them, Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. 2. All godly Ministers;
when you receive them into your houses, the Lord Jesus takes it as kindly as
if you received himself, or his Father, John 13.20. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, he that received whomsoever I send, receives me; and he that receives
me, receives him that sent me. 3. Such as are strangers, Matthew. 25.35. I was a
stranger, and ye took me in. Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers; for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. Job 31.32. The
stranger did not lodge in the streets, but I opened my doors to the traveller.
4. Such as are driven from their own Houses, or their own Country for
Conscience sake, Isa. 16.3,4. -- Hide the outcasts, bewray not him that
wandereth; let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab, be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler. When we see any persons harbourless that are
honest, and well disposed, we should take pity on them, and receive them into
our houses, Isa. 58.6,7. Is not this the fast that I have chosen? -- Is it not
to deal thy bread to the hungry? and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou
hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

SECT. 8.
8. Seeing God has spared and preserved your Estates from this Fire; by way of
gratitude, devote and dedicate your Estates to God, and resolve to spend them
according to his will, and employ them for his glory. We are commanded to
honor God with our substance, and we shall be no losers by spending any part
thereof for the advancing of his glory, Prove. 3.9,10. Honor the Lord with thy
substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase, so shall thy barns
be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. If you
ask how you should honor God with your Estates? I answer,

1. Do not spend them upon your lusts; what is spent for the satissying of
pride, sensuality, curiosity, vain glory, or the like, that is spent upon your
lusts; and you may be sure, that what is spent upon your lusts, that is not
spent to Gods glory; for it is mentioned by the Apostle as a vice, to spend
those things which God gives us upon our lusts, James 4.3. Ye ask and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Now no vice
glorisieth God.

2. Let the abundance wherewith God has blessed you, raise up your hearts to
serve God more cheerfully than other men who want what you enjoy. It is said of
Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.5,6. The Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand, and
all Judah brought Jehoshaphat presents, and he had riches, and honor in
abundance; and his heart was lift up (or, as it is in the Margin) was encouraged
in the wages of the Lord. God is displeased when our riches produce not this
effect, to make us serve the Lord with cheerfulness, Deuteronomy. 28.47,48. Because
thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart,
for the abundance of all things; therefore shall thou serve thine enemies which
the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness,
and in want of all things.

3. Do good according to your ability with what God has given you, feed the
hungry, cloth the naked, relieve the Fatherless and the Widows; then you
glorify God with your Estates when you do good with them, and relieve the poor
and the needy, Prove. 14.31. He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his Maker;
but he that honors him, has mercy on the poor. He that ministers to others
necessities, be it more or less, if it be according to the ability that God
has given him, glorifieth God, 1 Pet. 4.10,11. As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God -- If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
that God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.
Wherefore give freely and liberally upon all occasions to such as are in
necessity, remembering how the Scriptures charge and encourage you to give
bountifully to the poor: let me mind you of a few places to this purpose, 1 Timothy 6.17,18. Charge them that are rich in this world -- that they do good,
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. 2 Cor. 9.6. This I say, He which sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully. Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that
waters shall be watered also himself. Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given
unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running ever,
shall men give into your bosom; for with the same measure that ye meet withal,
it shall be measured to you again. Prove. 22.9. He that has a bountiful eye
shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor. Eccles. 11.1,2. Cast
thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days: Give a
portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth?

If any say, There are so many sufferers by this Fire, and so many objects of
Charity, that we know not where to bestow our Charity, seeing we are not able
to relieve all; who are they whom we are obliged in an especial manner to
relieve with our Charity? I answer,

1. If you have any near Relations that are in want, you ought in an especial
manner to take care to relieve them, 1 Timothy 5.4. If any Widows have Children,
or Nephews, let them learn first to show piety at home, and to requite their
Parents; for that is good and acceptable before God: and ver. 8. If any provide
not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the
faith, and is worse than an Infidel. When Job had lost his Estate, all his
brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance
before, gave him every one a piece of money, and an ear-ring of gold, Job 42.11.

2. If you know any godly men to be in want, you should in an especial manner
be careful to relieve their wants, Gal. 6.10. Let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith: and as you should have
respect unto godly men above others, so in a more peculiar manner to godly
Ministers. When the Apostle Paul, who was a Minister of Christ, was relieved in
his necessities by the Philippians, see how acceptable this was unto the Lord,
Phil. 4.18. I have all, and abound, I am full, having received of Epaphroditus
the things which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing to God. The smallest kindness that we can imagine
done to any of Christ's servants, whether Ministers, or others, upon this
account, because they belong to Christ, shall not go without a reward, Mark
9.41. Whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my Name, because ye
belong to Christ; verily I say unto you, He shall not lose his reward.

3. Such as are in greatest want and necessity, either because they are
burdened with Children, or have formerly lived plentifully, and so know not how
to bear a low condition; such as on any account are brought into a necessitous
condition, and are like to perish for want of relief: these ought in an
especial manner to be looked after, and relieved, Job 29.13. The blessing of
him that was ready to perish came upon me. Lev. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen
poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea, though
he be a stranger, or a sojourner, that he may live with thee. Here we are
directed what sort of persons we should relieve: 1. We are to relieve such as
have lived well formerly, and are waxen poor, and fallen in decay; whether he
be a brother or a stranger. 2. We are to relieve those that live in the places
where we live, before others at a farther distance. If a brother be fallen in
decay with thee, thou shall relieve him. 3. Such as know not how to live
without some relief, that he may live. But as was said before, if the necessity
of persons fearing God, be as great as other men's, their necessities are to be
considered before others, Romans 12.13. Distributing to the necessity of Saints:
and if we know or hear of any of Gods servants that are in want, we should send
relief to them, though they live in places that are at great distance from us.
The Disciples of Antioch sent relief as far as Judea to the distressed Servants
of Christ, Acts 11.29. Then the Disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief to the brethren which dwelt in Judea.

4. Such persons as are most shiftless and friendless, as Widows, Fatherless
Children, Orphans, and Strangers, these also ought to be considered in a more
especial manner, as being great Objects of Charity, Job 29.12,13. I delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him -- I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy. God takes a special care of the
Widows, and Fatherless, and Strangers, Psalm. 146.9. The Lord preserves the
strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and widow -- And we should labor to
resemble God: see also Job 31.16,17,18,19,20.

5. We should mind what opportunities God puts into our hands, and embrace our
present opportunities; and we should be doing good to those, unto whom our
opportunity leads us to do good, Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity,
let us do good unto all men -- Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do,
do it with thy might. Prove. 3.27,28. Withhold not good from them to whom it is
due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it; say not to thy neighbor,
Go and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee. You
see here, we should not defer our opportunities of doing good so much as for
one day.

I shall add no more upon this head, but only put you in mind of the courteous
carriage of the barbarous people of Melita, toward such as had suffered
shipwreck, and were cast upon their coasts; they received every one of the
shipwracked persons in a courteous manner, and at their departure did abundantly
supply all their necessities, Act. 28.1,2,10. When they were escaped, then they
knew that the Island was called Melita: and the barbarous people showed us no
little kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of
the presentrain, and because of the cold -- who also honored us with many
honors, and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were
necessary. Will it not be a shame for Christians to be wanting in relieving
their brethren, that have suffered the loss of their Estates by fire; when as
these Barbarians showed great kindness to men that they never saw before, when
they suffered shipwreck and lost their ship, and all their goods in the Sea.

SECT. 9.
9. Render your selves to God by way of gratitude for his sparing of you from
this sore judgment which has fallen so heavily upon others. Your Houses and
Estates are too little to give unto God for this mercy; and therefore you shall
do well to give your selves, both body and soul, all that you have and are,
unto the Lord. When David was debating the case with himself, what he should
render to the Lord for his benefits, he resolves to give himself to God, to be
his servant, and that not only in profession, but indeed and in truth, Psalm.
116.12,16. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, -- 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Be ye not
stiff-necked, -- but yield your selves unto the Lord, -- 2 Cor. 8.5. But first
gave their own selves to the Lord. What the Apostle said to the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 12.14. I seek not yours, but you: The like may be said of God, He does not
seek ours, but us; he is more pleased when we give him our selves, than with
any other gift that we have to give him. As a Christian looks upon it as the
greatest favor that God can bestow upon him, for God to give himself to him;
he prizeth none of Gods gifts so much as the gift of himself: so it is with
God, he esteems a man's giving up himself to God, above all the gifts that he
can give to God. Let therefore the mercies which God has given you, prevail
with you to give your selves, your whole selves, both body and soul unto God.
1. Let Gods mercies prevail with you to give God your bodies, Romans 12.1. I
beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service. It may be some will say, What? Does God care for our bodies? Will that
be an acceptable gift to God? The Apostle assures us it will be an acceptable
present, when they are preserved holy, present your bodies, holy, acceptable
unto God. And he tells us elsewhere, that the Lord is desirous of our bodies
as well as of our souls, 1 Cor. 6.13. The body is -- for the Lord, and the Lord
for the body. Now then we give God our bodies, when we keep our bodies in
subjection to the will of God, when we rule and govern all the members of our
bodies by the Word of God, when we are content to do or suffer any thing in our
bodies for the sake of God, that God and Christ may be magnified in our bodies,
Phil. 1.20. when we do not suffer sin to reign in our bodies, neither do yield
the members of our bodies as instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but do
readily yield up all the members of our bodies as instruments of righteousness
to do the will of God; this is to give God our bodies. And this is that which
the Apostle calls for, Romans 6.12,13. Let not sin reign in your mortal body,
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof; neither yield ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are above from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God. 2. Give God your souls as well as your bodies,
otherwise you do not present your bodies to God a living sacrifice, according
to the forementioned exhortation, Romans 12.1. for, The body without the spirit
is dead, Jam. 2.26. And if the body be a dead carcass without the spirit, then
we cannot present our bodies a living sacrifice unto God, unless we give him
our souls together with our bodies. The soul is that which God desires above
all things, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart. -- Matthew. 22.37,38. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind; this is the first and great Commandment. And why should any
of us stick at this, the giving our selves both body and soul unto God, seeing
it is our reasonable service? Let me show you the equity of what I am exhorting
you unto, that so such of you as have received great mercies from God, may be
persuaded by way of gratitude, to give your selves the more cheerfully both
body and soul unto the Lord.

1. Our bodies and souls are not our own, but the Lords; and shall we refuse to
give God his own? Shall we be backward to glorify God with that which is his
own? 1 Cor. 6.19,20. -- Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are Gods. God did
not make either our bodies or our souls for the service of sin or Satan, but
for himself, 1 Cor. 6.13. -- Now the body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord, -- Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself. Rev. 4.11. Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power; for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Now seeing
our bodies and souls were created for Gods pleasure; Is it not meet they should
be yielded up unto God?

2. The Lord Jesus gave himself both body and soul for us. He yielded his body
to be crucified for us, which was both a shameful and a painful death, 1 Cor.
11.24. This is my body which was broken for you, -- 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead unto sin,
should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. Isa. 50.6. I
gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked of the hair; I
hid not my face from shame and spitting. Why should we refuse to give our
bodies to be burned, imprisoned, banished, tortured, or to suffer any
affliction for the sake of Christ, seeing he gave his body to suffer such a
shameful and painful death for us? The Lord Jesus did not only give his body,
but his soul also an offering for our sins, Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief, when thou shall make his soul an offering
for sin, he shall see his seed, -- Shall we stick at giving our souls to
Christ, when he did not stick at making his soul an offering for our sins?

3. It will be much for the advantage both of our bodies and souls to give them
unto God; for he will sanctify them, and make them his Temple, and come and
dwell in them, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that
the spirit of God dwells in you? 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the living
God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them. -- Now, who are
they to whom the Apostle speaks, when he says, Ye are the Temple of the living
God, etc. They were such as had given themselves to God, as you may see, Chap.
8.5. But first gave their own selves to the Lord, -- What greater honor or
happiness are our souls and bodies capable of, whilst they are in this world,
than to become Temples of the living God? But besides this, if we give our
bodies and souls unto God, he will glorify both our bodies and souls in an
unexpressible manner in the Kingdom of Heaven to all eternity. The Sun is a
glorious creature, it dazleth our eyes to behold it; God will give his Saints
in Heaven a glory equal to the brightness of the Sun, Matthew. 13.43. Then shall
the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father: yea, they
shall excel the Sun in glory, for they shall be equal to the Angels, and the
Angels are far more glorious ceatures than the Sun, Luke 20.36. Neither can
they dye any more; for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of
God, being the Children of the Resurrection: yea, they shall be made like to
Christ, their bodies shall be made like to his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. Who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, -- and their souls shall be made like to his glorious soul, 1 John 3.2.
-- We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. We, -- that is, not our
bodies only, or our souls only; but our persons, both body and soul shall be
like him.

SECT. 10.
10. Render to God the Sacrifices of righteousness. When we have received any
eminent mercy from God, he expects that we should offer up unto him the
sacrifice of a righteous and godly life, which will please him better than all
the Sacrifices that were offered up under the Law, Psalm. 4.5. Offer the
Sacrifices of Righteousness. Psalm. 51.17,19. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise, -- Then
shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifices of righteousness. -- When David was
wonderfully delivered from the snares of death, he determines to offer this
Sacrifice to God, namely, to walk humbly and holily before God all the days of
his life, Psalm. 116.6,7,8. I was brought low, and he helped me: Thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
Then see what he renders to God for this mercy; I will walk before the Lord in
the Land of the living. I have touched upon this head before, and therefore I
shall not enlarge farther upon it; only I shall add two Scriptures, which do
imply, that it is our duty after we have received any eminent deliverances, to
labor after a more eminent degree of holiness than we had before; and are also
promises, that God will sanctify our deliverances, for the making of us more
holy, Obad. 17. Upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness. Isa. 4.2,3. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit of the Earth shall be excellent and comely for them
that are escaped of Israel. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one
that is written among the living in Jerusalem. In the former Chapter, the
Prophet had foretold the ruin of Jerusalem, and the fall of Judah, Isa. 2.8.
and here he foretells, that a little remnant should escape; and promises, that
Gods judgments on others, and his mercy in delivering them, should conduce much
to the promoting of their holiness, and cause them to prize highly the Lord
Jesus (who is understood by the Branch of the Lord, Zach. 3.8.) by whose merits
and mediation they should obtain their deliverance.

SECT. 11.
11. Let this deliverance cause you to seek after, and to trust in God for
farther mercies and deliverances, when you are brought into straits. This use
God servants have been wont to make of their deliverances, as you may see by
these instances, Judge. 15.18. And he was sore a thirst, and called on the Lord,
and said, Thou have given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant,
and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised. 1 Samuel 17.37. David said moreover, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of
the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear; he will deliver me out of the hand of
this Philistine. 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver; in him we trust that he will yet deliver us. This God expects that
when he has shielded us from, or helped us out of one trouble, we should trust
him when we come into another, Psalm. 115.9. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord,
he is their help and their shield. Psalm. 61.3,4. Thou have been a shelter for
me, and a strong Tower from the Enemy; I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever,
I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Psalm. 4.5. Offer the sacrifices of
righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. God was much displeased with the
Israelites when they did not trust in him, notwithstanding he had done great
things for them, Psalm. 78.21,22,23,24. -- Anger came up against Israel, because
they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation, though he had
commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven, and had rained
down Manna upon them to eat: -- see also ver. 32, 33. For all this they sinned
still, and believed not for his wondrous works; therefore their days did he
consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. We render that which is very
pleasing and acceptable to God, when we put our trust in him; for, The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm.
147.11.

If you ask, For what should great and remarkable deliverances cause a man to
trust in God? I answer,

1. When a man has had any remarkable deliverance out of any trouble, it
should encourage him to trust in God under all his straits and troubles that
come upon him all the days of his life, Psalm. 18.50. Great deliverance gives
he to his King, and shows mercy to his anointed, to David and to his seed for
evermore. This Psalm was penned upon the occasion of that deliverance which God
gave David out of the hands of Saul, as you may see in the title of the Psalm;
and from this deliverance, he concludes, that God would deliver him for ever,
Psalm. 6.9. The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my
Prayer: see the fore-quoted Scriptures, 1 Samuel 17.37. 2 Cor. 1.10. But some may
say, How can this be, That deliverance from one trouble or calamity should
cause us to trust in God for deliverance from another; when as we see, they
that escape one judgment, are cut off, or suffer deeply by another? I answer,
1. When God cuts off, and destroys those whom he has formerly delivered, it is
usually such as distrust him, and turn away from him, Jude 5. -- The Lord
having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that
believed not. Josh. 24.20. If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then
he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he has done you
good. 2. When God brings his servants who trust in him, into new troubles,
their faith is not vain, but brings down a great blessing; for, when they are
not delivered from troubles, they are delivered in trouble, and are kept from
the evil of trouble, that it does not hurt them, and this is a great
deliverance, Job 5.19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven
there shall no evil touch thee.

2. Deliverance from temporal evils should encourage the servants of God, to
trust in the Lord for deliverance from spiritual evils, and the bestowing upon
them spiritual blessings. As for instance,

1. When they have had deliverance out of trouble, they should conclude, that
God will also deliver them from all their sins, and preserve them in a state of
grace, till he has brought them to himself in glory. Thus Paul concludes from
his deliverance that he had from Nero, that God would deliver him from every
evil work, 2 Timothy 4.17,18. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and
the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly kingdom.

2. The servants of God that have escaped great calamities, and been delivered
from great dangers, should trust in God for a broken heart to mourn for their
sins; for God promises this mercy to such as escape great judgments, Ezekiel.
7.16. They that escape of them, shall escape, and shall be on the Mountains
like Doves of the Valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity.

3. When the servants of God escape out of great troubles, it should cause them
to trust in God to deliver them from the deceit of their own hearts, and to
direct the work of faith and repentance in truth in their souls, Isa. 10.20,21.
The remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the House of Jacob, shall no
more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the Lord, the
Holy One of Israel in truth: the remnant shall return, even the remnant of
Jacob, unto the mighty God. This remnant, unto whom God promises faith and
repentance in truth, are such as should escape the great calamities that were
coming on the Jews, as you may see ver. 21, 22.

4. When the servants of God have received any eminent deliverances, they
should be encouraged thereby to trust in God for power and strength to walk
before God in holiness and righteousness as long as they live, Psalm. 56.13.
Thou have delivered my soul from death; wilt not thou deliver my feet from
falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?

If any say, What grounds have the servants of God to take encouragement from
temporal deliverances, to trust in God for all spiritual blessings? Amongst
others that may be named, I will mention these two.

1. Redemption from outward troubles, is given to the servants of God by virtue
of the Covenant of Grace, as well as spiritual blessings, Psalm. 111.9. He sent
redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant for ever. Psalm.
106.44,45. Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry;
and he remembered for them his Covenant. Now when we find God remembering his
Covenant in one kind, it may encourage us to trust in God for all the other
blessings which are promised to us in Gods Covenant.

2. Redemption from outward troubles, is given to the servants of God from the
same love of God that spiritual blessings are bestowed upon them, Isa. 63.9. In
all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. Isa. 38.17. Behold, for peace I had great
bitterness, but thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of
corruption. -- Psalm. 18.19. He brought me forth into a large place, he
delivered me, because he delighted in me. Now even outward deliverances being
tokens of Gods love to his Servants, they may thereby be encouraged to trust in
God for spiritual blessings, Psalm. 36.6,7,8. There is much of Gods love seen in
his preserving our persons and goods; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast,
how excellent is thy loving kindeness? his loving kindness should cause us to
trust in him -- therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings. And this loving kindeness of God should cause us to trust in him,
not only for outward, but also for spiritual blessings, as appears from the
eighth verse.

SECT. 12.
12. Let this deliverance cause you to prepare for your day of visitation, and
to be ready to undergo whatever afflictions God shall see meet to lay upon you,
Amos 4.11,12. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand blucked out of the burning -- prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel. Both they that have suffered by this Fire, should
prepare for farther sufferings (as has been hinted in the second Question) and
they that escaped this burning, should prepare against the day of their
visitation. Preparing your selves for afflictions, is no way inconsistent with
that trusting in God, to which I exhorted you in the former Section, but is an
effect and fruit of Faith. It was Noah's faith, and not his diffidence that
moved him to prepare an Ark, when he understood the Flood was coming, Heb.
11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an Ark -- This being a needful point for a Christian to be
prepared for all sorts of affliction, I shall enlarge a little upon it, and
show you, 1. Why it is needful that we should be prepared for all kinds of
affliction. 2. How this may be done. There is great reason that we should
prepare our selves and stand ready for all sorts of affliction, because,

1. As we are men, men that carry about with us a body of sin and death, we are
liable to troubles and calamities every day, as long as we live in this world,
Job 5.7. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. Job 14.1. Man
that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of troubles. For ought we
know every day may bring forth as much trouble as we are able to bear; if it be
otherwise we must ascribe it to the goodness of God, Matthew. 6.34. Sufficient
unto the day is the evil thereof: and this is our condition as long as we live,
to be liable to trouble and sorrow all our days, Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the
ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life.
There is not any one creature in the world, no not that from which we promise
our selves most comfort, but at one time or another it may vex our very souls,
Eccles. 2.17. All is vanity and vexation of spirit.

2. As we are godly men, so we are liable to many and great troubles, Psalm.
34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous. Rev. 7.14. These are they
which came out of great tribulation. Acts 14.22. We must through much
tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. God would not have any godly man
promise himself immunity from trouble, but would have him prepare for the
sharpest trials, 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution. If we look over the examples of Gods servants,
we shall find they have all gone through very great trials. What crosses did
Jacob meet with from his brother Esau, his Uncle Laban, his own Children, etc.
there was scarce a day wherein he did not meet with some trouble, as he tells
Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been.
David who was a man after Gods own heart had a great portion of troubles, Psalm.
73.14. All the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning. Psalm.
31.9,10. -- Mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly; for my
life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing. Heman was full of
troubles, and that from his youth up, and those so great, that he was ready to
dye under them, Psalm. 88.3,15. My soul is full of troubles, and my life draws
nigh unto the grave -- I am afflicted, and ready to dye, from my youth up. Yea,
Jesus Christ who was Gods own Son, was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, Isa. 53.3.

3. We cannot assure our selves that we shall be exempted from any kind of
trouble; for whilst we are in the body, we are liable to all kinds of
adversity, Heb. 13.3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and
them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. Better than
we are, have met with all sorts of troubles, Psalm. 88.7. Thou have afflicted me
with all thy ways. Psalm. 42.7. All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
We may meet with such afflications as we never looked for, or scarce so much as
thought of them, Isa. 64.3. Thou did terrible things which we looked not for.
And as all sorts of afflictions do attend us; so at all times, and in all
places, we cannot promise our selves freedom from affliction in any place, Acts
20.22,23. I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that
shall befall me there; save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, That bonds and afflictions abide me. Neither can we promise our selves
freedom from trouble any one day, Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Now seeing we are liable to
all sorts of afflictions in all places, and at all times, is it not our
concernment to stand prepared continually for all sorts of trials?

4. God oft-times makes very great and sudden changes in our conditions, when
we least think of them: when we are in the height of prosperity, and adversity
is far from our thoughts; when we are looking for nothing but good days, God
suddenly exercises us with great trials, Job 30.26. When I looked for good,
then evil came unto me; and when I waited for light, there came darkness. Psalm.
30.6,7. In my prosperity, I said, I shall never be moved; Lord by thy savor
thou have made my mountain to stand strong; thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. When Job said, I shall dye in my nest, I shall multiply my days as
the sand, Job 29.18. It was but a little after he complains, Terrors are turned
upon me, they pursue my soul as the wind, and my welfare passes away as a
cloud; and now my soul is powered out upon me, the days of affliction have
taken hold upon me, Job 30.15,16. When Abraham was full of joy for his Son
Isaac, there arises a great affliction in his Family; Ishmael scoffs at Isaac,
Sarah makes suit to Abraham to cast out Hagar and her Son: and it is said, The
thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight, because of his Son, Genesis 20.11.
Afterward when God was so eminently present with Abraham, that Abimelech takes
notice of it, and desires to make a league with him, Genesis 20.22,23. and after
he had been worshipping God, ver. 33. on a sudden God brought as great a trial
upon him as possibly could befall him; he calls him to offer up his Son Isaac
for a burnt-offering, and that without any delay, Genesis 22.2. Take now thy Son,
thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land Moriah, and
offer him there for a burnt-offering -- It Is not, take a year, or a month
hence, but, take now; he was to set upon the work without delay.

5. God calls upon us with great earnestness to prepare our selves to undergo
such afflictions as he shall lay upon us, Amos 4.12. Thus will I do unto thee,
O Israel, and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel. Jer. 46.14. Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in
Moab; say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee, for the sword shall devour round
round about thee. This exhortation to prepare for approaching judgments, is
pressed with great earnestness; it is ushered in with a fourfold call, Declare
ye, publish, publish, say ye. What is it must be declared, and published with
such great earnestness? Stand fast, prepare thee -- see also ver. 19. O thou
danghter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thy self to go into captivity --

6. If afflictions come upon us before we are prepared for them, we shall be in
danger to sink under our burdens; but if we be well provided beforehand, we
shall go cheerfully through, whatever it seems good unto the Lord to lay upon
us, Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed (or as it is in the Margin) My heart is
prepared, O God, my heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise. David was
fled into a Cave when he penned this Psalm, as you may see by the title of it,
and was surrounded with great calamities, as you may see, ver. 1, 4. In the
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast.
My soul is among lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even
the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword. Yet in the midst of his troubles, he sings for joy and praises God; and
what helped him to bear his troubles so cheerfully? His heart was prepared for
them, My heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise. Joseph who had
prepared for seven years Famine, lived comfortably, and felt no great
inconvenience by it; other persons that had laid up nothing beforehand, would
have fainted and dyed, had not Joseph relieved them. The Apostle was so far
from being discouraged at his sufferings, that he joyed in the greatest of
them, even to lay down his life for the Gospels sake, Phil. 2.17. Yea, and if I
be offered upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, I joy, and rejoice
with you all. And how came he to do thus? he was ready and prepared to suffer
any thing for the sake of Christ and the Gospel, Acts 21.13. -- I am ready, not
to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Now having given you some reasons why we should prepare our selves for all
sorts of afflictions, I shall in the next place answer a weighty and necessary
case of Conscience, viz.

What shall we do that we may stand prepared to undergo any affliction that the
Lord shall be pleased to lay upon us?
Ans. 1. We must give our selves much unto prayer; we must pray before our
afflictions come, and pray in our afflictions; we must not pray in a cold
manner, but cry mightily to God, to strengthen and support us in our troubles.
By prayer we shall obtain from God an heart prepared to undergo any troubles,
Ps. 10.17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. Psalm. 57.2,7. I will cry unto
God most high, unto God that performs all things for me. And what did David
get by crying unto God? an heart prepared to bear his afflictions; as you may
see ver. 7. My heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared. The Apostle
advises Christians that would be able to stand in an evil day, to be much in
prayer, Ephesians. 6.13,18. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand --
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. Observe how
the Apostle multiplieth words to excite us to prayer, he does not barely bid us
pray, but pray always; and as if that were not enough, he adds, with all
prayer and supplication -- and not only so, but he bids us watch thereunto,
watch with perseverance, yea, with all perseverance. And adds, that this duty
must be performed in a spiritual manner, With all prayer and supplication in
the spirit: if we do not pray with our hearts and spirits as well as with our
lips, yea, if there be not the graces of Gods Spirit exercised in prayer, as
well as the actings of our own spirits, our Prayers are worth little in Gods
account. The Apostle joins these two together, Patient in tribulation,
continuing instant in prayer, Romans 12.12. Implying, that such as desire to be
patient in all their tribulations, must be, and continue instant in Prayer.

2. Endeavor as much as in you lies to strengthen and increase your Faith.
Faith is the chiefest piece of the spiritual armor, which above all the rest
will help us to stand in an evil day. The Apostle would not have us neglect any
piece of the spiritual armor, all must be put on; but Faith above all the rest,
Ephesians. 6.13,16. Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand. Above all, taking the
shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked. By faith a man may be able to do and suffer all things, Mark 9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes. The Apostles did, and suffered
great things for God: and how? it was through faith, 1 Timothy 4.10. Therefore we
both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God. The
servants of God have endured all sorts of tortures, and the most painful deaths
that their enemies could inflict upon them, and all other afflictions, by the
help of faith, Heb. 11.35,36,37. Others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection; and others had
trials of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover, of bonds and
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheeps skins, and goats skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented: and that they endured all these things
through faith, you may see, ver. 33. Whatever difficulties, snares, or
discouragements a man meets with in the world, either in respect of the good
things, or the evil things of the world, faith will overcome them all, 1 John
5.4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. Faith will
enable a man to resist and overcome all the temptations of Satan, whereby he
endeavors to disturb and foil us in times of affliction, 1 Pet. 5.8,9. Your
adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may
devour; whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. Fear weakens the
heart, and makes it faint at approaching troubles, Luke 21.26. Men's hearts
failing them for fear -- Now Faith conduces much to the fixing and
establishing the heart against fears, Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of
evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Psalm. 56.11. In God
have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. And
therefore it conduces much to the preparing of a man to undergo his
afflictions. I might show you here what you should believe in reference to your
afflictions, to enable you to bear them with cheerfulness: among many things
that might be instanced in, I will mention only these three.

1. Believe that no affliction does, or ever shall befall you, but by the wise
and gracious providence of God; and that not only every affliction, but every
circumstance in every affliction, is ordered and disposed by the infinite
wisdom of God. This is agreeable to such Scriptures as these, Romans 11.36. Of
him, and through him, and to him are all things. Ephesians. 1.11. -- Who works
all things, after the counsel of his own will. Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in
a City, and the Lord has not done it? Matthew. 10.30. But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. The believing that Gods hand is in our afflictions, will
bow our hearts, and make them stoop and submit to God, though it be a smarting
Rod wherewith the Lord corrects us. They were dreadful judgments which Samuel
denounced against Eli, yet he submits himself readily to it, because it came
from God, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

2. Believe that in every affliction God designeth the bringing glory to his
Name, and the doing good to your own souls; you have good ground to believe
this, for the Scriptures do assure us, that God aims both at our good and his
own glory, in all our afflictions, Heb. 12.10. He chastneth us for our profit
-- Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God. 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Romans 11.36. To him are all
things: All things are not only of God as the efficient, but they also tend to
him as their end, Isa. 5.16. The Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment.
This made the Apostle joyful in his afflictions, that they did illustrate the
glory of God, 2 Cor. 12.9,10. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me; therefore I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake. -- He rejoiced also in his afflictions, because
they did promote the good of his soul. When some preached Christ out of
contention, with a design to add affliction to his bonds, Phil. 1.14. Was he
troubled at the affliction they created to him? No: for he says, I therein do
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, ver. 18. And what made him to rejoice herein?
He gives us the reason of his joy, ver. 19. For I know that this shall turn to
my salvation, through your Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

3. Believe that you shall be delivered out of your troubles; this will be a
means to support you under them, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. You have
good ground from the Word of God to believe, that you shall be delivered out of
all your troubles, though they be very many, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. And
though they be great as well as many, such as you never met with, or heard of
the like, yet you may rest upon God that he will deliver you out of them, Jer.
30.7. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time
of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it? What is your affliction? Is
it the rod of men? God will not suffer it to lie overlong upon you, Psalm.
125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest
the righteous put forth their hand unto iniquity. Is it the Rod of God that is
upon you? Do the arrows of the Almighty stick fast in your soul? does he
contend with you? This will not last always, Isa. 57.16. I will not contend
for ever, neither will I be always wrath; for the spirit should fail before
me, and the soul which I have made. Does the Lord do more then contend with
you? does he seem to reject and cast off your soul? you may be assured that he
will not deal thus with you always because he himself has said it, that he
will not cast off for ever, Lam. 3.31,32. The Lord will not cast off for ever;
but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies. Is it a temptation of Satan that disquiets you? wait
but a while on God, and he will tread Satan and all his temptations under your
feet, Romans 16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
Is it some sin that vexes and troubles your soul? wait a while upon God, and
he will deliver you from your sins as well as your other troubles, Mich. 7.19.
He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our
iniquities. -- Psalm. 130.7,8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord
there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption, and he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities. When David was under many sorrows that
disturbed and cast down his soul, he bore up himself with hope of a better
state; that though for the present he was in a mourning condition, the time
would come wherein he should praise God for helping him out of his troubles,
Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
countenance.

3. If we would be prepared to undergo every affliction that God shall lay upon
us, we must labor to get Gods strength engaged with us, and for us: Though of
our selves we can do nothing, yet through the help of God, we shall be able to
do and suffer great things, Psalm. 60.11,12. Give us help from trouble, for vain
is the help of man; Through God we shall do valiantly, -- Psalm. 18.29. By thee
have I run through a Troup, and by my God have I leaped over a Wall. By the
help of God we may do and suffer every thing, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me. If a man have God for his strength, he
need not fear any thing, though an host of men should set themselves against
him, Psalm. 27.1,3. The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? Though an host should encamp against me, mine heart shall not fear;
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident: yea, though all
the world should set themselves against us, if we have God with us, we need not
fear any thing, Psalm. 118.10. All Nations compassed me about, but in the Name
of the Lord will I destroy them. Romans 8.31. What shall we then say to these
things, If God be for us, who can be against us? Though the whole world should
be turned upside down, and all places should be full of trouble and confusion,
and there should be no peace or safety either on the Sea or Land; that man that
has God for his strength need not fear any thing, Psalm. 46.1,2,3. God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble: Therefore will we not
fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea; though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the
Mountains shake at the swelling thereof. If then you would bear up comfortably
under all your afflictions; rememember the exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians.
6.10. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. Do not trust to your own strength, but seek to be strong in the Lord,
and to get his mighty power to assist you.

It may be some will say, What shall we do that we may get Gods strength to
support us under, and to carry us through all the troubles of this life? I
answer,

1. Be sensible of your own weakness, and renounce all confidence in your own
strength. God is wont to communicate his strength most eminently to his
servants, when they have lowest thoughts of their own strength, and are under
deepest apprehensions of their own weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9,10. My strength is
made perfect in weakness, -- When I am weak then am I strong. Isa. 40.29. He
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength. When we grow conceited of our own abilities, God withdraws himself
from us, and leaves us to fall under small trials. Peter being over confident
of himself, that he could suffer any thing, yea death it self for the sake of
Christ, and that though all men should deny Christ he would not, Matthew.
26.33,35. fell under the first temptation that assaulted him; a Damsel did but
say, Thou wast with Jesus of Galilee, and he denied Christ in the presence of
all that were in the Palace, ver. 69, 70. God is so far from helping proud
persons, that he is wont to set himself against them, Jam. 4.6. God resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble. I will mention three ways whereby
you may be convinced of your own weakness, and of the absolute necessity of
Gods strength, to carry you through your afflictions. 1. Weigh well what the
Scripture says of man's impotency; we are such weak creatures, that without
divine assistance we cannot do or suffer any thing, though it be never such a
small matter, Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. Thinking is much easier
than either doing or suffering; yet of our selves, we have not ability so much
as to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think anything as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. 2. Observe how
unable you have been when God has withdrawn himself, to bear those small and
light troubles wherewith God has exercised you. Has not a trifle, that which
has been an affliction and a trouble in your imagination, rather than in
reality, dejected and cast you down? If you have fainted under small troubles,
what will you do when great ones come, if you have not the Lords help? Jer.
12.5. If thou have run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how
can thou contend with Horses? And if in the Land of Peace, wherein thou
trustest, they wearied thee; then how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan?
3. Consider what great men have fainted under small trials, when the Lord has
left them but a little to themselves. Jonah a Prophet of the Lord, for the loss
of a gourd, which sprung up and withered in a day, fell into such a fret, that
he was even angry with God, and weary of his life, and wished that he might
dye. The Apostle Peter upon the speech of a maid, denied Christ, and swore that
he did not so much as know the man. If such eminent persons as these fainted
under such small trials; what shall we do without the help of God?

2. Being sensible of your own weakness, cry unto God to give you his strength,
Psalm. 86.16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strengh unto thy
servant -- Psalm. 119.28. Strengthen thou me according to thy Word. But will
this do? Will God give us his strength if we cry to him for it? yea, he will,
Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me; and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul.

3. Rest and rely upon God for the communicating of his strength to your souls.
The way to engage God to help and strengthen you, is to trust in him, 1 Chronicles.
5.20. They were helped -- for they cried to God in the battle, and he was
entreated of them; because they put their trust in him. 2 Chronicles. 13.11. Help
us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee. Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength,
and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am helped. Gods power is
communicated in an eminent manner to those that believe in him, Ephesians. 1.19.
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power. Though we are never so weak in
our selves, we may become strong by resting upon God, Heb. 11.33,34. Who
through faith -- out of weakness were made strong. If you ask, What ground have
we to rely upon God, that he will give us his strength to support us under all
our troubles? I answer, We have a sure Word of Promise; we have not only one
promise, but many to assure us, that God will not leave us destitute of his
help and strength, Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not
dismayed, for I am thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Zech. 10.12. I will
strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his Name, says
the Lord. Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will give strength unto his people. Joel
3.15,16. The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining; the Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the
hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.

Object. I have cried unto God, and hung upon, and pleaded his Promises for his
strength, and still I remain in a weak helpless condition.

Answ. Though it be so, yet cry still to the Lord, Isa. 63.15. Look down from
Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy glory; where
is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies
toward me? are they restrained? Isa. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O
arm of the Lord. Psalm. 105.4. Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face
evermore. And wait patiently upon him, and in due time he will strengthen you,
Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord. Isa. 40.31. They that wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings like Eagles,
they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.

4. Keep in Gods ways; when we go out of Gods ways we cause God to withdraw
himself, and when God withdraws, our strength departs from us; as it was with
Sampson, when his God departed from him, his strength departed also, Judge.
16.19. His strength went from him. How came he to lose his strength? by losing
the presence of God, ver. 20. I will go out as at other times; and he wist not
that the Lord was departed from him: so it is with Christians, when they lose
their God, they lose their strength. But by keeping in Gods ways, they shall
keep God with them, and increase their strength. That this is the way to get
Gods strength, to keep in Gods ways, you may see Prove. 10.29. The way of the
Lord is strength to the upright. Psalm. 84.5. Blessed is the man whose strength
is in thee, in whose heart are the ways of them. Job 17.19.

5. Get your interest in God made out to your souls. The knowing of God to be
our God, conveyeth great strength into our souls, and will support us in our
greatest troubles. What Solomon says of knowledge, Prove. 24.5. A wise man is
strong, a man of knowledge increases strength, is eminently true of this
knowledge that God is our God; for the more clearly we know God to be our God,
the more we shall increase in strength, Isa. 49.5. My God shall be my strength.
1 Samuel 30.6. David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him;
-- but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. The knowledge of our
interest in God, fills our hearts with joy, Luke 1.47. My spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior; and joy strengthens the soul, Neh. 8.10. The joy of
the Lord is your strength. Wherefore grow in acquaintance with God, if you will
grow in strength to suffer the will of God cheerfully, Col. 1.10,11. --
Increasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might according to
his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness;
especially labor to grow in the knowledge of your interest in God.

6. Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in your souls; the Word of God abiding
in you, will be a great means to strengthen you, 1 John 2.14. Ye are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. The
efficacy and power of the Word of God is wonderful. By speaking of a word, God
created the whole world, Psalm. 33.6,9. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens
made, and all the hosts of them, by the breath of his mouth: For he spoke and
it was done, he commanded and it stood fast. By his Word he governs and
upholdeth all his creatures, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the Word of his
Power. Is there such power in the Word as to uphold all things, and do thou
doubt whether it be able to uphold thy soul? If a man's heart be broken in
pieces and melted with grief, the Word of God will heal and strengthen him, and
settle him in a comfortable condition, Psalm. 107.20. He sent his Word and
healed them, and delivered them from their destructions. Psalm. 119.28. My soul
melts for heaviness, strengthen thou me according to thy Word.

7. If you would be strong in the Lord, put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians.
6.10,11. Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. But some may say, How shall we be strong in the Lord? the next words
shows this, Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil. No part of the armor of God must be neglected,
if we would be strong in the Lord. What this armor of God is, the Apostle
shows from the 14th. ver. to the 18th.

4. If we would be prepared to undergo all afflictions cheerfully, we must
labor to get our sins pardoned, and get our pardon evidenced, and keep clear
our evidences of our justified estate. Sense of guilt bows down the soul, and
weakens our strength, and renders us unfit for a suffering condition, Psalm.
31.10. My strength fails because of mine iniquity. Such of the Jews as were
under the sense of unpardoned guilt, were ready to faint under their
afflictions, when they were carried captive into Babylon, Lam. 3.18,19. I said
my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; remembering mine affliction
and my misery, the wormwoed and the gall. And if you would know what made their
cup so bitter, that they fainted under it, you may see ver. 42. We have
transgressed, and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned. But when our sins are
pardoned, that will help us to bear afflictions cheerfully, Isa. 33.24. The
Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the People that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity. Matthew. 9.2. They brought unto him a man sick of the
Palsy, lying on a bed; and Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of the
Palsy, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. Sickness is a great
affliction; and this man was so sick that he kept his bed, yet Christ bids him
be of good cheer, because his sins were forgiven him, before he speaks one word
of removing his sickness. A man that is in a justified estate, may triumph and
glory in his greatest troubles, Romans 5.1,3. Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: -- And not only so, but we glory
in tribulations also. --

5. If we would be prepared for a suffering condition, we must acquaint our
selves with, and cleave and adhere to the death and sufferings of Christ, and
labor to understand and get an interest in the imputed righteousness of
Christ. Christ's righteousness is one of the main Pillars our Souls have to lean
upon, for our support under all our troubles; Isa. 41.10. I will strengthen
thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. Our chiefest strength lies in our right hand, and when God
calls his righteousness, his right hand; it may imply, that Christ's
Righteousness (which is often called the Righteousness of God, as Romans 1.17. Romans
3.22,23.) is the chief and principal means for the strengthening and upholding
of our souls. David found great support in all his troubles, by looking to this
righteousness, Psalm. 71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God; I will
make mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only. It is recorded of the
servants of God, mentioned in the Revelation, who went through great
tribulations, that they were carried through their sufferings by looking and
adhering to the sufferings of Christ, Revel. 7.14. These are they which come
out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb. Rev. 12.11. They overcame (that is, the Devil who raised
up persecutions against them, as you may see, ver. 17.) by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death.

6. Let us get good evidences, that we are in the love and favor of God.
Well-grounded apprehensions of Gods love to our souls, will help us to bear up
cheerfully under the greatest trials, as Persecution, Sword, Famine, etc. and
enable us to overcome them all, Romans 8.35,37. Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Perscution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? Nay, in all these things we are more than
Conquerours, through him that loved us. The apprehensions of Gods love to us,
will cause us to love God, 1 John 5.19. We love him, because he first loved us.
And when we love God, we shall bear any thing that comes from him. Love to men
will make us bear with all things that we meet with from them. The Apostle
speaking of love, says, It bears all things, beliveth all things, hops all
things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. How much more will love to God, cause
us to bear and endure all things that we meet with from God? Love will carry us
out to suffer all afflictions, even death it self, Cant. 8.6,7. Love is strong
as death, -- Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.
When it was a time of great affliction with the people of God, they pray hard
for the light of Gods countenance; and if they could but obtain that, they
would account themselves in a safe and happy condition, notwithstanding all
their troubles, Psalm. 80.4,5,6,7. O Lord God of Hosts, How long will thou be
angry with the Prayers of thy People? Thou feedest them with the bread of
tears, and give them tears to drink in great measure; Thou make us a strife
unto our Neighbors, and our enemies laugh among themselves. Turn us again, O
God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

7. We must get and keep Gods presence with our souls, that will fortify our
souls to undergo any troubles with courage and cheerfulness, Psalm. 23.4. Yea,
though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me. Isa. 50.7,8. The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I
not be confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I
shall not be ashamed: He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me?
Psalm. 46.2. We will not fear though the Earth be removed, and though the
Mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea, -- And why? What put such courage
into them? they had Gods presence with them, ver. 5, 7. God is in the midst of
her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, and that right early; the Lord
of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. This upheld Christ, and
carried him comfortably through all his sufferings, (who went through greater
sufferings than ever any man met with all) Act. 2.25,26. I foresaw the Lord
always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved;
therefore did mine heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my
flesh shall rest in hope. As Gods presence with Christ upheld him, so it will
also uphold us in all our sufferings. If any say, It is true, Gods presence
with a man will help him to do great things; but God is departed from me, How
shall I gain his presence again? I answer, Gods departing from us usually
aristh from our departing from him; and if after we are departed from him, and
he is departed from us, we return to him, he will return again unto us, Zech.
1.3. Turn unto me says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the
Lord of Hosts. Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers, ye are gone away
from mine Ordinances, and have not kept them; return unto me, and I will turn
unto you says the Lord of Hosts. After we are returned to God, and he is
returned to us, if we keep with him, he will keep with us, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him. Joh. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you.

8. We must get our hearts weaned from the world; if our affections be set
inordinately on any earthly things, we shall find it an hard matter to bear up
under our afflictions, Jer. 45.3. Thou did say, Woe is me now; for the Lord
has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest: And
what caused Baruch to faint under his trials? we may see the root of his
distemper, ver. 5. Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not.
Though Baruch was a good man, his affections were carried out too much after
great things in the world, and that made affliction very burdensome to him. The
Apostle Paul who was crucified to the world, was prepared and ready to suffer
whatever God should call him to, Gal. 6.14. The world is crucified unto me, and
I unto the world. Acts 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem for the Lord Jesus. We must not only set loose to all worldly
things, but to our own lives also; when we are willing to yield up our lives to
God, we shall not be much moved by any troubles that come upon us for the Lords
sake, Acts 20.23,24. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that
bonds and afflictions abide me; but none of these things move me, neither count
I my life dear unto my self. Rev. 12.11. They overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death.

9. We must accustom our selves to bear our lesser trials with patience and
submission to the will of God, and that will fit and prepare us for greater.
There is scarce a day passes over our heads, wherein the Lord does not in one
kind or another, try our patience and submission to his will; now the right
bearing of those crosses which every day brings forth, would fit us for
greater trials, Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth. If we would know what good comes by an early accustoming our selves to
bear the cross, the following verses show, that it will make him patient and
silent under his sufferings, ver. 28. He sits alone and keeps silence,
because he has born it upon him. It will make a man suffer humbly, ver. 29. He
puts his mouth in the dust -- It makes him suffer willingly, ver. 30. He
gives his cheek to him that smites him. Our Lord Jesus exhorts us to take up
our cross daily, Luke 9.23. He said unto them, If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. If we did
practice this counsel; if we did every day expect crosses, and quietly submit
our selves under such crosses as every day brings forth; if we could but deny
our selves, and resign up our wills unto Gods will, this would prepare us to
undergo any trial that the Lord shall see meet to lay upon us.

10. A well grounded hope of eternal life, will help us to bear all the
troubles of this life cheerfully. A Christian that has good hope through
grace, that he shall go to Heaven when he dies, may by virtue of this hope
rejoice and glory in the midst of his greatest tribulations, Romans 5.2,3. We
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, -- we glory in tribulations. It was this
carried Moses through all the difficulties he met with in leaving Pharaoh's
Court, in wandering among the Israelites by the space of forty years in the
Wilderness, Heb. 11.24,25,26. By faith, Moses when he was come to years,
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. The hope of the reward
that he should have in heaven, caused him to make light both of the good and
evil things of this world. Hope of salvation is like an helmet, which is of
great use for our preservation, 1 These. 5.8. -- putting on for an helmet the
hope of salvation. Hope is of the same use to the soul in afflictions, that the
Anchor is to the Ship in a storm, which keeps it from perishing by being driven
upon the Rocks or Sands, Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the
Soul, both sure and steadfast, which enters into that within the vail.
Therefore if we would prepare our selves for afflictions, we must get a solid
and well grounded hope of eternal life.

11. Let us consider what it is which we have found in our own experience, has
made our yoke heavy; and also what we have observed either in reading, or by
discourse, has made the yoke of affliction heavy and hard to be born by
others, and let us take care to prevent those things: As for instance. 1. We
may observe, that the want of Gods presence in the time of affliction, has
made affliction very burdensome and hard to be born, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore
distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from
me, and answers me no more. When Readiness Enemies came against him, and God was
departed, this put him into such distress, that he knew not what to do. When
God withdrew from Job in his affliction, the want of Gods presence made his
affliction very bitter, Job 23.2,8,9. Even to day is my complaint bitter, my
stroke is heavier than my groaning: Behold, I go forward, but he is not there;
and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand, where he does work,
but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see
him. When David was in trouble, he tells God, if he did hide his face from him,
he should be like a dead man, Psalm. 143.7. Hide not thy face from me, lest I be
like unto them that go down into the pit. Therefore it is our wisdom to do what
in us lies to get and keep Gods presence with our souls, as was hinted before.
2. A galled and guilty Conscience. When David was under the sense of guilt in
the time of his sickness, it was such a burden, that he was ready to sink under
it, Psalm. 38.3,4. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger;
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sins; for mine iniquities
are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. 3. When
we promise our selves a settled course of prosperity, and do not look for
trouble, this makes affliction dreadful and terrible, Isa. 64.3. Thou did
terrible things which we looked not for. Psalm. 30.6,7. In my prosperity I said,
I shall never be moved, -- thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. 4. When
we have not learnt to deny our selves, and to resign and to submit our wills
unto the Will of God. It is very irksome to self-willed persons, and such as
abound with self-love to meet with crosses; Our Lord Jesus exhorts us to deny
our selves, before he exhorts us to take up our cross, Mar. 8.34. Whosoever
will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross: which implies
that no man can bear affliction with a cheerful contented mind, but such as
have learnt to deny themselves. 5. When God does not only withdraw his presence
(of which I spoke before) but shows himself terrible to us in an evil day,
this makes affliction very irksome to the soul. This the Prophet prays
against, Jer. 17.17. Be not a terror unto me, thou art my hope in the day of
evil. This made the calamity of the Jews exceeding heavy, and hard to be born,
that God set himself against them in the time of trouble, Lam. 3.3,7. Surely
against me is he turned -- he has made my chain heavy.

12. Treasure up in your hearts the promises of God which relate to an
afflicted condition. It is a great help to the bearing of affliction, to be
well acquainted with the promises that God has made to his people that are in
an afflicted condition. David found great comfort from Gods promises in his
afflictions, Psalm. 119.49,50. Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which
thou have caused me to hope, this is my comfort in mine affliction. When he met
with such hard trials that he stood astonished to see how God dealt with him,
he was filled with joy when he called to mind the promise of God, Psalm.
60.3,6. Thou have shown thy people hard things, thou have made us to drink the
wine of astonishment; God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice. He
tells us elsewhere, if it had not been for the comfort that he found in Gods
word, he had perished in his afflictions, Psalm. 119.92. Unless thy Law had been
my delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction. It was by the help
of the word of truth that the Apostle went through his manifold troubles with
great patience, 2 Cor. 6.4,5,7. Now there are variety of promises which do
relate to an afflicted condition, which may be of great use to us in our
afflictions, which we shall do well to store up against an evil day. I will
mention some of them.

1. God has promised to moderate our afflictions, and to lay no more upon us
than he will enable us to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken
you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above that ye are able: but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Isa. 27.8. In measure when it
shoots forth, thou will debate with it; he stays his rough wind, in the day
of his East wind. Jer. 15.11. The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy
remnant, verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of
evil, and in the time of affliction. This promise is added after the mentioning
of Gods unalterable purpose to send four sore Judgments upon the Jews, Death,
the Sword, Famine, and Captivity, verse 1, 2. So also after mention of a time
of trouble, such as there had not been the like, God comforts his people with
his promise, that he would not correct them out of measure, though he suffered
them to partake of the common calamity, Jer. 30.7,10,11. Alas, for that day is
great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble -- Yet
the Lord encourages Jacob not to be afraid, Fear thou not, O my servant Jacob,
says the Lord, neither be dismayed, O Israel -- for I am with thee, says the
Lord, to save thee, though I make a full end of all Nations, whether I have
scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee; but I will correct thee
in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

2. God has promised us his presence in our afflictions, Psalm. 91.15. He shall
call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with him in trouble. Isa.
43.1,2. But now, thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that
formed thee, O Israel, Fear not -- When thou passest through the waters, I will
be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee. This promise has dependence on the last verse, where the
Prophet tells us, what calamities were come upon Israel, He has poured upon
him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and it has set him on
fire round about -- and then adds, but now, thus says the Lord -- Fear not
-- When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee -- God would not
have his people fear any trouble, because he will be with them in all their
troubles, in one as well as another; and that not only when they first enter
into them, but till they are safely passed through all the troubles of this
life.

3. God has promised to strengthen, and support, and uphold us in all our
troubles: I have mentioned several promises to this purpose already, as Joel
3.15,16. Isa. 41.10. I will add two or three more, Nahum 1.7. The Lord is good,
a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in him.
Psalm. 37.39,40. The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord; he is their
strength in time of trouble: And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them; he
shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they put their trust
in him. Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help
thee, says the Lord, and thy redeemer the Holy One of Israel: see also Isa.
25.4.

4. God has promised to comfort and revive our souls when we are in
affliction, Psalm. 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will
revive me; thou shall stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine
enemies, and thy right hand shall save me. Micah 7.8. When I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me. Psalm. 71.20,21. Thou which have shown me
great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again
from the depths of the earth, thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me
on every side. Isa. 66.13. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. John 14.18. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you.

5. God has promised to sanctify our afflictions, and he has promised they
shall purge out our sins, and make us more holy, and shall be all of them so
blessed unto us, that they shall work together for our good, Isa. 27.9. By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
their sin. Zech. 13.9. I will bring the third part through the fire, and will
refine them as silver is refined -- Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according
to his purpose.

6. God has promised in due time to deliver us out of all our afflictions, 1
Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time. Job 5.19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven
there shall no evil touch thee. Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. God has promised when
he sees it to be most for our good, and for his own glory to preserve us from
afflictions, Psalm. 121.7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall
preserve thy soul. Psalm. 32.7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me
from trouble, thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance: but when
he does not preserve us from trouble, he has promised to deliver us out of
trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me.

SECT. 13.
13. Endeavor to demean your selves in such sort toward God, that you may
prevail with him to continue still to watch over, and preserve both your
persons, houses, and substance. If you ask what you should do that you may
engage the Lord to continue his preservation of your persons and substance. I
answer;

1. Walk in the fear of the Lord, and serve him with an upright and sincere
heart. Satan says of Job, who was an upright man, one that feared God and
eschewed evil, Job 1.9,10. Does Job fear God for naught? Have not thou made an
hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side?
Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and increased his substance in the
land. Prove. 2.7. -- He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.
The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Protection from
evils is a good thing, if you walk uprightly with God he will not withold his
protecting providence from you; but as he has been, so he still will be your
shield.

2. Show mercy to the Poor, and do good with your Estates, that is the way to
have them preserved, Psalm. 41.1,2. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the
Lord will deliver him in time of trouble; the Lord will preserve him, and keep
him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou will not deliver
him into the will of his enemies.

3. Love the Lord for preserving you hitherto, and thereby you shall be
preserved still, Psalm. 145.20. The Lord preserves all them that love him.
Psalm. 91.14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him.

4. You must not preserve any of your sins from destruction, if you would have
God preserve your persons and substance; for God threatens to destroy both the
persons and the substance of such as live wicked and ungodly lives, Job
15.20,21,29. The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, and the number
of years is hidden to the oppressor: A dreadful sound is in his ears, in
prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. He shall not be rich, neither
shall his substance continue; neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof
upon the earth. Zophar speaking of a man that spares his sins, and will not
forsake them, among other Judgments mentions this, that God will not spare,
but will desteoy such a man's substance, Job 20.12,13,15,26,28. He has
swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again; God shall cast them
out of his belly -- All darkness shall be hid in his secret places, a fire not
blown shall consume him -- The increase of his house shall depart, and his
goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath. If this merciful providence of
God, will not prevail with you to cast away your sins; your continuing in your
sins, will cause God to cast away your substance, Prove. 10.3. The Lord will not
suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, but he casts away the substance
of the wicked.

5. Commit your selves and your substance into the hands of the Lord, and trust
in God who has graciously preserved you hitherto, to preserve you and all that
belongth unto you for the time to come. There is no better way to engage God to
help us, than to commit our selves to him, and to put our trust in him, Prove.
29.25. Who so puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe. Psalm. 17.7. Show thy
mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand, them which
put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them. Psalm. 10.14. The
poor commits himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherless. Psalm.
5.11. Let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoice; let them ever shout
for joy, because thou defendest them. Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee;
they trusted, and thou did deliver them. Dan. 6.23. Daniel was taken up out
of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in
his God.

Now in regard that trusting in God avails much toward our preservation, I
shall mention three or four considerations that may encourage you to trust in
God for preservation of your persons and substance, at such times as you
apprehend your selves to be in greatest danger of suffering either in your
Persons or Estates.

1. Consider how solicitous and careful God is of your welfare, 1 Pet. 5.7. He
cares for you. You are as dear to him as the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. He
that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. He is so careful of your
welfare, that he gives all his Angels a charge concerning you, to pitch their
tents about your dwellings, and to take the care of you wherever you go, and to
deal tenderly with you, to carry you in their arms, that you may be preserved
from being hurt either by evil Angels, or evil Men, Psalm. 91.11,12. He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. Psalm.
34,7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. Besides the charge that God gives his Angels to look after
his people, he himself takes a special care of them, the Lord himself is their
keeper, and watches over them both by night and by day, Psalm. 121.4,5. Behold,
he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep; the Lord is thy keeper,
the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. Isa, 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I
will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. His
eyes are always upon his people, to behold their dangers, that the may send
them relief and deliverance in due season, 2 Chronicles 16.9. The eyes of the Lord
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf
of them, whose heart is perfect toward them. His hand is always stretched out
for their defense, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The eternal God is thy refuge, underneath are
the everlasting arms. The Lord is so tender of you, that he does as it were lay
you in his bosom, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather his lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom.

2. This care of God for his peoples welfare extends not only to some, but to
every one of his servants, Deuteronomy. 33.3. All his Saints are in thine hand. Psalm.
145.20. The Lord preserves all them that love him. The meanest of all Gods
servants is of more value than many Sparrows; yet there is not so much as one
Sparrow forgotten of God, Luke 12.6,7. Are not five Sparrows sold for two
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? Fear not therefore, ye
are of more value than many sparrows. Surely then there is not the meanest of
all Gods servants, which is forgotten of the Lord.

3. God is not only careful of his peoples persons, but of their substance and
habitations, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my
cup; thou maintainest my lot. Job 1.10. Have not thou made an hedge about him,
and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? When you are
afraid your houses should be fired, or any other evil should befall your
habitations, think on such Scriptures as these, wherein God has engaged
himself to preserve your habitations in safety, Psalm. 91.10. There shall no
evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. Prove. 1.33.
Whosoever hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of
evil. Isa, 4.5,6. The Lord will create upon every dewlling place of Mount Zion,
and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense, and there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. Prove. 12.7. The house of the
righteous shall stand.

4. The preservation which God has promised to his people, is not limited to
this or that particular evil, or to any period of time; but it extends to all
sorts of evils, and to all times. He has promised to preserve them from all
evils, Psalm. 121. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil -- Psalm. 91.10.
There shall no evil befall thee -- Job 5.19. He shall deliver thee in six
troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee. And as this
preservation is not limited in respect of evils, so neither in respect of time;
he has not promised to preserve them for a time, and then give over his care
of them, but he has promised them preservation all their days, Psalm. 121.8.
The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth,
and even for evermore. Psalm. 125.2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem,
so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth even for ever. Isa.
46.3,4. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of
Israel, which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb.
And even to your old age, I am he, and even to hoare hairs will I carry you: I
have made, and I will bear, even I will carry and will deliver you. If any say,
notwithstanding these promises of preservation, we see the servants of God do
oft-times fall into many troubles as well as other men, how then can these
promises be any encouragement to us to trust in God? I answer, 1. We must rely
on the promises of God, when his providence seems to run cross to his
promise, Romans 4.18. Who against hope, believed in hope -- according to that
which was spoken -- Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. 2.
When God does not preserve his servants from trouble, he does them good by
their troubles; he fulfils that promise, Psalm. 85.12. Yea, the Lord shall give
that which is good. Now oft-times it is good for the people of God to fall into
affliction, Psalm. 119.71. Wherefore we may with much freedom and satisfaction
commit our selves to God in our greatest dangers upon this account, that he
will make all our troubles work for our good, when he does not preserve us from
trouble.

SECT. 14.
14. Take heed to your selves, and to your ways; that you do not provoke the
Lord to send any more such mighty and dreadful Fires as this late Fire was:
What counsel our Lord Jesus gave the man that was made whole of his infirmity,
Joh. 5.14. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee; the same may be seasonable to such as have escaped this late Fire:
sin no more, lest a worse thing than what befell those that were sufferers by
this Fire, come unto you. Pharaoh, though he was exceedingly hardened in his
sins, yet when there had been great thunder and lightning, was so affrighted at
it, that he calls to Moses and Aaron, and desires them to pray for him, that
there might be no more mighty thunderings; and promises also to let Israel go
(which was the sin for which God contended with him) Ex. 9.27,28. And Pharaoh
sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this
time; the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked: Entreat the Lord
(for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail, and I
will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer. If we be not more hardened than
Pharaoh was, this dreadful Fire should put us upon confessing our sins to God,
and reforming our lives, and cause us to take heed that we do not provoke the
Lord to send any more such mighty Fires amonst us.

If any say, What should we do that we may not have any more such dreadful
Fires break out amonst us? I answer;

1. If we would have no more such dreadful Fires, we must make a good use of
this Fire, so as to be led to repentance by it; for if we be not reformed by
this Judgment, we may well expect that God will follow us with more Judgments,
Lev. 26.21,23,24. If ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I
will bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to your sins: And if ye
will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me; then will
I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your
sins. How we should make a good use of this Fire, is shown at large in the
second Question; and although the directions given therein, do chiefly respect
such as have been sufferers by the said Fire, there are several things hinted,
that may direct others also as well as the sufferers, how to make a good use of
this Judgment.

2. We must seek unto God with prayers and tears, that he would send no more
such dreadful Fires. When God contended with the Israelites by Fire, by the
Prayer of Amos, this Judgment was removed, Amos 7.4,5,6. Thus has the Lord God
showed unto me, and behold, the Lord God called to contend by Fire, and it
devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part: Then said I, O Lord God, cease,
I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? The Lord repented
for this: This also shall not be, says the Lord God. So also by the Prayer of
Moses, the Fire was stayed among the Israelites, when God had kindled a great
burning amongst them because of their murmurings, Numb. 11.1,2. When the people
complained, it displeased the Lord; and the Lord heard it: and his anger was
kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were
in the uttermost parts of the Camp. And the people cried unto Moses; and when
Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire was quenched. Prayers and tears are very
prevalent with God for preventing and removing of personal and national
Judgments, Joel 2.17,18. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep
between the Porch and the Altar; and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord,
and give not thine heritage to reproach -- Then will the Lord be jealous for
his land, and pity his people. When the sentence of death was passed upon
Hezekiah, by his prayers and his tears he prevailed with God to prolong his
life for the space of fifteen years, Isa. 38.5. I have heard thy prayer, I have
seen thy tears; behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.

3. If we would have God cease from sending any more such dreadful Fires, we
must cease from those sins which did provoke God to send this sore Judgment.
Until the cause of a Judgment be removed, we can have but little hope it should
cease. (What sins they are that provoke God to send this dreadful Judgment of
Fire has been shown before, Quest. 2. Sect. 4.) If we cease from our sins, and
return unto God, we may hope and expect that God will cease from his mighty
Judgments, Mal. 3.7,11,12. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says
the Lord of Hosts -- And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes -- And all
Nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a a delight some land. After
Judea had been wasted with Fire and Sword, the Lord promises, if they would
cease from their sins, he would remove his Judgments, Isa. 1.7,16,17,19,26.
Your Cities are burnt with Fire, -- cease to do evil, learn to do well. -- If
ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. -- And I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
afterward thou shall be called, The City of Righteousness, the faithful City.

4. If we would have no more such dreadful Fires, we must labor to pacify
Gods anger that is kindled against us. The mighty Judgments of God that have
fallen upon us, viz. the Sword, the great Pestilence, and this dreadful Fire,
are tokens of great wrath against this Nation; and we may fear, in regard there
is so little reformation, that notwithstanding all that is come upon us, the
anger of the Lord is not turned away, but that his hand is stretched out still,
as it is said three times of Israel, after mentioning great and sore Judgment,
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still,
Isa. 9.12,17,21. Wherefore we must endeavor to pacify and turn away the Lords
anger, else we may expect that the same Judgments will return, or some others,
as dreadful as any of these, will fall upon us. Now if you ask, How shall we
get Gods anger turned away from the Nation? I shall instance only in these two
means.

1. Gods chosen ones must get into the gap, and cry mightily to God in the Name
of Jesus Christ, that he would turn away his fierce anger that is kindled
against us. The Prayers of impenitent sinners cannot prevail with God to turn
from his wrath, but the Prayers of his Saints and Servants will cause him to
lay aside his anger, Psalm. 106.23. He said, he would destroy them, had not
Moses his chosen stood before in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them. Jer. 18.20. -- Remember that I stood before thee to speak
good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them. What Prayers the servants
of God put up to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, are presented by the Lord
Jesus unto his Father, Heb. 7.25. Rev. 8.3. and when the Lord Jesus interceeds
with his Father for the turning away of his wrath from a Nation, or a
particular person, his request shall certainly be granted, Zech. 1.12,13. The
Angel of the Lord, said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation
these threescore and ten years? And the Lord answered the Angel that talked
with me, with good words, and comfortable words: and presently after comes
tidings of the ceasing of Gods wrath, and his returning with mercy to
Jerusalem, ver. 16. 17. Thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies, -- My Cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the
Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

2. We must every one turn from his evil ways, and turn unto the Lord with all
our hearts, and then his wrath shall be turned away from us, Jonah 3.8,9. --
Let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in
their hands; who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not. Hos. 14.1,4. O Israel, return unto the Lord
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity: and when Israel did return at
the call of God, hear what God says unto him, ver. 4. I will heal their
backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him.
Jer. 3.12. Return thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for
ever.

5. If we would have God cease from sending any more such dreadful Fires, we
must set our faith on work on the blood of Christ, and on the Promises of God.
It was the blood of the Sacrifice that made atonement under the law, both for
particular persons, and for the whole Congregation of Israel, Lev. 17.11. -- It
is the blood that makes an atonement for the soul. And as the blood of the
Sacrifice made atonement for particular persons, so also for the whole
Congregation of Israel, Lev. 4.13,14,17,18,20. These Sacrifices did type out
the blood of Christ, and signified to us, that faith in Christ's blood is the
way to procure an atonement for our souls, and to render God propitious after
he has been provoked to anger by our sins, Romans 3.25. -- Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood -- This blood of Christ
is available to make atonement for whole Nations as well as particular persons,
Isa. 52.15. He shall sprinkle many Nations -- And as we should set our faith on
work upon Christ's blood; so also on Gods promises. If you ask what promises? I
answer, such Promises wherein God has promised to cease his Judgments after he
has for a long time been sorely contending with a people. We have diverse
promises to this purpose, I will mention some of them, Lam. 4.22. The
punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O Daughter of Zion, he will no
more carry thee away into captivity, he will visit thine Iniquity, O Daughter
of Edom, he will discover thy sins. Nah. 1.12. Though I have afflicted thee, I
will afflict thee no more. Isa. 51.21,22,23. Hear now this thou afflicted and
drunken, but not with wine; Thus says the Lord, the Lord, and thy God that
pleads the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the
cup of trembling, yea even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shall no more
drink it again: But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee. --
Isa. 60.18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor
destruction within thy Borders; but thou shall call thy Walls, salvation; and
thy Gates, praise. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
always wroth, for the spirits should fail before me, and the souls which I
have made. Zeph. 3.15. The Lord has taken away thy Judgments, he has cast out
thine Enemy, the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou
shall not see evil any more. Faith is of great force for preventing and
removing of National Judgments, and the procuring of National Mercies, Heb.
11.32,34. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire, escaped
the edge of the Sword; out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in
fight, turned to flight the Armies of aliens. We may see here what great things
have been done by faith; it has subdued Kingdoms, it has vanquished and put
to flight great and puissant Armies; it has prevailed against the ^orest of
Judgments, as Fire, Sword, wild Beasts, etc. By Faith and Prayer, we may even,
as it were, hold Gods hands from destroying a Nation, when they are lifted up
to destroy a sinful people, Exodus 32.9,10. And the Lord said unto Moses, I have
seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people: Now therefore let me
alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and
I will make of thee a great Nation. Though the Lord was exceedingly provoked
against Israel, yet by the Faith and Prayer of Moses, his hands were held that
he did not destroy them. Moses takes hold of the Covenant, and pleads that in
Prayer, and thereby prevailed with God to turn from his wreth, and to repent of
the evil that he thought to do unto the people of Israel, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.
The Lord stir up the like Spirit of Faith and Pryer in his Servants in this
Nation, that they that make mention of the Name of the Lord, may never hold
their peace day nor night, but may cry mightily to the Lord, and give him no
rest, until they have prevailed with him, through the mediation of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to turn from the fierceness of his anger, and to cease contending
with us by his mighty Judgments, and until he establish and make us a praise in
the Earth.

FINIS.

