The Unreasonableness of Separation: OR, An Impartial Account OF THE History,
Nature, and Pleas OF THE Present Separation FROM THE Communion of the Church of
ENGLAND. To which, Several late LETTERS are Annexed, of Eminent Protestant
Divines Abroad, concerning the Nature of our Differences, and the Way to
Compose Them. By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to HIS MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul' s
Churchyard. MDCLXXXI.

THE PREFACE.
IT is reported by Persons of unquestionable credit, that after all the Service
B. Jewel had done against the Papists, upon his Preaching a Sermon at St.
Paul's- Cross, in Defense of the Orders of this Church, and of Obedience to
them, Archbishop Whitgift's Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, p. 423.
he was so Ungratefully and Spitefully used by the Dissenters of that Time,
that for his own Vindication he made a Solemn Protestation on his Deathbed,
Life of Bishop Jewel before his Works, n. 34.
That what he then said, was neither to please some, Vita Juelli per Hum^red.
p. 255.
nor to displease others, but to Promote Peace and Unity among Brethren. I am
far from the vanity of thinking, any thing I have been able to do, in the same
Cause, fit to be compared with the Excellent Labors of that Great Light, and
Ornament of this Church, (whose Memory is preserved to this day, with due
Veneration in all the Protestant Churches;) but the hard Usage I have met with,
upon the like occasion, has made such an Example more observable to me;
especially when I can make the same Protestation, with the same sincerity as he
did. For, however it has been Maliciously suggested by some, and too easily
believed by others, that I was put upon that Work, with a design to inflame our
Differences, and to raise a fresh persecution against Dissenting Protestants; I
was so far from any thought tending that way, that the only Motive I had to
undertake it, was, my just Apprehension, that the Destruction of the Church of
England, under a Pretense of Zeal against Popery, was one of the most likely
ways to bring it in. And I have hitherto seen no cause (and I believe I shall
not) to alter my opinion in this matter; which was not rashly taken up, but
formed in my Mind from many years Observation of the Proceedings of that
Restless Party (I mean the Papists) among us; which has always Aimed at the
Ruin of this Church, as one of the Most Probable Means, if others failed, to
compass their Ends. As to their Secret and more Compendious ways of doing
Mischief, they lie too far out of our View, till the Providence of God, at the
same time, discovers and disappoints them; but this was more open and visible,
and although it seemed the farther way about, yet they promised themselves no
small success by it. Many Instruments and Engines they made use of in this
design; many ways and times they set about it, and although they met with
several disappointments, yet they never gave it over; but, Would it not be very
strange, that when they can appear no longer in it, others, out of mere Zeal
against Popery, should carry on the Work for them?

This seems to be a great Paradox to unthinking People, who are carried away
with mere Noise and Pretenses, and hope those will secure them most against the
Fears of Popery, who talk with most Passion, and with least Understanding
against it; whereas no persons do really give them greater advantages than
these do. For, where they meet only with intemperate Railings, and gross
Misunderstandings of the State of the Controversies between them and us (which
commonly go together) the more subtle Priests let such alone to spend their
Rage and Fury; and when the heat is over, they will calmly endeavor to let them
see, how grossly they have been deceived in some things, and so will more easily
make them believe, they are as much deceived in all the rest. And thus the East
and West may meet at last; and the most furious Antagonists may become some of
the easiest Converts. This I do really fear will be the case of many Thousands
among us, who now pass for most zealous Protestants; if ever, which God forbid,
that Religion should come to be Uppermost in England. It is therefore of mighty
consequence for preventing the Return of Popery, that Men rightly understand
what it is. For, when they are as much afraid of an innocent Ceremony, as of
real Idolatry; and think they can Worship Images, and Adore the Host on the
same grounds, that they may use the Sign of the Cross, or Kneel at the
Communion; when they are brought to see their mistake in one case, they will
suspect themselves deceived in the other also. For they who took that to be
Popery which is not, will be apt to think Popery it self not so bad as it was
represented, and so from want of right understanding the Differences between
us, may be easily carried from one Extreme to the other. For, when they find
the undoubted Practices of the Ancient Church condemned as Popish and
Antichristian by their Teachers, they must conclude Popery to be of much
greater Antiquity than really it is; and when they can Trace it so very near
the Apostles times, they will soon believe it settled by the Apostles
themselves. For, it will be very hard to persuade any considering Men that the
Christian Church should degenerate so soon, so unanimously, so universally, as
it must do, if Episcopal Government, and the use of some significant Ceremonies
were any parts of that Apostasy. Will it not seem strange to them, that when
some Human Polities have preserved their First Constitution so long, without
any considerable Alteration, that the Government instituted by Christ, and
settled by his Apostles, should so soon after be changed into another kind, and
that so easily, so insensibly, that all the Christian Churches believed, they
had still the very same Government which the Apostles left them? Which is a
matter so incredible, that those who can believe such a part of Popery could
prevail so soon in the Christian Church; may be brought upon the like grounds
to believe, that many others did. So mighty a prejudice does the Principles of
our Churches Enemies, bring upon the Cause of the Reformation. And those who
foregoe the Testimony of Antiquity, as all the Opposers of the Church of
England must do, must unavoidably run into insuperable difficulties in dealing
with the Papists, which the Principles of our Church do lead us through. For we
can justly charge Popery as an unreasonable Innovation, when we allow the
undoubted Practices and Government of the Ancient Church, for many Ages after
Christ. But it is observed by Bishop Sanderson, That those who reject the
Usages of our Church as Popish and Antichristian, Preface to 2d Vol. of Sermon.
Sect. 11.
when Assaulted by Papists, will be apt to conclude Popery to be the old
Religion, which in the purest and Primitive Times was Professed in all
Christian Churches throughout the World. Whereas the sober English Protestant,
is able, by the Grace of God, with much Evidence of Truth, and without
forsaking his Old Principles, to justify the Church of England from all
imputation of Heresy or Schism, and the Religion thereof, as it stood by Law
established, from the like imputation of Novelty. Wherein he professes to lay
open the inmost thoughts of his heart in this sad business before God and the
World. I might show, by particular Instances, from my present Adversaries, that
to defend their own practices they are driven to maintain such Principles, as
by evident consequences from them, do overthrow the Justice and Equity of the
Reformation; but I leave those things to be observed in their proper places:
Yet I do not question the Sincerity of many Men's Zeal against Popery, who, out
of too eager a desire of upholding some particular Fancies of their own, may
give too great advantage to our Common Enemies.

Three ways Bishop Sanderson observes, Preface to the First Volume, Sect. 18.
our Dissenting Brethren, though not intentionally and purposely, yet really
and eventually have been the great Promoters of the Roman Interest among us.
(1.) By putting to their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy. And,
says he, it is very well known to many what rejoicing that Vote brought to the
Romish Party: How even in Rome it self they Sung their Jo-^aeans upon the
Tidings thereof, and said Triumphantly, Now the day is ours; Now is the
Fatal-Blow given to the Protestant Religion in England. (2) By opposing the
Interest of Rome with more Violence than Reason. (3) By frequent mistaking the
Question; but especially through the necessity of some false Principle or
other, which, having once imbibed, they think themselves bound to maintain:
whatever becomes of the Common Cause of our Reformation. Which may at last
suffer as much through some Men's folly and indiscretion, who pretend to be the
most Zealous Protestants, as by all the Arts and Designs of our open Enemies.
For, as the same Learned and Judicious Bishop, has said in this case, Many a
Man, when he thought most to make it sure, has quite marred a good business,
by over-doing it. Thus when the Papists of late years, have not been able to
hinder the taking many things into consideration, against their interest, it
has been observed, that their Instruments have been for the most violent
Counsels, knowing, that either they would be wholly ineffectual, or if they
were pursued, they might in the end bring more advantage than prejudice to
their Cause. And it is to be feared, they may still hope to do their business,
as Divines observe the Devil does; who, when he finds one extreme will not do,
he tries whether he can compass his end by the other: And no doubt they will
extremely rejoice, if they can make some Men's Fears of Popery, prove at last an
effectual means to bring it about. As some of the Jews of old, out of a rash
and violent zeal for the preservation of the purity of their Religion (as they
pretended) by opposing the Sacrifices offered by Strangers, and denying the use
of the lawful Customs of their Country, brought the Roman Power upon them, and
so hastened the destruction both of their Religion and Country too. I do not
mention this, as though we could take too great care by good and wholesome Laws
to strengthen the Protestant Interest, and by that means, to keep out Popery;
but only to show, what mighty prejudice an indiscreet Zeal at this time may
bring upon us; if Men suffer themselves to be transported so far as to think
that overthrowing the Constitution of this Church will be any means to secure
the Protestant Religion among us.

For, What is it which the Papists have more envied and maligned than the
Church of England? What is it they have more wished to see broken in pieces? As
the late Cardinal Barberini said in the hearing of a Gentleman who told it me,
He could be contented there were no Priests in England, so there were no
Bishops; for then he supposed, their Work would do it self. What is it they
have used more Arts and Instruments to destroy, than the Constitution and
Government of this Church? Did not Cranmer and Ridley, and Hooper, and Farrar,
and Latimer, all Bishops of this Church, suffer Martyrdom by their Means? Had
not they the same kind of Episcopacy which is now among us; and which some now
are so busy in seeking to destroy; by publishing one Book after another, on
purpose to represent it as unlawful and inconsistent with the Primitive
Institution? Is all this done for the honor of our Reformation? Is this the way
to preserve the Protestant Religion among us; to fill Men's Minds with such
Prejudices against the first settlement of it; as to go about to make the World
believe, that the Church Government then established was repugnant to the
Institution of Christ; and that our Martyr-Bishops exercised an unlawful
Authority over Diocesan Churches? But, Whither will not Men's Indiscreet Zeal,
and love of their own Fancies carry them, especially after 40 years
prescription? I do not say such Men are set on by the Jesuits, but I say, they
do their Work as effectually, in blasting the credit of the Reformation, as if
they were. And yet after all these pains, and Forty years Meditations, I do not
question but I shall make it appear, that our present Episcopacy, is agreeable
to the Institution of Christ, and the best and most flourishing Churches. And,
Wherein does our Church differ from its first Establishment? Were not the same
Ceremonies then appointed? the same Liturgy in Substance then used? concerning
which Dr. Tailor who then suffered Martyrdom, Acts and Monuments, Tom. 3. p.
171.
publicly declared; That the whole Church Service was set forth in King
Edward' s days, with great deliberation, by the Advice of the best Learned Men
in the Realm, and Authorized by the whole Parliament, and Received and
Published gladly through the whole Realm; which Book was never Reformed but
once, and yet by that one Reformation, it was so fully perfected, according to
the Rules of our Christian Religion in every behalf, that no Christian
Conscience could be offended with any thing therein contained, I mean, says
he, of that Book Reformed. Yet this is that Book, whose constant use is now
pleaded by some, together with our Ceremonies, as a ground for the necessity of
Separation from our Churches Communion.

But if we trace the Footsteps of this Separation as far as we can, we may find
strong probabilities, that the Jesuitical Party had a great influence on the
very first beginnings of it. For which, we must consider, that when the Church
of England was restored in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, there was no open
Separation from the Communion of it, for several years, neither by Papists, nor
Non-conformists. At last, the more Zealous Party of the Foreign Priests and
Jesuits, finding this Compliance would in the end utterly destroy the Popish
Interest in England, they began to draw off the secret Papists from all
Conformity with our Church, which the old Queen Mary's Priests allowed them in:
this raised some heat among themselves, but at last the way of Separation
prevailed, as the more pure and perfect way. But this was not thought
sufficient by these busy Factors for the Church of Rome, unless they could,
under the same pretense of purity and perfection, draw off Protestants from the
Communion of this Church too. To this purpose Persons were employed under the
disguise of more Zealous Protestants, to set up the way of more Spiritual
Prayer, and greater Purity of Worship than was observed in the Church of
England: that so the People, under these Pretenses, might be drawn into
Separate Meetings. Of this we have a Considerable Evidence lately offered to
the World, Foxes and Firebrands. 1680.
in the Examination of a Priest so employed at the Council Table, A. D. 1567.
being the 9th of Q. Elizabeth, which is published from the Lord Burleighs
Papers, which were in the hands of Archbishop Usher, and from him came to Sir
James Ware, whose Son brought them into England, and lately caused them to be
Printed. Two years after, one Heath a Jesuit was Summoned before the Bishop of
Rochester on a like account, for disparaging the Prayers of the Church, and
setting up Spiritual Prayers above them; and he declared to the Bishop, That he
had been six years in England, and that he had labored to refine the
Protestants, and to take off all smacks of Ceremonies, and to make the Church
purer. When he was seized on, a Letter was found about him from a Jesuit in
Spain, wherein he takes notice, how he was admired by his Flock; and tells him,
they looked on this way of dividing Protestants as the most effectual to bring
them all back to the Church of Rome; and in his Chamber, they found a Bull from
Pius V. to follow the Instructions of the Society for dividing the Protestants
in England; and the License from his Fraternity. There is one thing in the
Jesuits Letter deserves our farther consideration, which the Publisher of it
did not understand: which is, that Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson are there
mentioned, as Persons employed to sow a Faction among the German Heretics;
which he takes to be spoken of the Sects in Germany; but by the German
Heretics the English Protestants are meant, i.e. Lutherans: and these very Men
are mentioned by our Historians, without knowing of this Letter, as the most
active and busy in the beginning of the Separation. Of these (says Fuller)
Coleman, Church History, l. 1. p. 81. History of Presbyter. l. 6. p. 257.
Button, Hallingham and Benson were the chief. At which time (says Heylin)
Benson, Button, Hallingham, and Coleman, and others taking upon them to be of
more ardent Zeal than others, etc. That time is 1568, which agrees exactly with
the Date of that Letter at Madrid, October 26. 1568. And both these had it from
a much better Author than either of them; Annals Elizabethae, A. D. 1568.
Camden I mean; who says, That while Harding, Sanders, and others attacked our
Church on one side; Coleman, Button, Hallingham, Benson, and others were as
busy on the other; who, under pretense of a purer Reformation, opposed the
Discipline, Liturgy, and Calling of our Bishops, as approaching too near to the
Church of Rome. And he makes these the Beginners of those Quarrels which
afterward brake out with great violence. Now, that there is no improbability
in the thing, will appear by the suitableness of these Pretenses about
Spiritual Prayer, to the Doctrine and Practices of the Jesuits. For they are
professed despisers of the Cathedral Service, and are excused from their
attendance on it by the Constitutions of their Order; and are as great admirers
of Spiritual Prayer, and an Enthusiastic way of Preaching, as appears by the
History of the first Institution of their Order, by Orlandinus and Maffeius.
They who are acquainted with their Doctrine of Spiritual Prayer, will find that
which is admired and set up here, as so much above Set-Forms, to be one of the
lowest of three sorts among them. That Gift of Prayer which Men have, but
requires the Exercise of their own Gifts to stir it up, they call Oration
acquisita, acquired Prayer; although they say, the Principle of it is infused.
The Second is, by a special immediate influence of the Holy Ghost upon the
Mind, with the concurrence of infused habits. The Third is far above either of
these, which they call the Prayer of Contemplation, and is never given by way
of habit to any; but lies in immediate and unexpressible unions. All these I
^ould easily show to be the Doctrine received and magnified in the Roman
Church, V. Thom. a Jesus, de natura divinae Orationis.
especially by those who pretend to greater Purity and Spirituality than
others. But this is sufficient to my purpose, to prove, that there is no
improbability that they should be the first setters up of this way in England.
And it is observable, that it was never known here, or in any other Reformed
Church before this time: and therefore the beginning of it is unjustly fathered
by some on T. C. But by whomsoever it was begun, it met with such great success
in the zeal and warmth of devotion which appeared in it, that no Charm has
been more effectual, to draw injudicious People into a contempt of our Liturgy,
and admiring the Way of Separation. When by such Arts the People were possessed
with an Opinion of a more pure and Spiritual Way of Worship than was used in
our Church, they were easily drawn into the admiration of those, who found
fault with the Liturgy and Ceremonies that were used among us; and so the
Divisions wonderfully increased in a very short time. And the Papists could not
but please themselves to see that other Men did their Work so effectually for
them. For the Authors of the Admonition 14 Elizab. declared, They would have
neither Papists nor others constrained to Communicate: which although, Defense
of the Answer, p. 605.
as Archbishop Whitgift says, they intended as a Plea for their own
Separation from the Church, yet, says he, the Papists could not have met with
better Proctors. And elsewhere he tells them, That they did the Pope very good
service, Page 55.
and that he would not miss them for any thing. For what is his desire but to
have this Church of England (which he has Accused) utterly defaced and
discredited, to have it by any means overthrown, if not by Foreign Enemies, yet
by Domestical Dissension. And, What fitter and apter Instruments could he have
had for that purpose than you, who under pretense of zeal, overthrow that which
other Men have builded, under color of Purity, seek to bring in Deformity, and
under the Cloak of Equality and Humility, would usurp as great Tyranny and
lofty Lordliness over your Parishes, as ever the Pope did over the whole
Church? And in another place, he says, They were made the Engines of the Roman
Conclave, whereby they intend to overthrow this Church by our own Folly, which
they cannot compass by all their Policy. Fair warning second Part Printed by H.
March. 1663.
Archbishop Grindal (as I find a Letter of his) expressed his great fear of
two things, Atheism and Popery, and both arising out of our needless Divisions
and Differences, fomented, he doubts not by Satan the Enemy of Mankind, and the
Pope the Enemy of Christendom. By these differences, the Enemies of our
Religion gain this, That nothing can be established by Law in the Protestant
Religion, whose every part is opposed by one or other of her own Professors; so
that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have their opportunity
to urge their way, which is attended with Order and Government, and our
Religion continuing thus distracted and divided, some vile wretches lay hold of
the Arguments on one side to confute the other; and so hope at last to destroy
all. Dr. Sutcliffe said long ago, That Wise Men apprehended these unhappy
Questions about Indifferent things to be managed by the subtle Jesuits, thereby
to disturb the Peace and Settlement of our Church, until at last they enjoy
their long expected opportunity to set up themselves, and restore the exploded
Tyranny and Idolatry of the Church of Rome. Among Mr. Selden's MSS. there is
mention^d an odd Prophecy, That Popery should decay about 1500, and be restored
about 1700, which is there said to be most likely by means of our Divisions,
which threaten the Reformation, upon the Interest of Religion, and open
advantages to the Enemies of it, and nothing is there said to be so likely to
prevent it as a firm establishment of sound Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship
in this Church.

Among the Jesuit Contzens directions for reducing Popery into a Country,
Contzen Politic. l. 2. c. 18* Sect. 6*
the most considerable are,

(1.) That it be done under a pretense of ease to tender Consciences, which
will gain a reputation to the Prince, and not seem to be done from his own
Inclination, but out of kindness to his People.

(2.) That when Liberty is granted, then the Parties be forbid to contend with
each other, for that will make way the more easily for one side to prevail, and
the Prince will be commended for his love of Peace.

(3) That those, who suspect the Design, and Preach against it, be traduced as
Men that Prea^h very unseasonable Doctrine, that the^^ are Proud,
Self-opiniators, and Enemies to Peace and Union.

But, the special Advice he gives to a Catholic Prince, is,

(4.) To make as much use of the Divisions of his Enemies, Sect. 9.
as of the Agreement of his Friends. How much the Popish Party here has
followed these Counsels, will easily appear by reflection upon their behavior
these last Twenty years.

But that which more particularly reaches to our own case, is, the Letter of
Advice given to F. Young, by Seignior Ballarini, concerning the best way of
managing the Popish Interest in England, upon His Majesty's Restoration,
wherein are several very remarkable things. This Letter was found in F. Young's
Study, after his death, and was translated out of Italian, and printed in the
Collection before mentioned;

The First Advice is, To make the Obstruction of Settlement their great design,
especially upon the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, whereunto if
things should fall, they would be more firm than ever.

(2.) The next thing is, To remove the jealousies raised by Prin, Baxter, etc.
of their design upon the late Factions; and to set up the prosperous way of
Fears and Jealousies of the King and Bishops.

(3.) To make it appear underhand, how near the Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline of the Church of England comes to us: at how little distance their
Common Prayer is from our Mass; and that the wisest and ablest Men of that way
are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to us, or at least meet us
half way; hereby the more stayed Men will become more odious, and others will
run out of all Religion for fear of Popery.

(4.) Let there be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by you.

(5.) That the Trade and Treasure of the Nation may be engrossed between
themselves and other discontented Parties.

(6.) That the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England be Aspersed, as
either Worldly and Careless on the one hand; or so Factious on the other, that
it were well they were removed.

These are some of those excellent Advices then given, and how well they have
been followed we all know.

For, according to this Counsel, when they could not hinder the Settlement
then, The great thing they aimed at for many years, was, the breaking in pieces
the Constitution of this Church by a General Toleration. This Coleman owned at
his Trial, Coleman's Tr^al, p. 101*
and after Sentence, Declared, That possibly he might be of an Opinion, that
Popery might come in, if Liberty of Conscience had been granted. The Author of
the Two Conferences between L'Chese and the Four Jesuits, owns the Declaration
of Indulgence, 1671/2, to be of the Papists procuring; but he says, the
Presbyterians presently suspected the Kindness, and like wise Men closed with
the Conformists; and refused the Bait, however specious it seemed, when they
saw the Hook that lay under it. It was so far from this, that when one of the
furious Dissenters, suspected the kindness, and made Queries upon the
Declaration, wherein he represented it as a Stratagem to introduce Popery, and
Arbitrary Government; one of the more moderate Party among them, Wrote a
Public Vindication of their accepting the Licenses, Vindiciae libertatis
Evangelii;
wherein he declared to the World, in their Name, That they were not concerned
what the Secret Design might be, Or a Justification of our present Indulgence
and acceptance of Licenses, 1672. p. 12.
so long as the thing was good And why, says he, do you insinuate Jealousies?
Have not we Public, and the Papists only Private Allowance? In fine, we are
thankful for the Honor put upon us to be Public in our Meetings. Was this the
Suspicion they had of the Kindness, and their Wisdom in joining with the
Conformists? If such bold and notorious Untruths are published now, when every
one that can remember but 8 years backward, can disprove them, What account may
we expect will be given to Posterity of the Passages of these Times, if others
do not take care to set them right? And I am so far from believing that they
then closed with the Conformists, that I date the Presbyterian Separation
chiefly from that time. For, Did not they take out Indulgences, Build Meeting
Places, and keep up Separate Congregations ever since? And did not those, who
before seemed most inclinable to hold Communion with our Churches, then
undertake in Print to defend the lawfulness of these Separate Meetings upon
such Principles as will justify any Separation? Sacrilegious desertion
rebuked* and Tolerated Preaching Vindicated, 1672.
Upon this, many of those who frequented our Churches before, withdrew
themselves; and since they have formed and continued Separate Bodies; and upon
the death of one Minister have chosen another in his room. And, What is a
Formal Separation if this be not? Then the Ejected Ministers resorted to Cities
and Corporations, not to supply the necessities of those who wanted them, but
to gather Churches among them. Answer to Sacrileg. desert. p. 171. 1672.
For a very credible Person informs us, That in the City he lived in, where
there were not above 30 or 40 that ordinarily refused the Public, and met
Privately before the Indulgence; there were Ten Nonconformist Ministers that
came into their City. And, What could this be for, but to draw People from
their Churches, to make up Separate Congregations? And ever since that time,
they have been hammering out Principles, such as they are, to justify their
own practices. But the Presbyterians did not join with the Papists for a
General Toleration. I grant some of them did not, although very powerful
Charm's were at that time used to draw them in: and not a few swallowed the
Specious Bait, although some had the Skill to disentangle themselves from the
Hook which went along with it. But that this honor does not belong Universally
to them, I shall thus evidently prove.

In A. D. 1675 there was a Book Printed, Entitled, The Peaceable Design, or an
Account of the Non-conformists Meetings, by some Ministers of London. Page 71.
In it an Objection is thus put; But What shall we say then to the P^pists? The
Answer is, The Papist in our Account is but one sort of Recusants, and the
Conscientious and Peaceable among them, must be held in the same Predicament
with those among our selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer.
What is this, but joining for a Toleration of Popery? Page 72.
If this be not plain enough, these words follow, But as for the Common Papist,
who lives innocently in his way, he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes
under like Toleration.

This notable Book, with some few Additions and Alterations, has been since
Printed, and with great sincerity called, An Answer to my Sermon. And the Times
being changed since, the former Passage is thus altered, The Papist is one,
Page 32.
whose Worship to us is Idolatry, and we cannot therefore allow them the
liberty of Public Assembling themselves, as others of the Separation. Is it
Idolatry, and not to be tolerated in 1680? And was it Idolatry and to be
tolerated in 1675? Or was it no Idolatry then, but is become so now, and
intolerable Idolatry too? The latter passage has these Alterations; in stead
of, He is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration;
these are put in, He is to us, in regard of what he does in private, in the
matter of his God, as others who likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer. Now
we see Toleration struck out for the Papists; but it was not only visible
enough before, but that very Book was Printed with a Design to present it to
the Parliament, which was the highest way of owning their Concurrence with the
Papists for a general Toleration. And the true reason of this alteration is,
that then was then, and now is now.

And to show yet farther, what influence the Jesuitical Counsels have had upon
their People, as to the Course of Separation; I shall produce the Testimony of
a very considerable Person among them, who understood those affairs as well as
any Man, viz Mr. Ph. Nigh. Who, not long before his Death, foreseeing the
Mischievous Consequence of those Extravagant Heats, the People were running
into, VVrote a Discourse on purpose, to prove it lawful to hear the Conforming
Ministers, and Answers all the Common Objections against it; toward the
C^nclusion he wonders, how the differing Parties came to be so agreed, in
thinking it unlawful to hear us Preach; Page 250.
but he says, He is persuaded it is one constant design of Satan in the
variety of ways of Religion he has set on foot by Jesuits among us. Let us
therefore be more aware of whatsoever tends that way. Here we have a plain
Confession of a Leading Man among the Dissenters, That the Jesuits were very
busy among them, and that they and the Devil joined together in setting them
at the greatest distance possible from the Church of England; and that those
who would countermine the Devil and the Jesuits, must avoid whatever tends to
that height of Separation the People were run into. And Mr. Baxter, in those
days, viz. but a little before the Indulgence came out, was so sensible of the
Mischief of Separation, Preface to the Defense of the Cure, p. 17.
that he says, Our Division gratifieth the Papists, and greatly hazardeth the
Protestant Religion, and that more than most of your seem to believe, or to
regard. Where he speaks to the Separating People. And among other great
inconveniences of Separation, which he mentions, this is one, Defense of the
Cure of Divisions, introduction, p. 52, etc.
That Popery will get by it so great advantage as may hazard us all, and we may
lose that, which the several Parties do contend about.

Two ways especially Popery will grow out of our Divisions.

(1.) By the odium and scorn of our disagreements, inconsistency, and
multiplied Sects: they will persuade People, that we must come for Unity to
them, or else run Mad, and crumble into dust and individuaals. Thousands have
been drawn to Popery, or confirmed in it by this Argument already; and I am
persuaded, that all the Arguments else in Bellarmin, and all other Books that
ever were Written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
Multitude of Sects among our selves. Yea, some Professors of Religious
strictness, of great esteem for Godliness, have turned Papists themselves, when
they were giddy and wearied with turnings; and when they had run from Sect to
Sect, and found no consistency in any.

(2.) Either the Papists by increasing the Divisions, would make them be
accounted Seditious, Rebellious, dangerous to the Public Peace; or else when
so many Parties are constrained to beg and wait for liberty, the Papists may
not be shut out alone, but have Toleration with the rest. And, says he, Shall
they use our hands to do their Works, and pull their Freedom out of the Fire?
We have already unspeakably served them, both in this, and in abating the Odium
of the Gunpowder Plot, and their other Treasons, Insurrections, and Spanish
Invasion.

Thus freely did Mr. Baxter Write at that time; and even after the Indulgence,
he has these passages, concerning the Separating and Dividing Humor of their
People; It shameth, it grieveth us to see and hear from England, and from New
England this common cry, Sacrilegious desertion, p. 103, 104.
We are endangered by Divisions, principally because the Self-conceited part of
the Religious People, will not be ruled by their Pastors, but must have their
way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church and them. And soon after he says
to them, You have made more Papists than ever you or we are like to recover.
Nothing is any whit considerable that a Papist has to say, till he comes to
your case, and says, Does not experience tell you, that without Papal Unity
and Force, these People will never be ruled, or united? It is you that tempt
them to use Fire and Faggot, that will not be ruled nor kept in concord, by the
Wisest, and holiest, and most Self-denying Ministers upon Earth. (Are not these
kind words for themselves, considering what he gives to others?) And must you,
even you, that should be our comfort, become our shame, and break our hearts,
and make Men Papists by your Temptation? Woe to the World because of offenses,
and woe to some by whom they come.

Let now any impartial Reader Judge, who did most effectually serve the Papists
Designs, those who kept to the Communion of the Church of England, or those who
fell into the Course of Separation? I will allow, what Mr. Baxter says,
Defense of the Cure, p. 53.
That they might use their endeavors to exasperate the several Parties against
each other; and might sometimes press the more rigorous execution of Laws
against them; but then it was to set them at the greater distance from us, and
to make them more pliable to a General Toleration And they sometimes
complained, that those who were most adverse to this, found themselves under
the severity of the Law, when more tractable Men escaped; which they have
weakly imputed to the implacable temper of the Bishops, when they might easily
understand the true Cause of such a discrimination: But from the whole it
appears, that the grand Design of the Papists for many years, was to break in
pieces the Constitution of the Church of England; which being done, they
flattered themselves with the hopes of great Accessions to their strength and
Party; and in order to this, they inflamed the differences among us to the
utmost height, on purpose to make all the Dissenting Parties to join with them
for a General Toleration; which they did not question would destroy this
Church, and advance their Interest. Whether they did judge truly in this, I am
not to determine; it is sufficient that they went upon the greatest
Probabilities. But, Is it possible to imagine such skilful Engineers should use
so much Art and Industry to undermine and blow up a Bulwark, unless they hoped
to gain the place, or at lest some very considerable advantage to themselves by
it? And it is a most unfortunate condition our Church is in, if those who
design to bring in Popery, and those who design to keep it out, should both
conspire toward its destruction.

This, which I have represented, was the posture of our Church Affairs, when
the late horrible Plot of the Papists, for Destruction of the Kings Person, and
Subversion of our Religion came to be discovered. It seems, they found the
other methods tedious and uncertain; and they met with many cross accidents,
many rubs and disappointments in their way; and therefore they resolved upon a
Summary way of Proceeding, and to do their business by one blow. Which, in
regard of the circumstances of our Affairs, is so far from being incredible,
that if they had no such design, it is rather a VVonder, they had not;
especially considering the allowed Principles and Practices in the Church of
Rome. Upon the discovery of the Plot, and the Means of Papists used confirm the
Truth of it (knowing our great proneness to Infidelity) by the Murder of a
worthy Gentleman who received the Depositions, the Nation was extremely Alarmed
with the apprehensions of Popery, and provoked to the utmost detestation of it.
Those who had been long apprehensive of their restless designs, were glad to
see others awakened; but they seemed like Men roused out of a deep sleep, being
amazed and confounded, fearful of every thing, and apt to mistrust all persons
who were not in such a Consternation as themselves. During this heat, some of
us, both in Private, and Public, endeavored to bring the Dissenters to the
sense of the necessity of Union among Protestants, hoping the apprehension of
present danger, common to us all, would have disposed them to a better
inclination to the things which belong to our Peace. But finding the Nation
thus vehemently bent against Popery, those who had formerly carried it so
smoothly and fairly toward the common and innocent Papists (as they then
styled them) and thought them equally capable of Toleration with themselves,
now they fly out into the utmost rage against them; and others were apt, by sly
insinuations, to represent those of the Church of England (some of whom had
appeared with vigor and resolution against Popery, when they were trucking
underhand for Toleration with them) as Papists in Masquerade. But now they tack
about, and strike in with the violent Rage of the People, and none so fierce
against Popery as they. What influence it has had upon others I know not, but
I confess it did not lessen my esteem of the Integrity of those of the Church
of England, that they were not so much transported by sudden heats, beyond the
just bounds of Prudence, and Decency, and Humanity, toward their greatest
Enemies, having learnt from St. Paul, That, the wrath of Man works not the
righteousness of God. They expected as little favor from them as any, if they
had prevailed, and I doubt not but some of them had been made the first
Examples of their Cruelty. However, this was interpreted to be want of Zeal, by
those who think there is no Fire in the House, unless it flame out at the
Windows; and this advantage was taken by the inveterate Enemies of our Church,
to represent us all as secret friends to the Papists (so improbable a Lie, that
the Devil himself would Blush at the Telling of it, not for the Malice, but the
Folly and Ill Contrivance of it) and those who were more moderate, were content
to allow 3 or 4 among the Bishops to be Protestants, and about 4 or 5 among the
Clergy of London To feed this humor (which wonderfully spread among more of the
People than we could have believed to have been so weak) most of the Malicious
Libels against the Church of England were Reprinted and dispersed, and new ones
added to them. Among the rest, one Translated out of French, to prove the
Advances of the Church of England toward Popery; but so unhappily managed,
that those Persons are Chiefly Mentioned, who had appeared with most zeal
against Popery. Yet, so much, had the Arts of some Men prevailed over the
Judgments of others, that even this Discourse was greedily swallowed by them.
But I must do the Author of it that Right, to declare, that before his Death,
he was very sensible of the Injury he had done to some Worthy Divines of our
Church therein; and begged God and them Pardon for it. Wherein, as he followed
the Example of some others, who were great Enemies to our Church while they
lived, but repented of it, when they came to die; so, I hope, others, upon
better consideration, will see reason to follow his. But this was but an
inconsiderable trifle in comparison of what follow. We were still in hopes,
that Men so Wise, so Self-denying as the Nonconformist Ministers represent
themselves to the World, would, in so Critical a time, have made some steps or
advances toward an Union with us; at lest to have let us known their Sense of
the Present State of things, and their Readiness to join with us, as far as
they could, against the Assaults of a Common Enemy. In stead of this, those we
Discoursed with, seemed farther off than before; and when we lest expected such
a Blow, under the Name of a Plea for Peace, out comes a Book, which far better
deserved the Title of a Plea for Disorder and Separation, not without frequent,
sharp, and bitter Reflections on the Constitution of our Church, and the
Conformity required by Law; as though it had been designed on purpose, to
Represent the Clergy of our Church as a Company of Notorious, Lying and
Perjured Villains, for Conforming to the Laws of the Land, and Orders
established among us; for there are no fewer than 30 Tremendous Aggravations of
the Sin of Conformity set down in it. And all this done, without the lest
Provocation given on our side; when all our Discourses that touched them,
tended only to Union, and the Desirableness of Accommodation. If this had been
the single Work of one Man, his Passion and Infirmities might have been some
tolerable excuse for the indiscretion of it; but he Writes in the Name of a
Whole Party of Men, and delivers the Sense of all his Acquaintance; and if
those Principles be owned, and allowed by them, there can hardly be expected
any such thing as a National Settlement, but all Churches must be heaps of
Sand, which may lie together till a puff of Wind disperses them; having no
firmer Bond of Union, than the present humor and good will of the People. But
of the Principles of that Book, I have Discoursed at large, as far as concerns
the business of Separation in the Second and Third Parts of the following
Treatise.

But, as though this had not been enough, to show what Enemies to Peace Men may
be under a Pretense of it; not long after, the same Author sets forth another
Book, with this Title, The true and only Way of Concord of all the Christian
Churches. As though he had been Christ's Plenipotentiary upon Earth, and were
to set the Terms of Peace and War among all Christians; but I wish he had
showed himself such a Pattern of Meekness, Humility, Patience, and a Peaceable
Disposition, that we might not have so much Reason to Dispute his Credentials.
But this is likewise Fraught with such impracticable Notions, and dividing
Principles; as though his whole design had been, to prove, That there is No
True Way of Concord among Christians: for if there be no other, than what he
allows; all the Christian Churches this day in the World, are in a mighty
mistake. When I looked into these Books, and saw the Design of them, I was
mightily concerned, and infinitely surprised, that a Person of his Reputation
for Piety, of his Age, and Experience in the World, and such a Lover of Peace,
as he had always professed himself; and one who tells the World so often of his
Dying, and of the Day of Judgment, should think of leaving two such Firebrands
behind him, as both these Books will appear to any one who duly considers
them, which have been since followed by 4 or 5 more to the same purpose, so
that he seems resolved to leave his Life and Sting together in the Wounds of
this Church. And it made me extremely pity the case of this poor Church, when
even those who pretend to Plead for Peace, and to bring Water to quench her
Flames, do but add more Fuel to them This gave the first occasion to those
thoughts, which I afterward delivered in my Sermon; for since by the means of
such Books, the zeal of so many People was turned off from the Papists against
those of our Church, I saw a plain necessity, that either we must be run down
by the Impetuous Violence of an Enraged, but Vnprovoked Company of Men, or we
must venture our selves to try, whether we could stem that Tide, which we saw
coming upon us. And it falling to my Lot to Preach in the most public Auditory
of the City, at a more than usual Appearance, being the first Sunday in the
Term, I considered the Relation I stood in under our Honored Diocesan, to the
Clergy of the City, and therefore thought my self more obliged to take notice
of what concerned the Peace and Welfare of the Churches therein. Upon these
Considerations, I thought fit to take that opportunity, to lay open the due
sense I had of the Unreasonableness and Mischief of the Present Separation.
Wherein I was so far from intending to reflect on Mr. B. as Preaching in the
Neighborhood of my Parish, that to my best remembrance, I never once thought of
it, either in the making or Preaching of that Sermon. And yet throughout his
Answer he would insinuate, That I had scarce any one in my eye but himself. His
Books indeed had made too great an Impression on my Mind for me easily to
forget them: But it was the great, the Dangerous, the Unaccountable Separation,
which I knew to be in and about the City, without regard to the Greatness or
Smallness of Parishes, to the Abilities or Piety of their Ministers, or to the
Peace and Order of the Church we live in; which made me fix upon that Subject;
although I knew it to be so sore a place, that the Parties most concerned,
could hardly endure to have it touched, though with a Soft and Gentle hand.
However, I considered the Duty which I owe to God, and this Church, above the
esteem and good words of Peevish and Partial Men; as I had before done in my
dealing with the Papists; and I resolved to give them no Just Provocation by
Reproachful Language, or Personal Reflections; but if Truth and Reason would
Anger them, I did not hold my self obliged to study to please them.

But, against this whole Undertaking, there have been two common Objections.

First, That it was Unseasonable.

Secondly, That it was too Sharp and Severe.

To both these I shall Answer;

First, As to the Unseasonableness of it. What! Was it Unseasonable to persuade
Protestants to Peace and Unity? That surely is very seasonable at any time, and
much more then. And I appeal to any one that Reads it, whether this were not
the chief, and only Design of my Sermon. And, to say, This was Unseasonable, is
just, as if a Garrison were besieged by an Enemy, and in great danger of being
surprised, and although they had frequent notice of it given them, yet many of
the Soldiers were resolved not to join in a common body, under Command of their
Officers, but would run into Corners, a few in a Company, and do what they
list, and one should undertake to persuade them to return to their due
obedience, and to mind the Common Interest, and some Grave bystanders should
say, It is true, this is good Counsel at another time, but at this present it
is very Unseasonable. When could it be more seasonable, than when the sense of
their danger is greatest upon them? At another time it might have been less
necessary; but when the common danger is apparent to all, Men of Sense, or
common ingenuity, could not but take such advice most kindly at such a season.
But this advice was not given to themselves, but to the Magistrates and Judges,
and that made it look like a design to stir them up to a persecution of them.
There had been some color for this, if there had been the left word tending
that way through the whole Sermon. But this objection is generally made by
those who never read the Sermon, and never intend to read it; and such I have
found have spoken with the greatest bitterness against it. They resolved to
condemn it, and therefore would see nothing that might have altered their
Sentence. It is enough, it was Preached before the Magistrates and Judges, and
therefore it must be for persecution of Dissenters. No^e are so incapable of
Conviction, as those who presently determine what a thing must be, without
considering what it is. Is it not possible for a Man to speak of Peace before
Hannibal, or of Obedience to Government before Julius Caesar? Must one speak of
nothing but Drums and Trumpets before, great Generals? Which is just as
reasonable as to suppose, that a Man cannot Preach about Dissenters before
Judges and Magistrates, but he must design to stir them up to the severe
Execution of Laws? But it is to no purpose for me to think to convince those by
any Vindication, who will not be at the pains to read the Sermon it self, for
their own satisfaction. But the Dissenters themselves were not there to hear
it. And must we never Preach against the Papists but when they are present? It
seems they soon heard enough of it, by the Noise and Clamor they made about it.
Yet still this gives advantage to the Papists, for us to quarrel among our
selves. Would to God this advantage had never been given them! And Woe be to
them by whom these offenses come. And what must we do? Must we stand still with
open Arms, and naked Breasts to receive all the Wounds they are willing to give
us? Must we suffer our selves to be run down with a Popular fury, raised by
Reviling Books, and Pamphlets, and not open our Mouths for our own Vindication,
lest the Papists should overhear us? Which is, as if the unruly Soldiers in an
Army must be let alone in a Mutiny, for fear the Enemy should take notice, and
make some advantage of it. But which will be the greater advantage to him, to
see it spread and increase, or care taken in time to suppress it? If our
Dissenters had not appeared more Active, and busy than formerly; if they had
not both by public Writings, and secret Insinuations, gone about to blast the
Reputation of this Church, and the Members of it, so disingenuously, as they
have done; there might have been some pretense for the Unseasonableness of my
Sermon. But when those things were notorious, to say it was Unseasonable to
Preach such a Sermon then, or now to defend it; is, in effect to tell us, they
may say and do what they will against us, at all seasons; but whatever we say
or do for our own Vindication is Unseasonable; Which, under favor, seems to be
little less than a State of Persecution on our side; for it is, like setting us
in the Pillory, for them to throw dirt at us, without allowing us any means to
defend our Selves.

But some complain of the too great sharpness and severity of it. But, Wherein
does it lie? Not, in raking into old Sores, or looking back to the proceedings
of former times? Not, in exposing the particular faults of some Men, and laying
them to the charge of the whole Party? Not, in sharp and provoking reflections
on Men's Persons? All these I purposely, and with care declined. My design being
not to exasperate any; but to persuade and argue them into a better disposition
to Union, by laying open the common danger we are in, and the great Mischief of
the present Separation But I am told by one, Dr. O. Vindication, p. 4.
There are severe reflections upon the sincerity and honesty of the Designs of
the Non-conformists; Letter out of the Country, p. 7.
by another, that indeed I do not bespeak for them, Gibbets, Whipping-posts,
and Dungeons; nor (directly) any thing grievous to their flesh; but I do not
pass any gentle doom upon them, in respect of their Everlasting State. God
forbid, that I should Judge any one among them, as to their present sincerity,
or final condition; to their own Master they must stand or fall; but, my
business was to consider, the nature and tendency of their Actions. My Judgment
being, that a causless breaking the Peace of the Church we live in, is really
as great and as dangerous a Sin, as Murder; and in some respects aggravated
beyond it; and herein, having the concurrence of the Divines of greatest
reputation both Ancient and Modern: Would they have had me represented that as
no sin, which I think to be so great a one; or those as not guilty, whom in my
Conscience I thought to be guilty of it? Would they have had me suffered this
Sin to have lain upon them without reproving it; or, Would they have had me
found out all the soft and palliating considerations to have lessened their
sense of it? No, I had seen too much of this already: and a mighty prejudice
done thereby to Men, otherwise scrupulous and conscientious, that seem to have
lost all Sense of this Sin; as if there neither were, nor could be any such
thing; unless perhaps they should happen to quarrel among themselves in a
particular Congregation. Which is so mean, so jejune, so narrow a Notion of
Schism, so much short of that Care of the Churches Peace which Christ has made
so great a Duty of his Followers; that I cannot but wonder that Men of
understanding should be satisfied with it, unless they thought there was no
other way to excuse their own actings. And that I confess, is a shrewd
temptation. But, so far as I can judge, as far as the Obligation to preserve
the Churches Peace extends, so far does the Sin of Schism ^each; and the
Obligation to preserve the Peace of the Church extends to all lawful
Constitutions in order to it; or else it would fall short of the Obligation to
Civil Peace, which is as far as is possible, and as much as lies in us.
Therefore to break the Peace of the Church we live in, for the sake of any
lawful Orders and Constitutions made to preserve it, is directly the Sin of
Schism, or an unlawful breach of the Peace of the Church. And this is not to be
determined by Men's fancies, and present apprehensions; which they call the
Dictates of Conscience; but upon plain and evident grounds, manifesting the
repugnancy of the things required to the Laws and Institutions of Christ, and
that they are of that importance that he allows Men rather to divide from such
a Communion, than join in the practice of such things. We were in a lamentable
case, as to the Defense of the Reformation, if we had nothing more to plead
against the Impositions of the Church of Rome, than they have against ours: and
I think it impossible to defend the lawfulness of our Separation from them, if
we had no better grounds to proceed upon, than they have against our Church.
For the proof of this, I refer the Reader to the BOOK it self. This then being
my opinion concerning their Practices, Was this a fault in me, to show some
reason for it? And How could I do that without proving those Practices to be
sinful? and if they were sinful, How could they who knowingly and deliberately
continue in the Practice of them be innocent? What influence the prejudices of
Education, the Authority of Teachers, the almost Invincible Ignorance of some
weaker People, and the Incurable Biass of some Men's Minds may have to lessen
their Guilt, I meddle not with; but the Nature of the Actions, and the Tendency
of them* which I then declared to be Sinful; and I am so far from being altered
in my Judgment by any of the Answers I have seen (and I have read all that have
been published) that I am much more confirmed in it. But Dr. O. says, He had
seen a Collection made of severe reflections by the hand of a Person of Honor,
Pag^ 4.
with his Judgment upon them. I wish the Doctor had favored me with a sight of
them; but at present it is somewhat hard for me to make the Objections and
Answers too. And it was not so fairly done to mention them, unless he had
produced them. Therefore, to the ^nknown Objections, I hope no Answer is
expected.

But there is one expression wherein I am charged with a Scurrilous Sarcasm, or
a very Unchristian Judging Men's hearts, or a Ridiculous piece of Nonsense, viz.
When I say, That the most godly People among them can the lest endure to be to
told of their Faults: Now, Mischief of Impos. end of the Preface.
says Mr. A. How can they be most Godly, who cannot bear reproof of their
Faults, which is a main part of Godliness. I am really sorry, some of my
Answerers have so much made good the Truth of that Saying in its plainest
Sense. But there needs no more to clear my Intention in it, but to consider, of
whom it is spoken; viz. of those, who will not bear being told of the Sin of
Separation by their own Teachers. For my Words are, Is it that they Fear the
Reproaches of the People? which some few of the most Eminent Persons among
them, have found they must undergo, if they touch upon this Subject (for I know
not how it comes to pass, that the most Godly People among them can the lest
endure to be told of their Faults.) In all which words I had a particular
respect to the Case of Mr. Baxter who, after he had, with great honesty,
published his Cure of Divisions, and therein sharply rebuked the Separating,
Dividing Humor of the People, who pretended most to Religious Strictness, he
met with bitter Reproaches from them for the sake of this Freedom, that he was
foced to Publish a Defense of his Cure in Vindication of himself from them;
wherein he says, He was judged by them to be too Censorious of them, Preface,
p. 11, 13.
and too sharp in telling them of that which he did not doubt to be their Sin:
And again, If I be mistaken, Should you be so impatient, as not to bear with
one, that in such an Opinion differs from you? And why should not you bear
with my Dissent, as well as I do with yours? Page 15.
Again, Why should not you bear with lesser contradiction, when others must
bear with far greater from you? Will you proclaim you selves to be the more
impatient? You will then make Men think, you are the most guilty. -- And a
little after, And yet you that should be most patient, take it for a heinous
crime and injury, to be told, that you wrong them, and that you judge too
hardly of them; and that their Communion is not unlawful. And when we join to
this, what he says elsewhere, that they are the most Self-conceited Professors
who will not be ruled by their Ministers, but are most given to Division and
Separation: in a passage before mentioned; there needs no more to vindicate the
truth of this saying, than to show, that the most Self-conceited do often pass
for the most Godly among them; which is a figure so common, so easy to be
understood, that it needs no more Apology, than our Saviors calling the
Pharisees Righteous Men, and saying, they were so whole, as to need no
Physician. And I cannot think such figures which were used by our Savior,
unfit for a Pulpit.

But notwithstanding all the care I took to prevent giving any just occasion of
Offense, my Sermon had not been long abroad, but I heard of Great Clamors
against it. At first it went down quietly enough, and many of the People began
to Read and Consider it, being pleased to find so weighty and so necessary a
Point debated, with so much Calmness, and freedom from Passion. Which being
discerned by the Leaders, and Managers of the Parties, it was soon resolved,
that the Sermon must be cried down, and the People Dissuaded, by all means,
from Reading it. If any of them were Talked with about it, they shrunk up their
Shoulders, and looked Sternly, and shook their Heads, and hardly forbore some
Bitter Words both of the Author and the Sermon. Upon this followed a great Cry
and Noise, both in City and Country, against it; and some honest persons really
pitied me, thinking I had done some very ill thing; so many People were of a
sudden so set against me, and spoke so bitterly of my Sermon. I Asked, What the
matter was? What False Doctrine I had Preached? Did they suspect I was turned
Papist, at such a Time, when all the Nation was set against Popery? who had
Written so much against it, when others, who are now so fierce, were afraid to
appear? It was something, they said, had Angered them sorely, but they could not
tell What: which made me Read my Sermon over again, to see what Offensive
Passages there might be in it; after all, I could see no just cause for any
Offense, unless it were, that I persuaded the Dissenters to Submit to the
Church of England, and not the Church of England to Submit to them. And this, I
believe, lay at the bottom of many Men's Stomachs. They would have had me
Humor'd the Growing Faction, which, under a Pretense of Zeal against Popery,
Designed to Overthrow the Church of England; or, at lest have Preached for
Alterations and Abatements, and taking away Ceremonies and Subscriptions, and
leaving them full Liberty to do what they pleased; and then I might have gained
their good opinion, and been thought to have Preached a very Seasonable Sermon.
But supposing my own private opinion were never so much for some Abatements to
be made, that might tend to strengthen and unite Protestants, and were
consistent with our National Settlement; Had it been seasonable to have spoken
of the Alteration of Laws before Magistrates and Judges, who are tied up to the
Laws in being? Is it fit for private persons, when Laws are in force, to take
upon them to Judge what Laws are fit to continue, and what not? I think the
Alteration of Established Laws, which concern the Preservation of our Church
and Religion, one of the Weightiest things that can be taken into
Consideration. And although the Arguments are very plausible one way, yet the
Objections are very strong another. The Union of Protestants, the Ease of
Scrupulous Consciences, the providing for so many poor Families of Ejected
Ministers, are great Motives on our side; But,

1. The Impossibility of satisfying all Dissenters.

2. The Uncertainty of gaining any considerable number by Relaxations.

3. The Difficulty of keeping Factions out of the Church, considering the
Vngovernableness of some Men's Tempers and Principles.

4. The danger of breaking all in pieces by Toleration;

5. The Exposing our selves to the Papists, and others, by Receding too far
from the first Principles and Frame of our Reformation.

And 6. The Difficulty of keeping out Priests, pretending to be allowed
Dissenters, are very weighty Considerations on the other side.

So that, whatever Men talk of the easiness of taking away the present
Impositions, it is a sign they look no farther than their own case; and do not
consider the Strength and Union of a National Settlement, and the necessity
thereof to keep out Popery; and, How much easier it is to break things in
pieces, than to set them in order again; for, new Objections will still be
raised against any Settlement, and so the result may be nothing but Disorder
and Confusion. Of what moment these things may be thought to other persons, I
know not; but they were great enough to me, to make me think it very
unseasonable to meddle with Established Law's; but on the other hand, I could
not but think it seasonable to endeavor to remove such Scruples and Prejudices,
as hindered the People most from Communion with our Churches; for, as I said in
the Epistle before the Sermon, If the People be brought to Understand and
Practice their Duty, as to Communion with our Churches, other difficulties,
which obstruct our Union, will more easily be removed. This passage, Mr A.
tells me, Mischief of Imposition Preface toward the end.
was the Sport and Entertainment of the Coffe^-Houses. I confess, I am a great
Stranger to the Wisdom of those places; but I see Mr. A. is able to give me an
Account of the Sage Discourses upon Points of Divinity there. But if those
pleasant Gentlemen would have understood the difference between Lay-Communion,
and Ministerial Conformity, they might have apprehended the meaning of that
passage. For, I am of Opinion, if the People once thought themselves bound to
do, what they may lawfully do, toward Communion with us; many of the Ministers
who seem now most most forward to defend the Separation, would think of putting
a fairer Construction upon many things than now they do. And therefore I
thought it fittest to handle the Case of the People, who are either
over-violent in these matters, without ever considering them, or have met with
ill-instructors, who have not faithfully let them know what the terms of
Communion, as to themselves, were. For the Scruple of the Surplice seems to be
worn out; Kneeling at the Sacrament is generally allowed by the more Judicious
Non-conformists; and the only Scruple, as to them, about the Sign of the Cross,
is not, whether it be lawful for the Minister to use it, but whether it be
lawful for them to offer their Children to be Baptized where it is used; and,
as Mr. Baxter resolves the case; Baptism is Gods Ordinance, Christian Direct.
and his privilege, Cases Eccles. p. 49.
and the Sin (if it be one) is the Ministers, and not his. Another Man's sinful
Mode will not justify the neglect of our Duty; else we might not join in any
Prayer or Sacrament in which the Minister Modally sins: that is with none.
As to the Use of the Liturgy, Defense of Cure of Divis. Introd. p. 55.
Mr. Baxter says, He that Separateth from all Churches among us, on the
account of the Unlawfulness of our Liturgy, does Separate from them on a Reason
Common to All, or almost All Christian Churches upon Earth; the thoughts of
which he is not able to bear. And although the New Impositions, he says, makes
their Ministerial Conformity harder than formerly; yet the Peoples Conformity
is the same (if not easier, by some Amendments of the Liturgy) as when
Separation was fully confuted by the Old Non-conformists. Ib. and p. 88.
And the most Learned and Worthy of them, he says, Wrote more against
Separation, than the Conformists: and the present Non-conformists have not more
Wisdom, Learning, or Holiness than they. But, he says, they did not only urge
the People against Separation, but to come to the very beginning of the Public
Worship, preferring it before their private Duties. What ground was there now,
to make such a Hideous. Outcry about a Sermon, which persuaded Men to no more,
than the Old Pious, and Peaceable Nonconformists would have done; who talked
more sharply against the Sin, and Mischief of Separation, than I have done; as
may be seen in the First Part of the following Treatise?

But as if they had been the Papists Instruments, to execute the fury of their
Wrath and Displeasure against me, they Summon in the Power of their Party, and
resolve, with their full might, to fall upon me. And, as if it had not been
enough to deal with me by open Force, which is more Manly, and Generous; they
made use of mean and base Arts, by Scurrilous Rimes, by Virulent and Malicious
Libels sent to me without Names; by Idle Stories, and False Suggestions, to rob
me at once, of my Reputation, and the Tranquillity of my Mind. But I thank God,
I despised such pitiful Artifices, and such Unmanly and Barbarous Usage; which
made no other Impression on my mind, but to make me understand, that other Men
could use me, as Bad, or Worse, than the Papists. But this brought to my Mind a
Passage of Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop Whitgift' s Defense, etc. p. 423.
concerning their Predecessors usage of Bishop Jewel; after he had so stoutly
defended this Church against the Papists. But, says he, it is their manner,
except you please their humor in all things, though you otherwise deserve never
so well, all is nothing with them, but they will Deprave you, Rail on you,
Backbite you, Invent Lies of you, and spread False Rumors, as though you were
the Vilest Persons upon Earth I could hardly have believed so ill a Character
of Men pretending to any kind of Religion, had I not found so just a parallel;
abating only the due allowances that must be made as to my Case, with respect
to the far greater deserts of that incomparable Bishop. But notwithstanding all
their hard Censures of me, I do assure them, I am as firm a Protestant as ever
I was, and should be still as ready to Promote the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, yea, and to do any Real Kindness to the Dissenters themselves, that
may be consistent with the National Settlement of our Church, and the Honor of
our Reformation.

After a while, they thought fit to draw their Strength into open Field, and
the First who appeared against me, was Dr. Owen, who treated me with that
Civility, and Decent Language, that I cannot but Return him Thanks for it;
however, I was far from being satisfied with his Reasoning, as will appear in
the Book it self. The next was Mr. Baxter, who appeared with so much Anger, and
unbecoming Passion; that I truly pitied him; and was so far from being
transported by it, that it was enough to cure an inclination to an indecent
passion, to see, how ill it became a Man of his Age, Profession, and
Reputation. At first he sent me some Captious Questions for a Trial of Skill; I
Returned him Answer, They were not to the business; but if he intended to
Answer my Sermon (as I perceived by his Letter he was put upon it, and I knew
how hardly he could abstain from Writing however) I desired him not to make too
hasty a Reply. But he, who seldom takes the Advice of his Friends, was, I
suppose, the more provoked by this Good Counsel; and seems to have Written his
whole Book in one continued fit of Anger; and by some Rules of Civility
peculiar to himself, he published my Private Letter, without so much as letting
me know that he intended it. Whatever Injurious and Spiteful Reflections he
has made upon me through his Book, I can more easily forgive him, than he can
forgive himself, when he looks them over again with a better mind. And
therefore I pass over the Scurrility of his Preface, wherein, after he has in
20 Particulars described, the most Unskilful, Proud, Partial, Obstinate, Cruel,
Impertinent Adversaries he could think of places of Scripture, or Similitudes
for, he then concludes; But although all this be not the case of the Reverend
Doctor. What a malicious way of Reproaching is this? To name so many very ill
things, and to leave it to the Reader to apply as much as he pleases; and when
he is charged with any one to say, he meant not that, for he added, although
all this be not the case of R. Dr. If this be the Justice, the Charity, and
Ingenuity of Mr. B. and his Brethren, who put him upon Writing, they must give
me leave to think, there are some Nonconformist Ministers, that are not the
Wisest, the Meekest, nor the most Self-denying Men upon Earth. He seems much
concerned about my being likely to have the last Word: which I am very willing
to let him have, hoping he may come to himself before he Dies; and may live to
Repent of the Injuries he has done to his Brethren and the Mischiefs he has
done to the Church of God, by so industriously exposing the Governors of it,
and laying the Foundation for Endless Separation, as will appear in the
following Discourse.

The Third who entered the Lists, was one, who seemed to Write more like a
Well-disposed Gentleman, than like a Divine; he wishes very well to the Cause
he undertakes; he di^courses Gravely and Piously, without Bitterness and
Rancor, or any sharp Reflections, and sometimes with a great mixture of
Kindness toward one; for which, and his Prayers for me, I do heartily Thank
him. What I find Material to the business in his Book, I have considered in its
due place.

The Fourth comes forth with a more than ordinary briskness; and seems to set
up rather for a sort of Wit, than a Grave Divine. His Book resembled the Bird
of Athens, for it seems to be made up of Face and Feathers: For, setting aside
his Bold Sayings, his Impertinent Triflings, his hunting up and down for any
occasion of venting his little Stories and Similitudes, there is very little of
Substance left in him; but what he has borrowed from Dr. O. or Mr. B.
Methinks, such a light, vain, scurrilous Way of Writing, does not become such a
Tenderness of Conscience as our Dissenting Brethren pretend to. There is a sort
of pleasantness of Wit which serves to entertain the Reader in the rough and
deep Way of Controversies; but certainly there is a difference between the
Raillery and Good Humor of Gentlemen, and the Jests of Porters and Watermen.
But this Author seems to be Ambitious of the honor of a Second Martin, whose
way he imitates, and whose Wit he equals. Yet this is not his greatest Fault,
for he deals with me as a Man that was by any means to be run down, without
regard to common Ingenuity. For, suppose I had mistaken the Sense of my Text,
which I am certain I did not; yet I am not the only Person in the World that
Talks Impertinently. Suppose there had been a Fault in my Reasoning, methinks
the sense of Humane Frailty should make Men not grow Insolent upon such a
Discovery: and yet I do not know one thing which he has made it in; as will
appear hereafter. But, Will nothing serve but to Represent me to the World as a
kind of Atheistical Hypocrite, i. e. as a secret underminer of the proof of a
Deity, under the pretense of proving it? Yet, this he does more than once:
which was so remote from his Business, that nothing but a Wretched, Malicious
Design of Exposing me, could make him draw it in: He gives a gentle Touch at it
in his Preface, to prepare the Readers Appetite; but p. 70. he charges me with
proceeding upon such Principles, as plainly render it impossible by any certain
Argument to prove the existence of a Deity. Mr. B. had unhappily said, and
without the least ground, that my Principles overthrow all Religion; and Mr. A.
vouches it, and undertakes to prove it for him. Mr. B. begins his Plea for
Peace with a saying of St. Augustine, (he meant St. Hierom) that no Man ought to
be patient under the accusation of Heresy: What should a Man then be under the
accusation of being guilty of overthrowing all Religion, and rendering it
impossible, by any certain Argument, to prove that there is a God? According to
all Rules of Justice, a Charge of so high a nature ought not to be brought
against any Man, without such evidence, as appears clear and convincing to him
that brings it. But I very much mistrust in this case, that Mr. A. in his
Conscience knew, his Proofs to be weak and insufficient; What then can we think
of him that charges another with so high a Crime, when he knows that he cannot
prove it? His first Proof, he takes from my Popish Adversaries, about the
inconsistency of proving a Deity, by such Infallible Arguments, as must suppose
the existence of what we prove; as all infallibility from Divine Assistance
must do. But did I ever say, there was no Certainty without Infallible
Assistance? And yet this whole matter about Certainty, Several Conferences, p.
258, etc.
as to the Proof of a God, and the Christian Religion, I had so lately cleared
in my last Answer to the Papists, which he refers to in this very place, that
he could not but be convinced of the Impertinency of it. His Main Argument he
pretends to bring from a Principle of my own; for his words are, He lays down
this for a Principle, that the Foundation of all Certainty lies in the
necessary Existence of a being Absolutely Perfect; How then, says he, shall we
come to prove his Existence by such demonstration, Cui non potest subesse
falsum? And then he adds, That I have excluded all Demonstration from the Works
of God, because we must first know, that there is an invisible God, before we
can certainly know, that there is a visible World. But if I make it evident,
that I lay down no such Principles of my own; and that I do particularly insist
upon the certainty of proving a God from his Works, What does this Man deserve
for his Calumnies?

First, That which he says I lay down for a Principle, I only propose as an
i^serence from the Hypothesis of other Men. For my words are, Orig. Sucr. l. 2.
chapter 8. p. 220.
And if that Principle be supposed, as the foundation of all Physical
Certainty, as to the Being of things, that there is a God: -- I say, if that
Principle be supposed. From hence appears a double Falsification.

1. That I make it the Principle of all certainty, whereas I expressly set down
in their Hypothesis Physical Certainty as to the being of things; but, Is there
no certainty but what is Physical? What thinks he of Mathematical, or
Metaphysical Certainty? so that there might be a Mathematical or Metaphysical
Certainty of the Being of God, though this Principle were allowed. How then
does this prove, that I render it impossible, by any Certain Argument, to prove
the Existence of a Deity?

2. That I make it a Principle of my own, whereas I only suppose it as
following from a Principle of others. To clear this, it will be necessary (...)
lay down the scope of that Discourse, which was to prove, that there is a
certainty of Faith, as well as of Sense; and to that end I showed from the
nature of the certainty of sense, that it does fall short of Mathematical
Demonstrations; which having done from other Arguments, I then consider their
Hypothesis, who derive all Physical Certainty from the knowledge of God, who
will not suffer Men's Minds to be deceived in clear perceptions; then from this
Principle being supposed, I infer several things for the advantage of the
certainty of Faith. 1. That the Foundation of all Certainty, i. e. such as was
before spoken of, lies in the necessary Existence of a being absolutely
perfect. Which I deduce as ^ just inference from the former Hypothesis; and
therefore on this Supposition, something above our Comprehension, viz. Absolute
perfection, must be made the foundation of our certain knowledge of things, and
so the difficulty of our conception of matters of Faith, ought to be no
hindrance to the certainty of Faith. 2. That we have as great, or greater
reason to believe, that God will not suffer us to be deceived in matters of
Faith, as in the objects of our Senses because as I there Argue, there is no
sue^ great danger of being deceived, or in being deceived in the objects of
Sense, as in the matters of Faith. Let any Man now Judge, whether this be the
discourse of one that rendered it impossible, by any certain Argument, to prove
the Existence of a Deity? or that I laid down that as a Principle of my own,
from which being supposed, I deduce such inferences as prove the certainty of
Faith has no greater difficulties, than the certainty of Sense.

Secondly, I am so far from excluding the certainty of the Argument from the
Works of God to prove his Being, that I particularly and largely insist upon it
from p. 401. to p. 411. but he pretends that I bring no Argument but from the
Idea of God in our minds, which is so false, that

(1.) I make use of that Argument only to slex, that the notion of a God has
no inconsistency in it, nothing repugnant to the faculties of our Minds: as
appeas by that very place he quotes: Orig. Sacr. p. 367, 368.


(2.) The main Arguments I insist upon, are, That the things in the World are
the manifest effects of Divine Wisdom, Goodness and Power: and that there be
such things in the World which are unacceptable without a Deity.

Let any Man now Judge, with what Conscience or ingenuity, this Man has
managed such an Accusation against me* as that I go upon such Principles, as
plainly render it impossible, by any certain Argument, to prove the Existence
of a Deity.

But it may be he will pretend, that he did not design to prove me Atheistical,
but only to show, that I acted very unreasonably, in requiring a greater
certainty in them, as to the Principles of Separation, than I do allow in far
greater things. As to his design I leave the Reader to Judge by his way of
preceding in it. As to the color he has to bring it in, on the account of
the Grounds of Separation, it is only this; The Sub-Committee of the Assembly
arguing against the Dissenting Brethren, says he, I say, That such tenderness
of Conscience, as arises out of an Opinion (cui potest subesse falsum) which
may be false, is not a sufficient ground, etc. to justify Separation. But here
is a dangerous etc. in the middle of a Sentence, which made me look again into
the Papers, and there I find such words left out, as fully explain and
determine the sense; for the whole Sentence runs thus. Papers for
Accommodation, p. 51.
We much doubt, whether such tenderness of Conscience, as arises out of an
Opinion, Cui potest subesse falsum, when the Conscience is so tender, as that
it may be withal an erring Conscience, can be a sufficient ground to justify
such a material Separation as our Brethren plead for. Where we see, the force
is not laid upon the bare possibility of Deception (for then no Separation
could be allowed in any case, since all Men are fallible) but upon the
supposition of an actual deception, which an Erroneous Conscience supposes. For
it is such a deception as does suppose Tenderness of Conscience, which does not
arise from a possibility of being deceived, but from an Error of Conscience.
The Plea is, Tenderness of Conscience; the Question is, Whether this Plea be
sufficient to justify Separation? We much doubt it, say they, Why so? the
other Reply; Our Reason is, Because this Tenderness may arise from an Erroneous
Conscience. But why should you suspect an Erroneous Conscience in the Case?
Because Persons are liable to be deceived in the Dictates of Conscience:
especially when they go merely upon their own apprehensions, without producing
Arguments ex Natura rei. For all the debate between them about Tenderness of
Conscience proceeded upon this. So that their meaning is not here to be taken
as to the bare possibility of deception, but of such an Opinion, as carried a
great probability along with it, that they were actually deceived. And what
coherence is there now between this, and the Proof that I bring for the
Existence of a Deity? so that, it is apparent, that this was an occasion sought
after, to lay as much load upon me as he could. And by this taste let the Reader
Judge, what Ingenuity I am to expect from this Man.

The Last who appeared against my Sermon is called, the Author of the Christian
Temper, I was glad to find an Adversary pretending to that; having found so
little of it in the Answers of Mr. B. and Mr. A. His business is, To commit the
Rector of Sutton with the Dean of St. Paul's: which was enough to make the
Common People imagine, this was some busy Justice of Peace who had taken them
both at a Conventicle. The whole Design of that Book does not seem very
agreeable to the Christian Temper which the Author pretends to. For it is to
pick up all the Passages he could meet with (in a Book written twenty years
since) with great tenderness toward the Dissenters, before the Law's were
Established. As though, as Mr Cotton once answered in a like case, there were
no weighty Argument to be found, but what might be gathered from the weakness
or unwariness of my Expressions. Answer to R. Williams, p. 129.
And, Have you not very well requited the Author of that Book for the
tenderness and pity he had for you, and the concernment he then expressed, to
have brought you i^, upon easier terms than were since required? And, Has he
now deserved this at your hands, to have them all thrown in his face, and to be
thus upbraided with his former kindness? Is this your Ingenuity, your
Gratitude, your Christian Temper? Are you afraid of having too many Friends,
that you thus use those, whom you once took to be such?

Methinks herein you appear very Self-denying, but I cannot take you to be any
of the Wisest Men upon Earth. When you think it reasonable, that upon longer
time, and farther consideration, those Divines of the Assembly, who then
opposed Separation, should change their Opinions; Will you not allow one single
Person, who happened to Write about these matters when he was very young; in
twenty years time of the most busy and thoughtful part of his life, to see
reason to alter his Judgment? But after all this, wherein is it that he has
thus contradicted himself? Is it in the Point of Separation, which is the
present business? No, so far from it, that in that very Book, he speaks as
fully concerning the Unlawfulness of Separation, as in this Sermon. Which will
appear by these particulars in it.

(1.) That it is unlawful to set up new Churches, Irenic. p. 123.
because they cannot conform to such practices which they suspect to be
unlawful.

(2.) Those are New Churches when Men erect distinct Societies for Worship
under distinct and peculiar Officers, governing by Laws, and Church Rules,
different from that form they separate from.

(3.) As to things in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches left
undeter^in'd by the Law of God, and in matters of mere order and decency, and
wholly as to the Form of Government, every one, notwithstanding what his
private judgment may be of them, is bound for the Peace of the Church of God,
to submit to the determination of the lawful Governors of the Church. Allow but
these Three Conclusions, and defend the present Separation if you can. Why then
do you make such a stir about other passages in that Book, and take so little
notice of these, which are most pertinent and material? Was it not possible for
you to espy them, when you ransacked every Corner of that Book, to find out
some thing which might seem to make to your purpose? And yet the very first
passage you quote is within two Leaves of these; Page 5.
and Two passages more you soon after quote, are within a Page of them; Page 6,
7.
and another in the very same Page; Page 8.
and so many up and down so very near them, that it is impossible you should
not see and consider them? Yes he has at last found something very near them;
for he quotes the very Pages where they are. And, he says, he will do me no
wrong, for I do distinguish, he confesses, between Non-communion in unlawful or
suspected Rites or Practices in a Church, and entering into distinct Societies
for Worship This is doing me some right however, although he does not fully set
down my meaning. But he urges another passage in the same place, viz. That if
others cast them wholly out of Communion, their Separation is necessary -- That
is no more, than has been always said by our Divines in respect to the Church
of Rome. But, Will not this equally hold against our Church, if it
Excommunicates those who cannot conform? I Answer, (1.) Our Church does not
cast any wholly out of Communion for mere Scrupulous Nonconformity in some
particular Rites. For, it allows them to Communicate in other parts of Worship;
as appeared by all the Non-conformists of former times, who constantly joined
in Prayers and other Acts of Worship, although they scrupled some particular
Ceremonies. (2.) The case is vastly different, as to the necessity of our
Separation, upon being wholly cast out of Communion by the Church of Rome; and
the necessity of others Separating from us, supposing a general Excommunication
ipso facto against those who publicly defame the Orders of this Church For
that is all which can be inferred from the Canons. For, in the former case, it
is not a lesser Excommunication denounced, as it is only in our case against
Public and scandalous Offenders (which is no more than is allowed in all
Churches; and is generally supposed to lay no obligation, till it be duly
executed, though it be latae sententiae and ipso facto) but in the Church of
Rome we are cast out with an Anathema, so as to pronounce us incapable of
Salvation, if we do not return to, and continue in their Communion; and this
was it which that Author meant, by being wholly cast out of Communion, i. e.
with the greatest and highest Church Censure. (3.) That Author could not
possibly mean, that there was an equal reason in these cases, when he expressly
determines, that in the case of our Church, Men are bound in Conscience to
submit to the Orders of it; being only about matters of Decency and Order, and
such things which in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches are
left undetermined by the Law of God. Although therefore he might allow a
scrupulous forbearance of some Acts of Communion, as to some suspected Rites,
yet upon the Principles there asserted, he could never allow Men's proceedings
to a Positive Separation from the Communion of our Church. And so much shall
serve to clear the Agreement between the Rector of Sutton and the Dean of St.
Paul's. But if any thing in the following Treatise, be found different from the
sense of that Book, I do entreat them to allow me that which I heartily wish to
them, viz. that in Twenty years time we may arrive to such maturity of
thoughts, as to see reason to change our opinion of some things; and I wish I
had not Cause to add, of some Persons too.

There is one thing more which this Author takes notice of, and the rest do not
(for else he offers little or nothing but what is in the others) which is, that
when I say our differences are condemned by the wiser Protestants abroad, he
says, if it be so, they may thank their Friends at home, that have
misrepresented them to the World. Therefore, to give satisfaction, as to the
judgment of some of the most eminent and learned Protestant Divines abroad
now-living, I have subjoyned to the following Treatise, some late Letters of
theirs, to a Person of great Honor and Dignity in our Church, to show the
Unlawfulness of Separation from the Communion of the Church of England. Which
were not written by such, who had only a partial representation from others at
a distance, but two of them by those who have been among us, and have been
curious observers both of the Separate Meetings and of the Customs of our
Churches; and the Third by the Famous and Excellent Monsieur Claude. And i^ a
Council could be called of all the Protestant Churches in Christendom, we
should not doubt of their Determination of the Unlawfulness of the Present
Separation.

But before I conclude this Preface, there is a great Objection yet to be
removed, which concerns the Time of Publishing this Treatise; which some do
seem to think, to be very unseasonable; when there is so much talk of Union
among Protestants, and there appears a more General Inclination to it than
formerly. And what, say they, can the laying open the Weakness of Dissenters
tend to, but to Provoke and Exasperate them, and consequently to obstruct the
Union so much desired? In so doing, I shall appear to resent more the Injuries
done to my Self, than the Mischief which may come to the Protestant Religion,
if this opportunity be not embraced for making an Union among Protestants. This
is the force of the Objection. To which I Answer.

God forbid that I should either design, or do any thing which tended to
obstruct so Blessed a Work, as a Firm and Lasting Union among Protestants would
be. But my Business is, to show the Unreasonableness of those Principles and
Practices, which hinder Men from such an Union, and lay a Foundation for
Perpetual and Endless Separations. For upon the Principles laid down by some of
our Dissenting Brethren, let the Constitution be made never so easy to
themselves, yet others may make use of their Grounds, and carry on the
Differences as high as ever. Which will render all Attempts of Union vain; and
leave the same Weapons ready to be taken up by others. If the Union so much
talked of, be such as tends to the lessening, and not to the increasing of our
Differences; if it be for strengthening and supporting the Protestant Religion,
and not rather for weaking and betraying it, by laying it more open to the
Assaults of our Enemies; no Man shall be more ready to promote it than I; no
Man will rejoice more in the Accomplishment of it:

But universal liberty is quite another thing from Union; as much as looseing
is from binding up; and it is strange if that which the Papists, not long
since, thought the best means to bring in Popery, should now be looked on as
the most effectual way to keep it out. But suppose the Indulgence be at present
strictly limited to Dissenting Protestants; are we sure it shall always so
continue? Will not the same Reasons, as to scruple of Conscience, suffering for
Religion, etc. extend farther when occasion serves, and the Popish Religion get
footing on the Dissenters grounds? Where has the Church of Rome more
Laborers, and a greater harvest, than under the greatest Liberty of
Conscience? Let the State of the Northern Kingdoms, as to this matter, be
Compared with the Number of Papists in the United Provinces. And it will be
found impossible to Root out Popery, where Toleration is allowed. (1) Because
of the various ways of creeping in under several disguises, which the Priests
and Jesuits have; and can never be prevented, where there is a general
Indulgence for Dissenters, and an unaccountable Church Power is allowed to
separate Congregations. (2) Because it will be thought great hardship, when
Men's heats are over, for them only to be deprived of the Liberty of their
Consciences, when the wildest Fanatics are allowed it. (3) Because the
diversity of Sects which will be kept up by this means, will be always thought
a plausible argument to draw Men to the Popish pretenses of Unity. (4) Because
the allowed Sects will in probability grow more insolent upon a Legal
Indulgence, and bid defiance to the settled Constitution; as we have seen
already by the yet visible effects of the former Indulgence. If Laws would
alter the temper of Men's minds, and make proud, selfwilled, froward and
passionate Men, become meek, and humble, gentle and peaceable, then it were
great pity, some Men had not had the Law on their side long ago. But is this
to be looked for? are we to expect the Laws of Men should work more upon them
than the Grace of God? If such then continue peevish and quarelsome, full of
wrath and bitterness against all that are not of their minds; and they meet
with Men as froward and contentious as themselves; will this look like the
Union of Protestants? And Bystanders will be apt to say, if this be all that
you mean by Union of Protestants, viz. a Liberty to Pray and Preach, and to
Write and Dispute one against another, there seems to be much more of sense and
reason in the Papal pretense to Unity and Infallibility.

But what then? Is there nothing to be done for Dissenting Protestants, who
agree with us in all Doctrinal Articles of our Church; and only scruple the use
of a few Ceremonies, and some late Impositions? shall these differences still
be continued, when they may be so easily removed? And so many useful Men be
encouraged and taken into the Constitution? Do we value a few indifferent
Ceremonies, and some late Declarations, and doubtful expressions, beyond the
satisfaction of Men's Consciences, and the Peace and Stability of this Church?

As to this material Question, I shall crave leave to deliver my opinion freely
and impartially; and that,

I. With respect to the Case of the People; the Terms of whose Union with us,
is acknowledged by our Brethren to be so much easier than their own. But these
are of two sorts:

1. Some allow the use of the Liturgy, but say they cannot join in Communion
with us, because the participation of the Sacraments has such Rites and
Ceremonies annexed to it, which they think unlawful; and therefore till these
be removed or left indifferent, they dare not join with us in Baptism or the
Lords Supper; because in the one the Cross is used, and in the other Kneeling
is required. As to these I answer,

(1) Upon the most diligent search, I could make into these things, I find no
good ground for any scruple of Conscience, as to the use of these Ceremonies;
and as little as any as to the Sign of the Cross, as it is used in our Church;
notwithstanding all the noise that has been made about its being a New
Sacrament, and I know not what, but of this at large in the following Treatise.

(2) I see no ground for the Peoples separation from other Acts of Communion,
on the account of some Rites they suspect to be unlawful. And especially when
the use of such Rites is none of their own Act, as the Cross in Baptism is not;
and when such an Explication is annexed concerning the intention of Kneeling of
the Lords Supper, as is in the Rubric after the Communion.

(3) Notwithstanding, because the use of Sacraments in a Christian Church ought
to be the most free from all exceptions, and they ought to be so Administered,
as rather to invite than discourage scrupulous Persons from joining in them; I
do think it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and Condescension in the
Governors of our Church, to remove those Bars from a freedom in joining in
full Communion with us, which may be done, either by wholly taking away the
Sign of the Cross; or if that may give offense to others, by confining the use
of it to the public administration of Baptism; or by leaving it indifferent,
as the Parents desire it. As to Kneeling at the Lords Supper, since some
Posture is necessary, and many devout People scruple any other, and the
Primitive Church did in ancient times, receive it in the Posture of Adoration;
there is no Reason to take this away, even in Parochial Churches; provided,
that those who scruple Kneeling do receive it, with the least offense to
others, and rather standing than sitting, because the former is most agreeable
to the practice of Antiquity, and of our Neighbor Reformed Churches. As to the
Surplice in Parochial Churches, it is not of that consequence, as to bear a
Dispute one way or other. And as to Cathedral Churches, there is no necessity
of alteration. But there is another thing which seems to be of late much
scrupled in Baptism, viz. the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers excluding the
Parents. Although I do not question but the Practice of our Church may be
justified (as I have done it toward the End of the following Treatise) yet I
see no necessity of adhering so strictly to the Canon herein, but that a little
alteration may prevent these scruples, either by permitting the Parents to join
with the Sponsors, or by the Parents publicly desiring the Sponsors to
represent them in offering the Child to Baptism; or, which seems most agreeable
to Reason, that the Parents offer the Child to Baptism, and then the Sponsors
perform the Covenanting part, representing the Child; and the charge after
Baptism be given in common to the Parents and Sponsors.

These things being allowed, I see no obstruction remaining, as to a full Union
of the Body of such Dissenters with us, in all Acts of Divine Worship, and
Christian Communion, as do not reject all Communion with us as unlawful.

2. But because there are many of those, who are become zealous Protestants,
and plead much their Communion with us in Faith and Doctrine, although they
cannot join with us in Worship, because they deny the lawfulness of Liturgies,
and the right constitution of our Churches; their case deserves some
consideration, whether and how far they are capable of being made serviceable
to the common Interest, and to the Support of the Protestant Religion among us?

To their Case I answer,

First, That a general unlimited Toleration to dissenting Protestants, will
soon bring Confusion among us, and in the end Popery, as I have showed already;
and a suspension of all the penal Laws that relate to Dissenters is the same
thing with a boundless Toleration.

Secondly, If any present Favors be granted to such, in consideration of our
circumstances, and to prevent their conjunction with the Papists, for a general
Toleration, (for if ever the Papists obtain it, it must be under their Name)
if, I say, such favor be thought fit to be showed them, it ought to be with
such restrictions and limitations, as may prevent the Mischief which may easily
follow upon it. For all such Meetings are a perpetual Reproach to our Churches,
by their declaring, that our Churches are no true Churches, that our Manner of
Worship is unlawful, and that our Church Government is Antichristian; and that
on these accounts they separate from us, and worship God by themselves. But if
such an Indulgence be thought fit to be granted, I humbly offer these things to
consideration.

1. That none be permitted to enjoy the privilege of it, who do not declare,
that they do hold Communion with our Churches to be unlawful. For it seems
unreasonable to allow it to others, and will give countenance to endless and
causeless Separations.

2. That all who enjoy it, besides taking the Test against Popery, do subscribe
the 36 Articles of our Faith, because the pretense of this Liberty is joining
with us in Points of Faith; and this may more probably prevent Papists getting
in amongst them.

3. That all such as enjoy it, must declare the particular Congregations they
are of, and enter their Names before such Commissioners as shall be authorized
for that purpose; that so this may be no pretense for idle, loose, and profane
persons, never going to any Church at all.

4. That both Preachers and Congregations be liable to severe penalties, if
they use any bitter or reproachful words, either in Sermons or Writings,
against the established Constitution of our Churches; because they desire only
the freedom of their own Consciences; and the using this liberty will discover,
it is not Conscience, but a turbulent factions humor, which makes them
separate from our Communion.

5. That all indulged Persons be particularly obliged to pay all legal Duties
to the Parochial Churches (lest mere covetousness tempt Men to run among them)
and no persons so indulged be capable of any public Office. It not being
reasonable, that such should be trusted with Government, who look upon the
Worship established by Law as unlawful.

6. That no other penalty be laid on such indulged persons, but that of Twelve
Pence a Sunday for their absence from the Parochial Churches, which ought to be
duly collected for the Use of the Poor, and cannot be complained of as any
heavy Burden, considering the Liberty they do enjoy by it.

7. That the Bishops, as Visitors appointed by Law, have an exact Account given
to them, of the Rule of their Worship and Discipline, and of all the persons
belonging to the indulged Congregations, with their Qualities and Places of
Abode; and that none be admitted a Member of any such Congregation without
acquainting their Visitor with it, that so means may be used to prevent their
leaving our Communion, by giving satisfaction to their scruples. This Power of
the Bishops cannot be scrupled by them, since herein they are considered as
Commissioners appointed by Law.

8. That no indulged persons presume under severe penalties to breed up
Scholars, or to teach Gentlemen's Sons University Learning; because this may be
justly looked on as a design to propagate Schism to Posterity, and to lay a
Foundation for the disturbance of future Generations.

II. As to the Case of the ejected Mininisters, I have these things to offer,

1. That bare subscription of the Thirty six Articles concerning doctrinal
Points, be not allowed as sufficient to qualify any man for a Living, or any
Church-preferment, for these Reasons,

First, Any Layman upon these Terms may not only be capable of a Living, but
may take upon him to Administer the Sacraments; which was never allowed in any
well constituted Church in the Christian World. And such an allowance among us,
in stead of settling and uniting us, will immediately bring things into great
confusion, and give mighty advantage to the Papists against our Church. And we
have reason to fear, a Design of this Nature, under a pretense of Union of
Protestants, tends to the subversion of this Church, and throwing all things
into confusion, which at last will end in Popery.

Secondly, This will bring a Faction into the Church, which will more endanger
it than external opposition. For such Men will come in triumphantly, having
beaten down three of the Thirty nine Articles; and being in legal possession of
their Places, will be ready to d^fie and contemn those who submitted to the
rest, and to glory in their Conquests, and draw Followers after them, as the
victorious Confessors against Prelacy and Ceremonies. And can they imagine those
of the Church of England will see the Reputation of the Church, or their own,
to suffer so much, and not appear in their own Vindication? Things are not come
to that pass, nor will they suddenly be, that the Friends of the Church of
England will be either afraid, or ashamed to own her Cause. We do heartily and
sincerely desire Union with our Brethren, if it may be had on just and
reasonable Terms; but they must not think, that we will give up the Cause of
the Church for it, so as to condemn its Constitution, or make the Ceremonies
unlawful, which have been hitherto observed and practiced in it. If any
Expedient can be found out for the ease of other Men's Consciences, without
reflecting on our own; if they can be taken in, without reproach or dishonor
to the Reformation of the Church; I hope no true Son of the Church of England
will oppose it. But if the Design be to bring them in as a Faction to bridle
and control the Episcopal Power, by setting up forty Bishops in a Diocese
against one; if it be for them to trample upon the Church of England, and not
to submit to its Order and Government upon fair and moderate terms, let them
not call this a Design of Union, but the giving Law to a Party to oppose the
Church of England. And what the success of this will be, let wise Men judge.

Thirdly, If a subcription to Thirty six Articles were sufficient by the
Statute 13 El. c. 12. I do not understand how by virtue of that Statute a Man
is bound publicly to read the Thirty nine Articles in the Church, and the
Testimonial of his Subscription, on pain of being deprived ipso facto, if he do
not. For the L. Chapter I. Coke faith, Co. Iast. 4. Part. 323, 324.
That subscription to the 39 Articles is required by force of of the Act of
Parliament 13 Eliz. c. 12. And he adds, That the Delinquent is disabled and
deprived ipso facto; and that a conditional subscription to them was not
sufficient, was resolved by all the Judges in England. But how a Man should be
deprived ipso facto, for not subscribing, and Reading the 39 Articles, as
appears by the Cases mentioned in Coke; and yet be required only to subscribe
to 36, by the same Statute, is a thing too hard for me to conceive.

2. But notwithstanding this, if any temper can be found out, as to the manner
of Subscription, that may give ease to the scruples of our Brethren, and secure
the Peace of the Church, the desired Union may be attained without that
apparent danger of increasing the Factions among us.

And this I suppose may be done, by an absolute subscription to all those
Articles which concern the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith, and the Use of
the Sacraments; and a solemn Promise under their hand, or Subscription of
Peaceable submission, as to the rest, so as not to oppose or contradict them,
either in Preaching or Writing; upon the same penalty as if they had not
subscribed to the 36. Which may be a more probable means to keep the Church in
quiet, than forceing a more rigorous subscription upon them, or leaving them at
their full liberty.

3. As to the other subscription required, 1. Jac. to the 3 Articles. The first
is provided for, by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. The third is the
same with the subscription to the 39 Articles. And as to the second, about the
Book of Common Prayer, etc. It ought to be considered,

(1) Whether, for the satisfaction of the scrupulous, some more doubtful and
obscure passages may not yet be explained or amended? Whether the New
Translation of the Psalms were not fitter to be used, at least in Parochial
Churches? Whether portions of Canonical Scripture were not better put in stead
of Apocrypha Lessons? Whether the Rubric about Salvation of Infants, might not
be restored to its former place, in the Office of Confirmation, and so the
present exceptions against it be removed? Whether those expressions which
suppose the strict exercise of Discipline, in Burying the Dead, were not better
left at liberty in our present Case? Such a Review made by Wise and Peaceable
Men, not given to Wrath and Disputing, may be so far from being a dishonor to
this Church, that it may add to the Glory of it.

(2) Upon such a Review, whether it be not great Reason that all Persons who
Officiate in the Church, be not only tied to a constant Use of it in all
Public Offices; (as often as they administer them) which they ought in Person
frequently to do, but to declare at their first entrance upon a Parochial
Charge, their approbation of the Use of it, after their own Reading of it, that
so the People may not suspect them to carry on a factious Design, under an
outward pretense of Conformity to the Rules of the Church they live in.

(3) Whether such a solemn Using the Liturgy, and approbation and promise of
the Use of it, may not be sufficient, in stead of the late Form of declaring
their Assent and Consent, which has been so much scrupled by our Brethren?

These are all the things which appear to me reasonable to be allowed in order
to an Union, and which I suppose may be granted without detriment or dishonor
to our Church. There are other things very desirable toward the happiness and
flourishing of this Church, as the exercise of Discipline in Parochial
Churches, in a due subordination to the Bishop; the Reforming the
Ecclesiastical Courts as to Excommunication, without prejudice to the excellent
Profession of the Civil Law; the Building of more Churches in great Parishes,
especially about the City of London; the retrenching Pluralities; the
strictness and solemnity of Ordinations; the making a Book of Canons suitable
to this Age, for the better Regulating the Conversations of the Clergy. Such
things as these, might facilitate our Union, and make our Church in spite of
all its Enemies become a Praise in the whole Earth.

The Zeal I have for the true Protestant Religion, for the Honor of this
Church, and for a firm Union among Brethren, has Transported me beyond the
bounds of a Preface; Which I do now conclude with my hearty Prayers to Almighty
God, that he, who is the God of Peace, and the Fountain of Wisdom, would so
direct the Counsels of those in Authority, and incline the hearts of the
People, that we may neither run into a Wilderness of Confusion, nor be driven
into the Abyss of Popery; but that the true Religion being preserved among us,
we may with one heart and mind serve the only true God, through his only Son
Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and our alone Advocate and Mediator. Amen.

The Contents.
PART I.
An Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of Separation.
1. No Separation in the beginning of the Reformation, although there were then
the same Reasons which are now pleaded. The Terms of Communion being the same
which were required by the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days. 3. A true account of
the Troubles of Francfurt. Mr. B's mistake about them. 4. The first causes of
the dislike of our Ceremonies. 5. The Reasons of retaining them at the time of
Reformation. 6. The Tendencies to Separation checked by Beza and other Reformed
Divines abroad. 7. The Heats of the Nonconformists gave occasion to Separation.
8. Their zele against it, notwithstanding their representing the sinfulness and
mischief of it. 9, 10. The true state of the Controversy between the
Separatists and Nonconformists. 11. Their Answers to the Separatists Reasons.
12. The progress of Separation. The Schisms and Divisions among the Separatists
the occasion of Independency. That makes Separation more inexcusable, by owning
some of our Churches to be true Churches. 13. The mischiefs which followed
Independency both abroad, and 14. hither into England. 15. The Controversy
stated between the Divines of the Assembly and the Dissenting Brethren. 16. The
cause of the Assembly given up by the present Dissenters. 17. The old
Nonconformists Judgment of the unlawfulness of men's preaching here, when
forbidden by Laws, fully cleared from some late Objections.

PART II.
Of the Nature of the present Separation.
1. The different Principles of Separation laid down. The things agreed on with
respect to our Church. 2. The largeness of Parishes a mere Color and Pretense;
showed from Mr. B's own words. 3. The Mystery of the Presbyterian Separation
opened. 4. The Principles of it as to the People. Of occasional Communion, how
far owned, and of what force in this matter, showed from parallel cases. 5. The
reasons for this occasional Communion examined. 6. Of the pretense of greater
Edification in separate Meetings, never allowed by the Separatists or
Independents as a reason for Separation. No reason for this pretense she^ed
from Mr. B's words. 7. The Principles of Separation as to the Ministry of our
Churches. Of joining with our Churches as Oratories. 8. Of the Peoples judging
of the worthiness and competency of their Ministers. Mr. B's Character of the
People. The impertinency of this Plea as to the London Separation. 9. The
absurdity of allowing this liberty to separate from Mr. B's own words. 10. The
allowance be gives for Separation on the account of Conformity. What public
Worship may be forbidden. 11. The Ministry of our Church charged with
Usurpation in many cases, and Separation allowed on that account. 12. Of
Separation from Ithacian Prelatists. 13. That the Schism does not always lie on
the Imposers side, where the terms of Communion are thought sinful. 14. The
Principles of the Independent Separation, or of those who hold all Communion
with our Church unlawful. 15. The nature of Separation stated and explained.
16. The charge of Separation made good against those who hold Occasional
Communion lawful. 17. The obligation to constant Communion, where Occasional
Communion is allowed to be lawful, at large proved. 18. The Objection from our
Saviors practice answered. 19. The text Phil. 3. 16. cleared from all
Objections. 20. A new Exposition of that text showed to be impertinent. 21. The
charge of Separation proved against those who hold all Communion with us
unlawful. 22, 23. The mischief brought upon the Cause of the Reformation by it.
The testimonies of foreign Protestant Divines to that purpose. 24. No
possibility of Union among the Protestant Churches upon their grounds, which
has been much wished for and desired by the best Protestants. 25. All the
ancient Schisms justifiable on the same pretenses. 26. There can be no end of
Separation on the like grounds. Mr. A's Plea for Schism at large considered.
27. The Obligation on Christians to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church.
The Cases mentioned wherein Separation is allowed by the Scripture. In all
others it is proved to be a great sin.

PART III.
Of the Pleas for the present Separation.
Sect. 1. The Plea for Separation from the Constitution of the Parochial
Churches considered. Sect. 2. Justice Hobart's Testimony for Congregational
Churches answered. Sect. 3. No Evidence in Antiquity for Independent
Congregations. Sect. 4. The Church of Carthage governed by Episcopal Power, and
not Democratical in S. Cyprian's time. Sect. 5, 6. No evidence in Scripture of
more Churches than one in a City, though there be of more Congregations. Sect.
7. No Rule in Scripture to commit Church Power to a single Congregation; but
the General Rules extend it further. Sect. 8. Of Diocesan Episcopacy; the
Question about it stated. But one Bishop in a City in the best Churches, though
many Assemblies. Sect. 9. Diocesan Episcopacy clearly proved in the African
Churches. The extent of S. Austin's Diocese. Sect. 10. Diocesan Episcopacy of
Alexandria. The largeness of Theodoret's Diocese: the Testimony of his Epistle
cleared from all Mr. B's. late Objections. Sect. 11. Diocese Episcopacy not
repugnant to any Institution of Christ proved from Mr. B. himself. Sect. 12.
The Power of Presbyters in our Church. Sect. 13. The Episcopal Power succeeds
the Apostolical, proved from many Testimonies. Sect. 14. What Power of
Discipline is left to Parochial Churches, as to Admission. Sect. 15. Whether
the power of Suspension be no part of Church Discipline. Sect. 16, 17. Of the
defect of Discipline; and whether it overthrows the being of our Parochial
Churches. Sect. 18. Of National Churches, and the grounds on which they are
built. Sect. 19. The advantages of National Churches above Independent
Congregations. Sect. 20. Mr. B's. Quaeries about National Churches answered.
The Notion of the Church of England explained. Sect. 21. What necessity of one
Constitutive Regent part of a National Church. Sect. 22. What Consent is
necessary to the Union of a National Church. Sect. 23. Other Objections
answered. Sect. 24. Of the Peoples power of choosing their own Pastors. Not
founded in Scripture. Sect. 25. The testimony of Antiquity concerning it fully
inquired into. The great disturbances of popular Elections: the Ganons against
them. The Christian Princes interposing. The ancient Rights of Nomination and
Presentation. The practice of foreign Protestant Churches. No reason to take
away the Rights of Patronage to put the choice into the peoples hands.
Objections answered. Sect. 26. No unlawfulness in the Terms of our Communion.
Of substantial parts of Worship. The things agreed on both sides. Sect. 27. The
way of finding the difference between their Ceremonies and parts of Divine
Worship cleared. Sect. 28. The difference of the Popish Doctrine from ours as
to Ceremonies. Sect. 29. The Sign of the Cross a Rule of Admission into our
Church, and no part of Divine Worship. Sect. 30 No new Sacrament. Mr. B's.
Objections answered. Sect. 31. His great mistakes about the Papist's Doctrine
concerning the Moral Casuality of Sacraments. Sect. 32. Of the Customs observed
in our Church, though not strictly required. Sect. 33. Of the Censures of the
Church against Opposers of Ceremonies, and the force of Excommunication ipso
facto. Sect. 34. Of the Plea of an erroneous Conscience in the case of
Separation. Sect. 35. Of scruples of Conscience still remaining. Sect. 36. Of
the use of Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism. Sect. 37. No ground of
Separation because more Ceremonies may be introduced. Sect. 38. No Parity of
Reason as to the Dissenters Pleas for separating from our Church, and our
Separation from the Church of Rome.

An Appendix containing several Letters of Eminent Protestant Divines abroad,
showing the unreasonableness of the present Separation from the Church of
England.

Letter of Monsieur le Moyn, -- p. 395 Of Monsieur le Angle, -- p. 412 Of
Monsieur Claude, -- p. 427
Errata in the Preface.
Page 14. marg. r. Church History l. 9 p. 81. p. 17. l. 24. after find insert
in. p. 34. l. 18. for S. Paul r. the Apostle, p. 36. l. 5. r. follows. p. 53.
l. 21. for our r. one.

In the Book.
p. 59. l. 5. for (1) r. (3) p. 71. l. 27. r. secession. p. 72. l, 8. r. as
will. l. 28. r. for which. l. ult. r. Cameron. p. 101, l, 12. dele for before
say they. p. 102. l. 11. r. their teachers. p. 378. l. 2. dele whether.

AN Historical Account OF THE RISE and PROGRESS OF THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT
Separation.
PART. I.
Sect. I. FOr our better understanding the State of this Controversy, it will
be necessary to Premise these Two Things.

1. That although the present Reasons for Separation would have held from the
beginning of our Reformation, yet, no such thing was then practiced, or
allowed, by those who were then most zealous for Reformation.

2. That when Separation began, it was most vehemently opposed by those
Non-conformists who disliked many things in our Church, and wished for a
farther Reformation. And from a true Account of the State of the Controversy
then, it will appear, that the Principles owned by them, do overthrow the
present practice of Separation among us.

In the making out of these, I shall give a full account of the Rise and
Progress of this Controversy about Separation from the Communion of our Church.

I. That although the present Reasons for Separation would have held from the
beginning of the Reformation, yet no such thing was then practiced, or allowed
by those who were then most zealous for Reformation. By Separation we mean
nothing else, but Withdrawing from the constant Communion of our Church, and
Joining with Separate Congregations for greater Purity of Worship, and better
means of Edification. By the present Reasons for Separation we understand such
as are at this day insisted on, by those who pretend to justify these
Practices; and those are such, as make the Terms of Communion with our Church
to be unlawful. And not one of all those, which my Adversaries at this time
hope to Justify the present Separation by, but would have had as much force in
the beginning of the Reformation. For our Church stands on the same Grounds;
uses the same Ceremonies (only fewer;) prescribes the same Liturgy (only more
corrected;) has the same constitution and frame of Government; the same defect
of Discipline; the same manner of appointing Parochial Ministers; and at least
as effectual means of Edification, as there were when the Reformation was first
established. And what advantage there is, in our present circumstances, as to
the Number, Diligence and Learning of our Allowed Preachers; as to the
Retrenching of some Ceremonies, and the Explication of the meaning of others;
as to the Mischiefs we have seen follow the practice of Separation, do all make
it much more unreasonable now, than it had been then.

Sect. II. It cannot be denied, that there were different apprehensions
concerning some few things required by our Church in the beginning of the
Reformation; but they were such things, as are the least scrupled now. Acts and
Monuments Vol. 3. p. 131.
Rogers refused the wearing of a Square Cap, and Tippet, etc. unless a
Difference were made between the Popish Priests and ours. Hooper at first
scrupled the Episcopal Habits, but he submitted afterward to the use of them.
Bucer, and some others, disliked some things in the first Common Prayer Book of
Edward the Sixth, which were Corrected in the Second: So that upon the Review
of the Liturgy there seemed to be little or no dissatisfaction left in the
Members of our Church; at least, as to those things which are now made the
grounds of Separation. For we read of none, who refused the constant use of the
Liturgy, or to comply with those very few Ceremonies which were retained, as
the Cross in Baptism, and Kneeling at the Communion, which are now thought such
Bugbears to scare People from our Communion, and make them cry out in such a
dreadful manner of the Mischief of Impositions; as though the Church must
unavoidably be broken in pieces by the weight and burden of two or three such
insupportable Ceremonies. Mischief of Impositions Preface.
Now we are told, That it is unreasonable that any should create a necessity of
Separation, and then complain of an Impossibility of Union. By Whom? At what
Time? In what Manner was this necessity of Separation created? Has our Church
made any New Terms of Communion, or altered the Old Ones? No: the same Author
says, It is perpetuating the old Conditions, and venturing our Peace in an old
Worm-eaten Bottom, wherein it must certainly misc^rry.

Not to insist on his way of Expression, in calling the Reformation, An Old
Worm-eaten Bottom; which ill be^omes them, that would now be held the most
Zealous Protestants. I would only know, if those Terms of Communion which were
imposed by the Martyrs, and other Reformers, and which are only continued by
us, do, as this Author says, Create a Necessity of Separation; how then it
came to pass, that in all King Edward's days, there was no such thing as
Division in our Church about them?

And even Dr. Ames, who searched as carefully as any into this matter, Fresh
suit against Ceremonies, p. 467.
can bring no other Instances of any differences then, but those of Rogers and
Hooper: he adds indeed, That Ridley and others agreed with Hooper. Wherein?
What, in opposing our Ceremonies, when Hooper himself yielded in that which he
at first scrupled? No, but there was a perfect reconciliation between them,
before they suffered. And what then? Is there any the least color of Evidence,
that before that Reconciliation, either Hooper or Rogers held Separate
Assemblies from the Conformists, or that Ridley ever receded from his steadfast
adhering to the Orders of this Church? This is then a very mean Artifice, and
disingenuous Insinuation. For although Ridley, in his Letter to Hooper, out of
his great Modesty and Humility, seems to take the blame upon himself, by
attributing the greater Wisdom to Hooper in that difference; yet he does not
Retract his Opinion, but only declares the hearty love that he bore to him for
his constancy in the Truth. Neither do we find that ever Hooper repented of his
Subm^ssion, to which he was so earnestly persuaded, both by Peter Martyr, and
Martin Bucer; and Peter Martyr in his Letter to Bucer condemns his frowardness,
Pet. Martyr, Epist. Theolog. Hoopero, Buc. r. Script. Anglic. p. 708.
and says, That his cause was by no means approved by the Wiser and Better
sort of Men. But Ames says, Mr. Bradford might have been added, who calls
Forked Caps and Tippets, Antichristian Pelf and Baggage. Suppose this were
true, it proves no more than that a good man had an unreasonable Scruple, and
such as is thought so by our Brethren themselves at this day. But did he ever
divide the Church on such an account as this? Did he set up separate
Congregations, because a square Cap and a Tippet would not go down with him?
No, he was a far better man than to do so. But if the whole words had been set
down, the seeming force of these words had been taken away, for they are these;
The cogniza^ce of the Lord stands not in forked Caps, Acts and Mon. Vol. 3.
p. 319.
Tippets, shaven Crowns, or such other Baggage and Artichristian pelf, but in
suffering for the Lords sake; i.e. it is more a Mark of Gods Service to suffer
Martyrdom as a Protestant, than to be at ease as a Romish Priest, for he puts
them altogether, Caps, Tippets, and shaven Crowns. And what is this to the
Impositions of our Church, or Separation on the account of them? Dr. Ames knew
too much, to pretend to any thing like that in those times; For there was no
such thing as Separation from our Church then heard of, on the account of these
dividing Impositions. Some furious Anabaptists it may be, or Secret Papists
then had separate Meetings, Ridiey's Articles of Visitation, 1550.
of which Ridley bids Enquiry to be made, in his Articles of Visitation; but no
Protestants, none that joined in the Articles of our Fait^, and Substantials of
Religion with our Church, as Dr. O. speaks, Vindicat. of Nonconf. p. 13.
did then ap^^ehend any (...) of Separation from it; not for (...) of the A^^^
Sign of the Cross; nor Kneeling at the Communion; nor the Religious Observation
of Holy Days; nor the constant use of the Liturgy; nor any one of all the
particulars mentioned by Dr. O. which he says, P. 35. 37.
makes our Communion unlawful and separation from it to be necessary. How come
these Terms of Communion to be so unlawful now; which were then approved by
such holy, learned, and excellent men as our first Reformers? Were they not
arrived to that measure of seize, or comprehension of the Truths of the
Gospel, that men in our Age are come to? Is it credible, that men of so great
integrity, such indefatigable industry, such profound judgment, as Cranmer and
Ridley, who were the Heads of the Reformation, should discern no such
sinfulness in these things, which now every dissenting Artificer can cry out
upon, as unlawful? Is it possible, that men that sifted every thing with so
much care themselves, and made use of the best help from others, and begg^d the
Divine Assistance, should so fatally miscarry in a matter of such might
importance to the Souls of Men? Could not Latimer, or Bradford, or such holy
and mortified men as they, discern so much as a Mote of unlawfulness in those
times, which others espy such Beams in now? What makes this wonderful
difference of eyesight? Were they under a cloudy, and dark, and Jewish
Dispensation; and all the clear Gospel Light of Division and Separation
reserved for our times? Did they want warmth and zeal for Religion, who burnt
at the Stake for it? Does God reveal his Will to the meek, the humble, the
inquisitive, the resolute Minds? And would he conceal such weighty things from
those who were so desirous to find the Truth, and so resolved to adhere to it?
If Diocesan Episcopacy, and the Constitution of our Church were such an
unlawful thing, as some now make it, it is strange such men should have no
suspicion of it, no not when they went to suffer? For as H. Jacob, Jacob's
Answer to Johnson, p. 20, 21.
the old Nonconformist, says, in answer to Johnson the Separatist, Did not M.
Cranmer hold himself for Archbishop still, and that he was by the Pope
unjustly and unsufficiently deposed, and by Queen Mary forcibly restrained from
it? Did he ever repent of holding that Office to his death? Also did not Ridley
stand upon his Right to the Bishopric of London though ready to die? Latimer,
though he renounced his Bishopric, yet he kept his Ministry, and never
repented him of it. Philpo^ never disliked his Archdeaconry: yea, when he
refused bloody Bonner, yet he appealed to his Ordinary the Bishop of
Winchester. The like mind is to be seen in Bishop Farrar. And generally,
whosoever were Ministers then of the Prelates Ordination, they never renounced
it, though they died Martyrs. Iohnson's Defense of his ninth Reason.
Johnson indeed quotes some passages of Bradford, Hooper, and Bale against the
Hierarchy; But he notoriously misapplies the words of Bradford, which are, The
time was when the Pope was out of England, but not all Popery; which he would
have understood of the times of Reformation, under Edward VI. whereas he speaks
them expressly of King Henry's days. And it is not credible, Hooper should think
the Hierarchy unlawful, who (as it is generally believed) had the
Administration of two Bishoprics at once. Bradford's Confer. with the B^. Acts
and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 298.
Bale's words were spoken in Henry VIII. his time; and could not be meant of a
Protestant Hierarchy, for he was after a Bishop himself. But H. Jacob answers
to them all, That supposing these men disliked the Hierarchy, it made the
stronger against the Principles of Separation: Iacob' s Answer, p. 82.
Seeing for all that, they did not refuse to communicate and partake with them
then as true Christians. And that not only occasionally and at certain seasons,
but they maintained constant and fixed Communion with our Church as the members
of it.

Sect. 3. Thus matters stood as to Communion with our Church in the days of
Edward VI. but as soon as the Persecution began in Queen Mary's time, great
numbers were forced to betake themselves to foreign parts, Letters of the
Martyrs, p. 50.
whereof some went to Zurick, others to Basil, others to Strasburg, and others
to Frankford. Grindal in a Letter to B. Ridley, says they were nigh 100
Students and Ministers then in Exile: These, with the people in all other
places, Geneva excepted, kept to the Orders established in our Church; but at
Frankford some began to be very busy in Reforming our Liturgy, leaving out
many things, and adding others; which occasioned the following Troubles of
Frankford. The true ground whereof is commonly much misrepresented. Plea for
Peace, p. 1^0.
Mr. Baxter says, The difference was between those which strove for the
English Liturgy, and others that were for a free-way of praying, i.e. as he
explains it, from the present sense and habit of the Speaker: but that this is
a great mistake, will appear from the account published of them, A. D. 1575. by
one that was a Friend to the Dissenting Party. From which it appears, That no
sooner were the English arrived at Frankford, but the Minister of the French
Congregation there, came to them and told them, he had obtained from the
Magistrates the freedom of a Church for those who came out of England, but
especially for the French; they thanked him and the Magistrates for so much
kindness, but withal let them understand this would be little benefit to the
English, unless they might have the liberty of performing all the Offices of
Religion in their own Tongue Upon an Address made to the Senate, this request
was granted them; and they were to make use of the French Church at different
times, as the French and they could agree, but with this express Proviso, that
they should not dissent from the French in Doctrine, or Ceremonies, lest they
should thereby Minister occasion of offense. But afterward, it seems, the
Magistrates did not require them to be strictly tied up to the French
Ceremonies, so they did mutually agree. Upon this, they perused the English
Order, and endeavored to bring it as near as they could to the French Model,
by leaving out the Responses, the Letany, Surplice, and many other things; and
adding a larger Confession, more suitable to the State and Time; after which a
Psalm was Sung; then the Minister, after a short Prayer for Divine Assistance
(according to Calvin's Custom) was to proceed to the Sermon; which being ended,
then followed a General Prayer for all Estates, particularly for England,
ending with the Lords Prayer; and so repeating the Articles of the Creed, and
another Psalm Sung, the People were dismissed with the Blessing. By which we
see, here was not the least controversy, whether a Liturgy or not; but whether
the Order of Service was not to be accommodated, as much as might be, to the
French Model. However, when they sent to the English in other places to resort
thither, by reason of the great Conveniences they enjoyed, and acquainted them
with what they had done; it gave great offense to them, which they expressed in
their Letters. Those of Zurick sent them word, They determined to use no other
Order, than that which was last established in England; and in another Letter,
They desire to be assured from them, that if they removed thither, they should
all join in the same Order of Service concerning Religion, which was in England
last set forth by King Edward. To this the Congregation of Frankford returned
Answer, That they could not, in all points, warrant the Full Use of the Book of
Service, which they impute to their present Circumstances, in which they
suppose such Alterations would be allowed; but they intended not hereby to
deface the worthy Laws and Ordinances of King Edward. These Learned Men of
Strasburg, understanding their resolutions, send Grindall to them with a Letter
subscribed by 16; wherein they entreat them, To reduce the English Church
there, as much as possible, to the Order lately set forth in England, lest, say
they, by much altering of the same, they should seem to condemn the chief
Authors thereof, who, as they now suffer, so are they most ready to confirm
that fact with the price of their Bloods; and should also both give occasion to
our Adversaries to accuse our Doctrine of Imperfection, and us of Mutability;
and the Godly to Doubt of that Truth wherein before they were persuaded, and to
hinder their coming thither, which before they had purposed. And to obtain
their desire, they tell them, They had sent Persons for that end to Negotiate
this Affair with the Magistrates, and, in case they obtained their Request,
they promised to come and join with them; and they did not question the English
in other places would do the same. Notwithstanding the weight of these Reasons,
and the desireableness of their Brethrens company in that time of Exile, they
persist in their former resolutions, not to have the Entire English Liturgy;
for by this time Knox was come from Geneva, being chosen Minister of the
Congregation: However, they returned this Answer to Strasburg, That they made
as little Alteration as was possible; Page 19.
for, certain Ceremonies the Country would not bear; and they did not dissent
from those which lie at the Ransom of their Bloods for the Doctrine, whereof
they have made a most worthy Confession. Page 21.
About this time, some suggested, that they should take the Order of Geneva, as
farthest from Superstition; but Knox declined this, till they had advised with
the Learned Men at Strasburg, Zurick, Emden, etc. knowing, that the Odium of it
would be thrown upon him. But finding their Zeal and Concernment for the
English Liturgy, he, with Whittingham, and some others, drew up an Abstract of
it, Calvin, Ep. 164.
and sent it to Calvin, desiring his Judgment of it. Who, upon perusal of it,
being thoroughly heated in a Cause, that so nearly concerned him, writes a very
sharp Letter, directed to the Brethren at Frankford; gently Rebuking them for
their unseasonable Contentions about these matters, but severely Reproving the
English Divines who stood up for the English Liturgy, when the Model of Geneva
stood in Competition with it. And yet after all his Censures of it, he
Confesses. The things he thought most unfit, were Tolerable; but he blames
them, if they did not choose a better, when they might choose; but he gives not
the least encouragement to Separation if it were continued; and he declares for
his own part, how easy he was to yield, in all indifferent things, such as
External Rites are. And he was so far, in his Judgment, from being for Free
Prayer, or making the constant use of a Liturgy a Ground of Separation, as Dr.
O. does, that when he delivered his Opinion, with the greatest Freedom, to the
then Protector, about the best method of Reformation, he declares, That he did
mightily approve a Certain Form, from which Men ought not to vary, Ep. 55.
both to prevent the inconveniences which some Men's folly would betray them
to, in the free way of Praying; and to manifest the General Consent of the
Churches in their Prayers; and to stop the vain affectation of some who love to
be showing some new things. Let Mr. Br. now Judge, Whether it were likely that
the Controversy then at Frankford, was, as he says, between them that were
for the English Liturgy, and others that were for a free way of Praying; when
Calvin, to whom the Dissenters appealed, was so much, in his Judgment, against
the latter. And it appears, Ep. 165.
by Calvin's Letter to Cox and his Brethren, that the State of the Case at
Frankford had not been truly represented to him; which made him Write with
greater sharpness than otherwise he would have done; and he expresses his
satisfaction, that the matter was so composed among them, when by Dr. Cox his
means, the English Liturgy was brought into use at Frankford. And to excuse
himself for his liberal censures before, he mentions Lights, as required by the
Book, which were not in the second Liturgy of Edward the Sixth. So that either
they deceived him, who sent him the Abstract; or he was put to this miserable
shift to defend himself; the matter being ended contrary to his expectation.
For, although upon the receipt of Calvin's Letter, the Order of Geneva had like
to have been presently voted in, Tr. of Fr. p. 30.
yet there being still some Fast Friends to the English Service, they were fain
to compromise the matter, and to make use of a Mixed Form for the present. But,
Dr. Cox, and others, coming thither from England, and misliking these
Alterations, declared. That they were for having the Face of an English Church
there; Page 31.
and so they began the Letany next Sunday; which put Knox into so great a Rage,
that in stead of pursuing his Text (which was directly contrary) he made it his
business, to lay open the nakedness of our Church, as far as his Wit and Ill
Will would carry him. He charged the Service Book with Superstition, Impurity,
and Imperfection; and the Governors of our Church with slackness in
Reformation, want of Discipline, with the business of Hooper, allowing
Pluralities; all the ill things he could think on. When Cox and his Party (with
whom, at this time, was our excellent Jewel) were admitted among them, they
presently forbad Knox having any thing farther to do in that Congregation; who
being complained of soon after for Treason against the Emperor, in a Book by
him Published, he was forced to leave the City, and to retire to Geneva;
whither most of his Party followed him. And thus says Grindal, in his Letter
to Bishop Ridley, The Church at Frankford was well quieted by the Prudence of
Mr. Cox, and others, which met there for that purpose.

Sect. 4. It is observed by the Author of the Life of Bishop Jewel (before his
Works) that this Controversy was not carried with them out of England, Letters
of the Martyrs, p. 60.
but they received New Impressions from the places whither they went. For as
those who were Exiles in Henry the Eighth's time (as particularly Hooper, who
lived many years in Switzerland) brought home with them a great liking of the
Churches Model, where they had lived (which being such as their Country would
bear, they supposed to be nearer Apostolical Simplicity, being far enough from
any thing of Pomp, or Ceremony) which created in them an aversion to the
Ornaments and Vestments here used: So now, upon this new Persecution, those who
had Friendship at Geneva, as Knox, and Whittingham, or were otherwise much
obliged by those of that way, as the other English were, who came first to
Frankford, were soon possessed with a greater liking of their Model of Divine
Service, than of our own. And when Men are once engaged in Parties, and several
Interests, it is a very hard matter to remove the Prejudices which they have
taken in, especially when they have great Abettors, and such, whose Authority
goes beyond any Reason with them. This is the True Foundation of those Unhappy
Differences, which have so long continued among us, about the Orders and
Ceremonies of our Church. For when Calvin and some others found, that their
Counsel was not like to be followed in our Reformation, our Bishops proceeding
more out of Reverence to the Ancient Church, than mere opposition to Popery
(which some other Reformers made their Rules) they did not cease by Letters,
and other ways, to insinuate, that our Reformation was imperfect, as long as
any of the Dregs of Popery remained. So they called the Use of those
Ceremonies, which they could not deny to have been far more Ancient than the
great Apostasy of the Roman Church. Calvin, in his Letter to the Protector,
Avows this to be the best Rule of Reformation, To go as far from Popery as they
could; and therefore what Habits and Ceremonies had been abused in the time of
Popery were to be removed, lest others were hardened in their Superstition
thereby: but at last he yields to this moderation in the case; That such
Ceremonies might be retained as were easy, and fitted to the Capacities of the
People; provided they were not such, as had their beginning from the Devil, or
Antichrist, i.e. were not first begun in the time of Popery. Now, by this Rule
of Moderation our Church did proceed; for it took away all those Ceremonies
which were of late invention. As in Baptism, of all the multitude of Rites in
the Roman Church, it reserved, in the Second Liturgy, only the Cross after
Baptism; which was not so used in the Roman Church; for there the Sign of the
Cross is used in the Scrutinies before Baptism; and the Anointing with the
Chrysm in vertice after it; in stead of these, our Church made choice of the
Sign of the Cross after Baptism, being of Uncontrollable Antiquity, and not
used till the Child is Baptized. In the Eucharist, in stead of Fifteen
Ceremonies required in the Church of Rome, our Church has only appointed
Kneeling. Bonavent. (...) Ps. 21.
I say appointed, for although Kneeling at the Elevation of the Host, be
strictly required by the Roman Church, yet in the Act of Receiving it is not;
Angel. Roecha de Soll^^i Communione Summi Pontificis, p. 33. 38.
(as manifestly appears by the Popes manner of Receiving, which is not
Kneeling, but either Sitting, as it was in Bonaventures time; or after the
fashion of Sitting, or a little Leaning upon his Throne, as he does at this
day) therefore our Church taking away the Adoration at the Elevation, lest it
should seem to recede from the Practice of Antiquity, which received the
Eucharist in the Posture of Adoration then used, has appointed Kneeling to be
observed of all Communicants. In stead of the great number of Consecrated
Vestments in the Roman Church, it only retained a plain Linen Garment, which
was unquestionably used in the times of St. Hierome, and St. Augustine. And
lastly, As to the Episcopal Habits, they are retained only as a Mark of
Distinction of a certain Order of Men; the Color of the Chimere being changed
from Scarlet to Black. These are now the Ceremonies, about which all the Noise
and Stir has been made in our Church; and any sober, considering Man, free
from Passion, and Prejudice, would stand amazed at the Clamor and Disturbance
which has been made in this Church, and is at this day, about the intolerable
Mischief of these Impositions.

Sect. 5. But the most Material Question they ever Ask, is, Why were these few
retained by our Reformers, which were then distastful to some Protestants, and
were like to prove the occasion of future Contentions?

I will here give a Just and True Account of the Reasons which induced our
Reformers either to Retain, or to Apoint these Ceremonies, and then proceed.

1. Out of a due Reverence to Antiquity. They would hereby convince the Papists
they did put a difference between the Gross and Intolerable Superstitions of
Popery, and the Innocent Rites and Practices which were observed in the Church
before. And What could more harden the Papists, then to see Men put no
difference between these? It is an unspeakable Advantage which those do give to
the Papists, who are for Reforming 1600 years backward, and when they are
pinched with a Testimony of Antiquity, presently cry out of the Mystery of
Iniquity working in the Apostles times: as though every thing which they
disliked, were a part of it. Next to the taking up Arms for Religion, which
made Men look on it as a Faction and Design, there was scarce any thing gave so
great a check to the Progress of the Reformation in France, especially among
Learned and Moderate Men, as the putting no difference between the Corruptions
of Popery, and the innocent Customs of the Ancient Church. For the time was
when many Great Men there, were very inclinable to a Reformation; but when they
saw the Reformers oppose the undoubted Practices of Antiquity, equally with the
Modern Corruptions, they cast them off, as Men guilty of an unreasonable humor
of Innovation; as may be seen in Thuanus, and Fran. Baldwins Ecclesiastical
Commentaries, and his Answers to Calvin and Beza. But our Reformers, although
they made the Scripture the only Rule of Faith, and rejected all things
repugnant thereto; yet they designed not to make a Transformation of a Church,
but a Reformation of it; by reducing it as near as they could, to that state it
was in, under the first Christian Emperors, that were sound in Religion; and
therefore they retained these few Ceremonies as Badges of the Respect they bore
to the Ancient Church.

II. To manifest the Justice and Equity of the Reformation; by letting their
Enemies see, they did not Break Communion with them for mere indifferent
things. For some of the Popish Bishops of that time were subtle and learned
Men, as Gardener, Heath, Tonstall, etc. and nothing would have rejoiced them
more, than to have seen our Reformers boggle at such Ceremonies as these; and
they would have made mighty advantage of it among the People. Of which we have
a clear instance in the case of Bishop Hoopers scrupling the Episcopal
Vestments. Peter Martyr tells him plainly, That such needless scrupulosity
would be a great hindrance to the Reformation. For, says he, since the People
are with difficulty enough brought to things necessary, if we once declare
things indifferent to be unlawful, they will have no patience to hear us any
longer. And, withal, hereby we condemn other Reformed Churches, and those
Ancient Churches, which have hitherto to been in great esteem.

III. To show their Consent with other Protestant Churches, Calvin. Epist. ad
Sadolet. De vera Eccl. Reformatione, c. 16. ^^^olamp. Epist. f. 17.
which did allow and practice the same, or more Ceremonies, as the Lutheran
Churches generally did. And even Calvin himself, in his Epistle to Sadolet,
declared, That he was for restoring the Face of the Ancient Church; and in his
Book of the true way of Reformation, he says, He would not contend about
Ceremonies, not only those which are for Decency, but those that are
Symbolical. Bucer. Scri^t. ^^gl. p. 479.
Oecolampadius looked on the Gesture at the Sacrament, as indifferent. Bucer
thought the use of the Sign of the Cross after Baptism neither indecent nor
unprofitable. Since therefore, so great a number of Protestant Churches used
the same Ceremonies; and the Chief Leaders of other Reformed Churches thought
them not unlawful, our first Reformers for this, and the foregoing Reasons,
thought it fit to retain them, as long as they were so few, so easy both to be
practiced and understood.

Sect. 6. But the Impressions which had been made on some of our Divines
abroad, did not wear off, at their Return home, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. For they retained a secret dislike of many things in our
Church; but the Act of Uniformity being passed, and the Use of the Liturgy
strictly enjoined; I do not find any Separation made then on the account of it;
no, not by the Dissenting Brethren, that withdrew from Frankford to Geneva;
Knox was forbidden to Preach here, because of some Personal Reflections on the
Queen; but Whittingham, Sampson, Gilby, and others, accepted of Preferment and
Employment in the Church. The Bishops, at first, showed kindness to them, on
the account of their forward and zealous Preaching, which at that time was very
needful; and therefore many of them were placed in London. Where, having gained
the People by their zeal and diligence in Preaching, Dialogue between a Soldier
of Barwick, and a-English Chaplain, p. 5, 6.
they took occasion to let fall at first their dislike of the Ceremonies, and a
desire of farther Reformation of our Liturgy; but finding that they had gained
ground, they never ceased, till by inveighing against the Livery of Antichrist,
as they called the Vestments and Ceremonies, they had inflamed the People to
that degree, that Gilby himself insinuates, That if they had been let alone a
little longer, they would have shaken the Constitution of this Church. This was
the first occasion of pressing Uniformity with any rigor; and therefore some
examples were thought fit to be made for the warning of others. But as kindness
made them presumptuous, so this severity made them clamorous; and they sent
bitter complaints to Geneva. Beza, after much importunity, undertook to give an
Answer to them; which being of great consequence to our present business, I
shall here give a fuller account of it. We are then to understand, that about
this time, the Dissenting Party being Exasperated, by the Silencing some of
their most busy Preachers, Beza Epist. 23.
began to have Separate Meetings; This Beza takes notice of in his Epistle to
Grindal Bishop of London; and it appears, by an Examination taken before him,
20th of June 1567. of certain persons, who were accused not only for absenting
themselves from their Parish Churches; Part of a Register, p. 23.
but for gathering together and making Assemblies, using Prayers and
Preachings, and Ministering Sacraments among themselves; and hiring a Hall in
London under Pretense of a Wedding, for that Purpose.

The Bishop of London first Rebuked them for their Lying Pretenses, and then
told them, That in this Severing themselves from the Society of other
Christians, they not only Condemned them, but also the whole State of the
Church Reformed in King Edward's days, which was well Reformed according to
the word of God; yea, and many Good Men have shed their. Blood for the same,
which your doings Condemn. Have ye not, says he, the Gospel truly Preached,
and the Sacraments Ministered accordingly, and good order kept, although we
differ from other Churches in Ceremonies, and in indifferent things, which lie
in the Princes Power to Command, for Order sake? To which one of them Answered,
That as long as they might have the Word freely Preached, and the Sacraments
Administered, without the preferring of Idolatrous Gear about it, they never
assembled together in Houses: but their Preachers being displaced by Law for
their Nonconformity, they be thought themselves what was best for them to do;
and calling to mind, that there was a Congregation there in the days of Queen
Mary, which followed the Order of Geneva, they took up that, and this Book and
Order, says he, we hold. Another Answered, That they did not refuse Communion
for Preaching the Word, but because they had tied the Ceremonies of Antichrist
to it; and set them up before it, so that no Man may Preach, or Minister the
Sacraments without them. Things being come to this height, and Separation
beginn^ng to break out, the Wiser Brethren thought not fit to proceed any
farther, till they had Consulted their Oracle at Geneva. Beza being often
solicited by them, with doleful Complaints of their hard usage, and the
different Opinions among themselves, what they were to do, at last resolves to
Answer; but first he declares, How unwilling he was to interpose in the
Differences of another Church, especially when but one Party was heard; and he
was afraid, this was only the way to exasperate and provoke more, rather than
Cure this evil, which he thought was not otherwise to be Cured, but Precibus
and Patientia, by Prayers and Patience. After this General Advice, Beza freely
declares his own judgment, as to the Reformation of several things he thought
amiss in our Church; but as to the case of the Silenced Preachers, and the
Peoples Separation, he expresses his Mind in that manner, that the Dissenters
at this day, would have published their Invectives against him, one upon the
back of another. For (1.) As to the Silenced Ministers, he says, That if the
Pressing Subscription continued, he persuades them rather to live privately
than to yield to it. For, they must either act against their Consciences, or
they must quit their Employments; for, says he, the Third thing that may be
supposed, viz. That they should exercise their Function against the Will of the
Queen and the Bishops, we Tremble at the Thoughts of it, for such reasons, as
may be easily understood, though we say never a word of them. What! Is Beza for
Silencing, and stopping the Mouths of such a number of Faithful and able
Ministers; and at such a time, when the Church was in so great Necessity of
Preaching, and so many Souls like to be famished for the want of it? when St.
Antholins, St. Peter's, St. Bartholomews, at which Gilby says their great
Preaching then was, were like to be left destitute of such Men? Would Beza,
even Beza, at such a time, as that, be for Silencing so many Preachers, i. e.
for their sitting quiet, when the Law had done it; And would not he suffer them
to Preach, when they ought to have done it, though against the Will of the
Queen and the Bishops? It appears that Beza was not of the Mind of our
Adversaries, but that he was of the contrary, it appears plainly by this, That
before he Persuades the Dissenting Ministers rather to live privately than to
subscribe; and that he expresses no such terrible apprehensions at their
quitting their Places, as he does at their Preaching in Opposition to the Laws.
(2) As to the case of the People, his Advice was, As long as the Doctrine was
sound, that they should diligently attend upon it, and receive the Sacraments
devoutly, and to join Amendment of Life with their Prayers, that by those means
they might obtain a through Reformation. So that nothing can be more express
against S^paration, than what is here said by Beza: for, even as to the
Ministers, he says, Though he did not approve the Ceremonies, yet since they
are not of the nature of things evil in themselves, he does not think them of
that moment, that they should leave their Functions for the sake of them; or
that the People should forsake the Ordinances, rather than hear those who did
Conform. Than which words, nothing can be plainer against Separation. Beza
Epist. 24. p, 148.
And it further appears, by Beza' s Resolution of a case concerning a Schism in
the French Church then in London; That he looked on it as a Sin, for any one to
Separate from a Church, wherein Sound Doctrine, and a Holy Life, and the Right
use of the Sacraments is kept up. And, by Separation, he says, he means, Not
merely going from one Church to another, but the Discontinuing Communion with
the Public Assemblies, as though one were no Member of them.

Beza's Authority being so great with the Dissenting Brethren at that time,
seems to have put an effectual Stop to the Course of Separation, which they
were many of them, then inclined to. But, he was not alone among the Foreign
Divines, who, about that time, expressed themselves against Separation from the
Communion of our Church, notwithstanding the Rites and Ceremonies herein used.
Gualter. Ep. ded. ad Hom. in 1 Ep. ad C^rinth.
For Gualter, a Divine of good Reputation in the Helvetian Churches, takes an
occasion in an Epistle to several of our Bishops to talk of the Difference
then about these things; and he extremely blames the Morose humor of those, who
disturbed the Church for the sake of such things, and gave an occasion thereby
to endless Separations. And in an Epistle to Cox Bishop of Ely, 1572. he tells
him, How much they had dissuaded them from making such a stir in the Church,
about Matters of no moment: and he Complains grievously of the Lies and
Prejudices against our Church, which they had sent Men on purpose to possess
them with, both at Geneva and other places.

Zanchy, Zanchii, Epist. l. 2. p. 391.
upon great Solicitation, wrote an earnest Letter to the Queen to remove the
Ceremonies; but withal he sent another to Bishop Jewel, to persuade the
Non-conformists, if the Queen could not be moved, not to leave their Churches
on such accounts, which, for his part, he did not understand how any could
lawfully do; as long as they had otherwise liberty to Preach the Gospel, and
Administer the Sacraments, although they were forced to do something therein,
which did not please them; as long as the things were of that kind, which in
themselves were neither good nor evil. And the same Reason will much more hold
against the Peoples S^paration.

Sect. 7. But about this time, the dissenting party much increasing, and most
of the old and peaceable Non-conformists being dead, or unfit for business; the
management of their affairs fell into the hands of younger and fiercer Men. Who
thought their Predecessors too cold in these matters; insomuch, that honest
John Fox complained of the Factious and Turbulent Spirit which had then
possessed that Party, although himself a Moderate Nonconformist; and he says,
See his Letter in Fullers Church History, l. 9. p. ^06.
They despised him, because he could not Rail against Bishops, and Archbishops
as they did; but if he could be as mad as they, they would be kinder to him.
And therefore he soberly advises the Governors of the Church to look well
after this sort of Men; for, says he, if they prevail, it is not to be
imagined, what Mischief and Disturbance they will bring; whose Hypocrisy is
more subtle and pernicious then that of the old Monks; for, under a Pretense of
Greater Purity, they will never give over, till they have brought Men under a
Jewish Slavery. These New Men, full of bitter zeal, despised the old trifling
Controversy about Garments and Ceremonies, they complained, That all was out
of order in the Church, and nothing but a New and Thorough Reformation would
please them. For, in the Admonition presented to the Parliament, 14 Eliz. they
complain for want of a Right Ministry, a right Government in the Church
according to the Scriptures, without which (they say) there could be no right
Religion. The Liturgy they deride, as c^lled and picked out of the Popish
Dunghill, the Portuise and Mass Book; the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops they call Devilish and Antichristian; and Condemn the
Vocation of the Clergy, as Popish and Unlawful; and add, That the Sacraments
are mangled, and profaned, that Baptism is full of Childish and Superstitious
Toys. All which, and many more expressions of a like Nature, are extant in the
First and Second Admonitions. Which Bold and Groundless Assertions, being so
Openly Avowed to the World, by the Leaders of the Dissenting Party, gave the
true Occasion to the following practice of Separation. For when these things
were not only published in the name of the Party, being the Pleas for Peace at
that time, but stiffly maintained with greater Heat, than Learning, It is easy
to imagine, what Impressions such things would make on the common sort of
People; who have still a good Inclination to find fault with their Governors,
especially in the Church, and to Admire those that Oppose them. And these they
Courted most, having their Opinions so suited to Vulgar capacities, that they
apprehended their Interest carried on together with that of Purity of
Reformation. Hence they pleaded then, as others do at this day, for the Peoples
right to choose their Bishops and Pastors against the Usurpations, as they
accounted them, of Princes and Patrons; hence they railed against the Pomp and
Greatness of the Clergy, which is always a Popular Theme; and so would the
exposing the inequality of Men's Estates be, if Men durst undertake it, with as
great hopes of impunity. Besides, it was not a Little Pleasant to the People,
to think, what a share they should come to in the New Seigniory, as they called
it, or Presbytery, to be erected in every Parish; and what Authority they
should Exercise over their Neighbors, and over their Minister too by their
double Votes. By such Arts as these, they complied with the Natural Humors of
the People, and so gained a mighty Interest amongst them; as the Anabaptists in
Germany and Switzerland at first did, upon the like Grounds. Which made
Bullinger, Bullinger, Ep. ad Robert Winton* in the Appendix to Bishop Whitgifts
first Book.
in an Epistle to Robert Bishop of Winchester, parallel the Proceedings of this
Party here, with that of the Anabaptists with them in those Countries; For,
says he, we had a sort of People here, to whom nothing seemed pure enough in
our Reformation, from whence they brake out into Separation, and had their
Conventicles among us, upon which followed Sects and Schisms, which made great
entertainment to our Common Enemies, the Papists. Just thus it happened here,
these hot Reformers designed no Separation at present; which they knew would
unavoidably bring confusion along with it; for, that was laying the Reins on
the Peoples ne^ks, and they would run whither they pleased, without any
possibility of being well managed by them; but since these Men would Refine
upon the present Constitution of our Church, there soon arose another sort of
Men, who thought it as fit to Refine upon them. They acknowledged they had good
Principles among them, but they did not practice according to them: If our
Church were so bad as they said, that there was neither right Ministry, nor
right Government, nor right Sacraments, nor right Discipline; What follows, say
they, from hence, but that we ought to separate from the Communion of so
corrupt a Church, and join together to make up new Churches for the pure
administration of all Gospel Ordinances? The Leaders of the Non-conformists
finding this Party growing up under them, were quickly apprehensive of the
danger of them; because the Consequence seemed so Natural from their own
Principles; and the People were so ready to believe, that nothing but Worldly
considerations of Interest and Safety kept them from practicing according to
them. Which was a mighty prejudice against them in the Minds of the
Separatists, as appears by Robinsons Preface to his Book of Communion.

Sect. 8. II. The Separation being now begun, the Non-conformists set
themselves against it, with the Greatest Vehemence. Which is the second thing I
am to make out. Parker on the Cross* Part. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 2.
As for those of the Separation, says Parker a Noted Nonconformist, Who have
Confuted them more than we? or, Who have Written more against them? And in a
Letter of his, he expresses the greatest Detestation of them. Now it grieved
me not a little, at this time, says he, that Satan should be so impudent, as
to fling the dung of that Sect into my Face, which, with all my Power, I had so
vehemently resisted, during the whole course of my Ministry in England: Vide
Profane Schism of the Brownists, Chapter 12.
I think no other, but that many of them love the Lord, and fear his Name;
howbeit their Error being Enemy to that Breast of Charity, wherewith Cyprian
covered his, Qui ab Ecclesia nunquam recessit, as Augustine speaks; they
cannot stand before his Tribunal, but by the Intercession of our blessed
Savior. Father forgive them for they know not what they do. Think not these
words are applied to their Sect amiss; for, in effect, What does it less than
even persecute the Lord Jesus in his Host, which it revileth; in his
Ordinances, which it dishonoreth; and in his Servants last of all, whose Graces
it blasphemeth, whose footsteps it slandereth, and whose Persons it despises.
And Two Characters he gives of the Men of that way, viz. That their Spirits
were bitter above measure, and their hearts puffed up with the Leaven of Pride.
How far these Characters still agree to the Defenders of the present
Separation, I leave others to Judge. When Brown and Harrison openly declared
for Separation, T. C. himself undertook to Answer them, in a Letter to
Harrison. His example was soon followed by others of his Brethren, who Wrote
the Admonition to the Followers of Brown, and the Defense of that Admonition.
When Barrow and Greenwood published their Four Reasons for Separation, Three of
which they took out of the Admonition to the Parliament, viz. Unlawful
Ministry, Antichristian Government, and False Worship; Gifford, a
Nonconformist at Maldon in Essex, undertook to Answer them in several
Treatises. And it is observable, that these Non-conformists Charge the
Brownists with making a Vile, Notorious, and Damnable Schism, because they
withdrew from the Communion of our Churches, and set up New Ones of their own.
Gifford not only calls them Schismatics, Giffords first Treatise against the
Donatists of England, Preface.
but says, They make a Vile Schism, Rending themselves from the Church of
England; and condemning by their Assertions, the Whole Visible Church in the
World, even as the Donatists did of old time: and he adds, That the end of
Brownism, as it was then called, is Infinite Schisms, Heresies, Atheism and
Barbarism. And the same Author, Gifford's Second Treatise. Preface.
in his Second Book, reckoning up the ill effects of this Separation among the
People, has these remarkable words. Now look also on the People, where we may
see very many, who not regarding the chief Christian Virtues, and Godly Duties,
as namely, to be Meek, to be Patient, to be Lowly, to be full of Love and
Mercy, to deal Uprightly and Justly, to Guide their Families in the Fear of
God, with Wholesome Instructions, and to stand fast in the Calling in which God
has set them, give themselves wholly to this, even as if it were the Sum and
Pith of Religion, namely, to Argue and Talk continually against Matters in the
Church, against Bishops and Ministers, and one against another on both sides.
Some are proceeded to this, that they will come to the Assemblies to hear the
Sermons and Prayers of the Preacher, but not to the Prayers of the Book, which
I take to be a more grievous sin than many do suppose. But yet this is not the
worst, for sundry are gone further, and fallen into a Damnable Schism; and the
same so much the more fearful and dangerous, in that many do not see the
foulness of it, but rather hold them as Godly Christians, and but a little
over-shot in these matters. But that this Man went upon the Principles of the
Non-conformists, appears, by his Stating the Question, in the same Preface.
For, I showed, says he, in express words, that I do not meddle at all in these
Questions, whether there be corruptions and faults in our Church, condemned by
Gods Word; whether they be many or few; whether they be small or great; but
only thus far, whether they be such, or so great, as make our Churches
Antichristian. Answer to Giffords Preface.
Barrow says, That this Gifford was one that Joined with the rest of the
Faction in the Petition to the Parliament against the English Hierarchy: and it
appears by several passages of his Books that he was a Nonconformist; and he
is joined with Cartwright, Hildersham, Brightman, and other Non-conformists, by
the Prefacer to the Desence of Bradshaw against Johnson: Dangerous Positions,
etc. l. 3. c. 5.
and I find his Name in one of the Classes in Essex at that time. The Author of
the Second Answer for Communicating, The Second Answer for Communicating, p.
20. Printed by John Windet, A. D. 1588.
who defends T. Cs. Letter to Harrison, Browns Colleague against Separation,
proves Joining with the Church a Duty necessarily enjoined him of God by his
Providence, through his being and placing in a particular Church, and justly
required of him by the Church, or Spiritual Body, through that same enforcing
Law of the coherence, and being together of the parts and members, which is the
express Ordinance of God. So that, says he, unless I hold the Congregation,
whereof I am now, disanulled, and become no Church of Christ, for the not
separating an unworthy Member, I cannot voluntarily either absent my self from
their Assemblies to Holy Exercises, or yet depart away being come together,
without Breach of the Bond of Peace, Sundring the Cement of Love, empairing the
growth of the Body of Christ, and incurring the guilt of Schism and Division.
Page 46.
To the same purpose he speaks elsewhere. Answer to Ainsworth, p. 13.
Richard Bernard calls it, An Uncharitable and Lewd Schism which they were
guilty of. But I need not mention more particular A^thors, since in the Grave
Confutation of the Errors of the Separatists, Page 57.
in the Name of the Non-conformists, it is said, That because we have a True
Church, con^^ting of a Lawful Ministry, and a Faithful People, therefore they
cannot separate themselves from us, but they must needs incur the most shameful
and odious Reproach of Manifest Schism. Preface to the Read^r, p. 17.
And concerning the State of the Persons who lived in Separation, they say, We
hold them all to be in a Dangerous Estate, (we are loath to say in a Damnable
Estate) as long as they continue in this Schism.

Sect. 9. But, for our farther understanding the full State of this
Controversy, we must consider, What things were agreed on both sides, and
where the Main Points of Difference lay.

1. The Separatists did yield the Doctrine, or Faith of the Church of England
True and Sound, and a Possibility of Salvation in the Communion of it. In their
Apology presented to King James, Brownists Apology, p. 7. A. D. 1604.
thus they speak; We testify by these presents unto all Men, and desire them
to take knowledge hereof, that we have not forsaken any one Point of the True
Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith professed in our Land; but hold the same
Grounds of Christian Religion with them still. A Defense of the Churches and
Ministry of England, Middleburgh, p. 3. A. D. 1599.
And the Publisher of the Dispute about Separation, between Johnson and Jacob,
says, That the first Separatists never denied, that the Doctrine and
Profession of the Churches of England, was sufficient to make those that
believed and obeyed them, to be true Christians, and in the state of Salvation,
but always held, professed, and acknowledged the contrary. Barrow's
Observations on Gifford's last Reply, n. 4. p. 240.
Barrow says, That they commended the Faith of the English Martyrs, and deemed
them saved, notwithstanding the false Offices, and great corruptions in the
Worship exercised: Brownists Apol. p. 92.
And in the Letter to a Lady a little before his Death, he says, He had
Reverend estimation of sundry, and good hope of many hundred thousands in
England; though he utterly disliked the present Constitution of this Church, in
the present Communion, Ministry, Worship, Government, and Ordinances
Ecclesiastical of these Cathedral and Parishional Assemblies.

2. The Separatists granted, Brownists Apology, p 7.
That Separation was not Justifiable from a Church, for all Blemishes and
Corruptions in it. Thus they express themselves in their Apology, Neither count
we it lawful for any Member to forsake the Fellowship of the Church, for
blemishes and imperfections, which every one, according to his Calling, should
studiously seek to cure, and to expect and further it, until either there
follow redress, or the Disease be grown incurable. And in the 36 Article of the
Confession of their Faith, written by Johnson and Ainsworth, they have these
words. None is to separate from a Church rightly gathered and established, for
faults and Corruptions, which may, and so long as the Church consists of
Mortal Men, will fall out and arise among them, even in true constituted
Churches, but by due order to seek the redress thereof. But in the case of our
Church they pleaded, that the Corruptions were so many and great, as to
overthrow the very Constitution of a Church. Barrow, ib.
So Barrow says, They do not cut off the members of our Church from Gods
Election, or from Christ, but from being Members of a True Constituted Church.

On the other side, the Non-conformists granted there were many and great
Corruptions in our Church, but not such as did overthrow the Constitution of
it, or make Separation from our Parochial Assemblies to be necessary, or
lawful. So that the force of all their Reasonings against Separation lay in
these two Suppositions.

1. That nothing could Justify Separation from our Church, but such
Corruptions which overthrew the being, or constitution of it. 2. That the
Corruptions in our Church were not such, as did overthrow the Constitution of
it.
The making out of these two will tend very much to the clear Stating of this
present Controversy.

1. That nothing could Justify Separation from our Church, but such
Corruptions which overthrow the being or constitution of it. Barrow's
Refutation of Giffard. Preface to the Reader. Sum of the Causes of Separation.
Barrow and his Brethren, did not think they could satisfy their Consciences
in Separation, unless they proved our Churches to be no true Churches. For,
here they assign the Four Causes of their Separation to be; Want of a right
gathering our Churches at first; False Worship; Antichristian Ministry and
Government: These Reasons, say they, all Men may see prove directly these
Parish Assemblies not to be the true established Churches of Christ, to which
any faithful Christian may join himself in this estate; especially, when all
Reformation unto the rules of Christ's Testament is not only denied, but
resisted, blasphemed, persecuted. These are the words of the First, and
Chiefest Separatists, who suffered death rather than they would foregoe these
Principles. We condemn not, say they, their Assemblies, barely for a mixture of
good and bad, which will always be, but for want of an orderly gathering, or
constitution at first: we condemn them not for some faults in the Calling of
the Ministry, but for having and reteining a false Antichristian Ministry
imposed upon them: we forsake not their Assemblies for some faults in their
Government, or Discipline, but for standing subject to a Popish and
Antichristian Government. Neither refrain we their Worship for some light
imperfections, but because their Worship is Superstitious, devised by Men
Idolatrous, according to that patched Popish Portuise their Service Book;
according unto which their Sacraments, and whole Administration is performed,
and not by the Rules of Christ's Testament. So that these poor deluded
Creatures saw very well, that nothing but such a Charge, which overthrew the
very being and constitution of our Churches (the Doctrine of Faith being
allowed to be sound) could justify their Separation: not mere promiscuous
Congregations, nor mixed Communions; not defect in the Exercise of Discipline;
not some Corruptions in the Ministry or Worship; but such gross corruptions as
took away the Life and Being of a Church; as they supposed Idolatrous Worship,
and an Antichristian Ministry to do. If Mr. Giffard, Ibid.
says Barrow, can prove the Parish Assemblies in this estate true and
established Churches, then we would show him how free we are from Schism. The
same Four Reasons are insisted on as the Grounds of their Separation in the
Brownists Apology to King James, Brownists Apology, p. 7, 8, 9.
by Ainsworth, Johnson, and the rest of them. Ainsworth frames his Argument for
Separation thus. That Church which is not the true Church of Christ and of God,
Ainsworth's Counter-poyson, p. 3. Ib. p. 87.
ought not, by any true Christian, to be continued, or Communicated with; but
must be forsaken, and separated from; and a true Church sought, and joined
unto, etc. But the Church of England is before proved, not to be the true
Church of Christ, and of God, therefore it ought to be separated from, etc. By
which we see, the Greatest Separatists that were then, never thought it Lawful
to Separate from our Churches, if they were true. On the other side, those who
opposed the Separation, with greatest zeal, thought nothing more was necessary
for them, to disprove the Separation, then to prove our Churches to be true
Churches. R. Brown (from whom the Party received their denomination) thought he
had a great advantage against Cartwright (the Ringleader of the
Non-conformists) to prove the Necessity of Separation, because he seemed to
make Discipline Essential to a Church; and therefore since he complained of the
want of Discipline here, he made our Church not to be a true Church, and
consequently that Separation was necessary. T. C. Answers, T. Cs. Letter to
Harrison against Separation, in Defense of the Admonition to the followers of
Brown p. 98, 99.
That Church Assemblies are builded by Faith only on Christ the Foundation, the
which Faith so being, whatsoever is wanting of that which is commanded, or
remaining of that which is forbidden, is not able to put that Assembly from the
right and title of so being the Church of Christ. For that Faith can admit no
such thing, as gives an utter overthrow, and turning upside down of the truth.
His meaning is, wherever the true Doctrine of Faith is received and professed,
there no defects or corruptions can overthrow the being of a True Church, or
Justify Separation from it. For, he adds, although besides Faith in the Son
of God, there be many things necessary for every Assembly; yet be they
necessary to the comely and stable being, and not simply to the being of the
Church. And in this respect, says he, the Lutheran Churches, Page 106.
(which he there calls the Dutch Assemblies) which beside the maym of
Discipline, which is common to our Churches, are grossly deceived in the
matter of the Supper, are notwithstanding holden in the Roll of the Churches of
God. Page 107.
Was not Jerusalem, says he, after the Return from Babylon, the City of the
Great King, until such time as Nehemias came and Builded on the Walls of the
City? To say therefore it is none of the Church, because it has not received
this Discipline, methinks is all one with this, as if a Man would say, It is no
City, because it has no Wall: or that it is no Vineyard, because it has
neither Hedge, nor Ditch. It is not, I grant, so sightly a City, or Vineyard,
nor yet so safe against the Invasion of their several Enemies which lie in wait
for them; but yet they are truly both Cities and Vineyards. And whereas T. C.
seemed to make Discipline Essential to the Church, his Defender says, He did
not take Discipline there strictly for the Political Guiding of the Church,
with respect to Censures, Page 91.
but as comprehending all the Behavior concerning a Church in outward Duties,
i. e. the Duties of Pastor and People.

Afterward, as often as the Non-conformists set themselves to disprove the
Separation, their main Business was, To Prove our Churches to be True Churches.
As in a Book, Entitled, Certain Positions h^ld and maintained by some Godly
Ministers of the Gospel, against those of the Separation; which was part of
that Book, afterward Published by W. R. and called, A Grave and Modest
Confutation of the Separatists. The Groundwork whereof, as Mr. Ainsworth calls
it, is thus laid.

That the Church of England is a True Church of Christ, Counterpoyson, p. 117.
and such a one, as from which whosoever Wittingly and Continually Separateth
himself, Cutteth himself off from Christ.

If this was the Groundwork of the Non-conformists in those days; those who
live in ours, ought well to consider it, if they regard their Salvation.

And, for this Assertion of theirs, they bring Three Reasons.

1. For that they Enjoy, and Ioyn together in the Use of these outward Means,
which God in his Word has ordained for the Gathering of an Invisible Church;
i. e. Preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of the Sacraments.

2. For that their Whole Church makes Profession of the True Faith: and Hold
and Teach, etc. all Truths Fundamental. So we put their Two Reasons into One,
because they both relate to the Profession of the Truth Faith; which, say they,
is that which gives life and being to a Visible Church: and upon this
Profession we find many that have been incorporated into the Visible Church,
and admitted to the Privileges thereof, even by the Apostles themselves. So
the Church of Pergamus, though it did Tolerate Gross Corruptions in it: yet
because it kept the Faith of Christ, was still called the Church of God.

3. For that all the known Churches in the World acknowledge that Church for
their Sister, and give unto Her the Right hand of Fellowship.

When H. Jacob undertook Fr. Johnson upon this Point of Separation, the
Position he laid down was this,

That the Churches of England are the True Churches of God. Which he proved by
this Argument.

Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular Man a true Christian, and in
state of Salvation; that is sufficient to make a Company of Men, so gathered
together, to be a True Church.

But the whole Doctrine, as it is Publicly Professed, and Practiced, by Law in
England, is sufficient to make a particular Man a true Christian, and in state
of Salvation; and our Public Assemblies are therein gathered together.

Therefore it is sufficient to make the Public Assemblies True Churches.

And in the Defense of this Argument, against the Reasons and Exceptions of
Johnson, that whole Disputation is spent. And, in latter times, the Dispute
between Ball and Can, about the necessity of Separation, runs into this,
Whether our Church be a True Church or not; concerning which, Ball thus
delivers his Judgment. Ball against Can, p. 77.
True Doctrine, in the main Grounds and Articles of Faith, though mix't with
Defects and Errors in other matters, not concerning the Life and Soul of
Religion, and the Right Administration of Sacraments for Substance, though in
the manner of Dispensation, some things be not so well ordered, as they might
and ought, are notes and marks of a True and Sound Church, though somewhat
crased in health and soundness, by Errors in Doctrine, Corruptions in the
Worship of God, and Evils in Life and Manners.

The Second Supposition which the Non-conformists proceeded on, was,

Sect. 11. (2.) That the corruptions in our Church were not such as did
overthrow the being and constitution of it.

This will best appear, by the Answers they gave to the main Grounds of
Separation.

I. That our Church was not rightly gathered at the time of our Reformation
from Popery. To which Giffard thus Answers, The Church of England in the time
of Popery, was a Member of the Universal Church, Giffard's Answer to the
Brownists, p. 55.
and had not the being of a Church of Christ from Rome, nor took not her
beginning of being a Church, by Separating her self from that Romish Synagogue;
but having her Spirits revived, and her Eyes opened, by the Light of the
Heavenly Word, did cast forth that Tyranny of Antichrist, with his Abominable
Idolatry, Heresies, and False Worship; and sought to bring all her Children
unto the Right Faith, Grave Confutation, etc. p. 9, 10, 11.
and True Service of God; and so is a purer, and more faithful Church than
before. Others add, That the Laws of Christian Princes have been a means to
bring Men to the outward Society of the Church, and so to make a visible
Church: Neither were sufficient means wanting, in our Case, for the due
Conviction of Men's Minds; but then they add, That the Question must not be,
Whether the Means used were the Right Means, for the Calling and Converting a
People to the Faith; but, Whether Queen Elizabeth took a lawful course for
recalling, and re-uniting of Her Subjects unto those true Professors, whose
Fellowship they had forsaken; which they Justify, by the Examples of
Jehoshaphat, and Josiah, Asa, and Hezekiah.

II. That we Communicate together in a False and Idolatrous Worship of God,
which is polluted with Reading stinted Prayers, using Popish Ceremonies, etc.

To this they Answer;

1. That it is evident by the Word, That the Church has used,
^rav^con^utation, etc. ^. 12, 13, 15.
and might lawfully use, in God's Worship, and Prayer, a stinted Form of Words:
and that not only upon Ordinary, but Extraordinary Occasions, which requires an
Extraordinary and Special Fervency of Spirit. Nay, they say, They are so far
from thinking them unlawful, that in the ordinary and general occasions of the
Church, they are many times more fit, than those which are called Conceived
Prayers.

2. If Forms, Ibid.
thus devised by Men, be Lawful and Profitable, What sin can it be for the
Governors of the Church, to Command, that such Fo^ms be used; or, for us, that
are persuaded of the Lawfulness of them, to use them? unless they will say,
That therefore it is unlawful for us to Hear the Word, Receive the Sacraments,
Believe the Trinity, and all other Articles of Faith, because we are Commanded
by the Magistrates so to do: Whereas indeed, we ought the rather to do good
things, that are agreeable unto the Word, when we know them also to be
commanded by the Magistrate*

3. It is true, Pall against Can. Part. 2. p. 8.
the Non-conformists say, The Liturgy is in great part picked and culled out of
the Mass Book; but it follows not thence, that either it is, or was esteemed
by them a devised or false Worship; for many things contained in the Mass Book
it self are good and holy. A Pearl may be found upon a Dunghill; we cannot more
credit the Man of Sin, than to say, That every thing in the Mass Book is
Devilish and Antichristian, for then it would be Antichristian to Pray unto
God in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, to read the Scriptures, to profess many
Fundamental Truths necessary to Salvation. Our Service might be Picked and
culled out of the Mass Book, and yet be free from all fault and tincture, from
all show and apperance of Evil; though the Mass Book it self was fraught with
all manner of Abominations -- But if it be wholly taken out of the Mass Book,
how comes it to have those things which are so directly contrary to the Mass,
that both cannot possibly stand together? Yea, so many points, says B^ll, are
there taught directly contrary to the foundation of Popery, that it is not
possible Popery should stand, if they take place. And, says he, it is more
proper to say, the Mass was added to our Common Prayer, than that our Common
Prayer was taken out of the Mass Book: for most things in our Common Prayer,
were to be found in the Liturgies of the Church, long before the Mass was heard
of in the World.

4. As to the Fasts, and Feasts, and Ceremonies retained, they Answer, That
what was Antichristian in them, was the Doctrine upon which those Practices
were built in the Church of Rome, which being taken away by the Reformation,
the things themselves are not Antichristian. As namely, Giffard's Plain
Declaration, etc. Preface.
says Giffard, the Remission of Sins, and Merit of Eternal Life by Fasting*
which is the Doctrine of the Romish Church; the Worship and Invocation of
Saints and Angels; Answ. to the Brown. p. 10, 11.
the Power of expelling Devils by the Sign of the Cross, and such like things,
which the Papacy is full of, but rejected by us.

III. That our Ministry was Antichristian. To this they Answer.

1. That Antichrist is described in Scripture, Mr. Arthur Hildershams Letter
against Separation, Sect. 2. highly commended by Mr. J. Cotton, in his Preface
before his Commentaries, on 4 John.
not by his unlawful outward Calling, or Office, that he should exercise in the
Church; but First by the False Doctrine he should Teach; and Secondly by the
Authority he should Vsurp, to give Laws to Men's Consciences, and to Rule in the
hearts of Men as God. Which two Marks of Antichrist, as they may evidently be
discerned in the Papacy, so admit all the outward Callings and Offices in the
Church of England exercised, were faulty, and unwarrantable by the Word, yet
you in your own Conscience know, that these Marks of Antichrist cannot be found
among the worst of our Ministers. For neither do the Laws of our Church allow
any to teach False Doctrine; and we all Profess Christ to be the only Lawgiver
to Conscience; neither is any thing among us urged to be done, upon pain of
Damnation, but only the Word and Law of God.

2. That the Office, I^. Sect. C, 7, 8.
which our Laws call the Office of Priesthood, is the very same in substance
with the Pastors Office described in the Word; V. Bradshaw's Answer to Johnson.
and the manner of outward Calling unto that Office, which the Law allows, is
the very same in substance which is set down in the Word. Does the Word
enjoin the Minister to Teach diligently? so, by our Laws, he is expressly
charged at his Ordination to do, and forbidden to Teach any thing, as required
of necessity to Salvation, but that which he is persuaded may be concluded and
proved by the Scripture: yea, it Commands him, with all faithful diligence,
to banish, and drive away all Erroneous and strange Doctrines, that are
contrary to Gods Word. Does the Word Authorize him, to Administer the
Sacraments? So does our Law. Does the Word require that the Minister should
not only publicly Teach, but also oversee, and look to the Peoples
Conversation, Exhorting, Admonishing, Reproving, Comforting them as well
privately as publicly? So does our Law. Lastly, Does the Word Authorize the
Minister to execute the Censures and Discipline of Christ? our Law does also
command the same. So that, although many, to whom the execution of these things
appertain, do grievously fail in the practice thereof, yet you see the Office
which the Law enjoyneth to the Minister, is the same in substance, with that
which the Word lays upon him. Tell us not then, That the same Name is given
to our Office, as to the Popish Sacrificers. Do you think the worse of your
self because you are called Brownists? And, Shall the Holy Office and Calling,
which is so agreeable to the Word, be misliked, because it is called a
Priesthood? considering, that though it agree in Name, yet it differs in
Nature and Su^stance as much from the Romish Priesthood, as Light does from
Darkness.

IV. That Discipline is wanting in our Church. To which they Answer.

1. That the want or neglect of some of those Ordinances of Christ, Hildershams
Letter, Sect. 3.
which concern the Discipline of his Church, and the outward calling of his
Ministers, is no such sin, as can make either the Ministers, or Governors of
our Church Antichrist, or our Church an Antichristian and False Church. And Mr.
H. adds, That no one place of Scripture can be found, wherein he is called an
Antichrist, or Antichristian, who holding the Truth of Doctrine, and professing
those Articles of Religion that are Fundamental, as we do, does swerve, either
in Judgment, or Practice, from that Rule, which Christ has given for the
Discipline of his Church. Neither can you find any Antichrist mentioned in
Scripture, whose Doctrine is sound. If then the Doctrine of our Church be
sound, What VVarrant have you to call us Antichrists? If our Pastors offer to
lead you unto Salvation, through no other door than Christ, How dare you, that
say you are Christ's, refuse to be guided by them? If our Assemblies be built
upon that Rock, How can you deny them to be True Churches?

2 That the Substance of Discipline is preserved among us; Grave Confutation,
etc. p. 17.
in which they reckon Preaching of the Word, and Administration of Sacraments,
as well as the Censures of Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication, and
Provision for the Necessity of the Poor; which, say they, by Law, ought to be
in all our Assemblies; and therefore we cannot justly be said to be without the
Discipline of Christ; but rather that we having the Discipline of Christ; which
is most substantial, do want the other, and so exercise it not rightly, that is
to say, not by those Officers which Christ has appointed. And farther they
add, That the Laws of our Land do Authorize the Minister to stay from the Lords
Table, all such as are Vncat^chised, Giffard's Answer to the ^rownists, p. 47.
and out of Charity, or any otherwise public offenders; as appears in the
Rubric before the Communion, and in that which is after Confirmation.

3. That although it were granted, Grave Confutation, etc. p. 18.
That we wanted both the Exercise of the Churches Censures, and some of those
Officers which Christ has appointed to exercise them by, yet might we be a
True Church notwithstanding: as there was a True Church in Judah all the days
of Asa and Jehosaphat, yet was not the Discipline Reformed there till the
latter end of Jehoshaphat's Reign. The Church of Corinth was a True Church,
even when the Apostle blamed them for want of Discipline. The Congregation at
Samaria is called a Church, Acts. 8, 12, 19, 31.
before the Discipline was established there. And even in Jerusalem there was a
famous visible Church of Christ long before sundry parts of the Discipline (for
want whereof they Condemn us) were established there; yea, it is evident, that
by the Apostles themselves diverse Churches were gathered some good space of
time, before the Discipline was settled, or exercised: by all which it is
manifest, that how necessary soever those parts of the Discipline (which we
want) be, to the Beauty and Well-being, or preservation of the Church; yet are
they not necessary to the being thereof; but a True Church may be without them.

4. That it does not belong to private persons to set up the Discipline of the
Church against the Will and Consent of the Christian Magistrate, Grave
Confutation, etc. p. 51. 52.
and Governors of the Church: Giffard's Answer, p. 59. 95, 100, 101, 102.
Nay, they declare, that in so doing, they should highly offend God. Giffard
says, That the Fetters and Chains, can no faster bind the hands and feet of
Brownists, then the hands of private Men are bound with the bands of
Conscience, and the Fear of God, from presuming to take upon them Public
Authority. And if all the Brownists in the Land should come together, and
choose a Minister and Ordain him, it would make him no more a Minister before
God, then if all the Apprentices in London, taking upon them to choose a Lord
Mayor, and Minister an Oath unto him, should make him a Lord Mayor. But of this
more afterward.

V. That the Ministers of our Church stand under (as they speak) an
Antichristian Hierarchy. To which they Answer,

First, Grave Confutation, etc. p. 19.
They deny that our Bishops can be called Antichristian, since they do, and by
the Laws of the Land ought to hold and teach all Doctrines that are
Fundamental; yea, some of them have Learnedly and Soundly maintained the Truth
against Heretics, that have gainsay'd it; some have not only by their Doctrine
and Ministry Converted many to the Truth, but have suffered Persecution for the
Gospel.

Secondly, Suppose it were an Antichristian Yoke, which they deny; yet this
does not destroy the being of a True Church, or Mi^istry under it. Since both
the Jewish and Christian Churches, have frequently born such a Yoke, and yet
have been the True Churches of God still.

Thirdly. That there is nothing unlawful, or Antichristian in the Office of
Bishops, if they consider them as the Kings Visitors and Commissioners, to see
that the Pastors do their Duties. And that this cannot destroy the nature of a
Visible Church, to cast many particular Churches, Bradshaw's Answer to Johnson,
p. 65. Ed. 1642.
under one Provincial, or Diocesan Government. Yea, Mr. Bradshaw undertakes to
prove this, not only lawful, but expedient, to that degree, that he thinks the
Magistrate cannot well discharge his Duty, as to the Oversight and Government
of the Churches within his Dominions, without it: as is employed in the seven
Quaeries he propounds to Fr. Johnson about it. Page 49.
But supposing them to be Pastors of the Churches under them, this, says he,
does not overthrow the Office of Pastors to particular Congregations, so long
as under them they perform the main and substantial Duties of True Pastors;
which all the Ministers of our Church Assemblies do, and by the Laws cought to
do.

These Particulars I have laid together with all possible brevity and
clearness, from the Authors of best reputation on both sides, that we might
have a distinct view of the State of the Controversy about Separation, between
the Old Non-conformists, and the Separatists of that time.

Sect. 12. But before we come to our present Times, we must consider the
Alteration that was made in the State of this Controversy, by those who were
called Independents, and pretended to come off from the Principles of Brownism,
or rigid Separation.

And here I shall give an Account of the Progress of the Course of Separation,
or the Steps by which it was carried on; and how it came at last to settle in
the Congregational Way; and what the True State of the Difference was, between
the Assembly of Divines, and the Dissenting Brethren; and how far the Reasons,
then used, will hold against the present Separation.

When those who were called Brownists, Stephen Offwoo^ 's Adve^tisement to Jo^n
Delecluse and H. May, p. 10, 39.
for the f^eer Exercise of their new Church way, withdrew into the
Low Countries, they immediately fell into strange Factions and Divisions among
themselves. A. D. 1582. Robert Brown, accompanied with Harrison a
Schoolmaster, and about 50 or 60 Persons, went over to Middleburgh, and there
they chose Harrison Pastor* and Brown Teacher. They had not been there Three
Months, but upon the falling out between Brown and Harri^on, Brown forsakes
them, and returns for England, and Subscribes, promising to the Archbishop, To
live Obediently to his Commands. Concerning whom, Harrison Writes to a Friend
in London in these words: Indeed the Lord has made a breach among us for our
sins, which has made us unworthy to bear his great and worthy Cause. Mr. Brown
has cast us off, and that with open, manifest, and notable Treacheries, and if
I should declare them, you could not believe me. Only this I testify unto you,
that I am well able to prove, That Cain dealt not so ill with his Brother Abel,
as he has dealt with me. Some of the words of Browns Subscription, Defense of
the Admon. to the Followers of Brown, p. 127.
were these, I do humbly submit my self to be at my Lord of Canterbury's
Commandment, whose Authority, under Her Majesty, I w^ll never resist, or
deprave, by the Grace of God, etc. But, being a Man of a Restless, and Factious
Temper, no Promises, or Subscriptions could keep him within due bounds; as one
who lived at that time has fully discovered. For, although he promised to
frequent our Churches, Page 133.
and to come to Prayers and Sacraments, yet, living Schoolmaster at S. Olaves
in Southwark for two years, in all that time he never did it; and when he was
like to have been questioned for it, he withdrew into another Parish. Sometimes
he would go to hear Sermons, Page 135.
but that he accounted no act of Communion; and declared to his Friends, Page
134.
That he thought it not unlawful to hear our Sermons; and therefore persuaded
his Followers in London so to do. Page 140.
Notwithstanding this, he Preached in Private Meetings, and that in the time of
Public Assemblies, when he thought fit; Which this Author, though a
Nonconformist, and Friend of T. Cs, calls a Cursed Conventicle: who sets forth
at large his Strange Iuglings, and Iesuitical Aequivocations in his
Subscription. Page 141.
By the Bishops Authority, he said he meant only his Civil Authority; by
declaring the Church of England to be the Church of God, he understood the
Church of his own setting up; Page 138, etc.
by frequenting our Assemblies according to Law, he meant, the Law of God, and
not of the Land: he declared, his Child was Baptized according to Law,
Counterpoyson p. 25. Cotton's Answ. to R. Will^^ms, p. 122.
but then told his Followers, it was done without his Consent Mr. Cotton, of
New England, has this passage concerning Brown. The first Inventor of that
way, which is called Brownism, from whom the Sect took its Name, fell back from
his own way, to take a Parsonage called I^ourc^; God so, in a strange (yet
wise) Providence, ordering it, that he, who had utterly renounced all the
Churches in England, as no Church; should afterward accept of one Parish
Church among them, and it called, A Church. But upon the Dissension at
Middleborough, between Brown and Harrison, that Congregation soon broke to
pieces. Ainsworth cannot deny the early Dissentions between Brown and Harrison,
Brown and Barrow, Barrow and Fr. Johnson; but he reckons up all the differences
in Scripture from Cain and Abel downwards to justify theirs; notwithstanding,
Offwood's Advertisement, p. 15.
as Dr. O. well observes, We are to distinguish between what falls out through
the passions of Men, and what follows from the nature of the thing. But one of
their own Party at Amsterdam takes notice of a Third Cause of these
Dissentions, viz. The Judgment of God upon them. I do see, says he, the hand
of God is heavy upon them, blinding their Minds, and hardening their Hearts,
that they do not see his Truth, so that they are at Wars among themselves, and
they are far from that true Peace of God which follows Holiness.

There were two great Signs of this hand of God upon them.

First, Their Invincible Obstinacy.

Secondly, The Scandalous Breaches which followed still one upon the other, as
long as the course of Separation continued; and were only sometimes hindered
from showing themselves, by their not being let loose upon each other; For then
the Firebrands soon appear, which at other times they endeavor to cover.

Their great Obstinacy appears, by the Execution of Barrow and Greenwood, who
being Condemned for Seditious Books, could no ways be reclaimed; rather
choosing to Dye, than to Renounce the Principles of Separation. But Penry, who
suffered on the same account about that time, had more Relenting in him, as to
the business of Separation. For Mr. I. Cotton, Cotton's Answer to R. Williams
p. 17.
of New England, relates this Story of him, from the Mouth of Mr. Hildersham,
an eminent Nonconformist; That he confessed, He deserved Death at the Queens
hand, for that he had Seduced many of Her Loyal Subjects to a Separation, from
Hearing the Word of Life in the Parish Churches, Which though himself had
learned to discover the Evil of, yet he could never prevail to recover diverse
of Her Subjects whom he had Seduced; and therefore the Blood of their Souls was
now justly required at his hands. These are Mr. Cotton's own words. Ib.
Concerning Barrow, he reports from Mr. Dod's Mouth, that when he stood under
the Gibbet, he lift up his eyes, and said, Lord, if I be deceived, thou have
deceived me. And so being stopped by the hand of God, he was not able to proceed
to speak any thing to purpose more, either to the Glory of God, or Edification
of the People. These Executions extremely startled the Party, and away goes
Francis Johnson with his Company to Amsterdam; Johnson charge Ainsworth and
his Party with Anabaptism, Clifton's Advertisement, p. 22. 26.
and want of Humility and due Obedience to Government. In short, they fell to
pieces, separating from each others Communion: Way of Congregational Churches
cleared, p. 6.
some say, They formally Excommunicated each other; but Mr. Cotton will not
allow that, but, he says, They only withdrew: yet those who were Members of
the Church do say, That Mr. Johnson and his Company, were Accursed, and Avoided
by Mr. Ainsworth and his Company: and Mr. A. and his Company were rejected and
avoided by Mr. Johnson and his. Profane Schism of the Brownists, p. 63.
And one Church received the Persons Excommunicated by the other, and so became
ridiculous to Spectators, as some of themselves confessed. Johnson and his
Party charged the other with Schism in Separating from them: Ib. chapter 2. p. 9.
But, as others said, who returned to our Church; Is it a greater Sin in them
to leave the Communion of Mr. Johnson, than for him to refuse and avoid the
Communion of all True Churches beside? But the Difference went so high, that
Johnson would admit none of Ainsworth's Company without Re-baptizing them; Page
71.
Ainsworth, on the other side, charged them with woeful Apostasy: Offwood's
Advertisement, p. 43.
And one of his own Company said, That he lived and died in Contentions. When
Robinson went from Leyden, on purpose to end these Differences, he complained
very much of the disorderly and tumultuous carriage of the People; Which, with
Mr. Ainsworths Maintenance, was an early discovery of the Great Excellency of
Popular Church-Governm^nt. Schism of the Browni^s, p. 87.
Smith, who set up another Separate congregation, was Iohnson's Pupil, and went
over, In hopes, says Mr. Cotton, Way of Congregational Churches, p. 7.
to have gained his Tutor from the Errors of his Rigid Separation; but he was
so far from that, that he soon outwent him: and he charges the other Separate
Congregations with some of the very same Faults which they had found in the
Church of England, viz. (1.) Idolatrous Worship; for if they charged the Church
of England with Idolatry, See Smith's Reasons in B^nard against Br^^nists,
called P^ain Evidences, p. 5, 6, 7.
in Reading of Prayers; he thought them equ^lly guilty in looking on their
Bibles, in Preaching and Singing. (2.) Antichristian Government, in adding the
Human Inventions of Doctors, and Ruling Elders: which was pulling down one
Antichrist, to set up another; and if one was the Beast, the other was the
Image of the Beast. Being therefore unsatisfied with all Churches, he began one
wholly new, and therefore Baptized himself. For, Smith's Ep. to the Character.
he declared, There was no one True Ordinance with the other Separatists. But
this New Church was of short continuance, for, upon his Death, it dwindled
away, or was swallowed up in the Common Gulf of Anabaptism. And now one would
have thought here had been an end of Separation; and so in all probability
there had; had not Mr. Robinson of Leyden abated much of the Rigor of it; for
he asserted, The Lawfulness of Communicating with the Church of England in the
Word and Prayer, Cotton's Way cleare^, p. 8.
but not in Sacraments and Discipline. The former he defended in a Discourse
between Ainsworth and him. So that the present Separatists, who deny that, are
gone beyond him, and are fallen back to the Principles of the Rigid Separation.
Robinson succeeded (though not immediately) Jacob, in his Congregation at
Leyden, whom some make the Father of Independency. Page 15.
But from part of Mr. Robinson's Church, it spread into New England; for Mr.
Cotton says, They went over thither in their Church State to Plymouth; and
that Model was followed by other Churches there; at Salem, Boston, Page 14.
Watertown, etc. Yet Mr. Cotton professes, That Robinson 's Denial of the
Parishional Churches in England to be true Churches (either by reason of their
mixed corrupt matter, or for defect in their Covenant, or for excess in their
Episcopal Government) was never received into any heart, from thence to infer a
nullity of their Church State. Page 138.
And in his Answer to Mr. Roger Williams, he has these words, That upon due
consideration he cannot find, That the Principles and Grounds of Reform^tion do
necessarily conclude a Separation from the English Churches, as false Churches;
from their Ministry as a false Ministry; from their Worship as a false
Worship; from all their Professors as no visible Saints: Nor can I find, that
they do either necessarily, or probably conclude a Separation from Hearing the
Word Preached by godly Ministers in the Parish Churches in England. R. Williams
Answer to Cotton 's (...). 3^.
Mr. R. Williams urged Mr. Cotton with an apparent inconsistency between these
Principles and his own Practice; for although he pretended to own the Parish
Churches as true Churches, yet by his Actual Separation from them, he showed,
that really he did not; and he adds, that Separation did naturally follow from
the old Puritan Principles; saying, That Mr. Can has unanswerably proved, Page
39.
That the Grounds and Principles of the Puritans against Bishops and
Ceremonies, and profaneness of People professing Christ, and the necessity of
Christ' s Flock and Disciples, must necessarily, if truly followed, lead on to,
and enforce a Separation. Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Cotton does assert the
Lawfulness of hearing English Preachers in our Parish Churches; but then, he
says, There is no Church Communion in Hearing, Page 43.
but only in giving the Seals. Mr. Williams urges, That there is Communion in
Doctrine, and Fellowship of the Gospel. Cotton's Answer to Williams, p. 129,
132.
Upon which, Mr. Cotton grants, That though a Man may join in Hearing, and
Prayer, before and after Sermon; yet not as in a Church State. Yet, after all,
he will not deny our Churches to be True Churches. But, if they remain true
Churches, it appears from the former Discourse, they can never justify
Separation from them; upon the Principles of either Party. So that though those
of the Congregational Way seem to be more moderate, as to some of their
Principles, then the old rigid Separatists; yet they do not consider, that by
this means they make their Separation more Inexcusable. The Dissenting
Brethren, in their Apologetical Narration, to avoid the imputation of Brownism,
deliver this as their Judgment, concerning our Parochial Churches. And for our
own Congregations, Apologet. Narrative, p. 5, 6.
viz. of England, we have this sincere Profession to make before God and all
the World, that all that Conscience of the Defilements, we conceived to cleave
to the true Worship of God in them, or of the Unwarranted Power in Church
Governors exercised therein, did never work in us any other thought, much less
opinion, but that Multitudes of the Assemblies, and Parochial Congregations
thereof, were the True Churches and Body of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a
True Ministry: much less did it ever enter into our hearts, to Judge them
Antichristian; we saw, and cannot but see, that by the same reason, the
Churches abroad in Scotland, Holland, etc.(though more Reformed) yet for their
Mixture, must be in like manner Judged no Churches also; which, to imagine, or
conceive, is, and has ever been an horror to our thoughts. Yea, we have always
professed, and that in those times when the Churches of England were the most,
either actually overspread with Defilements, or in the greatest danger thereof;
and when our selves had least, yea no hopes of ever so much as visiting our own
Land again in peace and safety to our persons, that we both did and would hold
Communion with them as the Church of Christ. This is a very fair Confession
from the Dissenting Brethren; but then the difficulty returns with greater
force; How comes Separation from these Churches to be lawful? If they had gone
upon the Brownists Principles, all the Dispute had been about the truth or
falsehood of them; but their truth being supposed, the necessity of Separation
followed; whereas now, upon altering the State of the Controversy by the
Independents, though their Principles seem more Moderate, yet their Practice is
more Unreasonable. It is therefore a vain pretense used at this day, to
justify the Separation, That they do not deny our Churches to be true
Churches, and that therein they differ from the old Separatists; It is true* in
that Opinion they do; but in Separation they agree, which is the more
unjustifiable in them, since they yield so much to our Churches. And yet
herein, whatever they pre^end, they do not exceed their Independent Brethren,
whose Separation themselves Condemned. But the Presbyterians were then
unsatisfied with this Declaration of the Dissenting Brethren, and thought, it
did not sufficiently clear them from the Charge of Brownism; Anatomy of
Independency, p. 18, 19, 20, etc.
because (1.) They agreed with the old Separatists in the Main Principle of
Popular Church Government, Which, they say, is inconsistent with the Civil
Peace; as may be seen, say they, in the Quarrels both at Amsterdam, and
Rotterdam; and the Law-Suites depending before the Magistrates there. (2.) They
overthrow the Bounds of Parochial Churches, as the Separatists did, and think
such a Confinement Unlawful. (3.) They make true Saintship the necessary
Qualification of Church Members, as the Separatists did: Whereby, say they,
they confound the Visible, and Invisible Church, and make the same essential
form of both. (4.) They renounce the Ordination received in our Church, but all
the allowance they make of a true Ministry, is, by virtue of an explicit or
implicit Call, grounded on the Peoples explicit or implicit Covenant, with such
a Man as their Pastor. For when they first began to set up a Congregational
Church, after the New Model, at Rotterdam, Ward was chosen Pastor, and Bridges
Teacher, but they both Renounced their Ordination in England; and some say,
They ordained one another; others, That they had no other Ordination, than what
the Congregation gave them.

Sect. 13. And now, new Congregations began to be set up in Holland, upon these
Principles; but they again fell into Divisions as great as the former. Simpson
renouncing his Ordination, was admitted a private member of the Church at
Rotterdam; but he grew soon unsatisfied with the Orders of that Church, and
thought too great a Restraint was laid upon the private Members, as to the
exercise of Prophesying; and so he, and those who joined with him, complaining
of the Mischief of Impositions, were ready for a Separation, if that restraint
were not speedily removed. Mr. Bridge yields to the thing, but not as to the
time, viz. On the Lords Day after Sermon; this gives no satisfaction, for they
must have their will in every thing, or else they will never cease complaining
of the Mischief of Impositions. And so Mr. Simpson, Answer to the Antapologia
p. 245.
and his Party, set up a New Church of their own: Which I. Goodwin does not
deny; for Mr. Simpson, says he, upon dislike of some persons and things in
that Church, whereof Mr. Bridge was Pastor, might seek and make a departure
from it. But were these Churches quiet, after this Separation made? Disswasive
from the Errors of the Times, p. 76*
So far from it, that the contentions and slanders were no less grievous, says
Baylie, than those of Amsterdam, betwixt Ainsworth and Johnsons followers* But
did not Mr. Bridges Church continue in great quietness? No, but in stead of
that, they were so full of Bitterness, Anatomy of Independ. p. 6.
Reproaches, and hard Censures, that Mr. Br^dge often declared, If he had known
at first, what he met with afterward, he would never have come amongst them,
nor being amongst them, have given them such scope and liberty, as he had. It
seems at last, he came to apprehend the necessity of Impositions, and the
mischief of a Separating dividing humor. But the People having the Power in
their hands, were resolved to show, that they held it not in vain; for Mr.
Ward, had it seems given Offense to some of the Congregation, by Preaching the
same Sermons there, which he had Preached before at Norwich; this, and some
other frivolous things, were thought Intolerable Impositions; and therefore
against the Will of Mr. Bridge, they Depose Mr. Ward from his Ministry. This
being a fresh discovery of the great inconveniency of Popular Church
Government, gave a mighty alarm to the Brethren: which occasioned a Meeting of
the Messengers from other Churches (as they called them) for closing up of this
wound; but they durst not search deep into it, but only skinn'd it over, to
prevent the great reproach and scandal of it. From these things, the
Presbyterians inferred the necessity of Civil Authorities interposing; Anatomy
of Independ. p. 49.
and of not leaving all to Conscience. For, say they, Conscience has been long
urging the taking away that Scandal occasioned at Rotterdam by that Schism,
where diverse Members left the one Church, and joined to the other, so
disorderly, wherein even the Rulers of one Church had a deep Charge; yet as
that could not then be prevented, so there had been many Meetings, Sermons, and
all means used to press the Conscience of taking it off, by a Reunion of the
Churches, and yet the way to do it could never be found, till the Magistrates
Authority and Command found it. These things I have more fully deduced; Not, as
though bare Dissentions in a Church were an Argument of it self against it;
but, to show (1.) That Popular Church Government naturally leads to Divisions,
and leaves them without Remedy; and (2.) That humerous and factious People will
always complain of the Mischief of Impositions, though the things be never so
just and reasonable; and (1.) That this Principle of Liberty of Conscience,
will unavoidably lead Men into Confusion: For when Men once break the Rules of
Order and Government in a Church, they run down the Hill, and tumble down all
before them. If Men complain of the Mischief of our Impositions, the Members of
their own Churches, may on the same grounds, complain of theirs; and as the
Presbyterians cannot Answer the Independents, as to the Pretense of Conscience;
so it is impossible for either, or both of them, to Answer the Anabaptists, who
have as just a Plea for Separation from them, as they can have from the Church
of England.

Sect. 14. From hence we find, that, although the Pretense of the Dissenting
Brethren seemed very modest, as to themselves; yet they going upon a Common
Principle of Liberty of Conscience, the Presbyterians charged them with being
the Occasion of that Horrible Inundation of Errors and Schisms, which
immediately overspread this City and Nation: which I shall briefly represent in
the words of the most ^^inent Presbyterians of that time. Thence (...), Duply
to M. S. p. 53.
a zealous Scotch Presbyterian, said, That he verily believed, Independency
cannot but prove the Root of all Schisms and Heresies: Yea, I add, says he,
That by consequence, it is much worse than Pop^ry.

Then^e the Scotch Commissioners, Arguments of the Scotch Commiss. p. 3, 4.
in the first place, pres^ed Uniformity in Religion, as the only means to
preserve Peace, and to prevent many Divisions and Troubles; a thing very
becoming the King to promote, according to the practice of the good Kings of
Judah; and a thing which, they say, all sound Divines and Politicians are for.

Dr. Corn. Burgess told the House of Commons, Sermon. Nov. 8. 1641.
That our Church was laid waste, and exposed to confusion, under the Plausible
Pretense of not forcing Men's Consciences: and that, to put all Men into a
course of Order and Uniformity, in God's way, is not to force the Conscience;
but to set up God in his due place, and to bring all his People into the paths
of righteousness and life.

The Errors and Innovations, Sermon. before the Com. Feb. 19. 1645.
under which we groaned so much of later years, says Mr. Case, were but
Tolerabiles Ineptiae, Tolerable Trifles, Childrens Play, compared with these
Damnable Doctrines, Doctrines of Devils, as the Apostle calls them: Polygamy,
Arbitrary Divorce, Mortality of the Soul; No Ministry, no Churches, no
Ordinances, no Scripture, etc. And the very foundation of all these laid in
such a Schism of Boundless Liberty of Conscience, and such Lawless Separation
of Churches, etc.

The Famous City of London is become an Amsterdam, Sermon. before the Lord Mayor,
Jan. 14. 1645.
says Mr. Calamy, Separation from our Churches is Countenanced, Toleration is
Cried Up, Authority asleep. It would seem a wonder, if I should reckon how many
separate Congregations, or rather Segregations there are in the City; What
Churches against Churches, etc. Hereby the hearts of the People are mightily
distracted, many are hindered from Conversion, and even the Godly themselves
have lost much of the Power of Godliness in their Lives. The Lord keep us,
says he, from being Poisoned with such an Error as that of an Unlimited
Toleration. A Doctrine that overthrows all Church Government, brings in
Confusion, and opens a wide door unto all Irreligion and Atheism.

Diversity of Religion, Sermon. before the Parliament, Sept. 12. 1644.
says Mr. Matthew Newcomen, disjoynts and distracts the Minds of Men, and is
the Seminary of perpetual Hatreds, Iealousies, Seditions, Wars, if any thing in
the World be; and in a little time, either a Schism in the State begets a Schim
in the Church, or a Schism in the Church begets a Schism in the State: i. e.
either Religion in the Church is prejudiced by Civil Contentions, or
Church-Controversies and Disputes about Opinions break out into Civil Wars. Men
will at last take up Swords and Spears in stead of Pens; and defend that by
Arms which they cannot do by Arguments.

These may serve for a Taste of the Sense of some of the most eminent
Presbyterian Divines at that time, concerning the dangerous effects of that
Toleration which their Independent Brethren desired.

The Dissenting Brethren finding themselves thus Laden with so many
Reproaches, and particularly with being the Occasion of so many Errors and
Schisms, published their Apologetical Narration in Vindication of themselves,
wherein (as is said before) they endeavor to purge themselves from the
Imputation of Brownism; declaring, That they looked on some of our Churches as
True Churches, and our Ministry, as a true Ministry; but yet they earnestly
desire liberty, as to the Peaceable practice of their own way.

To this the Presbyterians Answered,

First, Observations and Annotations on the Apologetical Narration, p. 17.
That they did not understand by them, in what Sense they allowed our Churches
to be true Churches.

Secondly, If they did, what Necessity there was for any Separation, or what
need of Toleration.

As to the Sense in which they owned our Churches to be true Churches; either
they understood it of a bare Metaphysical Verity, as many of our Divines, say
they, grant it to the Romish Church; That she is a True Church, as a rotten
Infections Strumpet is a True Woman; and then they thank them for their Favor,
that they hold our Churches in the same Category with Rome: or else they
understand it in a Moral sense for sound and pure Churches, and then, say they,
Why do ye not join with us, and Communicate as Brethren? Why desire ye a
Toleration? Yes, say the Dissenting Brethren, we own you to be True Churches,
and Communicate with you in Doctrine. To which the others replied, If you own
it by External Act of Communion, ye must Communicate with us in Sacraments: but
this ye refuse; therefore ye must return to the old Principles of Separation.
For where there was such a refusal of Communion, as there was in them toward
all Churches besides their own, Sermon at St. Paul's, Feb. 8. 1645. p. 41.
there must lie at the bottom the same Principle of Separation which was in the
Brownists. And, as Mr. Newcomen urged them, their agreeing with us in Doctrines
that are Fundamental, their holding one Head, and one Faith, does not excuse
them from being guilty of breach of Unity, and downright Schism, as long as
they hold not one Body, one Baptism. For when Men make different Assemblies,
and Congregations, and draw Men into Parties, it is not their owning the same
Doctrine does excuse them from Schism, as he proves from St. Augustine and Beza.
Of which afterward.

But still they denied themselves to be Brownists, or Rigid Separatists,
because they separated from our Congregations as no Churches, and from the
Ordinances dispensed as Antichristian, and from our People as no Visible
Christians.

To which the other Replied, That there was always a Difference among the
Separatists themselves, some being more rigid than others; and as to the last
Clause, none since Barrow had owned it. But, for the rest, Narrative of
New England, etc. Postscript, p. 52.
only putting Unlawful for Antichristian; and by Ordinances, understanding
Church-Ordinances, they own the very same Principles as the others did. And
although in words they seem to own our Parochial Congregations to be true
Churches; yet having the same Opinions with the more moderate Brownists,
touching Church-Constitution, Matter, Form, Power, Government, Communion,
Corruptions, etc. The consequence must be, say they, that we have no true
Churches, and that our Ordinances are all unlawful. And the less cause they
have to plead for their Separation, Baylies Disswasive, p. 104.
by acknowledging our Churches to be True Churches, their Separation is so much
the more culpable, and the grosser and more inexcusable the Schism. For, it is
a greater sin, says Bailey, to depart from a Church, which I profess to be
True, and whose Ministry I acknowledge to be saving, than from a Church which I
conceive to be False, and whose Ministers I take to have no calling from God;
nor any Blessing from his hand.

So that the Independents were then charged with Schism for these two things.

First, For refusing Communion with those Churches, which they confessed to be
true Churches. For, say the Members of the Assembly, Papers for Accommod. p. 47.
Thus to depart from True Churches, is not to hold Communion with them as such,
but rather by departing, to declare them not to be such.

Secondly, For setting up different Congregations, where they confessed there
was an Agreement in Doctrine.

Sect. 15. But because some Men are so unwilling to understand the True State
of this Controversy about Separation, between the Divines of the Assembly, and
the Independents, I shall here give a fuller account of it from the Debates
between them.

The desire of the Independents, as it was proposed by themselves at the
Committee for Accommodation, Dec. 4. 1645. was this,

That they may not be forced to Communicate as Members in those Parishes where
they dwell; but may have liberty to have Congregations of such Persons who give
good Testimonies of their Godliness, and yet out of tenderness of Conscience,
cannot Communicate in their Parishes, but do voluntarily offer themselves to
join in such Congregations.

To which the Divines of the Assembly Answered, December. 15.

This Desire is not to be granted them, for these Reasons.

1. Because it holds out a plain and total Separation from the Rule; as if in
nothing it were to be complied with; nor our Churches to be communicated with
in any thing, which should argue Church Communion. More could not be said, or
done, against False Churches.

2. It plainly holds out, The lawfulness of gathering Churches out of true
Churches, yea out of such True Churches, which are endeavoring farther to
reform according to the word of God; whereof we are assured, there is not the
least hint of any example in all the Book of God.

3. This would give Countenance to A perpetual Schism and Division in the
Church, still drawing away some from the Churches under the Rule, which also
would breed many Irritations among the Parties going away, and those whom they
leave; and again, between the Church that should be forsaken, and that to which
they should go.

December. 23. The Dissenting Brethren put in their Reply to these Reasons.

To the First Reason, they say, (1.) That gathering into other Congregations
such, who cannot, out of tenderness of Conscience, partake as Members in their
Churches, for the purer enjoyment (as to their Consciences) of all Ordinances
yet still maintaining Communion with them as Churches, is far from Separation,
much less a plain and total Separation. And this is not setting up Churches
against Churches, but Neighbor Sister Churches of a different Judgment. For,
say they, if the purest Churches in the World (unto our Judgment, in all other
respects) should Impose as a Condition of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, any one thing; that such tender Consciences cannot join in (as suppose
kneeling in the Act of Receiving, which was the case of Scotland and England)
if they remove from these Churches, and have Liberty from a State to Gather
into other Churches, to enjoy this and other Ordinances, this is no Separation.

(2.) That it is not a plain and total Separation from the Rule, unless they
Wholly in all things differ, by setting up altogether different Rules of
Constitution, Worship and Government; but they shall practice the most of the
same things; and these the most substantial, which are found in the Rule it
self.

(3.) That they would maintain Occasional Communion with their Churches, not
only in Hearing and Preaching, but Occasionally, in Baptising their Children in
their Churches, and receiving the Lords Supper there, etc.

And, Would not all this clear them from the Imputation of Schism? Not agreeing
in the main things? Not owning their Churches to be true? Not maintaining
Occasional Communion with them? Let us hear, what the Divines of the Assembly
think of all this.

Thus they Answer,

First, That although Tenderness of Conscience may bind Men to forbear, or
suspend the Act of Communion in that Particular, wherein Men conceive they
cannot hold Communion without sin, yet it does not bind to follow such a
positive Prescript, as possibly may be diverse from the Will and Counsel of God,
of which kind we conceive this of Gathering Separate Churches out of True
Churches, to be one.

Secondly, It is one thing to remove to a Congregation which is under the same
Rule, another to a Congregation of a different Constitution from the Rule; in
the former case a Man retains his Membership; in the latter he renounceth his
Membership upon difference of Judgment, touching the very Constitution of the
Churches, from and unto which he removes.

Thirdly, If a Church do require that which is evil of any Member, he must
forbear to do it, yet without Separation. They who thought Kneeling in the Act
of Communion, to be unlawful, either in England, or Scotland, did not Separate,
or Renounce Membership, but did, some of them, with Zeal and Learning, defend
our Church against those of the Separation.

Fourthly, The Notion of Separation is not to be measured by Civil Acts of
State, but by the Word of God.

Fifthly, To leave all Ordinary Communion in any Church with dislike, when
Opposition or Offense offers it self, is to Separate from such a Church in the
Scripture Sense.

Sixthly, A total difference from Churches is not necessary to make a total
Separation; for the most rigid Separatists hold the same rule of Worship, and
Government with our Brethren; and under this pretense, Novatians, Donatists,
all that ever were thought to Separate, might shelter themselves.

Seventhly, If they may occasionally exercise these Acts of Communion with us
once, a second, or third time, without sin, we know no reason why it may not be
ordinary without sin; and then Separation and Church-Gathering would have been
needless. To Separate from those Churches ordinarily and visibly, with whom
occasionally you may join without sin, seems to be a most Unjust Separation.

To the Second Reason, The Dissenting Brethren gave these Answers.

1. That it was founded upon this supposition, That nothing is to be tolerated
which is unlawful in the Judgment of those who are to Tolerate: Which the
Divines of the Assembly denied; and said, It was upon the supposition of the
unlawfulness, to tolerate gathering of Churches out of true Churches: which
they do not once endeavor to prove lawful.

2. That if after all endeavors, Men's Consciences are unsatisfied, as to
Communion with a Church, they have no Obligation lying upon them to continue in
that Communion; or on the Churches to withold them from removing to purer
Churches; or if there be none such to gather into Churches.

To which the Divines of the Assembly Replied.

I. That this opened a Gap for all Sects to challenge such a Liberty as their
due.

II. This Liberty was denied by the Churches of New England; and they have as
just ground to deny it as they.

To the third Reason they Answered.

First, That the abuse of the word Schism has done much hurt in the Churches;
that the signification of it was not yet agreed upon by the State, nor debated
by the Assembly.

To which the others Reply;

That if the word Schism had been left out, the Reason would have remained
strong, viz. That this would, give countenance to Perpetual Division in the
Church, still drawing away Churches from under the Rule. And to give
countenance to an unjust, and causless Separation from Lawful Church Communion,
is not far from giving countenance to a Schism; especially when the grounds,
upon which this Separation is desired, are such, upon which all other possible
scruples, which erring Consciences may, in any other case, be subject unto, may
claim the privilege of a like Indulgence, and so this Toleration being the
first, shall indeed but lay the foundation, and open the Gap, whereat as many
Divisions in the Church, as there may be Scruples in the Minds of Men, shall,
upon the self-same Equity be let in.

Secondly, This will give Countenance only to Godly Peoples joining in other
Congregations for their greater Edification, who cannot otherwise, without sin,
enjoy all the Ordinances of Christ; yet so, as not condemning those Churches,
they join not with, as false; but still preserving all Christian Communion with
the Saints, as Members of the Body of Christ, of the Church Catholic; and join
also with them in all duties of Worship, which belong to particular Churches,
so far as they are able; and if this be called Schism, or Countenance of
Schism, it is more then we have yet learned from Scriptures, or any approved
Authors.

To this, the Divines of the Assembly replied.

1. This desired forbearance is a perpetual Division in the Church, and a
perpetual drawing away from the Churches under the Rule. For, upon the same
pretense, those who scruple Infant Baptism, may withdraw from their Churches,
and so Separate into another Congregation; and so in that some practice may be
scrupled, and they Separate again: Are these Divisions, and Sub-Divisions, say
they, as lawful as they may be infinite? or, Must we give that respect to the
Errors of Men's Consciences, as to satisfy their Scruples, by allowance of this
liberty to them? And, Does it not plainly signify, that Errors of Conscience
is a protection against Schism?

2. The not condemning of our Churches as false, does little extenuate the
Separation: for, diverse of the Brownists, who have totally separated in former
times, have not condemned these Churches as false; though they do not pronounce
an Affirmative Judgment against us, yet the very Separating is a tacit and
practical condemning of our Churches, if not as false, yet as impure, eousque
as that in such Administrations, they cannot be by them, as Members,
Communicated with, without sin. And when they speak of Communion with us, as
Members of the Church Catholic, it is as full a declining of Communion with us
as Churches, as if we were false Churches.

3. We do not think differences in Judgment in this, or that Point, to be
Schism, or that every inconformity unto every thing used or enjoined is Schism,
so that Communion be preserved; or that Separation from Idolatrous Communion,
or Worship, ex se unlawful, is Schism: but to join in Separate Congregations of
another Communion, which succession of our Members is a manifest rupture of our
Societies into others, and is therefore a Schism in the Body: and if the
Apostle do call those Divisions of the Church, wherein Christians did not
Separate into diverse formed Congregations, of several Communion in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper Schisms, much more may such Separation as this
desired, be so called.

4. Scruple of Conscience is no cause of Separating, nor does it take off
causeless separation from being Schism, which may arise from Errors of
Conscience, as well as carnal and corrupt reasons; therefore we conceive the
causes of Separation must be shown to be such exnatura rei, will bear it out;
and therefore we say, that the granting the liberty desired will give
countenance to Schism.

5. We cannot but take it for granted upon evidence of Reason, and Experience
of all Ages, that this Separation will be the Mother and Nurse of Contentions,
Strifes, Envyings, Confusions, and so draw with it that breach of Love, which
may endanger the heightning of it into formal Schism, even in the sense of our
Brethen.

6. What is it that approved Authors do call Schism, but the breaking off
Members from their Churches, which are lawfully constituted Churches, and from
Communion in Ordinances, etc. without just and sufficient cause, ex natura rei,
to justify such secession, and to join in other Congregations of Separate
Communion, either because of personal failings in the Officers, or Members of
the Congregation from which they separate, or because of causeless Scruple of
their own Conscience, which has been called setting up altar contra altar:
from which they quote St. Augustine, and Camenon.

Thus I have faithfully laid down the State of this Controversy about
Separation, as it has been managed in former times among us. From whence there
are these things to be considered by us, which may be of some use in our
following Discourse.

(1.) That all the old Non-conformists did think themselves bound in Conscience
to Communicate with the Church of England, and did look upon Separation from it
to be Sin, notwithstanding the Corruptions they supposed to be in it. This I
have proved with so great evidence in the forgoing Discourse; that those who
deny it, may, with the help of the same Metaphysics, deny, That the Sun shines.

(2.) That all Men were bound in Conscience toward preserving the Union of the
Church, to go as far as they were able. This was not only Asserted by the
Non-formists, but by the most rigid Separatists of former times, and by the
Dissenting Brethren themselves. So that the lawfulness of Separation, where
Communion is lawful, and thought so to be by the persons who Separate, is one
of the Newest Inventions of this Age; but what new Reasons they have for it,
besides Noise and Clamor, I am yet to seek.

(3.) That bare Scruple of Conscience does not justify Separation, although it
may excuse Non-communion in the particulars which are scrupled; provided that
they have used the best means for a right information.

(4.) That where occasional Communion is lawful, constant Communion is a Duty.
Which follows from the Divines of the Assembly blaming the Dissenting Brethren
for allowing the lawfulness of occasional Communion with our Churches, and yet
forbearing ordinary Communion with them. For, say they, to separate from those
Churches ordinarily and visibly, with whom occasionally you may join, seems
to be a most unjust Separation.

(5.) That withdrawing from the Communion of a True Church, and setting up
Congregations for purer Worship, or under another Rule, is plain and downright
Separation; as is most evident from the Answer of the Divines of the Assembly
to the Dissenting Brethren.

Sect. 16. From all this it appears, that the present practice of Separation
can never be justified, by the old Non-conformists Principles; nor by the
Doctrine of the Assembly of Divines. The former is clear from undeniable
Evidence, and the latter is in effect confessed by all my Adversaries. Baxter's
Answer, p. 89. Dr. O. p. 50.
For, although they endeavor all they can, to blind the Readers Judgment, with
finding out the disparity of some circumstances, which was never denied; yet
not one of them can deny, that it was their Judgment, That the holding of
Separate Congregations for Worship, where there was an agreement in Doctrine,
and the substantials of Religion, was Unlawful, and Schismatical. And this was
the point, for which I produced their Testimony in my Sermon: and it still
stands good against them. For their resolution of the case, does not depend
upon the particular circumstances of that time, but upon General Reasons drawn
from the Obligations to preserve Unity in Churches; which must have equal force
at all times, although there happen a great variety, as to some circumstances.
For whether the greater purity of Worship be pleaded, as to one circumstance,
or another, the general case, as to Separation, is the same: whether the
Scruples do relate to some Ceremonies required, or to other Impositions as to
Order and Discipline; if they be such as they pretend to, a necessity of
Separation on their Account; it comes at last to the same point. Was it
unlawful to desire a Liberty of Separate Congregations, as the Dissenting
Brethren did, because of some Scruples of Conscience in them? and is it not
equally unlawful in others, who have no more but Scruples of Conscience to
plead, although they relate to different things? I will put this case as plain
as possible, to prevent all subterfuges and slight evasions. Suppose five
Dissenting Brethren now, should plead the necessity of having Separate
Congregations, on the account of very different Scruples of Conscience; one of
them pleads, that his Company scruple the use of an imposed Liturgy: another
says, His People do not scruple that, but they cannot bear the Sign of the
Cross, or Kneeling at the Communion; a third says, If all these were away, yet
if their Church be not rightly gathered and constituted, as to matter and form,
they must have a Congregation of their own; a fourth goes yet farther, and
says, Let their Congregation be constituted how it will, if they allow
Infant Baptism, they can never join with them; nor, says a fifth, can we, as
long as you allow Preaching by set forms, and your Ministers stint themselves
by Hour-glasses, and such like Human Inventions: Here are now very different
scruples of Conscience; but, Does the nature of the case vary, according to the
bare difference of the Scruples? One Congregation scruples any kind of Order as
an unreasonable Imposition and restraint of the Spirit, is Separation on that
account lawful? No, say all other Parties against the Quakers; because their
scruples are unreasonable. But is it lawful for a Congregation to separate on
the account of Infant Baptism? No, say the Presbyterians and Independents, that
is an unreasonable Scruple. Is it lawful for Men to Separate to have greater
purity in the frame and order of Churches, although they may occasionally join
in the duties of Worship? No, says the Presbyterians, this makes way for all
manner of Schism's and Divisions, if mere scruple of Conscience be a sufficient
ground for Separation: and if they can join occasionally with us, they are
bound to do it constantly; or else the obligation to Peace and Unity in the
Church signifies little: No Man's Erroneous Conscience can excuse him from
Schism. If they allege grounds to justify themselves, they must be such as
can do it ex natura rei, and not from the mere error or mistake of Conscience.
But, at last, the Presbyterians themselves come to be required to join with
their Companies in Communion with the Church of England, and if they do not,
either they must desire a separate Congregation, on the account of their
Scruples, as to the Ceremonies, and then the former Arguments unavoidably
return upon them. (For the Church of England has as much occasion to account
those Scruples Unreasonable, as they do those of the Independents, Anabaptists,
and Quakers,) Or else they declare, They can join occasionally in Communion
with our Church, but yet hold it lawful to have separate Congregations for
greater Purity of Worship; and then the obligation to Peace and Unity ought to
have as much force on them, with respect to our Church, as ever they thought it
ought to have on the dissenting Brethren, with respect to themselves. For no
disparity, as to other Circumstances, can alter the nature of this Case; viz.
That as far as Men judge Communion lawful, it becomes a Duty, and Separation a
Sin; under what denomination soever the persons pass. For the fault does not
lie in the Circumstances, but in the nature of the Act; because then Separation
appears most unreasonable, when occasional Communion is confessed to be lawful.
As will fully appear by the following Discourse. Those Men therefore speak most
agreeably to their present practice, although least for the honor of the
Assembly, who confess, Mischief of Impos. p. 58, 68, 69.
That they were transported with undue heats, and animosities against their
Brethren; which deserve to be lamented, and not to be imitated; that they are
not obliged to vindicate all they said, nor to be concluded by their
Determinations: ^etter out of the Country, p. ^8.
that it is to be hoped, the Party is become wiser since. This is plain
dealing, and giving up the Cause to the dissenting Brethren; and that in a
matter wherein they happened to have the strongest reason of their side. But
hereby we see, that those who justify the present Separation have forsaken the
Principles and Practices of the old Non-conformists; as to this point of
Separation.

Sect. 17. It remains now, that I show how far they are likewise gone off from
the Peaceable Principles of their Predecessors, as to private persons
undertaking to reform the Discipline of the Church, and setting up new
Churches, against the consent of the Magistrate, in a Reformed Church: and
particularly, as to the Preaching of their Ministers, when Silenced by our
Law's This I am the more obliged to do, because when I said, That I was
certain, that Preaching in opposition to our Established Laws, is contrary to
the doctrine of all the Non-conformists of former times, Mr. B. is pleased to
say, Answ. to my Sermon, p. 21.
That my Assertion is so rash and false, in matters of notorious Fact, that it
weakeneth his Reverence of my Judgment, in matters of right. I should desire no
better Terms from Mr. B. as to the matter of right in this present
Controversy, than that he would be determined by the plain Evidence of the
Fact; and if what I said be true, and notoriously true, I shall leave him to
consider on whose side the Rashness lies.

Giffard makes this one principal part of Brownism, Giffard's Answer to the
Brownists, p. 104.
That Churches are to be set up, and Discipline reformed, without the consent
of the Christian Magistrate: Brown makes many Arguments, says he, to prove,
that Princes are not to be stayed for, nor yet to have to do, by Public Power,
to establish Religion. Which Opinion of his, is such abridging the Sacred Power
of Princes, and such horrib^ Injury to the Church, contrary to the manifest
Word of God, that if there were nothing else, it is enough to make him an
odious and detestable Heretic, until he show Repentance. But to clear this
matter, he distinguishes, (1.) of Princes that are enemies to Christianity; as
they were in the time of the Apostles; to what end, says he, should they,
having Authority from Christ, to establish Discipline, sue unto the Courts of
such Princes, or attend their pleasure. (2.) Of such who profess Christianity,
but are Idolaters. In this case, he says, they are neither ^ound to forbear
Preaching, nor setting up Discipline if they do oppose it. (3.) Of such
Princes, who own the true Doctrine of Christianity, but the Churches in their
Dominions are corrupt in Discipline. In this case he determines, That though
every Man is to take care to keep a good Conscience, yet no private persons are
to break the Unity and Peace of the Faithful, or to take upon them Public
Authority to reform: which he there proves, and concludes it to be a wicked and
dangerous Principle in the Brownists to hold the contrary.

In Answer to this, Barrow against Giffard, p. 105.
Barrow says, That the Servants of God ought not to be stayed from doing the
Commandments of God, upon any restraint, or persecution of any Mortal Man
whatsoever; and for this he quotes the example of the Apostles, who then had
been guilty of the same disobedience and rebellion, if Princes had been to be
stayed for, or their restraint been a sufficient let: and adds, That they only,
according to Gods Commandment, refrained from their Idolatry, and other Public
Evils, and Assembled together in all holy and peaceable manner, to Worship the
Lord our God, and to join our selves together in the Faith, unto mutual Duties,
and to seek that Government which Christ left to his Church, and for the Church
to erect the same.

To the Instance of the Apostles, Giffard had Answered, That they were
furnished with an extraordinary Authority and Commission by Christ, to set up
his Kingdom: but ye have no Commission from God, it is the Devil that has set
you forward; And will ye, in such vile and wretched manner, pretend the
Examples of the Primitive Churches? Barrow replies, If the Commandment of God
were sufficient warrant to the Apostles to do their Work, though all the
Princes of the World resisted; then must the Commandment of the same God, be of
the same effect to all other Instruments, whom it pleases the Lord to use in
their callings to his Service also, though all the Princes in the World should
withstand, and forbid the same. By this we see, this was a great point in
controversy between the Brownists and Non-conformists. Which will more appear
by the Dispute between Fr. Johnson and Jacob. For among the points of false
Doctrine which he charges the Non-conformists with, Page 70, 72.
whom they called the forward Preachers; these are two.

1. That the planting, or reforming of Christ's Church must tarry for the Civil
Magistrate, and may not otherwise be brought in by the Word and Spirit of God
in the Mouths of his weakest Servants, except they have Authority from Earthly
Princes; which Doctrine, says he, is against the Kingly Power of Christ, and
three whole Lines of Scripture, which he there puts together.

2. That it is lawful for a Minister of Christ to cease Preaching, and to
forsake his Flock, at the commandment of a Lord Bishop: Which Doctrine, he
says, is contrary to two Lines of Scripture more, with the bare numbers of
Chapter and Verse. But, lest it should be supposed, that these two were among
those which Jacob says, he falsely laid to their charge; we find both these
Doctrines owned by the several Non-conformists, Confut. of the Brown. p. 51.
who joined together in a Confutation of the Brownists. For, say they, As to
the Peoples power of Reforming,

First, We cannot find any Warrant in Holy Scripture, for them that are private
Members of any Church, to erect the Discipline, no not though the Magistrate
and Ministers, who should deal in this work, were altogether profane and
ungodly.

Secondly, We esteem our Prince to be a most Lawful and Christian Magistrate,
and our Ministers to be true Ministers of Christ, and therefore we are justly
afraid, that by enterprising a public Reformation, not only without, but
contrary to the direction and liking of them, who by God's word ought to have,
if not the only, yet the principal hand in that work, we should highly offend
God.

Thirdly, That for the want of Public Reformation, the Magistrate is every
where blamed, and no where the Church, for ought we can find: Often are the
Priests and People blamed for erecting and practicing Idolatry, Page 2^*
but never for that they plucked it not down, when their Princes had set it up;
neither can we find, whether ever the Church, under a Christian Magistrate, was
by any Prophet, either commanded to deal (otherwise than by persuasion) in
public Reformation, when the Magistrate neglected it; or reproved for the
contrary.

Fourthly, To the Instance of the Apostles they Answer Two things.

I. That though they set up Church Government without the Magistrates leave;
yet not contrary to his liking; or when he opposed his Authority directly, and
inhibited it; they never erected the Discipline, when there was so direct an
opposition made against it by the Civil Magistrates.

II. If it could be proved that the Apostles did so then, yet would it not
follow, that we may do so now; for neither was the Heathen Magistrate
altogether so much to be respected by the Church, as the Christian Magistrate
is; neither have our Ministers and People now so full and absolute a power, to
pull down, and set up Orders in the Church, as the Apostles (those wise
Master Builders) had.

Fifthly, As to their Ministers Preaching being Silenced, they declare,

1. So long as the Bishops Suspend, Page 41.
and Deprive, according to the Law of the Land, we account of the Action
herein, as of the Act of the Church, which we may and ought to reverence, and
yield unto; if they do otherwise, we have liberty given us by the Law to appeal
from them. If it be said, the Church is not to be obeyed when it Suspends and
deprives us, for such causes as we in our Consciences know to be insufficient.
We Answer, That it lies on them to Depose, who may Ordain; and they may shut
that may open. And as he may, with a good Conscience execute a Ministry, by
the Ordination and Calling of the Church, who is privy to himself of some
unfitness (if the Church will press him to it) so may he who is privy to
himself, of no fault that deserves Deprivation, cease from the execution of
his Ministry, when he is pressed thereunto by the Church. And if a guiltless
person, put out of his Charge by the Churches Authority, may yet continue in
it, What proceedings can there be against guilty persons, who, in their own
conceit, are always guiltless, or will at least pretend so to be; seeing they
will be ready always to object against the Churches Judgment, That they are
called of God, and may not therefore give over the Execution of their Ministry
at the will of Bishops? The Second Quaere.


2. That the case of the Apostles was very different from theirs in Three
respects.

First. They that Inhibited the Apostles, were known and professed enemies to
the Gospel.

Secondly. The Apostles were charged not to teach in the Name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the Gospel, which Commandment might more hardly be yielded
unto, than this of our Bishops, who, though they cannot endure them which teach
that part of the Truth that concerns the good Government, and Reformation of
the Church, yet are they not only content that the Gospel should be Preached,
but are also Preachers of it themselves.

Thirdly. The Apostles received not their Calling and Authority from Men, nor
by the hands of Men, but immediately from God himself, and therefore also might
not be restrained or deposed by Men; whereas we, though we exercise a Function,
whereof God is the Author, and we are also called of God to it, yet are we
called and ordained by the hands and Ministry of Men, and may therefore by the
Ministry of Men be also deposed, and restrained from the Exercise of our
Ministry.

To this, Answer to Letter, p. 22.
which I had referred Mr. B. to, he gives this Answer, If Mr. Rathband has
denied this, it had been no proof. Did I ever mention Mr. Rathband's Testimony
as a sufficient proof? My words are, That I was certain their Practice was
contrary to the Doctrine of all the Non-conformists, as you may see in the Book
published in their name by Mr. Rathband. Can any thing be plainer, than that
the Book was written by the Non-conformists, and that Mr. Rathband was only the
Publisher of it? This way of Answering is just, as if one should quote a
passage out of Curcellaeus his Greek Testament, and another should reply, If
Curcellaeus said so, it had been no proof. Can Mr. B. satisfy his Mind with
such Answers?

When Fr. Johnson said, Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 89.
That our Ministers ought not to suffer themselves to be Silenced and Deposed
from their Public Ministry, no not by Lawful Magistrates. Mr. Bradshaw
Answered, This Assertion is false and seditious. And when Johnson says, That
the Apostles did not make their immediate Calling from God the ground of their
refusal; but this, that they ought to obey God rather than Man; which is a Duty
required of all Ministers and Christians. Bradshaw (a Person formerly in great
esteem with Mr. Baxter, and highly commended by the Author of the Vindication
of his Dispute with Johnson) gives this Answer.

1. Though the Apostles did not assign their immediate Calling from God, as the
Ground of their refusal, in so many Letters and Syllables, yet that which they
do assign, is by Implication, and in effect the same with it. For it is as much
as if they had said, God himself has imposed this Calling upon us, and not
Man; and therefore except we should rather obey Man than God, we may not
forbear this Office which he has imposed upon us. For, opposing the Obedience
of God to the obedience of Man, they therein plead a Calling from God, and not
from Man; otherwise, if they had received a Calling from Man, there had been
incongruity in the Answer; considering, that in common sense and reason, they
ought so far forth to obey Men, forbidding them to exercise a Calling, as they
exercise the same by virtue of that Calling. Else, by this reason, a Minister
should not cease to Preach, upon the Commandment of the Church, that has
chosen him; but should be bound, to give them also the same Answer, which the
Apostles gave, which were absurd. So that by this gross conceit of Mr. Johnson,
there should be no Power in any sort of Men whosoever, to depose a Minister
from his Ministry; but that nowithstanding any Commandment of Church or State,
the Minister is to continue in his Ministry.

2. For the further Answer of this his ignorant conceit, plainly tending to
Sedition, we are to know, that though the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists,
Preached Publicly, where they were not hindered by open violence; and did not,
nor might not leave their Ministry upon any Human Authority, or Commandment
whatsoever, because they did not enter into, or exercise the same upon the will
and pleasure of any Man whatsoever; yet they never erected and planted Public
Churches and Ministeries in the Face of the Magistrate, whether they would or
no; or in despite of them; but such, in respect of the Eye of the Magistrate,
were as private and invisible as might be.

3. Neither were some of the Apostles only forbidden, so as others should be
suffered to Preach the same Gospel in their places; but the utter abolishing of
Christian Religion was manifestly intended in Silencing of them. But our
Churches whereof we are Ministers, are no private and secret Assemblies, such
as hide themselves from the Face of a persecuting Magistrate and State; but are
public, professing their Worship, and doing their Religion in the face of the
Magistrate and State; yea, and by his Countenance, Authority and Protection;
and we are set over those Churches, not only by a Calling of our People, but
also by the Authority of the Magistrate, who has an Armed Power to hinder any
such public action; who is willing also to permit and maintain other true
Ministers of the Gospel, in those places where he forbids some. If therefore
after our public calling, to Minister to such a known and Public Church, not
by the Church only, but by the Magistrate also, the Magistrate shall have
matter against us (whether just or unjust it skilleth not) and shall in that
regard forbid us to Minister to our Church; I see not by what Warrant in Gods
Word, we should think our selves bound notwithstanding to exercise our
Ministry still; except we should think such a Law of Ministry to lie upon us,
that we should judge our selves bound to run upon the Swords point of the
Magistrate, or to oppose Sword to Sword. And suppose the Magistrate should do
it unjustly, and against the will of the Church, and should therein sin; yet
does not the Church in that regard cease to be a Churh, nor ought she therein
to resist the Will of the Magistrate; neither does she stand bound, in regard
of her affection to her Minister (how great and deserving soever) to deprive
her self of the Protection of the Magistrate, by leaving her public standing,
to follow his Ministry in private, and in the dark; refusing the benefit of
all other Public Ministry, which with the leave and liking of the Magistrate
she may enjoy.

4. Neither do I know what warrant any ordinary Minister has, by Gods Word, in
such a case, so to draw any such Church or People to his private Ministry,
that thereby they should hazard their outward state and quiet in the
Commonwealth where they live; when in some competent measure they may
publicly, with the grace and favor of the Magistrate, enjoy the ordinary means
of Salvation by another: and (except he have a calling to Minister in some
Church) he is to be content to live as a private member, till it shall please
God to reconcile the Magistrate to him, and to call him again to his own
Church; laboring mean while privately, upon particular occasions offered, to
strengthen and confirm in the ways of God, those People that are deprived of
his public Labor. And I take it to be the duty of the People, in such a Case,
if they will approve themselves faithful Christians, and good Subjects, so to
submit to the Ministry of another, as that by Prayer, and all other good,
dutiful, and loyal means, they may do their best endeavor to obtain him, of
whom, against their will, they have been deprived, and still to affect and love
him as their Pastor: now, if the People do thus, then is that Minister called
to be Silent, not only by the Magistrate, but by them also, though with much
grief.

To this Testimony of Mr. Bradshaw, Answer to Sermon. p. 99.
all that Mr. B. says, is, That Bradshaw thought, we should submit to a
Silencing Law, where our Ministry was unnecessary, and so does he. If Mr. B.
did allow himself any time to consider what he writes, he would never have
given such an Answer as this. For, Mr. Bradshaw never puts the case upon the
necessity, or no necessity of their Preaching, but upon the allowance, or
disallowance of the Christian Magistrate. And if it had been resolved upon the
point of necessity, Is it possible for Mr. B. to think there was less necessity
of Preaching at that time, than there is now, when himself confesses, several
years since, That Thirty years ago, Defense of the Cure of Divisions, p. 55.
there were many bare Reading, not Preaching Ministers, for one that there is
now? And what was there, which the old Non-conformists more complained of, than
the want of a more Preaching Ministry? This then, could not be Mr. Bradshaw's
Reason; and Mr. Baxter, upon second thoughts, cannot be of that opinion.

I have yet one Argument more, to prove this to have been the general sense of
the Non-conformists; which is Mr. Sprints Argument for Conformity in case of
Deprivation; Cassand. Anglic. p. 2.
Which is, that where two Duties do meet, a greater, and a less, whereof both
cannot be done at the same time, the lesser duty must yield unto the greater;
but this Doctrine of suffering Deprivation for not Conforming, teaches, and
the practice thereof causes, to neglect a greater duty for performing of a
less; therefore it seems to be an Error in Doctrine, and a Sin in Practice.
The force of which Argument does necessarily suppose, That Ministers, deprived
by Law, are not to exercise their Ministerial Function in opposition to the
Law's. And to confirm this, several Non-conformists undertook to Answer this
Argument, and to give an account of the disparity of the case, as to the
Apostles times, and ours. For Mr. Sprint had urged the instance of the Apostles
to this purpose, since they submitted to Jewish Ceremonies rather than lose the
liberty of their Ministry, they ought to yield to our Ceremonies on the same
ground; to which they Answer; That the Apostles had far greater reason so to
do; Page 232*
because their Ministry was of far greater excellency, and usefulness, and
therefore the Argument was of much greater weight with the Apostles, than it
could be with them. For, say they, What one Minister of the Gospel is there,
that dare be so presumptuous, as to say, That his Preaching and Ministry can
be of that necessity, and use for the Glory of God, and good of his Church; as
was the Ministry of his Apostles? The work whereunto the Lord called and
separated the Apostles (viz. the planting of the Church, and the Preaching the
Gospel to all Nations) was such, as could not have been performed by any other,
but the Apostles alone; but in deprivation of our Ministers that refuse
conformity, there is no such danger, and of their Preaching there can be no
such necessity imagined; though they Preach not, the Gospel is Preached still,
and that soundly, and fruitfully. Did these Men think, the Apostles Woe be unto
me if I Preach not the Gospel, did reach to their case? Can Mr. B. imagine,
that such Men thought themselves still bound to Preach, although they were
silenced by our Laws?

And now, I hope, I have proved that to be evidently True, which Mr. B. says
was notoriously false. But if after all this, Mr. B. will persist, in saying,
That he knew those who did otherwise; all that I have to say to it, is, That I
hope Mr. Bs. Acquaintance, both of the one, and the other Party (if they were
such, as he represents) are not to be the Standard for all the rest; for, it
seems, he was not very happy in either.

PART II.
Of the Nature of the Present Separation.
Sect. 1. HAving made it my business, in the foregoing Discourse, to show, How
far the present Dissenters are gone off from the Principles of the old
Non-conformists; I come to consider, What those Principles are, which they now
proceed upon;

And those are of Two sorts.

First, Of such as hold partial, and occasional Communion with our Churches to
be lawful; but not total and constant, i. e. they judge it lawful at some times
to be present in some part of our Worship, and upon particular occasions to
partake of some acts of Communion with us; but yet, they apprehend greater
purity and edification in separate Congregations, and when they are to choose,
they think themselves bound to choose these, although at certain seasons they
may think it lawful to submit to occasional Communion with our Church, as it is
now established.

Secondly, Of such as hold any Communion with our Church to be unlawful,
because they believe the Terms of its Communion unlawful; for which they
instance, in the constant use of the Liturgy; the Aereal sign of the Cross;
kneeling at the Communion; the observation of Holy Days; renouncing other
Assemblies; want of Discipline in our Churches; and depriving the People of
their Right in choosing their own Pastors.

To proceed with all possible clearness in this matter, we must consider these
Three things, 1. What things are to be taken for granted by the several
parties, with respect to our Church. 2. Wherein they differ among themselves
about the nature and degrees of Separation from it. 3. What the true State of
the present Controversy about Separation, is.

I. In General, they cannot deny these three things.

1. That there is no reason of Separation, because of the Doctrine of our
Church. 2. That there is no other reason of Separation because of the Terms of
our Communion, than what was from the beginning of the Reformation. 3. That
Communion with our Church has been still allowed by the Reformed Churches
abroad.
1. That there is no Reason of Separation, because of the Doctrine of our
Church. This was confessed by the Brownists, and most rigid Separatists; as is
proved already; and our present Adversaries agree herein. Vindication of Non
conformists, p. 8, 9.
Dr. Owen says, We agree with our Brethren in the Faith of the Gospel; and we
are firmly united with the main Body of Protestants in this Nation, in
Confession of the same Faith: And again, The Parties at difference do agree in
all Substantial parts of Religion, Page 22.
and in a Common Interest, as unto the preservation and defense of the
Protestant Religion. Mr. Baxter says, That they agree with us in the Doctrine
of the 39 Articles, Answ. to Sermon. p. 27.
as distinct from the form of Government, and imposed abuses. And more fully
elsewhere, Is not the Non conformists Doctrine the same with that of the Church
of England, when they subscribe to it, and offer so to do? Defense of the Cure
of Divisions, p. 64.
The Independents as well as Presbyterians offer to subscribe to the Doctrine
of the 39 Articles, as distinct from Prelacy and Ceremony. We agree with them
in the Doctrine of Faith, Restor of Sutton, p. 15.
and the Substance of God's Worship, says the Author of the last Answer. And
again, We are one with the Church of England in all the necessary points of
Faith, Page 30.
and Christian Practice, We are one with the Church of England as to the
Substance, and all necessary parts of God's Worship And even Mr. A. after many
trifling cavils, acknowledges, That the Dissenters generally agree with that
Book which is commonly called the 39 Articles, Mischief of Imposition. Preface.
which was compiled above a Hundred years ago; and this Book some Men call the
Church of England. I know not who those Men are, nor by what Figure they speak,
who call a Book a Church; but this we all say, That the Doctrine of the Church
of England is contained therein; and whatever the opinions of private persons
may be, this is the Standard by which the Sense of our Church is to be taken:
And that no objection ought to be made, against Communion with our Church, upon
account of the Doctrine of it; but what reaches to such Articles as are owned
and received by this Church.

2. That there are in effect no new terms of Communion with this Church, but
the same, which our first Reformers owned, and suffered Marty^dom for, in Q.
Mary's days. Not, but that some alterations have been made since, but not such
as do, in the Judgment of our Brethren, make the terms of Communion harder than
before. Mr. Baxter grants, that the terms of Lay Communion are rather made
easier by such Alterations, even since the additional Conformity, with respect
to the late Troubles. The same Reasons then, which would now make the terms of
our Communion unlawful, must have held against Cranmer, Ridley, Jacob against
Johnson, p. 21, 23, 29, 32, 33, 37, 40, 42, 47, 54, 68, 79, 82.
etc. who laid down their Lives for the Reformation of this Church. And this
the old Non-conformists thought a considerable Argument against Separating from
the Communion of our Church; because it reflected much on the honor of our
Martyrs; who not only lived and died in the Communion of this Church;
Bradshaw's Answer to Johnson's Third Reason Sect. 2. Giffard against Brow: p.
97, 98, 10^.
and in the practice of those things, which some are now most offended at; but
were themselves the great Instruments in settling the Terms of our Communion.

3. That Communion with our Church has been still owned by the Protestant and
Reformed Churches abroad. Which they have not only manifested, by receiving the
Apology and Articles of our Church into the Harmony of Confessions; but by the
Testimony and Approbation which has been given to it, by the most Esteemed,
and Learned Writers of those Churches, and by the discountenance which they
have still given to Separation from the Communion of it. This Argument was
often objected against the Separatists, by the Non-conformists; and Ainsworth
attempts to Answer it no less than Four times in one Book; but the best Answer
he gives, Counterpoyson, p. 9. 10, 27, 51, 92.
is, That if it prove any thing, it proves more than they would have For, says
he, the Reformed Churches have discerned the National Church of England to be a
true Church; they have discerned the Diocesan Bishops of England, as well as
the Parish Priests to be true Ministers; and rejoice as well for their Sees, as
for your Parishes, having joined these all alike in the^r Harmony. As to the
good opinion of the Reformed Church, and Protestant Divines abroad, concerning
the Constitution and Orders of our Church, so much has been proved already by
Dr. Durel, and so little or nothing has been said to disprove his Evidence,
that this ought to be taken as a thing granted; but, if occasion be given, both
he and others are able to produce much more from the Testimony of foreign
Divines, in Justification of the Communion of our Church against all pretenses
of Separation from it.

Sect. 2. We now come to the several Hypotheses and Principles of Separation,
which are at this day among the Dissenters from our Church.

Some do seem to allow Separate Congregations only in such places where the
Churches are not capable to receive the Inhabitants. For this I find insisted
on, by almost all my Answerers; Letter out of the Country, p. 34.
Some Parishes, says one, cannot receive a tenth part, some not half the
People, belonging to them, few can receive all. The Parochial Teacher, says
another, is overlaid with a numerous throng of People. Mischief of Imposition.
Preface. Rector of Sutton, etc. p. 35.
The Parish Ministers are not near sufficient for so populous a City, says a
third. And yet not one of these, but assigns such reasons, for the necessity
of Separate Congregations, as would equally hold, if there were never a Church
in London, but what would hold all the Inhabitants together. This is therefore
but a color, and pretense, and no real Cause. Any one would think, by Mr.
Baxter's insisting so very much, on the greatness and largeness of our
Parishes, as the Reason of his Preaching in separate Congregations, this were
his opinion, that such Congregations are only allowable in such vast Parishes,
where they are helps to the Parochial Churches: And no Man denies, that more
places for Worship are desirable, and would be very useful, where they may be
had, and the same way of Worship and Order observed in them, as in our
Parochial Churches; where they may be under the same Inspection, and
Ecclesiastical Government; where, upon pretense of greater Purity of Worship,
and better means of Edification, the People are not drawn into Separation. But,
is it possible that Mr. Baxter should think the case alike, where the Orders of
our Church are constantly neglected, the Authority of the Bishops is slighted
and contemned; and such Meetings are kept up in affront to them, and the Laws?
Would Mr. B. have thought this a sufficient Reason for Mr. Tombs to have set up
a Meeting of Anabaptists in Kidderminster, because it is a very large Parish?
Or for R. Williams in New England to have set up a Separate Congregation at
Boston, because there were but three Churches there, to receive all the
numerous Inhabitants? If such a number of Churches could be built, as were
suitable to the greatness, and extent of Parishes, we should be so far from
opposing it, that we should be very thankful to those who would accomplish so
excellent a Work: but, in the mean time, Is this just and reasonable, to draw
away the People, who come to our Churches, under the pretense of Preaching to
those who cannot come? For, upon consideration, we shall find,

(1.) That this is Mr. Baxter's own case. For, if we observe him, Answ. to Let.
p. 24.
although he sometimes pretends only to Preach to some of many thousands, that
cannot come into the Temples, many of which never heard a Sermon of many years;
and to this purpose he put so many Quaere 's to me, concerning the largeness of
Parishes, and the necessity of more Assistants, thereby to insinuate, That what
he did, was only to Preach to such, as could not come to our Churches; yet,
when he is pinched with the point of Separation, then he declares, That his
hearers are the same with ours; at least 10 or 20 for one; Ans. to Letter, p
17. Answer to Sermon, p. 57.
and that he knows not many (if any) who use to hear him, that Separate from
us. If this be true, as no doubt Mr. B. believes it, then what such mighty
help, or assistance is this to our great Parishes? What color, or pretense is
there from the largeness of them, that he should Preach to the very same
persons, who come to our Churches? And if such Meetings as theirs be only
lawful in great Parishes, where they Preach to some of many thousands who
cannot come into the Churches, Then how come they to be lawful, where few or
none of those many thousands ever come at all, but they are filled with the
very same Persons, who come to our Parish Churches? These two pretenses then
are inconsistent with each other; and one of them cannot hold. For if he does
Preach to those who come to our Churches, and scarce to any else (i^ any, as
Mr. B. supposes) then all the pretense from the large^ess of our Parishes, and
the many thousands who cannot come to our Churches, is vain and impertinent;
and, to Speak Softly, not becoming Mr. Baxter's sincerity.

(2.) That if this were Mr. Baxter's own case, viz. That he Preached only to
such, as could not come to our Churches, it would be no defense of the general
practice of Dissenters, who express no regard at all to the greatness or
smallness of Parishes. As, if it were necessary, might be proved, by an
Induction of the particular Congregations within the City; and in the adjacent
Parishes. Either those separarate Meetings are lawful or not; if not, Why does
not Mr. Baxter disown them? if they be, Why does he p^etend the greatness of
Parishes to justify Separate M^etings; when, if they were never so small, they
would be lawful however? This therefore must be set aside, as a mee^ color and
pretense, which he thought plausible for himself, and invidious to us, though
the bounds of our Parishes were neither of our own making, nor is it in our
power to alter them. And we shall find, that Mr. B. does justify them upon
other grounds, which have no relation at all to the extent of Parishes, or
capacity of Churches. I come therefore to the real grounds which they proceed
upon.

Sect. 3. Some do allow Communion with some Parochial Churches, in some duties,
at some Seasons; but not with all Churches, in all Duties, or at all times.
These things must be more particulary explained, for a right understanding the
Mystery of the present Separation. Which proceeds not so openly and plainly, as
the old Separation did; but has such artificial windings and turnings in it,
that a Man thinks they are very near our Church, when they are at a great
distance from it. If we charge them with following the steps of the old
Separatists, we utterly deny it, for, say they; For they separated from your
Churches as no true Churches; they disowned your Ministry and Hierarchy as
Antichristian, and looked on your Worship as Idolatrous; but we do none of
these things; and therefore you charge us unjustly with Separation. To which I
Answer,

(1.) There are many still, especially of the People, who pursue the Principles
of the old Separatists; of whom Mr B. has spoken very well in his Cure of
Divisions, and the Defense of it; and elsewhere. Where he complains, Cure of
Divis. p. 393.
of their Violence, and Censoriousness: their contempt of the Gravest and
Wisest Pastors; and forcing others to forsake their own judgments to comply
with their humors. And, he says, A sinful humoring of rash Professors, is as
great a Temptation to them, as a sinful compliance with the Great Ones of the
World. In another place he says, Sacrileg. desertion, p. 102. etc.
The People will not endure any Forms of Prayers among them, but they declare
they would be gone from them, if they do use them. And he does not dissemble,
that they do comply with them, in these remarkable words, Should the Ministers
in London, that have suffered so long, but use any part of the Liturgy and
Scripture Forms, though without any Motive but the pleasing God and the
Churches good, What Muttering and Censuring would then be among them? And Woe
to those few Teachers that make up their Designs by cherishing these
Distempers. One would think, that their warning had been fair; but, Si nati
sint ad bis perdendam Angliam; The Lord have Mercy upon us.

(2.) When the matter is thoroughly examined, the difference between the
Teachers, and the old Separatists, will be found not near so great as is
pretended. For what matter is it, as to the nature of Separation, whether the
terms of our Communion be called Idolatrous, or Unlawful; whether the Ministry
of our Church be called a False Ministry, or Insufficient, Scandalous,
Usurpers, and Persecutors; whether our Hierarchy be called Antichristian, or
Repugnant to the Institution of Christ. Now these are the very same Arguments,
which the old Separatists used, only they are disguised under another
appearance, and put into a more fashionable dress. As will be manifest by
Particulars.

(1.) As to the People. (2.) As to the Ministry of our Church.
Sect. 4. (I.) Our present Dissenters who disown the old Separation, yet make
the terms of Lay-Communion for Persons, as Members of our Church, to be
unlawful. For, First Plea, Sect. 9. p. ^41.
Mr. B. in his late Plea for Peace, has a whole Chapter of Reasons against the
Communion of Laymen with our Church. And in the same Book he says, It is
Schismatical in a Church to deny Baptism, without the Transient Sign of the
Cross, or for want of Godfathers, etc. or to deny the Communion to such who
scruple kneeling. Page 45.
Now, if the Church be Schismatical, then those who Separate in these things
are not. For says Mr. B. When the Laity cannot have their Children Baptized
without such use of the Transient Dedicating Image of the Cross; Answ. to Sermon
p. 49.
and such use of Entitling and Covenanting Godfathers, which they take to be no
small sin; Is it Separation to join with Pastors that will otherwise Baptize
them? We see the Church is Schismatical in requiring these things, and Mr. B.
thinks the People bound to join with other Pastors that will not use them; And
what is this but formal Separation? But for all this, Mr. B. may hold, that
total renouncing of Communion with our Church may be Schismatical; for, he
says, Plea for Peace, p. 47.
it may be Schism to Separate from a Church that has some Schismatical
Principles, Practices, and Persons, if those be not such, and so great, as to
necessitate our departure from them. But here Mr. B. says, There is a
necessity of departure, and to join with other Pastors; and therefore he must
hold a formal Separation: And as to the renouncing total Communion with our
Church, that was never done by the greatest Separatists. For they all held
Communion in Faith with it: And even Brown, the Head of the old Separatists,
thought it lawful to join with our Church in some Acts of Worship; and others
thought, they might join in Acts of private and Christian Communion, but not in
Acts of Church Communion; others thought it lawful to join in hearing Sermons
and Pulpit Prayers, though not in others; and yet were charged with Separation
by the old Non-conformists. And if our present Dissenters do hold the terms of
Communion with our Church to be unlawful; they must hold a necessity of
Separation, or that persons may be good Christians, and yet be no Members of
any Church. For, if it be unlawful to communicate as Members of our Church,
they must either not communicate at all as Members of any Church, or as Members
of a distinct and Separate Church from ours. If they declare themselves Members
of another Church, they own as plain a Separation, as the old Separatists ever
did: if they do not, and yet hold it unlawful to Communicate with our Churches
as Members, then they are Members of no Church at all. So that, if they hold
the terms of our Communion unlawful; they must either be Separatists, or no
good Christians upon their own Principles. Letter out of the Country, etc. p. 9.
For, says the Author of the Letter out of the Country; this were to exchange
visible Christianity, for visible (at least Negative) Paganism. Now, that our
present dissenters do hold the terms of our Communion unlawful, they are more
forward to declare, than I could have imagined. In my Sermon I mentioned some
passages, wherein it seemed clear to me, that some considerable persons among
them did allow Lay communion with our Church to be lawful: But they have taken
a great deal of pains to undeceive me; some declaring in express terms, That
they look on the terms of our Communion as unlawful, and that there is a
necessity of Separation from our Parochial Churches, and of joining to other
Congregations. And others saying, Dr. O. Vindication, etc. p. 35.
That such a Concession, viz. That they hold Communion with our Churches to be
lawful, taken in their own sense, will neither do them any harm, nor us any
service. For, as Mr. A. has summed up the sense of these Men. Mischief of
Impositions, etc. p. 36.
1. Many of them declare so, and many declare otherwise -- And it is as good an
Argument to prove Communion unlawful, because many declare against it, as it is
to prove it lawful, because many declare for it. 2. They d^clare Communion
lawful, but. D^ they declare Total Communion lawful? The same Persons will tell
us, that both these Propositions are ^^ue Communion is lawful* and Communion is
unlawful; Communion in some parts of Worship is so, in others not. And, 3. They
will further tell us, That Communion with some Parish chu^ches is lawful, with
others unlawful; that there are not the same Doctrines Preached, the same
Ceremonies urged, the same rigid terms of Communion in all Churches exacted.
And lastly, that occasional Communion is, or may be lawful, where a stated and
fixed Communion is not so; and they give this Reason for their Judgment and
practice, because to hold Communion with one Church, or sort of Christians,
exclusively to all others, is contrary to their true Catholic Principles,
which teach them to hold Communion, though not equally, with all tolerable
Churches; and that there are some things tolerable, which are not eligible,
wherein they can bear with much for Peace sake, but choose rather to sit down
ordinarily with Purer Administrations. Here we have the Principles of the New
Separation laid together.

1. Many of them hold Communion with our Church unlawful; and that must be
understood of any kind of Communion; for the Second sort, from whom they are
distinguish^d, hold total Communion unlawful; and therefore this first sort
must hold Communion in any parts of Worship unlawful. And so they exceed the
more moderate Separatists of Robinson's, and the New England way; and must fall
into the way of the most rigid Separatists.

2. Those that do hold Communion lawful, do it with so many restrictions and
limitations, that in practice it amounts to little more than the other. For
First, It is only with some Churches; and those it seems must be such, as do
not hold to our Constitution; for he says, The same Ceremonies are not urged
in all Churches, nor the same rigid terms of Communion exacted, i. e. If any
Churches among us comply with them, they can Communicate with them, i. e. if
they break their own Rules, they can join with them. Is not this an admirable
way of Communicating with our Churches? But, if our Churches hold to their
Rule, and observe the Orders prescribed, then it seems they renounce all
Communion with them as unlawful. And what is this but to deny Communion with
the Church of England? For unless Parochial Churches depart from the terms of
Communion required by it, they will have no Communion with them.

And Mr. A. delivers this, not only as his own Opinion* Mischief of
Impositions, p. 65.
but as the Sense of the Party, That if most of the Preachers in the Separate
Meetings were Asked their Judgments, about the Lawfulness of Joining with the
Parochial Churches in all the parts of Worship, or in any exclusive to their
joining with other Assemblies, where the Gospel Rule is more strictly observed,
they would flatly deny it. And he goes yet further, when he says, That the
People cannot lawfully Separate from those Churches whereof they are regularly
Members, and from those Pastors, under whose Ministerial Conduct their own Free
Election has placed them, to join ordinarily and constantly with any other
particular Churches. This is owning a plain and downright Separation, in as
clear and distinct words as ever Johnson or Ainsworth did. For, 1. He makes it
to be their general sense, That it is unlawful to communicate with our Churches
ordinarily and constantly, or to be Members of our Churches: Which is the same
thing which they said. 2. He ownes the setting up new and distinct Churches in
plain opposition to ours. For he owns other Pastors, other People, and a new
Relation between these, by the choice of the one, and the conduct of the other.
This is no mincing the matter, as Mr. B. often does; but he speaks it boldly,
and with great assurance; and ushers it in with, I have confidence contrary to
his. I think no Man doubts of his Confidence, that ever looked into his Book;
but in this matter he is so brisk, that he says, He does not question that he
should carry it by the Poll. And is withal so indiscreet as on this occasion
to Triumph in the Poll of Non-conformists at Guildhall: as though all who gave
their Votes there, had owned these Principles of Separation, for which, many of
those Gentlemen will give him little thanks, and is a very unseasonable
boasting of their Numbers.

(II.) All the difference then that seems to be left, is about the lawfulness
of that which they call Occasional Communion. As to which, these things are to
be observed. (1.) That it is practiced by very few; especially if Mr. A 's.
Poll be allowed. (2.) That it signifies little, as to this matter, if Men be
fixed Members of other Churches. For the denomination of their Communion is to
be taken from thence, and not from an Occasional and accidental Presence. For
Communion with a Church, is joining with a Church as a Member of that Church:
And it is not occasional Presence at some parts of Worship, which makes a Man a
Member of a Church. I suppose there are many occasionally present at Mr. A's,
or Mr. B's Meetings, who renounce all Communion with them. A Protestant may be
occasionally present at some parts of Worship in the Roman Church, and that
frequently too, to hear Sermons, etc. but, Does this make a Man to have
Communion with the Church of Rome? Most of our Gentlemen who have Traveled
abroad, have been thus occasionally present in some parts of the Romish
Worship, at Rome and Paris; but they would think themselves hardly dealt with,
to be charged to have had Communion with the Church of Rome. And if they be
urged with it, they will plead still, They were of the Protestant Communion;
and the Reason they will give, is, because they did not join with them in all
parts of their Worship; not in adoration of the Host, or Worship of Images; and
therefore they remained still of the Protestant Communion, although they were
occasionally present at some parts of the Popish Service. And Is it not the
same case here, If Men only afford an occasional Presence, at some parts of our
Worship? How comes this to make them more to have Communion with our Church,
than the like presence would make them to have Communion with the Roman Church?
In the beginning of Q Elizabeth's Reign, most of the Papists in England did
offer an Occasional Presence at our Churches, in some parts of our Worship; and
yet all that time were Members of the Roman Church, because they kept their
Priests, and had Mass in private, and declared, That though they looked on our
Service as tolerable, yet they thought the Roman more eligible; and so having
Full Communion with that, and being only occasionally present at our Service,
they thought themselves good Catholics. So, if Men do look on the Separate
Meetings as more eligible, and a better way of Worship; with which they
constantly join, and always choose to do it, their occasional Presence at our
Assemblies, does not make them Members of our Churches, but they still remain
Members of the Separate Congregations, if they maintain full and constant
Communion with them. And none of the formed Separate Churches will look on any
one as having Communion with them, for being occasionally present at some parts
of their Worship; for they say, That Heathens and Indians may have such
occasional Communion with them; but they require from Persons that are admitted
to Communion with their Churches, a Submission to all the Rules and Orders
among them. The New England Churches will suffer no Man to continue a Member of
their Communion, that scruples Infant Baptism, or refuses to be present at the
Administration of it; although he be never so willing to be occasionally
present at all other parts of Worship with them. For not only openly condemning
and opposing Infant Baptism, but going about secretly to seduce others from the
approbation or use thereof, or purposely departing the Congregation at the
Administration of that Ordinance, is liable, by their Laws, to the Sentence of
Banishment. And they have found it so necessary to twist the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Interests together, that as none but Church Members are Freemen
among them; so none that are banished can retain their Church Membership. From
all this, it appears, that this new Notion of Occasional Communion, in some
parts of Worship. exclusively to others, is disowned by all sorts of Churches;
and is a late fancy taken up on purpose to avoid the charge of Separation.

Sect. 5. But we here meet with an excellent Reason for the lawfulness of this
Occasional Communion with our Churches; viz. because to hold Communion with one
Church exclusively to all others, is contrary to their true Catholic
Principles, which teach them to hold Communion, though not equally, with all
tolerable Churches. Or as Mr. B. expresses it, Sacrileg. de ^ertion, p. 16.
The benefit of Christian Love and Concord may make it best, for certain
seasons, to join even in defective Modes of Worship, as Christ did in the
Synagogues and Temple in his time: though the least defective must be chosen,
when no such accidental Reasons sway the other way. From whence we may take
notice, (1.) That no obligation to the Peace and Unity of this Church, as they
are Members of it, does bring them to this occasional Communion with it, but a
certain Romantic Fancy of Catholic Unity; by which these Catholic Gentlemen
think themselves no more obliged to the Communion of this Church, than of the
Armenian or Abyssine Churches. Only it happens, that our Church is so much
nearer to them, than the others are, and therefore they can afford it more
occasional Communion. But I would suppose one of these Men of Catholic
Principles to be at Jerusalem, where he might have occasional Communion with
all sorts of the Eastern Churches; and some of the Members of those Churches
should Ask him, What Church he is Member of? If he should Answer, He could have
occasional Communion with all tolerable Churches, but was a fixed Member of
none: Would they take such a Man for a Christian? What, a Christian, and a
Member of no Church! That, they would all agree, was no part of Catholic
Christianity. And I much doubt, whether any of them would admit such a one to
occasional Communion, that could not tell what Church he was Member of. For, as
to the Church of England, he declares, That he holds only occasional Communion
with that, as he would do with any other tolerable Churches. But, Were they not
Baptized in this Church, and received into Communion with it as Members of it?
if so, then if they Communicate no otherwise with it, than as a tolerable
defective Church, they must renounce their former Membership; for that did
oblige them to fixed and constant Communion with it. And if they do renounce
their Membership in this Church, their occasional Presence at some duties of
Worship can never excuse them from Separation. We thank them, that they are
pleased to account our Churches tolerable, but we cannot see, how in any
tolerable sense they can be accounted Members of our Church; so that this great
favor of occasional Communion, which they do not choose but submit to for some
accidental reasons, and some very good occasions, is not worth the speaking of
among Friends; and so far from looking like Communion, that it has hardly the
face of a Civility.

(2.) That, if the least defective way of Worship is to be chosen, as they say,
then this occasional Communion cannot be lawful above once or twice in a Man's
Life: For that is sufficient to show their true Catholic Principles; and Mr.
B. faith, When no such accidental Reasons do sway, they are to choose the least
defective way of Worship; or as Mr. A. speaks, To sit down ordinarily with
purer Administrations. If then a Man be bound, out of love to his Soul, to
prefer the best way of Worship, and he judges the way of the Separate
Congregations to be such, there will arise a difficult case of Conscience,
concerning the lawfulness of this occasional Communion. For the same Reasons,
which moved him to prefer one Communion above the other, will likewise induce
him to think himself bound to adhere constantly to the one, and to forsake the
other. And why should a Man, that is acquainted with purer Administrations,
give so much countenance to a defective way of Worship, and have any Communion
with a Church which walks so disorderly, and contrary to the Rules of the
Gospel; and not reprove her rather, by a total forbearance of her Communion?
And why should not those general Rules of approving the things that are more
excellent, and holding fast that which is good, and not forsaking the
Assembling themselves together, persuade such a Man, that it is not lawful to
leave the best Communion, merely to show, what defective, and tolerable Church
he can communicate with? Which is, as if a Man should forsake his Muskmelons,
to let others see what Pumpions he can swallow; or to leave wholesome Diet to
feed on Mushroms, and Trash.

(3.) That here are no bounds set to the Peoples Fancies of Purer
Administrations, and less defective ways of Worship. So that there can be no
stop to Separation in this way. Suppose some think our Churches tolerable, and
Mr. B's. or Mr. A's. Meetings were eligible; but after a while, when the first
relish (...). they afford occasional Communion to the (...) or Quakers, and
then think their way more (...) and the other only tolerable; Are not these Men
bound to forsake them, for the same Reasons, by which they were first moved to
leave our Communion, and join with them, unless they be secure, that the
absolute perfection of their way of Worship is so glaringly visible to all
Mankind, that it is impossible for them, either to find or fancy any defect in
it? Defense of the Cure of Divis. Introd. p. 50.
Mr. Baxter once very well said, Separation will ruin the Separated Churches
themselves at last; it will admit of no consistency. Parties will arise in the
Separated Churches, and Separate again from them, till they are dissolved. Why
might not R. Williams of New England (mentioned by Mr. B.) proceed in his
course of Separation from the Church of Salem, Ibid. p. 170.
because he thought he had found out a purer and less defective way of Worship
than theirs; as well as they might withdraw from our Churches on the like
pretense? Why might he not go on still refining of Churches, till at last he
dissolved his Society, and declared, That every one should have liberty to
Worship God according to the light of his own Conscience? By which remarkable
Instance we see, that this Principle, when pursued, will carry Men at last to
the dissolution of all Churches.

Sect. 6. This I had objected to Mr. B. in my Letter, that upon his Principles
the People might leave him to Morrow, and go to Dr. O. and leave him next week
and go to the Anabaptists, and from them to the Quakers. Answ. p. 23.
To which Mr. B. Answers; What harm will it do me or them, if any hearers go
from me, as you say, to Dr. O. None, that I know. For, as Dr. O. says, Dr. O.
Vindicat. p. 20,
Since your Practice is one and the same, your Principles must be so also,
although you choose several ways of expressing them. But, Did the whole force
of my Argument lie there? Did I not mention their going from him to the
Anabaptists and Quakers, upon the very same ground? And, Is this a good way of
Answering, to dissemble the main force of an Argument, that something may seem
to be said to it? I suppose Mr. B's. great have made him leave the best part of
the Argument behind him. But I desire him calmly to weigh and consider it
better; whether he does think it reasonable to suppose, that since the Peace
and Unity of the Church is a thing of such great importance, Christian
Directory, part 3. p. 739, 741.
and Separation so mischievous (as he has represented it) that the Peoples
apprehension of a less defective way of Worship, shall be sufficient ground for
them to break a Church in pieces, and to run into ways of Separation? Has not
Mr. Baxter represented (and no Man better) the Ignorance, Sacrileg. desert, p.
102, etc.
Injudiciousness, Pride, Conceitedness and Vnpeaceabless of the ordinary sort
of zealous Professors of Religion? And after all this, must they, upon a
conceit of Purer Administrations, and Less Defective Ways of Worship, be at
liberty to rend and tear a Church into pieces; and run from one Separate
Congregation to another, till they have run themselves out of breath, and left
the best parts of their Religion behind them? How fully has Mr. B. set forth
the Vngovernable and Factious Humor of this sort of People, Cure of Divis. p.
393.
and the Pernicious consequences of complying with them? and, Must the Reins be
laid in their Necks, that they may run whither they please? Because, forsooth,
they know better, what is good for their Souls, than the King does; and they
love their Souls better than the King does, Answ. to my Letter; p. 23.
and the King cannot bind them to hurt, or Famish, or endanger their Souls.
But, Why must the King bear all the blame, if Men's Souls be not provided for
according to their own wishes? Does the King pretend to do any thing in this
matter, but according to the established Laws and Orders of this Church? Why
did he not keep to the good old Phrase of King and Parliament? And why did he
not put it as it ought to have been, that they know what makes better for their
own Edification, than the Wisdom of the whole Nation in Parliament, and the
Governors of this Church do: and let them make what Law's and Orders they will,
if the People, even the rash and injudicious Professors, as Mr. B. calls them,
do think other means of Edification better, and other ways of Worship less
defective, they are bound to break through all Laws, and to run into
Separation. And, How is it possible, upon these terms, to have any Peace, or
Order, or any established Church? I do not remember, that any of the old
Separatists, no not Barrow, or Johnson, did ever lay down such loose Principles
of Separation, as these are. The Brownists declare, in their Apology, That none
are to Separate for faults and corruptions, Apology of the Brownists, n. 36.
which may, and will fall out among Men, even in true constituted Churches, but
by due order to seek the redress thereof. Where a Church is rightly
constituted, here is no allowance of Separation for defects and corruptions of
Men, although they might apprehend Smith or Jacob to be more edifying
Preachers, than either Johnson, or Ainsworth. The ground of Separation with
them, was the want of a right constituted Church; if that were once supposed,
other defects were never till now thought to be good grounds of Separation.
Chap. 13.
In the Platform of the Discipline of New England, it is said, That
Church Members may not depart from the Church as they please, nor without just
and weighty cause: Because such departure tends to the dissolution of the Body.

Those just Reasons are, 1. If a Man cannot continue without sin. 2. In case of
Persecution.


Not one word of better means of Edification. For the Independents have wisely
taken care to secure their Members to their own Congregations, and not suffer
them to wander abroad upon such pretenses; lest such liberty should break them
into disorder and confusion. So in their Declaration at the Savoy, they say,
Order of Congregational Churches, n. 28.
That Persons joined in Church Fellowship, ought not lightly, or without just
cause, to withdraw themselves from the Communion of the Church, whereunto they
are joined.

And they reckon up those which they allow for just causes.

1. Where any person cannot continue in any Church without his sin: and that in
Three cases.

First, Want of Ordinances.

Secondly, Being deprived of due privileges.

Thirdly, Being compelled to any thing in practice, not warranted by the Word.

2. In case of Persecution.

3. Upon the account of convenience of Habitation.

And in these Cases, the Church or Officers are to be consulted, and then they
may peaceably depart from the Communion of the Church. No allowance here made
of forsaking a Church, merely for greater means of Edification. And how just
soever the reason were, they are civilly to take leave of the Church and her
Officers, Irenic. c. 22.
and to tell them why they depart. And Mr. Buroughs condemns it, as the direct
way to bring in all kind of disorder and confusion into the Church. Yet this is
now the main support of the present Separation; and mere necessity has driven
them to it; for either they must own the Principles of the old Separatists,
which they are unwilling to do, or find out others to serve their turn; but
they are such, as no Man, who has any regard to the Peace and Unity of the
Church, can ever think fit to maintain, since they apparently tend to nothing
but disorder and confusion, as Mr. Buroughs truly observed. But what ground is
there to suppose so much greater means of Edification in the Separate
Congregations? since Mr. B. is pleased to give this Testimony to the Preaching
in our Parish-Churches; Answ. to Letter, p. 18.
That for his part, he has seldom heard any, but very good well-studied
Sermons in the Parish Churches in London, where he has been; but most of them
are more fitted to well-bred Schol^rs, or judicious Hearers, than to such as
need more Practical Subjects, and a more plain, familiar, easy method. Is
this the truth of the case indeed? Then, for all that I can see, the King is
excused from all blame in this matter; unless it be a fault to provide too well
for them. And, Is this a good ground for Separation, that the Preaching is too
good for the People? Some Men may want Causes to defend, but at this rate they
can never want Arguments. Yet, methinks, the same Men should not complain of
starving, and famishing Souls, when the only fault is, that the Meat is too
good, and too well dressed for them. And on the other side, has not Mr. B.
complained publicly of the weakness and injudiciousness of too many of the
Nonconformist Preachers? Sacrileg. desert, p. 86.
and that he really fears, lest mere Non-Conformists have brought some into
reputation as conscientious, who, by weak Preaching, will lose the reputation
of being Judicious, more than their silence lost it. And again, But verily the
injudiciousness of too many is for a Lamentation. To which he adds, But the
Grand Calamity is, that the most injudicious are usually the most confident and
self-conceited, and none so commonly give way to their Ignorant Zeal, to
Censure, Backbite, and Reproach others, as those that know not what they talk
of. Let now any Reader judge, whether upon the stating of the case by Mr. B.
himself, their having better means of Edification, can be the ground of leaving
our Churches, to go to Separate Congregations, unless injudiciousness, and
self-conceited confidence and an ignorant zeal may perhaps be more edifying to
some capacities, and to some purposes, than judicious and well studied Sermons.

This Argument must therefore be quitted; and they who will defend the present
Separation, must return to the old Principles of the Separatists, if they will
justify their own practices. And so I find Mr. B. is forced to do; for
discerning* that the pretense of greater Edification would not hold of it self,
he adds more weight to it, and that comes home to the business; Answ. p. 18.
viz. That the People doubt of the Calling of the obtruded Men. This is indeed
an Argument for Separation, and the very same, which Barrow, and Greenwood, and
Johnson, and Smith, and Can used. Now we are come to the old Point of defending
the Calling of our Ministry; but we are mistaken, if we think they now manage
it after the same manner. We do not hear so much the old terms of a False and
Antichristian Ministry; but if they do substitute others in their Room as
effectual to make a Separation, but less fit to justify it, the difference
will not appear to be at all to their advantage.

Sect. 7. 2. I come therefore to consider the Principles of our new
Separatists, as to the Ministry of our Church; and to discover, how little they
differ from the old Separatists, when this matter is thoroughly enquired into,
as to the Argument for Separation.

I. In General, they declare, That they only look on those as true Churches,
which have such Pastors whom they approve. How often have I told you, says Mr.
B. that I distinguish, Answer to my Sermon, p. 63.
and take those for true Churches, that have true Pastors. But I take those for
no true Churches, that have, 1. Men incapable of the Pastoral Office. 2. Or not
truly called to it. 3. Or that deny themselves to have the power essential to a
Pastor.


And one or other of these he thinks most, if not all the Parochial Churches in
England fall under.

You will say then, Mr. B. is a Rigid Separatist; and thinks it not lawful to
join with any of our Parochial Congregations: but this is contradicted by his
own Practice.

There lies therefore a farther subtilty in this matter; for he declares in the
same place, he can join with them notwithstanding. But how? as true Churches,
though he says they are not? No; but as Chapels and Oratories, although they
be not Churches, as wanting an essential part. This will bring the matter to a
very good pass, the Parish Churches of England shall only be Chapels of Ease
to those of the Non-conformists. This I confess is a Subtilty beyond the reach
of the old Brownists, and Non-conformists, for they both took it for granted
that there was sufficient ground for Separation, if our Churches were not true
Churches, and the Proof of that depended on the Truth of our Ministry. Now,
says Mr. B. Although our Parochial Congregations be not true Churches, because
they want an essential part, viz. a true Ministry, yet he can join with them
occasionally, as Chapels or Oratories. From whence it appears, that he
accounts not our Parochial Churches as true Churches, nor does communicate with
them as such; but only looks on them as Public places of Prayer, to which a
Man may resort upon occasion without owning any relation to the Minister, or
looking on the Congregation as a Church. For, where he speaks more fully, he
declares, That he looks on none as true Churches, but such as have the Power of
the Keys within themselves, Sacrileg. desert. p. 34.
and has a Bishop or Pastor over them with that Power; True way of Concord,
Chapter 10.
and any Parochial Church that has such a one, and ownes it self to be
independent, he allows to be a true Church, and none else. So that unless our
Parochial Churches and Ministers assume to themselves Episcopal Power, in
opposition to the present Constitution of our Church, as he apprehends, he at
once discards them all from being true Churches: but I shall afterward
discover his mistake as to the nature of our Parochial Churches; that which I
only insist on now is, That he looks on none of them as truly constituted
Churches, or as he calls it, of the Political Organized Form, as wanting an
essential part, viz. a true Pastor. From hence it necessarily follows, either
that Mr. B. communicates with no true Church at all; or it must be a Separate
Church; or, if he thinks himself bound to be a Member of a true Church, he must
proceed to as a great Separation as the old Brownists did, by setting up new
Churches in opposition to ours. It is no sufficient Answer in this case, to
say, That Mr. B. does it not; for we are only to show, what he is obliged to do
by virtue of his own Principles: which tend to as much Separation, as was
practiced in former times, and has been so often condemned by Mr. B.

Sect. 8. II. Suppose they should allow our Parochial Churches in their
Constitution to be true Churches; yet the exceptions they make against the
Ministers of our Churches are so many, that they scarce allow any, from whom
they may not lawfully Separate.

1. If the People judge their Ministers unworthy, or incompetent, they allow
them liberty to withdraw, and to Separate from them. This I shall prove from
many passages in several Books of Mr. B. and others.

First, They (...) it in the Peoples Power, notwithstanding all Lega^
^stablishments, to own or disown whom they judge sit Mr. B. speaks his Mind
very freely against the Rights and ^etronage, Answ. p 15, 50.
and the Power of Magistrates in these cases, and pleads for the unalterable
Rights of the People; as the old Separatists did. Plea for Peace, p. 55.
God, says Mr. B. in Nature and Scripture, has given the People that
consenting Power, antecedent to the Princes determination, which none can take
from them. Brownis^s Apology, Sect. 23.
Mr. A. says, Every particular Church has an inherent right to choose its own
Pastors. Dr. O. makes the depriving the People of this right one of his grounds
of Separation. Mischief of Imposit. Preface.
So that although our Ministers have been long in possession of their Places,
yet if the People have not owned them, Dr. O's. Vindic. p. 36.
they are at liberty to choose whom they please. How many hundred
Congregations, Answ. p. 50.
says Mr. B. have Incumbents, whom the People never consented to; but take
them for their hinderers and burden! So many hundred Congregations it seems are
in readiness for Separation.

Secondly, The People are made Judges of the worthiness and competency of their
Ministers. This follows from the former. Plea for Peace, p. 83.
In case incompetent Pastors be set over the People, says Mr. B. though it be
half the Parishes in a Kingdom, or only the tenth part, it is no Schism, says
he, but a Duty, for those that are destitute, to get the best supply they can,
i.e. to choose those whom they judge more competent; and it is no Schism but a
Duty, for faithful Ministers, though forbidden by Superiors, to perform their
Office to such people that desire it. This is plain dealing. But suppose the
Magistrate should cast out some, and put in others; In that case he says, If
they be Men of uniried and suspected parts of fidelity (of which the People are
to be Judges) the Princes imposition does not make such true Pastors of the
Church before, or without the People consent; nor does it always bind the
People to consent, and to forsake their former Pastors, nor prove them
Schismatics, because they do it not.

Thirdly, They give particular directions to the People, what sort of Ministers
they should own, and what not. Mr. B. bids the People not think that he is
persuading them to make no difference: Cure of Divisions, Direct. 36.
but after he has set aside the utterly insufficient, and the heretical (of
which the People are admirable Judges) he lays down this general Rule, Any one
whose Ministry is such, as tends to destruction more than to edification, and
to do more harm than good is not to be owned. And if not to be owned so, then
he is to be separated from: and although he advises the People to lay aside
partiality and passion; yet whether they will or not, they are left sole Judges
in this matter. And that we may not think all this to be only a Romantic
Scheme, or Fiction, Sacrileg. desert. p. 10.
he tells us elsewhere, That they are not able to confute the People in too
many places, who tell them that their public Priests are so defective in their
necessary qualifications for their Office, as that they hold it unlawful to own
such for true Ministers, and to encourage them by their presence, or commit the
care of their Souls to such, i.e. in plain terms, they are encouraged to
Separation on this account, which is directly contrary to the Principles of the
old Non-conformists, as appears at large by Mr. Ball. Ball against Can, p. 1,
4, 5, etc.
if, says he, Can's meaning be, that it is not lawful to communicate in the
Worship of God with Ministers not fitly qualified, disorderly called, or
carelessly executing their Office and Function, then it is directly contrary to
the word of Truth, sound Reason, and consent of all the Learned. With much more
to that purpose. Page 15, 42, 56.
and even Mr. B. himself, when he takes upon him as a Casuist to determine
these things, Trial of New Church way, p. 11.
does then declare his Mind.

1. That a Ministers personal faults do not allow People to Separate from the
Worship of God. Christian Direct. Part. 3. p. 747.
2. Nor all Ministerial faults, but only those that prove him or his
Ministration utterly intolerable.
But now, Answ. p. 50.
if Mr. B. may be believed, the People need not be told, how great a number of
Cases there are among us, where the Ministers are incapable of the Ministerial
Office, and therefore it is no sin in them to judge him no Minister, and
consequently to Separate from him. Has not Mr. B. fully set forth the Pride,
Ignorance, Censoriousness, Headiness, Rashness of raw and injudicious Zealots?
and after all this. Is it fit or reasonable, that the opinion of such persons
be taken, concerning the qualifications of their Ministers? Has not Mr. B.
complained with more than ordinary resentment, Cure of Divis. p. 393.
that they are ready to scorn, and vilify the gravest wisest Pastors? And,
Must such Men's Judgments be taken, concerning the Abilities and Competency of
their Ministers? Either Mr. B. has extremely wronged them in the Characters he
has given of such People; or he has taken away all the reputation of their
Judgment in such cases: When they scorn and contemn the greavest wisest
Pastors, are they fit to Judge of Ministerial A^ilities? But there are graver
and wiser among the People. Suppose that; But does not Mr. B. say, That the
rawest and rashest Professors are commonly the most violent and censorious?
these are the bold and forward men, that will Judge in spite of the rest; these
are the men that need not be told, what numbers of incapable Ministers there
are among us And it does not become Mr. B's Gravity or Wisdom to hearken to all
the censures and malicious reports of such ignorant and heady zealots (as he
calls them) about the unworthiness or incapacity of their Ministers. Are they
only the grave and wise Pastors among themselves, which are scorned by such
men? It is possible, that those may be grave and wise among us too, whom they
censure for incompetent men; Or must the same People which are raw and
injudicious, ignorant and censorious, proud and self-conceited, when they make
their Judgment of them, be of a sudden turned into grave and wise men, when
they pass their Judgment upon the Abilities and Fitness of our Preachers? This
does not look like fair and equal dealing. I pray let our Ministers have a fair
hearing, and let the matter be well examined, before the People be thus
encouraged to Separate from their Ministers for their disabilities, or
unworthiness. But suppose there be too great a number of young, raw,
injudicious Preachers, as Mr. B. says, Answ. p. 54.
no Man can deny that knows England, and has any modesty. Is there no way,
but to your Tents O Israel? Will nothing but Separation serve your Turn? Is
this the way to mend the matter, and to make them grave and wise? Does not Mr.
B. confess, That they have too many such among themselves? Must they Separate
from them too? What endless confusions do such Principles tend to? But the
bottom of all is, this Separation must be justified, one way or other; and such
Principles found out, which may seem to do it. Yet after all, What is this to
the present case of Separation in this City? for here the Charge was laid, and
to this the Answer must be given, or it is to no purpose. Is it any reason,
that near half of some Parishes in London, should Separate from their grave and
wise Pastors, such as I know some to be, where this case is; because in
Cornwall, or Yorkshire, or Northumberland, there are many raw and injudicious,
besides scandalous Priests, as Mr. B. speaks? We urge you particularly with the
London Separation, you tell us what the People say of the Insufficiency and
Unworthiness of the Clergy in other parts of England; suppose it true, What is
all this to the business? If you persist in this way, we can name the Parishes
to you in London, where the Ministers are Men of unexceptionable Learning and
Piety; where the Churches are large enough to receive the People that Separate;
as well as those that come; and yet they forsake the Churches Communion, and
adhere to the Separate Congregations: Tell us plainly in this case, Is this
Separation lawful or not? If it be lawful, to what purpose do you make use of
so many shifts and evasions, as to great Prishes, and insufficient and
scandalous Priests, in other parts of the Nation? Answer to the case proposed,
and to the place where the Charge was laid; and think not to escape by such
apparent evasions, and impertinencies as these. If you think such a Separation
unlawful, then Why do you pretend to confute my Sermon, which was designed
purposely against it?

Sect. 9. But while you plead for this liberty of the Peoples Separating upon
their Judgment of their Ministers Abilities and Fitness, you can never secure
them from Separation from any Church or Ministers whatsoever. And no settled
Church in the World could ever subsist long, without infinite disorder and
confusion, if this were allowed. For Mr. B. thinks them incapable of the
Ministerial Office in the Peoples Judgment.

1. Who have not tolerable Ministerial Knowledge, Answ. p. 50.
or utterance.

2. Who are Heretical.

3. Who malignantly oppose serious Religion as Hypocrisy, or a needless thing.

4. Who by their wicked lives do more hurt than they do good. From such, says
he, St. Paul bids turn away.

And of all these things the People are to be Judges; and so may Separate, (1.)
When they are unsatisfied about the Ministerial Knowledge or utterance of their
Ministers. As for their Utterance; we may allow them to be Judges of that; but
I never heard before, that St. Paul did bid People turn away from their
Ministers, if their Utterance were not thought to be tolerable. For he
intimates, that some complained of his utterance and had him in contempt for
it. But as to Abilities and Knowledge fit for Ministers, Are not the People
admirable Judges? How few, how very few, even of those of the people who
pretend most to Knowledge in Religion, have any tolerable understanding of the
true principles, and right notion of it? I do not speak only of Artificers and
Tradesmen; but of those of better education, who either by prejudices, or want
of due application of their minds to such things, are subject to great mistakes
about Religion, and yet may be very good men: If such as these, are so unfit to
Judge of Ministerial Knowledge, and the Doctrines of Religion, What shall we
say to the common sort of raw, and injudicious Professors of Religion? Mr. B's.
experience in the World is not so little, as not to know and be sensible of the
truth of this, among the People most apt to divide and Separate. Is it not then
a strange thing he should thus subject the Judgment of Ministerial Knowledge to
such a Company of Triers as these? But suppose they do allow their Ministers to
pass for men of tolerable abilities, and reasonable good utterance, there is a
harder task yet behind, and that is, to approve themselves to the People to be
Sound and Orthodox; For, says Mr. B. (2) If they be Heretical, they may
without sin separate from them. But how shall a Man escape being thought
Heretical by the People, if they have a mind to make him so; i.e. if he
crosses their humor, and delivers such Doctrine as does not please them; for
that is generally their Standard for Heresy? And they cannot well have any
other; unless you will suppose all the People to be learned Divines, and every
Man obliged to read and understand Epiphanius and Binius: and then perhaps they
may be competent Judges of Heresy, and come at last to be even with the
Divines for having been their Judges so long in that matter. Let us now suppose
a Person of great value and esteem among them for his other Ministerial
Abilities, should happen to be thought unsound in the Point of Justification,
and to draw too near to the Papists in it; and this not only be said by the
common People, but they are abetted and encouraged in it, by the greatest part
of their Teachers, who tell them, this is a Fundamental point, Articulus
stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae; that they had as good give up the Cause of
Reformation, as yield in that matter, as some have said; I would fain know in
this Case, whether upon Mr. B's. Principles, the People are not bound to
Separate from such a Man, notwithstanding his other Abilities?

The like may happen as to many other Doctrines, which the People are as
incompetent Judges of, as they are in this matter. Let us yet suppose that such
a Man may pass for sound in the main among the People; what shall we say to
him, if under pretense of Curing Divisions he exposes good People, and lays
open with great freedom and plainness their Factious, Turbulent, Censorious,
Vngovernable humor; not omitting their Injudiciousness, but forgetting all the
while that these same injudicious People (with all their other faults) were
once his Electors, and are still his Judges; suppose, that he tells the World,
That for their Ignorance, Injudiciousness, Pride and Self-conceitedness, they
are their grief and their shame; that they are endangered by Divisions,
principally because the selfconceited part of the Religious People will not be
ruled by their Pastors; that it is they that tempt the Papists to use Fire and
Faggot that will not be ruled, nor kept in Concord by the wisest, and holiest,
and most self-denying Ministers upon earth. Notwithstanding all these very kind
words of themselves, Do not we think such People would call all this Reviling,
and Reproaching the People of God, and say, That such men do malignantly oppose
serious godliness as Hypocrisy; and let their lives be what they will, they do
more hurt than good; and therefore by Mr. B's own Rules, they are bound to
Seprate from the Wisest, the Holiest, the most Self-denying Ministers upon
earth. Which I think is sufficient for the present to show the mischievous
consequence of putting so great a power of Judgment, and Separation upon it
into the hands of the People.

Sect. 10. But this is not all the encouragement to Separation, which is given
to the People, by their power of Judging, and Withdrawing from their Ministers;
For,

2. They insinuate, That the whole Body of the conforming Clergy is guilty of
such Faults, as the People may lawfully Separate from them; as will appear by
these Particulars.

First, They make Conformity it self to be a very scandalous thing; and then
tell the People over and over, It is no sin to separate from Scandalous
Priests; especially when the Scandal is notorious, as it is in this case. Plea
for Peace, p. 108.
Mr. B. goes about to prove This, by many Arguments, when he Writes in the name
of the Party; now let us see what Judgment they pass upon Conformity. In one
place he says, That the Love of Peace, Sacrileg. desert. p. 43.
and the fear of frightning any farther from Parish Communion than I desire (as
though such suggestions did not do it enough) do oblige me to forbear so much
as to describe or name the additional Conformity; and that sin which
Non-conformists fear, and fly from, which makes it harder to us that desire it
to draw many good People to Communion with Conformists than it was of old. No
doubt of it, if you give such broad intimations as these are, what a horrible
scandalous sin Conformity is. Nay, he makes it an inexcusable sin, when he
says, in the Preface to his Plea, That more like Truth has been said for the
lawfulness of Anabaptistry, Poligamy, Drunkenness, Stealing, and Lying, in case
of necessity, than any thing he ever yet read of all that he has there
described, i.e. full Conformity. Answer to Sermon. p. 46.
He charge us downright with Lying, and by consequence with Perjury, Plea for
Peace, p. 220. 223, 226, 339.
and tells me of 30 tremendous Aggravations of the Sin of Conformity; among
which are Lying and Perjury, and not only that, but drawing on our selves the
guilt of many thousand Perjuries (by declaring, That the Covenant does not
oblige.) But I do not question, if Mr. B. pleased, he could find out 40 or 50
as tremendous aggravations of the Sin of Separation. For never did any Man lay
more load than he, upon whatever he opposes, without considering how it may
fall upon himself at last; and How easy it is to return such heaps of
Aggravations. And it was well said by one of Mr. B's. Adversaries concerning
him, Answ. to Sacril. desertion, p. 13.
That be the Controversy what it will, he can make his Adversary differ with
him about the Existence of God and Christ, a Heaven and Hell. Which I have
found too true, by my experience in this case, for without any color or
pretense in the World that I know of, but only by declaring against Separation,
he tells me, That he is so far past doubt, on the other side, as that he thinks
I overthrow all Religion, Answ. p. 19.
and set up Man in Rebellion against God. But the worst is that he would make
me say, which I never said or thought, That all Public Worship is sinful, when
forbidden: and then on he runs with a mighty torrent, Daniel may go to the
Lions; the Martyrs, Fathers, Counsels, the Universal Church are all foolisher,
than the meanest of his Auditors. I wonder he did not give me 30 tremendous
aggravations of Atheism and Hobbism. For he does in effect charge me with them;
For it follows, It Is strange that he can be sure, God's Word is true, and yet
be so sure, that Men's Laws are above it, and may suspend it. Did I ever in my
life say the least thing tending that way? I abhor and detest such Principles,
as set Man's Laws above Gods. And when I gave him the State of the Controversy
about Separation, I supposed an Agreement in all the Substantials of Religion,
between the dissenting Parties and our Church. How then could he possibly infer
from hence, that I set Man's Laws above Gods? The Question is not, Whether all
Public Worship be sinful, when forbidden? but whether in a Nation professing
true Religion, some public Worship may not be forbidden? If not, then an
universal, unlimited toleration of Turks, Jews, Papists, Socinians, Ranters,
etc. must follow. If some may be forbidden, then another Question follows, viz.
Whether such Public Worship, as may have an evil in it, antecedent to that
Prohibition, may not be forbidden? viz. such as tends to Idolatry, Sedition,
Schism, etc. and if this be allowed, then it comes to this at last, Whether
such Meetings are guilty of any of these faults; and if they be, Whether the
Magistrate so judging may not justly forbid them? And this is the utmost that
matter can be driven to; which I here mention, to let the Reader understand,
what little cause there is to dread Mr. B's 30 Aggravations of the Sin of
Conformity; which are built on as slight grounds as this heavy charge against
me; for the sake of which I shall hardly ever dread his aggravations more. But
the sting of these aggravations follows. If the People think, (though they
should mistake) that all the Conformists are guilty of the like, Answ. p. 50.
Can you wonder, if they prefer less Guilty Pastors to trust the Conduct of
their Souls with? Now the true Reason of Separation is come out at last. Our
Conformity is a horrible, scandalous sin with them, and therefore they must
choose better Pastors. Is not this just the old Brownists Argument? The
Ministry of the Church of England is a corrupt and sinful Ministry, and
therefore we must not communicate with them, but choose more honest and
faithful Guides: But let me ask Mr. B. supposing all this to be true, Is it
lawful to communicate with Conformists or not? If it be not lawful, then he
condemns his own practice, and takes away occasional communion; if it be
lawful, How comes Separation to be lawful, since, that is never lawful, but
when it is necessary? as it will be proved afterward.

Sect. 11. 2. They make most of the present Ministers of the Church of England
to be Usurpers; and from such they say, they may lawfully separate. Is it
Separation, Answ. p. 4^.
says Mr. B. to refuse Pastors that are Usurpers, and have no true Power over
them? But Who are these Usurpers among us, since we have a legal establishment,
and we thought Law and Usurpation contrary to each other? But notwithstanding
Law, it is determined,

First, All that come into the places of ejected Ministers are Usurpers, at
least to as many of the People, as do not consent to their coming in: Answ. p.
54.
How prove you, says Mr. B. that the relation of the ejected London-Ministers
and their Flocks was dissolved, and that the succeeders, were true Pastors to
the Non-consenting Flocks? When faithful Pastors, says he in his Plea (written
in the name of the Party, Plea for Peace, p. 55.
and by consent, as he says, of many of his Acquaintance) are in possession,
Answ. p. 44.
if a lawful Magistrate cast them out; and put others in their places of
untried or suspected parts or fidelity.

I. The Princes Imposition makes not such true Pastors of that Church, before,
or without the Peoples consent. II. Nor will it always bind the People to
consent, and to forsake their former Pastors, nor prove them Schismatics,
because they do it not.
The bottom of all this, is, they are Usurpers to whom the People do not
consent in any particular Parish; although the whole Nation in Parliament
consented to the passing of a Law for removal of some Pastors, and putting in
of others. And what dangerous consequences there may be of such Principles as
these, I leave others to Judge. For upon these grounds, when Solomon deprived
Abiathar, and put Zadok in his room; 1 Kings 2. 35.
any part of the People might have pleaded, They never consented to Zadok 's
coming in, and therefore he was their High-^riest still; let Solomon do what he
would; he could not dissolve the relation between them, without their own
consent. For the Question is not, Whether Abiathar did not deserve to be put
out, but to whom it belonged to do it, whether to the King, or the People? And
whether any part of the People might still own that relation which he had
before to them, without palpable disobedience and contempt of Authority?
Especially if the People had given their own consent, and the thing had been
done not only by Solomon, but by the States of Israel; as it was in our case.
They who discern not the ill consequences of such Assertions as to our
Government, have very little insight into Affairs. For it follows, that a small
part of the People may disown the Public Acts of Parliament, and choose other
Governors, to themselves in opposition to those established by Law: and why
they should not do it, upon an equal pretense in other cases, I do not
understand. For there is no more color for the Peoples resuming their right,
especially a small part against the whole, in one case then in the other. Which
makes me wonder at those who da^e call them Usurpers, who enjoy their places by
the same Laws, that any Men do enjoy their Estates. And they who assert, that
the people are bound notwithstanding the Laws to adhere to their former
Pastors, as Mr. A. does, who says, Mischief of Impos. Preface.
They judge it their unquestionable duty to abide in that relation to their
ejected Pastors, do not only assert a power in a handful of people to act
against established Laws, passed by general consent in Parliament; but
overthrow the settlement of our Church upon the Reformation. For, the Papists
then had the very same Plea, that these Men have now, v^z. That the Magistrate
could not dissolve the relation between their former Church Guides and them:
and therefore notwithstanding Acts of Parliament, they were still hound to
adhere to them. For the Magistrate had no power in such matters, and the real
Schism was to withdraw from those Guides; just as Mr. A. speaks concerning the
ejected Ministers. So much do these Men, in pursuing the interests of their
Parties, overthrow the principles of the Reformation. For either the Magistrate
has a Power to Silence some Ministers, and to put others in their places, or
he has none: if he has none, then, What becomes of the Justice of the
Reformation, when the Popish Bishops and Priests were ejected, and others put
into their places? If they say, He has a just power in some cases, but not in
theirs. Is not this a Plea common to all? For whoever thought themselves justly
ejected? Or that they did any thing which deserved so severe a punishment? What
then is to be done in this case, if Men think themselves unjustly cast out? The
old Non-conformists said, They ought to sit down quietly; with this
satisfaction, that there were others to Preach the Word of God soundly,
although they did not. They might by joining in their private capacities in
Communion with our Churches, and drawing the People to it by their example and
encouragement, have done more good both to the People and to this Church, than
I fear their public preaching in opposition to the Laws has done to either*
But if they go upon such principles ^s these, That the Magistrate had no
rightful power to eject them, That others are Usurpers who come in their
places, That the People are still bound to own them in their former relation
notwithstanding the Laws, And that it is Schism to separate from them,
notwithstanding that they confess the True Religion is maintained and preached
in our public Assemblies, I leave it to others to determine how consistent
such Principles are with the submission Men owe to Government, or that
peaceable behavior which becomes Christians. This I the rather insist upon,
because I find not only Mr. B. and Mr. A. asserting it, but that it is made the
standing Plea for the necessity of the present Separation, among those who do
not hold all Communion with our Churches unlawful. So the latest of my
Answerers makes a Question, Whether they can be said to erect new Churches,
Rector of Sutton etc. p. 26.
or proceed to the forming of separate Congregations, who were true Ministers,
and had their Congregations before others came into their places? If they had
done nothing worthy of ejection, or exclusion from their Ministry, whether they
have not still a right to exercise their Function. And consequently, whether
others may not as justly be said to draw away their People from them, as they
are charged with the same practice? There is not one word in all this Plea but
might have equally served the Papists in the beginning of the Reformation. For
the Law signifies nothing with them in any case where themselves are concerned,
if Ministers be ejected without or against Law, they who come into their places
are no Usurpers; and if they are cast out by Law, they that succeed them are
Usurpers; so that the Law is always the least thing in their consideration.

Secondly, All those who come into any Pastoral charge, whether Bishops by
virtue of the Kings Nomination, or others by the Presentation of Patrons, are
Usurpers, unless the People be pleased to give their free consent; and if they
do it not, they may lawfully withdraw from them. For, says Mr. B. the People
have an antecedent Right to consent, Plea, p. 55.
which none can take from them. Answ. p. 9.
And he says, he has proved it by many Canons, that he was no Bishop, that
was not chosen by the Clergy and the People; or came in without the Peoples
consent. Nay, if they have the consent of some, and not of the greater part,
those who did not consent, may proceed to choose another Bishop, if Mr. B. say
true. For these are his words. If a Diocese have a Thousand or 600, or 300
Parish Pastors, Plea, p. 81, 82.
and a Hundred thousand or a Million of People (or 50000 or 20000, as ye will
suppose) and if only a dozen or 20 Presbyters, and a Thousand People (or none)
choose the Bishop, this is not the Election or Consent of the Diocesan Church;
nor is it Schism for twenty thousand to go against the Votes of two thousand.
Therefore if they have so much the advantage in polling, as Mr. A. suggests,
there is nothing hinders them, but that in spite of Laws, they may proceed to
the choice of new Bishops, and new Pastors of Churches, wherever they think
they can make the Majority. For this is an inherent and unalterable right in
the People, say they, to choose their own Pastors. Again, says Mr. B. in the
name of the Party in his Plea, Ibid.
If Bishops that have no better a Foundation, i.e. that come in by the Kings
Nomination, and not by the Majority of the People, shall impose inferior
Pastors or Presbyters on the Parish Churches, and command the Peoples
acceptance and obe^^^nce, i.e. if they give them Institution upon a Patrons
presentation, the People are not bound to accept and obey them by any Authority
that is in that command as such; nor is it Schism to disobey it, no more than
it is Treason to reject the Usurper of a Kingdom. It is plain then, all Bishops
of the Kings Nomination, all Ministers presented by Patrons are mere Usurpers:
the People may give them a good Title if they please; but they are not to blame
if they do it not. For in them, Mr. B. says, Answ. p. 49.
the chief Power is, and sometimes he tells them, they are bound to Separate;
however, while they do not consent, they are no Churches, which they are set
over; Plea, p. 82.
and it is no Schism so to pronounce them; nor to deny them Communion proper to
a Church. Is not this an excellent Plea for Peace; and the true and only way of
Concord, which lays the foundation for all imaginable Disorders and Confusions,
only that they might have some pretense for their present Separation?

Sect. 12. 3. Suppose the Bishops and Clergy have gained the consent (implicit
at least) of the People, and so are no Usurpers, yet if they be Persecutors, or
Ithacian Prelatists, i.e. if they either act toward, or approve of the
Silencing Non-conformists, the People may Separate from them. When Mr. B. wrote
the Defense of his Book, called, The Cure of Divisions, to satisfy the People
who were much displeased with him for it; one of the material Questions,
Preface to Defense of his Cure, p. 9.
he Asks about his Book, is, Is there a word to persuade you to Communion with
Persecutors? As though that had been an unpardonable Crime. In the Plea he
says, If any Excommunicate persons for not complying with them in sin, Plea,
p. 42.
i.e. Conformity, but also prosecute them with Mulcts, Imprisonments,
Banishments, or other Prosecution, to force them to transgress, this were yet
more heinously aggravated Schism: and therefore it is no sin to Separate from
such. And how easily Men are drawn in to the guilt of this persecution, appears
by the example he makes of me, for although I expressly set aside the case of
Ministers, and declared, I intended only to speak of Lay-communion; Answ. p. 61.
yet he charges me with engaging my self in the Silencing design. And by such
consequences, all that speak against Separation may be Separated from, as
Persecuters, and Ithacian Prelatists.

Sect. 13. 4. As long as they suppose the terms of our Communion to be sinful,
they say, the Schism does not lie on those that Separate, Plea, p. 42.
but on those that do impose such terms; and therefore they may lawfully
separate from such imposers. This is the most colorable Plea has been yet
used by them. But in this case, we must distinguish between terms of communion
plainly and in themselves sinful; and such which are only fancied to be so
through prejudice, or wilful Ignorance, or error of Conscience. That there is a
real distinction between these two, is evident; and that it ought to be
considered in this case, appears from hence, that else there can be no sinful
separation under an erroneous Conscience. As suppose some men should think that
Preaching by an hourglass, and much more Praying by one, was a stinting of the
Spirit in point of Time, as Praying by a Form was in point of words; and all
Men should be required to begin the public Worship at such an Hour, and so end
at such an Hour; time being a necessary circumstance, our Brethren grant, that
the Magistrate or Church may lawfully determine it. Here is then a lawful
imposition; and yet the Quakers may really judge it to be sinful; and declare
they cannot communicate unless this sinful Imposition be removed; For it is
against their Consciences to have the Spirit limited to any certain time; On
whose side does the Schism lie in this case? Not on the Imposers, because they
grant such an imposition lawful; therefore it must lie on those that Separate,
although they judge such terms of Communion sinful. If therefore the
determination of other things not forbidden be really as much in the
Magistrates and Churches Power, as the necessary circumstances of time and
place, etc. then men's apprehending such terms of Communion to be sinful will
not hinder the guilt of Separation from lying on their side, and not on the
imposers. Because it is to be supposed. that where there is no plain
prohibition, men may with ordinary care and judgment, satisfy themselves of
the lawfulness of things required. As for instance, when the Church of Rome
imposes the Worship of Images, we have the plain prohibition of the Second
Commandment to prove that it is really a sinful condition of Communion; but
when our Church requires the constant use of a Liturgy, and Ceremonies, which
are now pleaded as sinful conditions of Communion, Where is the prohibition? In
the same Second Commandment say some. I desire them to read it over to me. They
do so. Where, say I, are the words that forbid a Liturgy, or Ceremonies? I am
mistaken, they tell me, it is not in the words, but in the sense. I Ask, How we
should come by the sense, but from the words? Yes, they say, there are certain
Rules for interpreting the Commandments. Are they Divine or Human? Where are
they to be found? What are those Rules? One, they say, is, that where any thing
is forbidden, something is commanded. So say I, there is here a Command to
Worship God without an Image. What is there more? Yes, say they, (1.) That we
must not Worship God with our own Inventions; now Liturgies and Ceremonies are
Men's Inventions* But, I say, no Inventions are condemned in the Worship of God,
but such as God himself has somewhere forbidden; but he has no where
forbidden these. And human Inventions are forbidden in this Commandment in the
Worship of God; but then (1) They are such inventions which go about to
represent God, and so to disparage him; and no other inventions are to be
understood, than the Reason of the Law does extend to, i.e. not such which are
consistent with the Spiritual and Invisible nature of God. (2.) They are not
such as do relate to the manner or form of Worship, supposing the Worship it
self be performed in a way agreeable to the Divine Nature and Law. For
otherwise all use of men's inventions, as to Preaching, or Reading, or
Interpreting Scripture, would be forbidden. And then this interpretation of the
Second Commandment would be unlawful, because it is a mere Invention of Men; as
much as Liturgies, or Ceremonies.

By this we see, what stretching and forcing of Scripture there must be, to
make Liturgies or Ceremonies unlawful terms of Communion; And that Men must
first blind and fetter their Minds by certain prejudices of Education, or
Reading only one sort of Books, and taking some things for granted which they
ought not, before they can esteem the terms of Communion required by our Church
to be sinful: and therefore the Schism does not lie on the Imposers side, but
upon those who suffer themselves first to be so easily Deluded, and then
Separate from our Church upon it. But there is another plain instance in this
case, wherein our Brethren themselves will not allow the Schism to lie on the
imposers side; and that is of those who deny the lawfulness of Infant Baptism.
Many of whom pretend to do it with as much sincerity and impartiality, as any
of our Brethren can deny the lawfulness of Liturgy or Ceremonies: if they break
Communion rather than allow what they judge to be sinful, On whose side does
the Schism lie, on theirs that require the allowance of it, as a condition of
Communion, or not? If on the Imposers side, they must condemn themselves, who
blame the Anabaptists for their Separation. And so did Fr. Johnson, and so did
the New England Churches. From whence it appears, that they do all agree, that
where Men through mistake do judge those to be sinful terms of Communion which
are not, the guilt of Schism does not lie on the imposers side, but on those
that separate. Therefore, this matter of Schism cannot be ended by the Plea of
Conscience judging the conditions to be sinful, but by evident and convincing
Proofs that they are so; but till these are brought forth, which never yet
were, or ever will be, they must bear the blame of the Schism, if they Separate
on these accounts.

Thus I have faithfully represented the Principles of those who allow
occasional Presence in our Churches, rather than Communion with them; which I
have discovered to be of that Nature, as leads Men to the greatest Separation.

Sect. 14. There are others who deal more openly and ingenuously, and so need
the less pains to discover their minds, and those are,

II. Such who do in terms assert all Acts of Communion with our Churches to be
unlawful. But there is a difference among these; For,

First, Some allow hearing Sermons in our Public Assemblies, and joining in
the Pulpit Prayers; but not in the Liturgy, or any proper Act of
Church Communion. This I have showed, was the Opinion of Robinson, and the
New England Churches; and was lately owned by Mr. Ph. Nigh, who Wrote a
Discourse about it, and answered all Objections. Yea, he goes so far, as to own
the public preaching, as a great blessing to the Nation; and he thinks, the
Dissenters and their Families are bound to frequent, (as they have liberty and
opportunity) the more public and National Ministry. But toward the end of his
Treatise he confesses the generality of their People, to be of another opinion;
which he imputes to the activity of the Jesuits among them; and he was a very
sagacious Man.

Secondly, Others hold it unlawful to join with our Churches in any Acts of
public Worship. And some are arrived to that height, Rector of Su^to^ etc. p.
25.
that one of my Answerers confesses, That they refuse to hear him, because he
owns many Parochial Churches to be true Churches. It seems then, they not only
think it unlawful to hear us, but to hear those who think it lawful; and the
next step will be to Separate from those who do not Separate from them, that
own many Parochial Churches to be true Churches.

Several Books have been published to prove it unlawful to hear our Ministers
Preach: and these proceed upon the old Arguments of the former Separatists; as
may be seen at large in a Book called Ierubbaal: whose Author goes about to
prove our Worship Idolatry, and our Ministers Antichristian; which Mr. Nigh was
so far from owning, that he grants our Ministry to be true and lawful, and
utterly denies it to be Antichristian; because the Articles of our Religion,
to which our Ministers are to conform their Instructions, are Orthodox, and
framed for the casting and keeping out of Popery.

Sect. 15. The several Principles of our Dissenters being thus laid down, the
State of the present Controversy, as to Separation from our Communion, will
soon appear. And any one may now discern,

1. That I do not mean bare local Separation. For Mr. B. puts this in the front
of his Quaere's; Answ. p. 46.
Do you think, that he is a Separatist that meets not in the same Parish
Church with you? No; I do assure him, provided that he elsewhere joins with our
Churches as a Member of them; and does not think himself bound to prefer the
Separate Meetings, as having a purer way of worship, and ordinarily to frequent
them for more Gospel-administrations. Mischief of Impos. P. 48.
And so much may satisfy Mr. A. too, who, after his trifling manner, talks of
a bellum Parochiale, as though Men were so weak to charge one another with
Separation because they meet in different Parishes; but as to the Gird he gives
about a Bellum Episcopale, I desire him only to look into the Evangelium
armatum for an Answer to it.

2. I do not mean by Separation any difference in Doctrine, not determined by
our Church, upon which Men do not proceed to divide from the Communion of it:
And I wonder, who ever did. But Mr. B. is pleased to make another Quaere about
it. To this I shall Answer him in Mr. Hales his words: While the Controversies
in Holland about Praedestination, Tract of Schism, p. 3.
went no farther th^n the Pen-combats, the Schism was all that while unhatcht;
but as soon as one party swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty art made it a
Church, by putting a new Pulpit in it for the Separating party there to meet,
that which was before a Controversy became a formal Schism.

3. By Separation I do not mean any difference in Modes of Worship allowed by
the Church in whose Communion we live. This is to Answer Mr. B's. Quaere
concerning the difference between Cathedral and Parochial Churches; and public
and private administrations of Sacraments. But this sticks much with Mr. A. who
takes his hints from Mr. B. which he cooks and dresses after his Facetious
manner, that they may go off the better with the common people. And a very
pleasant representation he endeavors to make of the difference of the Cathedral
Service from that in Country Parishes. Mischief of Impos. p. 48, 49.
But what is all this to the purpose? If the same Man puts on finer Clothes at
London, than he wears in the Country, Is he not the same Man for all that? Are
not David's Psalms the same, whether they be Sung, or Said? Or whether Sung in
a Cathedral Tune, or as set by a Parish Clerk? That which only looks like
Argument (and my business is to mind nothing else; possibly others may call him
to an account for his unbecoming way of Writing) That I say which looks like
Argument is, That some things are done without Rules in our Parish Churches,
Mischief of Impos. p. 53.
as the universal practice of Singing Psalms in Hopkins and Sternholds Meter;
and therefore they may do things without Rules and yet not be guilty of
Separation. This proceeds upon a mistake, for in the first establishment of the
Liturgy upon the Reformation under Edward the VI. allowance was made for the
use of the Psalms, as they were to be Sung in Churches distinct from the use of
them as part of the Liturgy; and from thence that custom has been so
universally practiced. But suppose there are some Customs received without
Rules; suppose there are some different Customs among us; What is this, to the
denying the lawfulness of constant Communion with our Churches? To the choosing
of new Pastors? and sitting down, as he speaks, with purer Administrations? All
which this Man owns in his Book, as their avowed Principles and Practices; and
yet has the confidence to parallel their Separation from our Church, with the
different Modes of Worship among our selves. He must have a very mean opinion
of Men's understandings, that thinks to deceive them in so gross a manner.

4. By Separation I do not understand a mere difference as to the way of
Worship, which the Members of foreign Churches are here permitted to enjoy. For
they do not break off from the Communion of our Churches; but have certain
privileges allowed them, as acting under the Rules of those Churches from
whence they came. But what have we to do to judge the Members of other Reformed
Churches? Our business is with those who being Baptized in this Church, and
living under the Rules and Government of it; either renounce the Membership
they once had in it, or avoid Communion with it as Members, and join with other
Societies set up in opposition to this Communion. Answ. p. 46. 60, 87.
Yet this matter about the Foreign Churches Mr. B. mentions again and again; as
though their case could be thought alike, who never departed from ours, but
only continue in the Communion of their own Churches.

5. I do not charge every disobedience to the King and Laws and Canons in
matters of Religion, Government and Worship with the Guilt of Separation. For
although a Man may be guilty of culpable disobedience in breaking the Commands
of Authority, Answ. p. 47.
and the Orders of the Church he lives in; yet if he continues in all Acts of
Communion with our Church, and draws not others from it upon mere pretense of
greater Purity of Worship, and better means of Edification, I do not charge
such a one with Schism.

6. I do not charge those with Separation, who under Idolatrous, or Arian
Princes did keep up the Exercise of true Religion though against the Will of
the Magistrate. But what is this to our case, where the true Religion is
acknowledged, and the true Doctrine of Faith owned by the dissenters
themselves, who break off Communion with our Churches. Wherefore then does Mr.
B. make so many Quaeres, Answ. 15, 52, 53, 84.
about the case of those who lived under Heathen Persecutors? or the Arian
Emperors, or Idolatorous Princes? I hope, he did not mean to Parallel their own
Case with theirs; for, What horrible reflection would this be upon our
Government, and the Protestant Religion established among us? To what end does
he mention Valens and Hunericus that cut out of the Preachers Tongues, Answ. p.
21.
and several other unbecoming Insinuations? when God be thanked, we live under
a most merciful Prince, and have the true Doctrine of the Gospel among us, and
may have it still continued, if Men's great Ingratitude, as well as other crying
Sins, do not provoke God justly to deprive us of it. What need was there, of
letting fall any passages tending this way? when I told him in the very State
of the Question, that all our Dispute was, Whether the upholding Separate
Meetings for Divine Worship, where the Doctrine established, and the
substantial parts of Worship are acknowledged to be agreeable to the Word of
God, be a Sinful Separation or not? Why is this Dissembled and passed over? And
the worst cases imaginable supposed, in stead of that which is really theirs?
If I could defend a Cause by no other means, I think Common Ingenuity, the
Honor of our Prince and Nation, and of the Protestant Religion Professed among
us, would make me give it over.

Sect. 16. And for the same Reasons, in the management of this debate, I
resolve to keep to the true State of the Question, as it is laid down; and to
make good the charge of Separation, I. Against those who hold occasional
Communion with our Church to be lawful in some parts of Worship; but deny
constant Communion to be a Duty. II. Against those who deny any Communion with
our Church to be lawful; although they agree with us in the Substantial of
Religion.


1. Against those who hold occasional Communion to be lawful with our Church in
some parts of Worship, but deny Constant Communion to be a Duty.

To overthrow this Principle, I shall prove these two things, 1. That bare
occasional Communion does not excuse from the guilt of Separation. 2. That as
far as occasional Communion with our Church is allowed to be lawful, constant
Communion is a Duty.


1. That bare occasional Communion does not excuse from the guilt of
Separation. Which will appear by these things,

First. Bare occasional Communion makes no Man the Member of a Church. This
term of occasional Communion, as far as I can find, was invented by the
Dissenting Brethren to give satisfaction to the Presbyterians, who charged them
with Brownism: to avoid this charge, they declared, That the Brownists held all
Communion with our Parochial Churches unlawful, which they did not; for, said
they, we can occasionally Communicate with you; but this gave no manner of
satisfaction to the other Pary, as long as they upheld Separate Congregations,
with whom they would constantly Communicate; and accounted those their
Churches, with whom they did join as Members of the same Body. But if
notwithstanding this lawfulness of occasional Communion with our Churches, they
joined with other societies in strict and constant communion; it was a plain
Argument they apprehended something so bad or defective in our Churches, that
they could not join as Members with them; and because they saw a necessity of
joining with some Churches as Members, they pleaded for separate Congregations.
And so, must all those do, who think it their duty to be members of any
Churches at all; and not follow Grotius his Example, in suspending Communion
from all Churches. Which is a principle I do not find any of our dissenting
Brethren willing to own. Answ. p. 64.
Although Mr. B. declares, Page 24.
That he and some others own themselves to be Pastors to no Churches; Page 62.
That he never gathered a Church; Page 86.
that he Baptized none in 20 years; and gave the Lords Supper to none in 18
years. I desire to know, what Church Mr. B. has been of all this time. For as
to our Churches, he declares, That he thinks it lawful to Communicate with us
occasionally; but not as Churches (for he thinks we want an essential part,
viz. a Pastor with Episcopal Power, as appears before) but as Oratories; and so
he renounces Communion with our Churches as Churches; and for other Churches,
he says he has gathered none, he has administered Sacraments to none in 18
years; and if he has not joined as a Member in constant Communion with any
separate Church, he has been so long a Member of no Church at all. It is true,
he has Prayed occasionally, and Received the Sacrament occasionally in our
Oratories, but not as a Member of our Churches; he has Preached occasionally
to separate Congregations, but he has gather^d no Church, he has Administered
no Sacraments for 18 years together. So that he has Prayed occasionally in one
place, and Preached occasionally in another, but has had no Communion as
Member of a Church any where. But I wonder, how any Man could think such a
necessity lay upon him to Preach, that Woe was unto him if he did not; and yet
apprehend none to Administer the Sacraments for so long together; none, to join
himself as a Member to any Church. Is it possible for him to think it
Sacrilege not to Preach; and to think it no fault, not to give the Sacraments
to others, nor to receive one of them himself as a Communicant with a Church?
Was there not the same devotedness, in Ordination to the faithful
Administration of Sacraments, as to Preaching the Gospel? Was not the same
Authority, the same charge as to both of them? Was there not the same promise
and engagement to give faithful diligence to Minister the Doctrine and
Sacraments? Is there an indispensable obligation to do one part of your duty,
and none at all to the other? Is this possible, to persuade impartial Men, that
for 18 years together you thought your self bound to Preach against the Laws;
and yet never thought your self bound to do that, which you were as solemnly
obliged to do as the other? Mr. B. knows very well in Church History, that
Presbyters were rarely allowed to Preach, and not without leave from the
Bishop, and that in some of the Churches he most esteems too; viz. the African;
but they were constantly bound to Administer the Sacraments; so that, if one
obligation were stricter than the other, that was so which Mr. B. dispensed
with himself in, for 18 years together; and why he might not as well in the
other, is not easy to understand. However, Why all this while, no Constant
Communicant with any Church? What, no Church among us fit for him to be a
Member of? No Obligation upon a Christian to that, equal to the necessity of
Preaching?

These things must seem very strange, to those who judge of Christian
Obligations, by the Scripture, and the Universal Sense and practice of the
Christian Church in the best and purest Ages. To what purpose is it to dispute
about the true notion of an Instituted Church for personal presential
Communion; if men can live for 18 years together without joining in Communion
with any such Church? What was this Communion intended for? The ancient
Churches at this rate, might easily be capacious enough for their Members, if
some never joined with them in so long a time. But he has communicated
occasionally with us: Yes, to show, what defective and tolerable Churches he
can communicate with, but not as a Member, as himself declares; and this
occasional Communion makes him none. Mischief of Impos. P. 85.
For Mr. A. says, Their occasional Communion with us, is but like any of our
occasional Communion with them: or occasional hearing of a weak Preacher; or
occasional going to a Popish Chapel; which no one imagines makes the Persons
Members of such Congregations. If therefore Men use this occasional Communion
more than once or twice, or ten or twenty times, as long as they declare it is
only occasional communion, it makes them no Members of our Churches; for that
obliges them to fixed and constant Communion.

Secondly, They that have fixed and constant communion in a Church gathered out
of another, are in a State of Separation from the Church out of which it is
gathered, although they may be occasionally present in it. Now, if Men who
think our constant communion unlawful, Do judge themselves bound to join
together in another Society for purer administrations, as Mr. A. speaks, and to
choose new Pastors; this is gathering new Churches; and consequently is a plain
Separation from those Churches out of which they are gathered. The Author of
the Letter out of the Country speaks plainly in this matter. Such, says he, of
the dissenting Ministers, Page 33.
as have most openly declared for communicating at some times with some of the
Parochial Churches; have also declared their judgment of the lawfulness and
necessity of Preaching and Hearing, and doing other Religious Duties in other
Congregations also. If this be true, as no doubt that Gentleman well
understands their Principles, then we see plainly a Separation owned,
notwithstanding the occasional communion with our Churches. For, here is not
only a lawfulness, but a necessity asserted of joining in Separate
Congregations, for Preaching, Hearing, and other Religious Duties. And here are
all the parts necessary for making New Churches, Pastors, People, and joining
together for Religious Worship, in a way separate from our Assemblies. For
although they allow the lawfulness of occasional communicating with some of
them; yet they are so far from allowing constant communion, that they assert a
necessity of separate Congregations for Divine Worship; And what was there more
then this which the old Separatists held? For when they first published the
Reasons of their Separation, which Giffard Answered, they laid down the grounds
of their dissatisfaction with our Assemblies; from whence they inferred the
necessity of Separation; and then declare, that they only sought the Fellowship
and Communion of Gods faithful servants; and by the direction of his Holy
Spirit to proceed to a choice of new Pastors; with whom they might join, in all
the Ordinances of Christ. And what is there in this different, from what must
follow from the Principles of those, who assert the necessity of joining in
other Congregations distinct and separate from our Assemblies for the
performance of Religious Duties? And if there be a necessity of Separation, as
this Gentleman tells us they generally hold, that seem most moderate, the
holding the lawfulness of occasional Communion, will not excuse them from the
guilt of the other. For, as long as the necessity of Separation was maintained,
the other was always accounted a less material dispute, and some held one way
and some another. And for this occasional communion the same Author tells us,
that he looks upon it, but as drinking a single glass of Wine, Page 51.
or of Water, against his own inclination, to a person out of Civility; when he
is not for any Man's pleasure to destroy his health by tying himself to drink
nothing else. It seems then, this occasional communion is a mere Complement to
our Churches, wherein they force themselves to a dangerous piece of civility
much against their own inclinations; but they account constant communion a
thing pernicious to their Souls, as the other is destructive to their health.
So that this Salvo cannot excuse them from the guilt of Separation.

Sect. 17. 2. That as far as occasional Communion is lawful, Page 50.
constant Communion is a Duty. This the former Gentleman wonders at me if I
think a good consequence. Mischief of Impos. p. 84.
Mr. A. brings several instances to prove, that we allow occasional Communion
to be lawful, where constant is no duty; as with other Parish Churches, upon a
Journey, at a Lecture, etc. but who ever questioned the lawfulness of
occasional Communion with Churches of the same constitution; or thought a Man
was bound to be always of that Church, where he goes to hear a Lecture, etc.
but the question is, about the lawfulness of Separation, where occasional
Commuon is allowed to be lawful. For a man is not said to separate from every
Church, where he forbears or ceases to have Communion; but only from that
Church, with which he is obliged to hold Communion, and yet withdraws from it.
And it is a wonder to me, none of my Friends (my Adversaries I am loath to call
them) could discern this. It is lawful, says Mr. B. to have Communion with the
French, Dutch, Answ. p. 105.
or Greek Church, Must constant Communion therefore with them be a duty? Yes,
if he were obliged to be a Member of those Churches, and thought it lawful to
communicate some times, constant communion would be a Duty. But because this
seems so hard to be understood, I will therefore undertake to prove it, by
these Two Arguments.

First, From the general Obligation upon Christians, to use all lawful means
for preserving the Peace and Unity of the Church.

Secondly, From the particular force of that Text, Philipp. 3. 16. As far as
you have already attained walk by the same Rule, etc.

First, From the general Obligation upon Christians to use all lawful means for
preserving the Peace and Unity of the Church. Romans 12. 18.
If it be possible, says St. Paul, as much as lies in you live peaceably with
all Men. Now I Ask, If there be not as great an obligation at least, upon
Christians to preserve Peace in the Church, as with all Men? and they are bound
to that, as far as possible, and as much as lies in them. And is not that
possible and lies in them to do, which they acknowledge lawful to be done, and
can do at some times? What admirable Arguments are there to Peace and Unity
among Christians? What Divine Enforcements of them on the Consciences of Men in
the Writings of Christ and his Apostles? And cannot these prevail with Men to
do that, which they think in their Consciences they may lawfully do, toward
joining in Communion with us? This I am persuaded, is one of the provoking Sins
of the Non-conformists, that they have been so backward in doing, what they
were convinced they might have done, with a good Conscience. When they were
earnestly pressed to it by those in Authority, they refused it; and they have
been more and more backward ever since, till now they seem generally resolved,
either to break all in pieces, or to persist in Separation. Mr. B. indeed very
honestly moved them 1663. to consider how far it was lawful, or their duty to
communicate with the Parish Churches in the Liturgy and Sacraments; and brought
many Arguments to prove it lawful; and no one of the Brethren seemed to
dissent: but observe the Answer Mr. A. makes to this; Mischief of Impos. P. 39.
i. e. says he, They did not enter their several Protestations, nor formally
declare against the Reasons of their Brother; like wise and wary persons they
would advise upon them. And so they have been advising and considering ever
since, till with great Wisdom and Wariness they are dropped into Separation
before they were aware of it; and the mere necessity of defending their own
practices, makes them espouse these Principles. Such another Meeting Mr. B.
says, they had after the Plague and Fire, at which they agreed, That Communion
with our Church was in it self lawful and good. Here Mr. A. charges me for
being tardy, Ibid.
and wronging the Relator, by leaving out the most considerable words of the
sentence, viz. When it would not do more harm than good. And upon this he
expatiates about the ways when it may do more harm than good; Whereas if the
Reader please to examine the place, he will find, I did consider the force of
those words; Plea. p. 240.
when I put it, that they resolved it to be lawful in it self; although some
circumstances might hinder their present doing it. For they declared, That it
was in it self lawful and meet; but the circumstances of that time, did make
them think it might do more harm than good; and therefore it is said, They
delaid for a fitter opportunity, which makes it clear, they were then resolved
upon the lawfulness of the thing. But that opportunity has never happened since;
and so they are now come to plead against the practice of it; as Mr. A. plainly
does; by such reasons as these. Communion with our Churches will then do more
harm than good,

1. When such Communion shall persuade the Parish Churches, that their frame is
eligible and not only tolerable. Mischief of Impos. p, 40.
As though Separation were more eligible, than a Communion that is lawful and
tolerable; and Schism were not more intolerable, than Communion with a
tolerable Church. What will not Men say in defense of their own practice? Was
ever Schism made so light a matter of, And the Peace and Unity of Christians
valued at so low a rate; that for the prevention of the one, and the
preservation of the other, a thing that is lawful may not be done, if there be
any danger that what is only tolerable should be mistaken for more eligible? As
if all the Mischiefs of Schism and Division in the Church, were not fit to be
put in the balance, against such a horrible and monstrous inconvenience.
Methinks, it were better sometimes to be wise and considerate, than always thus
subtle and witty against the common sense, and reason of Mankind.

2. When others shall thereby be thought obliged to separate from purer
Churches, i. e. be drawn off from their Separation.

3. When it will harden the Papists. As though their Divisions did not do it
ten thousand times more.

4. When it shall notably prejudice the Christian Religion in general. Yes, no
doubt the Cure of Divisions would do so.

By these particulars, it appears, that he thinks them not obliged to do what
lawfully they can do. Yet at last, he says, he tells us, as much is done, as
their Consciences will permit them. Say you so? Is it indeed come to this? Will
none of your Consciences now permit you either to come to the Liturgy, or to
make use of any parts of it, in your own Meetings? How often has Mr. B. told
the World, That you stuck not at Set-Forms, nor at the Use of the Liturgy,
provided some exceptionable passages were altered in it? Did not Mr. B. declare
at his Meeting, publicly, in a Writing on purpose, That they did not meet
under any color, or pretense of any Religious Exercise in other manner, than
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, and were he
able he would accordingly Read himself? Is this observed in any one Meeting in
London, or through England? Then certainly, there are some who do not, what
they think they lawfully may do toward Communion with us. And Mr. B. says in
the beginning of his late Plea, That they never made one Motion for Presbytery,
or against Liturgies; and these words are spoken in the Name of the whole Party
called Presbyterians. And since that, Mr. B. says, They did come to an
Agreement, wherein the constant Use of the Liturgy, Answ. p. 64.
with some Alterations, was required. And are we now told, That all that can
lawfully be done is done? Mr. B. indeed acts agreeably to his Principles, in
coming to our Liturgy; but Where are all the rest? And, Which of them Reads
what they think lawful at their own Assemblies? Do they not hereby discover,
that they are more afraid of losing their People, who force them to comply with
their humors, than careful to do, what they judge lawful, toward Communion
with our Church?

Sect. 17. But whence comes it to pass, that any who think occasional Communion
with us to be lawful, should not think themselves obliged to constant
Communion? From what grounds come they to practice occasional Communion? Is it
from the Love of Peace and Concord, as Mr. B. says? That is a good ground so
far, as it goes, But will it not carry a Man farther, if he pursue it, as he
ought to do? What love of Concord is this to be occasionally present at our
Churches, and at the same time to declare, That there is greater purity of
Worship, and better means of Edification in Separate Congregations? The one can
never draw Men so much to the love of Concord, as the other does encourage them
in the Principles of Separation. But, if there be an Obligation upon Men to
Communicate with the Church they live in, notwithstanding the defects and
corruptions of it, that Obligation can never be discharged by mere occasional
Presence at some times, and in some Acts of Worship; Trial of Grounds of
Separation. Chap. 10. p. 791.
for, says Mr. Ball, To use one Ordinance, and not another, is to make a
Schism in the Church.

The only Example produced to justify such occasional Communion with defective
Churches, is that our Blessed Savior did communicate after that manner in the
Jewish Synagogues and Temple. But this is so far from being true, that the old
Separatists granted, That our Lord Communicated with the Jewish Church in Gods
Ordinances, Robinson's Treatise, p. 11.
living and dying a Member thereof; and from thence they prove, That the Jewish
Church had a right Constitution in our Saviors time.

And did not he declare, Ainsworth's Consider. examined, p. 5.
That he came not to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill it? And that he complied
with John 's Baptism, because he was to fulfill all righteousness? Did he not
go up to the Feasts at Jerusalem, as a Member of the Jewish Church, and
frequent the Synagogues? Even at the Feast of Dedication, though not instituted
by the Law, he was present, John 10, 22, 23.
as other Jews were. Yea, Did he not express more than ordinary zeal, for
purifying the outward parts of the Temple, because it was to be a House of
Prayer for all Nations? Was not this to show Men's Obligation to come and
Worship there, as well, as that the place was to be kept Sacred for that use?
And, Does not the Apostle expressly say, That he was made under the Law? Where
is there the least ground in Scripture, to intimate, that Christ only kept
occasional, and not constant communion with the Jewish Church? What part of
Worship did he ever withdraw from? Did he not command his Disciples to go hear
the Scribes and Pharisees, because they sat in Moses Chair? Matt. 23. 2.
Where did he ever bid them go thither, when they could have no better; but
when they could to be sure to prefer the Purer way of Worship, and better Means
of Edification? Was not his own Doctrine incomparably beyond theirs? Is there
any pretense for greater Edification now, to be mentioned with what the
Disciples had, to forsake the Jewish Assemblies, for the love of Christ 's own
Teaching? Yet he would not have them to do that, out of the regard he had to
the Public Worship and Teaching. Our Savior himself did only Teach his
Disciples Occasionally, and at certain Seasons; but their constant Communion
was with the Jewish Assemblies. And so it was after his Passion, Luke 24, 53.
till the Holy Ghost fe^l upon them, and they were then employed to gather and
form a new Church; which was not done before; and thence the Author of the
Ordinary Gloss observes; That we never read of Christ 's Praying together,
with his Disciples (unless perhaps at his Transfiguration with three of his
Disciples) although we often read of his Praying alone. So that no example can
be mentioned, which is more directly contrary to the Practice of Separation
upon the present grounds, than that of our Blessed Savior's; which ought to be
in stead of all others to us.

Sect. 19. 2. I argue, from the particular force of that Text, Phil. 3. 16. As
far, as we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the
same things. From whence it appears evident, that Men ought to go as far as
they can, toward Uniformity; and not to forbear doing any thing, which they
lawfully may do toward Peace and Unity.

To take off the force of the Argument from this place, several Answers have
been given, which I shall now remove; so that the strength of it may appear to
remain, notwithstanding all the attempts which have been made to weaken it.

Some say, That the Apostles words are to be understood of the different
seize Christians had in knowledge, and the different conceptions and
opinions which they had concerning the Truths of the Gospel. Vindication of
Non-conform^ts. p. 25, 30.
Thus Dr. O. understands the Text; whose sense is somewhat obscurely and
intricately expressed; but as far as I can apprehend his meaning, he makes this
to be the Apostles; viz.

I. That although the best Christians in this life cannot attain to a full
measure and perfection in the comprehension of the Truths of the Gospel, or the
enjoyment of the things contained in them; yet they ought to be pressing
continually after it.

II. That in the common pursuit of this design, it is not to be supposed, but
the Men will come to different seize, have different measures of light
and knowledge, yea and different conceptions, or opinions about these things.

III. That in this difference of opinions, those who differed from others
should wait on the Teachings of God, in that use of the means of Instruction
which they enjoyed.

IV. That as to their Duty in common to each other, as far as they had
attained, they should walk by the same Rule, namely, which he had now laid
down, and mind the same things as he had enjoined them.

From whence he infers, That these words are so far from being a Foundation to
charge them with Schism, who agreeing in the substance of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, do yet dissent from others, in some things; that it enjoins a mutual
forbearance toward those who are differently minded. And again, he says, The
advice St. Paul gives to both Parties, is, that whereunto they have attained,
wherein they do agree, which were all those Principles of Faith and Obedience
which were necessary to their acceptance with God, they should walk by the same
Rule, and mind the same things, that is, forbearing one another in the things
wherein they differ; which, says he, is the substance of what is pleaded for
by the Non-conformists.

For the clearing of this matter, there are Three things to be debated, 1.
Whether the Apostle speaks of different opinions, or different practices? 2.
Whether the Rule he gives be mutual forbearance? 3. How far the Apostles Rule,
has an influence on our present case?


First, Whether the Apostle speaks of different opinions, or of different
practices? For the right understanding of this, we must strictly attend to the
Apostles scope and design. It is most evident that the Apostle began this
Discourse with a Caution against the Teachers of the Circumcision, Verse 2.
Beware of Dogs, beware of Evil Workers, beware of the Concision. But speaking
so reproachfully of them, he shows in the next words, that every thing that was
excellent in the design of the Law, was accomplished in the Gospel; and so he
proceeds to declare, how justly he was brought to a disesteem of the greatest
privileges of the Law, in comparison with the things revealed by the Gospel,
which shows, that the Apostle had still an eye to these False Teachers, who
were very busy in disturbing the Peace of the Churches, and drawing Disciples
after them, pleading the necessity of observing the Law; and dividing the
Christians into different Communions on that account, as appears by their
proceedings at Antioch, where they did separate themselves from the Gentile
Christians, and St. Peter for a time complied with them. Act. 16. 13.
If such as these had not been busy at Philippi (where it appears that Jews
inhabited) What need St. Paul give so much caution against them? What need all
this dispute concerning the Privileges of the Law? If it be allowed, that they
were there carrying on the same designs, which they did in other Churches, then
it follows, he had great reason to persuade them to Unity so earnestly, as he
does, Philip. 2. 1, 2. and to give so much caution against them; and to
represent the great excellencies of the Gospel above the Law; which being done,
the Apostle after his usual method, makes a digression, concerning himself,
viz. How far short he thought himself of what he aimed at, and yet with what
earnestness he pressed forward, toward Christian perfection; making no longer
any account of legal privileges. Which I take to be his meaning, when he
says, Forgetting the things which are behind I press forward, etc. So St.
Hierome understands it, Legis obliviscens ad perfecta Evangelii praecepta me
teneo. Forgetting the Law, I keep to the Precepts of the Gospel. This being
understood, the Apostles sense naturally follows, according to his former
design; Let us therefore, as many as are arrived to this height of Christianity
(so the word (...) is used, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Ephesians. 4. 13. Coloss. 4. 12. Heb. 5.
14.) agree in pursuing our main end. But then comes the case of those, who were
not so fully satisfied in this matter of the Law; there being many and
plausible Arguments on their side; well, says the Apostle, if they are
doubtful, I advise them however, not to hearken to these false Teachers, for
they make nothing but Faction and Divisions among you, wait patiently upon God,
which is the best means, for your satisfaction. If any be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you, i. e. says Beza in his Paraphrase, If any yet
doubt of the laying aside of the Law, let them make no disturbance in the
Church about it. And so Erasmus says, It ought to be understood of the
Iudaizing Christians, who did not yet discern, that the Ceremonial Law was to
be abolished, however, says he, they ought not to break the Peace of the
Church for it. But, What sense can Dr. O. here put upon the being otherwise
minded: Otherwise than what? As many as be perfect be thus minded, to pursue
your main end; but, if any be otherwise minded; Did any think they ought not to
mind chiefly their great end? that is incredible; Therefore the Apostle must be
understood of somewhat, about which there were then very different
apprehensions; and that it is certain there were about the Law among the
Christians then. The Apostle therefore does not speak of any kind of different
apprehensions Christians might fall into; but of such as were at that time
among them; and so one Copy reads it, (...) If hitherto ye have been otherwise
minded; they had no difference concerning the (...), the things before them;
viz. the happiness of the Gospel, but they had concerning the (...), the things
behind, viz. the force and obligation of the Law. And since this difference did
not rest barely in opinion, but was carried on so far, as to break the Peace of
the Church about it; it appears to have been no bare difference of Opinions,
but such as related to the Peace and Communion of Christians.

Secondly, Whether the Rule which the Apostle lays down, be only a Rule of
mutual forbearance? Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same Rule, let us mind the same things. The sense according to Dr. O. is
this, That those who are agreed in the stubstantials of Religion, should go on
and do their duty without regarding lesser differences. Which is a sense very
uncertain, and does not reach to the differences then among them* It is very
uncertain, because it sets no bounds to differences; and supposes the
continuance of such differences among them, which he designed to prevent, by
persuading them so often in this Epistle to be of one mind, Phil. 1* 27. 2. 2.
of one soul; as well as to mind the same things. Besides, the difference then
on foot, was none of the smaller differences of opinions, but that about which
they differed was urged on one side, as necessary to Salvation, Act. 15. 1.
by the false Apostles; and opposed on the other, as pernicious and destructive
to it. One of my Answerers says, Rector of Sutton, p. 15, 16.
That the Iudaizing Christians were leavened with such a corrupt Opinion, as
was by no means to be born with; which would have made Christ and his Death in
vain. And that the Apostle sets himself against it might and main, showing the
dreadful consequences of it. And is it probable the Apostle should prescribe a
Rule of mutual forbearance, Gal. 5. 2.
in such a case as this? especially, when in the same Chapter, he gives so
great a caution against them, with so much unusual sharpness of expression;
Beware of Dogs, beware of Evil Workers, beware of the Concision. Does this look
like a Precept of mutual forbearance, as to the differences then among them?
these we know there were, let Dr. O name any other smaller differences of
Opinion, which might be an occasion of the Apostles giving such a Rule of
mutual forbearance. But now, if we suppose the Apostle to speak to the
difference about the Law, about which the Churches were then divided, the sense
is plain, easy, and pertinent. For so, either (1.) It takes in those who
hitherto differed about the Law; and then the sense is, although you are not
come up to so great satisfaction as others have, yet go as far as you can with
the Body of Christians, you live with; keep within one Rule; break not the
bounds of Peace and Unity which Christ has set you; run not with the false
Teachers into Separating dividing courses. (2.) It is directed to those who
have got the start of others, and then it contains the obligation that lies
upon them, especially so have a mighty regard to the Peac^ and Unity of
Christians; not to break the Common^ties and bonds on the account of their
greater seize, nor to Separate from others, as meaner and lower
Christians, because they are not come up to that perfection, which you have
attained to. And so either way, it contains an excellent Rule, and of admirable
use to the Christian Church, not only at that time, but in all Ages of the
World, viz. That those who cannot be fully satisfied in all things, should go
as far as they can toward preserving Peace and Communion among Christians; and
not peevishly separate and divide the Church, because they cannot in all things
think as others do; nor others on the account of greater sanctity and
perfection, despise the inferior sort of Christians, and forsake their
Communion, but they ought all to do what lies possibly in them to preserve the
bonds of Peace, and the Unity of the Church.

Thirdly, How far this Rule has an influence on our case? (1.) It follows from
hence, that as far as Communion is lawful, it is a duty, since, as far as they
have attained they are to walk by the same Rule. And so much Dr. O. does not
deny; when he says, Those who are agreed in the Substantials of Religion, or
in the Principles of Faith and Obedience, should walk by the same Rule, and
mind the same things, forbearing one another in the the things wherein they
differ. Then as far, as they agree, they are bound to join together, whether it
be as to Opinion, or Communion. Because the obligation to Peace and Unity must
especially reach to Acts of Christian Communion, as far as that is judged to be
lawful. (2.) That the best Christians are bound to Unite with others, though of
lower seize, and to keep within the same Rule; which is a general
expression relating to the bounds of a Race, and so takes in all such Orders
which are lawful and judged necessary to hold the Members of a Christian
Society together. Vindication of Non-conformists, p. 26.
But, says Dr. O. Let the Apostles Rule be produced with any probability of
proof to be his, and they are all ready to subscribe and conform unto it. This
is the Apostles Rule, to go as far as they can; and if they can go no farther,
to sit down quietly, and wait for farther instruction, and not to break the
Peace of the Church, upon present dissatisfaction, nor to gather new Churches
out of others upon supposition of higher seize.

If the Rule reach our Case, Page 27.
says he again, it must be such as requires things to be observed, as were
never divinely appointed, as National Churches, Ceremonies and Modes of
Worship. And so this Rule does in order to Peace, require the observation of
such things, which although they be not particularly appointed by God, yet are
enjoined by lawful Authority, provided, they be not unlawful in themselves, nor
repugnant to the World of God.

But the Apostles never gave any such Rules themselves, Page 28,
about outward Modes of Worship with Ceremonies, Feasts, Fasts, Liturgies, etc.
What then? It is sufficient that they gave this general Rule, That all lawful
things are to be done for the Churches Peace: And without this no Unity, or
Order can be preserved in Churches. The Apostles, says he, gave Rules
inconsistent with any determining Rule, Page. 28* 31.
viz. of mutual forbearance, Rome. 14. And herein the Apostle acted not upon
mere Rules of Prudence, but as a Teacher divinely inspired. That he was
Divinely inspired, I do not question, but even such a one may determine a case
upon present circumstances, which resolution may not always bind, when the
circumstances are changed. For then, the meaning of the Apostle must be, that
whatever differences happen among Christians, there must be no determination
either way. But the direct contrary to this, we find in the Decree of the
Apostles at Jerusalem, upon the difference that happened in the Christian
Churches. Act. 15, 28.
And although there was a very plausible pretense of the obligation of
Conscience one way; yet the Apostles made a determination in the case, contrary
to their Judgment. Which shows, that the Rule of Forbearance, where Conscience
is alleged both ways, is no standing Rule to the Christian Church; but that
the Governors of it from Parity of Reason may determine those things which they
judge to conduce most to the Peace and Welfare of that Church, which they are
bound to preserve. And from hence it appears how little Reason there is for Dr.
O's Insinuation, as though the false Apostles were the only Imposers: whereas,
it is most evident, that the true Apostles made this peremptory Decree, in a
matter of great consequence, and against the pretense of Conscience on the
other side.

But says Dr. O. further, Page 7, 8.
The Jewish Christians were left to their own liberty, provided they did not
impose on others; and the Dissenters at this day, desire no more, than the
Gentile Churches did, viz. not to be imposed upon to observe those things which
they are not satisfied, it is the mind of Christ should be imposed upon them. I
Answer, 1. It was agreed by all the Governors of the Christian Church, that the
Jewish Christians should be left to their own liberty, out of respect to the
Law of Moses; and out of regard to the Peace of the Christian Church, which
might have been extremely hazarded, if the Apostles had presently set
themselves against the observing the Jewish Customs among the Jews themselves.
2. The false Apostles imposing on the Gentile Christians had two Circumstances
in it, which extremely alter their case from that of our present Dissenters.
For, (1.) They were none of their lawful Governors, but went about as Seducers
drawing away the Disciples of the Apostles from them. (2.) They imposed the
Jewish Rites as necessary to Salvation, and not as merely indifferent things.
And therefore the case of our Dissenters is very different from that of the
Gentile Christians, as to the Impositions of the false Apostles. Thus I have
considered every thing material in Dr. O. which seems to take off the force of
the Argument drawn from this Text.

The Author of the Letter says, (1.) That I ought to have proved, Letter cut
of the Country, p. 24.
that the Apostles meant some Rule superadded to the Scriptures; and, (2.) That
other Church-Guides had the same Power, as the Apostles had. But what need all
this? If it appear (1.) That the Apostles did give binding Rules to particular
Churches, which are not extant in Scriptures, as appears by 1 Cor. 7. 17. So
that either the Scripture is an imperfect Rule, for omitting some Divine Rules;
or else these were only Prudential Rules of Order and Government, (2.) That it
is a standing Rule of Scripture, that Men are bound to do all lawful things for
the Peace of the Church. And this I have showed, was the Apostles design in the
words of this Text.

Sect. 20. Others pretend, that the Apostle means no more by these words, but
that Christians must live up to their knowledge, and mind that one thing. This
is a very new Exposition; and the Author of it intends to set up for a Critic
upon the credit of it. It is pity therefore it should pass, without some
consideration. Mischief of Imposit. p. 6, 7.
But, I pass by the Childish triflings about (...), a Canon, viz. that is not
taken in a Military notion, because great Guns were not then invented; that it
is an Ecclesiastical Canon mounted upon a platform of Moderation; which are
things fit only for Boys in the Schools; unless, perhaps, they might have been
designed for an Artillery-Sermon on this Text; but however, methinks they come
not in very sutably in a weighty and serious debate.

I come therefore to examine the New-Light that is given to this Controverted
Text. (...) he observes from Grotius, is left out in one MS (it may be the
Alexandrian) but, What is one MS. to the general consent of Greek Copies? not
only the Modern, but those which St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Photius,
Oecumenius, and Theophylact had, who all keep it in. But suppose it be left
out, the sense is the very same to my purpose. No, says he, (...), To walk by
the same must be referred to the antecedent (...). And what then? Then, says
he, the sense is, What we have attained let us walk up to the same; Which comes
to no more than this, unto whatsoever measure or degree of knowledge we have
reached, let us walk sutably to it.

But the Apostle does not here speak of the improvement of knowledge; but of
the union and conjuction of Christians, as appears by the next words (...), to
mind the same thing. No such matter, says Mr. A. that phrase implies no more
than to mind that thing; or that very thing, viz. Verse. 14. pressing toward
the mark. But if he had pleased to have read on, but to Phil 4. 2. he would
have found (...), to signify Unanimity. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12* 25* opposes
the (...) to (...). That there be no Schism in the Body, but that all the
Members should take care of (...), one for another: and therefore the (...),
minding the same things, is very aptly used against Schisms and Divisions. I
should think St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Theophylact, all understood the
importance of a Greek Phrase, as well as our Author, and they all make no
scruple of interpreting it of the Peace and Concord of Christians. Although St.
Augustine did not understand much Greek, yet he knew the general sense of the
Christian Church about this place; and he particularly applies it to the Peace
of the Church, De Baptismo, ^c, Donat. l. 2. c, 4, 5.
in St. Cyprians case. By this taste, let any Man judge of the depth of that
Man's learning, or rather the height of his Confidence, who dares to tell the
World, That the Universal Current and Stream of all Expositors is against my
sense of this Text. And for this universal stream and current, besides Grotius,
who speaks exactly to the same sense with mine, viz. That those who differed
about the legal Ceremonies, should join with other Christians in what they
agreed to be Divine; he mentions only Tirinus and Zanchy, and then cries, In a
word, they all conspire against my Interpretation. If he be no better at
Polling Non-conformists than Expositors, he will have no such reason to boast
of his Numbers. Had it not been fairer dealing, in one word, to have referred
us to Mr. Pool's Synopsis? For, if he had looked into Zanchy himself, he would
have found, how he applied it sharply against Dissensions in the Church. Mr. B.
says, (...)
That the Text speaks for Unity and Concord is past Question; and that to all
Christians, though of different seize; and therefore requires all to
live in Concord that are Christians, notwithstanding other differences. And if
he will but allow, that by virtue of this Rule, Men are bound to do all things
lawful for preserving the Peace of the Church, we have no farther difference
about this matter: For then, I am sure, it will follow, that if occasional
Communion be lawful, constant Communion will be a Duty.

And so much for the first sort of Dissenters, who allow some kind of Communion
with our Church to be lawful.

Sect. 21. II. I come now to consider the charge of Schism, or Sinful
Separation, against Those, who, though they agree with us in the Substantials
of Religion, yet deny any Communion with our Church to be lawful. I do not
speak of any improper (...) Communion, Vindicat. p. 14.
which Dr. O. calls Comm^^^^ Faith and Love, this they do allow to the Church
of England, but no otherwise, than as they believe us to be Orthodox
Christians; yet he seems to go farther, as to some at least of our Parochial
Churches, that they are true Churches: But in what sense? Are they Churches
rightly constituted, with whom they may join in Communion as Members? No; that
he does not say. But his meaning is, that they are not guilty of any such
heinous Errors in Doctrine, or Idolatrous Practice in Worship, as should
utterly deprive them of the Being and Nature of Churches. And does this
Kindness only belong to some of our Parochial Churches? I had thought, every
Parochial Church was true, or false, according to its frame and constitution;
which among us supposes the owning the Doctrine and Worship received and
practiced in the Church of England, as it is established by Law; and if no such
Errors in Doctrine, nor Idolatrous Praces be allowed by the Church of England,
then every Parochial Church which is constituted according to it, is a true
Church. But all this amounts to no more, than what they call a Metaphysical
Truth; for he does not mean, that they are Churches with which they may
lawfully have Communion. And he pleads, for the necessity of having Separate
Congregations, from the necessity of Separating from our Communion: (although
the time was, when the bare want of a right Constitution of Churches, was
thought a sufficient ground for setting up new Churches, or for withdrawing
from the Communion of a Parochial Church; and I do not think the Dr. is of
another mind now.) But however, I shall take things as I find them; and he
insists on, as the grounds of this necessity of Separation, the things enjoined
by the Law's of the Land, or by the Canons and Orders of the Church; as Signing
Children Baptized with the Sign of the Cross; Kneeling at the Communion;
Observation of Holy Days* Constant Use of the Liturgy; Renouncing other
Assemblies, and the Peoples Right in choice of their own Pastors; Neglect of
the Duties of Church Members; submitting to an Ecclesiastical Rule and
Discipline, which not one of a Thousand can apprehend to have any thing in it,
of the Authority of Christ, or Rule of the Gospel. This is the short account of
the Reasons of Separation from our Churches Communion.

That which I am now to inquire into, is, Whether such Reasons as these be
sufficient ground for Separation from a Church, wherein it is confessed there
are no heinous Errors in Doctrine, or Idolatrous Practice in Worship; for if
they be not, such Separation must be a formal Schism; because such persons not
only withdraw from Communion with our Church, but set up other Churches of
their own.

Now the way I shall take to show the insufficiency of these Causes of
Separation, shall be, by showing the great Absurdities, that follow upon the
allowance of them.

These Five especially, I shall insist upon.

(1.) That it weakens the Cause of the Reformation. (2.) That it hinders all
Union between the Protestant-Churches. (3.) That it justifies the ancient
Schism's, which have been always condemned by the Christian Church. (4.) That
it makes Separation endless. (5.) That it is contrary to the Obligation which
lies on all Christians, to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church.
Sect. 22. (1.) The prejudice it brings upon the Cause of the Reformation.
Which I shall make appear, not from the Testimonies of our own Writers, who may
be suspected by the Dissenters of too much kindness to our Church; but, from
the most eminent and learned Defenders of the Reformation in France, who can be
the least suspected of partiality to our Church. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. n. 9.
I begin with Calvin; against whom I hope no exceptions will be taken.

(1.) In the General, He assigns two marks of the Visible Church, the Word of
God truly Preached, and Sacraments administered according to Christ's
Institution.

(2.) He says, Wherever these Marks are to be found in particular Societies,
those are true Churches, howsoever they are distributed according to humane
conveniences.

(3) That although those stand as Members of particular Churches, (who may not
be thought worthy of that Society) till they are duly cast out; yet the
Churches themselves having these Marks, do still retain the true Nature and
Constitution of Churches, and ought to be so esteemed.

(4.) Men ought not to Separate from, Numb. 10.
or break the Unity of such Churches. And he has this notable saying upon it:
God sets such a value upon the Communion of his Church, that he looks upon him
as an Apostate from his Religion, who does wilfully Separate himself from any
Christian Society, which has the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.
And a little after, he calls Separation a Denial of God and Christ, a
destruction of his Truth, a mighty provocation of his Anger, a crime so great
that we can hardly imagine a worse, it being a Sacrilegious and perfidious
breach of the Marriage betwixt Christ and his People. Numb. 11.
In the next Section he makes it a very dangerous and mischievous temptation so
much as to think of Separation from a Church that has these Marks.

(5.) That although there be many Faults and Corruptions in such a Church, yet
as long as it retains those Marks, Separation from it, is not justifiable: nay,
although some of those faults be about Preaching the Word, and Administration
of Sacraments: for, says he, all truths are not of equal moment: but as long
as the Doctrine according to Godliness, and the true Use of Sacraments is kept
up, Men ought not to separate upon lesser differences; but they ought to seek
the amending what is amiss, continuing in the Communion of the Church; and
without disturbing the Peace and Order of it. And he at large proves, Numb. 13,
14, 15, 16.
what great allowance is to be made, as to the corruption of Members from the
Examples of the Apostolical Churches: and he says, Men's Moroseness in this
Matter, although it seems to flow from zeal, yet it much rather comes from
Spiritual Pride, and a false opinion of their own holiness above others.
Although, says he, there were such universal corruptions in the Jewish Church,
Numb. 18.
that the Prophets compare it to Sodom and Gomorrah; yet they never set up new
Churches, nor erected other Altars, whereat they might offer Separate
Sacrifices: but whatever the People were, as long as Gods Word and Ordinances
were among them, they lifted up pure hands to God, although in such an impure
Society. The same he proves, as to Christ and his Apostles. From whence he
concludes, That Separation from such Churches, Numb. 19.
where the true Word of God and Sacraments are, is an inexcusable fault. But
how then comes he to justify the Separation from the Church of Rome? Cap. 2.
n. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Because in that Church the true Doctrine of Christ is so much suppressed, and
so many Errors obtruded on Men's Minds in stead of it; and the Worship of God so
corrupted, that the Public Assemblies are Schools of Idolatry and Wickedness.
And the truth of the Gospel, being the Foundation of the Churches Unity, it can
be no culpable Separation to withdraw from the Communion of a Church which has
so notoriously corrupted his Doctrine and Institutions: especially, when they
Anathematize those who will not comply with them? But does he mean any
indifferent Rites, Numb. 9, 10, 11, 12.
or Ceremonies, where the Doctrine is sound? No; but False Doctrine, and
Idolatrous Worship; as he frequently declares. And therefore he that would go
about to defend Separation from a Church, on the account of some Ceremonies
prescribed, and some Corruptions remaining in it, must overthrow the
fundamental grounds of the Reformation, as they are explained by Calvin himself.

Sect. 23. Among their later Writers, no Man has Vindicated the Cause of the
Reformation with greater success and reputation then Mr. Daille in his Apology.
And the Grounds he goes upon are these.

(1.) That we are bound to avoid the Communion of those, Apology, c. 3.
who go about to destroy and ruin Christianity.

(2.) If the Church of Rome has not required any thing from us which destroys
our Faith, offends our Consciences, and overthrows the service which we believe
due to God; if the differences have been small, and such as we might safely
have yielded unto; Cap. 4.
then he will grant, that their Separation was rash and unjust, and they guilty
of the Schism.

(3.) He proves, that they had weighty reasons for their Separation; Cap. 5.
which are these, (1.) Imposing new Doctrines as necessary Articles of Faith:
and yet, not all errros in Doctrine do afford sufficient ground for Separation;
Cap. 7.
but such as are pernicious and destructive to Salvation: for which he
instanceth in the Lutherans opinion of Christ's Bodily Presence in the
Sacrament, which overthrows not the use of the Sacraments, nor requires the
adoring it, it neither divides nor mutilates it, nor makes it an Expitiatory
Sacrifice for Sin; all which follows from the Popish Doctrine. From whence he
concludes, That to separate from a Church for tolerable Errors, is an unjust
Separation. Cap. 8.
(2.) Requiring such Worship, as overthrows the Foundations of Christianity;
which, says he, proves the necessity of our Separation; and for this he
instances in Adoration of the Host; which the Church of Rome strictly
requiring, and the Protestants believing it to be a mere Creature, they cannot
give it without Idolatry: from whence he concludes our Separation to be ^ust,
because it was necessary. Besides this he gives instances in the Worship of
Images, Cap. 18.
Invocation of Saints, etc. By which we see the Justice of the Cause of
Reformation does not depend on any such Ceremonies, as ours are, nor on the
want of Discipline, nor on the bare Dissatisfaction of Conscience, but on such
great and important Reasons, as obtruding new Articles of Faith, and Idolatrous
Worship on the partakers of the Communion of the Roman Church.

Amyraldus goes so far, De secess. ab Eccles. Romans etc, p. 233.
as to say, That if there had been no other faults in the Roman Church besides
their unprofitable Ceremonies in Baptism, and other things, beyond the measure
and genius of Christian Religion, they had still continued in its communion;
For, says he, a Physician is to be born with that loads his Patient with some
unuseful Prescriptions, if he be otherwise faithful and skilful. But if he
mixes Poison with his Medicines, and besides adds abundance of Prescriptions,
both needless and chargeable, then the Patient has great reason to look out
for better help, and to take care of his own safety and freedom. By which he
plainly declares, that bare Ceremonies, although many more than ours, are no
sufficient Ground for Separation.

Of late years, a Person of Reputation in France set forth a Book against the
Reformation, charging it with Schism, Prejuges legitimes contre les Calvinistes.
because of the Separation from the Roman Church; which has been Answered
three several ways by three learned Divines, M. Claude, M. Pajon, and M.
Turretin. But, Do any of these insist upon matters of mere Ceremony where the
Doctrine is sound, the constant use of Liturgy, bare neglect of Discipline,
etc. No, they were Men of better understanding than to insist on such things as
these, which they knew, could never bear that weight as to justify Separation
from a Church; and that they should have exposed themselves and their Cause to
the contempt of all considering Men, if they could have alleged no more
Substantial Reasons than these.

But they all agree in such common reasons, Claude sa Defense de la
Reformation. 8. part. Pajon Examen du livre, etc. 3. party. Turretini disput.
1. de necessaria secessione ab Ecclesia. Romans Sect. 11.
which they thought sufficient to make a Separation Justifiable, viz. Great
corruption in Doctrine, Idolatrous Worship, and insupportable Tyranny over the
Consciences of Men. Turretin expressly says, No slight errors, no tolerable
Superstitious Rites that do not infect the Conscience (as they cannot where
they are not forced upon it by unsound Doctrine) not any corruption of Manners,
nor defect in Government, or Discipline, are sufficient grounds for Separation.
In one word, says he, the Patient is not to be forsaken, unless his Disease be
deadly and infectious, nor then neither but with great difficulty.

Le Blanc showing the impossibility of Reunion with the Papists, Le Blanc.
Theses de Reunione.
goes upon these 3 grounds.

1. That it cannot be obtained without subscribing to the Decrees and Canons of
the Council of Trent, and without Anathematizing all those who have opposed
them. For the condition of Communion with that Church is no less, than
receiving all its Errors for necessary Articles of Faith.

2. That the Public Worship practiced, and allowed in that Church is
Idolatrous, he instanceth in Adoration of the Host, the Worship of Saints and
Images.

3. That they cannot return to that Church without subjecting their Consciences
to the Tyrannical Usurpations of the Pope.

Let our Brethren now consider, what Triumphs the Church of Rome would make
over us, if we had nothing to justify our Separation from them, but only that
we could not have our Children Baptized without an Aerial Sign of the Cross,
nor receive the Communion without kneeling; that we must observe Holy Days, and
use a Liturgy; and that Men are not so good as they should be, nor Discipline
so exact as were to be wished; How should we be hissed and laughed at all over
the Christian World; if we had nothing to allege for our Separation from the
Roman Church, but such things as these? And when the Papists see the weakness
of these Allegations, they are hardened in their own ways; and cry out
presently there is no end of Schism's and Separations on such pretenses as
these, by which, unspeakable mischief has been done to the Cause of the
Reformation.

Sect. 24. (2.) This Pretense of Separation would make Union among the
Protestant Churches impossible, supposing them to remain as they are. For the
Lutheran Churches have the same, and more Ceremonies, and Unscriptural
Impositions (as they are called) than our Church has. They use the Cross in
Baptism, Kneeling at the Communion; and the observation of Holy Days and times
of Fasting, and Set-Forms of Prayer, etc. yet these Churches have been thought
fit to be united with the most reformed Churches, by the best and wisest
Protestants both abroad, and at home. I do not mean only to have Communion with
them in Faith and Love, as Dr. O. speaks, but to join together so, as to make
the same Bodies of Churches. A Synod of the Reformed Churches in France, at
Charenton, A. D. 1631. declared, that there was no Idolatry, or Superstition in
the Lutheran Churches, and therefore the Members of their Churches might be
received into Communion with them, without renouncing their own opinions or
Practices, Which shows, that they did not look on those as sufficient grounds
of Separation; for then they would not have admitted them as Members of the
Lutheran Churches, but have told them, they ought to forsake their Communion,
and embrace that of the Reformed Churches. Look over all those learned and
peaceable Divines, who have projected or persuaded an Union with the Lutheran
Churches and others; and see, if any of them make the particulars mentioned any
cause of Separation from them. Praefat. ad Confess. Helot. and art. 17, 27.
The Helvetian Churches declare, That no Separation ought to be made for
different Rites and Ceremonies, where there is an Agreement in Doctrine: and
the true Concord of Churches lies in the Doctrine of Christ and the Sacraments
delivered by him. And this Confession was first drawn up by Bullinger, Myconius
and Grynaeus, and subscribed afterward by all their Ministers; and by those of
Geneva and other places. And they take notice of the different Customs in other
Churches about the Lords Supper and other things, yet, say they, because of our
consent in Doctrine, these things cause no Breach in our Churches. And they
make no scruple about the indifferency of any of the Ceremonies used in the
Lutheran Churches, except those of the Mass and Images in Churches. Consens.
Polon. p. 220.
At Sendomir in Poland, A. D. 1570. Those who followed the Helvetian, Auspurg,
Bohemian Confessions, came to a full agreement, so as to make up one Body,
notwithstanding the different Rites and Ceremonies among them; which, they say,
ought not to break the Communion of Churches, as long as they agree in the same
purity of Doctrine, and the same foundation of Faith and Salvation; Confess.
August. art. 7.
and for this they appeal to the Auspurg and Saxon Confessions. The Auspurg
Confession declares, That agreement in Doctrine and Sacraments is sufficient
for the Churches Unity; then Separation cannot be lawful merely on the account
of Ceremonies and Human Traditions. Confess. Argent. c. 14.
And the Confession of Strasburg says, That they look on no Human Traditions
as condemned in Scripture, but such as are repugnant to the Law of God; and
bind the Consciences of Men; otherwise if they agree with Scripture, and be
appointed for good ends, although they be not expressly mentioned in Scripture,
they are rather to be looked on as Divine than Human: and the contempt of them
is the contempt of God himself: nay, they say, though the Laws seem very hard
and unjust, a true Christian will not stick at obeying them, if they command
nothing that is wicked.

Ioh. Crocius distinguishes of 3 sorts of Ceremonies. Croc. de Ecc^es unit.
and Schism. c. 6. ^. 4.


The First Commanded, The Second Forbidden, The Third neither Commanded, nor
Forbidden.
The Unity of the Church supposes the observation of the First, and yet for
every omission the Communion of the Church is not to be broken. The Second
breaks the Churches Unity; yet its communion not to be forsaken for one or two
of these, if there be no Tyranny over the Consciences of Men: but for the
Third, Men ought not to break the Unity of the Church. And in another place he
gives particular instances in the ceremonies observed in the Lutheran Churches,
Comment. de Aug. confess. 9. c. 4. p. 33. c. 29. Page 435.
the Exorcism in Baptism, the Linen Garments and Wax Candles, the Holy Days
and Confession, etc. and declares, That we ought not to break off communion
with Churches, or make a Schism for these things. Zanch. 1. de. Re^. p. 765.
Zanchy accounts it a great sin to disturb the Peace of Churches for the sake
of indifferent ceremonies; and contrary to that charity we ought to have to our
Brethren and to Churches. Amyrald. de Secess. ab Eccl. Romans Deque pace cum
Evangel. constit. p. 23.
Amyraldus speaking of the ceremonies in the Lutheran Churches, says, That
those which came in use after the Apostolic times, have no other obligation on
us, than that for the sake of indifferent things, though at first appointed out
of no necessity, nay though there be inconveniency in them, yet the Churches
Peace ought not to be disturbed.

And he very well observes, That the Nature of ceremonies is to be taken from
the Doctrine which goes along with them; if the Doctrine be good the Rites are
so, or at least, are tolerable: if it be false, then they are troublesome, and
not to be born; if it be impure, and lead to Idolatry, then the ceremonies are
tainted with the Poison of it. Hornbeck de Consociat. Evang. Sect. 1. n. 3.
But, says he, the Lutheran Churches have no false or wicked Doctrine
concerning their Rites; and therefore he advises persons to communicate with
the Lutheran Churches, as their occasions serve: and so do others. And
Ludovicus Prince Elector Palatine, not only congratulated the mutual communion
of the several Churches in Poland, but Prayed for the same in Germany too,
Sencent. D. Daven. p. 5.
as Bishop Davenant tells us; who proves at large, that there is no sufficient
Reason to hinder it; which he makes to lie only in three things.

I. Tyranny over Men's Faith and Consciences. II. The Practice of Idolatry. III.
The denial of some Fundamental Article of Faith.
And none of these things being chargeable on the Lutheran Churches, the
lawfulness of the terms of Communion with them does fully appear.

And now I desire our Brethren, who justify their Separation upon pretense
that our Terms of communion are unlawful, to reflect upon these things. Will
they condemn so many Protestant Churches abroad, which have harder Terms of
communion than we? What would they think of the Exorcism of Infants, of
Auricular Confession, of Images in Churches, and some other things, besides
what are observed among us? Do we want Discipline? Do they not in other
Churches abroad?

The Transylvanian Divines in their Discourse of the Union of Protestant
Churches, Iren^c. tract. Pror. p. 55.
declared, That little or none was observed among them. Will they then Separate
from all Protestant Churches? Will they confine the Communion of Christians to
their Narrow Scantlings? Will they shut out all the Lutheran Churches from any
possibility of Union with them? For, What Union can be justifiable with those
whose terms of Communion are unlawful? They may pity them, and pray for them,
and wish for their Reformation, but an Union does suppose such a Communion of
Churches, that the Members of one may communicate in another. Do they allow
this to the Lutheran Churches? If not, then they render Union among the
Protestant Churches impossible, because unlawful. If they do, will they be so
unjust, as not to allow the same favor and kindness to our own Church? Can they
think Separation necessary from our Church on those grounds, which are common
to us with other Protestant Churches; and yet think Union desirable and
possible with them notwithstanding? Do they think that (...) Members of the
Reformed Churches could lawfully communicate with the Lutheran Churches,
although they have the Cross in Baptism, K^e^^g at the Communion, the Surpless,
and other Ceremonies which we have not? and yet, Is it necessary to S^parate
from our Churches Communion on the account of such things as these; where there
is acknowledged to be a full Agreement in the Substantials of Religion? Either
therefore they must differ from the judgment of the Reformed Churches, and the
most emine^^* Protestant Divines abroad, or they must renounce this Principle
of Separation.

Sect. 25. (3.) This will justify the ancient Schisms which have been always
condemned in the Christian Church. For setting aside the Ceremonies (of which
already) and the use of the Liturgy and Holy Days (which is common to our
Church with all other Christian Churches, for many hundred years before the
great degeneracy of the Roman Church; and are continued by an Universal consent
in all parts of the Christian World) the other Reasons for Separation are such,
which will justify the greatest Schismatics that ever were in the Christian
Church, Vindication of Non-conf^rmists, p. 13. 36.
viz. Want of Evangelical Church Discipline, and due means of Edification, and
depriving the People of their Liberty of choosing their own Pastors, whereby
they are deprived also of all use of their light and knowledge of the Gospel,
in providing for their own Edification. For, What gave occasion to the Novatian
Schism, which began so soon, and spread so far, and continued so long, but the
pretense of the want of Evangelical Church Discipline, and better means of
Edification, and humoring the People in the choice of their own Pastors?

There were Two things the Novatians chiefly insisted on, as to Evangelical
Discipline.

1. The Power of the Keys. 2. The Purity of the Church.
1. As to the Power of the Keys, they said, That Christ had never given it
absolutely to his Church, but under certain restrictions, which if Men
exceeded, the Church had no Power to release them: and that was especially in
the case of denial of Christ before Men, when Men fell in time of Persecution.

2. The Churches Purity ought to be preserved, by keeping such who had thus
fallen from ever being received into communion again. Cyprian. ad Anton. Ep.
52. n. 13.
They did not deny that God might pardon such upon Repentance, but they said,
the Church could not. And this they pleaded, would tend very much to the
Edification of Christians, and would make them more watchful over themselves,
when they saw no hopes of recovering the Churches Communion, if they once fell
from it. Add to this, that Novatus, or Novatianus (for the Greeks confounded
their Names) in his Epistle to Dionysius of Alexandria, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 45.
says, That he was forced to do what he did, by the importunity of the
Brethren, who out of their zeal for the Purity of the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, would not comply with the looser part which joined with Cornelius,
Pacian. Epist. 3. ad Sempron.
and therefore chose him to be their Bishop. And so much appears by Pacianus,
that Novatus coming from Carthage to Rome* makes a party there for Novatia^us
in opposition to Cornelius, which consisted chiefly of those who had stood
firmest in the Persecution; in their Name he Writes to Novatianus, declaring,
That he was chosen by the zealous Party at Rome, whereas Cornelius had admitted
the lapsed to Communion, and consequently corrupted the Discipline of the
Christian Church.

Here we have a concurrence of Dr. O's Pleas, Zeal for Reformation of
Discipline, the greater Edification of the People, and the asserting their
Right in choosing such a Pastor as was not likely to promote their Edification.
But notwithstanding these fair pretenses, Cyprian. Ep^st. 51, 52. (...) unit.
Eccl. de latsis. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 45.
the making a Separation in the Church, was every where condemned as a great
Sin; as appears by St. Cyprian, Dionysius of Alexandria, Theodoret, Epiphanius,
and others. Dionysius tells the Author of the Schism, Theod. haeret, fab, l 3.
5. Epiph. haer. 59.
that he had better have suffered any thing, than thus to have made a Rent in
the Church: and it was as glorious a Martyrdom to die to prevent a Schism, as
to avoid Idolatry, and he thinks it a much greater thing; the one being a
Martyrdom for the Church, the other only for ones own Soul. St. Cyprian charges
those who were guilty of this Schism with Pride and Arrogance, and doing
unspeakable mischief to the Church, by breaking the Peace of it: and will
hardly allow those to be Christians who lived in such a Schism: when as
Epiphanius observes, Cyprian. de Unit. Eccl. n. 11, 12, etc.
they still pleaded they had the same Faith with the Catholic Church; and yet
St. Cyprian will not allow that to be true Faith which has not charity; and
says, That there can be no true charity, where Men do thus break in pieces the
Unity of the Church.

The Meletians in Egypt agreed with the Catholic Christians in the
Substantials of Religion, Epiph. haer. 68.
holding the same Faith with them, as Epiphanius relates the Story; and their
Schism began too about preserving the Discipline of the Church, and the best
means for the Edification of the People. They allowed a Restitution for the
lapsed to the Communion of the Church, but after a very severe Discipline, and
an utter incapacity of those in Orders as to any parts of their Functions. But
Peter Bishop of Alexandria thought the milder way the better; whereupon a
Separation followed: and the Meletians had distinct Churches; which they
called, The Churches of the Martyrs. This Schism grew to that height, that they
would not pray together in Prison, nor in the Quarries whither they were sent.
Meletius being a Bishop was deposed by Peter of Alexandria, Theod. l. 1. c. 9.
but he went on still to promote the course of Separation in Thebais, and other
parts of Egypt, upon which the Council of Nice, in their Synodical Epistle,
deprived him of all Episcopal Power, and the People that adhered to him, of the
Power of choosing their own Pastors (or rather of proposing the names of those
who were to be ordained.) And so, according to Dr. O. they had just cause to
continue their Separation still, although it were condemned by the Council of
Nice.

Audaeus began his Schism out of a mighty zeal for the Discipline of the
Church, Epiph. haer. 70.
and a great freedom which he used in reproving the faults of the Bishops and
Clergy; but meeting with ill usage, he withdrew from the Churches communion,
with his Disciples, although he still retained the same Faith, and agreed in
the Substantials of Religion with the best Christians; Sect. 15.
but forbore all communion with them; which Epiphanius accounts (...), the most
dreadful thing in the World: and yet upon Dr. O's Principles of Separation,
they did a very commendable thing as long as their design was to restore the
Churches Discipline, and to consult their own greater Edification.

The followers of Eustathius Sebastenus are on this account likewise excused,
who withdrew from the public Congregations on a pretense of greater sanctity
and purity in Paphlagonia, and stand condemned in several Canons of the Council
at Gangrae; so are those mentioned and condemned in the Councils of
Constantinople and Carthage; and the Separation of Felicissimus and his
Brethren from St. Cyprian; all which are set down together in my Sermon, but
are gently passed over by Dr. O. and Mr. B. and the rest of their Adversaries.

Only one says, Rector of Sutton, etc. p. 42.
That the Errors of the followers of Eustathius Sebastenus, both in Opinion and
Practice, were very gross, which the Council takes notice of and condemns. Yet,
as gross as they were, there was a pretense of greater Sanctity and Purity in
them. For their abstaining from Marriage, and peculiarity of Habits, and
Separate Meetings, were all carried on with the same Pretense.

To proceed then. On the same accounts the Donatists will be vindicated in the
main grounds of their Schism, although they were mistaken in the matter of fact
concerning Coecilian; for their great pretense was to preserve the purity of
the Churches Discipline, as may at large be seen in Optatus, and St. Augustine;
and yet they frequently, and deliberately call it, a most Damnable and
Sacrilegious Schism.

The Luciferians pretended such a zeal for the true Faith, and the Discipline
of the Church, that the only pretense for their Schism was, that they could not
communicate with those who had subscribed to Arianism, or received Ordination
from Ari^n Bishops; as may be seen at large in the Book of Marcellinus and
Faustinus. And they joined with the party of Vrsinus at Rome against that of
Damasus, and complained, they were deprived of the liberty of choosing their
own Pastors.

So that upon these grounds, there has scarce been any considerable Schism in
the Christian Church, but may be justified upon Dr. Owens Reasons for
Separation from our Church.

Sect. 26. (4.) Another Argument against this course of Separation, is, That
these grounds will make Separation endless. Which is, to suppose all the
Exhortations of Scripture to Peace and Unity among Christians, to signify
nothing. For nothing being more contrary to Unity than Division and Separation;
if there be no bounds set, but what the fancies of Men dictate to them, be
sufficient Grounds to justify Division and Separation; any People may break
Communion with a Church, and set up a new one, when they think fit; which will
leave the Christian Church in a remediless condition against those who break
its Peace and Communion. Cotton 's Answer to R. Williams p. 121.
It being a true saying of Mr. Cottons of New England, That they that separate
from their Brethren farther than they have just Cause, shall at length find
cause (or at lest think they have found cause) just enough to separate one from
another. I never heard, says he, of any instance to the contrary, either in
England, or Holland. The substance of this I had objected before in the Preface
to my Sermon; Mischief of Imposit. in the Preface.
To which Mr. A. Replies after this manner; That though some petty and
inconsiderable inconveniences, some little trouble may arise to a Church from
the levity and volubility of Men's Minds; yet this is no Reason why they should
enslave their Judgments or Consciences to others. And Is this all the Antidote
against the Mischief of Separation? Is it a Sin, to break the Churches
Communion, or, Is it not? If it be a Sin in some cases, but not in others; Why
do you not show us what those cases are; and that it is a sinful Separation in
other cases, but not in them? But to talk of small inconveniences by the
levity of Peoples minds, is Childish trifling, and not Answering. Is Schism
indeed become such an inconsiderable and petty inconvenience? Is this an Answer
becoming a Christian, To swell every small imposition into a huge insupportable
Mountain, and to make themselves lie groaning under the weight of a Ceremony or
two, as though their very heart strings were cracking, and as if Nero had begun
a fresh Persecution; and at the same time to lessen the guilt of Division and
Separation, as though it were nothing but a little wantonness in the Lambs of
their Flocks, frisking up and down from one Pasture to another; some small and
inconsiderable inconveniences may happen by it, but not worth speaking of; and
it is pity they should be deprived of their pleasure for it? What a rare
Advocate had this Man been for the Novatians, Donati^ts, Luciferians, or what
Schismatics soever rent the Church in pieces in former times? And supposing
St. Cyprian, and St. Augustine, and other great opposers of the ancient
Schisms, to be met together, we may gather from these words, and the Principles
of Separation, which he lays down, after what manner he would accost them.

Alas (says he) What do you mean, Cyprian, and Austin, and other Reverend
Fathers, to talk with so much severity and sharpness against separation from
the communion of the Church, as though it were such a damnable sin, such a
sacrilegious impiety, such a horrid wickedness? Will you make no allowance to
the levity and volubility of Men's Minds? What! you would have Men enslave their
Judgments and consciences to others, would you? you would have us be mere
Brutes to be managed by your Bit and Bridle? If the Novatians do think your
Discipline too loose, Why should not they join together for stricter? If
Felicissimus and his Brethren dislike some things in the Church of Carthage,
Why may not they go to the Mountains for separate Meetings? If the good People
were imposed upon against their Wills in the choice of Cornelius, Why may not
they choose Novatian for their Pastor? What a stir do you Cyprian make in your
Epistles about keeping the Peace of the Church, and submitting to your Rules of
Discipline? As though there were not more mischief in your imposing, than in
the Peoples separating. And as for you, Augustine, Who can with patience read
your long and fierce Declamations, against the sober Donatists? For, there were
mad hare-brained Fanatics, called Circumcellians, who were troubled with more
than ordinary levity and volubility, running from place to place, and taking
away other Men's lives, and their own too, out of pure zeal; These I grant have
an extraordinary Worm, which ought to be picked out in time; but for the rest
of the Brethren that only separate on the account of impurity which they
apprehend in your Church, Why should you be so severe against them? Why do you
so often cry out of the sacrilegiousness of this Schism? we know no other
sacrilege, but the sacrilegious desertion of our Ministry, in obedience to
the Laws; this is a Sacrilege we often talk of, and tell the People, it is far
worse than robbing Church-Plate, considering what precious Gifts we have. Aug.
c. Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 7. l. 2. c. 1, 3, 11. l. 3. c. 1.
But for the Sacrilege of Schism, that we can never understand; although I
perceive you have it over and over; besides many other hard words, De bapt. c.
Donat. l. 2. c. Crescon. l. 2. c. 14.
wherein you would seem to make it the greatest of all Wickedness; and you say,
That God punished it more severely than Idolatry; since those who were guilty
of the latter, were to be destroyed by the Sword, but Schismatics were
swallowed up of the Earth; Aug. Ep. 43. and 51.
as Corah, and his Company. Whereas we that have greater light, look upon
Separation but as an effect of the levity and volubility of Men's Minds, and
though some little trouble may come to the Church by it, yet it is far better
than submission to others impositions. And is not this an intolerable
imposition, for you to force these honest Donatists to Communicate in a corrupt
and impure Church, as they do believe yours to be? When the Cause was strictly
examined at Carthage, Col^ at. 3. Carthag. n. 258.
What was it their Party pleaded for, but Purity of Discipline, and that the
Church was defiled for want of it? and therefore they were forced to Separate,
for greater Purity of Ordinances. And, Is this the Damnable, Devilish,
Sacrilegious Schism you talk of? Methinks you should consider better the
Mischief of your Impositions, when you require Communion so strictly with you,
or else they must presently be Separatists and Schismatics. I pray Sirs have a
little patience with me; if I do not fetch off my good friends the Donatists in
this matter, we will all be content to be called Schismatics, Mischief of
Imposi^ions in the Preface.
as well as they. For if our Principles do clear our selves, I am sure they
will do as good a turn for them. Now, the main Principles of our present
Separation are these.

(1*) That every particular Church, upon a due balance of all circumstances,
has an inherent right to choose its own Pastor, and every particular Christian
the same Power to choose his own Church. I say not to mischoose, do you mark
me, but, a power to choose; not to choose any, but one that may best advance
their own Edification; at lest that no Pastor be forced upon a Church, no
Church obtruded on a single Christian without their own consent. Now I pray
consider, Why might not Lucilla, and Donatus, and Botrus, and Celeustus, with
their Party among the People at Carthage, choose Majorinus for their Pastor;
although the rest had chosen Caecilian? For they were not well satisfied with
Mensurius his Predecessor, whom they suspected for a Traditor; but when they
had their liberty to choose, Why should they be debarred of their inherent
right of choosing their own Pastor? Why should Caecilian be obtruded upon them?
Why should not they choose one, who would best advance their Edification? For
Caecilian was at lest under suspicion of compliance in time of Persecution; and
therefore for my part, upon our Principles, I think the Donatists very free
from the charge of Schism.

(2.) That it is the duty of every Christian to Worship God, not only in purity
of heart, but according to the purity of Gospel-Administrations. Now observe,
that there was nothing the Donatists pleaded so much, and so vehemently for, as
the purity of Gospel-Administrations. This was that which Parmenian, Petilian,
and the rest still contended for, as appears by the Plea they put in for
themselves in the last Conference at Carthage. We are they (say they) that have
suffered persecution for maintaining the Purity of the Church, Collat. 3.
Carthag. n. 258.
this hundred years, because we would not comply with their corruptions, we
have been turned out of our Churches, and been sent to Prison, and had our
Goods taken from us, and some of our Brethren have been killed, and others
hardly used for so good a Cause; And, Can such Men as you condemn them for a
horrible Schism? I tell you, they are as Innocent as our selves, for they went
upon the same grounds.

(3.) That every Christian is obliged to live in the use of all God's
Ordinances and Commandments. Now, Is not Discipline one of God's Ordinances?
And, Do we not make want of Discipline, one of the Reasons of our Separation?
And therefore the Donatists were very honest Men, for they were just of our
mind. And these being the chief grounds we go upon, we cannot but in Brotherly
kindness speak this in vindication of them, against your unreasonable severity.
I know you tell them often, There will be no end of Separation upon these
terms; for why might not Maximia^^us do the same by Primianus, that Majorinus
did by Caecilian? and so make frustum de frusto, by which they did minuta^im
concidere, Aug (...) ^6.
cut the Church into so many little pieces, C. Parmen. l. 1. c. 5. l. 2. c. 18.
that could never be joined together again: But, let me tell you, that the
force of your Argument comes to this, That Men may choose one Pastor to day,
and another to morrow, and a third the next; and so turn round till they are
giddy, and run themselves out of breath in a wild Goose chase, till they sit
down and rest in Irreligion and Atheism. And is this all? (these are his own
words.) The Apostle commands us to prove all things (What! By running from one
Communion to another?) M^^t we needs therefore never hold fast that which is
good? unsettled heads, and unsettled hearts will be ^^ndring; let them go, it is a
good riddance of them (...) they be obstinate; but where this humor has
destroyed one Church, this rigorous forcing of Pastors on the People (as
Caecilian on the People of Carthage) has divided and destroyed hundreds.

Thus far the Advocate-General for Schismatics.

Judge now, Reader, whether the Causes of the present Separation, as they are
laid down by my Adversary, do not equally defend the Donatists in their Schism;
and his making so light a matter of Schisms does not give encouragement to Men
to make more.

Sect. 27. But I shall not send him so far back as St. Cyprian, and St.
Augustine, for better instruction in this matter; but I shall refer him to one
whose Writings I perceive he is better acquainted with, even Mr. Baxter. Who
has very well, in several Books, set forth the great Mischief of Divisions,
and Separations. He does not look upon them as petty and inconsiderable
inconveniences, little troubles to the Church, Cure of Divisions, Direct. 7.
Defense of the Cure, p. 3.
the effects of levity, and volubility of Men's Minds; but he quotes above Forty
places of Scripture against them, and says, That the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil are the causes from whence they come; that they are as much the Works of
the Flesh, as Adulteries, Fornications, etc. that contentious dividers are
carnal Men, and have not the Spirit; that Divisions are the Wounding, Christian
Dire^tory, p. 739, etc.
nay the Killing of the Church, as much as lies in the Dividers; and that to
Reform the Church, by dividing it, is no wiser, than to cut out the Liver, or
Spleen, or Gall to cleanse them from the filth that both obstruct them, and
hinder them in their Office: that Divisions are the deformities of the Church,
the lamentation of Friends, and the scorn of Enemies: the dishonor of Christ
and the Gospel: the great hindrance of the Conversion and Salvation of the
World, and of the Edification of the Members of the Church: That they fill the
Church with sins of a most odious nature; they cherish Pride, and Malice, and
Belying others (the three great Sins of the Devil) as naturally as dead flesh
breeds Worms. In a word, the Scripture tells us, that where envying and
strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. (And, is not this a
lamentable way of Reformation of some imaginary, or lesser evils) Yet farther,
he says, They are uneasy to the persons themselves, and rob them of the
sweetest part of Religion; they lead directly to Apostasy from the Faith, and
shake States and Kingdoms, having a lamentable influence on the Civil Peace. Is
all this nothing but the natural effect of the levity or volubility of Peoples
Minds? M^schief of Impos. Sect. 1.
This learned Author begins his Book with a very starched relation of his
admirable Reading, That in his time he has read an Elegant Oration in praise
of a Quartan Ague; another upon the Gout, a third upon Folly; but there wants
one yet in the praise of Schism; and I never met with one that does offer
fairer toward it, than he does. For he not only excuses it, from the natural
cause of it, and the small trouble that attends it; but he implies it to be the
consequence of Men's using their Reason, and not being made Bruits to be managed
with a strong bit and bridle. But Mr. Baxter will teach him another Lesson;
for, he says, that Schism is a sin against so many, Christian Directory, p.
741.
and clear, and vehement words of the Holy Ghost, that it is utterly without
excuse; Whoredoms, and Treason, and Perjury are not oftener forbidden in the
Gospel, than this: that it is contrary to the very design of Christ in our
Redemption, which was, to reconcile us all to God, and to unite and center us
all in him: that, it is contrary to the design of the Spirit of Grace, and to
the very nature of Christianity it self: that it is a sin against the nearest
bonds of our highest Relations to each other; that it is either a dividing
Christ, or robbing him of a great part of his inheritance: and neither of these
is a little sin: that it is accompanied with Self-ignorance, and Pride, and
great unthankfulness to God: that Church-dividers are the most successful
servants of the Devil, being enemies to Christ in his Family and Livery: and
that they serve the Devil more effectually than open enemies: that Schism is a
sin which contradicts all Gods Ordinances and Means of Grace, which are
purposely to procure and maintain the Unity of his Church. That it is a sin
against as great and lamentable experiences, as almost any sin can be: and this
is a heinous aggravation of it, that it is commonly justified, and not repented
of by those that commit it; and it is yet the more heinous, `that it is
commonly fathered upon God: Lastly, that it is most unlike the Heavenly State,
and in some regard worse than the Kingdom of the Devil, for he would not
destroy it by dividing it against it self. Remember now, says he, that Schism,
and making Parties and Divisions in the Church, is not so small a Sin, as many
take it for. I conclude this, with his Admonition to Bag shaw, upon his
lessening the Sin of Separation. Alas, dear Brother, that after so many years
Silencing and Affliction, Defense of his Cure, 2 Except. p, 6.
after Flames and Plagues, and Dreadful Judgments, after Twenty years Practice
of the Sin it self, and when we are buried in the Ruins which it caused, we
should not yet know, that our own Uncharitable Divisions, Alienations, and
Separations are a Crying Sin! Yea, the Crying Sin; as well as the
Incharitableness and Hurtfulness of others. Alas! Will God leave us also, even
us, to the Obdurateness of Pharaoh? Does not Judgment begin with us? Is there
not Crying Sin with us? What have we done to Christ's Kingdom, to this Kingdom,
to our Friends (dead and alive) to our selves, and (alas) to our Enemies, by
our Divisions. And, Do we not feel it? Do we not know it? Is it to us, even to
us, a Crime intolerable to call us to Repentance? Woe to us! Into what
Hard-heartedness have we sinned our selves? Yea, that we should continue, and
Passionately defend it! When will God give us Repentance unto Life?

Let Mr. A. read these Passages over Seriously, and then consider, Whether he
can go on to Excuse, and Palliate the SIN of SCHISM.

But it may be said, That Mr. A. speaks all this Comparatively, with enslaving
our Judgments and Consciences to others, which he calls an Enormous and
Monstrous Principle; and he says, This is a Medicine worse than the Poison,
even as it is much better to have a Rational Soul, though subject to Mistakes,
than the Soul of a Brute, which may be managed as you will, with a strong bit
and bridle. To make it plain, that he makes little, or nothing of the Sin of
Separation, we must attend to the Argument he was to Answer; which was, That if
it be lawful to Separate on a pretense of greater purity, where there is an
Agreement in Doctrine, and the substantial parts of Worship, as is agreed in
our Case, then a bare difference of Opinion, as to some circumstances of
Worship, and the best Constitution of Churches, will be sufficient Ground to
break Communion, and to set up new Churches; which considering the great
variety of Men's fancies about these matters, is to make an infinite
Divisibility in Churches, without any possible stop to farther Separation.
Where we see plainly the inconvenience urged is endless Separation: Does he set
any kind of bounds to it? No; but only talks of inconsiderable and petty
inconveniences, and some little trouble that may arise to a Church from the
levity and volubility of Men's Minds, i. e. let Men Separate as long as they
will* ^his is the worst of it; and he must grant, that though Separation be
endless, there is no harm in it. But he that could find out a medium between
Circumstances of Worship, and Substantials; can find out none between endless
Separation, and the enslaving Men's Judgments and Consciences: for he supposes,
one of the two must of necessity be: Which is plain giving up the Cause to the
Papists. For this is their Argument, Either we must give up our Judgments and
Consciences to the Conduct of our Guides, or there will be endless Separation.
He grants the consequence, and cries, What then? It is nothing but the levity
and volubility of Men's Minds, and this is much rather to be chosen, than the
other. But any sound Protestant that understands the State of the Controversy
between us and them (as this Author apparently does not) will presently deny
the Consequence: because a prudent and due submission in lawful things lies
between Tyranny over Men's Consciences, and endless Separation. But he knows no
Medium between being tied Neck and Heels together, and leaping over Hedge and
Ditch, being kept within no bounds. And what ignorance or malice is it to
suppose, that our Church brings in that enormous and monstrous Principle, of
enslaving Men's Judgments and Consciences, forcing them to surrender their
Reasons to naked Will and Pleasure? and if he does not suppose it, his
Discourse is frivolous and imperti^^^t. For, a due submission to the Rules of
our established Church, without any force on the Consciences of Men, as to the
Infallibility of Guides, or necessity of the things themselves; will put a
sufficient stop to Separation; which must be endless on my Adversaries
suppositions.

Sect. 28. (5.) Lastly, I Argue against this Separation, from the Obligation
which lies upon all Christians, to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church.
And now I have brought the matter home to the Consciences of Men, who it may be
will little regard other inconveniences, if the practice of Separation do not
appear to be unlawful from the Word of God. Which I now undertake to prove,
upon these Suppositions.

(1.) That all Christians are under the strictest obligations to preserve the
Peace and Unity of the Church. For it is not possible to suppose, that any Duty
should be bound upon the Consciences of Men, with plainer Precepts, and
stronger Arguments than this is. The places are so many, that it were endless
to repeat them; and therefore needless, because this is agreed on all hands. So
that violation of the Unity of the Church, where there is no sufficient reason
to justify it, is a Sin, as much as Murder is, and as plainly forbidden. But
it happens here, as it does in the other case, that as Murder is always a sin;
but there may be some circumstances, which may make the taking away a Man's
life, not to be Murder; so it may happen, that though Schism be always a sin,
yet there may be such circumstances which may make a Separation not to be a
Schism; but then they must be such Reasons, as are not fetched from our
Fancies, no more than in the case of Murder; but such as are allowed by God
himself in his Law. For, he only that made the Law can except from it.

(2.) The Unity of the Church does not lie in a bare communion of Faith and
Love, but in a Ioynt-participation of the Ordinances appointed by Christ to be
observed in his Church. For although the former be a duty, yet it does not take
in the whole Duty of a Christian, which is to join together, as Members of the
same Body. And therefore they are commanded to Assemble together; and upon the
first Institution of a Christian Church, it is said, The Disciples continued in
the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, Heb. 10. 25.
and in breaking of Bread, Act. 2. 42.
and in Prayers. And the Apostle sets forth Christians as making one Body, by
Communion in the Ordinances of Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We being many are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that
one Bread. 1 Cor, 12. 13.
And by one Spirit, we are all Baptized into one Body; whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. The
Unity of the Christian Church, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5.
St. Paul says, is to be preserved by the bond of Peace; and that Unity
supposes One Body and One Spirit; and the Members of that Body as they are
united to one Head, whom he calls One Lord, so they are joined together by One
Faith, and One Baptism. Therefore as the Unity of the Church is founded upon
some External Bonds, as well as Internal, that is, One Faith, and One Baptism,
as well as One Lord, and One Spirit; so the manifestation of this Unity ought
to be by External Acts; for, How can this Unity be discovered by Acts merely
Internal and Spiritual; as inward love to the Members of the Body, being
present in Spirit, etc? Therefore, the Obligation to preserve the Unity of the
Church, does imply a joining together with the other Members of the Church, in
the Common and Public Acts of Religion.

(3.) Nothing can discharge a Christian from this obligation to Communion with
his Fellow Members, but what is allowed by Christ or his Apostles, as a
sufficient Reason for it. Because this being a new Society of Christ's own
Institution; and the obligation to Communion being so strictly enjoined, we are
to suppose it still to hold, where some plain declaration of his Will to the
contrary does not appear. Although God has, with great severity, forbidden
Killing: yet when himself appointed particularly cases, wherein Men's Lives were
to be taken away; we are thereby assured, that in these cases it is not that
killing which is forbidden; so in the present case, if it appear that although
Separation from the C^mmunion of Christians be a thing condemned; yet if the
same Authority do allow particular exemptions, we are certain in those cases
such Separation is no sin. But then, as in the former case, no Man is exempted
from the guilt of shedding blood, who upon his own fancy takes upon him to
execute Justice; so here, no Man's imagination that he does separate for a good
end, will justify his Separation; for the guilt of the sin remains as great in
it self. And there is scarce any other sin more aggravated in the New Testament
than this; it being so directly contrary to that Unity of his Church, which our
Savior prayed for, Joh^ 17. 21.
and his Apostles with so much earnestness recommend to all Christians; and use
so many Arguments to persuade Men to persevere. From hence Irenaeus says, That
Christ will come to Judge those who make Schisms in the Church, Iren. l. 4. c.
62.
and rather regard their own advantage, than the Churches Unity; who, for
slight causes, or for any, make nothing of cutting asunder the great and
glorious Body of Christ, and do what in them lies to destroy it. They speak for
Peace, says he, but they mean War: they strain at a Gnat, and swallow Camels.
The benefit they hope to bring to the Church, cannot make amends for the
Mischief of their Schism. Chrysostom in. Ephesians. 4. p. ^22,
Nothing provokes God more, says St. Chrysostom, than to divide his Church:
Nay, says he, the Blood of Mortyrdom will not wash off the guilt of it. The
Mischief the Church receives by it, is greater than it receives from open
Enemies: for the one makes it more glorious, the other exposes it to shame
among its Enemies, when it is set upon by its own Children. This, says he, I
speak to those who make no great matter of Schism; and indifferently go to the
Meetings of those who divide the Church. If their doctrine be contrary to ours,
for that reason they ought to abstain; if not, (...), they ought to do it so
much the rather. Do no you know, what Corah, Dathan, and Abiram suffered? and
not they only, but those that were with them. But you say, they have the same
Faith, and they are very Orthodox; Why then, says he, do they Separate? One
Lo^d, one Faith, one Baptism. If they do well, we do ill; if we do well, they
do ill. If they have the same Doctrines, the same Sacraments, For what cause do
they set up another Church in opposition to ours? It is nothing but vain glory,
ambition and deceit. Take away the People from them, and you cut off the
disease. And after much more to that purpose; I speak these things, says he,
that no Man might say, he did not know it to be such a sin: I tell you, and
testify this to you, that Separation from the Church, or dividing of it, is no
less a sin, than falling into Heresy. If the sin then be so great and
dangerous, Men ought to examine with great care, what cases those are wherein
Separation may be made without Sin.

And I do earnestly desire our Brethren, as they love their own Souls, and
would Avoid the Guilt of so Great a Sin, Impartially and without Prejudice to
consider this passage of Irenaeus, and how Parallel it is with their own Case
who Separate from us, and set up other Churches in opposition to ours, which
yet they acknowledge to be very Orthodox, and to agree with them in the same
Doctrine, and the same Sacraments.

4. There are Three Cases wherein the Scripture allows of Separation.

First, In the case of Idolatrous Worship. For the Precepts are as plain that
Christians should abstain from Idolatry, as that they should preserve the Unity
of the Church. Neither be ye Idolaters. Flee from Idolatry. 1 Cor. 10. 6. 14.
Keep your selves from Idols. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. 1 St. John 5.
And to the case of Idolaters, St. Paul applies the words spoken of old to the
Babylonians, Matt. 4. 19.
Come out from among them, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
and be separate; and touch not the unclean thing. Now in this case, where
there is so plain a Command, there is no doubt of the lawfulness of Separation;
if Men cannot join with a Church in their Religious Worship, without doing that
which God has so strictly forbidden.

Secondly, In case of false Doctrine being imposed in stead of true. Heb. 13.
7. 17.
For although in other things great submission is required to the Guides and
Governors of the Church; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13.
yet if any Teachers offer to bring another Gospel, or to corrupt the true one;
St. Paul denounces an Anathema against them: Gal. 1. 6. 7. 8.
and that implies, that they should have no Communion with them, but look upon
them as Persons cut off from the Body (like putrid Members) lest they should
corrupt the rest. St. Paul commands Titus, Tit. 3. 10.
when there is no hopes of reclaiming such, to exclude them from the Society of
Christians. St. John forbids all familiar conversation with such. The Church of
Ephesus is commended for hating the Nicolaitans; 2 John 10.
and the Church of Pergamus reproved for tolerating their Doctrine. Revel. 2.
6. 15.


Thirdly. In case Men make things indifferent necessary to Salvation, and
divide the Church upon that account. And this was the case of the false
Apostles, A^t. 15. 2.
who urged the Ceremonies of the Law, as necessary to Salvation; and to
propagate this Opinion of theirs, they went up and down, and endeavored to draw
away the Apostles Disciples, and to set up Separate Churches among the
Christians; and to allow none to partake with them, that did not own the
Necessity of the Jewish Ceremomonies to Salvation. Now although St. Paul
himself complied sometimes with the practice of them; and the Jewish Christians
especially in Iudaea, generally observed them; yet when these false Apostles
came to enforce the observation of them, as necessary to Salvation, then he bid
the Christians at Philippi to beware of them, Phil. 3. 3.
i. e. to fly their Communion, and have nothing to do with them. These are all
the Cases I can find in the New Testament, wherein Separation from Public
Communion is allowed; but there are two others, wherein S. Paul gives
particular directions, but such as do not amount to Separation.

1. The different opinions they had about Meats and Drinks; Romans 14. 2*
some were for a Pythagorean Abstinence, from all Flesh; some for a Jewish
Abstinence, from some certain sorts; others for a full Christian Liberty. Now
this being a matter of Diet, and relating to their own Families, the Apostle
advises them not to censure or judge one another; but notwithstanding this
difference, to join together as Christians in the Duties common to them all.
For the Kingdom of God does not lie in Meats and Drinks; (...)
i. e. Let every one order his Family as he thinks fit; but that requires
innocence, and a care not to give disturbance to the Peace of the Church for
these matters; which he calls Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; which is
provoked and grieved by the dissentions of Christians. And he, says he, that
in these things serves Christ, 18,
is acceptable to God, and approved of Men. Let us therefore follow after the
things that make for Peace, 19.
and things wherewith we may edify one another. In such Cases then, the
Apostle allows no Separation from the public Communion of Christians. It was
the same case as to the observation of Days then; for some Christians went then
on Jewish Holidays to the Synagogues; others did not; but for such things they
ought not to divide from each others Communion in the common Acts of Christian
Worship. And the design of the Apostle is not to lay down a standing Rule of
Mutual forbearance as to different Communions; but to show, that such
differences ought not to be an occasion of breaking Communion among Christians,
and so the Apostles discourse, Romans 14. holds strongly against Separation, on
these and the like Accounts.

2. The corrupt lives of many who were not under Churches Censure. When St.
Paul taxes so many Corruptions in the Church of Corinth, no wonder if some of
them, put the case to them, what they should do, in case they knew some Members
of the Church to be Men of bad lives; although the offenses were not
scandalous, by being publicly known; Must they abstain from the Communion of
the Church for these? 1 Cor. 5. 11.
To this St. Paul Answers, That every private Christian ought to forbear all
familiar Conversation with such; If any one that is a Brother, be a fornicator,
etc. with such a one, no not to eat. Which is all the Apostle requires of
private Christians; but if the Scandal be public, as that of the Incestuous
persou, the Church had power to vindicate its own honor, by casting such out:
not as though the Church Communion were defiled, Verse. 12. 13,
if they continued in; but the reputation and honor of the Church suffered by
it; the preservation whereof, is the true cause of the Churches Discipline. But
the Apostle gives not the lest countenance to private Men's withdrawing from the
Churches Communion, though such persons still continued in it. For there may be
many reasons to break off private familiarity, which will not hold as to
public Communion. For our Communion in public, is a thing which chiefly
respects God, and a necessary duty of his own appointing, the benefit whereof
depends upon his Promises, and all the communion they have with other Men, is
only joining together for the performance of a common Religious Duty: but
private familiarity is a thing which wholly respects the Persons converse with,
and a thing of mere choice, and hardly to be imagined without approbation at
lest, if not imitation of their wickedness. And therefore to argue from one to
the other is very unreasonable.

The matter of Separation being th^s stated according to the Scripture, there
can be no way le^t to justify the Separation from our Church, but to prove,
either that our Worship is Idolatrous, or that our Doctrine is false, or that
our Ceremonies are made necessary to Salvation; which are all so remote from
any color of Truth, that none of my Adversaries have yet had the hardiness to
undertake it. But however, what Pleas they do bring to justify this Separation
must in the next place be examined.

PART III.
The Pleas for Separation examined.
Sect. 1. ALL the considerable Pleas at this time made use of for Separation
may be reduced to these Heads. 1. Such as relate to the Constitution of our
Church. 2. To the terms of Communion with it. 3. To the Consciences of
Dissenters. 4. To the Parity of Reason as to our Separation from Rome.

1. Such as relate to the Constitution of our Church: which are these, 1. That
our Parochial Churches are not of Christ's Institution. 2. That our Diocesan
Churches are unlawful. 3. That our National Church has no foundation. 4. That
the People are deprived of their Right in the choice of their Pastors.


1. I begin with our Parochial Churches; because it is Separation from these,
with which we principally charge our Adversaries; for herein they most discover
their principles of Separation, since in former times, the Non-conformists
thought it their duty to keep up Communion with them. But since the
Congregational way has prevailed in England, the present Dissenters are
generally fallen into the practice of it, whatever their principles are, at
least so far as concerns forsaking Communion with our Parochial Churches, and
joining together in separate Congregations for Divine Worship. This principle
is therefore the first thing to be examined. And the main foundation of that
way, I said, was, that Communion in Ordinances must be only in such Churches
as Christ himself instituted by unalterable Rules, which were only particular
and Congregational Churches. Concerning which I laid down two things. (1.) That
supposing Congregational Churches to be of Christ's Institution, this was no
reason for separation from our Parochial Churches, which have all the
essentials of such true Churches in them. (2.) That there is no reason to
believe that the Institution of Churches was limited to particular
Congregations.

In answer to this Dr. O. says these things, (1.) That they do not deny, at
least some of our Parochial Churches to be true Churches: but why then do they
deny Communion with them? But, he says, he hopes it will not be made a Rule,
that Communion may not be withheld (so the sense must be although not be left
out) or withdrawn from any Church in any thing, so long as it continues as unto
the essence of it to be so. This is somewhat odly and faintly expressed. (...).
But as long as he grants, that our Parochial Churches are not guilty of such
heinous Errors in Doctrine, or idolatrous Practice in Worship as to deprive
them of the Being and Nature of Churches, I do assert it to be a Sin to
separate from them. Not but that I think, there may be a separation without
sin, from a Society retaining the essentials of a Church; but then I say, the
reason of such separation is, some heinous Error in Doctrine, or some
idolatrous Practice in Worship, or some tyranny over the Consciences of men;
which may not be such, as to destroy true Baptism; and therefore consistent
with the essentials of a Church. And this is all that I know the Protestant
Writers do assert in this matter.

(2.) He answers, That they do not say, that because Communion in Ordinances
must be only in such Churches as Christ has instituted, that therefore it is
lawful and necessary to separate from Parochial Churches, but if it be on
other grounds necessary so to separate or withhold Communion from them, it is
the duty of them who do so, to join themselves in or unto some other
particular Congregation.

To which I reply, that This is either not to the business, or it is a plain
giving up the Cause of Independency. For, wherefore did the dissenting Brethren
so much insist upon their separate Congregations, when not one of the things,
now particularly alleged against our Church, was required of them? But if he
insists on those things common to our Church with other reformed Churches, then
they are such things, as he supposes contrary to the first Institution of
Churches; And then I entreat him to tell me, what difference there is, between
separating from our Churches because Communion in Ordinances is only to be
enjoyed in such Churches as Christ has instituted; and separating from them
because they have things repugnant to the first Institution of Churches? Is not
this the primary reason of Separation, because Christ has appointed
unalterable. Rules for the Government of his Church; which we are bound to
observe, and which are not observed in Parochial Churches? Indeed, the most
immediate reason of separation from such a Church is not observing Christ's
Institution; but the primary ground is, that Christ has settled such Rules for
Churches which must be unalterably observed. Let us then (1.) suppose, that
Christ has by unalterable Rules appointed that a Church shall consist only of
such a number of men as may meet in one Congregation, so qualified; and that
these by entering into Covenant with each other become a Church, and choose
their Officers, who are to Teach, and Admonish and Administer Sacraments, and
to exercise Discipline by the consent of the Congregation; And let us (2.)
suppose such a Church not yet gathered, but there lies fit matter for it
dispersed up and down in several Parishes. (3.) Let us suppose Dr. O. about to
gather such a Church. (4.) Let us suppose not one thing peculiar to our Church
required of these members; neither the aereal sign of the Cross, nor kneeling
at the Communion, etc. I desire then to know, whether Dr. O. be not bound by
these unalterable Rules to draw these members from Communion with their
Parochial Churches, on purpose that they might form a Congregational Church,
according to Christ's Institution? Either then he must quit these unalterable
Rules, and the Institution of Christ; or he must acknowledge that setting up a
Congregational Church is the primary ground of their Separation from our
Parochial Churches. If they do suppose but one of those Ordinances wanting
which they believe Christ has instituted in particular Churches, do they not
believe this a sufficient ground for separation? It is not therefore any Reason
peculiar to our Church, which is the true Cause of their separation; but such
Reasons as are common to all Churches, that are not formed just after their own
model. If there be then unalterable Rules for Congregational Churches, those
must be observed, and separation made in order to it; and therefore separation
is necessary upon Dr. O.'s grounds, not from the particular Conditions of
Communion with us, but because our Parochial Churches are not formed after the
Congregational way. But this was a necessary piece of art at this time, to keep
fair with the Presbyterian Party, and to make them believe (if they can be so
forgetful) that they do not own separation from their Churches, but only from
ours, the contrary whereof is so apparent from the debates with the dissenting
Brethren, and the setting up Congregational Churches in those days, that they
must be forgetful indeed, who do not remember it. Have those of the
Congregational way since altered their judgments? Has Dr. O. yielded, that in
case some terms of Communion in our Church were not insisted upon, they would
give over separation? Were not their Churches first gathered out of
Presbyterian Congregations? And if Presbytery had been settled upon the Kings
Restoration, would they not have continued their Separation? Why then must our
Church now be accused for giving the Occasion to the Independent separation,
when it is notoriously otherwise; and they did separate and form their
Churches, upon reasons common to our Church with all other Reformed Churches?
This is more artificial than ingenuous.

Sect. 2. As to the Second, Dr. O. answers, that it is so clear and evident in
matter of fact, (...). p. 37.
and so necessary from the nature of the thing, that the Churches planted by
the Apostles were limited to Congregations, that many wise men, wholly
unconcerned in our Controversies, do take it for a thing to be granted by all
without dispute. And for this two Testimonies are alleged, of Justice Hobart,
and Father Paul; but neither of them speaks to the point. All that Chief
Justice Hobart says is, That the Primitive Church in its greatest Purity, was
but voluntary Congregations of Believers submitting themselves to the Apostles,
and after to other Pastors. Methinks Dr. O. should have left this Testimony to
his Friend L. du Moulin, it signifies so very little to the purpose; or rather,
quite overthrows his Hypothesis; as appears by these two Arguments. (1.) Those
voluntary Congregations over which the Apostles were set, were no limited
Congregations of any one particular Church; but those Congregations over whom
the Apostles were set, are those of which Justice Hobart speaks. And therefore
it is plain he spoke of all the Churches which were under the care of the
Apostles, which he calls voluntary Congregations. (2.) Those voluntary
Congregations over whom the Apostles appointed Pastors after their decease,
were no particular Congregations in one City; but those of whom Justice Hobart
speaks, were such; for he says, they first submitted to the Apostles, and
after to other Pastors. But Justice Hobart could not be such a stranger to
Antiquity to believe that the Christians in the Age after the Apostles amounted
but to one Congregation in a City. And therefore, if he consults Justice Hobart
's honor or his own, I advise him to let it alone for the future. As to the
Testimony of Father Paul, it only concerns the Democratical Government of the
Church, and I wonder how it came into this place; I shall therefore consider it
in its due season.

Sect. 3. I come therefore to consider now, the evidence for the Institution of
Congregational Churches; concerning which, Sermon. p. 26.
these are my words. It is possible at first, there might be no more Christians
in one City than could meet in one Assembly for Worship; but where does it
appear, that when they multiplied into more Congregations, they did make new
and distinct Churches under new Officers with a separate Power of Government?
Of this I am well assured, there is no mark or footstep in the New Testament,
or the whole History of the Primitive Church. I do not think it will appear
credible to any considerate man, that the 5000 Christians in the Church of
Jerusalem made one stated and fixed Congregation for Divine Worship; not, if we
make all the allowances for strangers which can be desired: but if this were
granted, where are the unalterable Rules, that as soon as the company became
too great for one particular Assembly, they must become a new Church under
peculiar Officers and an Independent Authority? To this Dr. O. answers in four
particulars.

1. That an account may e're long be given of the insensible deviation of the
First Churches after the decease of the Apostles from the Rule of the first
Institution: which although at first it began in matters of small moment; yet
still they increased until they issued in a fatal Apostasy; Or as he after
expresses it, leaving their Infant state, by degrees, they at last brought
forth the Man of Sin. But I do not understand how this at all answers the
former Paragraph of my Sermon concerning the first Institution of Churches; but
being I suppose intended for a Reason why he does not afterward answer to the
evidence out of Antiquity, I shall not only so far take notice of it, as to
let him know, that when that is done, I do not question, but the Primitive
Church will find sufficient Advocates in the Church of England: but I desire
that undertaker to consider, what a blot and dishonor it will be to Christian
Religion, if the Primitive Churches could not hold to their first Institution,
not for one Age after the Apostles. I know what abominable Heresies there were
soon after, if not in the Apostles days; but the question is not concerning
these, but the purest and best Churches; and about them, not whether some
trifling Controversies might not arise, and humane infirmities be discovered;
but whether they did deviate from the plain Institutions of Christ, and the
unalterable Rules of Government which he had fixed in his Church? This seems
utterly incredible to me upon this consideration among many others: That
Government is so nice and tender a thing, that every one is so much concerned
for his share in it, that men are not easily induced to part with it. Let us
suppose the Government of the Church to have been Democratical at first, as Dr.
O. seems to do; is it probable, that the People would have been wheadled out
of the sweetness of Government so soon and made no noise about it? Yea Dr. O.
tells us that in Cyprian's time it continued at Carthage; Vindic p. 41.
and others say, a great deal longer: there was then no such change as to this
part of the Government so soon after. And why should we imagine it otherwise, as
to extent of Power and Jurisdiction? Suppose Christ had limited the Power of a
Church to one Congregation; the Pastor of that Church could have no more
pretense over any other Congregation, than Dr. O. by being Pastor over one
Congregation in London, could challenge a right to Govern all the Independent
Congregations in London or about it; and appoint their several Teachers, and
call them to an account for their proceedings. I appeal now to any man of
consideration, whether there be the least probability that such an alteration
could be made without great noise and disturbance? Would not Mr. G. Mr. B. Mr.
C. and many more, think themselves concerned to stand up for their own Rights?
And if they could be drawn into the design, would the People submit? Let us put
the case, as to New England. Suppose the Apostles an Age or two since, had
planted such Congregational Churches there, as have been formed within these
last 50 years at Plymouth, Boston, Hereford, Newhaven, etc. and had invested
every Congregation with the full Power of the Keys, the execution whereof they
had entrusted with the several Elderships, within their own Congregation; but
so, as not to have any Power or Authority, over the Elders or Members of any
other Congregation: let us then suppose, that after the decease of the
Apostles, these Churches gradually declined so far, that in this Age Mr. Cotton
at Boston should take upon him the whole Power of the Keys, and not only so,
but appoint Pastors over other Congregations, and keep a great number of
Elders under him, and challenge the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the whole
Colony of Massachusetts, of which Boston is the chief Town, and so three others
do the same at the chief Places of the other Colonies; would not this be a
wonderful alteration of the Church Government? And is it possible to conceive,
such a change should be brought about insensibly, without any complaint of the
subordinate Elders, or the members of the Congregations, who were robbed of
their inherent Right by an Institution of Christ, and so late an establishment
by the Apostles? Doctrines may be insensibly changed by continuing the names
and altering opinions, through the carelessness and unskilfulness of People: but
in matters of Government, the meanest People are sensible, and look big with an
opinion of it. If therefore it be not conceivable in this case, the Government
should be thus changed from the Institution of Christ in so short a time; let
the same consideration be applied to the Ages which really succeeded the
Apostles.

Sect. 4. I shall, to prevent all cavils, choose that very Church which Dr. O.
mentions, and I find Mr. Cotton and others make their Appeals to, and that is
the Church of Carthage in Saint Cyprian's time. Here Dr. O. finds the Community
of members determining Church affairs; Cotton's way of Congregati^nal Churches
cleared, p. 98, 99.
but Mr. Cotton has further discovered the judgment of the Elders, the Votes
of the Congregation, and the Consent of neighbor Ministers; in short, he has
found there, the express and lively lineaments of the very Body of
Congregational Discipline; and the same for substance wherein they walk (as he
calls it) at this day. Hitherto then, there was no deviation from the
unalterable Rules of Christ. Let us therefore impartially consider, what the
Government of the Church of Carthage then was: concerning which these things
may be observed.

1. That there was a great number of Presbyters belonging to the Church of
Carthage, and therefore not probable to be one single Congregation. This
appears from Saint Cyprian's Epistles to them in his retirement. Cyprian l. 5.
Ep. 2. in the late Edit. Ep. 5.
In one he gives them advice how to visit the Confessors in Prison, which he
would have them to do by turns, every one taking a Deacon with him because the
change of Persons would be less invidious: and considering the number of
Confessors and the frequent attendance upon them, the number of Presbyters and
Deacons must be considerable. When he sent Numidicus to be placed among the
Presbyters at Carthage, L. 4. 10. Ep. 35.
he gives this reason of it, that he might adorn the plenty of his Presbyters
with such worthy men, it being now impaired by the fall of some, during the
persecution. L. 5. Ep. 3.
In the case of Philumanus, Fortunatus and Favorinus, he declares he would give
no judgment, cum multi adhuc de Clero absentes sint, when many of his Clergy
were absent. And in another Epistle he complains, Ep. 28.
that a great number of his Clergy were absent, and the few that were remaining
were hardly sufficient for their work. L. 3. Ep. 22. Ep. 24.
At one time Felicissimus and five Presbyters more did break Communion with the
Church at Carthage; and then he mentions Britius, Rogatianus and Numidicus, as
the chief Presbyters remaining with them; Ep. 40.
besides Deacons and inferior Ministers. About the same time Cornelius Bishop
of Rome mentions 46 Presbyters he had with him in that City. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 35.
And in Constantinople of old, says Justinian in his Novels, Phot. Nomo-Can.
tit. 1. c. 30.
were 60 Presbyters (for in one he says, The custom was to determine the
number, and in another, that 60 was to be the number at Constantinople.) Let
any one now consider, whether these Churches that had so many Presbyters were
single Congregations; and at Carthage, we have this evidence of the great
numbers of Christians; that in the time of Persecution, although very many
stood firm, yet the number of the lapsed was so great, L. 3. Ep. 5. Ep. 15.
that Saint Cyprian says, Every day thousands of Tickets were granted by the
Martyrs and Confessors in their behalf for reconciliation to the Church: and
in one of those Tickets sometimes might be comprehended twenty or thirty
persons, L. 3. 15. Ep. 11.
the form being Communicet ille cum suis. Is it then probable this Church at
Carthage should consist of one single Congregation?

2. These Presbyters and the whole Church were under the particular care and
Government of Saint Cyprian as their Bishop. Some of the Presbyters at Carthage
took upon them to meddle in the affairs of Discipline, L. 3. Ep. 14. Ep. 10.
without consulting their Bishop then in his retirement. Saint Cyprian tells
them they neither considered Christ's Command, nor their own Place, nor the
future Judgment of God, nor the Bishop who was set over them, and had done that
which was never done in foregoing times, to challenge those things to
themselves, with the contempt and reproach of their Bishop, which was to
receive Penitents to Communion without imposition of hands by the Bishop and
his Clergy. Wherein, L. 3. Ep. 15. Ep. 11.
he vindicates the Martyrs and Confessors in his following Epistle, saying,
that such an affront to their Bishop was against their will: for they sent
their Petitions to the Bishop, that their Causes might be heard when the
Persecution was over. In another Epistle to the People of Carthage on the same
occasion, L. 3. Ep. 10. Ep. 12.
he complains of these Presbyters, that they did not Episcopo honorem
Sacerdotii sui and Cathedrae reservare, reserve to the Bishop the honor which
belonged to his Place: and therefore charges, that nothing further be done in
this matter till his return, Ep. 21.
when he might consult with his fellow-Bishops. Celerinus sends to Lucian a
Confessor, to beg him for a Letter of Grace for their Sisters Numeria and
Candida who had fallen. Lucian returns him answer, Ep. 22.
that Paulus before his Martyrdom had given him Authority to grant such in his
Name, and that all the Martyrs had agreed to such kindness to be showed to the
lapsed; but with this condition that the Cause was to be heard before the
Bishop, and upon such Discipline as he should impose, they were to be received
to Communion. Ep. 25.
So that though Lucian was extremely blamed for relaxing the Discipline of the
Church; yet neither he nor the other Martyrs would pretend to do any thing
without the Bishop. Cyprian gives an account of all that had passed in this
matter to Moses and Maximus two Roman Presbyters and Confessors; Ep. 26.
they return him answer, that they were very glad he had not been wanting to
his Office, especially in his severe reproving those who had obtained from
Presbyters the Communion of the Church in his absence. In his Epistle to the
Clergy of Carthage he mightily blames those who communicated with those persons
who were reconciled to the Church merely by Presbyters without him; Ep. 28.
and threatens excommunication to any Presbyters or Deacons who should presume
to do it. The Roman Clergy in the vacancy of the Sea, take notice of the
discretion of the Martyrs in remitting the lapsed to the Bishop, Ep. 30.
as an argument of their great modesty, and that they did not think the
Discipline of the Church belonged to them: and they declare their resolution,
Ep. 31.
to do nothing in this matter, till they had a new Bishop. By which we see the
Power of Discipline was not then supposed to be in the Congregation, or that
they were the first subject of the Power of the Keys; but that it was in the
Bishop as superior to the Presbyters. And that they were then far from
thinking it in the Power of the People, to appoint and ordain their own
Officers, Ep. 33.
Saint Cyprian sends word to the Church of Carthage, that he had taken one
Aurelius into the Clergy; although his general custom was in Ordinations to
consult them before, and to weigh together the manners and deserts of every
one: Ep. 34.
which is quite another thing from an inherent Right to appoint and constitute
their own Church Officers: the same he does soon after, concerning Celerinus
and Numidicus. Ep. 35.
When he could not go among them himself, by reason of the persecution, he
appoints Caldonius and Fortunatus two Bishops, Ep. 38.
and Rogatianus and Numidicus two Presbyters, to visit in his name; and to take
care of the poor, and of the persons fit to be promoted to the Clergy. Who give
an account in the next Epistle, Ep. 39.
that they had excommunicated Felicissimus and his Brethren for their
separation.

3. That Saint Cyprian did believe that this Authority which he had for
governing the Church was not from the Power of the People, but from the
Institution of Christ. Ep. 27.
So upon the occasion of the Martyrs invading the Discipline of the Church, he
produces that saying of Christ to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter, etc. And
whatsoever you shall bind, etc. From whence, says he, by a constant succession
of times, such a course has been always observed in the Church, that the
Church has been still governed by Bishops, and every Act of the Church has
been under their care and conduct. Since this, says he, is a Divine
Institution, I wonder at the boldness of those who have written at that rate to
me (concerning the lapsed) since the Church consists in the Bishop, the Clergy
and the standing People. In his Epistle to Antonianus, Ep. 52.
he speaks of the Agreement of the Bishops throughout the whole world: Ep. 55.
and in that to Cornelius, that every Bishop has a part of the flock committed
to him, which he is to govern and to give an account thereof to God: Ep. 65.
and that a Bishop in the Church is in the place of Christ; and that
disobedience to him is the cause of schisms and disorders. To the same purpose
he speaks in his Epistle to Rogatianus, Ep. 69.
and to Pupianus; where he declares a Church to be a People united to a Bishop;
Ep. 75.
and to Stephanus, that they have succeeded the Apostles in a constant course.

Let the Reader now judge, whether these be the strokes and lineaments of the
Congregational way; and whether Dr. O. had any reason to appeal to Saint
Cyprian for the Democratical Government of the Church. But we have this
advantage from this appeal, that they do not suppose any deviation then from
the Primitive Institution, and what that was in Saint Cyprian's judgment any
one may see; when he speaks of nothing peculiar to his own Church, but what was
generally observed over the Christian world. And now let Dr. O. give an
account, how a change so great, so sudden, so universal, should happen in the
Christian world, in the Government of the Church; that when Christ had placed
the Power in the People, the Bishops in so short a time should be every where
settled, and allowed to have the chief management in Church Affairs, without
any control from the People: which to me is as strong an argument as a matter
of this nature will bear, that the Power was at first lodged in them, and not
in the People. For, as Mr. Noys of New England well argues, It is not
imaginable that Bishops should come by such Power, as is recorded in
Ecclesiastical History, Moses and Aaron, p. 62.
and that over all the world; and in a way of ambition, in such humbling times,
without all manner of opposition for 300 years together, and immediately after
the Apostles; had it been usurpation or innovation. When and where is
innovation without opposition? Would not Elders, so many seeing and knowing
men, at least some of them, have contended for Truth, wherein their own
Liberties and Rights were so much interessed? Aerius his opposing of Bishops,
so long after their rise and standing, is inconsiderable. The force of which
reasoning, will sway more with an impartial and ingenuous mind, than all the
difficulties I ever yet saw on the other side. So much for the account Dr. O.
promises of the deviations of the Churches after the Apostles decease.

Sect. 5. (2.) Dr. O. answers as to the matter of fact concerning the
Institution of Congregational Churches, that it seems to him evidently
exemplified in the Scripture. Vindic. p. 39.
The matter of fact is, that when Churches grew too big for one single
Congregation in a City, then a new Congregational Church was set up under new
Officers, with a separate Power of Government. Let us now see Dr. O.'s proof of
it. For although it may be there is not express mention made that these or
those particular Churches did divide themselves into more Congregations with
new Officers: i. e. Although the matter of fact be not evident in Scripture:
yet, says he, there are Instances of the erection of new particular
Congregations in the same Province. But what is this to the proof of the
Congregational way? The thing I desired was, that when the Christians in one
City multiplied into more Congregations, they would prove, that they did make
new and distinct Churches; and to exemplify this he mentions new Congregations
in the same Province. Who ever denied or disputed that? On the contrary, the
proof of this, is a great advantage to our Cause; for since, where the
Scripture speaks of the Churches of a Province, it speaks of them as of
different Churches; but when it mentions the Christians of one City, it calls
them the Church of that City (as the Church of Jerusalem, the Church of
Ephesus; Act. 9. 31.
but the Churches of Judea, Galilee and Samaria) what can be more evident, than
that the Christians of one City, though never so numerous, made but one Church?
If one observe the language of the New Testament, one may find this observation
not once to fail: that where Churches are spoken of in the plural number, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
they are the Churches of a Province, as the Churches of Judea, 1 Cor. 16. 19.
the Churches of Asia; the Churches of Syria and Cilicia; Act. 15. 41.
the Churches of Galatia; the Churches of Macedonia; 1 Cor. 16. 1.
but where all the Christians of one City are spoken of, Gal. 1. 2.
it is still c^lled the Church of that City; 2 Cor. 8. 1.
as the Church at Antioch; the Church at Corinth; and when the 7 Churches are
spoken of together, they are the 7 Churches; but when spoken to single, it is
the Church of Ephesus, the Church of Smyrna, etc. Which being spoken, without
any discrimination, as to the difference of these places, in greatness and
capacity, or the number of Believers in them, does evidently discover that what
number soever they were, they were all but the Church of that City. For it is
not to be supposed that the number of Christians was no greater in Ephesus,
Sardis, Pergamus and Laodicea, which were great and populous Cities, than in
Thyatira and Philadelphia, which were much less; especially, considering the
time Saint Paul staid at Ephes^s; Act. 20. 19. 31.
and the mighty success which he had in preaching there; which will amount to
no great matter, 1 Cor. 16. 9.
if in three years time, he converted no more, than made up one single
Congregation. And thus men to serve an Hypothesis take off from the mighty
Power, and prevalency of the Gospel. I cannot but wonder, what Dr. O. means
when after he has produced the evidence of distinct Churches in the same
Province, Vindic. p. 40.
as Galatia and Macedonia, he calls this plain Scripture evidence and practice
for the erecting particular distinct Congregations: who denies that? but I see
nothing like a proof of distinct Churches in the same City which was the thing
to be proved, but because it could not be proved was prudently let alone:
whereas we have plain Scripture evidence that all the Christians of a City,
though never so great, made but one Church; and uncontrollable evidence from
Antiquity, that the neighboring Christians were laid to the Church of the
City. All that he says further to this matter, p. 4^.
is, that such Churches had power to rule and govern themselves, because in
every one of them Elders were ordained, Act. 14. 22. which is again an argument
on our side: for if we compare Act. 14. 22. with Titus 1. 5. we shall find that
ordaining Elders (...) has the same importance with ordaining them (...); so
that by the Church is understood the Body of Christians inhabiting in one City,
as the '(...) at Athens was the whole Corporation here; and particular
Congregations are but like the several Companies, all which together make up
but one City.

Sect. 6. (3.) Dr. O. says that the Christians of one City might not exceed
the bounds of a particular Church or Congregation, although they had a
multiplication of Bishops or Elders in them, and occasional distinct Assemblies
for some Acts of Divine Worship. Then, say I, the notion of a Church is not
limited in Scripture to a single Congregation: For if occasional Assemblies be
allowed for some Acts of Worship, why not for others? if the number of Elders
be unlimitted, then every one of these may attend the occasional distinct
Assemblies for Worship, and yet all together make up the Body of one Church; to
which, if he had but allowed a single Bishop over these, he had made up that
representation of a Church, which we have from the best and purest Antiquity.
Orig. c. Cells. l. 3.
And so Origin compares the Churches of Athens, Corinth and Alexandria with the
Corporations in those Cities; the number of Presbyters with the Senates of the
Cities; and at last the Bishop with the Magistrate. But Dr. O. adds, that when
they did begin to exceed in number, beyond a just proportion for Edification;
they did immediately erect other Churches among them, or near them. Name any
one new Church erected in the same City, and I yield. And what need a new
Church when himself allows occasional distinct Assemblies for greater
Edification? But he names the Church at Cenchrea, which was a Port to the City
of Corinth; because of the mighty increase of Believers at Corinth, Act. 18.
10. with Romans 16. 1. I answer, (1.) It seems then there was such an increase at
Corinth, as made them plant a distinct Church; and yet at Ephesus, where Saint
Paul used extraordinary diligence, and had great success, there was no need of
any new and distinct Church. And at Corinth he staid but a year and six months,
Act. 18. 11.
but at Ephesus three years; Act. 20. 31.
as the time is set down in the Acts. Does not this look very improbably? (2.)
Stephanus Byzant. reckons Cenchrea as a City distinct from Corinth; S^t. l. 8.
and so does Strabo, who places it in the way from Tegea to Argos through the
Parthenian Mountain; and it is several times mentioned by Thucydides as
distinct from Corinth: Thucyd. l. 4. and l. 8.
and so it is most likely was a Church originally planted there, and not formed
from the too great fullness of the Church of Corinth.

As to the Church of Jerusalem, p. 41.
he says, that the 5000 Converts were so disposed of or so dispersed, that
some years after, there was such a Church there, as did meet together in one
place, as occasion did require, even the whole multitude of the Brethren; nor
was their number greater when they went unto Pella. To which I answer (1.) the
force of the Argument lies in the 5000 being said to be added to the Church,
Act. 4. 4.
before any dispersion, or persecution. In which time we must suppose a true
Church to be formed, and the Christians at that time performing the Acts of
Church Communion: the Question then is, whether it be in the least probable,
that 5000 persons should at that time, make one stated and fixed Congregation
for Divine Worship and all the Acts of Church Communion? What place was there
large enough to receive them, when they met for Prayer and Sacraments? Dr. O.
was sensible of this inconvenience, and therefore only speaks of the Church of
Jerusalem when these were dispersed; but my question was about them, while they
were together. Were they not a Church then? Did they not continue in the
apostles Doctrine and Fellowship and breaking of Bread and Prayers? But how
could 5000 then do all this together? Therefore a Church according to its
first Institution is not limited to a single Congregation. (2.) A Church
consisting of many Congregations, may upon extraordinary occasions assemble
together; as the several Companies in a Common Hall for matters of general
concernment, which yet manage their particular interests apart: so for Acts of
Worship and Christian Communion particular Congregations may meet by
themselves; but when any thing happens of great concernment they may
occasionally assemble together; S^^. l. 9. Eustar. ad Il. ^.
as in the two debates mentioned Act. 15. 4. and 21. 22. so the several Tribes
in Athens did, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.
at their general Assemblies; which Strabo and Eustathius say, were 174. (3.)
There is no number mentioned of the Christians that went to Pella, Epiph. haer.
29.
neither by Eusebius, nor Epiphanius who relate the story, so that nothing can
thence be concluded; but if the force lies, in his calling Pella a Village, I
am sure Eusebius calls it a City of Peraea, beyond Jordan; and Epiphanius adds,
that they spread themselves from thence to Coelesyria, and Decapolis, and
Basanitis. So that all this put together makes no proof at all, that the
Christian Churches by their first Institution were limited to single
Congregations.

Sect. 7. (4.) He answers that he cannot discern the least necessity of any
positive Rule or Direction in this matter, p. 42.
since the nature of the thing and the duty of men does indispensably require
it. But is it not Dr. O. that says that the Institution of Churches, and the
Rules for their disposal and Government throughout the world, Evangel. Love. p.
59.
are the same, stable and unalterable? Are all these Rules now come to nothing
but what follows from the nature of the thing? Is it not Dr. O. that says,
that no religious Union or Order among Christians is of spiritual use and
advantage to them, p. 65.
but what is appointed and designed for them by Jesus Christ? Does not this
overthrow any other Order or Union among Christians but what Christ has
instituted and appointed for them? The Question is not about such a
Constitution of Churches as is necessary for performing the duties of religious
Worship; for all Parties are agreed therein; but whether Church Power be
limited to these exclusively to all other Unions of Christians? whether every
single Congregation has all Church Power wholly in it self, and unaccountably,
as to subordination to any other? How does this appear from the nature of the
thing, and the necessary duties of Christians? I grant the Institution of
Churches was for Edification: And I think a great deal of that Edification lies
in the orderly disposal of things. Whatever tends to Peace and Unity among
Christians, in my judgment tends to Edification. Now I cannot apprehend how a
sole Power of Government in every Congregation tends to the preserving this
Peace and Unity among Christians: much less how it follows so clearly from the
nature of the thing as to take away the need of any positive Rule or Direction
in this matter. And here the main Controversy lies, between us and the
Congregational Churches. Is there no positive Rule or Direction in this matter?
then it follows as much from the nature of the thing, that since Peace and
Order is to be kept up among Churches as well as Persons, every single
Congregation ought not to engross Church Power to it self, but to stand
accountable for the management of it to those who are entrusted with the
immediate care of the Churches Peace. And I cannot yet see, by all that has
been said, how those that break the established Order in a Church wherein all
the substantials of Religion are acknowledged to be sound, and set up
particular Independent Churches in opposition to it, can acquit themselves from
the Guilt of Schism, how great and intolerable soever it be thought. p. 43.


As to what concerns the Churches in the Houses of Priscilla and Aquila, and
Nymphas and Philemon, I say, p. 44.
that this is to be understood, not of a Church meeting in their Houses, but of
their own Families was pleaded by the dissenting Brethren who say, Reasons
against the Instances, etc. p. 83.
most of our Divines are of that Opinion: and therefore the Argument holds
against them. And from Dr. O.'s Discourse I less understand than I did before,
what obligation of Conscience can be upon any, when they may serve God in their
Families, in opposition to Laws, to keep up such public Congregations as are
forbidden by them. For (1.) he grants that a Church may be in a Family;
although a Family as such be not a Church. Then the members of a Family
submitting to the Government of the Master as their Pastor are a true Church:
for a Church, he says, may consist only of the Persons that belong to a
Family. Then there is no necessity of going out of a Family for the Acts of
Church Communion; especially, when the addition of four more, may provide
sufficiently for all the Officers they believe necessary to the making up a
Church. (2.) All that he says, is, that there is no such example given of
Churches in private Families in Scriptures, as should restrain the extent of
Churches from Congregations of many Families. And what then? the Question is
not now whether they be lawful, but whether they be necessary; for nothing
less than a Divine Command can justify the breach of a plain Law; but where is
that Command? Does not Dr. O. appeal to the nature of the thing, and the
indispensable duties of men with respect to the end of Churches, as his great
Rule in these cases? But which of all these necessary duties may not be
performed within the terms of the Law? so that no obligation can arise from
thence to have Congregations of many Families. All that he says further, as to
this matter is, p. 46.
that if through noncompliance any disturbance happen, the blame will be found
lying upon those who would force others to forego their Primitive Constitution.
Then it seems at last the Primitive Constitution is come to be the ground of
noncompliance; which in this case amounts to separation. But this primitive
Constitution had need be far better proved, before it can be thought a good
ground for breaking the Peace of the Church and the Laws of the Land; and much
more, before it can carry off the blame from the persons who break Orders and
Laws to the Makers of them. All men no doubt that ever broke Laws, if this Plea
would be admitted, would transfer the blame upon those that made them. And so
much for the Plea of the Congregational Party.

Sect. 8. 2. I now come to consider the Plea of those, who hold our Diocesan
Episcopacy to be unlawful. In my Sermon, as it is printed, I set down this
saying of Mr. Baxter, p. 24.
That to devise new species of Churches (beyond Parochial or Congregational)
without God's Authority, and to impose them on the world (yea in his name) and
to call all Dissenters Schismatics, True and only way of Concord. p III.
is a far worse usurpation, than to make or impose new Ceremonies or Liturgies.
Which I said does suppose Congregational Churches to be so much the Institution
of Christ; that any other Constitution above these is both unlawful and
insupportable: which is more than the Independent Brethren themselves do
assert. Now for our better understanding Mr. B. 's meaning, we must consider
his design in that place from whence those words are quoted. 1. He says,
Christ has instituted only Congregational or Parochial Churches. 2. That
Diocesan Episcopacy is a new species of Churches devised by men without God's
Authority, and imposed in such a manner, that those are called Schismatics who
dissent from it. 3. That such an imposition is worse than that of Ceremonies
and Liturgies; and consequently affords a better plea for Separation. But to
prevent any misunderstanding of his meaning, I will set down his own Cautions.
Premonition to the true way of Concord.
1. That the Question is not whether every particular Church should have a
Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons: i.e. whether every Rectour of a Parish
be not a Bishop, if he has Curates under him. This he calls Parochial
Episcopacy. 2. Nor, whether these should have Archbishops over them, as
Successors to the Apostolical and general Overseers of the first Age, in the
ordinary continued parts of their Office. 3. Nor, whether Partriarchs,
Diocesans and Lay-chancellours be lawful, as Officers of the King, exercising
under him such Government of the Church as belongs to Kings, to which in such
exercise all Subjects must for conscience sake submit. 4. Nor, if Diocesans
become the sole Bishops over many hundred Parishes, all the Parochial Bishops
and Parish Churches being put down and turned into Curates and Chapels,
whether a Minister ought yet to live quietly and peaceably under them. You will
ask then, where lies this horrible imposition, and intolerable usurpation? It
is in requiring the owning the lawfulness of this Diocesan Episcopacy; and
joining with Parochial Churches as parts of it. But wherein lies the
unsufferable malignity of that? 1. It is making a new species of Churches
without God's Authority. 2. It is overthrowing the species of God's making:
which, according to Mr. B. requires two things. 1. Local and presential
Communion, as he calls it, i.e. That it consists only of so many, as can well
meet together for Church Society. 2. The full exercise of Discipline within it
self by the Pastors; which being taken away, they are only Curates, and their
Meetings Oratories and no Churches. This I think is a true and fair
representation of Mr B. 's opinion in this matter. Which tending so apparently
to overthrow our present Constitution as insupportable, and to justify
separation from our Parochial Churches as members of a Diocesan Church;
Therefore to vindicate the Constitution of our Church, I shall undertake these
three things.

1. To show that our Diocesan Episcopacy is the same for substance which was in
the Primitive Church. 2. That it is not repugnant to any Institution of Christ,
nor devising a new species of Churches without God's Authority. 3. That the
accidental alterations in Discipline do not overthrow the being of our
Parochial Churches.
1. That our Diocesan Episcopacy is the same for substance which was in the
Primitive Church. This I begin with, because Mr. B. so very often makes his
Appeal to Antiquity in this matter. And my first inquiry shall be into the
Episcopacy practiced in the African Churches; Plea for peace, p. 66.
Church History. p. 37.
because Mr. B. expresses an esteem of them above others; for in Saint Cyprian
's time he says they were the best ordered Churches in the world; and that the
Bishops there were the most godly, faithful, peaceable company of Bishops
since the Apostles times. And of the following times he thus speaks, p. 73.
Most of the African Councils, says he, were the best in all the world.
Church History, p. 57.
Many good Canons for Church order were made by this and most of the African
Councils, no Bishops being faithfuller than they. Therefore concerning the
Episcopacy there practiced, I shall lay down these two Observations.

Obs. 1. That it was an inviolable Rule among them, That there was to be but
one Bishop in a City, though the City were never so large, or the Christians
never so many. This one Observation made good, quite overthrows Mr. B.'s
Hypothesis. For upon his principles, where ever the Congregation of Christians
became so great, Answ. to Sermon. p. 74.
that they could not conveniently assemble at one place so as to have personal
Communion in presence, as he speaks; there either they must alter the
instituted species of Government, or they must have more Bishops than one in a
City. For, he says, the Church must be no bigger, than that the same Bishop
may perform the Pastoral Office to them in present Communion, and for this he
quotes 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7, 17. i.e. their Bishops must be such as
they must hear preach, and have Conversation with. But that this was not so
understood in the African Churches, appears by their strict observance of this
Rule; of having but one Bishop in a City how large soever it was. And how
punctually they thought themselves bound to observe it, will appear by this one
Instance, That one of the greatest and most pernicious Schisms that ever
happened, might have been prevented if they had yielded to more Bishops than
one in a City; and that was the Schism of the Donatists, upon the competition
between Majorinus and Coecilian; as the Novatian Schism began at Rome upon a
like occasion between Cornelius and Novatian. Now was there not all the Reason
imaginable upon so important an occasion to have made more Bishops in the same
City, unless they had thought some Divine Rule prohibited them? When there were
46 Presbyters at Rome, had it not been fair to have divided them? or upon Mr.
B.'s principles made so many Bishops that every one might have had three or
four for his share? But instead of this, how does Saint Cyprian, even the holy
and meek Saint Cyprian, as Saint Augustine calls him, Aug. de Bapt. l. 2. c. 4.
aggravate the Schism of Novatian for being chosen a Bishop in the same City,
where there was one chosen before? His words are so considerable to our
purpose, that I shall set them down. Cypt. Ep. 52. n. 4.
Et cum post primum secundus esse non possit, quisquis post unum qui solus esse
debeat, factus est, non jam secundus ille sed nullus est. Since there cannot be
a second after the first, whosoever is made Bishop when one is made already,
who ought to be alone, he is not another Bishop, but none at all. Let Mr. B.
reconcile these words to his Hypothesis if he can. What! in such a City of
Christians, as Rome then was, where were 46 Presbyters, to pronounce it a mere
nullity to have a second Bishop chosen? Mr. B. would rather have thought there
had been need of 46 Bishops; but Saint Cyprian who lived somewhat nearer the
Apostles times, and I am apt to think, knew as well the Constitution of
Churches then, thought it overthrew that Constitution to have more Bishops than
one in a City. At Carthage it seems some turbulent Presbyters that were not
satisfied with Saint Cyprian's Government, or it may be looking on the charge
as too big for one, chose one Fortunatus to be Bishop there: Cypr. Ep. 55. n.
6, 9.
with this Saint Cyprian acquaints Cornelius; and there tells him, how far they
had proceeded, and what mischief this would be to the Church, since the having
one Bishop was the best means to prevent Schisms. After the election of
Cornelius, some of the Confessors who had sided with Novatian deserted his
Party, Ep. 46. n. 3.
and were received back again at a solemn Assembly, where they confessed their
fault, and declared, That they were not ignorant, that as there was but one
God, and one Christ, and one Holy Ghost, so there ought to be but one Bishop in
the Catholic Church. Not according to the senseless interpretation of
Pamelius, who would have it understood of one Pope; but that according to the
ancient and regular Discipline and Order of the Church, there ought to be but
one Bishop in a City. After the Martyrdom of Cornelius at Rome, Ep. 58. n. 2.
Saint Cyprian sends to Rome to know who that one Bishop was, that was chosen
in his place. And the necessity of this Unity, De Unit. Eccl. n. 3, 4.
he insists on elsewhere; and says, Our Savior so appointed it, unam
Cathedram constituit, and unitatis ejusdem originem, ab uno incipientem sua
auctoritate disposuit. Which the Papists foolishly interpret of Saint Peter's
Chair; for in his following words he utterly overthrows the supremacy, saying,
all the Apostles were equal; and a little after, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur. But this is sufficient to my purpose, to show
that these holy men, these Martyrs and Confessors, men that were indeed dying
daily, and that for Christ too, were all agreed that a Bishop there must be,
and that but one in a City, though never so large and full of Christians. S.
August. Ep. 162. N. E. Ep. 43.
Saint Augustine in his excellent Epistle to the Donatists, gives an account of
the proceedings about Caecilian after the election of Majorinus, and that
Melchiades managing that matter with admirable temper, offered for the healing
of the Schism to receive those who had been ordained by Majorinus, with this
Proviso, that where by reason of the Schism there had been two Bishops in a
City, he that was first consecrated was to remain Bishop, and the other to have
another People provided for him. For which Saint Augustine commends him, as an
excellent man, a true Son of Peace, and Father of Christian People. By which we
see the best, the wisest, the most moderate Persons of that time, never once
thought that there could be more Bishops than one in a City. In the famous
Conference at Carthage between the Catholic and Donatist Bishops, the Rule on
both sides was, Collat. Carthage 1.
but one Bishop to be allowed of either side of a City and Diocese; and if
there had been any new made, to increase their number, as it was objected on
both sides; if it were proved, they were not to be allowed: for generally then,
every Diocese had two Bishops of the different Parties; but in some places they
had but one, where the People were of one mind; and nothing but this notorious
Schism gave occasion to such a multiplication of Bishops in Africa; both
Parties striving to increase their Numbers.

Sect. 9. Obs. 2. In Cities and Dioceses which were under the care of one
Bishop, there were several Congregations and Altars, and distant places.
Carthage was a very large City, Aug. Ep. 43.
and had great numbers of Christians even in S. Cyprians time, as I have
already showed. Victor Vitens. l. 1.
And there besides the Cathedral called Basilica Major and Restituta Aug. Sermon.
4. 14. 102. de diversis.
, in which the Bishops always sat, as Victor Vitensis says; there were
several other considerable Churches, in which S. Augustine often preached when
he went to Carthage; Sermon. 12. 122. de diversis.
as the Basilica Fausti; the De diverse. 11.
Basilica Leontiana; the 96. de Temp.
Basilica Celerinae mentioned by Vict. l. 1.
Victor likewise, who says it was otherwise called Scillitanorum. The 110. de
Temp.
Basilica Novarum. The 251. de Temp.
Basilica Petri. The 24. de diverse.
Basilica Pauli. And I do not question there were many others, which I have not
observed; for Victor says, that when Geisericus entered Carthage he found
there Quodvultdeus the Bishop, and maximam turbam Clericorum, a very great
multitude of Clergy, all which he immediately banished. And without the City
there were two great Churches, says Victor; one where S. Cyprian suffered
Martyrdom, and the other where his body was buried, at a place called Mappalia.
In all he reckons about 500 of the Clergy belonging to the Church of Carthage,
Victor Vit. l. 5.
taking in those who were trained up to it; And does Mr. B. imagine all these
were intended to serve one Congregation? or that all the Christians then in
Carthage could have local and presential Communion, as he calls it, in one
Church; and at one Altar? Sometimes an Altar is taken with a particular respect
to a Bishop; and so setting up one Altar against another, was setting up one
Bishop against another, as that Phrase is commonly used in Saint Cyprian and
Saint Augustine; sometimes for the place at which the Christians did
communicate, and so there were as many Altars as Churches. So Fortunatus a
Catholic Bishop objected to Petilian the Donatist, that in the City where he
was Bishop, Collat. 1. Carthage n. 139.
the Heretics had broken down all the Altars: which is the thing Optatus
objects so much against them. Optat. l. 6.
And that there were Altars in all their Churches appears from hence, that not
only the Oblations were made there, and the Communion received, but all the
Prayers of the Church were made at them: as not only appears from the African
Code and Saint Augustine (which I have mentioned elsewhere) but from Optatus,
who upbraiding the Donatists for breaking down the Altars of Churches, he tells
them that hereby they did what they could to hinder the Churches Prayers, for,
says he, illac ad aures Dei ascendere solebat populi oration. The Peoples
Prayers went up to Heaven that way. And that distant places from the City were
in the Bishops Diocese and under his care I thus prove. In the African Code,
Cod. Eccl. Afric. c. 71.
there is a Canon that no Bishop should leave his Cathedral Church, and go to
any other Church in his Diocese there to reside; which evidently proves, that
there were not only more places, but more Churches in a Bishops Diocese. And
where the Donatists had erected new Bishoprics, as they often did, the African
Council decrees, that after the decease of such a Bishop, c. 98, 99.
if the People had no mind to have another in his room, they might be in the
Diocese of another Bishop. Which shows, that they thought the Dioceses might be
so large, as to hold the People that were under two Bishops. And there were
many Canons made about the People of the Donatist Bishops. In one it was
determined, that they should belong to the Bishop that converted them, without
limitation of distance; c. 117.
after that, that they should belong to the same Diocese they were in before:
c. 118.
but if the Donatist Bishop were converted, then the Diocese was to be divided
between them. If any Bishop neglected the converting the People of the places
belonging to his Diocese, he that did take the pains in it, was to have those
places laid to his Diocese; c. 121.
unless sufficient cause were showed by the Bishop, that he was not to blame.
Let Mr. Baxter now judge, whether their Bishoprics were like our Parishes;
Church History, p. 73.
as he confidently affirms. Saint Augustine mentions the Municipium Tullense not
far from Hippo, De Curd pro Mortuis c. 12.
where there was Presbyter and Clerks under his care and government: and he
tells this particular story of it; that a certain poor man who lived there fell
into a trance, in which he fancied he saw the Clergy thereabout, and among the
rest the Presbyter of that place who bade him go to Hippo to be baptized of
Augustine who was Bishop there; the man did accordingly, and the next Easter put
in his name among the Competentes and was baptized, and after told Saint
Augustine the foregoing passages. It seems the Donatists were very troublesome
in some of the remoter parts of the Diocese of Hippo, whereupon Saint Augustine
sent one of his Presbyters to Caecilian the Roman President, Aug. Ep. 60.
to complain of their insolence, and to crave his assistance, which he says,
he did, lest he should be blamed for his negligence, who was the Bishop of that
Diocese. And can we think all these persons had praesential and local Communion
with Saint Augustine in his Church at Hippo? While he was yet but a Presbyter at
Hippo, in the absence of the Bishop he writes to Maximinus a Donatist Bishop a
sharp Letter, Aug. Ep. 203.
for offering to rebaptize a Deacon of their Church who was placed at Mutagena,
and he says, he went from Hippo to the place himself to be satisfied of the
truth of it. Ep. 204.
At the same place lived one Donatus a Presbyter of the Donatists whom Saint
Augustine would have had brought to him against his Will, to be better
instructed, as being under his care, but the obstinate man rather endeavored
to make away himself, Ep. 262.
upon which he writes a long Epistle to him. In another Epistle he gives an
account, that there was a place called Fussala, which with the Country about
it, belonged to the Diocese of Hippo; where there was abundance of People, but
almost all Donatists; but by his great care in sending Presbyters among them,
those places were all reduced; but because Fussala was 40 miles distant from
Hippo, he took care to have a Bishop placed among them; but as appears by the
event he had better have kept it under his own Care. For upon the complaints
made against their new Bishop, he was fain to resume it; as appears by a
Presbyter of Fussala, Ep. ad Quodvultdeum ante lib. de haeres.
which he mentions afterward. However it appears, that a place 40 miles
distance was then under the care of so great a Saint, and so excellent a Bishop
as Saint Augustine was. And could Mr. B. have found it in his heart to have told
him that he did not understand the right constitution of Churches? How many
Quaere's would Mr. B. have made about the numbers of Souls at Fussala, and how
he could take upon him the care of a place so far distant from him? And it is
no hard matter to guess what answer Saint Augustine would have given him.

But besides this plain evidence of the extent of Dioceses, we have as clear
proof of Metropolitan Provinces in the African Churches. Quidam de Episcopis in
Provincia nostra, S. Cyprian. Ep. 52. n. 13.
says Saint Cyprian; and yet he speaks of his Predecessors times, which shows
the very ancient extent of that Province, Ep. 23. n. 2.
In provincia nostra per aliquot Civitates, says he again; which shows that
more Cities than Carthage were under his care. Quoniam latius fusa est
provincia nostra, in his Epistle to Cornelius. Ep. 45. n. 2.
In the African Code it appears the Bishop of Carthage had the Primacy by his
place; in the other Provinces by Seniority of Consecration. Victor mentions one
Crescens, Victor Vit. l. 1.
who had 120 Bishops under him as Metropolitan. And I hope at least for the
sake of the African Bishops, Mr. B. will entertain the better opinion of the
English Episcopacy.

Sect. 10. But that he may not think this sort of Episcopacy was only in these
parts of Africa, let us enquire into the Episcopacy of the Church of
Alexandria. And we may suppose Athanasius did not spend all his zeal upon
doctrinal points, but had some for the right Constitution of Churches; and yet
it is most certain the Churches under his care could not have personal
Communion with him. Epiph. haer. 68. n. 6.
It is observed by Epiphanius, that Athanasius did frequently visit the
neighbor Churches, especially those in Maraeotis; of which Athanasius himself
gives the best account. Athanas. Ap. p. 781. 802.
Maraeotis, says he, is a Region belonging to Alexandria, which never had
either Bishop or Suffragan in it; but all the Churches there are immediately
subject to the Bishop of Alexandria; but every Presbyter is fixed in his
particular Village; and here they had Churches erected in which these
Presbyters did officiate. All this we have expressly from Athanasius himself,
whence we observe, (1.) That here were true Parochial Churches; for so
Athanasius calls them Churches, and not bare Oratories. (2.) That these had
Presbyters fixed among them, who performed divine Offices there. (3.) That
these were under the immediate inspection of the Bishop of Alexandria, so that
the whole Government belonged to him. (4.) That these were at that distance,
that they could not have local Communion with their Bishop in his Church at
Alexandria. Which is directly contrary to Mr. Baxter's Episcopacy. So in
Alexandria it self, Haeres. 68. n. 4. 69. n. 1.
there were many distant Churches with fixed Presbyters in them, as Epiphanius
several times observes: and it would be a very strange thing indeed, if so many
Presbyters should have fixed Churches in Alexandria, and yet the whole Church
of Alexandria be no bigger than to make one Congregation for personal Communion
with the Bishop. Abridgment of Chur. hist. p. 9.
But Mr. Baxter's great argument is, from the meeting of the whole multitude
with Athanasius in the great Church at Alexandria to keep the Easter Solemnity;
whence he concludes, that the Christians in Alexandria were no more than that
the main body of them could meet and hear in one Assembly. Athanas. Ap. p. 682.
Whereas all that Athanasius says, amounts to no more than this, that the
multitude was too great to meet in one of the lesser Churches, and therefore a
great clamor was raised among them that they might go into the New Church;
Athanasius pressed them to bear with the inconveniency and disperse themselves
into the lesser Churches; the People grew impatient, and so at last he yielded
to them. But what is there in all this to prove that all the Christians in the
whole City were then present, and that this Church would hold them all? If a
great Assembly should meet at one of the lesser Churches in London upon some
Solemn Occasion, and finding themselves too big for that place should press the
Bishop to open Saint Paul's for that day before it were quite finished, because
of the greater capacity of the Church for receiving such a number, would this
prove that Saint Paul's held all the Christians in London? Athanasius says not
a word more, than that it was Easter, and there appeared a great number of
People, such a one as Christian Princes would wish in a Christian City. Does he
say, or intimate, that all the Christians of the City were present? that none
of them went to the lesser Churches? or were absent, though the Crowd was so
great? Does he not say, the multitudes were so great in the smaller Churches in
the Lent Assemblies, that not a few were stifled and carried home for dead? And
therefore it was necessary to consider the multitude at such a time. In my mind
Mr. Baxter might as well prove that the whole Nation of the Jews made but one
Congregation; because at the dedication of Solomon's Temple there was so great
a multitude present, that one of the lesser Synagogues could not hold them. But
the argument is of greater force in this respect, that God himself appointed
but one Temple for the whole Nation of the Jews: and therefore he intended no
more than a single Congregational Church. But to serve this hypothesis,
Alexandria it self must be shrunk into a less compass; Eusebius. l. 7. c. 21.
although Dionysius Alexandrinus who was Bishop there says it was (...) a very
great City; and the Geographer published by Gothofred says it was (...), Vetus
Orbis descript. p. 18.
an exceeding great City; so great that it was (...) past men's comprehension:
Amm. Marc. l. 22.
and Ammianus Marcellinus says it was the top of all Cities. Eusebius. l. 7. c.
11.
And for the number of Christians there long before the time of Athanasius,
Dionysius Alexandrinus says in a time of great persecution, when he was
banished, he kept up the Assemblies in the City; and at Cephro he had a large
Church, partly of the Christians of Alexandria which followed him, and partly
from other places, and when he was removed thence to Colluthion, which was
nearer the City, such numbers of Christians flocked out of the City to him,
that they were forced to have distinct Congregations: so the words (...)
signify, and so Athanasius uses them, Athan. Apol. p. 683.
(...), for the Christians meeting in several Congregations. If there were such
a number of Christians at Alexandria so long before, under the sharpest
persecution, is it possible to imagine, in so great a City, after Christianity
had so long been the Religion of the Empire, that the number of Christians
there should be no greater than to make one large Congregation? There is no
hopes of convincing men, that can build Theories upon such strange
improbabilities. I shall only add one Instance more from Antiquity, which is
plain enough of it self to show the great extent of Diocesan Power then; and
that is of Theodoret, a great and learned Bishop; and although his Bishopric
was none of the largest, yet in his Epistle to Leo he says, Theodor. Ep. 113.
he had the Pastoral charge of 800 Churches; for so many Parishes, says he,
are in my Diocese, which he had then enjoyed twenty six years. Does Mr. B.
believe that all the Christians in these 800 Churches had personal Communion
with Theodoret? And yet these Parishes did not change their species, for he
says, they were Churches still.

This Testimony of Theodoret is so full and peremptory, Treatise of Episcopacy,
p. 67.
that Mr. Baxter has no other way to avoid the force of it, but to call in
question the Authority of the Epistle. But without any considerable ground,
unless it be that it contradicts his Hypothesis. For, what if Theodoret' s
Epistles came out of the Vatican Copy? Is that a sufficient argument to reject
them, unless some inconsistency be proved in those Epistles, with the History
of those times, or with his other Writings? Critic. Sacr. l. 4. c. 21.
Which are the Rules, Rivet gives for judging the sincerity of them. That
Epistle which Bellarmin and others reject as spurious, is contradicted by other
Epistles of his still extant; which show a full reconciliation between Cyril of
Alexandria and him before his death. And it is supposed, that John of Antioch
was dead some considerable time before Cyril; which manifestly overthrows the
Authority of it. But what is there like that in this Epistle to Leo? when the
matter of fact is proved by other Epistles? As to the unreasonable proceedings
of Dioscorus against him, (which was the occasion of writing it) his other
Epistles are so full of it, that Mr. B. never read the rest, if he calls this
into question upon that account. That Hypatius, Abramius and Alypius were sent
into the West upon Theodoret's account, appears by the Epistles to Renatus and
Florentius, Theod. Ep. 116. Ep. 117.
which follow that to Leo. What if several Epistles of his are lost, which
Nicephorus saw, does that prove all that are remaining to be counterfeit? But
he is much mistaken, if he thinks, there was no other Copy but the Vatican
translated by Metius; Sirmond. Praef. ad Theod. Opera.
for Sirmondus tells us he met with another Copy at Naples, which he compared
with the Vatican, and published the various Readings of the Epistles from it.
What if Leontius says that Heretics feigned Epistles in Theodoret' s name?
Does that prove an Epistle wherein he vindicates himself from the imputation of
Heresy, to be spurious? What Mr. B. means by the printing this Epistle alone
after Theodoret' s Works, I do not well understand, unless he never saw any
other than the Latin Edition of Theodoret. But it is a very bold thing to
pronounce concerning the Authority of a man's Writings, without so much as
looking into the latest and best Editions of them. But there are two things he
objects which seem more material. (1.) That it seems incredible that a Town
within two days journey of Antioch should have 800 Churches in it at that time.
(2.) That he proves from other places in Theodoret, that it is very improbable
that Dioceses had then so many Churches.

1. As to the first; certainly no man in his wits ever undertook to prove, that
one such City as Cyrus then was, had 800 Churches in it. But by Cyrus,
Theodoret means the Diocese of Cyrus; as will afterward appear. If Cyrus were
taken for the Regio Cyrrhestica with the bounds given it by Ptolemy, Ptolem. l.
5. c. 15.
Strabo and Pliny, then there would not appear the least improbability in it,
Strab. l. 16.
since many considerable Cities were within it; Plin. l. 5. c. 24.
as Beroea (now Aleppo) and Hierapolis, and extended as far as Euphrates;
Zeugma being comprehended under it. The Ecclesiastical Province was likewise
very large, and by the ancient Notitiae it is sometimes called Euphratensis,
Amm. Marcel. l. 14.
which in Ammianus his time took in Comagena and extended to Samosata (but the
Regio Cyrrhestica before was distinct from Comagena as appears by Strabo and
others) in that Province there was a Metropolitan, Notitiae Antiq. Append. ad
Car. a S. Paulo, p. 59.
who was called the Metropolitan of Hagiopolis, which by the same Notitiae
appears to have been then one of the names of Cyrus, or Cyrrhus. But
notwithstanding, I do not think the words of Theodoret are to be understood of
the Province, but of his own peculiar Diocese; Theodor. Ep. 16.
for Theodoret mentions the Metropolitan he was under. By Cyrus therefore we
understand the Region about the City, which was under Theodoret's care; within
which he was confined by the Emperor's Order, Theodor. Ep. 79, 81.
as he complains in several Epistles, and there it is called by him, (...),
Regio Cyrrhestica; and Theodoret himself sets down the extent of it in his
Epistle to Constantius, Ep. 42.
where he says, it was forty miles in length and forty in breadth. And he
says in another Epistle, Ep. 72.
that Christianity was then so much spread among them, that not only the
Cities, but the Villages, the Fields, and utmost bounds were filled with Divine
Grace. And that these Villages had Churches and Priests settled in them under
the care of the Bishop, appears expressly from a passage in the Life of Symeon;
Religios. Hist. Vit. Symeon. p. 879.
where he speaks of Bassus visiting the Parochial Churches; (...). If there
were then Parochial Churches settled with Presbyters in them, and these under
the care of the Diocesan Bishop, then Mr. B.'s Hypothesis is utterly
overthrown. Ep. 81.
In his Epistle to Nomus, he mentions eight Villages in his Diocese that were
overrun with the Heresy of Marcion, another with the Eunomian, another with
the Arian Heresy; which were all converted by his care: Ep. 145.
and in another place he says, he had brought ten thousand Marcionists to
Baptism. In another he mentions the spreading of Marcion' s Doctrine in his
Diocese, Vita Jacobi jun. p. 860. 861, etc. 858, 869, 876, 877, 878, 879.
and the great pains he took to root it out; and the success he had therein.
And we find the names of many of the Villages in his Lives, as Tillima,
Targala, Nimuza, Teleda, Telanissus, which are sufficient to show, that
Theodoret had properly a Diocesan Church, and that his Episcopal care and
Authority did extend to many Parochial Churches; his Diocese being forty miles
in length, and as many in breadth. So that Mr. B. must reject, not onley that
Epistle to Leo, but the rest too, and his other Works, if he hopes to make good
his Parochial Episcopacy; which is too hard a task to be undertaken, without
better evidence than he has hitherto brought.

2. But he offers to produce other Testimonies out of Theodoret to show the
improbability that Dioceses had so many Churches. The question is not about the
bare number of Churches in Dioceses, which all men know to have been very
different; but about the extent of Episcopal Power, whether it were limited to
one Parochial Church, or was extended over many. And what is there in Theodoret
which contradicts this? I extremely failed of my expectation, as to the other
places of Theodoret, which he promised to produce; Treatise of Episcopacy, part
2. p* 49, 50.
For I find five or six places cited out of his History, but not one that comes
near any proof of this matter. The (1.) proves that in a time of Persecution at
Alexandria, nineteen Presbyters and Deacons were banished to Heliopolis in
Phoenicia, where there were no Christians. Theod. Hist. l. 4. c. 19.
Therefore in Theodoret's time, there was no Diocesan Episcopacy. The (2.)
shows that in a small City of Thebais, l. 4. c. 15.
Whither Eulogius and Protogenes were banished, and there were but a few
Christians, yet there was a Bishop. Who ever denied this, where there was a
prospect of converting more, as appears by the endeavors of Eulogius and
Protogenes there? But he ought to have proved that as the Christians increased,
new Bishops were made, which this is very far from. The (3.) proves that Lucius
of Alexandria was made Bishop by force, l. 4. c. 19.
without any Synod of Bishops, or Choice of the Clergy, or Request of the
People. I suppose by this time, Mr. B. had forgotten what he promised to prove
from Theodoret. But I wonder, how it came into his mind to say the Church of
Alexandria at that time was like a Presbyterian Church: which I am sure he had
not from Theodoret, nor from the Epistle of Peter of Alexandria. l. 4. c. 21.
The (4.) is intended to prove, that in the time of Valens the Patriarchal
Orthodox Church of Alexandria was but one Assembly, which met only in one
place at once. But it is very unhappy, that Theodoret shows just the contrary
in that place, for he says, that Valens expelled the Orthodox Christians out
of their Churches, (...), are his very words: to whom, he says, Iovianus had
likewise given the new built Church. Which Mr. B. thus translates, Valens found
the Orthodox, even in the great Patriarchial City of Antioch in possession but
of one Church, which good Jovinian the Emperor had given them, of which he
dispossessed them. I desire any one who relies on Mr. B.'s skill and fidelity
in these matters, but to compare this Translation with the Text in Theodoret;
and I dare say, he will see cause to admire it. But if any one can imagine that
the Patriarchal Church of Antioch in the time of Valens could consist but of
one Congregation, for my part, I must give him over, as one incapable of being
convinced of any thing by me. I do not speak what the Church in a time of great
persecution might be driven to, but of what it was in its settled state. l. 4.
c. 2*
The (5.) is, from Terentius his begging One Church for the Orthodox of Valens;
which says Mr. B. intimates their numbers. I am ashamed to read, much more to
confute such arguments as these. For if the Papists should desire the liberty
but of one Church in London, does that prove they are no more than can make one
Congregation? l. 5. c. 4.
The (6.) proves that Maris was made Bishop of Dolicha a small Town infected
with Arianism. It is true, Theodoret says, Doliche was a little City, and so
he tells us, Cyrus was no great one; but he does not set down the bounds of the
Diocese; which for any thing we see in Theodoret, might be as large, as, we
have evidently proved from him, the Diocese of Cyrrhus was. Let the Reader now
judge, whether Theodoret does not plainly overthrow Mr. B.'s notion of
Parochial Episcopacy.

But Mr. B. insists upon the Institution of Christ; and if Christ has
appointed one sort of Churches, viz. for personal Communion, and men make
another, is not this a violation of Christ's Command, and setting up Man
against God? I see no evidence produced for any such Institution of Christ,
which limits Episcopal Power to a single Congregation; and therefore the
extending it to more, can be no violation of Christ's Command, or setting up a
new species of Churches, as will appear from Mr. B. himself under the next
particular. Yet Mr. B. according to his wonted meekness toward his
Adversaries, charges me, for speaking against this principle of his, Answ. to
Sermon. p. 73.
with pleading for presumption, profanation, usurpation, uncharitableness,
schism, what not? What is the reason of all this rage and bitterness? Why, I
set down a saying of his, as going beyond the Independents in making the
devising new species of Churches beyond Parochial or Congregational without
God's Authority, and to impose them on the world, yea in his name, and call all
dissenters Schismatics, a far worse usurpation than to make or impose new
Ceremonies or Liturgies. But is not all this true supposing that such new
species of Churches be so devised and so imposed? That is not to the business;
for that which I quoted it for, was to show that Mr. B. looked upon all
Churches beyond Parochial, as Churches merely of men's devising; and that to
charge men with Schism for opposing any such Constitution is unreasonable; and
that the imposing it as Divine, is an intolerable usurpation; and all this at
the same time, when he pretends to write for Peace and Concord. My business is
now to show

Sect. 11. 2. That such an Episcopacy as is practiced here, and was so in the
Primitive Church is no devising a new species of Churches, nor has any thing
repugnant to any Institution of Christ. And to prove this, I need no more than
one of Mr. B.' s own Cautions in his Premonition; viz. that he does not dispute
the lawfulness of Archbishops, as he calls them, over Parochial Bishops, as
Successors to the Apostolical and other general Overseers of the first Age, in
the ordinary continued parts of their Office. And what he says in his own name
and others in his Plea for Peace: p. 263.
There are some of us, that much incline to think that Archbishops, that is,
Bishops that have oversight of many Churches with their Pastors, are lawful
Successors of the Apostles in the ordinary part of their Work. But I cannot
here omit Mr. Baxter' s Arguments to prove, that the Ordinary governing part of
the Apostolical Office, Christian Directory. Eccles. Cases, Q. 56. p. 831.
was settled for all following Ages. 1. Because we read of the settling of
that form, but we never read of any abolition, discharge, or cessation of the
Institution.

(...) affirm a cessation without proof, we seem to accuse God of mutability,
as settling one form of Government for one Age only, and no longer. 3. We
leave room for audacious Wits accordingly to question other Gospel
Institutions, as Pastors, Sacraments, etc. and to say, they were but for an
Age. 4. It was general Officers Christ promised to be with, to the end of the
world, Matt. 28. 20. Which being joined with the Consent of the Christian
Church of the Ages succeeding the Apostles, that the Apostles did leave
Successors in the care and Government of Churches, have a great deal of weight
in them, and overballance the difficulties on the other side. As upon this
occasion I think fit to declare. From whence I argue thus, That which is only
a Continuance of the same kind of Churches which were in being in the
Apostolical times is no devising a new species of Churches, nor has any thing
repugnant to any Institution of Christ. But that is the case as to our
Episcopacy. We intend no quarrel about names: If it be Mr. B.' s pleasure to
call our Bishops, Archbishops, let him enjoy his own fancy. It already appears
from Saint Cyprian, and might much more be made plain from many others if it
were needful, that the Bishops of the several Churches were looked on as
Successors to the Apostles in the care and Government of Churches. Now the
Office of Mr. B.' s Parochial Bishops was only to attend to one particular
Congregation; but the Apostolical Office was above this, while the Apostles
held it in their own hands; and did not make a new species of Churches, nor
overthrow the Constitution of Parochial Churches. It seems then a strange thing
to me, that the continuance of the same kind of Office in the Church, should be
called the devising a new species of Churches.

But Mr. B. runs upon this perpetual mistake, that our English Episcopacy is
not a succession to the Ordinary part of the Apostolical Power in Governing
Churches; but a new sort of Episcopacy not heard of in the ancient Church,
which swallows up the whole Power of Presbyters, and leaves them only a bare
name of Curates, and destroys the being of Parochial Churches. But if I can
make the contrary to appear from the Frame and Constitution of this Church, I
hope Mr. B. will be reconciled to our Episcopal Government, and endeavor to
remove the prejudices he has caused in Peoples minds against it.

Sect. 12. Now to examine this, let us consider two things. (1.) What Power is
left to Presbyters in our Church. (2.) What Authority the Bishops of our Church
have over them.

I. What Power is left to presbyters in our Church: and that may be considered
two ways. 1. With respect to the whole Body of this Church. 2. With respect to
their particular Congregations or Cures.

1. With respect to the whole Body of this Church: and so (1.) There are no
Rules of Discipline, no Articles of Doctrine, no Form of Divine Service, are to
be allowed or received in this Nation; but, by the Constitution of this Church,
the Presbyters of it have their Votes in passing them, either in Person, or by
Proxy. For, all things of that Nature, are to pass both Houses of Convocation;
and the lower House consists wholly of Presbyters; who represent the whole
Presbytery of the Nation; either appearing by their own Right, as many do; or
as being chosen by the rest, from whom by Indentures they either do, or ought
to receive Power to transact things in their names. And the Custom of this
Church has sometimes been, for the Clergy of the Dioceses to give limited
Proxies in particular Cases to their Procuratours. Now I appeal to any man of
understanding, whether the Clergy of this Church have their whole Power
swallowed up by the Bishops, when yet the Bishops have no power to oblige them
to any Rules or Canons but by their own consent; and they do freely vote in all
things of common concernment to the Church; and therefore the Presbyters are
not by the Constitution deprived of their share in one of the greatest Rights
of Government, viz. in making Rules for the whole Body. And in this main part
of Government the Bishops do nothing without the Counsel of their Presbyters,
and in this respect our Church falls behind none of the ancient Churches, which
had their Councils of Presbyters together with their Bishops; only, there,
they were taken singly in every City; and here they are combined together in
Provincial Synods; modeled according to the Laws of the Nation. And when the
whole Body of Doctrine, Discipline and Worship are thus agreed upon by a
general consent, there seems to be far less need of the particular Councils of
Presbyters to every Bishop; since both Bishops and Presbyters are now under
fixed Rules, and are accountable for the breach of them. Can. 31. and 35.
(2.) In giving Orders; by the Rules of this Church four Presbyters are to
assist the Bishops; and to examine the Persons to be Ordained (or the Bishop in
their presence) and afterward to join in the laying on of hands upon the
Persons ordained. And is all this nothing but to be the Bishop's Curates, and
to officiate in some of his Chapels?

2. As to their particular charges; one would think those who make this
objection, had never read over the Office of Ordination; for therein (1.) For
the Epistle is read the charge given by Saint Paul to the Elders at Miletus,
Act. 20. or the third Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy; concerning the
Office of a Bishop. What a great impertinency had both these been, if the
Presbyters Power had been quite swallowed up by the Bishops? But it hence
appears, that our Church looked on the Elders at Ephesus, and the Bishop in
Timothy to be Presbyters, as yet under the care and Government of the Apostles,
or such as they deputed for that Office, such as Timothy and Titus were. Which
I suppose is the true meaning of Saint Jerome and many other doubtful passages
of Antiquity, which relate to the community of the names of Bishop and
Presbyter, while the Apostles governed the Church themselves. And at this time
Timothy being appointed to this part of the Apostolical Office of Government,
the Bishops mentioned in the Epistle to him, may well enough be the same with
the Presbyters in the Epistle to Titus, who was appointed to ordain Elders in
every City, Titus 1. 5. (2.) In the Bishop's Exhortation to them that are to be
ordained, he says, Now we exhort you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to
have in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how chargeable an Office ye
be called, that is to say, the Messengers and Watchmen, the Pastors and
Stewards of the Lord, to teach, to premonish, to feed and provide for the
Lord's Family, etc. have always therefore printed in your remembrance, how
great a treasure is committed to your charge; for they be the Sheep of Christ
which he bought with his death, and for whom he shed his blood. The Church and
Congregation whom you must serve is his Spouse and Body. And if it shall chance
the same Church, or any member thereof, to take any hurt or hinderance, by
reason of your negligence, you know the greatness of the fault and of the
horrible punishment which will ensue, etc. Is this the language of a Church
which deprives Presbyters of the due care of their flocks, and makes Parochial
Congregations to be no Churches? (3.) The person to be ordained does solemnly
promise to give faithful diligence to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments,
and the Discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has
received the same, according to the Commandments of God, so that he may teach
the People committed to his Cure and charge, with all diligence to keep and
observe the same. Here we see a Cure and charge committed to the Presbyters;
Preaching and Administration of Sacraments required of them; and the exercise
of Discipline as far as belongs to them, (of which afterward): but now in the
Consecration of a Bishop, this part is left out, and instead of that it is
said, That he is called to the Government of the Church; and he is required to
correct and punish such as be unquiet, disobedient and criminous in his
Diocese. So that the more particular charge of Souls is committed to every
Pastor over his own Flock, and the general care of Government and Discipline
is committed to the Bishop; as that which especially belongs to his Office as
distinct from the other.

Sect. 13. II. Which is the next thing to be considered, viz. What Authority
the Bishop has, by virtue of his Consecration, in this Church? And that, I
say, is what Mr. B. calls the ordinary parts of the Apostolical Authority;
which lies in three things, Government, Ordination and Censures. And that our
Church did believe our Bishops to succeed the Apostles in those parts of their
Office, I shall make appear by these things. (1.) In the Preface before the
Book of Ordination, it is said, That it is evident unto all men, diligently
reading holy Scripture, and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time,
there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. What is the reason that they express it thus, from the Apostles
time, rather than in the Apostles times, but that they believed, while the
Apostles lived, they managed the affairs of Government themselves; but as they
withdrew, they did in some Churches sooner, and in some later, as their own
continuance, the condition of the Churches, and the qualification of Persons
were, commit the care and Government of Churches to such Persons whom they
appointed thereto? Of which, we have an uncontrollable evidence in the
Instances of Timothy and Titus; for the care of Government was a distinct thing
from the Office of an Evangelist; and all their removes do not invalidate this,
because while the Apostles lived, it is probable there were no fixed Bishops,
or but few. But as they went off, so they came to be settled in their several
Churches. And as this is most agreeable to the sense of our Church, so it is
the fairest Hypothesis for reconciling the different Testimonies of Antiquity.
For hereby the succession of Bishops is secured from the Apostles times, for
which the Testimonies of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Saint Cyprian, and others, are
so plain; hereby room is left to make good all that Saint Ierom has said; and
what Epiphanius delivers concerning the differing settlements of Churches at
first. So that we may allow for the Community of names, between Bishop and
Presbyter, for a while in the Church, i. e. while the Apostles governed the
Churches themselves; but afterward, that which was then part of the
Apostolical Office, became the Episcopal, which has continued from that time
to this, by a constant succession in the Church. (2.) Archbishop Whitgift
several times declares that these parts of the Apostolical Office still
remained in the Bishops of our Church. Defense of the Answer to the Admonit. p.
218.
As for this part of the Apostles function, says he, to visit such Churches as
were before planted, and to provide that such were placed in them, as were
virtuous and godly Pastors, I know it remains still, and is one of the chief
parts of the Bishops function. And again, there is now no planting of Churches,
p. 424.
nor going through the whole world, there is no writing of new Gospels, no
prophesying of things to come, but there is Governing of Churches, visiting of
them, reforming of Pastors and directing of them, which is a portion of the
Apostolical function. p. 427.
Again, Although that this part of the Apostolical Office which did consist in
planting and founding of Churches through the whole world is ceased; yet the
manner of Government by placing Bishops in every City, by moderating and
Governing them, by visiting the Churches, by cutting off schisms and
contentions, by ordering Ministers remains still, and shall continue, and is
in this Church in the Archbishops and Bishops, as most meet men to execute the
same. Bishop Bilson fully agrees, as to these particulars. (1.) That the
Apostles did not at first commit the Churches to the Government of Bishops,
Perpetual Government of Christ's Church. chapter 12. p. 224.
but reserved the chief power of Government in their own hands. (2.) That upon
experience of the confusion and disorder which did arise through equality of
Pastors, did appoint at their departures certain approved men to be Bishops.
chapter 13 p. 244.
(3.) That these Bishops did succeed the Apostles in the care and Government of
Churches, as he proves at large; and therefore he calls their function
Apostolic. Instead of many others, which it were easy to produce, I shall
only add the Testimony of King Charles I. in his debates about Episcopacy, who
understood the Constitution of our Church as well as any Bishop in it, and
defended it with as clear and as strong a Reason. In his third Paper to
Henderson, he has these words, Where you find a Bishop and Presbyter in
Scripture to be one and the same (which I deny to be always so) it is in the
Apostles times; now I think to prove the Order of Bishops succeeded that of the
Apostles, and that the name was chiefly altered in reverence to those who were
immediately chosen by our Savior. In his first Paper at the Treaty at Newport,
he thus states the case about Episcopal Government. I conceive that Episcopal
Government is most consonant to the word of God, and of an Apostolical
Institution, as it appears by the Scriptures to have been practiced by the
Apostles themselves, and by them committed and derived to particular persons as
their substitutes or successors therein (as for ordaining Presbyters and
Deacons, giving Rules concerning Christian Discipline, and exercising Censures
over Presbyters and others) and has ever since to these last times been
exercised by Bishops in all the Churches of Christ, and therefore I cannot in
conscience consent to abolish the said Government. In his Reply to the first
Answer of the Divines, he says, that mere Presbyters are Episcopi Gregis
only, they have the oversight of the Flock in the duties of Preaching,
Administration of Sacraments, public Prayer, Exhorting, Rebuking, etc. but
Bishops are Episcopi Gregis and Pastorum too, having the oversight of Flock and
Pastors within their several precincts in the Acts of external Government. And
that, although the Apostles had no Successors in eundem gradum as to those
things that were extraordinary in them, as namely the Measure of their Gifts,
the extent of their charge, the infallibility of their Doctrine, and the having
seen Christ in the flesh: but in those things that were not extraordinary (and
such those things are to be judged which are necessary for the service of the
Church in all times, as the Office of Teaching and the Power of Governing are)
they were to have and had Successors; and therefore the learned and godly
Fathers and Councils of old times did usually style Bishops the Successors of
the Apostles without ever scrupling thereat. Many other passages might be
produced out of those excellent Papers to the same purpose, but these are
sufficient to discover that our Bishops are looked on as Successors to the
Apostles, and therefore Mr. Baxter has no reason to call our Episcopacy a new
devised species of Churches, and such as destroys the being of Parochial
Churches.

Sect. 14. 3. It now remains, that we consider whether the restraint of
Discipline in our Parochial Churches does overthrow their Constitution? To make
this clear, we must understand that the Discipline of the Church either
respects the admission of Church Members to the Holy Communion; or the casting
of them out for Scandal afterward.

1. As to that part of Discipline which respects the admission of
Church Members. The Rubric after Confirmation says, That none shall be
admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he be confirmed, or be
ready and desirous to be confirmed. Now to capacitate a person for
Confirmation, it is necessary that he be able to give an account of the
necessary points of the Christian Faith and Practice, as they are contained in
the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments and the Church Catechism;
and of his sufficiency herein the Parochial Minister is the Judge. For he is
either to bring or send in writing, with his hand subscribed thereunto, the
names of all such persons within his Parish, as he shall think fit to be
presented to the Bishop to be confirmed. Now, if this were strictly observed
(and the Church is not responsible for men's neglect) were it not sufficient for
the satisfaction of men as to the admission of Church Members to the Lord's
Supper? And I do not see, but the Objections made against the Discipline of
this Church might be removed, if the things allowed and required by the Rules
of it, were duly practiced; and might attain to as great purity, as is ever
pretended to by the Separate Congregations who now find so much fault for our
want of Discipline. For, even the Churches of New England do grant, Synod of
New England concerning the subject of Baptism, etc. 1662.
that the Infant seed of Confederate visible Believers are members of the same
Church with their Parents, and when grown up are personally under the Watch,
Discipline and Government of that Church. And, that Infants baptized have a
right to further privileges, if they appear qualified for them. And the main of
these qualifications are, understanding the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly
professing their assent thereto, not scandalous in life, and solemnly owning
the Covenant before the Church. Taking this for the Baptismal Covenant, and not
their Church Covenant, our Church owns the same thing, only it is to be done
before the Bishop instead of their Congregation. But the Minister is to be
judge of the qualifications, Baxter of Confirmation, p. 20.
which Mr. Baxter himself allows in this case. Who grants the Profession of
Faith to be a Condition of Right before the Church; and then adds, that such
profession is to be tried, p. 49, 52.
judged and approved by the Pastors of the Church to whose Office it belongs;
because to Ministers as such the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed;
and they are the Stewards of God's House, etc. which he there proves at large
by many Arguments. p. 155.
But he complains of the old careless practice of this excellent duty of
Confirmation. This is a thing indeed to be lamented, that it is too hastily and
cursorily performed: but let the fault then be laid, where it ought to be laid;
not upon the Church, whose Rules are very good, but upon those persons in it
who slubber over so important a Duty. But is it not more becoming Christians in
a peaceable and orderly manner to endeavor to retrieve so excellent a means
for the Reformation of our Parochial Churches; than peevishly to complain of
the want of Discipline, and to reject Communion with our Church on that
account? And I shall desire Mr. Baxter to consider his own words, That the
practice of so much Discipline, p. 172.
as we are agreed in, is a likelier way to bring us to agreement in the rest,
than all our disputings will do without it. Yea Mr. Baxter grants, That the
Presbyters of our Church have by the Rubric the Trial and Approbation of
those, that are sent to the Bishop for Confirmation; and that the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of England, p. 262.
is for the Power of Presbyters herein as far as they could desire. This is a
very fair confession, and sufficient to make it appear that our Diocesan
Episcopacy does not overthrow the Power of Presbyters, as to this part of
Discipline which concerns admission of Church Members to the Communion.

Sect. 15. 2. As to that part of Church Discipline which respects the rejecting
those for Scandal, who have been Church Members. In case of open and public
Scandal, Rubric before Communion.
our Church does allow if not require the Parochial Minister to call and
advertise such a one that is guilty of it in any wise not to come to the Lord's
Table, until he has openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended
his former naughty life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which
before was offended. And in case the offender continue obstinate, he may repel
him from the Communion; but so, that after such repelling, he give an account
to the Ordinary within 14 days; and the Ordinary is then to proceed according
to the Canon. Here is plainly a Power granted to put back any Scandalous
Offender from the Sacrament, whose faults are so notorious as to give offense
to the Congregation; but it is not an absolute and unaccountable Power, but the
Minister is obliged to give account thereof within a limited time to the
Ordinary. Now wherein is it that our Diocesan Episcopacy destroys the being of
Parochial Churches for want of the Power of Discipline? Is it that they have
not Power to exclude men, whether their faults be Scandalous to the
Congregation or not? Or is it, that they are bound to justify what they do,
and to prosecute the Person for those faults for which they put him back from
the Communion? Or is it, that they have not Power to proceed to the greater
Excommunication, that being reserved served to the Bishop, upon full hearing of
all parties concerned? But as long as by the Constitution of our Church every
Minister in his Parish has power to keep back notorious Offenders, it will be
impossible to prove from other circumstances that the being of our Churches is
destroyed by our Diocesan Episcopacy. Defense of the Plea. p. 58.
Mr. B. says, that if it could be proved, that the lesser excommunication out
of our particular Congregations were allowed to the Parish Ministers, it would
half reconcile him to the English sort of Prelacy; but if it be so, he has
been in a sleep these 50 years, that could never hear or read of any such
thing. It is strange, in all this time, he should never read or consider the
26 Canon, which says, that no Minister shall in any wise admit any one of his
Flock, or under his care to the Communion of the Lord's Supper, who is
notoriously known to live impenitently in any scandalous Sin. This is not in
the Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, which he mentions as an abortive thing,
published by John Fox, (which last any one that has seen them, knows to be a
mistake) nor in Dr. Mocket's Book which was burnt; yet not so destroyed, but
with some diligence he might have seen it (but it was for nothing of this kind,
that Book underwent so severe a censure; as Mr. B. insinuates; but for seeming
to incroach too much on the King's Prerogative.) But I appeal to what Mr. B.
calls the Authorized Church Canons; which I think are plain in this case. But
Mr. B. says, this is not the lesser excommunication, but a temporary
suspension of the Ministers own Act in delivering the Sacrament to such
persons. Let Mr. B. call it by what name he pleases; this is certain, the
Minister is empowered, is required to do this; the question then is, whether
this be not such a Censure of the Church, as to suspend notorious Offenders
from the Sacrament; and that within the Power of the Parochial Minister? I
grant, this is not the lesser excommunication, according to the Use of this
Church, for that supposes the sentence passed; and is so called by way of
distinction from the greater pronounced by the Bishop in Person, upon
extraordinary occasions. But yet it is a Church-censure upon Offenders, and was
accounted a sort of excommunication by the Ancient Church; for those who were
in the state of Penitents were then said to be under a kind of excommunication;
Epist. 108.
as appears by several passages in S. Augustine, produced by Spalatensis to this
purpose, Post collat. c. Donat. c. 20.
viz. to prove that there was a penitential excommunication. But Mr. B. quotes
Albaspinaeus to show that the old Excommunication did shut persons out from all
other Church Communion as well as the Sacrament. Spalat. l. 5. c. 9.
Which is very true of the greater Excommunication; but besides this there were
other Censures of the Church upon Offenders, whereby they were suspended from
full Communion; but not debarred the hopes of it upon satisfaction given. These
were said to be in the state of Penitents. Albaspin. l. 2. c. 4.
It was a favor to the excommunicated to be brought into this state; and
others were never allowed to hope to be restored to Communion; others only on
their deathbeds; others according to the nature and degrees of their
Repentance; of which those were left to be Judges, who were particularly
entrusted with the care of the Penitents. Albaspinaeus grants that as long as
men remained Penitents they were actually deprived of the Privileges of
Church Communion; but he says, the Penitents were in a middle state between
the excommunicated and the faithful, being still Candidates, as he calls them;
so that all that were Penitents were suspended from Communion; but not wholly
cast out of the Church; because the Christians might as freely converse with
these, as with any, but they were not allowed to participate in the Sacred
Mysteries. But there was no question, wherever there was a Power to suspend any
Persons from Communion, there was a Power of Discipline; because the Churches
Discipline did not consist merely in the power of Excommunication; no more than
a Judges power lies only in condemning men to be hanged; but in so governing
the Members of the Church, that Scandalous persons may be kept from the
greatest Acts of Communion, and by Admonition and Counsel be brought to a due
preparation for it. Since then our Church does give power to Parochial
Ministers to suspend notorious Offenders from the Communion, it is thereby
evident, that it does not deprive them of all the necessary and essential parts
of Church Discipline. But says Mr. B. If a Minister does publicly admonish
another by name, Defense of the Plea. p. 65, 72.
not censured by the Ordinary, the Lawyers tell him he may have his action
against him. I answer, 1. What need this public Admonition by name? Does the
nature of Church Discipline lie in that? Suppose a man be privately and
effectually dealt with to withdraw himself, is not this sufficient? I am sure
Saint Augustine took this course with his People at Hippo, De T^mp^re Sermon. ^52.
he persuaded them to examine their own Consciences, and if they found
themselves guilty of such Crimes as rendered them unfit for the holy Communion,
he advised them to withdraw themselves from it, till by Prayers and Fasting and
Alms they had cleansed their Consciences, and then they might come to it. Here
is no public Admonition by name; and in many cases Saint Augustine declares the
Church may justly forbear the exercise of Discipline toward Offenders, and yet
the Church be a true Church, and Christians obliged to communicate with it; as
appears by all his disputes with the Donatists. 2. If a restraint be laid on
Ministers by Law: the question then comes to this, whether the obligation to
admonish publicly an Offender, or to deny him the Sacrament, if he will come
to it, be so great as to bear him out in the violation of a Law; made by
public Authority, with a design to preserve our Religion? But my design is
only to speak to this case, so far as the Church is concerned in it.

Sect. 16. If it be said, that notwithstanding this, the neglect and abuse of
Discipline among us are too great to be justified, and too notorious to be
concealed; I answer,

1. That is not our question, but whether our Parochial Churches have lost
their being for want of the Power of Discipline? and whether the Species of our
Churches be changed by Diocesan Episcopacy? which we have showed sufficient
Reason to deny. And what other abuses have crept in, ought in an orderly way to
be reformed, and no good man will deny his assistance in it.

2. It is far easier to separate, or complain for want of Discipline, than to
find out a due way to restore it. Of Confirmation. p. 174, etc.
No man has more set out the almost insuperable difficulties which attend it,
than Mr. Baxter has done; especially in that, it will provoke and exasperate
those most who stand in need of it; and be most likely to do good on those who
need it least.

3. The case of our Churches now, is very different from that of the Churches
in the Primitive times. For, the great Reason of Discipline is not, that for
want of it the Consciences of Fellow-communicants would be defiled (for to
assert that, were Donatism) but that the honor of a Christian Society may be
maintained. If then the Christian Magistrates do take care to vindicate the
Churches honor by due punishment of Scandalous Offenders, there will appear so
much less necessity of restoring the severity of the ancient Discipline. To
which purpose these words of the Royal Martyr King Charles I. are very
considerable. His Majesty's final Answer to the Divines at Newport, n. 4.
But his Majesty sees no necessity that the Bishops challenge to the Power of
Jurisdiction should be at all times as large as the exercise thereof at some
times appears to have been; the exercise thereof being variable according to
the various conditions of the Church in different times. And therefore his
Majesty does not believe that the Bishops under Christian Princes do challenge
such an amplitude of Jurisdiction to belong unto them in respect of their
Episcopal Office precisely, as was exercised in the Primitive times, by Bishops
before the days of Constantine. The reason of the difference being evident,
that in those former times under Pagan Princes, the Church was a distinct Body
of it self, divided from the Commonwealth, and so was to be governed by its
own Rules and Rulers; the Bishops therefore of those times, though they had no
outward coercive power over men's Persons or Estates, yet in as much as every
Christian man when he became a Member of the Church, did ipso facto, and by
that his own voluntary Act put himself under their Government, they exercised a
very large Power of Jurisdiction in spiritualibus, in making Ecclesiastical
Canons, receiving accusations, converting the accused, examining Witnesses,
judging of Crimes, excluding such as they found guilty of Scandalous offenses
from the Lord's Supper, enjoining Penances upon them, casting them out of the
Church, receiving them again upon their Repentance, etc. And all this they
exercised as well over Presbyters as others. But after that the Church under
Christian Princes began to be incorporated into the Commonwealth, whereupon
there must of necessity follow a complication of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Power, the Jurisdiction of Bishops (in the outward exercise of it) was
subordinate unto, and limitable by the Supreme Civil Power, and has been, and
is at this day, so acknowledged by the Bishops of this Realm.

4. The due exercise of Discipline is a work of so much prudence and
difficulty, that the greatest Zealots for it, have not thought it fit to be
trusted in the hands of every Parochial Minister and his particular
Congregation. Calvin. Ep. 136.
Calvin declares, that he never thought it convenient that every Minister
should have the power of Excommunication: not only because of the
invidiousness of the thing, and the danger of the example; but because of the
great abuses and Tyranny it may soon fall into, and because it was contrary to
the Apostolical Practice. And to the same purpose, Beza delivers his judgment,
who likewise gives this account of the Discipline of Geneva, Bez. Ep. 20.
that the Parochial Ministers and Elders proceed no farther than Admonition;
but in case of Contumacy they certify the Presbytery of the City which sits at
certain times and hears all Causes relating to Discipline, and as they judge
fit either give admonition, or proceed to suspension from the Lord's Supper;
or, which is a rare case, and when no other remedy can prevail, they go on to
public Excommunication. Where we see, every Parochial Church is no more
trusted with the Power of Discipline than among us; nay, the Minister here has
no power to repel, but all that he can do there is to admonish; and how come
then their Parochial Churches to be true, and not ours? Besides, why may not
our Ministers be obliged to certify the Bishop, as well as theirs to certify
the Presbytery? Codex Eccles. Afric. c. 6, 7, 9, 43.
since in the African Churches the matter of Discipline was so much reserved to
the Bishop, that a Presbyter had no power to receive a Penitent into the
Communion of the Church without the advice and direction of the Bishop; and
Saint Augustine proposed it, that whosoever received one that declined the
judgment of his own Bishop, should undergo the same censure which that person
deserved; and it was allowed by the Council. Alipius, Saint Augustins great
Friend and Legate of the Province of Numidia, c. 10.
proposed the case of a Presbyter under the censure of his Bishop, who out of
pride and vainglory sets up a separate Congregation in opposition to the Order
of the Church; c. 11.
and he desired to know the judgment of the Council about it; and they
unanimously determined that he was guilty of Schism, and ought to be
anathematized, and to lose his place. And this was the Judgment even of the
African Bishops, for whom Mr. Baxter professes greater reverence than for any
others; and says, their Councils were the best in the world; and commends
their Canons for very good about Discipline. But he pretends that a Bishop's
Diocese there, was but like one of our Parishes, which I have already refuted
at large, by showing that there were places at a considerable distance under
the care of the Bishops. So that the bringing the full power of Discipline into
every Parochial Church, is contrary to the practice of Antiquity, as well as of
the Reformed Churches abroad, which plead most for Discipline; and would
unavoidably be the occasion of great and scandalous disorders, by the ill
management of the Power of Excommunication; as was most evident by the
Separatists when they took this Sword into their hands, and by their foolish
and passionate, and indiscreet use of it, brought more dishonor upon their
Churches, than if they had never meddled with it at all. And in such a matter,
where the honor of the Christian Society is the chief thing concerned, it
becomes wise men to consider what tends most to the promoting of that; and
whether the good, men promise themselves by Discipline, will countervail the
Schisms and Contentions, the heart-burnings, and animosities which would follow
the Parochial exercise of it. The dissenting Brethren in their Apologetical
Narration do say, p. 5.
That they had the fatal miscarriages and shipwrecks of the separation, as
Landmarks to forewarn them of the rocks and shelves they ran upon; and
therefore they say they never exercised the Power of Excommunication. p. 9.
For they saw plainly, they could never hold their People together if they did;
since the excommunicated party would be sure to make friends enough, at least
to make breaches among them; and they holding together by mutual consent, such
ruptures would soon break their Churches to pieces. Besides, this would be
thought no less than setting up an Arbitrary Court of Judicature in every
Parish; because there are no certain Rules to proceed by; no standing
determination what those sins and faults are, which should deserve
excommunication; no method of trials agreed upon; no security against false
Witnesses; no limitation of Causes; no liberty of Appeals, (if Parochial
Churches be the only instituted Churches, as Mr. Baxter affirms:) besides
multitudes of other inconveniences, which may be easily foreseen; so that I do
not question, but if Mr. Baxter had the management of this Parochial Discipline
in any one Parish in London, and proceeded by his own Rules; his Court of
Discipline would be cried out upon in a short time, as more arbitrary and
tyrannical, than any Bishop's Court this day in England: Let any one therefore
judge, how reasonable it is for him to overthrow the being of our Parochial
Churches, for want of that, which being set up according to his own principles,
would destroy the Peace and Unity, if not the very being, of any Parochial
Church whatsoever.

5. That want of Discipline, which is in Parochial Churches, was never thought
by the most zealous Non-conformists of old, destructive to the Being of them.
Of which I have already produced the Testimonies of Cartwright, Hildersham,
Giffard, and many others.

Sect. 17. And supposing all persons left to the judgment of their own
Consciences, as to their own fitness for the Holy Communion, we may observe
these things; which may serve toward the vindication of our Parochial Churches.

(1.) That the greatest Offenders do generally excommunicate themselves; not
daring to venture upon so hazardous a thing, as they account the holy Communion
to be, for fear of the damnation following unworthy receiving. So that, the
most constant Communicants, are the most pious and sober and devout Christians.

(2.) That if any such do voluntarily come, it is upon some great awakenings of
Conscience; some fresh resolutions they have made of amendment of life; after
some dangerous sickness, or under some great affliction; when they are best
inclined, and have strong convictions, and hope for greater strength of Grace
against the power of Temptations. So that whether this Sacrament be a
converting Ordinance or not, by God's Institution, yet the preparation and
disposition of men's minds before it, puts them into the fittest capacity for
Divine Grace; if they be not looked on as the effects of it.

(3.) That it is no prejudice to the benefit of this holy Sacrament to those
who are well prepared, if those who are not, do come to it; any more than in
joining in Prayer or Thanksgiving with them. And if the presence of such
persons who deserve excommunication and are not excommunicated, do overthrow
the being of a Church; then Christ and his Disciples did not make a Church,
when Judas was present with them; as in probability he was, at his last Supper.
At least, if this kind of Discipline had been so necessary, it would never have
been left so doubtful, as it is by the Evangelists; since it had been
necessary for the information of the Christian Church, to have set it down
expressly; not only that he was not present, but that he ought not to be; and
therefore was cast out before.

(4.) That several Presbyterian Churches for many years had no Discipline at
all among them; nor so much as the Lord's Supper administered. And were these
true Churches all that while, and are not ours so now? Plea for Peace, p. 243.
Nay Mr. Baxter says, That some Non-conformists have these seventeen or
eighteen years forborne to Baptize, Answ. 10 Sermon.
or administer the Lord's Supper, or to be Pastors of any Churches. Now I
would fain know, what Churches these men are of? Some or other they must own,
if they be Christians; New Churches they have not, they say; either then they
must own our Churches to be true, notwithstanding the defect of Discipline, or
they must be of no Church at all.

(5.) That our Church is but in the same condition, the Church of
Constantinople and other Churches were in, when Nectarius changed the
Discipline of it, or rather took it quite away. For, the Poenitentiary, whom he
removed for the scandal given, was the Person whose business it was to look
after the Discipline of the Church, and to see that all known Offenders
performed the Penance enjoined them, for satisfaction of the Church. And, the
consequence of it Socrates says was, Socr. l. 5. c. 19.
That every one was left to the judgment of his own Conscience, as to the
participation of the holy Mysteries. And this Socrates says, he had from
Eudaemon himself, who gave the Counsel to Nectarius to take that Office away;
which was accordingly done; Soz. l. 7. c. 16.
and no more restored, says Sozomen: the consequence whereof was, says he,
that every one went to the Lord's Table, (...), as his Conscience gave him
leave, and as he was assured in his own mind. And this example of Nectarius was
soon followed in other Churches, says Sozomen; and so the Discipline of the
Church decayed. But I hope all those Churches did not lose their being, by the
loss of Discipline. And so much in vindication of our Diocesan Church
Government.

Sect. 18. I now come to the National Constitution of our Church. Sermon. p. 19.
By the Church of England, I said, we meant that Society of Christian People
which in this Nation are united under the same Profession of Faith, the same
Laws of Government, and Rules of Divine Worship. And that this was a very
consistent and true notion of our National Church, I proved from the first
notion of a Church, which is a Society of men united together for their Order
and Government according to the Rules of Christian Religion. And since, the
lowest kind of that Society, viz. Congregations for Worship, are called
Churches; since the largest Society of all Christians is accounted a true
Catholic Church; and both from their union and consent in some common thing; I
said I did not understand why a National Society agreeing together in the same
Faith, and under the same Government and Discipline, might not be as truly and
properly a Church, as any particular Congregations? Because the narrowness or
largeness of extent does not alter the nature of the thing: the Kingdom of
France being as truly a Kingdom, as the small Kingdom of Ivetot: and as several
Families make one Kingdom, so several lesser Churches make one National. And
that this notion was not disagreeing with the importance of the word (...), I
showed, that at Athens, from whence the word was taken, it did comprehend in it
all the several Tribes when met together, although every one of those Tribes in
its particular Assembly might be an (...) too; and from thence in the first
Ages of the Christian Church, the name of a Church comprehended in it the
Ecclesiastical Governors and People of whole Cities, and therefore might by
parity of Reason be extended to many Cities united together under one civil
Government and the same Rules of Religion. This is the substance of what I
delivered upon this subject; against which all my Adversaries have something to
say, though not with equal strength, clearness, or temper. Dr. Owen says (1.)
That since I make National Churches to begin with the dissolution of the Roman
Empire, Vindicat. of Non-conform. p. 16.
it fell out a great while after the first Institution of Churches, and
therefore they are not concerned in it: because he supposes Congregational
Churches to be entire Churches of Christ's Institution, and therefore to have a
just right to govern and reform themselves, independently as to any National
Constitution. To which I answer, that if the Churches of Christ's Institution be
not limited to particular Congregations, as I have already proved, then the
gradual increase of Churches, till they came to be National, does not alter any
Institution of Christ; and consequently the Power of those Churches must limit
and determine that of particular Congregations; or else nothing but disorder and
confusion will follow, if every Congregation may have a several Rule of Worship
and Doctrine of Faith, without being liable to an account to any superior
Church Authority. Which is all one, as to suppose that every Family may govern
it self, because a Kingdom is made up of Families, without any respect to the
Laws and Constitution of a Kingdom. No, p. 17.
says Dr. O. the case is not the same. For God never appointed that there
should be no other Government but that of Families. And where has he appointed
that there should be no other Churches but particular Congregations? But God by
the Light and Law of Nature, by the ends and use of the Creation of man, by
express Revelation in his Word, has by his own Authority, appointed and
approved other sorts of Civil Government. So say I, that God by the Light and
Law of Reason, by the ends and use of a Christian Society, by express
Institution of the Apostolical function in the care and Government of many
Churches did declare, that he did appoint and approve other sorts of Church
Government besides that of particular Congregations. For, if God upon the
dispersion of the Nations after the Flood, had appointed twelve Princes to have
ruled the People in their several dispersions, it had been a plain
demonstration he did not intend the several Families to have a distinct and
independent Power within themselves; but that they ought to be governed
according to their appointment; so in the case of Churches; since Christ did
appoint twelve Apostles to plant, settle and govern Churches, and set up Rulers
in them, but still under their Authority, can any thing be plainer, than that
these particular Churches were not settled with an entire power of governing
themselves? But as in the former case, if we suppose those twelve Princes to
have led out their several Divisions, and to have placed them in convenient
Seats, and given them general Rules for governing themselves in Peace and Order
under such as they should appoint, and as they found themselves decaying,
should nominate so many Successors as they thought fit for the ruling the
several Colonies, were they not then obliged to submit to such Governors?
Without breaking in pieces into so many Families, every Master governing his
family by himself; which would certainly ruin and destroy them all; because
they could not have strength and union to defend themselves. So it is again in
the case of Churches, The Apostles planted them, and settled such Officers in
them as were then fit to teach and govern them, still reserving the main care
of Government to themselves; but giving excellent Rules of Charity, Peace,
Obedience and Submission to Governors; and as they withdrew from particular
Churches (within such a precinct, as Crete was) they appointed some, whom they
thought fit to take care of all those Churches, and to constitute inferior
Officers to teach and rule them; and therefore in this case, here is no more
independency in particular Congregations; than in the other, as to private
Families; which is as contrary to the general design of the Peace and Unity of
Christians, and their mutual preservation and defense, as in the former case.
In which, we believe the civil Government to be from God, although no Monarch
can now derive his Title from such Princes at the first dispersion; and would
it not then seem unreasonable to question the succession of Bishops from the
Apostles, when the matter of fact is attested by the most early, knowing,
honest and impartial Witnesses? Lastly, as in the former case, several of those
lesser Princes might unite themselves together by joynt-consent for their
common interest and security, and become one Kingdom: so in the latter case;
several Bishops with the Churches under them, might for promoting the common
ends of Christianity, and the Peace and establishment of their Churches, join
together under the same common bonds and become one National Church: which
being intended for the good of the whole so united, and no ways repugnant to
the design of the Institution, and not usurping upon the Rights of others, nor
assuming more than can be managed, as an universal Pastor must do; will
appear to be no ways repugnant to any particular command or general Rules of
the Gospel, as the Pope's challenge of universal Dominion over the Church is.
Which I therefore mention that any one may see, that the force of this
Reasoning will never justify the Papal Usurpations.

But says Dr. O. National Provincial Churches must first be proved of Christ's
Institution, p. 17.
before they can be allowed to have their power given them by Jesus Christ. And
yet in the case of Congregational Churches he says there is no need of any
positive Rule or direction; p. 42.
for the Nature of the thing it self, and the duty of men with respect to the
end of such Churches, is sufficient for it. And this is as much as we plead in
behalf of National Churches, viz. What the nature of a Christian Society, and
the duty of men with respect to the end of it does require. For, whatever tends
to the support of Religion, to the preserving Peace and Unity among Christians,
to the preventing dangerous Errors and endless confusions, from the very
nature of the thing, and the end of a Christian Society becomes a Duty. For the
general Rules of Government lay an obligation upon men to use the best means
for advancing the ends of it. It being then taken for granted among all
Christians, 1. That Christ is the Author or founder of this Society which we
call the Church; 2. That he designs the continuance and preservation of it; 3.
That the best way of its preservation is by an Union of the members of it;
provided the Union be such as does not overthrow the ends of it: We may
reasonably infer, that whatever tends to promote this Union, and to prevent any
notable inconveniences or mischiefs which may happen to it, is within the
design of the first Institution; although it be not contained in express words.

Sect. 19. We are now therefore to consider, whether single Congregations
dispersed and disunited over a Nation; or a combination of them together under
some common bonds as to Faith, Government and Worship, be the more likely way
to promote Religion, to secure the Peace and Tranquillity of a Church.

Let us then compare these two Hypotheses together in point of Reason, as to
these ends.

In the Congregational way, there may be as many Religions as Churches. I do
not say there are, but we are arguing now upon what may be, from the nature of
the thing. Supposing then every Congregation to have an entire and
unaccountable Power within it self; what hinders but of ten Congregations one
may be of Socinians, another of Papists, another of Arians, another of Quakers,
another of Anabaptists, etc. and it may be no two of them of the same mind. But
if they be, it is mere chance and good hap; there being no obligation upon them
to have any more than mutual forbearance toward each other. Let now any
rational man judge, whether it appear probable, that so loose and shattered a
Government as this is, should answer the obligation among Christians, to use
the best and most effectual means to preserve the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, and to uphold Peace and Unity among Christians? But supposing all these
several Congregations united together under such common bonds, that the
Preacher is accountable to superiors; that none be admitted but such as own
the true Faith, and promise obedience; that public legal Censures take hold
upon the disturbers of the Churches Peace: here we have a far more effectual
means according to Reason for upholding true Religion among us. And that this
is no mere theory, appears by the sad experience of this Nation, when upon the
breaking the bonds of our National Church Government, there came such an
overpowring inundation of Errors and Schisms among us, that this Age is like
to smart under the sad effects of it. And in New England, two or three men, as
Williams, Gorton and Clark discovered the apparent weakness of the Independent
Government: which being very material to this business, I shall give a brief
account of it as to one of them. Mr. Roger Williams was the Teacher of a
Congregational Church at Salem, and a man in very good esteem as appears by Mr.
Cotton's Letter to him: Williams his Answer to Cotton's Letter, p. 1.
he was a great admirer of the purity of the New England Churches; but being a
thinking man, he pursued the principles of that way farther than they thought
fit, for he thought it unlawful to join with unregenerate men in prayer, or
taking an Oath; and that there ought to be an unlimited toleration of Opinions.
etc. These Doctrines, and some others of his not taking, he proceeded to
Separation from them, and gathered a New Church in opposition to theirs; this
gave such a disturbance to them, that the Magistrates sent for him, and the
Ministers reasoned the case with him. He told them, he went upon their own
grounds, and therefore they had no reason to blame him. Mr. Cotton told him
they deserved to be punished who made Separation among them; Mr. Williams
replied, this would return upon themselves; for had not they done the same as
to the Churches of Old-England? In short, Cottons Answer to R* Williams, p. 57.
after their debates, and Mr. Williams continuing in his principles of
Separation from their Churches, a sentence of banishment is decreed against him
by the Magistrates, and this sentence approved and justified by their Churches.
For these are Mr. Cotton's words, That the increase of concourse of People to
him on the Lord's days in private, to a neglect or deserting of public
Ordinances, and to the spreading of the leaven of his corrupt imaginations,
provoked the Magistrates, rather than to breed a Winters spiritual plague in
the Country, to put upon him a Winters journey out of the Country. This Mr.
Williams told them, was falling into the National Church way, which they
disowned; or else, says he, why must he that is banished from the one, be
banished from the other also? And he charges them that they have suppressed
Churches set up after the Parochial way; (...) p. 46.
and although the Persons were otherwise allowed to be godly, to live in the
same air with them, if they set up any other Church or Worship than what
themselves practiced. Which appears by the Laws of New England mentioned
before: and Mr. Cobbet one of the Teachers of their Churches, confesses that
by the Laws of the Country, Cobbet's Answer to Cla^ks N^rrative, p. 40, 47.
none are to be free men, but such as are members of Churches. I now appeal to
any man, whether these proceedings and these Laws do not manifestly discover
the apparent weakness and insufficiency of the Congregational way for
preventing those disorders which they apprehend to be destructive to their
Churches? why had not Mr. Williams his liberty of Separation as well as they?
why are no Anabaptists or Quakers permitted among them? Because these ways
would disturb their Peace, and distract their People, and in time overthrow
their Churches. Very well: but where is the entireness of the power of every
single Congregation, the mean while? Why might not the People at Salem have the
same liberty as those at Boston or Plymouth? The plain truth is, they found by
experience, this Congregational way would not do alone, without civil
Sanctions, and the interposing of the Pastors of other Churches. For when
Williams, and Gorton, and Clark had begun to make some impressions on their
People, they besti^red themselves as much as possible to have their mouths
stopped, and their persons banished. This I do only mention, to show, that where
this way has prevailed most, they have found it very insufficient to carry on
those ends which themselves judged necessary for the preservation of their
Religion, and of Peace and Unity among themselves. And in their Synod at
Boston, 1662, the New England Churches are come to apprehend the necessity of
Con^eciation of Churches, in case of divisions and contentions; and for the
rectifying of male-administrations, and healing of errors and scandals, Synod
of New England. p. 30. Defense of the Synod, p. 1^2.
that are unhealed among themselves: For, Christ's care, say they, is for whole
Churches as well as for particular persons. Of which Consociation they tell us,
that Mr. Cotton drew a platform before his death. Is such a Consociation of
Churches a Duty or not, in such cases? If not, why do they do any thing
relating to Church Government, for which they have no Command in Scripture? If
there be a Command in Scripture, then there is an Institution of a Power above
Congregational Churches. It is but a slender evasion, which they use, when they
call these only voluntary Combinations, for what are all Churches else? Only,
the antecedent obligation on men to join for the Worship of God makes entering
into other Churches a Duty; and so the obligation lying upon Church Officers to
use the best means to prevent or heal divisions, will make such Consociations a
Duty too. And therefore in such cases the Nature of the thing requires an union
and conjunction superior to that of Congregational Churches; which is then
most agreeable to Scripture and Antiquity when the Bishops and Presbyters join
together. Who agreeing together upon Articles of Doctrine, and Rules of Worship
and Discipline, are the National Church representative; and these being owned
and established by the civil Power, and received by the Body of the Nation, and
all persons obliged to observe the same in the several Congregations for
Worship; these Congregations so united in these common bonds of Religion, make
up the complete National Church.

Sect. 20. And now I hope I may have leave to consider Mr. Baxter's subtilties
about this matter; which being spread abroad in abundance of words to the same
purpose, I shall reduce to these following heads, wherein the main difficulties
lie.

1. Concerning the difference between a National Church and a Christian
Kingdom. 2. Concerning the Governing Power of this National Church; which he
calls the Constitutive regent part. 3. Concerning the common ties or Rules
which make this National Church.

1. Concerning the difference between a Christian Kingdom and a National
Church. Answ. p. 31, 32.
A Christian Kingdom, he says, they all own, but this is only equivocally
called a Church, but, he says, the Christian Bishops for 1300 years, were far
from believing that a Prince or Civil Power was essential to a Christian
Church, or that the Church in the common sense was not constituted of another
sort of regent part that had the Power of the Keys. If there be any such
Christians in the world, that hold a Prince an essential part of a Christian
Church, let Mr. Baxter confute them; but I am none of them; for I do believe
there were Christian Churches before Christian Princes, that there are
Christian Churches under Christian Princes, and will be such, if there were
none left. I do believe the Power of the Keys to be a distinct thing,
Difference between the Power of the Magistrates and Church Past^^rs, 1^^1.
from the Office of the Civil Magistrate; and if he had a mind to write against
such an opinion, he should have rather sent it to his learned, sincere, and
worthy Friend Lewis du Moulin; if he had been still living. But if I only mean
a Christian Kingdom, p. (...), 40.
who denies it? says he; If all this confused stir, be about a Christian
Kingdom, be it known to you that we take such to be of divine Command. Nay
farther, (...)
if we mean all the Churches of a Kingdom associated for Concord as equals, we
deny it not. What is it then, that is so denied and disputed against, and such
a flood of words is poured out about? It seems at last it is this, that the
Nation must be one Church as united in one Saccrdotal head, personal or
collective, Monarchical or Aristocratical. Before I answer this Question, I
hope, I may ask another; whence comes this zeal now against a National Church?
For, when the Presbyterians were in power, they were then for National
Churches, and thought they proved them out of Scriptures; and none of these
subtilties about the Constitutive Regent part did ever perplex, or trouble
them. Thus the Presbyterian London Ministers 1654. made no difficulty of owning
National Churches; (...) p. 12, 13, 14.
and particularly the Church of England; in these words. And if all the
Churches in the world are called one Church; let no man be offended if all the
Congregations in England, be called the Church of England. But this you will
say, is by association of equal Churches. No, they say, it is when the
particular Congregations of one Nation living under one Civil Government,
agreeing in Doctrine and Worship, are governed by their greater and lesser
Assemblies, and in this sense, say they, we assert a National Church. Hudson of
the Church. p. 15.
Two things says Mr. Hudson are required to make a National Church. 1.
National agreement in the same Faith and Worship. 2. National union in one
Ecclesiastical body, in the same Community of Ecclesiastical Government. The
old Non-conformists had no scruple about owning the Church of England, and
thought they understood what was meant by it. Whence come all these
difficulties now to be raised about this matter? Is the thing grown so much
darker than formerly? But some men's Understandings are confounded with nice
distinctions, and their Consciences ensnared by needless Scruples.

To give therefore a plain answer to the Question, what we mean by the National
Church of England. By that is understood either (1) the Church of England
diffusive. Or (2) The Church of England representative.

1. The National Church of England diffusive, is, the whole Body of Christians
in this Nation, consisting of Pastors and People, agreeing in that Faith,
Government and Worship, which are established by the Laws of this Realm. And by
this description, any one may see, how easily the Church of England is
distinguished from the Papists on one side, and the Dissenters on the other.
Which makes me continue my wonder at those who so confidently say, they cannot
tell what we mean by the Church of England. For was there not a Church here
settled upon the Reformation in the time of Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth? Has
not the same Doctrine, the same Government, the same manner of Worship,
continued in this Church? (bating only the interruption given by its Enemies.)
How comes it then so hard for men to understand so easy, so plain, so
intelligible a thing? If all the Question be, how all the Congregations in
England make up this one Church? I say, by unity of consent; as all particular
Churches make one Catholic Church. If they ask, how it comes to be one
National Church? I say, because it was received by the common consent of the
whole Nation in Parliament, as other Laws of the Nation are; and is universally
received by all that obey those Laws. And t^is I think is sufficient to scatter
those mists which some pretend to have before their eyes, that they cannot
clearly see what we mean by the Church of England.

2. The representative Church of England, is the Bishops and Presbyters of this
Church, meeting together according to the Laws of this Realm, to consult and
advise about matters of Religion. And this is determined by the allowed Canons
of this Church. Can. 139.
We do not say, that the Convocation at Westminster is the representative
Church of England, as the Church of England is a National Church; for that is
only representative of this Province, there being another Convocation in the
other Province; but the Consent of both Convocations, is the representative
National Church of England.

Sect. 21. And now to answer Mr. Baxter's grand difficulty, concerning the
Constitutive Regent part of this National Church. I say, 1. It proceeds upon a
false supposition. 2. It is capable of a plain resolution.

1. That it proceeds upon a false supposition: which is, that wherever there
is the true Notion of a Church, there must be a Constitutive Regent part, i. e.
there must be a standing Governing Power, which is an essential part of it.
Which I shall prove to be false from Mr. Baxter himself. He asserts, that there
is one Catholic visible Church; and that all particular Churches, Christian
Directory. Eccl. Cases Q. 5^. p. 830.
which are headed by their particular Bishops, or Pastors, are parts of this
Universal Church, as a Troop is of an Army, or a City of a Kingdom. If this
Doctrine be true, Answer to my Sermon, p. 77.
and withal it be necessary that every Church must have a Constitutive Regent
part as essential to it, then it unavoidably follows that there must be a
Catholic visible Head, to a Catholic visible Church. And so Mr. Baxter' s
Constitutive Regent part of a Church, has done the Pope a wonderful kindness,
and made a very plausible Plea for his Universal Pastourship. But there are
some men in the world, who do not attend to the advantages they give to Popery;
so they may vent their spleen against the Church of England. But does not Mr.
Baxter say, that the universal Church is headed by Christ himself? I grant he
does; but this does not remove the difficulty; for the Question is about that
visible Church whereof particular Churches are parts; and they being visible
parts do require a visible Constitutive Regent part as essential to them;
therefore the whole visible Church must have likewise a visible Constitutive
Regent part, i. e. a visible Head of the Church; as if a Troop has an
inferior Officer, an Army must have a General; if a City has a Mayor, a
Kingdom must have a King, that is equally present and visible as the other is.
This is indeed to make a Key for Catholics, by the help of which they may
enter and take possession.

2. The plain resolution is, that we deny any necessity of any such
Constitutive Regent part, or one formal Ecclesiastical Head as essential to a
National Church. For a National Consent is as sufficient to make a National
Church; as an Universal Consent to make a Catholic Church. But if the Question
be, by what way this National Consent is to be declared? then we answer
farther; that by the Constitution of this Church, the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Presbyters being summoned by the King's Writ are to advise and declare their
Judgments in matters of Religion; which being received, allowed and enacted by
the King and three Estates of the Kingdom; there is as great a National Consent
as is required to any Law. And all Bishops, Ministers, and People, taken
together, who pr^fess the Faith so established, and worship God according to
the Rules so appointed, make up this National Church of England: which notion
of a National Church being thus explained, I see no manner of difficulty
remaining in all Mr. Baxter' s Quaeries and Objections about this matter.

Sect. 22. 3. That which looks most like a difficulty is (3.) concerning the
common ties or Rules which make this National Church. For Mr. B. would know,
Anws. p 34.
whether by the common Rules I mean a Divine Rule or a mere humane Rule. If it
be a Divine Rule, they are of the National Church as well as we; if it be a
humane Rule, how comes consent in this to make a National Church? how come they
not to be of it for not consenting? how can such a consent appear, when there
are differences among our selves? This is the substance of what he objects. To
which I answer (1.) Our Church is founded upon a Divine Rule, viz. the Holy
Scriptures, which we own as the Basis and Foundation of our Faith; and
according to which, all other Rules of Order and Worship are to be agreeable.
(2.) Our Church requires a Conformity to those Rules which are appointed by it,
as agreeable to the word of God. And so the Churches of New England do, to the
orders of Church Government among themselves by all that are members of their
Churches; and annex civil Privileges to them; and their Magistrates impose
civil Punishments on the breakers and disturbers of them. And although they
profess agreement in other things, yet because they do not submit to the Orders
of their Churches, they do not own them as members of their Churches. Why
should it then be thought unreasonable with us, not to account those members of
the Church of England, who contemn and disobey the Orders of it? (3.) There is
no difference among our selves concerning the lawfulness of the Orders of our
Church, or the duty of submission to them. If there be any other differences,
they are not material, as to this business: and I believe are no other than in
the manner of explaining some things, which may happen in the best Society in
the world, without breaking the Peace of it. As about the difference of Orders;
the sense of some passages in the Athanasian Creed; the true explication of one
or two Articles; which are the things he mentions. p. 39.
A multitude of such differences will never overthrow such a Consent among us,
as to make us not to be members of the same National Church.

Sect. 23. Having thus cleared the main difficulties which are objected by my
more weighty Adversaries, the weaker assaults of the rest in what they differ
from these, will admit of a quicker dispatch. Mr. A. objects, Mischief of
Impos. p. 27.
(1.) That if National Churches have Power to reform themselves, then so have
Congregational; and therefore I do amiss to charge them with Separation. I
grant it, if he proves that no Congregational Church has any more Power over
it, than a National Church has: i. e. that there is as much evidence against
both Episcopal and Presbyterial Government as there is against the Pope's
Usurpations. When he does prove that, ibid.
he may have a farther answer. (2.) That National Churches destroy the being of
other Churches under them; this I utterly deny, and there wants nothing but
Proof; as Erasmus said one Andrelinus was a good Poet, only his Verses wanted
one Syllable and that was (...). p. 29.
(3.) By my description the Parliament may be a National Church, for they are a
Society of men united together for their Order and Government, according to the
Rules of the Christian Religion. But did I not immediately before say, that
National Churches are National Societies of Christians, under the same Laws of
Government and Rules of Worship? from whence it is plain that in the next
words, when I went about to prove National Churches to be true Churches, I used
such a general description as was common to any kind of Church and not proper
to a National Church. p. 30.
(4.) He gives this reason why consent should not make National Churches as
well as Congregational; because it must be such an agreement as the Gospel
warrants; and that is only for Worship, and not to destroy their own being.
This is the reasoning of a horse in a mill; still round about the same thing.
And therefore the same answer may serve. p. 31.
(5.) Out come Mr. B.'s Objections, against a visible Head of this National
Church; and the manner of union, and the differences among our selves; as
though Mr. B. could not manage his own Arguments, and therefore he takes them
and strips them of their heavy and rusty Armor; and makes them appear again in
the field, in another dress, and if they could not stand the field in the
former habit, they can much less do it in this.

The Author of the Letter says, Letter out of the country, p. 24.
I only prove a National Church a possible thing. He clearly mistakes my
design; which was to show that if there be such a thing as a National Church,
then no single Congregations have such a power in themselves to separate from
others in matters of order and decency where there is a consent in the same
Faith. To prove that there was such a thing, I showed that if the true Notion
of a Church does agree to it, then upon the same reason that we own particular
Churches, and the Catholic Church, we are to own a National Church; so that
the design of that discourse was not barely to prove the possibility of the
thing; but the truth and reality of it. p. 25.
But, says he, Can it be proved that Christ has invested the Guides of this
Church, not chosen by the People, with a Power to make Laws and Decrees,
prescribing not only things necessary for common order and decency, but new
federal rites, and teaching signs and symbols, superadded to the whole
Christian Institution? etc. I answer, that such a Church has Power to appoint
Rules of Order and Decency not repugnant to the word of God, which on that
account others are bound to submit to; and to take such care of its
preservation, as to admit none to its privileges but such as do submit to them;
and if any disturb the Peace of this Church, the Civil Magistrate may justly
inflict civil Penalties upon them for it. All which is no more than any settled
Church in the world asserts, as well as ours. And I wonder this should be so
continually objected against our Church, which all Societies in the world think
just and necessary for their own preservation. As to the Guides of the Church
not being chosen by the People, I shall speak to that afterward. One objection
more he makes, which the others did not, viz. I had said that by whole or
National Churches, I understood the Churches of such Nations which upon decay
of the Roman Empire resumed their just right of Governing themselves, and upon
their owning Christianity incorporated into one Christian Society, under the
same common ties and Rules of Order and Government. Such Churches, I say, have
a just right of Reforming themselves, and therefore are not liable to the
imputation of Schism from the Roman Church. Would one think, what unlucky
Inferences he draws from hence? (1.) Then all that remain within the Empire, p.
26.
were bound to continue in the Communion of the Roman Church. What, if I should
deny the continuance of the Roman Empire? then all would be safe. But do I any
where say, that being in the Empire, they were bound to submit to the Roman
Church? No; but as the Nation resumed its just civil Rights, the Church might
as rightfully recover it self from Papal Usurpations; not laying the force of
one upon the other, but paralleling them together: and the advantage of the
argument is on the Churches side. (2.) Then where Princes have not resumed
their just rights as to Reformation, they are Schismatics that separate from
Rome. Part 2.
That does not follow: for in the cases before mentioned separation is lawful;
but no Reformation is so unexceptionable, as when there is a Concurrence of the
Civil Power.

My last Adversary does not deny a National Church from consent in the same
Articles of Religion, Rect^r of Sutton, etc. p. 2^.
and Rules of Government and Order of Worship; but then he says, such ought to
be agreeable to the established Rule of Holy Scriptures. And therein we are all
agreed. So that after much tugging, this point is thought fit to be given up.

Sect. 24. The next thing to be considered, is, the interest and Power of the
People as to the choice of their Pastors; for want of which great complaints
are made by my Adversaries, as a thing injurious to them, and prejudicial to
the Church, and that we therein go contrary to all Antiquity. Vindication, etc.
p. 3^.
Dr. O. puts the depriving the People of their liberty of choosing their
Pastors among the Causes of Separation. Mr. Baxter is very Tragical upon this
argument; and keeps not within tolerable bounds of discretion, in pleading the
People's Cause, Answ. p. 15, 16.
against Magistrates and Patrons and Laws: and he tells me, I go against all
the ancient Fathers and Churches for many hundred years, and am so far a
Separatist from more than one Parish Priest; and therefore my charge of them is
schismatical and unjust, and recoileth on my self; who instead of God's Rule,
accuse them that walk not by our novel crooked Rules, which may make as many
modish Religions as there are Princes. When I first read such passages as
these, I wondered what I had said, that might give occasion to so much undecent
Passion, as every where almost discovers it self in his Answer: and the more I
considered the more I wondered; but at last I resolved as Mr. A. does about the
Assembly, that Mr. B. is but a man, as other men are; and for all that I see,
of equal passions, and that upon little or no provocation. For I had not said
one word upon this Argument. What then? would Mr. B. seek a Cause to express
his anger against me? as if I had allowed Princes to set up what Religions they
please. Surely, he thought himself writing against Hobbs and Spinosa then. No:
but thus he artificially draws me into this snare. I spoke much against
Separation. How then? They would never have separated, if they had not been
silenced; therefore my being against their separation, shows I am for their
silencing. As though these necessarily followed each other. What is this to
Princes imposing what Religion they please? Thus* Then Magistrates by their
Laws may put out Nonconformists and put in Conformists. But have we not the
same Religion still? But, says Mr. Baxter, these must be my supposed Grounds;
that Magistrates may appoint what Religion they please, and those are
Separatists who do not obey them. Is not this admirable ingenuity, to rail upon
a man, for suppositions of his own making? However Mr. Baxter will have it so,
let me say what I will. The People's part he will take, and let me take that of
the Magistrates and Laws, if I think good; and since they are fallen to my lot,
I will defend them as well as I can, as to this matter. Mr. B. appearing very
warm in this business, what does Mr. A. coming after him, but make it the very
first and fundamental Ground of their Separation? viz. Mischief of (...),
Preface.
That every particular Church upon a due balance of all circumstances, has an
inherent right to choose its own Pastor, and every particular Christian the
same Power to choose his own Church. Nay then, I thought, we were in a very fair
way of settlement; when the Anabaptists in Germany never broached a looser
principle than this; nor more contrary to the very possibility of having an
established Church: for it leads to all manner of Schisms and Factions in
spite of all Laws and Authority in Church or State. The Author of the Letter
goes upon the same principle too, Letter out of the Country, p. 25.
and says, The Guides of the Church are to be chosen by the People, according
to Scripture and Primitive practice. This I perceive is a popular argument, and
a fine device to draw in the common People to the dissenting Party; whatever
becomes of Laws, and men's just and legal Rights of Patronage, all must yield to
the antecedent Right of the People. But to bring this matter to a strict
debate, we must consider these three things. 1. What Original, or inherent
Right and Power the People had. 2. How they came to be divested of it. 3.
Whether there be sufficient ground to resume it. And from thence we shall
understand, whether some of the People's consenting to hear the Nonconformists
preach, notwithstanding the Laws, can excuse them from Separation? for this
lies at the bottom of all.

1. As to the Original, inherent Right and Power of the People. Dr. O.
supposes all Church Power to be originally in the People; for to manifest how
favorable wise men have been to the Congregational way, he quotes a saying of
F. Paul; Vindicat. p. 37.
out of a Book of his, lately translated into English, that in the beginning,
the Government of the Church had altogether a Democratical Form; which is an
opinion so absurd and unreasonable, that I could not easily believe such a
saying to have come from so learned and judicious a Person. For was there not a
Church to be formed in the beginning? Did not Christ appoint Apostles and give
them Commission and Authority for that end? Where was the Church power then
lodged? Was it not in the Apostles? Did not they in all places, as they planted
Churches, appoint Officers to teach and govern them? And did they not give them
Authority to do what they had appointed? Were not then the several Pastors
and Teachers invested with a Power superior to that of the People and
independent upon them? And if they had such Power and Authority over the
People, how came their Power to be derived from them, as it must be, if the
Church Government then were Democratical? Besides, Is it reasonable to suppose
the People should assemble to choose their Officers, and convey the Power of
the Keys to them; which never were in their hands? And how could they make
choice of men for their fitness and abilities, when their abilities depended so
much on the Apostles laying on of their hands? For then the Holy Ghost was
given unto them. But in all the Churches planted by the Apostles, in all the
directions given about the choice of Bishops and Deacons, no more is required,
as to the People, than barely their Testimony; therefore it is said they must
be blameless, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 7, 10.
and men of good report. But, where is it said or intimated that the
Congregation being the first subject of the Power of the Keys, must meet
together, and choose their Pastor, and then convey the Ministerial Power over
themselves, to them? If it were true that the Church Government at first was
Democratical, the Apostles have done the People a mighty injury; for they have
said no more of their Power in the Church, than they have done of the Pope's.
It is true the Brethren were present at the nomination of a new Apostle: Act.
l. 14.
but were not the Women so too? And is the Power of the Keys in their hands
too? Suppose not, does this prove that the Churches Power was then
Democratical? then the People made an Apostle and gave him his Power; which I
do not think any man would say, much less F. Paul. As to the election of
Deacons; it was no properly Church Power which they had; but they were Stewards
of the common Stock; and was there not then, all the reason in the world, the
Community should be satisfied in the choice of the men? Act. 6. 3, 5.
When Saint Peter received Cornelius to the Faith, he gave an account of it to
all the Church. And what then? Must he therefore derive his power from it? Do
not Princes and Governors give an account of their proceedings for the
satisfaction of their Subjects minds? But here is not all the Church mentioned;
Act. 11. 3.
only those of the Circumcision at Jerusalem had a mind to understand the
reason of his receiving a Gentile Convert. And what is this to the power of the
Church? But in the Council of Jerusalem the People did intervene, and the
Letters were written in the names of all the three Orders, Apostles, Priests
and faithful Brethren. I grant it; but is it not expressly said, that the
Question was sent up from the Churches, to the Apostles and Presbyters? Act.
15. 2.
Is it not said, that the Apostles and Presbyters met to debate it; and that
the multitude was silent? 6. 12.
Is it not said, that the Decrees were passed by the Apostles and Presbyters,
without any mention of the People? 16. 4.
And here was the proper occasion to have declared their Power; but in the
other place, it signifies no more than their general consent to the Decrees
that were then made. In success of time, it is added, when the Church increased
in number, the faithful retiring themselves to the affairs of their Families,
and having left those of the Congregation, the Government was retained only in
the Ministers, and so became Aristocratical, saving the election which was
Popular. Which account is neither agreeable to Reason, nor to Antiquity. For,
was not the Government of the Church Aristocratical in the Apostles times? How
came it to be changed, from that to a Democratical Form? Did not the Apostles
appoint Rulers in the several Churches, and charged the People to obey them?
And was this an argument the Power was then in the People? It was not then the
People's withdrawing (of which there can be no evidence, if there be so much
evidence still left for the People's Power, in Antiquity) but the Constitution
of the Church was Aristocratical by the appointment of the Apostles.

Sect. 25. We therefore come now to consider the Popular Elections, as to which
there is so fair a pretense from Antiquity; but yet not such, as to fix any
inherent, or unalterable Right in the People. As I shall make appear, by these
following observations.

1. That the main ground of the People's Interest was founded upon the Apostles
Canon, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 7.
That a Bishop must be blameless and of good report.

2. That the People upon this assuming the Power of Elections, caused great
disturbances and disorders in the Church.

3. That to prevent these, many Bishops were appointed without their choice,
and Canons made for the better regulating of them.

4. That when there were Christian Magistrates, they did interpose as they
thought fit, notwithstanding the popular claim; in a matter of so great
consequence to the Peace of Church and State.

5. That upon the alteration of the Government of Christendom the Interest of
the People was secured by their consent in Parlaments, and that by such consent
the Nomination of Bishops was reserved to Princes, and the Patronage of Livings
to particular Persons.

6. That things being thus settled by established Laws, there is no reasonable
Ground for the Peoples resuming the Power of electing their own Bishops and
Ministers in opposition to these Laws.

If I can make good these Observations, I shall give a full answer to all the
Questions propounded, concerning the Right and Power of the People, which my
Adversaries build so much upon.

(1.) That the main ground of the Peoples interest was founded upon the
Apostles Canon, that a Bishop must be blameless, and of good report. For so the
Greek Scholiast argues from that place in Timothy, If a Bishop ought to have a
good report of them that are without, (...), How much rather of the Brethren,
(...), says Theophylact. And both have it from Saint Chrysostom. So it is said
concerning Timothy himself, (...), Who had a good Testimony from the Brethren
in Lystra and Iconium. Act. 1^. 2.
And this is mentioned before Saint Paul's taking him into the Office of an
Evangelist. So in the choice of the Deacons, the Apostles bid them find out,
(...), Act. 6. 3.
men of good reputation among them. And there is a very considerable Testimony
in the Epistle of Clemens to this purpose; Clement. Epist. p. 54, 55, 56, 57.
where he gives an account, how the Apostles preaching through Cities and
Countries, did appoint their First Fruits, having made a spiritual trial of
them, to be Bishops and Deacons of those who were to believe. Here it is plain,
that they were of the Apostles appointment, and not of the Peoples choice; and
that their Authority could not be from them, whom they were appointed first to
convert and then to govern; and although their number was but small at first,
yet as they increased, though into many Congregations, they were still to be
under the Government of those, whom the Apostles appointed over them. And then
he shows how those who had received this Power from God came to appoint others:
and he brings the Instance of Moses, when there was an emulation among the
Tribes, what method he took for putting an end to it, by the blossoming of
Aarons Rod; which, says he, Moses did on purpose to prevent confusion in
Israel, and thereby to bring Glory to God; now, says he, the Apostles foresaw
the contentions that would be about the name of Episcopacy ((...)) i. e. about
the choice of men into that Office of Ruling the Church; which the sense shows
to be his meaning: therefore, foreseeing these things perfectly, they appointed
the persons before mentioned, and left the distribution of their Offices, with
this instruction, that as some died, other approved men should be chosen into
their Office. Those therefore who were appointed by them, or other eminent Men,
the whole Church being therewith well-pleased, discharging their Office with
humility, quietness, readiness, and unblameableness, being men of a long time
of good report, we think such men cannot justly be cast out of their Office. It
seems, some of the Church of Corinth were at that time factious against some
Officers in their Church, and endeavored to throw them out for the sake of one
or two more, and made such a disturbance thereby as had brought a great
scandal, not only on themselves, but the Christian Church; which made Clemens
write this Epistle to them; wherein he advises those busy men rather to leave
the Church themselves, than to continue making such a disturbance in it; and if
they were good Christians they would do so; and bring more glory to God by it,
than by all their heat and contentions. Now by this discourse of Clemens it is
plain, (1.) That these Officers of the Church were not chosen by the People,
but appointed by the Apostles, or other great Men, according to their Order?
(2.) That they took this course on purpose to prevent the contentions that
might happen in the Church, about those who should bear Office in it. (3.) That
all that the People had to do, was to give Testimony, or to express their
approbation of those, who were so appointed. For he could not allow their power
of choosing, since he says, the Apostles appointed Officers on purpose to
prevent the contentions that might happen about it. And it seems very probable
to me, that this was one great reason of the faction among them; viz. that
those few Popular men in that Church, who caused all the disturbance,
represented this, as a great grievance to them; that their Pastors and
Officers were appointed by others, and not chosen by themselves. For they had
no objection against the Presbyters themselves, being allowed to be men of
unblameable lives; yet a contention there was, and that about casting them out;
and such a contention, as the Apostles designed to prevent by appointing a
succession from such whom themselves ordain^d; and therefore it is very ^ikely,
they challenged this power to themselves to cast out those whom they had not
chosen. But it seems, the Apostles knowing what contentions would follow in the
Church, took (...) them, leaving to the People their Testimony concerning those
whom they ordained. And this is plain, even from Saint Cyprian where he
discourses of this matter, Answ. p. 27.
in that very Epistle concerning Basilides and Martialis, to which Mr. Baxter
refers me. For, the force of what Saint Cyprian says comes at last only to
this giving Testimony; Cypr. Epist. 68.
therefore, says he, God appointed the Priest to be appointed before all the
People, thereby showing that Ordinations in the Christian Church ought to be,
sub Populi Assistentis Conscientia, in the Presence of the People: for what
reason? that they might give them Power? no; that was never done under the Law;
nor then imagined, when S. Cyprian wrote; but he gives the account of it
himself; that by their presence, either their faults might be published, or
their good acts commended; that so it may appear to be a just and lawful
Ordination, which has been examined by the suffrage and judgment of all. The
People here had a share in the Election, but it was in matter of Testimony
concerning the good or ill behavior of the Person. And therefore, he says, it
was almost a general Custom among them, and he thinks came down from Divine
Tradition and Apostolical Practice, that when any People wanted a Bishop, the
neighbor Bishops met together in that place, and the new Bishop was chosen,
plebe praesente, the People being present, (not by the Votes of the People)
quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, which best understands every man's
Conversation: and this, he says, was observed in the Consecration of their
Fellow-bishop Sabinus, who was put into the place of Basilides. Where he does
express the Consent of the People, but he requires the Judgment of the Bishops;
which being thus performed, he incourages the People to withdraw from Basilides
and to adhere to Sabinus. For, Basilides having fallen foully into Idolatry,
and joined blasphemy with it, had of his own accord laid down his Bishopric,
and desired only to be received to Lay-Communion, upon this Sabinus was
consecrated Bishop in his room; after which Basilides goes to Rome and there
engages the Bishop to interpose in his behalf, that he might be restored;
Sabinus finding this, makes his application to Saint Cyprian and the African
Bishops, who write this Epistle to the People to withdraw from Basilides,
saying that it belonged chiefly to them to choose the good and to refuse the
bad. Which is the strongest Testimony in Antiquity for the Peoples Power; and
yet here we are to consider (1.) It was in a case where a Bishop had
voluntarily resigned. (2.) Another Bishop was put into his room, not by the
Power of the People, but by the judgment and Ordination of the neighbor
Bishops. (3.) They had the judgment of a whole Council of African Bishops for
their deserting him. (4.) For a notorious matter of fact, viz. Idolatry and
Blasphemy by his own confession. (5.) All the proof which Saint Cyprian brings
for this, does amount to no more, than that the People were most concerned to
give Testimony, as to the good or bad lives of their Bishops. This further
appears by the words in Lampridius concerning Alexander Severus, who proposed
the names of his civil Officers to the People, to hear what they had to object
against them, and said it was a hard case, when the Christians and Jews did so
about their Priests, the same should not be done about Governors of Provinces,
who had men's lives and fortunes in their hands. But no man could ever from
hence imagine, that the People had the Power to make or unmake the Governors of
Roman Provinces. Orig. hom 6. in Levit.
Origin says, The Peoples presence was necessary at the Consecration of a
Bishop, that they might all know the worth of him who was made their Bishop; it
must be astante Populo, the People standing by; and this is that Saint Paul
meant, when he said, A Bishop ought to have a good Testimony from those that
are without.

(2.) That the People upon this assuming the Power of Elections caused great
disturbances and disorders in the Church. Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 59.
Eusebius represents the disorders of Antioch to have been so great in the City
upon the choice of a new Bishop, by the Divisions of the People, that they were
like to have shaken the Emperor's Kindness to the Christians. For, such a
flame was kindled by it, that he says, it was near destroying both the Church
and the City: and they had certainly drawn Swords, if the Providence of God,
and fear of the Emperor had not restrained them. Who was forced to send
Officers and Messages to keep them quiet: and after much trouble to the
Emperor and many meetings of Bishops, Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.
at last Eustathius was chosen. Greg. Nazianzen sets forth the mighty
unruliness of the People of Caesarea in the choice of their Bishop, saying it
came to a dangerous sedition, and not easy to be suppressed: and he says, the
City was very prone to it, on such occasions. And although there was one Person
of incomparable worth above the rest, yet through the Parties and Factions that
were made, it was a hard matter to carry it for him. He complains so much of
the inconveniences of popular Elections, that he wishes them altered; and the
Elections brought to the Clergy; and he thinks no Commonwealth so disorderly
as this method of Election was. Evagr. l. 2. c. 5.
Evagrius says, the sedition at Alexandria was intolerable, upon the division
of the People between Dioscorus and Proterius; the People rising against the
Magistrates and Soldiers who endeavored to keep them in order: and at last
they murdered Proterius. Such dangerous Seditions are described at
Constantinople, upon the Election of Paulus and Macedonius, by Sozomen; and in
the same place after the death of Eudoxius, Socr. l. 4. c. 14.
and after the death of Atticus by Socrates; Soz. l. 3. c. 5.
and after the deprivation of Nestorius. Socr. l. 7. c. 26, 35.
And again at Antioch upon the removal of Eudoxius; and about the Election of
Flavianus; at Ephesus by Saint Chrysostom, at Verselles by Saint Ambrose;
Ambros. Ep. 82.
at Milan by Socrates, and many other places. Socr. l. 4. c. 30.
I shall only add a remarkable one at Rome on the choice of Damasus: which
came to bloodshed for several days; Soz. l. 4. c. 28.
and is particularly related by Ammianus Marcellinus; Socr. l. 5. c. 9. l. 6.
c. 11.
and the Preface to Faustinus his Libellus Precum. Mr. Baxter grants there are
inconveniences in the Peoples consenting Power, Amm. Marc. l. 27.
and so there are in all humane affairs. Answ. p. 15.
But are these tolerable inconveniences? Is this Power still to be pleaded
for, in opposition to Laws, as though Religion lay at stake; and only
Magistrates were bad men, and the People always good and wise and virtuous? A
man must have great spite against Men in Power, and unreasonable fondness of
the Common People that can represent great Men as wicked, debauched, and
enemies to Piety, and at the same time dissemble, and take no notice of the
Vices of the Common People; besides their Ignorance and incapacity of judging
in such matters, and their great proneness to fall into sidings and parties and
unreasonable contentions on such occasions. De Sacerd. l. 3.
But Saint Chrysostom complains much of the unfitness of the People to judge in
such cases. Hieron. adversus Iovin. in Ezekiel. c. 33.
Saint Hierom says, they are apt to choose men like themselves: and says
elsewhere, they are much to be feared whom the People choose. Orig in Number. hom.
22.
Origin says, the People are often moved either for favor or reward.

(3.) That to prevent these inconveniences many Bishops were appointed without
the choice of the People, and Canons were made for the regulation of Elections.
Hieron. Epist. ad Evagr.
In the Church of Alexandria the Election of the Bishop belonged to the 12
Presbyters; as Saint Ierom and others show. For by the Constitution of that
Church, before the alteration made by Alexander, the Bishop of Alexandria was
not only to be chosen out of the 12 Presbyters, but by them. So Severus in the
life of the Alexandrian Patriarchs, Ecc^ellens. de Orig. Eccl. Alex. c. 6.
says, that after the death of their Patriarch, the Presbyters met together
and prayed, and proceeded to election; and the first Presbyter declared it
belonged to them to choose their Bishop, and to the other Bishops to consecrate
him. To which the Bishops assented, only saying, if he were worthy they would
consecrate whom they chose, but not otherwise. Elmacinus makes this a
Constitution of Saint Mark in the first foundation of that Church; and says it
continued to the time of the Nicene Council: Ambros. Comment. in 4 Ephesians.
and then as Hilarious the Deacon says, the custom was altered, by a Council
among themselves, which determined that they might choose the most deserving
person, whether of that Body or not. And there could be no room for popular
elections, wherever that Custom obtained, which the Counterfeit Ambrose speaks
of, ut recedente uno sequens ei succederet; speaking of the Bishop dying and
the next in course succeeding. But if this be only a particular conceit of
that Author, yet we find the Bishops consecrating others in several Churches
without any mention of choice made by the People. So, when Narcissus retired
from Jerusalem, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 10.
Eusebius says, the neighbor Bishops assembled, and consecrated one Dius in
his room; c. 11.
and after him followed Germanio and then Gordius, in whose time Narcissus
returned: but being grown very old, Alexander was brought in to assist him, by
Revelation, and a Voice from Heaven to some of the Brethren. Severus Bishop of
Milevis in his lifetime appointed his Successor, and acquainted the Clergy
with it, but not the People; great disturbance was feared hereupon; the Clergy
sent to Saint Augustine to come among them, Aug. ep. 110.
and to settle their new Bishop; who went, and the People received the Bishop
so appointed very quietly. S. Augustine himself declares, the sad effects he had
often seen of the Churches Election of Bishops, through the ambition of some,
and the contention of others, and therefore he desired to prevent any such
disturbance in his City, when he was dead. And for that reason, he acquainted
the People that he designed Eradius, or as some Copies have it, Eraclius for
his Successor. So Paulus the Novation Bishop at Constantinople, Socr. l. 8. c.
46.
appointed his Successor Marcianus to prevent the contentions that might
happen after his death; and got his Presbyters to consent to it.

The Greek Canonists are of opinion, that the Council of Nice took away all
power of election of Bishops from the People, Council. N^cen. c. 4.
and gave it to the Bishops of the Province. And it is apparent from the
Council of Antioch, Council. Antioch. c. 18.
that Bishops were sometimes consecrated in the East, without the consent of
the People; for it does suppose a Bishop after consecration may not be received
by his People, which were a vain supposition if their election necessarily went
before it. And withal, it puts the case of a Bishop that refused to go to his
People after consecration; c. 17.
which shows, that the consecration was not then performed in his own Church.
Gregory subscribed at Antioch as Bishop of Alexandria, Socr. l. 2. c. 10.
before ever he went thither. So Saint Basil mentions his consecration of
Euphronius to be Bishop of Nicopolis, without any consent of the People before;
it being then performed by the Metropolitan in his own See; Basil. Ep. 194.
but he persuades the Senate and People to accept of him. If the People did
agree upon a Person to be Bishop, their way then was, to petition the
Metropolitan and his Synod, who had the full Power either to allow or to refuse
him. And it is evident from the twelfth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, that
although all the People chose a Bishop, if he intruded himself into the
possession of his See without the consent of a Provincial Synod, he was to be
turned out or rejected by them. Which shows how much the business of elections
was brought into the Bishops Power in the Eastern parts. And by virtue of this
Canon, Bassianus and Stephanus were rejected in the Council of Chalcedon.
Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
By the Law of Justinian, the common People were excluded from elections of
Bishops; Novell. Justin. 123, 137.
and the Clergy and better sort of Citizens were to nominate three to the
Metropolitan; out of which he was to choose one. C. de Episc. lex. 42.
By the Canon of Laodicea* the common People were excluded from the Power of
choosing any into the Clergy: Can. Laod. c. 13.
For they were wont to raise tumults upon such occasions; Aug. Ep. 225.
such as Saint Augustine describes in the case of Pinianus; but some of the
Greek and Latin Canonists enlarge the sense of the Laodicean Canon to the
election of Bishops too. The second Council of Nice restrained the election
only to Bishop; Conc. Nic. 2. c. 3.
which was confirmed by following Councils in the Greek Church; Council. 8. c.
28.
as Can. 28. Council. Constantinopol. against Photius; and the People are there
excluded with an Anathema. So far were popular Elections grown out of request
in the Eastern Church.

(4.) That when there were Christian Magistrates, they did interpose in this
matter as they judged expedient. Soz. l. 2. c. 19.
So Constantine did in the Church of Antioch, when there was great dissension
there, upon the deposition of Eustathius, he recommended to the Synod
Euphronius of Cappadocia, and Georgius of Arethusa, or whom they should judge
fit, without taking any notice of the interest of the People: and they
accordingly consecrated Euphronius. After the death of Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, Socr. l. 2. c. 6, 7.
the People fell into Parties, some were for Paulus, and others for Macedonius;
the Emperor Constantius coming thither puts them both by, and appoints
Eusebius of Nicomedia to be Bishop there. c. 13.
Eusebius being dead, the Orthodox Party again choose Paulus, Constantius sends
Hermogenes to drive him out by force: c. 16.
and was very angry with Macedonius for being made Bishop without his leave;
although afterward he placed him in his throne. c. 23.
When Athanasius was restored, Constantius declared, it was by the decree of
the Synod, and by his consent. And he by his Authority restored likewise Paulus
and Marcellus, Asclepas and Lucius to their several Sees. Soz. l. 7. c. 7.
When Gregory Nazianzen resigned the Bishopric of Constantinople, Theodosius
commended to the Bishops the care of finding out a Person, who recommending
many to him, the Emperor himself pitched upon Nectarius, l. 8. c. 2.
and would have him made Bishop, though many of the Bishops opposed it. When
Chrysostom was chosen at Constantinople, Socr. l. 7. c. 29.
the royal assent was given by Arcadius, the election being made, says
Sozomen, by the People and Clergy; but Palladius gives a more particular
account of it, Pallad. Vit. Chrysostom. p. 42.
viz. That upon the death of Nectarius many Competitours appeared, some making
their application to the Court, and oaths to the People; in so much that the
People began to be tumultuous, ((...), says Palladius) upon which they
importuned the Emperor to provide a fit man for them. Eutropius being then
chief Minister of State, recommended Chrysostom to the Emperor, and
immediately an express was sent to the Comes Orientis, that he should with all
privacy, for fear of a tumult at Antioch, send him away to Constantinople:
whither being brought, he was soon after consecrated Bishop. So that here was
no antecedent election of the People, as Sozomen says, but whatever there was,
was subsequent to the Emperor's determination. After the death of Sisinnius,
the Emperor declared, That to prevent disturbance they would have none of the
Clergy of Constantinople chosen Bishop there; So^r. l. 7. c. 40.
and so Nestorius was brought from Antioch. Maximianus being dead he gave order
that Proclus should be made Bishop, before the others body was buried. These
instances are sufficient to show, that Christian Princes did from the first
think fit, when just occasion was given, to make use of their Authority in this
matter.

(5.) Upon the alteration of the Government of Christendom there was greater
reason for the Magistrates interposing than before. For upon the endowment of
Churches by the great liberality of the Northern Princes, it was thought at
first very reasonable, that the Royal assent should be obtained, though a
Bishop was chosen by the Clergy and People: which at first depended only on
tacit consent; but after the solemn Assemblies of the People came to be much
used, these privileges of Princes came not only to be confirmed by the Consent
of the People, Council. Aurelian. A. D. 549.
but to be enlarged. V. Council. Tarracon.
For, the Princes obtained by degrees not only the confirmation of the
elected, but the liberty of nomination; A. D. 599. Can. 3.
with a shadow of election by the Clergy and others of the Court; Council.
Tolet. 12. c. 6. and ibi Loaisam.
as appears by the Formulae of Marculphus. This way was not always observed in
France where frequently according to the Edict of Clotharius, Grati. Did. 63.
the Clergy and People chose, the Metropolitan consecrated, and the Prince gave
his Royal assent: Council. Vernense Can. 2.
but in doubtful or difficult cases, he made use of his Prerogative, and
nominated the Person, Sirmond. Append. ad To. 2. Council. Gall.
and appointed the Consecration. Afterward, there arose great contests between
the Papal and Royal Power; which continued for several Ages; and at last among
us, Lup. Ferrariens.
the royal Power overthrowing the other, Ep. 81, 98, 99.
reserved the Power of Nomination of Bishops, V. Grotii Piet. p. 91.
as part of the Prerogative; which being allowed in frequent Parlaments, the
Consent of the People is swallowed up therein: since their Acts do oblige the
whole Nation. For not only the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. declares, The Right of
appointing Bishops to be in the King; but 25 Edw. 3. it is likewise declared,
That the Right of disposing Bishoprics was in the King by Right of Patronage,
derived from his Ancestors before the freedom of elections was granted. Which
shows not only the great Antiquity of this Right, but the consent of the whole
Nation to it. And the same is fully related in the Epistle of Edw. 3. to
Clement 5. where it is said, Walsingh. in Edw. 3. p. 161.
That the King did dispose of them, jure suo Regio, by his Royal Prerogative;
as his Ancestors had done from the first founding of a Christian Church here.
This is likewise owned in the famous Statute of Carlisle 25 Edw. 1. so that
there is no Kingdom where this Right has been more fully acknowledged by the
general consent of the People, than here in England; and that from the Original
planting of a Christian Church here. As to the inferior Right of Patronage; it
is justly thought to bear equal date with the first settlements of Christianity
in peace and quietness. For when it began to spread into remoter Villages and
places distant from the Cathedral Churches, where the Bishop resided with his
Presbyters, as in a College together; a necessity was soon apprehended of
having Presbyters fixed among them. For the Council of Neocaesarea mentions the
(...), the Country Presbyters, c. 13. whom the Greek Canonists interpret to be
such as then were fixed in Country-Cures, and this Council was held ten years
before the Council of Nice. In the time of the first Council of Orange, A. D.
441. express mention is made of the Right of Patronage reserved to the first
Founders of Churches, c. 10. viz. If a Bishop built a Church on his own Land in
another Bishop's Diocese, yet the right of presenting the Clerk was reserved to
him. And this was confirmed by the second Council of Arles, c. 36. A. D. 452.
By the Constitution of the Emperor Zeno. C. si quis 15. Cod de Sacros. Eccles.
A. D. 479. the Rights of Patronage are established, upon the agreements at
first made in the endowments of Churches. This Constitution was confirmed by
Justinian, Nov. 57.
A. D. 541. and he allows the nomination and presentation of a fit Clerk: Nov.
123. c. 18.
And the same were settled in the Western Church; as appears by the ninth
Council of Toledo, about A. D. 650. and many Canons were made in several
Councils about regulating the Rights of Patronage, and the endowments of
Churches, till at last it obtained by general consent that the Patron might
transmit the right of presentation to his heirs, and the Bishops were to
approve of the Persons presented, Matt. Paris ad A. 1239.
and to give institution to the Benefice. The Barons of England in the Epistle
to Gregory IX. plead, That their Ancestors had the Right of Patronage, from
the first planting of Christianity here. For those upon whose Lands the
Churches were built, and at whose cost and charges they were erected, and by
whom the Parochial Churches were endowed, thought they had great Reason to
reserve the Nomination of the Clerks to themselves. Joh. Saris^. Ep. 6. and 119.
And this Ioh. Sarisburiensis says, was received by a general custom of this
whole Kingdom. So that the Right of Patronage was at first built upon a very
reasonable consideration; and has been ever since received by as universal a
Consent as any Law or Custom among us. And the only Questions now remaining
are, whether such a Consent can be made void by the Dissent of some few
Persons, who plead it to be their inherent Right to choose their own Pastors?
and supposing, that it might be done, whether it be reasonable so to do? And I
conclude, that,

6. Things being thus settled by general consent and established Laws there is
no ground for the People to resume the liberty of Elections: (1.) because it
was no unalterable Right, but might be passed away; and has been by consent of
the People upon good considerations, and (2.) because no such inconveniences
can be alleged against the settled way of disposal of Livings, but may be
remedied by Laws; far easier, than those which will follow upon the Peoples
taking this Power to themselves, which cannot be done in a divided Nation,
without throwing all into remediless confusion. (3.) Because other Reformed
Churches have thought this an unreasonable pretense. Beza declaims against it,
Epist. 83.
as a thing without any ground in Scripture, or any right in Antiquity, and
subject to infinite disorders. In Sweden the Archbishop and Bishops are
appointed by the King: and so are the Bishops in Denmark; In other Lutheran
Churches, the Superintendents are appointed by the several Princes and
Magistrates: Rittershus. ad Novell. p. 1. c. 7. n. 36, 37.
and in these the Patrons present before Ordination. The Synod of Dort has a
Salvo for the Right of Patronage, Can. Eccles. 5. In France the Ministers are
chosen by Ministers; at Geneva by the Council of State, which has Power to
depose them. And it would be very strange, if this inherent and unalterable
right of the People should only be discovered here; where it is as unfit to be
practiced, as in any part of the Christian world.

But Mr. B. is unsatisfied with any Laws that are made in this matter; Treatise
of Episcop. p. 2. p 123.
for when the objection is put by him, That the People chose the Parliament who
make the Laws which give the Patrons Power, and therefore they now consent; he
says, this seems a Jest; for, he says, 1. It cannot be proved that all the
Churches or People gave the Patrons that Power. 2. They never consented that
Parlaments should do what they list, and dispose of their Souls, or what is
necessary to the saving of their Souls. 3. They may as well say, that they
consent to be baptized and to receive the Sacraments because the Parliament
consented to it. 4. Their forefathers had no power to represent them by such
consenting. 5. The obligation on the People was Personal, and they have not
God's consent for the transmutation.

So that one would think by Mr. B.'s Doctrine, all Laws about Patronage are
void in themselves; and all Rights of Advowson in the King, or Noblemen and
Gentlemen, or Universities are mere Usurpations, and things utterly unlawful
among Christians, since he makes such a personal obligation to choose their own
Pastors to lie on the People, that they cannot transfer it by their own Act.
But upon second thoughts I suppose he will not deny, that the freedom of
Public Churches and the endowments of them, do lie within the Magistrates
Power, and so binding Laws may be made about them; unless he can prove that the
Magistrates Power does not extend to those things which the Magistrate gives.
And if these may be justly settled by Laws, then the Rights of Patronage are as
just and legal Rights as men have to their Estates; and consequently every
Minister duly presented has a legal Title to the Temple and Tithes, as Mr. B.
calls them. But this does not, says he, make a Minister for their Souls, and
the Parliament cannot dispose of their Souls. The meaning of all which is, if
the People be humorsome and factious, they may run after whom they please, and
set up what Minister they please, in opposition to Laws. And so for instance,
suppose a Parish be divided in their Opinions about Religion, (as we know too
many are at this day) all these several parties, viz. Anabaptists, Quakers, yea
and Papists too, as well as others, will put in for an equal share in what
concerns the care of their Souls, and consequently, may choose a several
Pastor to themselves, and leave the Incumbent the bare possession of the
Temple and Tithes. But if there be no other objection, this may be thought
sufficient, that he was none of their choosing, being imposed upon them by
others, who could not dispose of their Souls. By which means, this pretense of
taking care for their Souls, will be made use of, to justify the greatest
disorder and confusion, which can happen in a Church. For, let the Person be
never so worthy in himself, the People are still to have their liberty of
choosing for themselves. And who are these People? Must all have equal Votes?
then according to Mr. B.'s opinion of our Churches, the worst will be soonest
chosen; for why should we not think the worst People will choose their like as
well as the worst Patrons, and the worst Bishops? But if the Profane must be
excluded, by what Law? Is it because they have no right to the Ordinances? But
have they no right to their own Souls and to the care of them? therefore they
are equally concerned with others. Yet let us suppose all these excluded, as no
competent Judges; shall all the rest be excluded too, who are incompetent
Judges? then I am afraid, there will not be many left. And whatever they
pretend, the People where they do choose, do trust other men's Judgments, as
well as where the Patrons present; and to prevent popular tumults, such
elections are generally brought by a kind of devolution to a few Persons who
are entrusted to choose for the rest. But if all the People were left to choose
their own Pastors, it is not to be imagined, what parties and factions, what
mutual hatreds, and perpetual animosities, they would naturally fall into on
such occasions. Do we not daily see such things to be the fruits of popular
elections, where men are concerned for the strength and reputation of their
Party? What envying and strife, what evil speaking and backbiting, what tumults
and disorders, what unchristian behavior in general, of men to each other, do
commonly accompany such elections? Which being the natural effects of men's
passions stirred up by such occasions, and there being so much experience of it
in all Ages of the Christian Church, where such things have been; I am as
certain, that Christ never gave the People such an unalterable Right of
choosing their own Ministers, as I am, that he designed to have the peace and
unity of the Church preserved. And of all Persons, I do the most wonder at him,
who pretends to discover the Only way of unity and concord among Christians,
that he should so much, so frequently, so earnestly insist upon this; which if
it be not the only, is one of the most effectual ways to perpetuate disorder
and confusion in a broken and divided Church. And so much for the Plea for
Separation, taken from the Peoples Rights to choose their own Ministers.

Sect. 26. Having thus dispatched all the Pleas for Separation, which relate to
the Constitution of our Church, I come to those which concern the Terms of
Communion with us; wh^^ are said to be unlawful.

One of the chief Pleas alleged for Separation, by Dr. O. and Mr. A. is,
Mischief of Impositi^ns, p. 41.
that many things in the constant total Communion of Parochial Churches are
imposed on the Consciences and Practices of men, which are not according to the
mind of Christ. These are very general words; but Dr. O. reckons up the
particulars, which (setting aside those already considered) are, the use of the
Aereal sign of the Cross, Vindic. of Non-conf. p. 13.
kneeling at the Communion, the Religious observation of Holy Days; and the
constant use of the Liturgy in all the public Offices of the Church. As to
this last, I shall say nothing, it being lately so very well defended by a
learned Divine of our Church. Dr. Falkner's Vindication of Liturgies, 1680.
To the other, Mr. B. adds, the use of Godfathers and Godmothers; and now I am
to examine what weight there is in these things, to make men seriously think
Communion with our Church unlawful.

When I found our Church thus charged with prescribing unlawful terms of
Communion, I expected a particular and distinct proof of such a charge, because
the main weight of the Cause depended upon it. And this is the method we use in
dealing with the Church of Rome. We do not run upon general charges of
unscriptural Impositions, and things imposed on men's Consciences against the
mind of Christ; but we close with them upon the particulars of the charge, as
Worship of Images, Invocation of Saints, Adoration of the Host, and we offer to
prove by plain Scripture, that these are forbidden and therefore unlawful. But
I find no such method taken or pursued by our Brethren; only we are told over
and over, that they judge, they think, they esteem them unlawful; and they
cannot be satisfied about them; but for particular arguments to prove them
unlawful I find none; which makes the whole charge look very suspiciously. For
men do not use to remain in generals, when they have any assurance of the
Goodness of their Cause. Yet, to let the Reader see that I decline nothing that
looks like argument in this matter, I shall pick up every thing I can find,
which seems to prove these terms of our Communion to be unlawful, or to
justify their Separation.

In the Epistle before my Sermon I had used this Argument against the present
Separation, that if it be lawful to separate on a pretense of greater purity,
where there is an agreement in Doctrine and the substantial parts of Worship,
as is acknowledged in our Case; then a bare difference of opinion, as to some
circumstantials of Worship and the best Constitution of Churches will be
sufficient ground to break Communion and to set up new Churches; which,
considering the great variety of men's fancies about these matters, is to make
an infinite Divisibility in Churches, without any possible stop to further
Separation.

This Argument others were willing to pass over, but Mr. A. in his Preface,
undertakes to answer it in all the parts of it; which being so material to our
business, I shall now distinctly consider: and like an able Disputant he allows
nothing at all in this Argument; for he denies the Supposition, viz. that there
is any such agreement in Doctrine and the substantial parts of Worship; he
denies the first consequence; and as though that were not sufficient, he denies
the remoter consequence too. And what Argument can stand before a man of such
prowess in disputing?

1. He denies an Agreement in Doctrine, which I have already showed was allowed
by all Dissenters before him, from the days of R. Brown to Mr. A. But we must
not mistake him, for as fierce as he seems to be at first, yet let him but have
scope to show some tricks of Wit, and trials of his skill in fencing; and he is
as tame and yielding as you would wish him; for at last he confesses they
generally agree with the Doctrine contained in the 39 Articles; and but for
mere shame, he would have said all; for I never heard of one before him made
any scruple of it. And this is the Doctrine established in this Church; and if
there be an Agreement in this, then this Supposition is granted.

2. As to substantial parts of Worship; he denies an Agreement in this too:
Vindication, p. 22.
although Dr. O. says, we are agreed in the substantial parts of Religion; and
I hope the parts of Worship are allowed to be some of them. But he pretends not
to know what we mean by the difference between the parts of Worship, making
some substantial, and others circumstantial; and then he offers to prove that
our Church appoints new substantial parts of Worship, and therefore he must
know one from the other; and after he has spent some leaves in the proof of
that, at last he fairly concludes, that there is a difference at least in a
circumstantial part of Worship.

But because this is a weighty charge against our Church, I shall take the more
pains to consider it, because the main objection against our Ceremonies lies
under it, and that which most sticks with the more sober Nonconformists.

Mr. A. 's charge about a substantial part of Worship being appointed by our
Church, is thus drawn up. An outward visible sign of an inward invisible grace,
whereby a person is dedicated to the profession of, and subjection to the
Redeemer, is a substantial part of Worship. Now this he charge our Church
with, but gives no instance; but the sign of the Cross after baptism, Answ. p.
49.
is that which he means: which Mr. B. calls the transient dedicating Image of
the Cross. For the clearing of this, it will be necessary to show,

1. What we mean by a substantial part of Worship.

2. How it appears that the sign of the Cross is made no substantial part of
Worship by our Church.

1. What we mean^^y a substantial part of divine Worship. For I have observed,
that the want of a clear and distinct notion of this, has been one of the
greatest occasions of the Scruples of the most conscientious Non-conformists.
For being afraid of displeasing God, by using any other parts of Worship, than
himself has appointed; and looking on our Ceremonies, as real parts of divine
Worship, upon this reason they have thought themselves obliged in conscience,
at least to forbear the use of them. The great principle they went upon was
this, that whatever was any ways intended or designed for the Worship of God,
was a real and substantial part of his Worship; and when their Adversaries told
them that Divine Institution was necessary to make a part of Worship; their
answer was, that Divine Institution did not make that a part of Worship which
was none, but that to be a part of true Worship, which otherwise would be a
part of false Worship. In the mean time, they did not deny the lawfulness of
the application of common circumstances to Acts of Religious Worship, as Time
and Place, etc. but the annexing any other Rites, or Ceremonies to proper Acts
of Religious Worship (as the sign of the Cross to Baptism) they supposed to be
the making new substantial parts of Divine Worship; and therefore forbidden by
all those places of Scripture, which imply the Scripture it self to be a
perfect Rule of Worship. This as far as I can gather is the strongest Plea of
the Non-conformists side, which I have represented with its full advantage,
because my design is, if possible, not so much to confute, as to convince our
Dissenting Brethren.

Let us then seriously consider this matter, and if we can find out a plain
discernible difference between substantial parts of Divine Worship and mere
accidental appendices, this discovery may tend more to disentangle scrupulous
minds, than the multiplying of arguments to prove the lawfulness of our
Ceremonies. And that we may better understand where the difficulty lies, these
following things are agreed on both sides.

1. That besides proper Acts of Worship there are some Circumstances which may
be differently used, without setting up new parts of Worship. As for instance,
Adoration is a substantial and proper Act of Divine Worship; but whether that
Adoration be performed by prostration, or by bowing, or by kneeling, is in it
self indifferent; and no man will say, that he that makes his adoration
kneeling makes another new part of Worship, from what he does who performs it
standing or falling on his face. And so, if the Ancient Eastern Church did at
certain times forbid kneeling in acts of Adoration; this does not prove that
they differed in point of Adoration from the Western Church which requires
kneeling in the same Offices of Divine Worship; because they agreed in the act
of Adoration, but only differed in the manner of expressing it.

2. That Divine Institution makes those to be necessary parts of Worship which
of themselves are not so. As is plain in the Sacraments of the New Testament;
which of themselves are no necessary substantial parts of the worship of God;
but only become so, by being appointed by Christ. So under the Law, many
things merely ritual and ceremonial in themselves, yet by virtue of Divine
appointment became substantial parts of Divine Worship.

3. That for men to make new Parts of Divine Worship is unlawful. For that is
to suppose the Scripture an imperfect Rule of Worship; and that Superstition is
no fault; and consequently that our Savior, without cause, found fault with
the Scribes and Pharisees for their Traditions.

4. That there are many things which may be done in the Worship of God; which
are not forbidden to be done unless they be Parts of Divine Worship. For, if
the supposed reason of their prohibition, be their being made Parts of Divine
Worship, if it be made appear, that they are not so, then it follows they are
not forbidden.

5. That what is neither forbidden directly, nor by consequence is lawful and
may be practiced in the Worship of God. For although Mr. A. quarrels with me,
for saying, they require express Commands to make things lawful in the Worship
of God; Mischief of Impos. p. 29.
yet he allows, that what is not required either directly or by consequence is
unlawful; and by parity of Reason, what is not forbidden in the same manner
must be lawful.

Sect. 27. It remains now to find out those certain notes and marks of
distinction in this matter, as may give satisfaction to the consciences of men,
in the difference between innocent Ceremonies, and superstitious parts of
Divine Worship. For the difference here does not lie in supposing some things
of Divine Institution which are not, but in making those to be parts of Divine
Worship which are not. And that may be done these ways.

1. By supposing them to be so necessary, that the doing them would be a thing
pleasing to God, and the omitting of them would be a thing displeasing to God,
although there were no humane Law which required the doing of them. For, where
there is no obligation by virtue of any humane Law and yet men suppose they
should please God by doing, or displease God by not observing some particular
Ceremonies; it is a sign they esteem those to be parts of Divine Worship. And
this was the case of the Scribes and Pharisees whom our Savior reproved, not
so much for their frequent washings, as for supposing that a man's Conscience
was defiled, Matt. 15. 11. 19, 20.
if he did not observe them. For they had taken up an opinion among them, (as
H. Grotius observes) that any thing that was touched by a Person unclean by the
Law, did communicate an uncleanness first to their Bodies, and then to their
Souls; but that this ceremonial washing did purify both Body and Soul: upon
which supposition, they concluded this washing so necessary a part of God's
Worship, that the doing of it was a thing very pleasing to God, and the
omission of it must be displeasing to him, because it left an inward defilement
upon their Consciences, which might have been removed by the use of it. But it
is lately pleaded by Mr. A. that this washing of hands among the Jews condemned
by our Savior, Exercit. on Matt. 15. 1, 9.
was just of the nature of our Ceremonies, being only observed as a command of
their Superiors not repugnant to the Law of God, p. 23, 25.
but rather more agreeable to it than our Ceremonies are: from whence he
infers, that all Traditions, p. 28.
Canons, Injunctions, concerning unnecessary things are contrary to the Law of
God, and consequently invalid and not obligatory. But I say, the Reason of our
Savior's opposing the Pharisees about this matter, was not because a thing in
it self unnecessary, was determined by their Superiors, but because of the
superstitious opinion which the Pharisees had concerning this washing with
respect to the Consciences of men. And that I shall prove 1. From the force of
our Savior's reasoning. 2. From the general sense of the Jews concerning it.

1. From the force of our Savior's reasoning: which will appear, by observing
what He proves, viz. that they set up their Tradition above the Law. v. 3. Why
do you also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition? and v. 6. Thus
ye have made the Commandment of God of none effect by your Tradition. v. 9.
Full well ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own
Tradition. Our Savior here proves by a plain and undeniable Instance about the
Vow Corban, that they did believe their Traditions to have a force superior to
the Law; else it were impossible they should suppose such an arbitrary Vow
should supersede the obligation of the Law, as to the duty which Children owe
to their Parents; but from hence it appeared that they believed the keeping of
this Vow to be a thing more pleasing to God, than relieving their Parents, and
so they esteemed it a more necessary and substantial part of Divine Worship.
The force of his Argument then extends to all things which they looked on as
things pleasing to God, on the account of the Tradition of their Elders; for he
argued against the main supposition, the truth of which he proves by a clear
instance, where the Tradition did contradict the Law. And since by this, it
appeared, that they thought their Tradition to overruled the Law, it was no
wonder they set up others equal to it; and thought men's consciences strictly
obliged to observe them. But how does the argument reach to the present case,
viz. Because that when their Traditions contradicted the Law, they were not to
be observed; therefore, not, when agreeable; unless he rejected all kind of
Traditions? I answer, the Pharisees did think a man's Conscience defiled if he
did not observe that Tradition, as appears by what follows, when he taught the
People upon this occasion, v. 11. That which enters into the mouth defiles
not a man; but that which comes out of the mouth defiles a man. This was the
Doctrine Christ taught the People with respect to this dispute with the
Pharisees: which signified nothing, unless the opinion among them was, that
eating of bread with unwashen hands, did really defile a man's Conscience
toward God. At which the Pharisees were much offended, as the Disciples told
him, v. 12. and they were not so very well satisfied, but they desire a further
explication of this matter from himself; which he gives them, v. 17, 18, 19.
where he shows that no defilement could come to men's Consciences merely by what
they did eat; but that men's inward lusts were the things which defiled them,
for these were the source of those wicked actions, which were most displeasing
to God. And so he concludes his Discourse, v. 20. These are the things which
defile a man, but to eat with unwashen hands defiles not a man. From whence it
follows, that the main thing in dispute was, whether this Ceremony of washing
hands could be omitted, without defiling the conscience? or else our Savior's
conclusion does not reach the Question. But if the conclusion was contrary to
the Pharisees Doctrine, then they must look upon this Ceremony of washing of
hands, as a part of Worship equal to the Law of God, and which men pleased God
by doing, and displeased him by omitting it; not merely with respect to the
command of Superiors, but as they supposed some lesser guilt upon the
Conscience might be expiated by it, which would remain, if they did not use it.

2. From the general sense of the Jews. Even Mr. A. himself, in the very same
discourse, where he would make this washing of hands like our Ceremonies,
quotes several passages of the Talmudists, p. 17.
to prove that they equalled their Traditions with the Laws of God; and
sometimes set them above them; and particularly of this Tradition he says, It
is a saying of the Talmud, that he that eats bread with unwashen hands, sins as
grievously as if he lay with a Whore. Which is a saying of R. Ase in Sota;
E^ce. pta G^mar. c. 1. ^ 6.
and abundantly proves, that this was not looked on as an indifferent Ceremony,
but as a thing, whose omission brought a guilt on the Conscience. And I wonder
Mr. A. did not discern, that by this one saying, he overthrew all the rest of
his discourse: but this opinion is not built on the saying of any Rabbi, but on
a constant Tradition among them, which they derive from the days of Solomon;
who, they say, appointed it first, when they did eat of Sacrifices; afterward,
the wise men applied it to the Terumah, and at last Hillel and Schammai decreed
it ought to be observed for their greater purification, before the eating their
common Meals. And the Pharisees placing the greatest part of their Religion in
the nice observance of such Traditions, thought themselves so much more holy
than others, as they did more carefully avoid the defilements of common
Conversation; and for that reason they observed this washing especially when
they had been in promiscuous company. Ma^k 7. 4.
For they thought themselves defiled by any touch from the ordinary sort of
People; and this, Maimonides says, They looked on, as a peculiar part of
Sanctity; and the more strict and punctual they were in this, the more holy
they were accounted. Therefore in the Talmud one John the Son of Gudged is
particularly admired for his Sanctity, Chagiga c. 2. ult.
because he exceeded others in the niceness of washing his hands. And they have
a saying in the Misna to this purpose, The Garments of the common People, are a
pollution to the Pharisees, the Garments of the Pharisees to those that eat the
Terumah, and theirs to those that eat of the Sacrifices, and theirs to those
that touched the water of cleansing. So that they had different degrees of
Sanctity about this matter of washing, none of which was imposed for the sake
of cleanliness, but from the supposition of some inward purification they
obtained by it, from the common filthiness of the world. And upon this
principle, even the vessels of the Temple were to be washed all over, if they
were but touched by the common People. In the washing their hands, they put a
difference between that before, and that after meat; the latter they accounted
a matter of liberty, or at least only for health to wash off the dangerous
saline particles which they supposed to remain; but the former was required for
inward purification; which they require so strictly, that if water may be had
within four miles, a Jew is bound not to eat till he has washed, no not with a
fork; and in case none can be had, then he is to cover his hands and so eat;
nor can he take meat from another in his mouth, until his mouth be first
washed. If there be no more water than will serve for his drink, he must part
with enough of it to wash his hands; Erub i^ f. 21.
and therefore R. Akiba in prison said, He would rather perish with thirst than
want water to wash his hands. And they say, Whosoever disesteems this Custom,
deserves not only excommunication but death too. Since all this is evident
from the most authentic Writers among the Jews, I cannot but admire at Mr.
A.'s design, who would make the world believe, that this was no more than an
indifferent Ceremony among the Jews, that was only required for Order and
Decency, as our Ceremonies are, when those very citations he brings from
Buxtorf and Dr. Lightfoot do manifestly prove the contrary. This I thought
necessary to be cleared, because this is the chief place in the New Testament
which they bring to prove the unlawfulness of our Ceremonies.

From hence it now appears that the reason of Christ's condemning that Ceremony
of washing of hands, was not upon the account of Decency, but a superstitious
Opinion they had concerning it, that it did expiate a lesser kind of guilt and
spiritual filthiness which they contracted by the impure touches of men less
holy than themselves. And this the Pharisees more wondered at in Christ's
Disciples, because it was a Rule among them, that the Disciples of the Wise
ought to be more strict in these cases than others, because these things tended
to advance the reputation of their holiness, among the People. And where such
an opinion prevails, there such Ceremonies are made parts of Divine Worship.

Sect. 28. And thus it is in many of the Ceremonies of the Roman Church,
Bellarm. de effectu Sacra. l. 2. c. 31. Sect. tertia.
which their Divines assert to have a purifying and cleansing faculty as to the
Souls of men; not for justification of men from mortal sins, but for other
spiritual effects, and taking away the guilt of venial sins. For say they, no
doubt they are effectual for the ends to which the Church appointed them, and
of this, there is no dispute among Catholics. And withal, they add, That it
is probable that the Church has power to appoint Ceremonies in such a manner,
that they may produce these effects, ex opere operato, as the Sacraments do
justification, because Christ has left it in the power of the Church to apply
his merits for lesser effects, having appointed the Sacraments himself for the
greater. But Bellarmin thinks this latter part disputable concerning the opus
operatum of Ceremonies; but as to the former, viz. by way of impetration, he
says, it is past all doubt among Catholics. So, as to the sprinkling of Holy
Water, Bell. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 7. Nota.
Bellarmin says, it is no mere significant Ceremony; but it is effectual for
the blotting out of venial sins; and he quotes Saint Thomas, and Dom. a Soto,
and Gratian for it; who produces the Canon of Alex. 1. whereby it appears it
was first instituted ut ea cuncti aspersi sanctificentur and purificentur; that
all that were sprinkled might be sanctified and purified by it. Benedict. Salis
ad aquam lustral. Pastoral. de Sacr. Bap.
In the prayer of Consecration for the Salt to make holy Water, one expression
is, that it might be wholesome both to Body and Soul; Azor. Instit. Moral. l. 4.
c. 11.
and the Water is consecrated to drive away the power of the Devil. Azorius
says, that holy Water cleanses venial sins, Greg. de Valent. To. 4. disp. 7.
q. 4. puncto 1.
ex opere operato, and drives away Devils. Greg. de Valentia agrees in the
thing, but is not so peremptory in the manner. But Marsilius Columna has
written a whole Book of the admirable effects of this Ceremony. Marsil.
Columnae Hydragiologia. Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 30.
And so for the sign of the Cross, Bellarmin attributes wonderful effects to
it, for driving away Devils and Diseases, and sanctifying the things it is
applied to: Thyrae. de locis infest. p. 3. c. 68.
and he says, it has power against the Devil ex opere operato. Pet. Thyraeus
the Jesuit, attributes a proper efficiency to the sign of the Cross against the
power of the Devil. Thesaur. Cathol. To. 1. l. 2. art. 9.
Coccius says it is a terror to the Devils, and very beneficial to mankind.
Which makes me wonder at Dr. Ames his disingenuity, when he would go about to
make the Doctrine of our Church about Ceremonies not to differ from that of the
Church of Rome. Fresh Suit against Cerem. p. 70. p. 427. Cassand. Consult. art.
7. and 9.
It is true, Cassander and some few others, talk at another rate; and Cassander
himself says, the best men on both sides were agreed about these matters. But
we are not to take their general sense from such as Cassander; especially when
their public Offices speak the sense of their Church better than Cassander.
Greg. de Valentia indeed, To. 4. disp. 3. q. 1. p. 4.
says, it is a lie that they attribute as much to Ceremonies as to Sacraments:
and in truth they do it not; for they attribute Justification to the
Sacraments, and the expiation of the remainder of venial sins to the use of
Ceremonies. However, since they attribute so spiritual effects to them; it is
an argument they look upon them as real parts of Divine Worship, as much as
they do on Prayer, with which they compare them in point of efficacy. But with
what face can this be objected against our Church; which utterly rejects any
such spiritual efficacy, as to the Ceremonies that are retained among us; and
declares that they are no otherwise received in our Church, Preface to the
Common Prayer. Can. 30.
than as they are purged from Popish Superstition and Error. And therefore all
opinion of merit and spiritual efficacy is taken from them; which do make them
to be parts of Divine Worship; which being removed, they remain only naked
Ceremonies, i. e. as Cassander well expresses it, Words made visible, or
teaching Actions; whose design and intention being toward us, and not toward
God, they cannot be thought to be made parts of Divine Worship, although they
be used in the performance of them. As if the Christians in the East did wear
the b^dge of a Cross upon their Arms, at some solemn days, as on good Friday at
their devotions, to distinguish them from Turks and Jews; would any one say,
that they made this badge a part of Divine Worship? But when they see the
Papists on that day using the most solemn postures of adoration to the
Crucifix, they might well charge them with making this a part of Divine
Worship. So that the distinction between these two, is not so hard to find, if
men apply their minds to the consideration of it.

2. Men may make Ceremonies to become parts of Divine Worship if they suppose
them unalterable, and obligatory to the Consciences of all Christians: for this
supposes an equal necessity with that of Divine Institution. If men do assert
so great a Power in the Church, as to appoint things for spiritual effects, and
to oblige the Consciences of all Christians to observe them; it is all one as
to say, the Church may make new parts of Worship. But this can with no color
be objected against a Church which declares as expressly as it is possible,
Preface to Common Prayer.
that it looks on the Rites and Ceremonies used therein, as things in their own
nature indifferent and alterable; and that changes and alterations may be made,
as seems necessary or expedient to those in Authority; And that every Country
is at liberty to use their own Ceremonies; (...)
and that they neither condemn others nor prescribe to them What can more
express the not making Ceremo^^ any parts of Divine Worship than these things
d^ And thus I have at once showed, what we mean by substantial parts of Divine
Worship, and that our Church does not make any human Ceremonies to be so.

Sect. 29. I now come particularly to examine the charge against our Church. For
Mr. A. says, An outward visible sign of an inward invisible grace, whereby a
person is dedicated to the profession of and subjection to the Redeemer, is a
substantial part of Worship. I answer,

1. An outward visible sign between men representing the duty or engagement of
another, is no part of Divine Worship at all, much less a substantial part of
it. There are some visible signs from God to men, representing the effects of
his Grace to us; and those we call Sacraments; there are other signs from men
to God, to testify their subjection and dependence, and these are acts of
Worship; and there are signs from men to men to represent some other thing
besides the bare action; and these are significant Ceremonies, such as the
Cross in Baptism is. For, after the Child is baptized and received into the
Church, the sign of the Cross is used in token that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, etc. To whom is this token
made? Is it to God? no certainly. If it were a permanent sign of the Cross,
would it be for a Testimony to God, or to Men? When the Primitive Christians
used the sign of the Cross in token they were not ashamed of Christ crucified,
was this a dedicating sign to God, or a declarative sign to men? And what if it
represents subjection to Christ as the Redeemer? must it therefore be such an
outward visible sign of inward invisible Grace, as the Sacraments are? It
represents the Duty and not the Grace; the Duty is ours and may be represented
by us; but the Grace is Gods and therefore he must appoint the signs to
represent and convey that, because he alone is the Giver of it.

2. The Cross in Baptism is not intended by our Church for a sign of immediate
dedication to God, but of obligation on the person. It is true, that in the 30
Canon it is said, that this Church retains the sign of the Cross, following the
example of the Primitive and Apostolical Churches; and accounts it a lawful
outward Ceremony and honorable badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the
service of him who died upon the Cross. But for the right understanding
thereof, we must consider, That Baptism is declared to be complete before; so
that the sign of the Cross adds nothing to the perfection or virtue of it, nor
being omitted, takes nothing from it; as it is there expressed as the sense of
this Church. This therefore, is no part of the Baptismal Dedication. And the
Minister acts in a double capacity, when he does baptize, and when he signs
with the sign of the Cross: when he baptizeth, he acts by virtue of Authority
derived from Christ, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. Which being
done, and the Child thereby solemnly dedicated to God in Baptism; he then
speaks in the name of the Church, varying the number; We receive this Child
into the Congregation of Christ 's Flock, and do sign him with the sign of the
Cross, etc. i. e. We Christians that are already members of Christ's Flock do
receive him into our number; and in token of his being obliged to perform the
duty belonging to such a one, do make use of this sign of the Cross, as the
Rite of Admission into the Church, and of his obligation to behave himself, as
becomes a Christian. And if we consider the sign of the Cross in this sense, as
no doubt it was so intended, Plea for Peace, p. 178, 179.
all the difficulties about a Dedicating, Covenanting, Symbolical, Sacramental
Sign, concerning which some have made so great a stir, Defense of the Plea, p.
4^.
will soon appear to be of no force. For why may not the Church appoint such a
Rite of Admission of one of her Members declaring it to be no part of Baptism?
Let us suppose an adult person to be baptized, and immediately after Baptism to
be admitted a Member of an Independent Church; and the Ceremony of this
admission to be holding up of his hand in token of his owning the
Church Covenant, i. e. of promising to live as a Churchmember ought to do
among them; the Pastor of the Church then baptizes him, and immediately after,
upon the holding up of his hand in token of his owning the Church Covenant, he
says in the name of the Church, we receive thee into this Congregation, and
accept of thy holding up of thy hand as a token that thou will hereafter behave
thy self as a Churchmember ought to do among us. What harm is there in all
this? And yet is not this a Professing, Dedicating, Covenanting, Symbolical,
Sacramental Sign, as much as the Sign of the Cross is among us? Does not
holding up the hand signify and represent? Is it not therefore a significant
and symbolical Ceremony? Does it not import an obligation lying on the person?
Is it not therefore dedicating, covenanting, and sacramental, as much as the
sign of the Cross? Why then should this be scrupled more than the other?

And by this Mr. B.'s great mistake appears about this matter; plea (...) p. 18.
who supposes that the Minister speaks in the name of Christ when he signs
with the sign of the Cross; and as God's Officer from him, and so dedicates him
by this sign to the service of him that died upon the Cross; whereas the
Minister in the Act speaks in the name of the Church, as evidently appears by
those words, We receive him into the Congregation of Christ 's Flock; and then
follows, as the solemn rite of Admission, And do sign him with the sign of the
Cross, etc. All public and solemn Admissions into Societies, having some
peculiar Ceremony belonging to them. And so as Baptism besides its sacramental
Efficacy is a Rite of Admission into Christ's Catholic Church; so the sign of
the Cross is into our Church of England: in which this Ceremony is used,
without any prescription to other Churchs.

Sect. 30. But says Mr. B. though the sign of the Cross may be lawful,
Christian Directory.
as a transient, arbitrary, professing sign; Ecclesiastical Cases, Q. 113.
yet not as a dedicating sign, and as the common professing symbol of baptized
Persons. If it be lawful in the former sense, I cannot understand how it
should be unlawful in the latter. Yes, says he, the instituting of the latter
belongs to God only. How does that appear? Because he has made two Sacraments
already for that end. True, but not only for that end; but to be the means and
instruments of conveying his Grace to men; which none but God himself can do,
and therefore none but he ought to appoint the means for that end. And we
account it an unsufferable insolency in the Roman Churches, for them to take
upon them to make application of the Merits of Christ to Rites of their own
Institution; which is the only possible way for a Church to make new
Sacraments; but if every significant custom in a Church must pass for a new
Sacrament, then sitting at the Sacrament is a new Sacrament, because we are
told it betokens rest and Communion with Christ; then putting off the Hat in
Prayer is a new Sacrament, because it is a professing sign of Reverence; then
laying on the hand, and kissing the Book in swearing are new Sacraments,
because they are public symbolical Rites. But says Mr. B. it belongs only
to the King to make the common badge or symbol of his own Subjects. Yet I hope,
every Nobleman or Gentleman may give a distinct Livery without Treason. And
therefore why may not every Church appoint its own Rite of admission of Members
into its Body? But the obligation here is to the common duties of Christians.
And is not every Churchmember bound to perform these? That which is peculiar,
is the manner of admission by the sign of the Cross; and this Rite our Church
imposes on no others but its own Members, i. e. makes it necessary to none
else; and to show it to be only a solemn Rite of Admission, it allows it to be
forborne in private Baptism. But says Mr. B. Christ's Sacraments or Symbols are
sufficient, we need not devise more, and accuse his Institutions of
insufficiency. If it be lawful, the Church is to judge of the expediency; and
not every private person. And to appoint other Rites that do not encroach upon
the Institutions of Christ, by challenging any effect peculiar to them, is no
charging them with insufficiency. Well, says Mr. B. but it is unlawful on
another account, viz. as it is an Image used as a medium in God's Worship, and
so forbidden in the Second Commandment. He may as well make it unlawful to use
Words in God's Worship, for are not they Images and represent things to our
minds, as well as a transient sign of the Cross? Nay, does not Mr. B. in the
same place make it lawful to make an Image an Object or Medium of our
consideration exciting our minds to Worship God? as he instanceth in a
Crucifix, or historical Image of Christ, or some holy man. If any Divine of the
Church of England had said any thing to this purpose, what outcries of Popery
had been made against us? How many Advances had we presently made for letting
in the grossest Idolatry? How many Divines of the Church of Rome had been
quoted, to show, that they went no further and desired no more than this? Yet
the transient sign of the Cross, without any respect to Worship, is condemned
among us, as forbidden by the Second Commandment; and that by the same person
and in the same page. But it is used as a medium in God's Worship. Is our
Worship directed to it? or, do we kneel before it, as Mr. B. allows men may do
before a Crucifix? Do we declare that we are excited by it to worship God? No;
all these are rejected by our Church. How then is it a medium in God's Worship?
Why forsooth, it is not a mere circumstance but an outward act of Worship.
What, as much as kneeling before a Crucifix? and yet that is lawful according
to him, supposing the mind be only excited by it. Suppose then we only use
the sign of the Cross to excite men's consideration in the act of Worship; what
harm were in it upon Mr. B.'s ground? But our Church allows not so much, only
taking it for a lawful outward Ceremony, which has nothing of Worship
belonging to it; how comes it then to be a medium in God's Worship? For Mr. B.
says, in the same place, there is a twofold medium in God's Worship. 1. Medium
excitans, that raises our minds to Worship God, as a Crucifix, etc. 2. Medium
terminans; or as he calls it terminus, in genere causae finalis, a worshipped
medium or the terminus, or the thing which we worship mediately, on pretense of
representing God, and that we worship him in it ultimately. And this he takes
to be the thing forbidden directly in the second Commandment, viz. to worship a
Creature (with mind or body) in the Act of Divine Worship, as representing God,
or as the mediate term of our Worship, by which we send it unto God, as if it
were more acceptable to him. So that it is lawful, says he, by the sight of a
Crucifix to be provoked to worship God, but it is unlawful to offer him that
Worship, by offering it to the Crucifix first, as the sign, way, or means of
sending it to God. Observe here a strange piece of partiality. 1. It is allowed
to be lawful to pray before a Crucifix, as a medium excitans, as an object
that stirs up in us a worshipping affection; and so all those Papists are
excused from Idolatry who profess they use a Crucifix for no other end,
although they perform all Acts of adoration before it; and it will become a
very hard Question whether the mind in its consideration, uniting the Image
with the Object may not give the same Acts of Worship to one as to the other,
but in different respects. For the Image being allowed to excite the mind to
consideration of the object to be worshipped, the object is considered in the
mind as represented by the Image, and consequently is so worshipped; and why
then may not the worship be as well directed to the Image as representing, as
to the Object represented by the Image; provided, that the Act of the mind be
still fixed upon the Object as represented by the Image? And thus even Latria
may be performed to a Crucifix. Is not this a very fair concession to the
Papists? But on the other side, 2. The sign of the Cross, even the aereal sign,
as Dr. O. calls it, must be made a medium in God's Worship, though it be
utterly denied by our Church; and there be no color for it, from his own
grounds. For it is neither medium excitans, being not intended by our Church
for that purpose, a Crucifix being much fitter for that purpose; and our Church
calls it only a lawful ceremony and honorable badge; much less can it be
thought to be any mediate object of our Worship, there being nothing like
Worship performed toward it. But if all his meaning be, that whatever is used
in the time of Worship that is not a mere circumstance must be a medium of
Worship, that is so weak a pretense, that I shall consider it no farther.

Sect. 31. But suppose it be no medium of Worship, Defense of the Plea, p. 41.
yet it cannot out of Mr. B. 's Head, but that it must be a new Sacrament; For,
says he, If Christ had instituted the Cross as our Church does; would you not
have called this a Sacrament? And if it want but Divine Institution and
Benediction, it wants indeed a due efficient, but it is still a Human
Sacrament though not a Divine, and therefore an unlawful Sacrament. If Christ
had instituted it with such promises, as he has his other Sacraments, no doubt
it had been one; but then the use of it had been quite changed, from what it is
now. For then its signification had been from God to us; and the Minister had
signed in Christ's Name and not in the Churches; and then it had been in token
that Christ will not fail of his Promise, if we perform our Conditions. But
here it is quite contrary, as has already appeared.

There is one thing yet remaining in Mr. B. about this matter to be considered,
Defense of the Plea, p. 49.
viz. That according to the Rule of our Church, the Cross in Baptism has a
Sacramental efficacy attributed to it; for, says he, As the Water of Baptism
works morally, by signifying the washing of Christ's Body; so the Cross is to
operate morally, by signifying Christ's Crucifixion, the benefits of his Cross
and our Duty. And then he adds, That it is the common Doctrine of Protestants
that the Sacraments are not instituted to give Grace physically, but only
morally; and that even the wisest Papists themselves do maintain only such
moral Causality in Sacraments. And so by this means he would make the sign of
the Cross to have the nature of a Sacrament with us. But that he has
misrepresented or misapplied both the Popish and Protestant Doctrine about the
efficacy of Sacraments to serve his purpose, I shall now make appear,

1. Concerning the Popish Doctrine; that which overthrows the strength of all
that Mr. B. says is, that it is unanimously agreed among them as a matter of
faith, that the Sacraments do confer grace, ex opere operato, where there is no
actual impediment; and that it is no less than heresy to assert, that they are
bare outward professing signs, i. e. Council. Florent. Decret. Union. Council.
Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 6.
That they are mere Ceremonies. This not one of them, whom I ever saw, either
denies, or disputes; and it is expressly determined in the Councils of Florence
and of Trent. But then they have a very nice and subtle question among them
about the manner how the Sacraments do confer Grace, whether physically or
morally. By physically, they mean, when a thing by its own immediate action
has influence on producing the effect; by morally, they mean that which does
effectually concur to the producing the effect, but after another manner, as
by persuasion, by entreaty, etc. As he that runs the sword into another
bowels, kills him physically; he that persuades and incourages him effectually
to do it, is as really the cause of his death as the other; but then they say,
he is but a moral and not a physical cause of the murder. They all agree, that
the Sacraments do effectually convey Grace, where there is no obstacle put; but
the only question is, about the manner of producing it. And as to this they
agree, that the Sacraments do work as moral Causes, not principal but
instrumental; the principal they say is the Merit of Christ, the Instrumental
the Sacraments as deriving their efficacy from the former; as the Writing from
the Seal, and the Seal from the Authority of the Person; or as Money from the
Stamp, and the Stamp from the King: but besides this, they question whether
there be not a proper efficiency by Divine Power in the Sacraments, to produce
at least the character from whence Divine Grace immediately follows. And about
this indeed they are divided. Some say, there is no necessity of asserting more
than a bare moral Causality; because this is sufficient for the infallible
efficacy of the Sacraments, Gamachae Sum. Theol. To. 3. qu. 2. c. 5.
sublato obice, as Gamachaeus a late Professor in the Sorbon delivers their
Doctrine: and of this opinion, he reckons Bonaventure, Altissidore, Scotus,
Durandus, Canus, Ledesma, and many others: and with this he closes, because
this is sufficient, and the other is to make Miracles without cause; as long as
the effect follows certo, infallibiliter and ex opere operato, as he there
speaks. And for the same reason Card. de Lugo yields to it, Lu^o de Sacram.
disp. 4. Sect. 4. n 32.
although he there says, that a Sacrament is signum practicum infallibile
Gratiae. So that those who do assert only this moral Causality of Sacraments,
do not suppose any uncertainty in the effect, any more than the others do, but
only differ about the way of producing it. Yet Ysambertus, Ysambert. de
Sacram. ad. Qu. 62. disp. 4 art. 3.
another late Professor of the Sorbon proves the Doctrine of a Physical
efficiency to be much more agreeable to the sense of their Church; and that the
argument is of no force against it, because it is so hard to be understood, for
then they must quit many other Doctrines besides this. Ioh. Baptista Gonet, a
late learned Thomist not only contends earnestly for this opinion, but says,
The greater part of their Divines assert it, Clypeus Theolog. Thomist. To. 5.
disp. 3. art. 2. 1.
and those of greatest reputation, as Ruardus Tapper, Vega, Sayrus, Ysambertus,
Suarez, Valentia, Bellarmin, Reginaldus, Moeratius, Ripalda and many more. And
Conquetius, he says, reckons up Fifty three eminent Divines who hold the
physical Causality of the Sacrament. So that Mr. B. is both very much mistaken
in the common Doctrine of the Roman Schools, and in applying the moral
Causality of the Sacraments, as it is asserted by their Divines, to the
significancy of our Ceremonies.

2. As to the Protestant Doctrines, he represents that in very ambiguous terms;
for, he says, That Protestants commonly maintain that the Sacraments are not
instituted to give Grace physically, but only morally. If it be their
Doctrine, that the Sacraments are instituted for the conveying of Grace at all,
which he seems to yield; (and if he did not, might be fully proved from the
Testimonies of the most eminent Reformers abroad, as well as at home) This is
sufficient to show that the sign of the Cross can never be advanced to the
dignity of a Sacrament among us; since in no sense it is held to be an
Instrument appointed for the conveying of Grace.

And so this Phrase of a New Sacrament is a thing only invented to amuse and
perplex tender and injudicious persons. There being not the least ground for
it, that I can discern; and yet such pretenses as these have served to darken
People's minds, and have filled them with strange fears and scruples; yea, some
who have conquered their prejudices as to other things, have not been able to
get over this mighty stumbling block; which I have therefore taken the more
pains to remove out of their way.

And yet after all, Christian Directory Eccles. Cases Q. 49. p. 826.
Mr. B. declares, That if it be a sin, it is the Ministers, and not the
Person's who offers the Child to be baptized; and another man's sinful mode
will not justify the neglect of our duty. And therefore supposing the sign of
the Cross to be as bad as some make it, yet it can be no pretense for
Separation.

Sect. 32. But Mr. A. has a farther blow at our Church, Mischief of Imposit.
Preface.
for allowing worshipping toward the Altar, the East, and at the sound of the
word Jesus; which, he says, are made the Motive of Worship, if not something
else. The lawfulness of these things, so far, as they are required by our
Church, I had formerly defended against the Papists, and now Mr. A. borrows
their Weapons from them; although he does not manage them with that skill and
dexterity which T. G. used. I had said, that bowing at the name of Jesus, was
no more than going to Church at the Toll of a Bell, the Worship being not given
to the Name, but to Christ at the sound of his Name. Why may not, says he, an
Image give warning to the Eye, when to worship God, as well as a Bell to the
Ear? I will tell him, since he needs it, because an Image is a mighty
disparagement to an infinite and invisible Being; it is directly contrary to
his Law to worship him by an Image; it is against the sense of the Christian
Church in its best and purest Ages; this one would have thought I had proved so
much against the Papists, that I had little reason to expect such a question
from a Protestant. But such men do too much discover, whose part they are
willing to take against the Church of England. He grants the Papists go too far
in preferring an Image higher than to be Motivum Cultus, but the Question is,
whether they do not sin in applying it to this lower use, to make it an
ordinary stated Motive to Worship. When I read this, I began to pity the man,
being in some fear lest something had a little disordered his fancy. For where
do we ever allow such an use of Images in our Church? If he had written against
Mr. B. who allows a Crucifix to be Medium excitans, he had some reason to have
answered him, but I have none. But he brings it home to us; for, says he, If
men do sin who make an Image an ordinary stated motive of Worship, then how
shall we excuse our own adorations? What does the man mean? I am yet afraid,
all things are not right somewhere. We acknowledge no adorations, but what are
due to the Divine Majesty; and do these need to be excused? And what
consequence is there from the unlawfulness of the Worship of Images, against
our worshipping of God? Let him first prove, that we give adoration to any
besides the Divine Majesty, before we shall go about to excuse our adorations.
But if men do not sin in making an Image a stated Motive of Worship(whoever
said they did not? I am sure, not our Church. But let this pass, what follows?)
then, says he, why do we not introduce Images into our Churches? Ask Mr. B.
that Question, and not us of the Church of England. If we allowed the Worship
of Images to be lawful, this were a pertinent Question; but since we deny it,
what makes all this against us? which if our Churchmen shall venture upon; I
pray stay till they do, before you charge us with it. Are not these men hugely
to seek for Arguments against our Church that talk at this rate? But, he says,
they may do it with equal reason. Here is something now fit to be proved. We
utterly deny that we may worship Images on the same Reason, that we perform
external adoration to God by bowing the Body; or to Jesus at the mention of his
name. Hold now to this, and prove it. Instead of that, he shows the difference
between going to Church at the sound of a Bell, and bowing at the name of
Jesus; viz. That the Bell tolls out of Worship to bring them to it; but the
sound of the word Jesus is in the middle of Worship, when men's minds should be
intent on devotion, and not sit listening and watching, as Whittington' s Cat
watched the Mouse, (there it is for you, viz. what he has labored for all this
while) for the casual starting of a word, and the dropping of two syllables.
But the Question is not about the seasonableness of doing this when we are in
other Acts of Devotion and immediate Application to God, which no body contends
for, that I know of, but about the lawfulness of doing it in the time of Divine
Service, when we hear the name of Jesus repeated in the Lessons, or the Creed;
and the Canon which requires it refers to the former Custom, and in the
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, the Lessons and Sermons are mentioned
particularly; and although it be said, or otherwise in the Church pronounced,
yet by the manner of showing this Reverence, viz. with lowness of courtesy and
uncovering of heads of mankind; it supposes them at that time not to be
employed in any other Act of Devotion. And so it gives no interruption to the
intention of it; nor obliges men to lie at the catch for the coming of the
word, as though all our Worship consisted in it; but since our Church approves
it as a laudable Ceremony, we ought not to refuse it at seasonable times;
unless it can be proved unlawful in it self. Which I say, can never be done,
as long as the Worship is directed to a true object, viz. the Person of Christ;
and the mention of his name, only expresses the time, as the tolling the Bell
does of going to Church. Neither does it signify any thing to this purpose,
whether Persons be in the Church or out of it, when the Bell rings; for in the
same page he mentions the Mass-bell; which sounds to the People in the Church
as well as out of it; and if the Object of their Worship were true, as it is
false, that would make him better understand the parallel.

But, says he, if it be a duty to give external Reverence to God, when ever
the word Jesus is mentioned, there is more need of it in our ordinary
converses, and the secular affairs of the world; and so, he adds, this word
might do the service of the Mass-bell going about the streets, at which all are
bound to fall down and worship. Now, what a strange piece of crosness is this,
to dispute the lawfulness of doing it at Church, because we do it not at the
Marketplace? My business is to defend what our Church requires, if he will
allow that, and thinks it convenient to do it likewise in common conversation,
let him defend his own new invented ways of Reverence; as for us, we think
there are proper seasons for Divine Worship, and that it is not enough to do
what is lawful, unless it be done at its convenient time, but there are some
men, who know no mean between doing nothing, and over-doing. But is this
becoming a Protestant Divine to parallel the Worship we give to the Eternal Son
of God, as our Church declares, Can. 18. and that which the Papists give to the
Host, when it is carried up and down the streets? At last, he commends the
moderation of the Canon, 1640. about bowing toward the East or Altar, that
they which use this Rite, despise not them who use it not; and they who use it
not, condemn not those that use it: but he would fain know why the same
moderation should not be used in other Rites, as the sign of the Cr^s^, and
kneeling at the Lords Supper? It had been much more to his purpose to have
proved any thing unlawful which had been required by our Church. But the case
was not the same as to those things which were required by our Church, ever
since the Reformation* and as to some customs, which although in themselves
lawful, yet were never strictly enjoined, but left indifferent. And therefore
the moderation used in the Canon, 1640, was very suitable to the principles of
our Church; but how does it follow, that because some things are left at
liberty, therefore nothing should be determined; or being determined ought not
to be obeyed? It was the great Wisdom of our Church not to make more things
necessary (as to practice) than were made so at the settlement of our
Reformation; but whether there be sufficient Reason to alter those terms of
Communion which were then settled, for the sake of such whose scruples are
groundless and endless, I do not take upon me here to determine. But as far as
I can perceive by Mr. A. he thinks the Apostles Rule of forbearance, Romans 14.
to be of equal force in all ages, and as to all things, about which Christians
have different apprehensions; and then the Papists come in for an equal share
in such a toleration. And so those who do not worship the Host, or Images, or
use Auricular Confession, must not censure those that do, unless he will say,
that the Papists have no scruple of Conscience, as to such things; but if
notwithstanding these scruples, our Laws put a just restraint upon them, then
the Rule of Forbearance, Romans 14. is no obligatory Law to Christians in all
Ages; and consequently, notwithstanding that, our Church may justly require the
observation of some things, though it leaves others undetermined.

But he says, these Customs though left indifferent, are still observed among
us, and practiced by all the leading Churchmen. And what then? are they
lawful, or are they not? If not, why are they not proved to be unlawful? And if
that were proved, what is all this to the point of Separation, unless they were
enjoined to all People, and made terms of Communion; i. e. that persons were
not allowed to join in all Acts of Communion with us, unless they did them.
However, he thinks this will prove(What, that they differ from us in any
substantial part of Worship? No, he dares not say that: but what then?) that we
differ in more than a circumstance, even at least in a circumstantial part of
Worship, yet we must be supposed to be agreed. To convince the Reader, what an
admirable faculty of proving this man has, let him but look on the thing he
undertook to prove. I had said, that we were agreed in the substantial parts of
Worship; this he undertakes to disprove, for two or three leaves together, and
the conclusion is, that at least we differ in a circumstantial part of Worship,
and his consequence must be, therefore we differ in a substantial, or else it
is idle and impertinent talk. T. G. would have been ashamed to have argued
after this fashion: but they are to be pitied, they both do as well, as their
Cause will bear.

Yet Mr. A. cannot give over, for he has a very good will at proving something
against our Church, although he has very ill luck in the doing of it. My
argument was, If it be lawful to separate upon pretense of greater purity,
where there is an agreement in doctrine, and the substantial parts of Worship,
then a bare difference in opinion, as to some circumstantials in Worship and
the best constitution of Churches will be a sufficient ground to break
Communion and to set up new Churches. Hitherto we have considered his denial of
the Antecedent; and the charge he has brought against our Church, about new
substantial parts of Worship; we now come to his denying the Consequence, viz.
that although it be granted that there is an agreement in Doctrine and the
substantial parts of Worship, yet he will not allow it to follow that a bare
difference in opinion as to some circumstantials will be sufficient ground to
break Communion and to set up new Churches. To understand the consequence we
must suppose, 1. An agreement in the substantial parts of Worship. 2. A
Separation, for greater parity of Worship. And what then can justify this
Separation, but a difference of Opinion as to some circumstantials in Worship?
Hold, says he, the consequence is not good, for there are certain middle
things, between substantial parts of worship and bare circumstances, about
which it will be lawful to divide, though otherwise we agree in doctrine, and
the substantial parts of Worship. So that here a Separation is justified (1.)
on the account of such things, which are confessed to be neither substantial
nor circumstantial parts of Worship, (2.) Although there be an agreement in the
substantial parts of Worship; and consequently, although these middle kind of
things be not made substantial parts of worship. For that he charged us with in
the Antecedent; and now allowing the Antecedent and denying the Consequence, he
must grant, that it is lawful to separate on the account of Ceremonies,
although they be made no parts of worship at all. For if they be neither
substantial nor circumstantial parts of worship, they can be none at all; and
yet he says, it is lawful to divide about them. And which is more pleasant,
when he goes about to prove the lawfulness of separating for the sake of these
things, he does it by undertaking to show, that they are made substantial parts
of Worship. For thus he argues, The Church of England has exalted these
things, i. e. Ceremonies, to a high preferment in worship, to signify the same
things with the Sacramental Elements, to make them necessary to salvation as
far as man can make them; and therefore they conclude them sinful. If their
preferment in Worship makes them sinful, then they must be either substantial,
or circumstantial parts of Worship, and their separation is not upon the
account of their being Ceremonies, but those Ceremonies are supposed to be made
Parts of Worship, which I have answered already.

But after all our arguings about these matters,. 33.
Mr. A. says, the Controversy stands still, where it did these hundred years,
and more: I utterly deny that, for the Nonconformists have advanced more
toward Separation these last ten years, than they did in a hundred years
before; as appears by the foregoing discourse. However, they are still
unsatisfied in Conscience about these matters, and so long they cannot join
with us, and our Church excommunicates those who condemn our ceremonies; so
that there appears from hence a necessity of separation; and if it be necessary
it cannot be denied to be lawful. This is the fairest remaining Plea for
Separation, which I shall consider both ways. (1.) As it respects the Churches
censures. (2.) As it respects the judgment of Conscience.

1. As it respects the Churches censures. 1. Answer to Sermon. p. 47, 48.
This Mr. B. often insists upon. The Canons, says he, excommucate ipso facto,
all that say the imposed Conformity is unlawful. Plea for Peace, p. 232, 233.
If this be unjust, is it separation to be so excommunicated? And who is the
Schismatic here? Would you have excommunicate men communicate with you? And if
men be wrongfully excommunicate, are they thereby absolved from all public
Worshipping of God? or do they lose their Right to all Church Communion? To
this I answer, That the Excommunication denounced, is not against such as
modestly scruple the lawfulness of things imposed, but against those who
obstinately affirm it? The words of the Canon are not, as Mr. B. quotes them,
If any one do but affirm any thing in the Liturgy, Ceremonies, etc. to be
unlawful are excommunicate, ipso facto; Ca^. 6.
but whosoever shall Affirm the Ceremonies of the Church of England,
established by Law, to be impious, Antichristian, or Superstitious, let him be
Excommunicate ipso facto. Mr. B.'s words bear quite another sense from those of
the Canon; for to say, if any man do but affirm, etc. it implies that a bare
single affirmation incurrs excommunication ipso facto; but when the Canon
says, if any shall affirm, etc, it implies, these circumstances which
according to the common sense of mankind do deserve excommunication, viz. that
it be done publicly and obstinately: (Both which the word Affirm will bear.)
For, as S. Augustine very well says, Aug. (...) R^ig. c. ^.
every man's error is born with, until he either finds an accuser, or he
obstinately defends his opinion. Tam diu sustinetur peccatum aut error
cujus^ibet, donec aut accusatorem inveniat, aut pravam opinionem pertinaci
animositate defendat. All excommunication does suppose precedent admonition,
according to the Rule, If he will not hear the Church, let him be as an
Heathen, or a Publican. Therefore general excommunications although they be
latae sententiae as the Canonists speak, do not affect particular persons,
until the evidence be notorious, not only of the bare fact but of the contumacy
joined with it. Besides, such excommunications which are de jure and latae
sententiae, are rather to be looked on, as Comminations, than as formal
excommunications. (...)
For Gerson putting the question, what the effect of such excommunications is?
he answers, that it is no more than this, that there needs no new judicial
process, but upon proof or confession the Judge may pronounce the sentence.
Which, he says, he learnt from his Master, who was Pet. de Alliaco the famous
Cardinal of Cambray. And if it requires a new sentence, (...)
then it does not actually excommunicate. But of this the learned Archbishop
of Spalato has discoursed coursed at large; to whom I refer the Reader. As to
the practice of Canon Law in England, De Constit. c. quia incontinent. ipso
facto.
Lyndwood says, that a declaratory sentence of the Judge is necessary,
notwithstanding the Excommunication ipso facto. And it is a Rule in our Church,
Can. 65.
that Persons excommunicate are to be publicly denounced excommunicate in a
Cathedral or Parochial Church every six months, that others may have notice of
them; and until the sentence be thus declared, I do not know how far particular
persons can think themselves obliged to forbear Communion on the account of a
general sentence of excommunication, though it be said to be ipso facto. For
although the sentence seem peremptory, yet ipso facto, does suppose a fact, and
such as deserves excommunication in the sense of the Church; of which there
must be evident proof brought, before the sentence can take hold of the Person.
And to make the sentence valid as to the person, there must be due execution of
it; and the question in this case then is, whether any person knowing himself
to be under such qualifications which incur a sentence of excommunication, be
bound to execute this sentence upon himself? which he must do, if he thinks
himself bound to separate from our Church on the account of this general
excommunication. Plea for Pea^e p. 2^^.
And so Mr. B. himself seems to resolve this point; Although, says he, we are
excommunicated ipso facto, yet we are not bound our selves to execute their
sentence; but may stay in Communion till they prove the fact, and do the
execution on us themselves by refusing us. And so he has fully answered his
own objection. But can those be called Schismatics for not communicating with
a Church, who are first excommunicated by that Church? Yes, in these cases they
may (1.) when there is a just and sufficient Cause for that sentence. For,
otherwise, no Church could condemn any excommunicated Persons for Schism; if it
declared before hand, that all those who held such Doctrines, or condemned such
Practices, should be excommunicated. To make this plain by Instances: Suppose
the Churches of New England declare the sentence of excommunication ipso facto
against all that oppose Infant Baptism; R. Williams and his Company oppose it;
they upon this are actually excommunicated; may the Churches of New England
call these men Schismatics or not? If they are Schismatics notwithstanding
the sentence of excommunication; then the denouncing this sentence before hand
does not excuse them from the guilt of Schism. Dis^ipl. de France, Des Minist.
art. 5.
By the Constitution of the Churches of France, every Minister that refuses to
subscribe to the Orders among them is to be declared a Schismatic; Would this
make such a one not to be a Schismatic, because this amounts to an
excommunication, ipso facto? So in Scotland 1641. Subscription to the
Presbyterian discipline was required under pain of excommunication; if any had
been excommunicated on this account, would this excuse them from the charge of
Schism, in the judgment of the Covenanters? By the Constitutions of Geneva,
any one that opposes, or contemns the Authority of that Church for a year
together, is liable to the sentence of banishment for a whole year; as Calvin
himself relates it. Suppose this were merely excommunication for so long;
Calvin. Epist. (...). p. 311.
would not Calvin have thought them Schismatics for all that? For he fully
declares his mind in this case, p. 122.
on occasion of a certain Nonconformist in an Epistle to Farell; where he
advises that he should be first summoned before the Magistrate; if that did not
prevail, they should proceed to excommunication of a person who by his
obstinacy disturbed the order of the Church; which, says he, is agreeable to
ancient Councils and the mind of God in Scripture; therefore let him that will
not submit to the Orders of a Society be cast out of it. Here we see
excommunication justified against such as refuse to obey the Orders of a
Church; and much more certainly, if they publicly affirm them to be Impious,
Antichristian or Superstitious as 8. Canon expresses: and no Church in the
world, but will think excommunication reasonable upon the like grounds; and
therefore if there be such a thing as Schism, they may be guilty of it still,
although excommunication be denounced against them on such accounts. (2.) If
they proceed to form new Churches; as will appear evident to any one that
reflects on the former instances; and let him judge, whether all persons so
excommunicated, would not have been condemned much more for Schismatics, if
they had set up new Churches in opposition to theirs. (...). c. 6.
S. Augustine puts the case of good men unjustly excommunicated; and he says,
they are to bear it with patience, for the peace of the Church, and such will
still maintain the true faith, sine ulla Conventiculorum segregatione, without
running into separate Meetings; although they do believe themselves unjustly
excommunicated. Such as these, says he, the Father which sees in secret, will
reward and crown in secret. This kind seems very rare, but there want not
instances, yea, there are more than can be believed.

2. As to the judgment of Conscience.. 34.
The Author of the Letter out of the Country lays the Foundation of the
separation upon the force of Scruples, Letter out of the Country, p. 5, 6, etc.
mighty Scruples, Scruples of a long standing, and of a large extent, Scruples
that there is no hopes to remove, without some very overpowering impression on
men's minds. I am so much of another mind, that I think a little impartiality,
and due consideration would do the business; but as long as men read and hear
and judge only of one side, and think it a temptation to examine things as they
ought to do, and cry out, they are satisfied already, there is not much hopes
of doing good upon such, but I think they can have no great comfort in such
Scruples. Men that really scruple things out of tenderness of Conscience, are
sincerely willing to be better informed, and glad of any light that brings them
satisfaction, and do not fly out into rage, and violent passion against those
who offer to remove their Scruples. Has this been the temper of our scrupulous
Brethren of late? Let their Scruples be touched never so tenderly, they cannot
bear it, and take it extremely ill of those who would better inform them. Answ.
p. 81.
Mr. B. freely tells me, that he that thinks his own, or others reasonings will
ever change all the truly honest Christians in the Land(as to the unlawfulness
of the things imposed) knows so little of matters, or of men, or of
Conscience, as that he is unmeet to be a Bishop or a Priest. What is the reason
of such a severe saying? Where lies the strength and evidence of these
Scruples? Why may not honest men be cured of their errors and mistakes, as I am
persuaded these are such which they call Scruples? Is there no hopes to bring
the People to a better temper, and more judgment? For I know nothing more is
necessary for the cure of them. Here is no depth of learning, no subtilty of
reasoning, no endless quotation of Fathers necessary about these matters. The
dispute lies in a narrow compass, and men may see light if they will. But what
if they will not? Then we are to consider, how far a wilful mistake or error
of Conscience, will justify men? I say it does not, cannot justify them in
doing evil; and that I am sure breaking the Peace of the Church for the sake of
such Scruples, is. And this I had said in my Sermon, which I take to be very
material for our scrupulous persons to consider. For suppose they should be
mistaken, does this error of Conscience justify their separation, or not? If
not, they may be in an ill condition, for all their Scruples, or their
confidence. And so Mr. Baxter has long since declared, 5. Disputations of
Church Gov. p. 48^.
that if we do through weakness, or perverseness take lawful things to be
unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience. Our error is our sin,
and one sin will not excuse another sin. But Mr. A. says, (1) That I do ill to
put together wilful Error and mistake of Conscience, Mischief of Impos. p. 72.
when I say they do not excuse from sin, since there is so great a difference
between a wilful Error and a mistake of simple ignorance. What strange
cavilling is this? When any one may see that I join wilful both to Error and
Mistake. And is not a mistake or error of Conscience all one? If I had said a
mistake of simple ignorance does not excuse from sin, I had contradicted the
whole design of that discourse, which is to show that there must be wilfulness
in the error or mistake which does not excuse. For I say expressly, if the error
be wholly involuntary, it does excuse. This is but a bad beginning in a
Discourse about Conscience.

2. If no error will excuse from sin, why is the Question afterward put by me,
What error will excuse? I answer, (1.) it is an exercise of patience, to be
troubled with a cavilling adversary. (2.) Do not I say as plainly, as words can
express it, that a wilful error does not excuse from sin? And the question
afterward put, concerns the same thing; and the Answer I give to it is, if the
error be wholly involuntary, it does excuse, but if it be wilful it does not.
Is this man's conscience full of Scruples that writes at this rate, with so
little regard to the plain meaning and words of him whom he pretends to confute?

3. He says, I put one of the wildest cases that ever was put, P. 73.
viz. If a man think himself bound to divide the Church by sinful Separation,
that separation is nevertheless a sin for his thinking himself bound to do it.
For (1.) It may be justly questioned, whether it be possible for a man in his
Wits to think himself bound to divide the Church by sinful Separation. What
Sophisters arguments are these? As though we did not commonly speak of the
thing as it is, and not as the Person apprehends it. S. Paul did think himself
bound to a sinful persecution, although he did not think it so, when he did it.
The Jews thought themselves bound to kill the Apostles, which was wilful
murder, and yet they were men in their wits. The false Apostles thought
themselves bound to divide the Church by a sinful separation. How then comes
this to be thought so impossible a case as to the thing it self? for I was not
so foolish to put the case concerning men, who thought themselves bound to
commit a sin, knowing it to be a sin. (2.) He much questions, whether ever any
did think himself bound to divide a Church, he may possibly think himself bound
to avoid it. If he may think himself bound to do that which makes divisions in
a Church, it is sufficient to my purpose. And did not the false Apostles do so,
and have not others followed their examples? And thus, after other trifling
Cavils to the same purpose, after his manner, he yields all that I say, and
says, It is freely granted by all the world, that wilful Error does not excuse
from sin. And after many words about the case of an erroneous conscience, P. 77.
he concludes that I deliver nothing but the common doctrine of all Casuists;
only he thinks it not pertinent to the matter in hand. Why so? was not the
matter in hand about the duty of complying with an established Rule? And was it
not very pertinent to this, to show how far an erroneous conscience may, or may
not excuse from sin? But Mr. A. says, it should have been about the Power of
Conscience, concerning an established Rule of man's making; and such for which
they have neither general nor particular warrant from God so to make. Is not
this indeed to the purpose? First to suppose an unlawful rule imposed, and then
to enquire what conscience is to do about it. My business was to show, that men
were not in doubtful cases to satisfy themselves with this, that they followed
their consciences; because their consciences might err, and if that Error
happened to be wilful, being contracted for want of due care, what they did,
might not only be sinful in it self, but imputed to them as sins. Which all men
who pretended any regard to conscience ought to have an eye to: for why do they
pretend conscience, but to ^void sin? And if under a wilful error of (...) they
may still be guilty of great sins, as the Ie^^ and S. Paul were, then men ought
not to satisfy themselves barely with this pretense, that they do as (...)
direct them. This was the plain (...) of that ^art of my Sermon; and I leave
any (...) whether it were not pertinent.

But he says, (...), P. 78.
if they be such, are wholl^ (...) invincible Ignorance. If (...) better for
them. I hope they have (...) in their own breasts for it, than what appears in
some of their late Books; for neither a peevish, angry, scornful, provoking way
of writing about these matters; nor a light, scurrilous, cavilling, Sophistical
Answer to a serious discourse, are any great signs of such an impartial
endeavor after satisfaction, as Mr. A. boasts of. I cannot tell how much they
have read the Scriptures, and studied this Controversy; nor how earnestly they
have prayed for direction; but I have seen enough of their unfriendly debates,
which give me no great satisfaction in this matter. But I leave this to God and
their own consciences to judge; being very willing to hope and believe the best.

To return to the Author of the Letter.. 35.
The main force of what he says, lies in this, that those who cannot conquer
their scruples as to communion with our Church, p. 4.
must either return to the State of Paganism, or set up new Churches by joining
with the ejected Ministers. This is new doctrine, and never heard of in the
days of the old Puritans; for they supposed men obliged to continue in the
Communion of this Church, although there were some things they scrupled, and
could not conquer those scruples. And this they supposed to be far enough from
a State of Paganism.

But they scruple the Use of the Sacraments with us; p. 8.
and much more living under some of our Ministers. I never heard this last
alleged for a ground of separation till very lately, and it has been
considered already. And it is a very hard case with a Church, if People must
fly into Separation, because all their Ministers are not such as they ought to
be. But if they do scruple joining in communion with our Church, I would fain
know, whether as often as men do scruple joining with others, their Separation
be lawful? If it be, it is a vain thing to talk of any settled Constitution of
a Church; whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent; for this Principle
overthrows them all. I will instance particularly in the last, as most
favorable to such kind of Liberty. And I need not suppose a case, since such
has already happened several times in New England. R. Williams is one
remarkable Instance, who scrupled many things in their Churches, and therefore
could join no longer with them; and thought himself bound to set up a separate
congregation among them; and the People who scrupled as well as he, chose him
for their Pastor. What is there in this case, but is every whit as justifiable,
as the present separation? But did the Churches of New England allow this for a
just Cause? Answ. to Cotton's Letter. Bloody Tenent.
so far from it, that R. Williams published grievous complaints to the world,
of the persecution he underwent for it. Mr. Baxter mentions another Instance
since this from the mouth of Mr. Norton, Defense of the Cure of Divis. p 124.
an eminent Minister of New England, viz. of a Church that separated from a
Church, on the account of their Preachers having human learning; and upon all
the applications and endeavors that could be used toward them, their answer
was, That is your judgment, and this is ours, i. e. they could not conquer
their Scruples, and therefore must persist in separation, or return to
Paganism. Mr. Cobbet of New England mentions a third instance; (...). to
Magist^a^es Power, ^. (...).
one Obadiah Holmes being unsatisfied with the proceedings of the Church of
Rehoboth, withdraws from their Communion, and sets up another Assembly in the
Town; and upon his obstinate continuance therein, was solemnly excommunicated
by them. And what the late differences among them concerning the Subject of
Baptism and Consociation of Churches may come to, time will discover. I would
only know, whether if Mr. Davenport and the dissenting party there from the
determination of their Synod, should proceed to Separation, whether this
Separation be justifiable or not? This is certain, that the Dissenters there do
charge their Brethren with Innovation and Apostasy from their first
principles; First Principles of New England by I. Mather, 1675.
and say, their consciences cannot comply with their Decrees: and if they
proceed, those Churches may be broken in pieces, by these principles of
Separation. As the Separate Congregations in the Low Countries, most of them
were by new Scruples, which the People could not conquer; for the Anabaptists
commonly raised Scruples among their members, and carried away many of them.
And so they had done in New England, and dissolved those Churches before this
time, if this principle had been allowed there, viz. that where People cannot
conquer their scruples, they may proceed to Separation. No, they tell them,
they must preserve the Peace of their Churches, and if they cannot be quiet
among them, the world is wide enough for them. So they sent R. Williams and
others out of their Colonies; notwithstanding the far greater danger of
Paganism among the Indians. This I only mention, to show that no settled Church
does allow this liberty of Separation, because men cannot conquer their
Scruples. And upon the same ground, not only Anabaptists and Quakers, but the
Papists themselves must be allowed the liberty of setting up separate
Congregations. For, I suppose this Gentleman will not deny, but they may have
Scruples too, many Scruples, and of long standing, and among great numbers, and
they have Priests enough at liberty to attend them. And by that time all these
have set up among us, shall we not be in a very hopeful way to preserve the
Protestant Religion?

These consequences do flow so naturally from such principles, that I wonder
that none of those who have undertaken to defend the Cause of Separation, have
taken any care to put any stop to it, or to let us know, where we may fix and
see an end of it; what scruples are to be allowed, and what not: and whether it
be lawful to separate as long as men can go on in scrupling, and say they
cannot conquer their Scruples. Are there no Scruples among us, but only against
the sign of the Cross, and Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, and kneeling
at the Lords Supper? Are there none that scruple the lawfulness of
Infant Baptism among us? Are there none that scruple the very use of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, saying they are not to be literally understood? Are there
none that scruple giving common respect to others as a sort of Idolatry? Are
there none that scruple the validity of our Ordinations, and say, we can have
no true Churches, because we renounce Communion with the Pope? What is to be
done with all these, and many more scruplers, who profess they cannot conquer
their Scruples no more than others can do theirs about our ceremonies, and such
weighty things as the use of Godfathers and Godmothers.

This I mention,. 36.
because this Gentleman seems to look on it, as a more dreadful thing than the
sign of the Cross. p. 6.
For, having spoken of that, he adds, Nor is it in it self of less weight
(perhaps it is of much greater) that in Baptism the Parents are not suffered to
be Sponsors for their Children, but others must appear and undertake for them:
p. 8.
which he repeats soon after. And yet T. C. who saw as much into these matters,
as any that have come after him, in the Admonitions declared, that this was a
thing arbitrary, and left to the discretion of the Church. T. C. 's first
Answer to W^itg. p. 13^.
And in his first Answer he says, For the thing it self, considering that it
is so generally received of all the Churches, they do not mislike of it. So
that, on the same ground it seems, all o^^er Protestant Churches may be
scrupled at, as well as ours; and yet not only this Gentleman, but Mr. B.
several times mentions this, Answ. p. 49. Plea for Peace, p. 143. 10^.
as one of the grounds of the unlawfulness of the Peoples joining in Communion
with us: nay, he calls this, his greatest objection; and yet he confesses,
Defense of his Plea. p. 26. Plea for Peace, p. 149.
that if the Sponsors do but represent the Parents, our Baptism is valid and
lawful. Now where is it, that our Church excludes such a representation? Indeed
by Canon 29, the Parents are not to be compelled to be present, nor suffered to
answer, as Susceptors for their Children; but the Parents are to provide such
as are fit to undertake that Office. Ratio Discip. Fratr. c. 3. Sect. 2.
In the Bohemian Churches, there seems to be an express compact between the
Parents and the Sponsors; but there is no declaration of our Church against
such an implicit one, as may be reasonably inferred from the consent of the
parties. For the Parents desire of the Sponsors undertaking such an Office for
his Child is in effect transferring his own Right to them; and so they may be
said to represent the Parents. If our Church had appointed the Sponsors without
(...) against the consent of the Parents; then none cou^^ in reason suppose,
that there was any implicit compact between them. But since they are of the
Parents choosing, what they do in that office, is supposed to be with their
full consent. If Baptism were solemnly celebrated as of old, at some certain
seasons only, and indispensable occasions required the Parents absence, might
not they appoint others to be Sponsors for their Children upon mutual consent
and agreement among themselves? Our Churches not permitting the Parents
themselves to be Sponsors is but like such an occasion of absence; and the
intentention of our Church is not to supersede the obligation of Parents, but
to superinduce a farther obligation upon other Persons for greater security of
performance. If men be negligent in doing their duty, must the Church bear the
blame, and this be pleaded for a ground of Separation from her Communion?

But there is something beyond this, which lies at the bottom of this scruple;
viz. that the Child's Right to Baptism depends on the Right of the Parents, and
therefore if the Parents be excluded, and only Sponsors admitted, the Children
so baptized have no right to Baptism. For Mr. B.'s first Question is, Def. of
the Plea. p. 25.
which way the Child comes to have right to Baptism, any more than all the
Infidels Children in the world? And his next is, whether the Church of England
require any ground of title in the Infant, besides the Sponsion of the
fore-described Godfathers, and Gods general promise?

I answer, (1.) The Church by requiring Sponsors does not exclude any Title to
Baptism, which the Child has by the Right of the Parents. For the Sponsors may
be supposed to appear in a threefold Capacity. 1. As representing the Parents
in offering up the Child to Baptism; and so whatever right the Parents have,
that is challenged, when the Child is brought to be baptized. 2. As
representing the Child in the Answers that are made in Baptism; which is a very
ancient and universal practice of the Christian Church; for it was not only
observed in the Latin Churches in S. Augustins time; Aug. ep. 23.
and in the Greek Churches in S. Chrysostom's; Chrysostom. in Psalm. 14.
and has so continued ever since; but the Aethiopick and Armenian Churches do
still observe it. 3. In their own capacity; when they promise to take care of
the good education of the Child in the principles of the Christian faith; in
the charge given to them, after Baptism. So that since one of these capacities
does not destroy another, they all succeeding each other, there is no reason to
say that the Church does exclude the right which comes by the Parents.

(2) If the Parents be supposed to have no right, yet upon the Sponsion of
Godfathers, the Church may have right to administer Baptism to Children. Not,
as though their Sponsion gave the right, but was only intended to make them
parties to the Covenant in the Child's name and Sureties for performance. To
make this clear, we must consider, that administration of Baptism, is one
considerable part of the Power of the Keys, which Christ first gave to the
Apostles, and is ever since continued in the Officers of the Church. By virtue
of this Power, they have Authority to give admission into the Church to capable
Subjects. The Church of Christ, as far as we can trace any records of
Antiquity, has always allowed Children to be capable Subjects of Admission
into the Christian Church; but lest the Church should fail of its end, and
these Children not be afterward well instructed in their Duty, it required
Sponsors for them, Tert^l. de Baptismo. c. 18.
who were not only to take care of them for the future but to stand as their
sureties to ratify their part of the Covenant which Baptism implies. And the
ancient Church went no farther as to the right of Baptism than this, for since
the Power of the Keys was in the Church to give admission to capable Subjects;
since the Catholic Church did always judge Infants capable, there seemed to
be no more necessary for their admission than the undertaking of Sponsors in
their name. All this appears from S. Augustines Epistle, ad Bonifacium; where
he says (1.) That the Child's benefit by Baptism does not depend upon the
intention of those that offer him. For Boniface put the question to S. Augustine
about some who offered Children to Baptism, not for any spiritual benefit, but
for corporal health; notwithstanding this, says S. Augustine, if the due form
of Baptism be observed, the spiritual effect of it is obtained. (2.) That the
Churches right is chiefly concerned in the baptism of Infants. For, says he,
the Children are offered to Baptism and the Spiritual Grace to be received
thereby, not so much by those in whose arms they are carried (for so the
Sponsors used to carry them in their right arms) as by the whole Society of the
Faithful. Tota ergo matter Ecclesia quae in sanctis est facit, quia tota omnes,
tota singulos parit: so that it is by the Churches right, that he supposes
them to receive baptism and the benefits by it. (3.) That there is no
necessity, that the Parents themselves offer their Children. For he calls it a
mistake to think that Children receive the benefit in Baptism, as to the
remission of Original Guilt, or the account of their Parents offering them. For
many are offered to Baptism by strangers, and slaves sometimes by their
Masters. And when Parents are dead, Children are offered by such as take pity
upon them; and sometimes Children exposed by Parents, and sometimes as they are
taken up by holy Virgins, which neither have Children, nor intend to have any.
(4.) That the Answers made by the Sponsors in Baptism in the name of the Child
are a part of the solemnity of Baptism. Not as though the Child did really
believe, yet it is said to believe on the account of the Sacrament which
supposes faith. For the Sacraments because of the resemblance between them and
the things represented by them, do carry the name of the things represented;
as, says he, the Sacrament of Christ's body after a certain manner is called
his Body; and the Sacrament of his blood is called his blood, so the Sacrament
of faith is called faith, i. e. the Baptismal Covenant supposing believing on
one part, the Church supplies that part by the Sponsors, which cannot be
performed by the Children. Thence he says, ipsa responsio ad celebrationem
pertinet Sacramenti, so that then the Church looked upon the Sponsors
Answering, as a necessary part of the solemnity of Baptism. Thence S. Augustine
elsewhere says, Sermon. 116. de Tempore.
that the fide-jussores or Sureties did in the name of the Children renounce
the Devil and all his Pomp and Works; and in another place he declares, that he
would not baptize a Child without the Sponsors answering for the Child that he
would renounce the Devil, De peccat. meritis and remiss. l. 1. c. 34.
and turn to God, and that they believed he was baptized for the remission of
sins.

(3.) Those who think themselves bound to baptize Children only by virtue of
the Parents right, must run into many perplexing Scruples about baptizing
Children, and be forced to exclude the far greater number of those that are
offered. For, (1.) They are not well agreed, what it is which gives Parents a
right to have their Children baptized; whether a dogmatical Faith be
sufficient, or a justifying faith be necessary? If saving faith be necessary,
whether the outward profession of it be sufficient? Whether that ought to be
taken for a true profession which is only pretended to be a true sign of the
mind, or that only which is really so? Whether profession be required for it
self, or as a discovery of something further? Whether seeming seriousness in
profession be sufficient, or real serio^sness be required? What we must judge
real seriousness in profession, as distinct from inward sincerity? What
contradiction may be allowed to make a profession not serious? Whether besides
a serious profession it be not necessary to be a practical profession? and what
is necessary for the judging a profession to be practical? Whether besides mere
practical profession the positive signs of inward Grace be not necessary? And
whether besides all these, actual confederation and joining in Church Covenant
be not necessary? And if it be, whether the Children of confederated Parents
not being confederated themselves, can convey a right to their Children? About
these, and other such like Questions, those who go upon the Parents Right are
in perpetual disputes, and can neither give others, nor hardly themselves
satisfaction about them. (2.) The consequence of this is, that they must
baptize many with a doubting mind; and must exclude many more, than they can
baptize. For Mr. B. says, Preface to Right to Sacraments.
if he took a dogmatical faith it self, or any short of justifying for the
Title and necessary qualifications of them I must admit, I would baptize none,
because I cannot know who has that dogmatical faith, and who not. The like
others are as ready to say, of his serious, voluntary, not prevalently
contradicted, practical profession; or at least, that no man can baptize with a
good Conscience, till he has upon good evidence thoroughly weighed the lives of
the Parents, and is able to pronounce that the actions of their lives do not
prevalently contradict their profession. Others must reject all those in whose
Parents they do not see positive signs of Grace; or are not actually
confederated with them. And upon all these several bars to the Parents Right,
how few Children will be left, that a man can baptize with a safe Conscience?
Is not this now a more likely way to reduce the far greatest part of
Christianity to Paganism than denying the lawfulness of Separation? Thus I have
considered this main Scruple against the Use of entitling and Covenanting
Godfathers, as Mr. B. calls them; and have showed how little reason there is to
make use of this as so great an objection against our Churches, Communion.

As to kneeling at the Communion, I find nothing particularly objected against
that deserving consideration, Conferen^^ first Part.
which I have not answered in another place.

Mr. A. has one thing yet more to say against the terms of our Churches
Communion,. 37.
viz. Mischief of Impos. p. 85, 86, 87.
that upon the same Reason these are imposed, the Church may impose some use of
Images, Circumcision, and the Paschal Lamb. To which I answer,

(1.) That our Question is about Separation from the Communion of our Church on
the account of the terms that are imposed; and is this a reasonable pretense
for men not to do what is required, because they do not know what may be
required on the same grounds? A Father charges his Son to stand with his Hat
off before him, or else he shall not stay in his House; at first the Son
demurrs upon putting off his Hat to his Father, because he has some scruples,
whether putting off the Hat be a lawful ceremony or not; not merely on the
account of its significancy, but because it seems to him to be giving worship
to a Creature. This he thinks so weighty a scruple, that he charges his Father
with Tyranny over his Conscience for imposing such a condition, on his
continuing in his house, and thinks himself sufficiently justified by it in his
disobedience and forsaking his Fathers House, and drawing away as many of his
servants from him, as he can infuse this scruple into. But let us suppose him
brought to understand the difference between Civil and Religious Worship, yet
he may upon Mr. A.'s grounds still justify his disobedience. For faith he to
his Father, Why do you require me to put off my Hat in your Presence, and to
make this the condition of my staying in your House? Is it not enough that I
own my self to be your Son, and ask you blessing Morning and Evening, and am
very willing to sit at your Table, and depend upon you for my subsistence? Are
not these sufficient Testimonies that I am your Son, but you must expect my
obedience in such a trifling Ceremony as putting off my Hat? You say, it is a
token of respect; I say for that reason I ought not to do it. For, how do I
know when you will have done with your tokens of respect? It is true, you
require no more now, but I consider what you may do, and for all that I know,
the next thing you may require me will be to put off my Shoos before you, for
that is a token of respect in some Countries; next you may require me to kiss
your Toe, for that is a token of respect used some where; and who knows what
you may come to at last; and therefore I am resolved to stop at first, and will
rather leave your House, than be bound to put off my Hat in your Presence. Let
any one judge whether this be a reasonable ground for such an obstinate
disobedience to the Command of his Father. Or suppose a Law were made to
distinguish the several Companies in London from each other, that they should
have some Badge upon their Livery Gowns, that may represent the Trade and
Company they are of; would this be thought a just excuse for any man's refusing
it, to say, What do I know how far this imposing Power may go at last; it is
true, the matter is small at present, but I consider, it is a Badge, it is a
moral significant ceremony, a dangerous teeming thing, no man knows what it may
bring forth at last; for how can I or any man living tell, but at last I may be
required to wear a Fools Coat. Would such an unreasonable jealousy as this
justify such a man's refractoriness, in rather choosing to lose the privilege
of his Company, than submitting to wear the Badge of it? So that the fears of
what may be required is no ground for actual disobedience to what is required.
(2.) There can be no reasonable suspicion that our Church should impose any
other Ceremonies, than what it has already done, supposing that it might do
it, on the same ground: Because the Church has rather retrench^d than
increased Ceremonies; as will appear to any one that compares the first and
second Liturgies of Edw. 6. And since that time no one new Ceremony has been
required, as a condition of Commmunion. But besides, our Church gives a
particular reason against the multiplying of Ceremonies: because the very
number of them, (...) to the (...).
supposing them lawful is a burden; of which S. Augustine complained in his
time, and others had much more cause since; and therefore for that cause many
were taken away, And withal, it is declared that Christ's Gospel was not to be
a Ceremonial Law. So that for these reasons there can be no just fears that our
Church should contradict her own doctrine, which it must do, if it increased
our Cermonies, so as to make a new argument against them, from the number of
them. (3.) There is not the same Reason for introducing the things mentioned by
Mr. A. as for the Ceremonies in Use among us. For, (1.) As to the Use of
Images, our Church has fully declared against any Religious Use of them, in
the Homilies about the Peril of Idolatry; and that from such reasons, as cannot
extend to our Ceremonies: viz. from the express Law of God, and the general
sense of the Primitive Church; which allowed and practiced the sign of the
Cross, at the same time when it disputed most vehemently against Images. (2.)
For Circumcision, which he tells us, may be used as signifying the circumcision
of the heart. He knows very well that our Church joins significancy and decency
together in the matter of Ceremonies; and no man can imagine that such a kind
of significancy as that he mentions, should be sufficient to introduce such a
practice which is so repugnant to Decency among us. Besides that S. Paul makes
it so great a badge of the obligation to the Law, that he says, If ye be
circumcised, Christ profits you nothing: which was never said of any of our
Ceremonies. And whereas he says, it is observed in Abassia as a mystical
Ceremony; he is much mistaken, if their Emperor Claudius say true; Confe^^o
Fid^i Claudii Regis Aethiopiae.
for he says, it is only a National Custom without any respect to Religion,
like the cutting of the face in some parts of Aethiopia and Nubia, and boreing
the ear among the Indians. And Ludolphus proves it to be no other, because it
is done by a woman in private, without any witnesses. (3.) As to his Paschal
Lamb in memory of Christ our Passover that is sacrificed for us; We owe
greater Reverence to Gods own Institutions that were intended to typifie Christ
to come, than to presume to turn them quite another way to represent what is
past. Especially since Christ is become the great Sacrifice for the sins of
mankind. And he might as well have mentioned the Scapegoat and the Red Heifer
as the Paschal Lamb; since they were all Types of the great Sacrifice of
Propitiation. But why are things never used by the Primitive Church (for as to
his story of Innocent 2. be it true or false, it is nothing to us) brought to
parallel our Ceremonies, when the great Reason of our Churches retaining any
Ceremonies was declared from the beginning of the Reformation to be out of
Reverence to the Ancient Church, which observed the same kind of Ceremonies?

The only remaining pretense for the present Separation,. 38.
is, that there is a parity of reason, as to their Separating from us, and our
Separating from the Church of Rome. For so Mr. A. urges the argument, we
Separate from them because they impose doubtful things for certain, Mischief of
(...).
false for true, new for old, absurd for reasonable; then this will hold for
themselves because they think so; and that was all I opposed to T. G. But is it
possible for any man that pretends to be a Protestant Divine to think the case
alike? When (1.) They confess our Doctrine in the 39 Articles to be true, we
reject all their additional Articles, in Pius 4. his Creed, not only as false,
but some of them as absurd and unreasonable, as men can invent, viz. that of
Transubstantiation; which is made by them the great trying and burning point.
But what is there, which the most inveterate enemies of our Church can charge
in her doctrine, as new, as false, as absurd? nay, they all yield to the
Antiquity, to the Truth, to the Reasonableness of our Doctrine; and yet is not
Mr. A. ashamed to make the case seem parallel. But what new and strong Reason
does he bring for it? You may be sure it is some mighty thing; for, he says,
presently after it, that my Importunity has drawn them out of their
reservedness, and they have hitherto been modest to their prejudice. Alas for
him, that his modesty should ever hurt him! But what is this dangerous Secret,
that they have hitherto kept in, out of mere veneration to the Church of
England? Let us prepare our selves for this unusual, this killing charge. Why,
says Mr. A. In the Catechism of the Church, this Doctrine is contained (It is
matter of Doctrine then, I see; although we are confessed to be agreed in the
39 Articles, as far as they concern* Doctrine. But what is this notorious
doctrine?) It is, says he, that Infants perform Faith and Repentance by their
Sureties. Did I not fear, it was some dreadful thing; some notorious heresy,
condemned by one or two at least of the four General Councils? But is it said
so, in plain words? or is it wire-drawn by far-fetched Consequences? No, it is
plain enough; for the Question is, What is required of Persons to be baptized.
Answ. Repentance whereby they forsake sin; and faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament. Quest. Why then are
Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age, they cannot perform them?
Answ. Because they promise them both by their Sureties; which promise when they
come to age themselves are bound to perform. But I pray does it hence follow,
that Infants do perform Faith and Repentance by their Sureties? Are not the
words express, that they promise both by their Sureties? And is promising and
performance all one? I do not find it so by this Instance. For here was a great
matter promised, and nothing performed. It is true the Catechism says, Faith
and Repentance are required of them that are to be baptized: which supposes
the persons to be baptized capable of performing these things themselves. And
then comes a Question, by way of objection; why then are Infants baptized, etc.
to which the sense of the Answer is, that although by reason of their Age they
are incapable of performing the Acts of Repentance and Believing; yet the
Church does allow Sureties to enter into Covenant for them; which does imply a
Promise on their parts for the Children, and an obligation lying on them to
perform what was then promised. And now let the Reader judge, since this
horrible Secret is come out, whether this ought to be ranked in an equal degree
as to the justifying Separation with the monstrous, absurd and unreasonable
doctrines of the Roman Church. And I know nothing can do them greater Service,
than such Parallels as these.

(2.) We charge them with those Reasons for Separation, which the Scripture
allows; such as Idolatry, perverting the Gospel and Institutions of Christ, and
Tyranny over the Consciences of men, in making those things necessary to
salvation, which Christ never made so: But not one of these, can with any
appearance of Reason be charged on the Church of England, since we profess to
give Religious Worship only to God; we worship no Images; we invocate no Sains;
we adore no Host; we creep to no Crucifix; we kiss no Relics. We equal no
traditions with the Gospel; we lock it not up from the People in an unknown
language; we preach no other terms of salvation than Christ and his Apostles
did; we set up no Monarchy in the Church to undermine Christ's, and to dispense
with his Laws and Institutions. We mangle no Sacraments, nor pretend to know
what makes more for the honor of his Blood than he did himself. We pretend to
no skill in expiating men's sins when they are dead; nor in turning the
bottomless pit into the Pains of Purgatory by a charm of words and a quick
motion of the hand. We do not cheat men's souls with false bills of exchange,
called Indulgences; nor give out that we have the Treasure of the Church in our
keeping, which we can apply as we see occasion. We use no pious frauds to
delude the People, nor pretend to be infallible, as they do when they have a
mind to deceive. These are things which the Divines of our Church have with
great clearness and strength of Reason made good against the Church of Rome;
and since they cannot be objected against our Church, with what face, can men
suppose the cases of those who separate from each of them to be parallel?

(3.) As to the Ceremonies in the Roman Church and ours, there are these
considerable differences,

(1.) They have a mighty number, as appears by their Rituals and Ceremonials,
and the great volums, written in explication of them; we, very few, and those
so very easy and plain; that it requires as great skill not to understand
ours, as it does to understand theirs. (2.) They place great holiness in
theirs, as appears by the Forms of consecration of their Water, Oil, Salt,
Wax, Vestments, etc. but we allow none of these, but only the use of certain
ceremonies, without any preceding Act of the Church importing any peculiar
holiness attributed to them. (3.) They suppose great virtue and efficacy to be
in them, for the purging away some sorts of sins; we utterly deny any such
thing to belong to our ceremonies, but declare, that they are appointed only
for Order and Deceny. (4.) They make their ceremonies being appointed by the
Church to become necessary parts of Divine Worship; as I have already proved;
but our Church looks upon them, even when determined as things in their own
nature indifferent, but only required by virtue of that general obedience which
we owe to lawful Authority. So that as to ceremonies themselves there is a vast
disparity between the Roman Church and ours; and no man can pretend otherwise,
that is not either grossly ignorant, or does not wilfully misunderstand the
state of the Controversy between them and us.

Thus I have gone through all the Pleas for the present Separation I could meet
with, in the Books of my Answerers: and I have not concealed the force or
strength I saw in any of them. And however Mr. A. reproaches me with having a
notable talent of misrepresenting my Adversaries, Mischief o^ Impo^. ^. (...).
(a thing which I have always abhorred, and never did it wilfully in my life,
it appearing to me an act of injustice as well as disingenuity) yet I do assure
him, I have endeavored to understand them truly, and to represent them fairly,
and to judge impartially. And although I make no such appeals to the day of
Judgment as others do; yet I cannot but declare to the world, as one that
believes a day of Judgment to come, that upon the most diligent search, and
careful Inquiry I could make into this matter, I cannot find any Plea
sufficient to justify in point of conscience, the present Separation from the
Church of England.

Monseigneur,
DEux voyages que j'ay ete oblige de fair, m'ont empeche de repondre aussi
tossed que je l'aurois souhaite a la lettre don't Votre Grandeur m'a fait la grace
de m'honorer. Comme j'etois sur le point de vous en fair des excuses, Monsieur
de L' Angle est arrive en ceste ville, quime les a fait encor differer, dans
l'esperance, qu' il voudroit bien se charger de ma reponse, and qu' elle
pourroit par ce moien vous etre plus fidellement rendue. Il est vray, Monsieur,
que si j'en croyois mon deplaisir, je la remettrois encor a une autre fois; car
je ne peux vous ecrire sans un extreme douleur, quand je song a la matiere
surla quelle vous me commandes de vous dire mon sentiment. Ie croy que vous le
scaves deja bien, et que vous ne me faites pas l'honneur de me le demander
comme en ayant quelque sort de doubt; vous me faites plus de justice que cela;
and vous ne me comprenez pas au nombre de ceux, qui ont touchant l 'Eglise d'
Angleterre une si mechante opinion. Pour moy, je n'en avois pas une si mechante
d'aucun veritable Anglois, and je ne pouvois pas me persuader qu' il y en eut
un seul, qui crut qu'on ne peut estre dans sa communion sans hasarder son
propre salut. Pour ceux qui sont engages dans le parti de l' Eglise Roman,
j'en jugeois tout autrement. Ils ont des maxims particuliers, and agissent par
d'autres Interests. Mais pour ceux qui n'ont aucune liaison avec Rome, c'est
une chose bien singuliere de les voir passer jusqu' a cette extremite que de
croire que dans l' Eglise Anglicane on ne peut fair son salut. C'est n'avoir
gueres de conoissance de la Confession defoy, que tout le monde Protestant a si
hautement approuvee, and qui merit en effect les louanges de tout ce qu'il y a
de bons Chrestiens. Car on ne pouvoit rien fair de plus sage que cette
Confession, and jamais les articles de foy n'ont ete recueillis avec un
discernment plus just, and plus raisonnable que dans cette excellent^ piece.
On a raison de la garder avec tant de veneration dans la Bibliotheque d'
Oxford, and le grand Iuellus pour l'avoir si dignement defendue, est digne
d'une louange immortelle. C'est d'elle don't Dieu se servit dans le commencement
de la Reformation d' Angleterre, and si elle n'avoit pas ete comme son ouvrage,
il ne l'auroit pas benit d'une facon si avantageuse. Le succes qu' elle out,
devroit fermer la bouche a ceux qui sont les plus animes, and l'avoir veue
trionpher de tant d' Obstacles devroit fair reconnoitre a tout le monde, que
dieu s'est declare en sa faveur, qu'il est visiblement mele de son
etablissement, and qu'elle a la verite and la fermete de sa parole, a qui elle
doibt en effect sa naissance, and son origin. Elle est aujourdhuy ce qu'elle
etoit quand elle ^toit formee, and on ne peut pas reprocher a Messieurs les
Eveques qu'ils y ayent depuis cette term la, apporte quelque changement. Et
comment donc s'imaginer qu'elle ayt change d'usage? and peut on rien voir de
plus inique, que de dire, qu'un Instrument que Dieu employa autrefois pour
l'instruction de tant de gens de bien, pour le salut de de tant de peuples,
pour la consolation tant de fidelles soit aujourdhuy devenue quelque chose de
funeste, and pernicieuse. Si votre Confession de foy est pure, and innocente,
votre service divin l'est aussi Car on n'y voit rien de tout qui tend a
L'idolatrie; vous n'adores que Dieu seul; dans votre culte il n'y a rien qui se
termine a la creature, and si l'on y trouve quelques ceremonies qui ne se
rencontrent pas ailleurs, c'est fair profession d'une terrible Theology,
avoir depouille toute charity, ne scavoir guere ce que valent les ames, ne
conoitre point la nature de chooses indifferentes, que decroire qu'elles sont
capables de perdre eternellement ceux qui s'y veulent assujettir. C'est avoir
une meme durete que de croire que votre discipline ecclesiastique est capable
de damner les hommes. Car ou a t'on jamais vu que pour des articles de
Discipline le salut des hommes se trouve interesse, and de chooses qui ne
regardent que le dehors, and L'ordre de L' Eglise, et qui ne sont que comme
L'ecorce, and les envelopes de la verite, peuvent else causer la mort, and
glisser du poison dans une ame? Certes on ne les comprend jamais au nombre de
verites essentielles, and comme il n'y a que celles cy qui sauvent, il n'y a
qu'elles aussi qui peuvent exclurre du salut. Pour le gouvernement Episcopal,
qu'a t'il qui soit dangereux, and qui puisse raisonnablement alarmer des
consciences? and s'il est capable de priver de la gloire eternelle, and de
boucher les avenues du ciel, qui estce qui y est enter l'espace de plus de
quinze cents ans? Puisque pendant tout ce temps la, toutes les Eglises du monde
n'ont point eu d'autre gouvernement. S'il etoit contraire a la verite and a
l'aquisition du bonheur eternel, est il croyable que Dieu l'eut si hautement
approuve, and qu'il eut permis que pendant tant de siecles son Eglise en eust
ete tyrannise? Car qui estce qui l'a gouverne, qui estce qui a compose ses
conciles tant generaux que particuliers, qui estce qui a combatu les Heresies
don't elle a este de tout temps attaque? ont ce pas ete les Eveques, and n'
estce pas a leur sage conduite, que la parcle de Dieu est redevable, apres
Dieu, de ses victoires and de ses Triomphes. Et sans remonter jusq' au berceau,
and la naissan ce de l' Eglise, qui estce qui dans le siecle precedant delivra
l' Angleterre, de l' Erreur don't elle etoit envelopee? Qui estce qui y fit
resveiller si miraculeusement la verite? fut ce pas le zele, and la fermete des
eveques, leur ministere? degagea t'il pas les Anglois de l'oppression sous
laquelle ils gemissoient de puis si long temps; and leur exemple aida't y pas
puissamment a la Reformation de toute l' Europe? En verite je croy qu'ils en
pouvroient vser comme fifth autre fois Gregoire de Nazianze au milieu de
Constantinople. Quand il y arriva, il trouva que L' Arrianismey avoit fait de
fort grand progres, cependant, son courage, son zele, son scavoir affoblioent
si fort le parti des Heretics, qu'en peu de temps la verite y apparut plus
belle que jamais, and il voulut que le Temple ou il l'avoit si fortement
appuiee portoit le nom d' Anastasie, parce qu'il L'y avoit comme deterree, and
degagee de dessous L'erreur, and par ses soins continuels, il y avoit comme
fait sortir du tombeau, and glorieusement resuscitee, c'est ce qu'ont fait
aussi Les Evesques d' Angleterre. Ils voyoient non une verite seulement, mais
quasi toutes les verites fondamentales ensevelies sous un nombre espouvantables
d' Erreurs. Ils voyoient le joug de Rome plus pesant au milieu d'eux qu'il
n'etoit nulle part ailleurs. La difficulte qu'il y avoit a reussir dans la
Reformation etoit capable de decourager des persons d'une capacite, and d'un
zele mediocre, and neantmoins rien ne les detourne d'un si gene reux dessein.
Les ennemis de dehors, ceux de dedans, tous terribles qu'ils parussent, ne les
intimident point; ils entreprenent ce grand ouvrage, et ne l'abandonnent point
qu'ils n'en soient venus au bout, and qu'ils n'ayent remis sur le throne la
verite resuscitee. En sort qu'ils pouuoient lusser par tout des monuments de
ce miracle and nommer justement toutes leur Eglises du nom d' Anastasie and de
resurrection. Mais si ce Tiltre manque a leur Temples, la chose en soy leur
convient, and l'on n'entend ressonner au milieu d'eux que les Lessons, and Les
louanges de la pure Verite. Ce que doit obliger tous les gens de bien a ne s'en
ecarter pas, and a regarder L' Eglise Anglicane comme une Eglise tres
Orthodoxe. C'est ce qui font Les Protestants de France, ceux de Geneva, Ceux de
Suisse, and d' Allemagne, and ceux d' Hollande aussi. Car ils se firent un fort
grand Honneur, d'avoir dans leur Concile de Dordrecht des Theologiens d'
Angleterre, and monstrerent bien qu'ils avoient pour L' Eglise Anglicane une
profonde veneration. Et d'ou vient donc, que des Anglois memes en ont
aujourdhuy si mechante opinion, and rompre si temerairement comme ils font,
avec Elle? estce pas rompre avec toute L' Eglise Ancienne, avec toutes les
Eglises Orientales, avec toutes les Eglises Protestants qui ont toujours fort
considere la purete de celle d' Angleterre? estce pas une horrible durete que
de l'excommunier sans misericorde, and s'en fair etrangement a croire que de
s'imaginer qu'ils soient le seuls en Angleterre and meme au milieu de tout le
monde chrestien, qui soient destines au bonheur eternel and a soustenir, comme
il faut, le verites necessaires au salut. Certes on pourroit fair un parallele
fort odieux enter ces Docteurs, and le Pape Victor, qui volut excommunier les
Eglises d' Asie par ce qu'elles ne celebroient le feste de Pasque au meme jour
que Rome le faisoit; enter eux and les Audiens, qui rompoient avec les
Chrestiens, and ne vouloient point souffrir d' Eveques riches. Enter Eux and le
Donatistes, qui ne vouloient point de communion avec ceux qui avoient este
ordines par des Eveques laches, and qui s'imaginoient que leur societe etoit la
veritable Eglise, and l'epouse bien aimee qui paissoit son troupeau verse le
midi. Enter eux and ceux de la communion Roman, qui ont si bonne opinion de
leur Eglise, que horse d'elle ils ne s'imaginent pas qu'un puisse jamais
acquerir le Salut. Pour moy quelque enclin que je sois a la tolerance, je ne
pourois pourtant me persuader qu'il en faille avoir pour ceux qui en ont si peu
pour les autres, and que s'ils etoient les maitres feroient assurement un
mauvais quartier a ceux qui dependroient d'eux. Ie regard ces gens la, comme
de perturbateurs de l'Estat, and de l'Eglise, and qui sont infalliblement
animes d'un esprit de sedition. I'ay meme de la pain a croire qu'ils soient
justement ce qu'ils disent estre, and je craindrois bien que sous ces Docteurs
il n'y eust des ennemis tres dangereux qui fussent caches. Des Societes
composees detelles persons seroient extrement perilleuses, and on ne les
pourroit soufrir sans ouvrir la port au disordre, and travailler asa propre
ruin. Ily en a de composees de persons plus raisonnables. Mais j'y voudrois
qu'elles le fussent assez, pour ne se point separer de celles qui composent l'
Eglise Anglicane; particulierement au term ou nous sommes else devroient tout
fair pour une bonne Reconciliation; and dans le conjuncture des affairs
presents ils devroient bien s'apercevoir qu'il n'y a qu'une bonne reunion qui
puisse prevenir les maux don't l'Angleterre est menacee. Car pour dire la
verite, je ne voi pas que leave Meetings soient de fort grande utilite, and
qu'on puisse s'y consoler davantage, que dans les Eglises Episcopales. Quand
j'estois a Londres, il y a bien tossed cinq ans, je me trouvay en plusieurs
assemblees particulieres pour voir comme on l'y prenoit pour l'instruction du
peuple, and la predication de la parole de Dieu. Mais j'avoue que je ^'en
receus aucune edification. I'entendis un de plus fameux Non-conformistes. Il
pre-choit en un lieu ou il y avoit trois hommes and soissante, ou quatre vingt
^emmes. Il avoit choisi un text touchant le restablissement des ruins de
Jerusalem, and pour l'expliquer il cita cent fois Pliny and Vitruve, and
n'oublia pas de dire en Italien ce proverb, duro con duro non fa muro. Tout
cela me parut horse de propos, fort peu a propos pour des femmelettes, and tres
eloigne d'un esprit qui ne cherche que la consolation and l'edification de ses
auditeurs. Se Cantonner and fair un schism pour avoir la liberte de debiter
de tells vanit^s est une fort m^^vaise conduite; and les peuples paroissent
bien ^^ibles de quitter leur mutuelles assemblees pour de chooses qui m^ritent
^i peu leur estime, and leur preference. Ie n'estime pas, qu'on soit en
obligation de souffrir ce dereglement. Il est vray qu'autrefois on souffroit
les Assemblees de Novatiens a Rome and a Constantinople, and que le Donatistes
a voient en la premiere place quelque sort de liberte. Mais c'estoit les
Estrangers, and cela meme ne dura pas long temps and comme il'y en avoit peu,
cela ne tiroit pas en consequence. Mais c'est un autre fait en Angleterre, and
comme le bien de l' Estat, and de l' Eglise depend absolument de l'union du
peuple sur le poinct de la Religion, on n'y pourroit trop presser une union
universelle. Mais il la faut procurer par les bonnes voyes, and comme Messieurs
les Eveques sont de persons d'une grande experience, d'un Scavoir
extraordinaire, d'un zele, and d'une bonte, envers leur peuples veritablement
paternelle, j'espere qu'ils s'employeront a c^grand O^rage avec toute la
prudence and la charity qui s^nt necess^ires pour fair reussir une si louable
entreprise. t'ous particulierement, Monseigneur, don't la moderation and la
capacite sont reconnues de tout le m^nde, il semble que (...) soit un dessein
reserve pour votre grande Sag^sse, and (...) vous n'y reuscistes pas,
apparemment que tous les autres 'y travailleront inutilement. Pour mor, je re
(...) ^^^tribuer d'icy que de vo^us, and que de pr^res; (...) bien protester
que j'en fais tous les jours de f^^r sinceres pour la prosperity de (...) qu'il
plaise a Dieu fair en sort, que tous les Protestants d'Angleterre ne soyent a
l'avenir qu'un coeur, and qu'une Ame. Ie pry Vostre Grandeur d'en estre bien
persuade, and de croire qu'il n'est pas possible d'estre avec plus de respect
que je le suis,

A Leyden 3 September. 1680. Monseigneur, Votre tres humble and tres Obeissant
Serviteur, Le Moyne.

First Letter.
A Letter from Monsieur le Moyne, Professor of Divinity at Leyden, to my Lord
Bishop of London, concerning the nature of our present Differences, and the
unlawfulness of Separation from the Church of England.
My Lord,
TWo Journeys that I have been obliged to take, have hindered me from answering
the Letter, with which your Lordship did me the favor to honor me, so soon as
I could have wished. Just as I was about to excuse my self to you for it,
Monsieur de l' Angle came to this Town, which made me defer it longer yet, in
hopes that he would charge himself with my answer, and that by that means it
might be brought unto you more safely. It is true, my Lord, that if I should
hearken to my own unwillingness, I should put it off still to another time; for
I cannot write unto you without being extremely grieved, when I think upon the
matter, of which you command me to tell you my opinion. I believe that you know
it already, and that you do not do me the honor to ask it of me, as if you had
any kind of doubt of it. You do me more right than so; and you do not account
me of the number of those that have so ill an opinion of the Church of England.
For my part I had not so bad a one of any true Englishman, and I could not
have persuaded my self that there had been so much as one, which had believed
that a man could not be of her communion, without hazarding his own salvation.
For those that are engaged in the party of the Church of Rome, I judged quite
otherwise of them; they have particular Maxims, and act by other interests. But
for those that have no tie to Rome, it is a very strange thing to see them come
to that extreme, as to believe that a man cannot be saved in the Church of
England. This is not to have much knowledge of that Confession of Faith, which
all the Protestant World has so highly approved, and which does really deserve
the praises of all good Christians that are. For there cannot be any thing made
more wise than that Confession, and the Articles of Faith were never collected
with a more just and reasonable discretion than in that excellent piece. There
is great reason to keep it with so much veneration in the Library of Oxford;
and the great Jewel deserves immortal praise for having so worthily defended
it. It was this that God made use of in the beginning of the Reformation of
England. And if it had not been as it were his work, he had never blessed it in
so advantageous a manner. The success that it has had, ought to stop the mouth
of those that are the most passionate, and it is having triumphed over so many
obstacles, should make all the World acknowledge, that God has declared himself
in favor of it, and that he has been visibly concerned in its establishment;
and that it has the truth and confirmation of his word, to which in effect it
owes its birth and original. It is the same at present as it was when it was
made, and no one can reproach the Bishops for having made any change in it
since that time. And how then can it be imagined, that it has changed its use?
And can there be any thing more unjust, than to say, that an instrument which
God has heretofore employed for the instruction of so many people, for the
consolation of so many good men, for the salvation of so many believers, is now
become a destructive and pernicious thing? If your Confession of Faith be pure
and innocent, your Divine Service is so too: for no one can discover any thing
at all in it that tends to Idolatry: You adore nothing but God alone; in your
Worship there is nothing that is terminated on the Creature: And if there be
some Ceremonies there, which one shall not meet with in some other places; this
were to make profession of a terrible kind of Divinity, to put off all Charity,
not to know much what souls are worth; not to understand the nature of things
indifferent, to believe that they are able to destroy those eternally, that are
willing to submit themselves unto them. It is to have the same hardness to
believe that your Ecclesiastical Discipline can damn any. For where has it been
ever seen, that the salvation of men was concerned for Articles of Discipline,
and things that regard but the outside, and order of the Church, and are but
as it were the bark and covering of the truth? Can these things cause death,
and distill poison into a soul? Truly these are never accounted in the number
of essential truths; and as there is nothing but these that can save, so there
is nothing but these that can exclude men from salvation. For the Episcopal
Government, what is there in it that is dangerous, and may reasonably alarm
men's consciences? And if this be capable of depriving us of eternal glory, and
shutting the Gates of Heaven, who was there that entered there for the space of
fifteen hundred years, since that for all that time all the Churches of the
World had no other kind of Government? If it were contrary to the truth, and
the attainment of eternal happiness, is it credible that God had so highly
approved it, and permitted his Church to be tyrannized over by it for so many
Ages? For who was it that did govern it? Who was it that did make up its
Councils, as well General, as particular? Who was it that combated the Heresies
with which it has been at all times assaulted? Was it not the Bishops? And is
it not to their wise conduct, to which next under God, his Word is beholden for
its Victories and Triumphs? And not to go back so far as the birth and infancy
of the Church; who was it that in the last Age delivered England from the error
in which she was inveloped? Who was it that made the truth to rise so
miraculously there again? Was it not the zeal and constancy of the Bishops, and
their Ministry that disengaged the English from that oppression under which
they had groaned so long? And did not their Example powerfully help forward the
Reformation of all Europe? In truth I think they might make the same use of
this, as Gregory Nazianzen did heretofore at Constantinople. When he arrived
there he found that Arrianism had made a very great progress in that place; but
then his courage, his zeal, his learning did so mightily weaken the party of
the Heretics that in a little time the truth appeared there again more
beautiful than ever; and the Church where he had so stoutly upheld it, he would
have to bear the name of Anastasia; because he had brought the truth as it were
out of the earth, and cleared it from the error that lay upon it, and by his
continual cares had caused it, as it were, to come out of the Grave to a
glorious Resurrection. It is this too that the Bishops of England have done;
they saw not only one truth, but almost all the fundamental truths buried under
a formidable number of errors; they saw the yoke of Rome heavier among them,
than it was any where else: The difficulty that there was of succeeding in the
Reformation, was enough to discourage persons of an ordinary capacity and zeal.
Nevertheless nothing turns them from so generous a design; the enemies without,
and those within as terrible as they seem, do not fright them; they undertake
this great work, and do not leave it till they had brought it about, and raised
up the truth, and placed it again upon the Throne, in such a manner that they
might every where have monuments of this miracle, and justly have called all
their Churches by the name of Anastasia or Resurrection. But if their Churches
have not that title, the thing it self belongs unto them; and you shall hear
nothing discoursed of in these, but lectures and praises of the pure truth.
Which ought to oblige all good men not to separate from it; but to look upon
the Church of England, as a very Orthodox Church. Thus all the Protestants of
France do, those of Geneva, those of Switzerland and German, and those of
Holland too; for they did themselves a very great honor in having some Divines
of England in their Synod of Dort, and showed plainly that they had a profound
veneration for the Church of England. And from whence does it then come, that
some Englishmen themselves have so ill an opinion of her at present, and divide
rashly from her, as they do? Is not this to divide from all the ancient
Churches, from all the Churches of the East, from all the Protestant Churches,
which have always had a very great respect for the purity of that of England?
Is it not horrible impudence to excommunicate her without mercy, and to make
themselves believe strangely of her, for them to imagine that they are the only
men in England, nay, in the Christian World, that are predestined to eternal
happiness, and to hold the truths necessary to salvation, as they ought to be
held? Indeed one might make a very odious Parallel betwixt these Teachers and
Pope Victor, that would needs excommunicate the Churches of Asia, because they
did not celebrate the Feast of Easter the same day they did at Rome. Betwixt
them and the Audeans that divided from the Christians, and would not endure
rich Bishops. Betwixt them and the Donatists, that would have no communion with
them that had been ordained by lapsed Bishops, and imagined that their Society
was the true Church, and the well beloved Spouse, that fed her flock in the
South. Betwixt them and those of the Roman Communion, who have so good an
opinion of their own Church, that out of her they do not imagine that any one
can ever be saved. For my part, as much inclined to Toleration as I am, I
cannot for all this persuade my self, that it ought to be allowed to those that
have so little of it for other men; and who, if they were Masters, would
certainly give but bad quarter to those that depended upon them. I look upon
these men as disturbers of the State and Church, and who are doubtlesly
animated by a Spirit of Sedition. Nay, I can scarce believe, that they are just
such as they say they are; and I should be something afraid, that very
dangerous enemies might be hid under color of these Teachers. Societies
composed of such persons, would be extreme dangerous; and they could not be
suffered without opening the Gate to disorder, and advancing toward ones own
ruin. There are some of these that are composed of more reasonable men, but I
could wish they were reasonable enough not to separate from those of which the
Church of England is composed. Especially in the case we are in, they should do
all for a good agreement; and in the present conjuncture of affairs, they
should understand that there is nothing but a good reunion, that can prevent
the evils with which England is threatened. For to speak the truth, I do not see
that their Meetings are of any great use, or that one may be more comforted
there, than in the Episcopal Churches. When I was at London almost Five years
ago, I went to several of their private assemblies, to see what way they took
for the instruction of the people, and the preaching of the Word of God. But I
profess I was not at all edified by it. I heard one of the most famous
Non-Conformists, he preached in a place where there were three men and three or
fourscore women: he had chosen a Text about the building up the Ruins of
Jerusalem, and for the explication of it, he cited Pliny and Vitruvius a
hundred times, and did not forget to mention a Proverb in Italian, Duro con
duro non fa muro. All this seemed to me nothing to the purpose, and very
improper for the poor women, and very far from a Spirit that sought nothing but
the comfort and edification of his hearers. To cantonize themselves, and make a
Schism, to have the liberty to vent such vanities, is very ill conduct, and the
people seem very weak to quit their mutual Assemblies for things that so little
deserve their esteem and preference. I do not think that any one is obliged to
suffer this irregularity. It is true, that the Assemblies of the Novatians were
sometimes suffered at Rome and Constantinople, and that even the Donatists had
some kind of liberty in the first of these places. But they were only
strangers; and that neither did not endure any long time; and as there were but
few of them, that is not to be drawn into example. But it is another case in
England; and seeing the good of the State and Church depends absolutely upon
the union of the people in the point of Religion, one cannot there press an
universal union too much. But it ought to be procured by good means; and since
the Bishops are persons of great experience, of an extraordinary knowledge, of
a true fatherly zeal and goodness toward their people, I hope that they will
employ themselves in this great work with all the prudence and charity that are
necessary to the succeeding of such a commendable undertaking. You
particularly, My Lord, whose moderation and capacity are acknowledged by all
the World; it looks as if it were a design reserved for your great Wisdom; and
if you do not succeed, it is clear, that all others will labor in it but in
vain. For my part, I can contribute nothing to it where I am, but Vows and
Prayers; and of these I can protest that I make very sincere ones every day for
the prosperity of the English Church; and that it would please God to order
things in such manner, that all the Protestants of England for the future,
might be of one heart and of one soul. I beg your Lordship to be well assured
of this and to believe that it is impossible to be with more respect than I am,

Leyden Sept. 3. 1680. My Lord, Your most Humble and most Obedient servant, Le
Moyne.

A Paris l' 32. d'Octob. Monseigneur,
RIen ne vous a deu paroistre si estrange ny si incivil que mon silence sur la
lettre que vous me fistes l'honneur de m'escrire il y a environ trois mois; Il
est pourtant vray que je n'ay rien a me reprocher sur cela, and a fin que vous
le croyiez comme moy, vous voulez bien me permettre de vous dire comment la
chose s'est passee. Quand on m'apporta vostre lettre, j'estois retombe dans une
grande and violente fiebvre don't Dieu m'a afflige durant quatre ou cinq mois,
and qui m'a mean jusqu'a deux doits de la mort. Ie priay un de mes amiss, qui
estoit alors dans ma chamber, de l'ouvrir and de me dire le nom de celuy qui me
l'escrivoit, mais il se trouva que vous aviez oublie de la signer, sur quoy je
me l'a fis apporter, pour voir si je n'en connoistrois point le caractere; Et
ce fut encore inutilement, par ce que jusqu'alors je n' avois rien veu de
vostre main: Cela me fit croire qu'elle avoit este escrite par celuy la mesme
qui l'avoit apportee, pour m'attrapper dix ou douze sous de port; car ce petit
stratageme est assez commun en cette ville and aprez cela, je ne me mis pas
fort en peine de ce qu'elle deviendroit. Elle se conserva pourtant dans mon
cabinet par le plus grand hazard du monde, and m'estant heureusement tombee
sous la main, il y a deux ou trois jours, je la relus; and l'aiant trouvee trop
sage and trop grave pour avoir este escrite par un homme tell que je me l'estois
imagine, je la monstray a Monsieur Claude qui y reconnut d'abord vostre
escriture, and qui me dit que vous en estiez l'Auteur. Ie pense Monseigneur que
cela suffit pour me justifier auprez de vous d'un silence, qui bien que je n'en
sois aucunement coupable, ne laisse pas de me donner quelque espece de
confusion. Mais pour venir au contenu de vostre lettre, je ne vous puis
exprimer avec quelle douleur j'apprens que vos divisions continuent, en un
temps auquel il y a des raisons si pressantes de se reunir; Ce que vous me
dites sur tout des escrits que l'on publie a cette heure, pour fair croire que
la communion avec l' Eglise Anglicane est illegitime, and que les Ministres ne
la peuvent permettre aux particuliers sans crime, me paroist une chose si
deraisonnable en elle mesme, and si fort a contre-temps, que j'aurois peine a
la croire si elle ne m'estoit attestee par une person de vostre merit and de
vostre poids. Vous savez bien Monseigneur quels sont and quels ont toujours
este mes sentimens sur cela, and la maniere don't j'en uzay il y a deux ans dans
mon voyage d' Angleterre, en frequentant vos assemblees, and en preschant mesme
dans un troupeau qui est sous la Jurisdiction de l' Eglise Anglicane, monstre
assez que je suis bien eloigne de croire que sa communion soit illegitime; Et
cela mesme prouve d'une maniere bien evidente, que mon sentiment a cet egard
est celuy de nos Eglises, parce qu'il n'est pas imaginable que j'eusse voulu
fair, sans necessite, une chose qui m'eust attire l'indignation de mes freres,
and qui, a mon retour, m'eust expose a leurs reproaches ou a leurs censures.
Pleust a Dieu, Monseigneur, que tout ce qu'il y a de Chrestiens egarez dans le
monde voulussent recevoir vostre Reformation, que je repandrois de bon coeur
tout ce que j'ay de sang pour leur procurer un si grand bien. Et que je suis
asseure de la joye extresme avec laquelle nos Eglises entreroient dans leur
Communion, Si en estant dans la purete de vos sentimens pour les dogmes, ils ne
differoient plus d'avec nous que par des Surplis, par des Ceremonies
innocents, and par quelque diversite d' Ordres dans le gouvernement de l'
Eglise. Et cela Monseigneur vous fait assez comprendre, ce que j'ay a respondre
a vostre second question. Car puis que l' Eglise Anglicane est une veritable
Eglise de nostre Seigneur, Puis que son Culte and ses Dogmes sont purs, and
n'ont rien de contraire a lu parole de Dieu, Et puis que quand la Reformation y
a este receue, elle y a este receue avec l'Episcopat. Et en y establissant la
Liturgy and les Ceremonies qui y sont aujourdhuy en uzage, il est sans doubt
du devoir de tous les Reformez de Vostre Royaume de se tenir inseparablement
unis a Cette Eglise; Et ceux qui ne le font pas, sous ombre qu'ils
desireroient, plus de simplicite dans les Ceremonies, and moins d'inegalite
enter les Ministres commettent asseurement un tres grand peche. Car le schism
est le plus redoutable mal qui puisse arriver a l' Eglise; Et pour l'eviter la
charity Chrestienne oblige tous les gens de bien a supporter en leurs freres
des chooses bien moins supportables que ne le doivent paroistre celles don't il
s'agit, aux yeux de ceux la mesmes qui les ont le plus en aversion: Et c'estoit
la si bien le sentiment de nostre Grand and Excellent Calvin que dans son
traitte de la necessite de la Reformation il ne fait point de difficulte de
dire, Que s'il se trouvoit des gens assez deraisonnables pour refuser la
Communion d'une Eglise pure dans son culte and dans ses Dogmes, and pour ne pas
se soumettre avec respect a son Gouvernement, sous ombre qu'elle auroit retenu
l' Episcopat conditionne comme le vostre, il n'y auroit point de censure ny de
rigueur de discipline qu'on ne deust exercer contre eux. C^lv. Edit. Amstel.
^om. 8 p. 60.
Talem nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi ut Christo
subesse non recusent, ut ab illo tanquam ab unico capite pendeant and ad ipsum
referantur, in qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant ut non alio modo
quam ejus veritate sint colligati, tum vero nullo non anathemate dignos fatear,
si qui erunt qui non eam revereantur, summaque obedientia observent. Et Beze
mesme, qui n'approuvoit pas en general le gouvernement Episcopal, fait une
tell distinction du vostre, et est si eloigne de croire que l'on puisse, ou
que l'on doive en prendre sujet de se separer de vostre Eglise, qu'il pry Dieu
ardenment qu'elle puisse toujours de meurer dans l'heureux estate ou elle avoit
este mise et conservee, par le sang, par la purete de la foy, et par la sage
conduite de ses Excellens Evesques. Bez. contra Sarrav. ad cap 8. art. 3. page
27^ Edit. Fran^o^. ann. 16^1
Quod si nunc Anglicana Ecclesia instaurata suorum Episcoporum and
Archiepiscoporum authoritate persistat, quemadmodum hoc nostra memoria
contigit, ut ejus ordinis homines non tantum insignes Dei Martyrs, sed etiam
praestantissimos Pastores and Doctores habuerit, fruatur sane ista singulari
Dei beneficentia, quae utinam illi sit perpetua. Mais, Monseigneur, quoy que
les premiers Auteurs de la separation qui vous trouble soient
extraordinairement coupables, et que ceux qui la continuent et qui la
fortifient par leurs escrits de raisonnables et emportez le soient aussy
extrem^ment, est neanmoins certain que dans la multitude qui les suit, il y a
une infinite de bonnes gens don't la foy est pure et la piete sincere; et qui ne
demeurent cloignez de vous que parce que leur simplicite est surprise, et qu'on
les a effrayez par ces grands mots de Tyranny, d' Oppression, de supposts de
l' Antechrist don't on leur bat perpetuellement les oreilles: Ie les mets au
rang de ces foibles qui disoient qu'ils n'estoient point du corpse et don't St.
Paul dit qu'ils estoient du corpse pourtant; Et il me semble que les bons et
charitables Evesques comme vous, en doivent dire, quoy qu'en un sens un peu
different, ce qu' Optat de Mileve disoit des Donatistes de son temps, Si
collegium Episcopale nolunt nobiscum habere, tamen fratres sunt: Au nom de Dieu
donc Monseigneur faites tout ce qui vous sera possible pour les ramencr a leur
devoir par la douceur et par la Charity qui seule est capable d' operer de
grandes chooses en ces occasions. Car les hommes qui ont toujeurs de l'orgueil,
se soulevent ordinairement contre tout ce qui leur paroist n'agir que par la
seule Authorite, mais ils ne manquent presque jamais de se render au support et
a la condescendance, Mansuetus homo, cordis est medicus. Ie ne pretens pas
Monseigneur m'ingerer de vous donner la dessus aucun conseil particulier; Vous
qui voiez les chooses de prez, et qui avez le coeur tout penetre de la charity
Chrestienne jugez mieux que person des remedes qui sont les plus propres a un
si grand mal; Et je suis asseure que s'il ne falloit pour le guerir que s'
abstenir de quelques expressions, que quitter quelques ceremonies, et que
changer la couleur de quelques habits, vous vous y resouariez avec grand pla
s^r, et a quelque chose de plus difficile. Il me semble m^sme avoir leu en
quelque endroit des Vindiciae de Monsieur le Doien de Winsor que ce furent la
les sentimens charitables que fit paroistre l' Eglise Anglicane par la bouche
de trois ou quatre de ses Evesques dans une Conference qui se fit sur les
moiens de reunion, en la preniere annee du restablissement de sa Majeste
Britannique, et qu'il ne tint qu'a quelques Ministres de ceux qu'on appelle
Presbyteriens que la chose ne passast plus avaunt. Quoy qu'il en soit je pry
Dieu de tout mon coeur qu'il ouvre les yeux des uns pour leur fair connoistre
la foiblesse des raisons sur lesquelles ils fondent une separation si
affligeante, Et qu'il conserve et qu'il augmente de plus en plus dans les
autres, la piete, le zele et la charity don't ils ont besoin pour travailler
heureusement a une reunion qui rejonira les hommes et les Anges, et qui
attirera mill benedictions de la terre et du Ciel sur ceux qui y auront le
plus contribue: Et je vous avoue Monseigneur que je ne servis pas consolable si
je voiois qu'on ne fist pas au moins quelque nouvel effort pour reussir dans un
ouvrage si saint et si important dans un temps qui m'y paroist si propre. Car
outre que les interests de Vostre Estat et de Vostre Eglise le demandent
extraordinairement, IN apprens que par une admirable benediction du Ciel,
toutes vos Chaires Episcopales sont maintenant remplies par d' Excellens
Serviteurs de Dieu, qui aiment Jesus Christ et son Eglise, et qui ont tous les
qualitez de la test et du coeur qui sont necessaires pour pouvoir et pour
vouloir contribuer a cette bonne oeuvre. Et a en juger par vous Monseigneur, et
par Monseigneur l' Archevesque de Canterbery, et Monseigneur l' Evesque d'
Oxford que j'ay eu l'honneur de voir durant mon sejour en Angleterre, je n'ay
pas de peine a me le persuader. Mais j'ay peur de vous avoir ennuye par cette
longue lettre, je vous en demand tres humblement pardon, Et je vous supply
d'estre bien persuade que je conserve toujours une extresme reconnoissance de
l' amity don't vous m'honorez, et que je suis avec tout le respect que je vous
dois

Vostre tres humble and tres obeysant Serviteur, De l'Angle.
Monseigneur,
Monsieur Claude mon Excellent Colleague a qui j'ay monstre cette lettre, m'a
pry de vous dire, en vous asseurant de son tres humble service, qu'il la
souscriroit de bon coeur et qu'il est absolument dans mes sentimens.



Paris, October. 31. 1680. Second Letter.
From Monsieur de L' Angle one of the present Preachers of the Reformed Church
meeting at Charenton near Paris, upon the same subject.
My Lord,
NOthing may seem so strange and so uncivil to you, as my silence upon your
Letter you did me the honor to write me about three months ago. But yet it is
true that in this case I have nothing to blame my self for; and that you may
believe it, as well as I, you will give me leave to tell you how the matter
happened. When your Letter was brought me, I was relapsed into a great and
violent Fever, with which God has afflicted me for the space of four or five
months, and which has brought me very near the grave; I prayed one of my
friends, which was then in my Chamber, to open the Letter, and to tell me the
name of him that wrote it; but it chanced that you had forgotten to subscribe
it, upon which I made it be brought to me, to see if I did not know the
Character; but it was to no purpose, because till then I had not seen any thing
of your hand. This made me believe that it had been written by the same man
that brought it, to get ten or twelve Sons for the carriage; for that little
stratagem is common enough in this Town. After this, I did not much trouble my
self what became of it; but yet it was preserved in my Cabinet by the greatest
chance in the world; and being happily fallen into my hands two or three days
since, I read it over again; and having found it too prudent and grave to have
been written by such a one as I had imagined, I showed it to Monsieur Claude,
who presently knew your hand, and told me that you were the Author of it. I
think, my Lord, this is enough to excuse me to you, for a silence, for which
though I am not any way faulty, yet I cannot choose but be something ashamed.

But to come to the contents of your Letter; I cannot express to you with how
much grief I understand that your divisions continue, at a time in which there
are such pressing reasons for being Reunited. Above all, that which you tell me
of writings that are at this time published, to make men believe that Communion
with the Church of England is unlawful, and that the Ministers cannot permit it
to private persons without sinning, seems to me a thing so unreasonable in it
self, and so very unseasonable now, that I should scarce believe it, if it were
not attested by a person of your merit and consideration. My Lord, you know
well what my sentiments are, and always have been in this matter; and the way
which I used two years ago, when I was in England, in frequenting your
assemblies, and preaching too in a Congregation that is under the jurisdiction
of the Church of England, sufficiently shows that I am very far from believing
that her Communion is unlawful. And this also proves very evidently that my
opinion in this matter is the same that is holden by our Churches; because it
is not imaginable that I would without any necessity, have done a thing which
would have drawn the displeasure of my Brethren upon me, and which at my return
would have exposed my self to be blamed, if not to be censured by them. My
Lord, I would to God that all the mistaken Christians that are in the world
would receive your Reformation; I would with all my heart spend all the blood I
have to procure them so great a good. And I am sure with what an exceeding Joy
our Churches would enter into their Communion, if being pure in their opinions
for Doctrine, they differed no more from us, than by Surplices, and innocent
Ceremonies; and some diversity of Orders in the Government of the Church.

And by this, my Lord, you may perceive what I have to answer to your second
question. For since the Church of England is a true Church of our Lord; since
her Worship and Doctrines are pure, and have nothing in them contrary to the
word of God; and since that when the Reformation was there received, it was
received together with Episcopacy, and with the establishment of the Liturgy,
and Ceremonies, which are there in use at this day; it is without doubt the
duty of all the Reformed of your Realm, to keep themselves inseparably united
to the Church. And those that do not do this, upon pretense that they should
desire more simplicity in that Ceremonies, and less of inequality among the
Ministers, do certainly commit a very great sin. For Schism is the most
formidable evil that can befall the Church: and for the avoiding of this,
Christian charity obliges all good men to bear with their Brethren in some
things much less tolerable than those, of which the dispute is, ought to seem,
even in the eyes of those that have the most aversion for them. And this was so
much the opinion of our great and excellent Calvin, Calvin ^pera Edit. (...)
38. p. 6^.
that in his Treatise of the necessity of the Reformation he makes no
difficulty to say; That if there should be any so unreasonable as to refuse the
Communion of a Church that was pure in its Worship and Doctrine, and not to
submit himself with respect to its Government, under pretense that it had
retained an Episcopacy qualified as yours is; there would be no Censure nor
rigor of Discipline that ought not to be exercised upon them. Talem nobis
Hierarchiam si exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi ut Christo subesse non
recusent, ut ab illo tanquam ab unico Capite pendeant, et ad ipsum referantur;
in qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant, ut non alio modo quam ejus
veritate sint colligati; tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear, si qui
erunt* qui non eum revereantur, summaque obedientia observent. And Beza
himself, who did not in the general approve of the Episcopal Government, makes
such a distinction of yours, and is so far from believing, that one may, or
that one ought to take occasion from thence to separate from your Church, that
he prays earnestly to God that she may always remain in that happy estate in
which she had been put and preserved, (...) cap. 8. art. 3. page (...) Edit.
(...) anno 1601.
by the blood, by the purity of the Faith, and by the wise conduct of her
excellent Bishops. Quod si nunc Anglicana Ecclesia instaurata suorum
Episcoporum et Archiepiscoporum authoritate persistat, quemadmodum hoc nostra
memoria contigit, ut ejus ordinis homines, non tantum insignes Dei Martyrs,
sed etiam praestantissimos Pastores et Doctores habuerit, frautur sane ista
singulari Dei beneficentia, quae utinam illi sit perpetua.

But, my Lord, although the first Authors of the Separation, which troubles
you, be extraordinarily to blame, and though those that continue it, and
strengthen it, by their unreasonable and passionate Writings, be extremely so
too; it is certain yet that among the multitude that follows them, there is a
very great number of good-men, whose faith is pure, and whose piety is sincere,
and who remain separate from you only because their simplicity is surprised,
and because they have been frightened with the bugbear words of Tyranny,
Oppression, Limbs of Antichrist which are continually beaten into their ears. I
rank these with those weak ones who said they were not of the Body; and of whom
St. Paul said they were of the Body for all that. And it seems to me that the
good and charitable Bishops, such as you, ought to say of them, though in
something a different sense, as Optatus Milevitanus said of the Donatists of
his time, Si Collegium Episcopale nolunt nobiscum habere, tamen Fra^res sunt.
In the name of God then, my Lord, do all that possibly you can to bring them
back to their duty by sweetness and charity, which is only able to do great
things on these occasions. For men, who have always something of pride, do
commonly oppose every thing that seems to them to act by bare Authority only:
but they scarce ever fail to yield themselves up to forbearance and
condescension. Mansuetus homo cordis est medicus.

I do not pretend, My Lord, to thrust my self in to give you any particular
advice in this case; you that see things near at hand, and that have a heart
deeply affected with Christian Charity, will judge better than any man, what
remedies are the most proper for so great an evil; and I am sure that if there
were nothing wanting to cure it, but the a staining from some expressions, the
quitting some Ceremonies, and the changing the color of some habits, you would
resolve to do that, and something more difficult than that, with great
pleasure. And I think I have read in some part of the Vindiciae of Mr ^ean of
Windsor, that these were the charitable sentiments which the Church of England
declared by the mouth of three or four of her Bishops, in a Conference that was
held concerning the means of reunion, the first year that his Majesty was
restored; and that nothing hindered the matter from going farther, but some of
those Ministers they call Presbyterians. However it be, I pray God with all my
heart, that he would open the eyes of the one to make them see the weakness of
the reasons upon which they ground such an afflicting Separation; and that he
would preserve, and increase more and more in the other, that piety, that zeal,
and that charity which they have need of for the happy proceeding to a
reunion, which will rejoice men and Angels, and bring down a thousand
blessings of Heaven and Earth upon those that shall contribute the most unto
it. And I assure you, My Lord, I should be (...) ^^mpt at all Comfort if I
should see that some new (...) least were not made for the success of a (...)
so holy, and of such consequence, in a time (...) to me so proper for it. For
besides that the interest of your State, and Church do require it in such an
extraordinary manner; I hear that by a wonderful blessing of Heaven, all your
Episcopal Sees are filled at this time with excellent servants of God, who love
Jesus Christ and his Church and who have all the qualities of the head and the
heart, which are necessary to make them able, and willing to contribute to this
good work. And to judge of it by you, My Lord, and My Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and My Lord Bishop of Oxford, whom I had the honor to see during
my stay in England, I am easily persuaded of it.

But I am afraid I have tired you with this long Letter; I humbly beg your
pardon for it; and I beseech you to be very well assured that I always
preserve a very grateful acknowledgement of the Friendship with which you
honor me, and that I am with all the respect that I owe

My Lord, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, De L' Angle.
Mons. Claude my excellent Colleague, to whom I have showed this Letter, has
prayed me to tell you, with assurance of his most humble service, that he would
subscribe this with all his heart, and that he is absolutely of my Opinion.



The Third Letter, from Monsieur Claude, on the same Subject.
A Paris 29. November. Stilo Novo. Monseigneur,
MOnsieur de l' Angle m'ayaut rendu la Lettre qu'il vous a plu m'ecrire, j'ay
este surpris d'y voir que vous m'aviez fait l'honneur de m'en ecrire une autre
que je n'ay point receue, and a laquelle je n'eusse pas manque de fair
reponse. Vous me faites beaucoup d'honneur de vouloir bien que je vous dise ma
pensee sur le different qui vous trouble depuis long-tems, enter ceux qu'on
appelle Episcopaux, and ceux qu'on nomme Presbyteriens. Quoy que je m'en sois
deja diverses fois explique and par des Lettres que j'ay faites sur ce sujet a
plusieurs persons, and dans mon livre mesme de la Defense de la Reformation,
ou parlant de la distinction de l' Evesque and du Prestre, j'ay dit
formellement que je ne blame pas ceux qui l'observent comme une chose fort
ancienne, and que je ne voudrois pas qu'on s'en fist un sujet de querelle dans
les lieux ou elle se trouve etablie, page 366. and quoy que d'ailleurs je me
connoisse assez pour ne pas croire que mon sentiment doive estre fort
considere, je ne laisseray pas de vous temoigner dans cette occasion, comme je
feray toujours en toute autre, mon estime Chretienne, mon respect, and mon
obeissance. C'est ce que je feray d'autant plus que je ne vous diray pas
simplement ma pensee particuliere, mais le sentiment du general de nos Eglises.

Premierement donc, Monseigneur, nous sommes si fort eloignez de croire qu'on
ne puisse en bonne conscience vivre sous vostre discipline, and sous vostre
Gouvernement Episcopal, que dans nostre pratique ordinaire nous ne faisons
nulle difficulte, ni de donner nos chaires, ni de commettre le soin de nos
troupeaux a des Ministres receus and ordinez par Messieurs vos Evesques, comme
il se pourroit justifier par un assez grand nombre d'exemples, and anciens, and
recens, and depuis peu Mr. Duplessis ordine par Monsieur l' Evesque de Lincoln
a este establi, and appelle dans une Eglise de cette Province, and Monsieur
Wicart, que vous, Monseigneur, avez receu au S. Ministere nous fit l'honneur
il-n'y-a que quelques mois de Prescher a Charenton a l'edification universelle
detout nostre troupeau. Ainsi ceux qui nous imputent a cet egard des sentimens
eloignez de la paix and de la concord Chretienne, nous font assurement
injustice.

Ie dis la paix and la concord Chretienne, car, Monseigneur, nous croyons que
l'obligation a conserver cette paix and cette concord fraternelle, qui fait
l'unite exterieure de l'eglise, est d'une necessite si indispensable que S.
Paul n'a pas fait difficulte de la joindre avec l'unite interieure d'une mesme
foy, and d'une mesme regeneration, non seulement comme deux chooses qui ne
doivent jamais estre separees, mais aussi comme deux chooses dependantes l'une
de l'autre, parce que si l'unite exterieure est comme la fille de l'interieure,
elle en est aussi la conservatrice. Cheminez, dit il Ephesians. 4. comme il est
convenable a la vocation don't vous estes appellez, avec toute humilite, and
douceur, avec un esprit patient, supportant l'un l'autre en charity. Estant
soigneux de garder l'unite de l'esprit par la lien de la paix. D'un cote il
fait dependre cette charity fraternelle, qui nous joint les uns avec les
autres, de nostre commune vocation, and de l'autre il nous enseigne qu'un des
principaux moyens de conserner en son entier cette commune vocation qu'il
appelle l'unite de l'esprit, est de garder enter nous la paix. Selon la
premiere de ces maxims nous ne pouvons avoir de paix, ni de Communion
Ecclesiastique avec ceux qui ont tellement degenere de la vocation Chretienne
qu'on ne peut plus reconnoitre en eux une veritable and salutaire foy,
principalement lors qu' a des erreurs mortelles ils ajoutent la tyranny de
l'ame, and qu'ils voulent contraindre la conscience, en imposant la necessite
de croire ce qu'ils croyent and de pratiquer ce qu'ils pratiquent. Car en ce
cas le fondement and la veritable cause de la communion exterieure n'estant
plus, la communion exterieure cesse aussi de droit, and il-n'y-en peut plus
avoir de legitime. Selon la second maxim nous ne croyons pas qu'une simple
difference de gouvernement, ou de discipline, ni mesme un difference de
ceremonies innocents de leur nature, soient un sujet suffisant pour rompre le
sacre lien de la communion. C'est pourquoy nos Eglises ont toujours regard and
considere la vostre, non seulement comme une soeur, mais comme une soeur aisuee
pour qui nous devons avoir des tendresses accompagnees de respect and de
veneration, and pour qui nous presentons sans cesse a Dieu des voeux
tresardens. Nous n'entrons point dans la comparaison de vostre order, aver
celuy sous lequel nous vivons. Nous savons qu'il-n'y-en a, ni n'y-en peut avoir
aucun enter les hommes, qui par nostre corruption naturelle, ne soit sujet a
des inconveniens, le nostre a les siens comme le vostre, and l'un and l'autre
sans doubt ayant leurs avantages and leurs desavantages a diverse egards,
alternis vincut and vincuntur. Il nous suffit de savoir que la mesme Providence
Divine qui par une necessite indispensable, and par la conjoncture des chooses,
mit au commencement de la Reformation nos Eglises sous celuy du Presbyterat, a
mis la vostre sous celuy de l' Episcopat, and que comme nous sommes assurez que
vous ne meprisez point nostre simplicite, nous ne devons pas aussi nous elever
contre vostre dignite. Ainsi, Monseigneur, nous desapprouvons entierement, and
voyons avec douleur, de certeines extremitez ou se jettent quelques uns de part
and d'autre, les uns regardant l' Episcopat comme un order si absolument
necessaire que sans luy il-n'y peut avoir ni de societe Ecclesiastique, ni de
legitime vocation ni d'esperance de salut, and les autres le regardant avec
indignation comme un rest d' Antichristianisme. Ce sont egalement des chaleurs
and des exces qui ne viennent point de celuy qui nous appelle, and qui pechent
contre les loix de la sagesse and de la charity.

Voyla, Monseigneur, nos veritables and sinceres sentimens communs, pour ce qui
vous regard, and puisque vous desirez que je descend un peu plus
particulierement a l'etat ou se trouve vostre propre Eglise, par les divisions
intestines qui la travaillent, Permettez moy que je ne vous dise mes pensees
qu'en vous expliquant mes souhaits, and les desirs de mon coeur, sur une chose
aussi importante que l'est celle la. Ie souhaiterois donc de toute mon ame que
ceux qui sont allez jusqu' a ce point que de songer a rompre les liens
exterieurs, and la dependence mutuelle de vos troupeaux, pour donner a chaque
Eglise particuliere une espece de souveraignte de gouvernement, considerassent
bien si ce qu'ils pretendent fair n'est pas directement contraire a l'esprit
du Christianisme qui est un esprit d'union, and de societe, and non de
division. Qu'ils considerassent que sous pretexte que le principe des Reformez
est d'avoir en horreur la domination human sur la foy, and sur la conscience,
comme une chose destructive de la Religion, il ne faut pourtant pas ni rejetter
tout frein de discipline, ni secouer tout joug de Gouvernement, ni se priver
des secours que nous pouvous tirer de l'union generale pour nous affermir dans
la vraye foy, and dans la vraye piete. Qu'ils considerassent enfin que la mesme
raison qui leur fait desirer l' Independence des troupeaux, peut estre aussi
employee pour etablir l' Independance des persons dans chaque troupeau. Car
un troupeau n'a pas plus de droit de vouloir estre Independent des autres
troupeaux, qu'une person en auroit de vouloir estre Independante des autres
persons. Or ce seroit' aneantir toute discipline, jetter l' Eglise entant
qu'en nous seroit dans une horrible confusion; and exposer l'heritage du
Seigneur a l'opprobre de ses adversaries.

Pour ce qui regard ceux qu'on appelle parmy vous Presbyteriens, comme je suis
persuade qu'ils ont de la lumiere, de la sagesse, and du Zele, je souhaiterois
aussi de tout mon coeur qu'ils gardassent plus de mesure dans le scandale
qu'ils croyent avoir autrefois receu de l'ordre Episcopal, and qu'ils
distinguassent les persons d'aves le Ministere. Les persons qui occupent
les charges non seulement ont leurs defauts, mais il peut mesme quelquefois
arriver que les plus saints, and les plus eminentes charges soient possedees
par des mechans, and en ce cas la raison and la piete voulent egalement qu'on
ne confonde pas le Ministere avec le Ministre. A present que Dieu par sa grace
a ote ce scandale de devant leurs yeux, and qu'il leur a fait voir dans les
persons de Messieurs les Evesques de la piete, du Zele, and de la fermete,
pour la conservation de la Religion, j'espere que cela mesme ne contribuera pas
peu a l'adoucissement des esprits. D'ailleurs je souhaiterois qu'il leur plust
de considerer que si dans le Gouvernement Episcopal il-y-a des inconveniens
facheux, comme je ne doubt pas qu'il-n'y-en-ayt, il-y-en-a aussi and de
tres-facheux dans le Presbyterien, comme je l'ay deja dit. Null order don't
l'exercice est enter les mains des hommes n'en est exempt, l'egalite a ses
vices, and ses exces a craindre, de mesme que la superiorite. Le plus sur and
le plus sage n'est donc pas de voltiger de l'une a l'autre, ni de risquer de
fair un ebranlement general, sur l'esperance d'estre mieux, quand mesme on
seroit en autorite and en pouvoir de le fair. La prudence, la justice, and la
charity Chretienne ne permettent pas d'en venir a ces eclattantes and
dangereuses extremitez, pour une simple difference de Gouvernment. Le plus sur,
and le plus sage est de tacher d'apporter quelque temperament pour eviter, ou
pour diminuer autant qu'il se peut les inconveniens qu'on apprehende, and non
de recourir a des remedes violence.

Ie ne craindray pas d'appeller de ce nom celuy de fair des assemblees a part,
de se separer des assemblees communes, and de se soustraire de vostre
gouvernement. Il-n'y-a person qui ne voye que ce seroit un veritable schism,
qui en luy-mesme and de sa nature ne peut jamais estre qu'odieux a Dieu, and
aux hommes, and don't les auteurs, and les protecteurs ne sauroient eviter
qu'ils ne rendent conte devant le Tribunal de nostre commun Maitre. Quand S.
Paul nous a defendu de delaisser nostre commune assemblee, il a non seulement
condamne ceux qui ne s'y trouvent point en demeurant dans leur particulier,
mais ceux aussi sans doubt qui en font d'autres opposees aux communes, car
c'est rompre le lien de la charity Chretienne qui ne nous joint pas seulement
avec quelques uns de nos freres, mais avec tous nos freres, pour recevoir d'eux
de l'edification, and pour leur en donner de nostre part, en vivant ensemble
dans une mesme societe. El il ne servirot de rien de pretexter que la
conscience resist a se trouver dans des assemblees qui se font sous un
Gouvernement qu'on n'approuve pas, and que ce seroit approuver exterieurement,
ce que l'on condamne interieurement. Car outre qu'il faudroit bien examiner la
question si ces resistances ne viennent pas d'une conscience trompee, par un
jugement precipite, puisque les plus gens de bien sont souvent sujets a se
former de tells scrupules qui au fond ne sont pas tout a fait legitimes. Outre
cela, il faut distinguer trois sorts de chooses, les unes que la conscience
approuve, and recoit, and ausquelles elle acquiesce pleinement, les autres
qu'elle regard comme insupportables, and comme destructives de la gloire de
Dieu, de la vraye foy, on de la vraye Piete, and de l'esperance du salut, and
les autres enfin qui tiennent le milieu, c'est-a-dire qu'on n'approuve pas a la
verite pleinement, mais qu'on ne croit pourtant pas mortelles a la vraye piete
and au salut, en un mot qu'on regard comme des taches and des infirmitez
supportables. I'avoue que quand on trouve dans des assemblees des chooses de ce
second order, ou que la conscience les juge tells, on ne peut y assister, and
toute la question se reduit a savoir, si l'on ne se trompe pas, sur quoy il
faut bien prendre guard de ne pas fair de jugemens temeraires. Mais de
s'imaginer qu'on ne puisse en bonne conscience assister a des assemblees, que
lors qu'on y approuve pleinement and generalement toutes chooses, c'est
assurement ne pas connoitre ni l'usage de la charity, ni les loix de la societe
Chretienne. Ce principe renverseroit toutes les Eglises, car je ne say
s'il-y-en a aucune don't le Gouvernement, la Discipline, la form exterieure,
les usages, and les pratiques soient dans une tell perfection, qu'il-n'y-ayt
absolument rien a redire, and quoy qu'il en soit comme les jugemens des hommes
sont fort differens, ce seroit ouvrir la port a des separations continuelles,
and abolir les assemblees. Il est donc constant que la conscience n'oblige
point a se soustraire des assemblees, mais qu'au contraire elle nous oblige de
nous y tenir attachez, lors que les chooses qui nous y choquent sont
supportables, and qu'elles n'empechent pas l'efficace salutaire de la parole,
du culte divin, and des Sacremens. Et c'est a la faveur de ce support de la
charity qu'est couverte l'assistance que nous donnons a des chooses que nous
n'approuvons pas entierement. Voyez ce que S. Paul dit a ses Philippiens, chap.
3. Si vous sentez quelque chose autrement, Dieu vous le revelera aussi.
Toutefois cheminons en ce a quoy nous sommes pervenus d'une mesme regle, and
sentons une mesme chose. Cela est bien eloigue de dire, des que vous aurez le
moindre sentiment contraire separez vous, la conscience ne vous permet pas de
demeurer ensemble. Consilia separationis, dit S. Augustine contre Parmenian,
Inania sunt and perniciosa, and plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam corrigant
animosos malos. Quels funestes effets ne produiroit pas une tell separation si
elle s'etablissoit au milieu de vous? De la maniere que les esprits des hommes
sont faits, on verroit bientot naitre de la la difference des interets, celle
des partys, celle des sentimens a l'egard mesme de la societe civil, la hayne
mutuelle, and toutes les autres tristes suites que la division, qui n'est plus
temperee par la charity, produit naturellement. Ie laisse a part le scandale
qu'en recevroient toutes les Eglises reformees de l' Europe, la joye qu'en
auroient leurs adversaires, and les avantages qu'ils en retireroient, qui selon
toutes les apparences ne seroient pas petits. I'ay trop bonne opinion de ces
Messieurs qui croyent que la Gouvernement Presbyterien est preferable a l'
Episcopal, pour n'estre pas persuade qu'ils font de sages and de serieuses
reflections sur toutes ces chooses, and sur tant d'autres que leurs lumieres leur
fournissent, and que la conscience, and l'amour de la Religion Protestante les
empechera toujours de rien fair, qui puisse estre blame devant Dieu, and
devant les hommes. Car enfin je ne saurois croire qu'il-y-en-ayt aucun parmy
eux, qui regard ni vostre Episcopat, ni vostre Discipline, ni quelques
Ceremonies que vous observez, comme des taches and des erreurs capitales, qui
empechent qu'on ne puisse fair son salut, and mesme avec facilite dans vos
Assemblees and sous vostre Gouvernement. Il ne s'agit icy ni de l' esse, ni du
been esse, mais seulement du melius esse, qu'ils disputent avec vous, and cela
estant ainsi la justice, la charity, l'amour de la paix, la prudence, and le
zele pour le general de la Religion ne consentiront jamais qu'ils se detachent
de vous.

Mais, Monseigneur, puisque vous m'avez mis la plume a la main sur ce sujet,
Pardonnez je vous supply a ma liberte si elle va jusqu'a vous dire ce que je
croy que vous aussi devez fair de vostre part. I'espere donc que dans ces
occasions que Dieu vous present vous ferez voir a toute la terre, and en
convaincrez les plus incredulez que vous aves de la piete, du zele, and de la
crainte de Dieu, and que vous estez de dignes ouvriers, and de dignes
serviteurs de Jesus Christ. C'est deja le temoignage que vous rendent les gens
de bien, and que null quelque mal intentionne qu'il soit, n'ose contredire, and
je ne doubt pas que vous ne poussiez vostre vocation jusqu'an bout. Mais outre
cela, Monseigneur, j'espere que vous ne defaudrez point aux devoirs de la
charity, and de l'esprit de paix, and que quand il ne s'agria que de quelques
temperamens, ou de quelques Ceremonies qui servent d'achoppement, and qui en
else mesmes ne sont rien en comperaison d'une entiere reunion de vostre Eglise
sous vostre saint Ministere, vous ferez voir que vous aymez l'Epouse de vostre
Maitre plus que vous mesmes, and que ce n'est pas tant de vostre grandeur, and
de vostre dignite Ecclesiastique que vous desirez tirer vostre gloire and
vostre joye, que de vos vertus Pastorales, and des soins ardens que vous avez
de vos troupeaux. I'espere aussi que ceux que vous avez choisis, and appellez
au S. Ministere, and ceux que desormais vous y appellerez avec un prudent
discernement, reglez non seulement par la donceur, mais aussi par la severite
de la Discipline, quand la severite sera necessaire, marcheront sur vos traces,
and suiront heureusement l'exemple que vous leur donnerez, pour estre
eux-mesmes en exemple, and en edification aux Eglises qui leur sont commises.
Ie finis, Monseigneur, par des prieres tres-ardentes que je present a Dieu de
tout mon coeur, afin qu'il luy plaise de vous conserver a jamais le flamebeau
de son Evangile, de repandre sur tout le corpse de vostre Ministere, une
abondante mesure de son onction and de sa benediction celeste, don't celle de
l'ancien Aaron n'estoit que l'ombre, afin qu'elle soit non l'embleme and
l'image de la concord fraternelle comme cette ancienne, mais qu'elle en soit
la cause and le lien. Ie le pry qu'il veu^lle de plus en plus ramener le coeur
des enfans aux peers, and des peers aux enfans, afin que vostre Eglise soit
heuereuse, and agreeable comme un Eden de Dieu. Ie le pry enfin qu'il vous
conserve, vous, Monseigneur, en parfait and longue sante pour sa gloire, and
pour le bien and l'avantage de cette grande and considerable pertie de son
champ qu'il vous a done cultiver, and que vous cultivez si heureusement. Ie
vous demand aussi le secours de vos saints prieres, and la continuation de
l'honneur de vostre affection, en vous Protestant que je seray toute ma vie
avec tout le respect que je vous dois,

Monseigneur, Vostre tres-humble and tres-obeissant Serviteur and Fills en Jesus
Christ, CLAVDE.

Paris November. 29. Stilo Novo. My Lord,
MOnsieur de L' Angle having given me the Letter which you have been pleased to
write me, I was surprised to see by that, that you had done me the honor to
write me another which I have not received, and to which I had not failed to
make an answer. You do me a great deal of honor to desire that I should tell
you my thoughts of the difference that has troubled you so long, betwixt those
they call Episcopal, and those they name Presbyterians. Although I have already
explained my self about this diverse tims, both by Letters which I have written
upon this Subject to several persons, and in my Book too of the Defense of the
Reformation, where speaking of the distinction betwixt the Bishop and the
Priest, I have said expressly, That I do not blame those that observe it as a
thing very ancient, and that I would not that any one should make it an
occasion of quarrel in those places where it is established, page 366. And
though I otherways know my self sufficiently not to believe that my opinion
should be much considered, I will not forbear to assure you upon this occasion,
as I shall always do upon any other, of my Christian esteem, my respect, and my
obedience. This I shall do the rather because I shall not simply tell you my
private thoughts, but the opinion of the generality of our Churches.

First then, my Lord, we are so very far from believing that a man cannot live
with a good Conscience under your Discipline and under your Episcopal
Government, that in our ordinary practice we make no difficulty, neither to
bestow our Chairs, nor to commit the care of our Flocks to Ministers received,
and ordained by my Lords the Bishops; as might be justified by a great number
enought of Examples both old and new: And a little while since Mr. Duplessis
that was ordained by my Lord Bishop of Lincoln has been established and called
in a Church of this Province. And Monsieur Wicart, whom you, my Lord, received
to the Holy Ministry, did us the honor, but some months ago, to preach at
Charenton to the general edification of our Flock. So that they who in this
respect do impute unto us any opinions distant from peace, and Christian
concord, do certainly do us wrong.

I say Peace and Christian concord: for, my Lord, we believe that the
obligation to preserve this Peace, and this Brotherly concord, which make up
the external unity of the Church, is of a necessity so indispensable, that St.
Paul has made no difficulty to join it with the internal unity of the same
Faith, and the same Regeneration; not only as two things which ought never to
be separated, but likewise as two things depending the one upon the other;
because if the external unity be as it were the Daughter of the internal, she
is likewise the preserver of it. Walk, says he, Ephesians. 4. worthy of the calling
wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love; Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace. On the one side he makes this brotherly love, which joins us
one with another, to depend upon our common vocation; and on the other side he
teaches us that one of the principal means to preserve our common vocation
entire, which he calls the unity of the spirit, is to keep peace among our
selves. According to the first of these maxims we cannot have peace, or
Ecclesiastical communion with those that have so degenerated from the Christian
vocation, that one cannot perceive in them a true and saving Faith; especially
when with mortal errors they join tyranny over the Soul, and that they will
force the Conscience, by imposing a necessity to believe that which they
believe, and to practice that which they practice. For in this case the
foundation and true cause of external communion being no more, the external
communion to its self ceases of right, and there is not any that is lawful to
be had any more with such. According to the second maxim we do not believe
that a single difference of government or discipline, nor even a difference of
Ceremonies innocent in their own nature is a sufficient occasion to break the
sacred bond of Communion. Wherefore our Churches have always looked upon and
considered yours, not only as a Sister, but as an Elder Sister, for which we
ought to have a kindness accompanied with respect, and veneration, and for
which we do present most ardent prayers unto God without ceasing. We do not
enter into the comparison of your Order, with that under which we live. We know
that there is not neither can there be any amongst men, which by reason of our
natural corruption is not subject to inconveniences, ours has hers, as well as
yours; and the one and the other without doubt have their advantages, and
disadvantages in diverse respects: alternis vincunt, and vincuntur. It is enough
for us to know that the same Divine Providence which by an indispensable
necessity, and by the conjuncture of affairs, did at the beginning of the
Reformation put our Churches under that of the Presbytery, has put yours under
that of the Episcopacy; and as we are assured that you do not despise our
simplicity, so neither ought we to oppose our selves against your preeminence.
So that, my Lord, we utterly disapprove and see with grief, certain extremes
whereinto some of the one side, and the other do cast themselves. The one
looking upon Episcopacy as an order so absolutely necessary, that without it
there can be no Ecclesiastical society, nor lawful vocation, nor hope of
Salvation; and the other looking upon it with indignation as a rellque of
Antichristianism. These are equally heats and excesses which do not come from
him that calls us, and which do offend against the laws of wisdom and charity.

These, my Lord, are our true and sincere common opinions. For what concerns
you, since you desire that I would descend a little more particularly into the
state that your own Church is in, by reason of the intestine divisions that
trouble it; give me leave not to tell you my thoughts, without declaring my
wishes, and the desires of my heart, upon a matter so important as this is. I
could wish then with all my sold that those that are gone so far as this
point, to think to break the external bonds, and the mutual dependence of your
Flocks, to give every particular Church a kind of sovereignty of government,
would consider well whether that they pretend to do be not directly contrary
to the spirit of Christianity, which is a spirit of union, and society, and not
of division. That they would consider that under the pretense that the
principle of the Reformed was to abhor men's domineering over Faith, and
Conscience, as a thing destructive of Religion, we ought not for all that to
reject the bridle of Discipline, nor to shake off the whole yoke of Government,
nor deprive our selves of the succors we might draw out of a general Union,
for to strengthen us in the true Faith, and in true Piety. That they would
consider, in fine, that the same reason which makes them desire the
Independency of the Flocks, may be likewise employed to establish the
Independency of the persons in every Flock. For a Flock has no more right to
desire to be Independent upon other Flocks, than a person might have to desire
to be Independent upon other persons. But this would be to bring all discipline
to nothing, to throw the Church, as much as in us lies, into a horrible
confusion, and to expose the heritage of the Lord to the reproach of its
adversaries.

For what concerns those which amongst you they call Presbyterians, as I am
persuaded that they have light, and wisdom, and zeal, so I could wish with all
my heart, that they would observe more moderation in the scandal they believe
they have heretofore received from the Episcopal Order, and that they would
distinguish the Persons from the Ministry. The persons that possess the places
have not only their faults, but it may happen too sometimes that the most
holy, and most eminent places may be possessed by wicked men; and in that case
reason and peity do equally require that we should not confound the Ministry
with the Minister. At present that God by his grace has taken away this scandal
from before their eyes, and made them see piety, zeal, and constancy for the
preservation of Religion in the persons of the Bishops, I hope that this will
not a little contribute to the sweetning of their spirits. Besides, I could
wish that they would be pleased to consider that if there be some unpleasant
inconveniences in the Episcopal Government, as I do not doubt but there are,
there are too some very unpleasant ones in the Presbyterian, as I have said
already. No order whose execution is in the hands of men, is exempt from them;
an equality has its faults and excesses to be feared, as well as a superiority.
Therefore it is not the most safe and wise way to leap from the one to the
other, nor to hazard the making a general concussion, upon the hopes of being
better, though one should be in authority and power to do it. Christian
prudence, justice and charity do not permit us to proceed to such daring and
dangerous extremes, for a single difference of Government. It is most safe and
wise to endeavor to provide some kind of temper to avoid, or to lessen as much
as may be, the inconveniences that are feared, and not have recourse to
violent remedies.

I shall not be afraid to give that name to the holding of assemblies apart,
and separating from the public assemblies, and withdrawing themselves from
under your government. There is no man that does not see that this would be
real schism, which in it self and of its own nature cannot choose but be always
odious to God and men, and of which the Authors and Patrons cannot avoid the
rendering an account before the Tribunal of our common Master. When Saint Paul
forbad us to forsake the assembling of our selves together, he did not only
condemn those that did not come thither, but stayed at home; but those too
without doubt that held other assemblies in opposition to the public ones. For
this is to break the bond of Christian charity which does not only join us
with some of our brethren, but with all our brethren, to receive from them, and
to give them edification by living together in the same communion. And it would
be to no purpose to pretend that our conscience did oppose our being present at
those assemblies that are held under a Government that we do not approve; and
that that would be to approve outwardly, what we inwardly condemn. For besides
that it would be necessary to examine well the question, whether these
oppositions do not proceed from a conscience mistaken by a precipitate
judgment; since that the best men are often subject to fram to themselves such
scruples, as are not altogether lawful at the bottom. Further than this it is
necessary to distingush three kinds of things; the one those which the
conscience approves, and admits of, and in which it does fully acquiesce; the
other which she looks upon as intolerable, and destructive to the glory of God,
and the true faith, or true piety, and the hopes of salvation; and others
lastly which are between these, that is to say such as we do not fully approve
as to the truth, but yet we do not believe them mortal enemies to true piety
and salvation; in a word such as we look upon as stains, and tolerable
infirmities. I affirm that when we find things of this second rank in any
Assemblies, or those which the Conscience judges such, we cannot be present
there; and the whole question will be reduced to this, to know, whether we be
not mistaken, where we ought to take good heed that we do not make a rash
judgment. But to imagine that we cannot with a good Conscience be present at
Assemblies, but only when we do fully and generally approve of all things in
them, it is certainly not to know neither the use of charity, nor the laws of
Christian society. This principle would overturn all Churches, for I cannot
tell whether there be any, whose government, discipline, outward form, usages,
and practices be of such perfection, that there is nothing at all in them to
blame; and however it be, as the judgments of men are very different, this
would be to open the gate to continual separations, and to abolish all
Assemblies. It is therefore certain that Conscience does not oblige us to
withdraw from the Assemblies, but on the contrary it obliges us to join with
them, when the things that offend us are tolerable, and do not hinder the
salutary efficacy of the Word, of the Divine Worship, and of the Sacraments.
It Is the favor of this charitable patience that justifies our being present at
those things which we do not perfectly approve. See what St. Paul says to the
Philippians, chap. 3. If in any thing ye be otherways minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. This is very far from saying, as
soon as ye have the least contrary sentiment separate your selves, Conscience
will not allow you to remain together. Consilia separationis, says St. Augustine
against Parmenian, inania sunt and perniciosa, and plus perturbant infirmos
bonos, quam corrigant animosos malos. What deadly effects would not such a
separation produce if it were established amongst you? As the dispositions of
men are, one should quickly see to spring from hence a difference of interests,
of parties, of opinions, even in respect of the civil society, mutual hatred,
and all the other sad consequences which a division not tempered with charity
does naturally produce. I let alone the scandal which all the Reformed Churches
of Europe would receive by (...) which their Adversaries would have, and we
advantages which they would draw from it, which in all appearance would not be
small. I have too good an opinion of those Gentlemen who believe that the
Presbyterian Government is to be preferred before the Episcopal, not to be
persuaded that they make wise and serious reflections upon all these things,
and many more which their own knowledge furnishes them with; and that
conscience, and the love of the Protestant Religion will always hinder them
from doing any thing, that may be blamed before God and men. For in fine I
cannot believe that there is any one amongst them that looks upon your
Episcopacy, or your Discipline, or certain Ceremonies which you observe, as
blots, and capital errors, which hinder a man from obtaining salvation, even
with facility in your Assemblies, and under your Government. The question here
is not about the Esse, or the been Esse, but only about the melius Esse, that
they dispute with you; and this being so, justice, charity, the love of peace,
prudence, and zeal for Religion in the general will never allow that they
should divide themselves from you.

But, my Lord, since you have put the pen into my hand upon this subject, I
beseech you pardon my freedom if it go so far as to tell you what I think you
also ought to do on your part. I hope then that on these opportunities that
God presents unto you, you will make all the world see, and convince the most
incredulous, that you have piety, zeal, and the fear of God, and that you are
worthy laborers, and worthy servants of Jesus Christ. This is the tetimony
which all good men do already give you, and none how spightfull soever he be
dares to contradict it, and I do not doubt but that you will carry on your
calling to the end. But besides this, my Lord, I hope you willnot be wanting in
the duties of charity, and the spirit of peace, and that when the dispute shall
be only of some temperaments, or of some Ceremonies that are a
stumbling block, and which in themselves are nothing in comparison of an entire
reunion of your Church under your holy Ministry, you will make it seen that you
love the Spouse of your Master more than your selves; and that it is not so
much from your greatness, and your Ecclesiastical dignity that you desire to
receive your glory, and your joy, as from your pastoral virtues, and the ardent
care you take of your Flocks. I hope too that those you have chosen and called
to the holy Ministry, and those which hereafter you shall with a prudent
diseretion call unto it, being governed not only by sweetness, but likewise by
severity of discipline, when severity shall be necessary, will tread in your
steps, and happily follow the example which you shall give them, that they may
be themselves for an example, and edification to the Churches that are
committed to them.

I conclude, my Lord, with very earnest prayers which I present to God with all
my heart, that it would please him always to preseve unto you the light of his
Gospel, and to pour out upon the whole body of your Ministry, an abundant
measure of his unction and heavenly benediction, of which that of the old Aaron
was but a shadow; that it may be not the emblem, and image of brotherly
concord, like the unction of old, but the cause and bond of it. I pray him that
he would more and more bring back the heart of the Children to the Fathers, and
of the Fathers to the Children, that your Church may be happy and pleasant as
the Paradise of God.

Lastly I pray that he would preserve you, my Lord, in perfect and long health,
for his glory, and the good and advantage of that great and considerable part
of his field which he has given you to cultivate, and which you do cultivate so
happily. I desire too the help of your holy prayers, and the continuance of the
honor of your affection, protesting to you that I will be all my life with all
the respect that I owe you,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant and Son in Jesus Christ,
CLAUDE.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Mortclock at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion, being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended answer of T. C. wherein the true grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the false discovered; the Church of England Vindicated from the Imputation of
Schism, and the most Important particular Controversies between us and those of
the Church of Rome, thoroughly examined. The Second Edition corrected, by Edw.
Stillingfleet, D. D. Folio.

Sermons preached upon several occasions, with a Discourse annexed concerning
the True Reason of the Sufferings of Christ, wherein Crellius his Answer to
Grotius is considered, by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. Folio.

Irenicum: A Weapon Salve for the Churches Wounds, by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D.
Quarto.

A Discourse concering the Idolatry Practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the communion of it, in Answer to some Papers of a
Revolted Protestant, with a particular Account of the Fanaticism and Divisions
of that Church, by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to several Late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled a Discourse
concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of
Salvation in the Communion of it, by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. the first part,
Octavo.

A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against
the pretense of Infallibility in the Romans Church, in Answer to the Guide in
Controversies, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and
Religion, or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into
the Miracles of the Roman Church, by Edw. Stillingflect, D. D. Octavo.

A Defense of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, in Answer to a Book cutituled Catholics no Idolaters, by Edw.
Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of S. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

THE END.

