A TREATISE OF Family Instruction: Wherein it is proved to be the Duty of
Parents and Masters of Families to Train up their Children and Servants in the
Knowledge of the SCRIPTURES.

With Directions how this Work may be done so as to promote the Conversion,
Edification, and Eternal Salvation of all such as are under their Charge.

Useful for Parents and Masters of Families.

By Owen Stockton, Minister of the Gospel.

Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children --

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXII.

To Parents and Masters of Families, more especially to such as are Inhabitants
of Colchester in Essex.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
IT is God that sets the solitary in Families Psalm. 68.6.
. And when he builds us houses, and commits to our charge the Education of
Children or Servants, he reposeth a great trust in us. For our Children are
more his Children than ours. Ezekiel. 18.4.
Behold all souls are mine; As the soul of the Father, so also the soul of the
Son is mine. And our Servants are more his Servants than ours. As the soul of
the Master, so also the soul of the Servant is his. Both children and servants
are committed to us, not so much for our own use and service, as that we should
train them up to know, serve and glorify God. What Pharaoh' s daughter said to
Moses his Mother. Exodus 2.9.
Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages The like
God says to us, Take these children, Take these servants, and educate them for
me, and I will give you your reward, Your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. The charge which the Lord gives us concerning every one that he commits
to our trust is strict and weighty, much like that which is mentioned, 1 Kings
20.39. Behold a man turned aside, and brought a man to me, and said, Keep this
man, if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life. At the
Day of Judgment every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. Romans
14.12.
And not of our selves only, but of all the souls also that are under our
charge, as we may learn from the words of the Apostle, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls as they that must give an account. At that day, when we, the
children, and the servants, whom God has given us, shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, if any of them be missing, and it be found that they
perished, either through our negligence, or our evil example, or any other way
through our means, our lives shall go for theirs. When Laban committed the
keeping of his flock unto Jacob, he required at Jacob' s hands, every beast
that was lost, although he was his near kinsman. Genesis 31.39.
That which was torn of beasts I brought it not unto thee. I bare the loss of
it, of my hands did thou require it, whether stolen by day or by night. If
Laban required at Jacob' s hands every beast that he lost, God may much more
require at our hands every soul which he entrusts us withal, and if any be lost
through our carelessness, cause us to bear the loss of it; for one soul is of
more value than all the beasts in the whole world. Wherefore the Apostle Paul
called unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.20.
O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thy trust. So may I call unto
you, my beloved Brethren, O keep those children, keep those servants whom the
great God has committed to your trust. Keep them from sinning against the
Lord. Keep them from walking in the broad way that leads to destruction. Keep
them from perishing by ignorance, error, or a sinful conversation, least their
blood be required at your hands, for not showing them the path of life, and
Ezekiel. 3.17, 18.
warning them to turn from their evil ways. Keep them as our Lord Jesus kept
those whom his Father committed to him, of whom he says, John 17.12.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name, those that thou
gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost but the son of perdition. And
how did Jesus Christ keep those whom his Father had given him? By praying for
them. Ver. 92.11.
I pray for them -- Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou
have given me, that they may be one as we are. And by instructing them, I have
manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world -- And
whence did he draw the Instructions which he gave them? Out of the Scriptures.
Luke 24.27.
Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures, the things concerning himself. He gave them his Word, whereby they
were brought to know and believe in him. John 17.8.
I have given them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me. He did not only teach them to know but also to obey the
Word. Verse. 6.
They have kept thy Word. And they keeping his Word, were kept by his power
through faith unto salvation.

As soon as Manoah had but the promise of a child, he went to God and desired
to be taught how he should order and educate his child. Judge. 13.8.
Then Manoah entreated the Lord, and said, O my Lord, let the Man of God which
thou did send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the
child that shall be born. Would you that have not only a promise, but the
actual enjoyment of children and servants, know what God would have you do unto
them? You need no Angel or Man of God to come from Heaven to tell you; Do but
search the Scriptures, and there you shall find that the Lord requires you to
instruct and train up your children and servants, in the knowledge, belief, and
obedience of his holy Word. Hear what God himself says to you concerning this
matter. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children -- Ephesians. 6.4.
Ye Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. And as God commands you to teach your
children, so he has put great advantages into Parents hands for doing this
work, in regard of their daily presence with their children, their authority
over them, the interest they have in their affections, and their dependence on
their Parents for their present and future subsistence.

How much it conduces to the glory of God to train up our children and
servants in the knowledge and obedience of the holy Scriptures, what blessings
it will bring upon our selves and Families, what exceeding great benefits will
accrue thereby to our children, what good we may do to the generations that are
yet to come, how much it tends to the propagating of Religion and the power of
godliness, and how Family Instruction may be carried on successfully to the
Conversion, Edification, and eternal Salvation of such as are under charge, you
may see in the perusal of this ensuing Treatise, which I have composed for the
use of such Heads of Families as are not provided of better helps, but more
especially for you my dearly beloved Friends, among whom I have lived, and with
whom I have conversed: My humble and earnest request to you is, that if you
have any love to the Lord Jesus, you would express it by feeding his Lambs with
the sincere milk of his Word; if you have any zeal for the glory of God, if any
bowels toward your posterity, if any desire of their spiritual and eternal
welfare, if any regard to the generations that are yet unborn, if you have ever
found any comfort in or benefit by the Word of God, that you would bend your
minds, and set your hearts to this good work of instructing your children and
servants in the knowledge, and training them up in the obedience of the
Scriptures. And that you (and all others, into whose hands the Providence of
God shall bring this small Treatise) may by the perusal thereof, be quickened
to, directed and encouraged in this work of Family Instruction, and be enabled
to manage the same to the glory of God, your own and your Families Edification,
shall be the prayer of

Your Servant in the work of the Lord, Owen Stockton.

ERRATA.
Page 17. line 15. for 1 Cor. 5.7. read 1 Cor. 1.5, 7. p. 23. l. 27. for 1 Pet.
2.22. r. 1 Pet. 1.22. p. 75. l. 15. r. Cocceius. p. 105. l. 20. for Prove.
15.20. r. Prove. 13.20. p. 144. l. 2. r. fortify.

Some other small faults have escaped the Press, which the judicious Reader
will easily correct.

The Contents.
THe neglect of Family Instruction a great evil, page 1, 2. Several Scriptures
to prove it to be our du^y to instruct our Families, and that the Instructions
which we give them be drawn out of the Word of God, page 3. to the 11. Servants
as well as Children must be instructed, page 11. to the 16. The ignorance of
Children and Servants proves the necessity of Family Instruction, page 16, 17
Ignorance brings many and great evils upon our Families page 17. to 22 The
corruption that is in Children and Servants prove the necessity of Family
Instruction, page 22 to 26 Family Duties cannot be performed without Family
Instruction, page 26. to 30. We have Gods example for teaching our Children and
Servants, page 30. to 33. Mothers as well as Fathers must instruct their
Children, page 33. to 40.
Chap. 2. Motives to Family Instruction. 1. Instructing our Children and
Servants will be a means of their conversion, page 40, 41. Six reasons why we
should labor after our Children and Servants conversion, page 41. to 45. 2.
Neglect of Family Instruction makes us guilty of our Children and Servants
blond. What a great evil it is to be guilty of the blood of souls, page 45. 3.
Instructing our Children out of the Scriptures instills wisdom into them. The
advantages that will come to them by being endued with wisdom, page 51. to 57.
4. Instructing our Children will bring them great advantage on several
accounts, page 57. to 62. 5. We benefit our selves several ways by instructing
our Families, page 62. to 66. 6. The neglect of Family Instruction is the cause
of several evils, page 66. to 59. 7. Family Instruction will propagate Religion
to a thousand generations, page 69. to 73. 8. Family Instruction greatly
advances the glory of God, page 73. to 76. 9. We show our love to God by
instructing our Families, page 76, 77. 10. Gods mercy in giving us Families
should stir us up to instruct them, page 77. to 79. 11. We have the example of
Jesus Christ, and the best men that ever lived for instructing their Families,
page 79. to 84. 12. Gods Judgments that have lately been upon the Nation, call
for Family Instruction, and Family Reformation, page 84. to 87. 13. The
usefulness and excellency of the Scriptures, should stir us up to train up our
Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures, page 87. to 92. 14. They deal
unjustly with their Families, who defraud them of Instruction, page 92. to 95

Chap. 3. Directions how to manage the work of Family Instruction so as to
promote the Conversion, Edification, and eternal Salvation of all such as are
under our charge, page 95. to 200. 1. Direct. We must be diligent in studying
the Scriptures, page 95. to 98. 2. We must teach our Families, the knowledge of
the Principles, and the practice of the Duties of Religion. Nothing but the
Truth, Soul-saving Truths, seasonable Truths, page 98. to 107 What are
Soul-saving Truths, page 102. to 105. What are seasonable Truths, page 106,
107. 3. We must instruct our Families in the most edifying manner. What manner
of Instruction is must edifying. What are Edifying Duties, page 107 to 113. 4.
We must take the fittest seasons for Family Instruction. What are the fittest
seasons for this work, page 113. to 116. 5. We must cause them to keep the Word
of God in remembrance. What benefits come by remembering the Word, page 116. to
119. 6. We must watch over our Families, page 119. to 121. 7. We must reprove
them, when they do any thing contrary to the Word of God, page 121, 122. How to
manage this duty of Reproof with success, page 122, to 128. 8. When Reproofs
take no place, we must correct our Children, page 128, How Corrections may be
made effectual for our Childrens good, page 129. to 132. 9. We must keep up our
authority in our Families, page 132. How to keep up our authority in our
Families, page 132 to 137. 10. We must endeavor to gain our Children and
Servants affections. How this may be done, page 137. to 140. 11. We must
endeavor to engraft those Scriptures which we teach our Children and Servants,
in their hearts. How this may be done, page 140. to 143. How to bring our
Children and Servants in love with the Word, page 143. 12. We must endeavor to
draw our Families to Christ, page 144. How to draw our Children and Servants to
Christ, page 144. to 148. How to fortify our Families against the offense of
the Cross, that when troubles arise for the Gospels sake, they may not fall off
from the ways of Christ, page 148. to 151. 13. We must labor to know the state
of the several members of our Families. How we may gain this knowledge, page
152 to 155. 14. We must commune with our Children and Servants about their
spiritual state. What questions we should put to them, page 155 to 159. 15. We
must apply our Instructions suitable to the state and condition of our Families,
page 159. How to deal with the unconverted in order to their Conversion, page
159 to 161. What we are to do when we find our Children or Servants profiting
by the Instructions we give them, page 161 to 164. How to deal with such as get
no good by our Instructions, page 164, 165. How to deal with such as rest in a
form of godliness, page 165, 166. How to deal with such as are in a declining
condition, page 166, 167. 16. We must be diligent in instructing our Families.
Six Arguments for diligence in this work, page 167 to 170. 17. We must teach
and watch over every member of our Families. Arguments to persuade us hereunto,
page 170 to 173. 18. Our Families must be kept from strife, and preserved in
love and peace, page 173, 174. What we should do to prevent discord and
contention, and to preserve love and peace in our Families, page 174 to 177.
19. We must join Prayer with Family Instruction. The necessity of Prayer for
assistance and success in this work, page 177 to 182. The case of such as have
prayed long for their childrens Conversion and see no answer of their Prayers,
page 182 to 186. 20. We must act faith for the Conversion and Salvation of such
as are under our charge, page 186. Several promises to encourage us to trust in
God for Family mercies and Family blessings, page 187 to 190. The case of such
as are discouraged from acting Faith upon the Promise, because they see no
fruit of their faith or labors, page 190, 196. 21. We must walk exemplarily in
our Families, page 196, 197. 22. Family Instruction must be continued as long
as we live, page 197 to 200.

Chap. 4. Objections against Family Instruction answered, page 200 to 304. 1.
Plea. Want of gifts and abilities for this work. Ans. in 17 particulars, page
200 to 207. How we may get our gifts and abilities increased, page 206, 207. 2.
The plea of such as cannot read answered, page 207 to 209. 3. The plea of such
as neglect Family Instruction because they have difordered Families answered,
page 209, 210. 4. The plea of such whose Children and Servants are dull,
answered, page 210 to 215. How to deal with such as are dull and have weak
memories, page 212 to 215. How to help the infirmities of our Understandings
and Memories, page 214, 215. 5. The plea of such as neglect Family Instruction,
because their Children or Servants are hard hearted and rebellious Answ. page
215 to 219. 6. The plea of such as say their Children are too young to be
instructed, Answered, page 219 to 223. 7. The plea of such as say their
Families are all such knowing persons, as that they need no Instruction, page
223 to 226. 8. The plea of such as say their Families are so small, that it is
not worth their time and pains to instruct them, answered, page 226 to 229. 9.
The plea of such as neglect Family Instruction because their Families are great
and numerous, answered, page 229 to 231. 10. The plea of such as say it is
beneath them to instruct their Children or Servants, because they are great
men, Answ. page 231 to 233. 11. The plea of such as say they have no spare time
to instruct their Families, because they are poor, or have much business, or
are often abroad, Answered, page 233 to 240. 12. The plea of such as are afraid
they should wrest the Scriptures, Answered, page 240 to 242. What means we
should use to come to the right understanding of the Scriptures, and to be kept
from wresting them, page 242 to 246. 13. The plea of such as neglect Family
Instruction, because they find their hearts in a dry, unsavory frame, Answ.
page 246 to 250. How we may come to taste the sirectness that is in Gods Word,
page 246. to 248. 14. The plea of such as say, It Is the Ministers work to
instruct their Children, Answ. page 250 15. The plea of such as say, Family
Instruction would make every man turn Preacher, and bring the ministry into
contempt, page 251 to 254. 16. The plea of such as neglect Family Instruction,
because they think it is sufficient for every man to follow the light that is
within him. page 254 to 270 17. The plea of such as neglect Family Instruction,
because it is promised in the times of the Gospel, that we shall all know the
Lord, Answered, page 270 to 273. The Promises of our being taught of God do not
make void Family Instruction, or ministerial teaching, page 272, 273. 18. The
plea of such as say, many Children and Servants are never a whit the better for
being instructed, page 273 to 275. 19. The plea of such as neglect Family
Instruction for fear of aggravating their Childrens condemnation. Answered page
275 to 277. 20. The plea of such as say, it will spread and multiply Errors for
illiterate men to instruct their Families, page 277. to 281. What we should do
that we may be kept from corrupting and perverting the Word of God when we
instruct our Families, page 278 to 281. 21. The plea of those who think they do
enough because they read the Scriptures in their Families, and hear their
Children and Servants read also, page 281 to 286. 22. The plea of such as say,
They may teach their Families to know and remember the Word, but they cannot
teach them obedience, and knowledge without obedience will do them no good,
page 286. Instructing Children while they are young makes eminent Saints, page
287. 288. 23. The plea of such as neglect Family Instruction because their
Servants are Fainted wick erroneous Principles, page 288 to 290. 24. The plea
of such as neglect Family Instruction, lest they should be counted singular,
and be repreached, page 290, 291, 292. They that neglect Family Instruction are
worse then Infidels and Idolaters, page 290. 291. 25. The plea of such as say,
Their Families refuse to submit unto Instruction What is to be done in this
case, page 292 to 296. 26. The plea of such as give over Family Instruction,
because they can see no success of their labors, page 296 to 304. What they
should do who find no success in their labors in teaching their Families, page
296, 297. Encouragements to persist in Family Instruction, although we see no
suceess of our labors, page 299 to 304.

Chap. 5. Considerations to quiet Parents whose Children died in such an
estate, as they can have no hope of their Salvation, page 304. to 336. 1.
Consider Gods Sovereignty, page 306 to 308. 2. Other as good and better then we
have met with the same trial, page 308 to 310. 3. Gods right and interest in
our Children is greater than ours, page 310. 311. 4. God is just and righteous,
true and faithful in all his ways, page 311. 312. 313. 5. God shall have
eternal glory from them that perish, page 313. 314. 6. We should consider Gods
great mercy in taking our own souls into a Covenant of Life and Salvation, page
314. 315. The case of such as are overwhelmed with grief, because they fear
their Children are in eternal torments: Gods justice in punishing sinners to
eternity vindicated, page 315 to 325. The case of such as are troubled because
they conveyed Original Sin to their Children considered, page 325 to 327. The
case of such as are troubled, because their Childrens blood will be required at
their hands considered, page 327 to 331. Though it be a great sin to be guilty
of the blood of souls, yet it is a pardonable sin, page 329. 330. The case of
such as are cast down, because God has not answered their Prayers for their
Children, or prospered their labors, considered, page 331, 332. The case of
such as cannot reconcile the Providence of God in casting away their seed, with
his promise, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, page 333 to 336.

A TREATISE OF Family-Instruction.
CHAP. I.
The Evils that arise from the neglect of Family-Instruction: Whence it
proceeds that Family-Instruction is neglected. Five Arguments to prove it to be
a Duty. The Instructions we give our Families must be drawn out of the
Scriptures. Servants as well as Children must be instructed. Mothers as well as
Fathers must instruct their Children.

THe neglect of Family-Instruction is a great and yet a common Evil: The sad
effects thereof, such as the decay of the power of Godliness, gross ignorance,
undutiful and disobedient Children, evil and unfaithful Servants, the growth
and increase of sin, etc. are so plain and visible almost in all places, that
he that runs may read them. Neither is it the present Generation only, which
is corrupted through the carelessness of those Parents and Masters of Families
who neglect to train up their Children and Servants in the knowledge and fear
of God; but hereby ignorance and iniquity are like to be propagated unto, and
greatly increased in, the Generations which are yet to come. For when God shall
give those Children and Servants who were trained up without Instruction,
Families of their own, it is most probale that they will neglect to teach their
Children and Servants, and that the succeeding Generations which shall spring
out of their Loins, will tread in their Fathers steps, and so vice and
ignorance will descend from one Family to an other for many generations. If we
enquire into the ground and cause of this evil, whence it comes to pass that
Family-Instruction is so much neglected, I conceive the reason of most, if not
of all men's neglect of this Duty, may be reduced to one of these four heads:

1. Either they are not convinced that it is their Duty to instruct their
Families.

Or 2. Though they know it to be their Duty, they want an heart to set about
the performance of it.

Or 3. Though they are willing to instruct their families, yet they know not
how to set about this work, at least they know not how to carry it on in an
advantageous successful manner, and therefore leave it undone.

Or 4. They have gotten certain pleas, whereby they think to excuse their
neglect of this work. Wherefore in this ensuing Treatise, the design whereof is
to excite parents and masters of families to train up their children in the
knowledge and obedience of the Scriptures, I shall do these four things.

1. I shall prove it is the duty of parents and masters of families to instruct
their children and servants in the knowledge, and to train them up in the
obedience of the word of God. 2. I shall produce some motives to excite those
who neglect this work of Family-instruction, to be diligent, constant, and
conscientious, in the performance of their duty in teaching and instructing
their families. 3. I shall give some directions how this work of
family-instruction may be carried on so as to promote the conversion,
edification, and eternal salvation of such as are under our charge. 4. I shall
answer the most material Pleas and Objections that are brought against training
up our Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures, whereby many persons are
either kept from, or discouraged in the performance of this work.
I shall begin with the first of these, namely to prove, that it is the duty of
all Parents and Masters of Families to teach the Scriptures unto their Children
and Servants, and to train up their Families in the knowledge and obedience of
the Word of God.

SECT 1. Scripture proofs for Family-Instruction. The Instructions we give our
Families must be drawn out of the word of God.
families to teach his word unto their children and servants, and requires
them to be very diligent therein. I shall mention some places both out of the
old and also out of the new Testament, where we have express commands from God
for the teaching his word to our children, and prove that under the name of
Children, are comprehended our Servants, and all the Members of the Family:
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. This being a full and pregnant
Text for proving the point in hand, I shall observe several things from it:

1. What it is which we are to teach our children, and that is the word of God;
These words which I command thee this day -- thou shall teach them unto thy
Children. The Apostle gives this commendation of the Scripture, that it is
profitable for instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. and intimates to us,
Romans 2.17, 18. That the Jews drew their instructions which they gave to those
whom they taught, out of the Law of God: Behold thou art called a Jew, and
know his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being
instructed out of the Law of God.

2. Observe who they are whom God commands to teach his word unto their
Children, and you shall find that this Charge is not given to the Tribe of
Levi, but to all Israel: The Lord calls out twice to the whole Body of the
People, Hear O Is ael, verse. 3. Hear O Israel, verse. 4. If it had been said,
Hear O House of Aaron, or Hear O ye Sons of Levi, we might have thought it had
special reference to the Ministers of the Word; but when this charge is ushered
in with a double Call to all Israel to give audience, no man can say, This
Command of teaching Gods word to my Children, belongs not unto me, except he
be one that is and resolves to continue an alien to the Commonwealth of
Israel: I may add further, that this charge, Thou shall teach them diligently
unto thy Children, is given to the same persons that are commanded to love God
with all their hearts, verse. 5. and to the same persons that are enjoined to
treasure up Gods word in their hearts, verse. 6. So that every one that is
obliged to love God, and to lay up Gods word in his heart, is obliged also, if
he be one unto whom God has given Children, to teach Gods word unto his
Children.

3. Take notice what is meant by teaching Gods word unto our Children: It
implies, 1. That we should train them up in the knowledge of the Scriptures: To
teach, is to convey knowledge and understanding, Psalm. 119.66. Teach me good
judgment and knowledge; and to this effect the Persian Translation renders
these words, Expones ea filiis tuis, Thou shall expound them unto thy Children,
thou shall cause them to understand the sense and meaning of my word. 2. To
teach our Children the Scriptures, is to train them up in the obedience and
practice of those things which the Lord requires of us in his holy word: There
is a teaching to do, as well as to know the will of God, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me
to do thy will. Matr. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. 2 Chronicles. 6.27. Thou have taught them the good way wherein
they should walk.

4. Observe in what manner, and when we are to teach Gods word unto our
Children; this work must not be done in a slight superficial manner, but with
all diligence; Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children. And as for
the times and seasons when we are to teach them, Moses intimates, that it must
not be seldom, but this work must be done frequently, we should embrace all
convenient seasons to be dropping some portion of Gods word into them, -- Thou
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

5. We have the persons described whom we are to instruct out of the word of
God, and they are our Children, Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children: Now under the name of Children are comprehended our Servants, and all
others in the Family that need instruction, as shall be showed more fully
afterward.

Another Scripture wherein God commands us to teach his word unto our Children,
we have in the Psalms of David, Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7. He established a Testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they
should make them known unto their Children, that the Generation to come might
know them, even the Children which should be born, who should arise and declare
them to their Children, that they might set their hope in God, and not forget
the works of God, but keep his Commandments. Here we may observe, 1. What it is
which Parents are to teach and make known unto their Children, The Law and the
Testimony; that is, the holy Scriptures, which are often called by this name,
the Law and the Testimony, as we may see Psalm. 19.7. Isa. 8.16, 20. 2. We have
a strict Command and a solemn Injunction from God, given unto Parents, to make
known the Law and the Testimony unto their Children; He commanded our Fathers
that they should make them known unto their Children. 3. We may take notice,
that this practice of Parents teaching Gods Laws unto their Children, should be
continued from one Generation to another, unto the end of the world, That the
Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be born, who
should arise and declare unto their Children. 4. Here are three things hinted
that Parents should aim at in making known Gods word unto their Children: 1.
The bringing their Children to believe and hope in God; That they might set
their hope in God. 2. The fixing and imprinting in their memories the word and
the works of God, And not forget the works of God. 3. The training of them up
in the practice and obedience of Gods Commandments, But keep his Commandments.
The Psalmist shows in the eighth verse what the want or neglect of Parents
making known Gods Laws to their Children produces, Children prove stubborn and
rebellious, or if they make a profession of Religion, they soon discover their
hearts are not right with God; And might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn
and rebellious Generation, a Generation that set not their heart aright, and
whose spirit was not steadfast with God.


Besides these Scriptures already mentioned, I might produce several others
where God commands Parents to make known his word unto their Children, as Isa.
38.19. The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth: By Gods truth,
which Fathers are here enjoined to make known unto their Children, we may
understand his word, for his word is called his Truth, John 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. See also Deuteronomy. 4.8, 9, 10. What
Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all
this Law which I set before you this day? Only take heed to thy self, and keep
thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen,
and lest they depart from thine heart all the days of thy life; but teach them
thy sons, and thy sons sons, specially the day when thou stoodest before the
Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather the People together,
and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days
that they shall live upon the Earth, and that they may teach their Children.
Here we may observe, 1. That Gods word was given to the Jews for this very end
that they might be brought to fear the Lord, and that they might teach his word
unto their Children, I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me -- and that they may teach their Children. 2. The Lord charge them
very strictly to teach their Children his works which they had seen; but more
specially his word which he delivered to them in Horeb: -- Only take heed to
thy self, and keep thy soul diligently -- teach them thy sons, and thy sons
sons.


To these places which I have cited out of the old Testament, I will add one
out of the New, wherein God charge Parents to train up their Children in the
knowledge and obedience of his holy word, Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers provoke
not your Children, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord:
The Apostle does not say, And ye Ministers, as limiting this work to them; but,
And ye Fathers -- implying, that it is the will of God, that all Parents should
bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. But some may
say, What is meant by the nurture and admonition of the Lord? The Greek words
are, (...) is rendered Instruction, 2 Timothy 3.16. and the instruction the Apostle
speaks of there, is instruction in righteousness, such instructions as are
drawn out of the Scriptures to instruct and direct us how to lead a righteous
and holy life. It is sometimes also used for correction, Heb. 12.5. My son
despise not the chastening of the Lord; (...) signifies such a teaching as
fixes in the mind, and fasteneth upon the heart those instructions which are
useful to inform the judgment and reform the life. To this effect Zanchy
interprets this word (...), Significat admonitionem non simpliciter, sed talem,
qua in mentem pueri ponas and ingeras, quae sunt illi ad salutem necessaria.
And Camerarius, Significat efficacem admonitionem qua aliquis ad meliorem
mentem revocatur. The Apostle adds (...), to show that those instructions and
admonitions which we give our Children, must not be what our own hearts, or our
own wisdom prompts us to, but they must be drawn out of the word of the Lord.
The Ethiopick Translation renders the words thus, Enutrite and erudite in
Doctrina Dei; bring them up and instruct them in the Doctrine of God. The
Doctrine of God is an Epithet given the Gospel, Tit. 2.10. When therefore the
Apostle exhorts Parents to bring up their Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, the sense and meaning of those words is to this effect,
That they should labor by instruction, correction, and daily admonitions, to
train up their Children in the knowledge, faith, and obedience of the Word of
God; and thus the generality of Expositors interpret this place: As Beza,
Monitis ex verbo Dei petitis; Draw the Counsel and Admonitions which you give
your Children, out of the word of God. And Vatablus, Date eis vivendi, modum,
secundum doctrinam and monita Christi; Give them Rules and Directions how to
order their Lives according to the Doctrine and Commandments of Christ. Zanch.
Vt pueri instituantur (...), id est, in vera Dei cegnitione, vera Pietate,
veraque religione doctrinam coelestem in liberorum animos semper instillando;
To bring up our Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is to bring
them up in the true knowledge of God, true Piety, and the true Religion, by a
continual instilling heavenly Doctrine (that is, the word of God) into our
Childrens minds. And Piscator, Erudiant and instituant in Doctrina Christiana;
Let them bring them up and instruct them in the Doctrine of Christ. Corn.
Lapid. Vos, O Patres, educate illos in Doctrina Christi, date eis Christiana
monita, quibus been and Christian vivendi modum addiscant; Do you, O Fathers,
educate your Children in the Doctrine of Christ, give them Christian counsel,
that they may learn to live well, and as becomes Christians. Our English
Annotations explain those words, In the admonition of the Lord, thus; Such
Admonitions, Instructions, and Precepts, as are taken out of the word of God,
and are acceptable to him. I might mention Theodoret, Chrysostom, (who
discourses very largely on this place about the education of Children in the
knowledge of the Scriptures) and diverse others, who give the same sense of this
Text; but I suppose it needless to add any more. What is implied in those
words, Bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, may be
gathered by comparing this place with 1 Timothy 4.6. where the same Apostle
speaking of Timothy, says, He was nourished up in the words of Faith and good
Doctrine; And what those words of Faith and good Doctrine were, in which
Timothy was nourished up, we may learn from 1 Timothy 6.3. Even the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. So that to
bring up our Children in the nurture and admontion of the Lord, is to nourish
them up from their Childhood in the knowledge of the word of the Lord, and
especially to instill such portions of the Gospel into their minds, as may
breed in their hearts faith in Jesus Christ, and may bring them to lead godly
and holy Lives.

SECT. 2. Servants as well as Children are to be instructed.
IT may be some will say, These Scriptures which you have produced, speak fully
of teaching Gods word unto our Children; but here is nothing spoken of
instructing our Servants: How does it appear that we are to teach Gods word
unto our Servants, as well as unto our Children?

I answer:

1. In Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8. Where the Lord commands us to lay up his words in our
hearts, and to teach them diligently unto our Children, there is added, Thou
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house; and verse. 9. Thou shall
write them upon the posts of thine house, and on thy gates: which Precepts
imply thus much, That it is our duty not only to teach our Children, but that
we are also bound to instruct all that go out, and all that come in at our
doors, even our whole household, in the knowledge of the word of God.

2. In those fore-quoted Scriptures, wherein the Lord commands us to teach
his word unto our Children, we are commanded to teach our Servants also; for
our Servants are comprehended in this word Children. This will be made evident
by considering how the word Children is used in other places, and the use of
the Hebrew word (...) and the Greek words (...) and (...). It is usual with the
Scripture to call those persons whom we either do, or by our duty are obliged
to instruct, our Children, 1 John 2.1. My little Children, these things I write
unto you, that ye sin not -- 2 Cor. 6.13. I speak as unto my Children -- Psalm.
34.11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. The People of a Nation that are united under one form of Government, are
called the Children of that Nation. Thus we read of the Children of Israel, and
the Children of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 13.18. The Children of Israel were brought
under at that time, and the Children of Judah prevailed, because they relied
upon the Lord God of their Fathers. The Children of Israel signify the ten
Tribes that were under Jeroboam's Government; and the Children of Judah, the
two Tribes that were under the Government of the house of David. Now if all the
People that belong to one Nation, are called the Children of that Nation, why
may not all the members of a Family be called the Children of that Family?
(...) which is the Hebrew word that is used for Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. is
translated by the Septuagint Zeph. 1.8. Amos 3.1. and in many other places, by
(...), which signifies an House, or a Family: And younger persons are called
(...) as Prove. 7.7. I discerned among the youths -- where the Hebrew word
translated youths, is the same with that which is rendered Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
It is also of that comprehensive signification, that it includes all
Inferiors, and such as are in subjection to others, as well as Children, 2
King. 16.7. So Ahaz sent Messengers to Tiglath-Pileser, saying, I am thy
Servant, and thy Son. And the Greek word (...) signifies Servants as well as
Children. It is rendered a Servant, Mat. 8.13. and Mat. 14.2. It is translated a
Child, John 4.51. Mat. 2.16. So also (...) which is another word used for
Children, signifies not only Children in a strict sense, that is, such as come
out of our Loins, but such Persons as inhabit one and the same place, are
called (...), Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together? -- And such as are under the care and
instruction of one and the same person, are called by the name of (...), that
man's Children. Thus the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, whom he had
instructed and begotten to Christ, calls them (...), my Sons, 1 Cor. 4.14. As
my beloved Sons, I warn you. I may add this farther, That the Master of a
Family is called Pater Familias, The Father of the Family: Naamans Servants
call their Master, Father; 2 Kings 5.13. His Servants came near unto him, and
said, My Father -- And it is usual in Scripture for Superiors to call their
Servants and Inferiors by the name of Sons or Children. I will produce, of
many instances which might be named, only these two, the one of Joshua, who
calls Achan son, Josh. 7.19. Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give I pray thee
glory to the God of Israel, and make confession to him. The other of Christ,
who tells his Disciples that he was their Lord and Master, John 13.13. yet he
calls them by the name of Children, John 21.5. Jesus says unto them, Children
have ye any meat?

3. The practice and example of the Servants of God in former Ages, proves it
to be our duty to instruct our Servants as well as our Children: If we observe
what they did, we shall find they were careful to train up their household in
the knowledge and fear of God. Thus did Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know him that he
will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. So also did Joshua, Josh. 24.15.
As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. Cornelius being a devout man
himself, trained up all his house in the fear of God, Act. 10.2. A devout man,
and one that feared God, with all his House.

4. In all Religious Exercises we find Governors of Families enjoined to
regard with an equal care their Children and their Servants, whether they be
Men or Maid Servants. As for instance, in the sanctification of the Sabbath,
they are commanded to look after their Servants, and them that sojourn with
them, as well as their Children, Exodus 20.8. Remember the sabbath to keep it
holy -- In it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy stranger that is within thy
Gates. -- So also in the celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles, the whole
Family was to keep the Feast unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.14. Thou shall rejoice in
thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man servant and thy maid
servant.

5. Instruction is as necessary for, and will be as beneficial to our Servants
as our Children, (as shall be showed afterward) and therefore we should not
think much to bestow our pains in teaching them such things as are necessary to
salvation: Seeing 1. They have immortal Souls, which are as precious to God as
our own Souls, or the Souls of our Children, Ezekiel. 18.4. Behold all Souls are
mine. -- 2. Jesus Christ has done as great things for our Servants as he has
done for us or our Children; He died for them as well as for us; He makes the
Bond as well as the Free Members of his Body, and Partakers of his Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been made to drink into one
Spirit: He makes no distinction of Bond or Free, in the communication of his
benefits; but the bond man and the free man are all one in Christ, Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. 3. God the Father
will do as great things for our servants, as he will for us or our Children; if
they seek and serve him, he will give them his Spirit, Joel 2.29. And also upon
the Servants and upon the Handmaids in those days I will pour out my Spirit: He
will give them an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, Col. 3.22, 24. Servants
obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh -- knowing that of the
Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance. John 12.26. If any man
serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my servant be --
He will give them all good things, Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord shall
not want any good thing. Shall we think much to spend a little time, and to
take a little pains in teaching our Servants, when God the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ, does such great things for them?

It is evident from these Scriptures which I have produced, that it is our duty
to teach Gods word unto our Children; and not only to our Children, but also to
our Servants: yea, that there are many clear, express, and strict Commandments
given to us by the great God for our performance of this Duty. Now how shall we
be able to appear before God at the day of Judgment, if we live in the neglect
of a known Duty, which is so often and so earnestly pressed upon us by God
himself!

SECT. 3. The ignorance of Children and Servants proves the necessity of
Family-Instruction. The Evils of Ignorance.
And that their Children which have not known any thing: And not Children only,
but the greater part of such as are grown to man's estate have little or no
knowledge of God, Psalm. 14.2. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the
Children of men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God. And
what account does he give of the Children of men? Romans 3.11. There is none that
understands, there is none that seeks after God. There is none
comparatively, there are so few understanding men, that they seem to be none,
compared with the multitude of ignorant persons; or if it relate to men in an
unregenerate condition, they are all destitute of the true and saving knowledge
of God and Jesus Christ. Even in those places, in those families, and in those
Churches where persons enjoy great means of knowledge, if inquiry be made what
understanding in the things of God such persons have attained unto, there will
be found much ignorance in many that have a long time enjoyed great advantages
to get knowledge. The people of Israel had greater means of knowledge than any
Nation under Heaven, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation;
yet hear how God complains of Isreal's ignorance. Jer, 4.22. My people is
foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish children, and they have none
understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. The Hebrews who had excellent teaching a long time, in so much that
in respect of the time and means they might have been Teachers of others, were
so raw and weak in knowledge, that it was needful for them to be instructed in
the first principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. When for the time ye
ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God. The Church of Corinth had many eminent
Pastors and Teachers, as Paul, Apollo, etc. and did excel in gifts, 1 Cor. 5.7.
In every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance, and in all knowledge,
-- so that ye come behind in no gift: Yet in this eminent Church there were
some found that had no knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame.

Now in regard there is naturally much blindness and ignorance in the minds and
understandings of our children and Servants; it is necessary we should labor
and take great pains with them, to bring them to the knowledge of God, by
instructing them out of Gods word; if we have any regard either to the glory of
God, or to our own good, or the good of our Children and Families. For,

1. The permitting of our Families to remain without the knowledge of God, will
bring down Gods Judgments upon them: for God is wont to pour out his fury upon
those persons and Families that have no knowledge of God, Jer. 10.25. Pour out
thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call
not upon thy Name. Ignorance of God was one ground of the Lords controversy
with the Land of Israel, Hos. 4.1. The Lord has a Controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the Land. If where the knowledge of God is wanting in a Nation, God has
a controversy with that Nation, may we not also conclude that God has a
controversy, and will plead his controversy with those Families where there
is no knowledge of God?

2. Our Children will prove great Crosses, and bring much grief and sorrow upon
us, if we train them up in ignorance, Prove. 17.25. A foolish son is a grief to
his father, and bitterness to her that bare him, Prove. 19.13. A foolish son is
the calamity of his father. And as they will be a great grief to their Parents,
who are nursed up in ignorance, so they will walk in such courses as will
pierce themselves through with many sorrows, Hos. 13.13. The sorrows of a
traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an unwise son.

3. If we do not instruct our Children and endeavor to instill knowledge into
them, they will become useless persons, and spend their days in vanity, and do
no service for God or their Generation. They will be unable to undertake and
manage common and easy employments, Eccles. 10.15. The labor of the foolish
wearieth every one of them, because he knows not how to go to the City. What
is more easy to find out, than the way to a City, where there is much commerce
and frequent going to and fro. Such persons as are foolish and indiscreet,
though they labor and toil in common and easy things, as easy as to find the
way to a City, they can bring nothing to any effect: And as foolish children
will be unable to manage any employments of themselves, so so they are unfit to
be employed by others, Prove. 26.6. He that sends a message by the hand of a
fool, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage.

4. If our Children and Servants be not taught to know the Lord, they cannot
live godly lives, but will be alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. They
will be so far from leading godly lives, if they be brought up in ignorance of
God, that they will prove vicious persons; when the Israelites neglected the
knowledge of God, they became a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity,
Isa. 1.3, 4. Israel does not know, my people does not consider: Ah sinful
nation! A people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, Children that are
corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy One of
Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. The Apostle ranketh such as are
without understanding among haters of God, and the chiefest of sinner, Romans
1.30, 31. If our Children and Servants be destitute of the knowledge of God,
they will be easily drawn to the vilest and most abominable sins: such as
Idolatry, Gal. 4.8. When ye knew not God, ye did service to them which by
nature are no Gods: Blasphemy, Psalm. 74.18. The foolish people have blasphemed
thy Name: Persecution of the people of God, so far as to kill and destroy them,
Joh. 16.2, 3. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time comes
that whosoever kills you, will think he does God service; and these things
will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me: Adultery,
Prove. 7.7, 10, 21, 22, 25. I beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among
the youths, a young man void of understanding, and behold there met him a woman
with the attire of an Harlot -- With much fair speech she caused him to yield,
with the flattering of her lips she forced him; he goes after her
straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter -- till a dart strike through his
Liver, as a Bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life.
Such as have no instruction, or being instructed do not obey the counsels that
are given to them, are in the ready way to run into all kind of evil, Prove.
5.13, 14. I have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that instructed me; I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the
Congregation and the Assembly. If we tremble at the thoughts of having our
Children prove Blasphemers, Idolaters, Adulterers, Persecutors of the people of
God, and to run into all kind of evil, let us endeavor to prevent these great
evils, by training them up in the knowledge and fear of the Lord.

5. If we bring up our Children in ignorance, they can have no fellowship with,
or enjoyment of God, who is the chiefest Good: For, God is Light, and in him is
no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. And persons that have no knowledge are said to
be in darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness: And there can be no
communion between Light and Darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. What Communion has Light
with Darkness? Now what will all the good things which we give our Children
whilst we live, or which we shall leave them when we die, avail them, if they
have no enjoyment of God, who is the chiefest Good?

6. Without knowledge our Children and Servants cannot obtain salvation, but
must perish eternally, Psalm. 5.5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight. Job
36.12. They shall die without knowledge. Prove. 2.16. The man that wandereth out
of the way of understanding shall remain in the Congregation of the dead: That
is, he shall be cast into Hell, and abide there among the Devils and damned
persons for ever. So it is expounded by R. Sell. in caetu gehennae. And Menoch,
Videtur sensus esse cum Daemonibus futuros and cum impiis hominibus ad aeterna
supplicia ^amnatis: That the Hebrew word which is here translated dead,
signifies Hell, may be gathered from Prove. 9.18. He knows not that the dead
are there, and that her guests are in the depths of Hell.

7. Without knowledge our Children will not only be undone in the world to
come, but they are likely by their folly and indiscretion to undo themselves
and their Families in this world, either by idleness, Eccl. 4.5. The fool
foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh, Prove. 24.30, 31. Or by
prodigality, Prove. 21.20. There is a treasure to be desired, and Oil in the
dwelling of the Wise, but the foolish spends it up: Or by Surety ship, Prove.
17.18. A man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes Surety in the
presence of his friend: Or by Lawsuits, Prove. 18.6. A fools lips enter into
contention: Or by speaking against persons in Authority, Eccles. 10.12. The
lips of a fool will swallow up himself, Prove. 10.14. The mouth of the foolish
is near destruction. Or by some other rash and indiscreet carriages.

8. Instructing our Children and Servants out of the word of God, will remove
their ignorance, and make them of foolish and simple to become wise and
understanding persons, and so consequently will prevent all the aforementioned
evils which will accrue both to us and them, if they be trained up in
ignorance, Prove. 12.1. Whosoever loves instruction loves knowledge, Prove. 8.33.
Hear instruction and be wise. Psalm. 19 7. The Testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple. Prove. 1.1, 4. The Proverbs of Solomon -- to give
subtilty to the simple, and to the young man knowledge and discretion. Psalm.
119.130. The entrance of thy word gives light, it gives understanding to the
simple.

SECT. 4. The corruption that is in children and servants, proves
Family-instruction to be a necessary duty.
Romans 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing:
and full of evil, Eccles. 9.3. The heart of the sons of men is full of evil. --
Yea, the seeds of the foulest sins, such as Murder, Adultery, Blasphemy, and
the like, are in the heart of man, which will break out if they be left to
themselves, Matthew. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. The inclinations
of the heart to sin, even to the worst of sins, are strong and violent; so that
the heart is not only set upon evil, but fully set to do evil, Eccles. 8.11.
The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. There is such a
bottomless depth of sin in their hearts, that we cannot fathom it, it is hard
to express, yea, hard to understand how wicked and sinful the heart of man is:
Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who
can know it? And this corruption of the heart, begins to work and discover it
self very early, even whilst we are young, Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth: Isai. 48.8. I knew that thou would deal very
treacherously, and wast called a transgressour from the womb.

Now seeing there is so much sin and corruption in the hearts of our children
and servants, from hence it will follow, that it is our duty to train them up
in the knowledge and obedience of the Word of God, whereby their hearts may be
purified and sanctified; and that it is necessary that we should employ all the
skill and strength that we have in this work: for,

1. Though their hearts be exceeding sinful, as we have heard before; yet if we
instruct them in the knowledge, and train them up in the obedience of the Word
of God, this will be a means to purify and sanctify their hearts, and to
reform their lives: for the word of God has a sanctifying virtue in it, John
17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth: And being hid in
the heart, it will cleanse the heart, and keep a man from sinning against God,
John 15.3. Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.
Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. Obeying and practicing the word, will purify the heart, 1 Pet. 2.22. Ye
have purified your Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit. -- If we can
bring our Children to take heed to their ways, and to frame them according to
the word of God, we need not doubt but this will cleanse their hearts and
lives, Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking
heed thereto, according to thy word.

2. If we suffer our Children and Servants to live without instruction, and do
not labor to bring them acquainted with God, and with his holy word, there is
no hope that they should be reclaimed from their sins, Hos. 5.4. They will not
frame their doings to turn unto their God, for the spirit of whoredoms is in
the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. The Prophet gives this
reason why they would not frame their doings to turn to the Lord, They did not
know the Lord, and the spirit of whoredoms was in them. By the spirit of
whoredoms we may understand strong and habitual inclinations to sins of
uncleanness, and also to Idolatry, which is spiritual Adultery. When the mind
of a man is vehemently carried out after a thing, and these impetuous motions
continue and reside with him, the Scripture calls this by the name of a Spirit,
as Numb. 5.14. The Spirit of Jealousy. From this passage of the Prophet Hosea,
we may draw this conclusion, As long as persons who have strong and habitual
inclinations to that which is evil (which is the case of all Children and grown
persons that are in an unregenerate condition) continue ignorant of God, there
is no hope that they should frame their doings to turn unto the Lord. Our
Children and Servants will be so far from reforming their lives without
instruction, that as long as they remain ignorant of God, they will grow worse
and worse, Jer. 9.3. They proceed from evil to evil, and know not me says the
Lord. 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse.

3. If we suffer our Children and Servants to walk after their own hearts lust,
we shall undo them for ever; for this is the broad way that leads to
destruction, for a man to walk after the lusts of his own heart, and we shall
also bring down Gods Judgments upon our selves, and cause his Judgments to rest
upon our Families for many Generations, 1 Samuel 3.13, 14. I will judge his house
for ever, for the iniquity which he knows, because his Sons made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not; and therefore I have sworn unto the house of
Eli, That the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor
Offering for ever.

4. We had need employ all the skill and strength that we have in teaching and
educating our Children in the knowledge and fear of the Lord, because it is a
difficult work to change their Natures, and to subdue their Wills to Gods Will.
Zophar compares man to a wild Asses Colt, Job 11.12. For vain man would be
wise, though man be born like a wild Asses Colt. The difficulty of taming a
wild Ass, his untractable ranging disposition, is elegantly set forth Job 39.7,
8. He scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the crying of
the Driver, the range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after
every green thing. Such a wild unruly Creature is man, and that from his Birth:
Man is born like a wild Asses Colt. If he be not tamed whilst he is young, he
will not regard the voice of his Teachers, though multitudes labor with him
one after another, it will be a difficult matter to bring him to any good
order. If our Children have added to their sinful natures, a custom in sinful
courses, it will be as hard to reclaim them as to change the Leopards spots, or
to make the Ethiopian (who is naturally black) to become white, Jer. 13.25. Can
the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do
good, who are accustomed to do evil.

SECT. 5. Family-Instruction is necessary for the performing of Family Duties.


1. Prayer is a Duty to be performed in all Families; the neglect of it is such
a great sin, that God ranks those Families among the Heathen that do not call
upon him, and threatens to pour out his fury upon them, Jer. 10.25. Pour out
thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call
not upon thy Name: Fury is more than wrath or anger, it is the highest degree
of anger; God is not only angry, but he is filled with fury against, and will
pour out his fury upon those Families that do not call upon him. Now how shall
our Children or Servants be able to pray without instruction? Or how are they
like to be edified by joining in Family Prayer, if they be ignorant of that God
to whom we pray, and of Jesus Christ, in whose name our prayers are offered up
to God, and of those things which are asked of God, when we pray to him in his
Sons name. That knowledge is necessarily required to enable us to pray, and
also to join in prayer so as to receive edification, (and if knowledge, then
also instruction, which breeds knowledge) is evident from such Scriptures as
these, Romans 10.14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed, and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a Preacher? 1 Cor. 14, 15. I will pray with the
Spirit, and will pray with the understanding also, Job 37.19. Teach us what we
shall say unto him, for we can not order our speech by reason of darkness.
Ignorant worship is not accepted of God; Christ reproved the Samaritans for
worshipping they knew not what, and tells them, that such as expect Life and
Salvation from God, must worship him understandingly, John 4.22. Ye worship ye
know not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews. If they
be wholly ignorant, when they are joining in holy Duties, as in prayer, or in
praising God, though he that performs the Duties, performs them well, and in
a spiritual manner; yet such as are ignorant of God, and the things of God,
will not be edified by those Duties, 1 Cor. 14.16, 17. When thou shall bless
with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say,
Amen; seeing he understands not what thou say? For thou verily give
thanks well, but the other is not edified. The Apostle speaks here of giving
thanks in an unknown Tongue, but though we use a known Tongue in prayer, or
praising God, yet if our Families have no knowledge of God, they will receive
little or no edification by joining with us, when we pray to, or praise the
Lord. If we do not train up our Families in the fear, as well as in the
knowledge of God, though they should learn to pray, their prayers will avail
nothing with God, John 9.31. Now we know that God hears not Sinners; but if
any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. Isa. 1.15.
And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes; yea, when ye make
many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.

2. It is the Duty of every Member of our Families to praise the Lord, and to
give him thanks for his mercies, Psalm. 145.2. Let all flesh bless his holy Name
for ever and ever. Psalm. 150.6. Let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord. 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. It is a duty to be performed every day, Psalm.
145.2. Every day will I bless thee. Psalm. 92.1, 2. It is a good thing to give
thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High; to show
forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. It
is a duty to be performed not only by our selves when we are alone, but all the
members in the Family should join together in blessing and praising God, Psalm.
135.19. Bless the Lord, O house of Aaron. Psalm. 34.3. O magnify the Lord with
me, and let us exalt his Name together. Deuteronomy. 14.26. Thou shall rejoice, thou
and thy household. Now how can our Families bless and praise God for his
mercies, if they be not taught that all the good things they have, come from
God; and also taught who that God is that gives them all good things, and how
and in what manner they should express their thankfulness unto him? We find
that when the Scripture speaks of praising God, it often intimates that we
should praise him with understanding: Psalm. 47.6, 7. Sing praises to God, sing
praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises: For God is the King of the
Earth, sing ye praises with understanding. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will sing with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also: Which implies, that the
Lord cannot be praised by the sons of men in an acceptable manner, if they be
not endued with knowledge and understanding.

3. It is our Duty to exhort our Children and Servants to flee from sin, and to
follow after Righteousness, to love, and fear, and serve the Lord, and to walk
in his ways, etc. Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Now if we
would have our exhortations to take place, we must join Doctrine or Instruction
with our Exhortations. 2 Timothy 4.2. Exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.
If we do not instruct them wherein the nature of those Duties lies unto which
we exhort them, and how and in what manner they should be performed, we shall
be like those that beat the air, our Exhortations will be of no advantage to
them.

4. It is our Duty to reprove our Children and Servants when we see them
negligent in their duty, or committing any sin against God, Lev. 19.17. Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. If we must
rebuke a Neighbor, then much more those of our own house, when they sin
against the Lord. Now instruction makes way for reproof; one word of reproof to
a man instructed with wisdom and understanding, will do more good than an
hundred stripes will do toward the reformation of an ignorant foolish person:
Prove. 17.10. A reproof enters more into a wise man, than an hundred stripes
into a fool. We shall find it a very difficult matter to fasten a reproof upon
our Children and Servants, so as to make it take place, and do them good, if
they be without understanding. The like may be said of other Duties which we
ought to perform toward our Children and Servants, they cannot be performed
successfully if we suffer our Families to be without Instruction.

SECT. 6. We have Gods example for teaching our Children and Servants.
Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children. In order to our
imitation of God in this practice, Let us consider,

1. Who they are whom God teaches; all his Children and Servants from the
greatest of them to the least; he leaves not one of them without instruction,
Isa. 54.13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord: Jer. 31.34. They
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 33.3. Yea, he loved the people; all his Saints are in thy hand, and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words. So should we
teach and instruct every one of our Children and Servants, from the least to
the greatest.

2. God begins to teach his Children betimes: Psalm. 71.17. O God thou have
taught me from my youth. So should we begin early with our Children, 2 Timothy
3.15. From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures.

3. God teaches his children and servants knowledge, Psalm. 94.10. He that
teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? He teaches them to know himself
Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord: And to
know and believe in his Son Jesus Christ, John 6.45. It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God: every man therefore that has
heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. And to love one another, 1
These. 4.9. Ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. He instructs
them to shun and to avoid evil company, and evil examples, Isa. 8.11. For the
Lord spoke thus unto me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not
walk in the way of this people. He teaches them by his grace to deny all
ungodliness and to live righteous and holy lives, Tit. 2.12. The grace of God
that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, That denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly,
in this present world. He instructs them how to order and manage the works of
their Callings with Wisdom and Discretion, Isa. 28.24, 25, 26. Does the Plowman
plow all day to sow? Does he open and break the clods of his ground? When he
has made plain the face thereof, does he not cast abroad the Fitches, and
scatter the Cummin, and east in the principal Wheat, and the appointed Barley,
and the Rye in their place? For his God does instruct him to discretion, and
does teach him. He instructs them how they should walk, and what they should
say and do, and how they should order their Conversations aright in all things,
Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way that thou shall go,
Exodus 4.12, 15. I will be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what thou shall
say -- and will teach you what ye shall do. 2 Chronicles. 32.22. The Lord guided
them on every side. Psalm. 107.7. He led them forth by the right way. He shows
them the Path of Life, and guides them in the way to Heaven: Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the Path of Life: Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, and afterward receive me unto glory. Herein we should imitate God, we
should teach our Children and servants to know God, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and to believe in Christ, and to love one another, and to forsake evil company,
and to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly, in this present world: We should instruct them how to
follow their Calling, and how to speak and walk, and to order their
conversations aright in all things, we should show them the path of Life, and
guide them therein, that they may obtain eternal salvation in the world to come.

4. God teaches his children and servants out of his holy Word, Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy
Law. The Lord builds up all his household in knowledge, faith, and holiness,
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; that is, the Doctrine
delivered in the Scriptures by the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. Ye
are of the Household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. He instructs
penitent persons by making known his word to them: Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my
Reproof; behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words
unto you. David describes Gods teaching his people Israel thus, Psalm. 147.19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. In
like manner, when we teach our children and servants, we should teach them out
of the word of God, and establish them in the knowledge, belief, and practice,
of the Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures by the Prophets, and Apostles.

5. The Lord condescends to teach such as are of a froward and perverse
disposition: The Children of Israel were a perverse generation, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
They are a perverse and crooked generation: yet the Lord taught and instructed
Israel: Verse. 10. He found him in a desert Land, and in the waste howling
Wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of
his eye: And this he did notwithstanding they were a very froward people, as
Moses tells us again, verse. 20. They are a very froward Generation. In like
manner, though our Children or Servants should be of a froward perverse spirit,
yet we should not forbear instructing them.

6. The Lord imprints and fastens in the minds and hearts of his Children and
Servants those Instructions which he gives them; hence he is said to seal
their instruction, Job 33.14. He opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction. So should we endeavor to imprint those Instructions which we give
our Families, upon their minds, that they may retain them in their memories as
long as they live.

SECT. 7. Mothers, as well as Fathers, must instruct their Children.


Answ. Although the Scripture does forbid Women teaching in public Assemblies,
1 Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the Law: 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection -- But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silence. Yet it does allow them to teach their Children
and Servants; and though this work does lie chiefly upon Fathers to teach Gods
word unto their Children, as appears by the special charge that is given to
them, Ephesians. 6.4. Isa. 38.19. Psalm. 78.5. yet it is the duty of Mothers also to
instruct and watch over their Children and Servants. For the proving hereof,
and the stirring up of Mothers to join with, and to be helpful to their
Husbands, in instructing their Children and Servants, I shall propose to them
these following Considerations:

1. It has been the practice of godly women in former times, to instruct their
Children in the knowledge of the Scriptures, which the holy Ghost has left
upon record, as a monument of their praise, as long as the world shall
continue, and as a Pattern to be followed by all women that fear God. Solomon's
mother, though she was a Queen, did not look upon it as a work beneath her, to
instruct her Son; but taught him a Prophecy containing excellent Lessons
concerning Chastity and Temperance, defending the Oppressed, etc. Prove. 31.1.
The words of King Lemuel, the Prophecy which his mother taught him: What this
Prophecy was that his mother taught him, is set down in the following verses;
Solomon was instructed by his Father, Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my Fathers Son -- he
taught me also; yet Solomon's mother did not think her self excused from
teaching her Son, because his Father instructed him, but she joined with her
husband, and teaches him a Prophecy. Now if those women who have godly
Husbands that instruct their Families, must also instruct their Children; how
much more is it the duty of those women who have careless and negligent
Husbands that regard not their Families, to be diligent in teaching their
Children and Servants? Another example we have in Lois and Eunice; Lois being
converted to the Christian Religion, trains up her Daughter Eunice in the faith
of Christ; Eunice being instructed in the faith of Christ, instructs her Son
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.9.

2. Children are commanded to hearken to; and not forsake the instruction which
their Mothers (as well as which their Fathers) give them out of the Law of God,
Prove. 1.8. My Son hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law
of thy Mother; which implies, That Mothers, as well as Fathers, are to teach
Gods Laws to their Children.

3. It is mentioned as one of the Virtues of a virtuous woman, That she looks
well to the ways of her Household, Prove. 31.27. and this oversight that she
takes of the ways of her Houshhold, conduces so much to the good of her
Children, that it will cause them to bless God for her as long as they live, as
the next verse implies, Her Children arise up, and call her blessed, verse. 28.
And the Apostle Paul advises elder women to be Teachers of good things, Tit.
2.3. And he tells them both whom they should teach, younger women, and what
Lessons they should teach younger women, verse. 4.5. which is to be understood
of instilling those Principles into their Children and Maid Servants, how they
should demean themselves when God shall bring them into a married estate, and
also of instructing their Neighbors and Acquaintance when they visit them, and
have occasion to confer with them.

4. The Mother as well as the Father does concur to the conveying of a sinful
nature unto their Children, Psalm. 51.5. In sin did my Mother conceive me: And
therefore Mothers ought by their prayers, and tears, and instructions, and the
use of all good means, to endeavor after the Conversion and Regeneration of
their Children, as well as their Fathers.

5. Children are very apt to follow their Mothers example, in so much that it is
become a Proverb, As is the Mother, so is the Daughter; and the truth of this
Proverb is such, that God himself allows of it, Ezekiel. 16.44. Behold every one
that uses Proverbs shall use this Proverb against thee, As is the Mother, so
is the Daughter. So that if Mothers live religiously, and show a good example
to their Children, and instruct them out of Gods word, there is great hope that
their Children will become Religious also. It is remarkable both amongst the
good and evil Kings that were in Judah and Israel, that the Scripture does
frequently record their Mothers names; as for good Kings, we may see 1 Kings
22.42, 43. 2 Kings 18.2, 3. and 22.12. And for evil Kings, 2 King. 8.26, 27. 1
Kings 15.2, 3. which shows that the Mothers example and carriage amongst her
Children, has a great influence upon them, to make them either good or evil.

6. Mothers have greater opportunities to be instilling good things into their
Children, than their Fathers, for they are oftener with them, especially whilst
they are young, as they are dressing or undressing them, or giving them meat,
or sitting with them at work, or walking abroad with them, they should be
talking with them of the word of God, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And every one is to do good
according to the opportunities that God puts into their hands, Gal. 6.10.

7. Hereby Mothers may do great service for Christ, in training up Children for
the Lord: All the good that such Children shall do in their generation, shall
redound to the Mothers Comfort and Reward. The Apostle mentions the bringing
up of Children (by which is meant bringing them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord) amongst the first and chiefest good works which women
are able to do in their generation, 1 Timothy 5.10. Well reported of for good
works, if she have brought up Children. --

8. What service women do for Christ, he takes as kindly as he does what men do
for him, when there was a woman poured upon his head a Box of precious
Ointment, though the Disciples had indignation, yet the Lord Jesus took it well
from her, and said that this act of the woman should be had in remembrance, and
be spoken of to her praise, as long as the Gospel should be preached in the
world, Mat. 26.13. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached in the whole world, there also this that this woman has done, shall
be told for a memorial of her. If you that are Mothers teach Gods word to your
Children, and labor to bring them up in the knowledge and fear of God, the
Lord Jesus will take this more kindly from you, than he took this box of
precious Ointment from this woman, which anointed his body against his burial:
And that may be evidenced several ways: 1. Christ was more pleased with those
that minded his word, than with those that were at the cost and trouble to
provide for his Body; as appears from the case of Mary and Martha, Mary sat at
Jesus feet, and heard his word, but Martha was cumbred with much serving, Luke
10.38, 39. Hereupon Martha complains to Christ, that her sister had left her to
serve alone, and desires him to bid Mary to help her; but Christ commends
Mary's choice, and her work, who was employed about his word, above Martha's,
who was employed in preparing food for his Body, and those that were with him,
Verse. 40, 41, 42. 2. The Lord Jesus loves your Childrens Souls as well as he
loves his own Body; he gave his own Body to be crucified to save your Childrens
Souls; And therefore doubtless it is as acceptable to see you endeavoring to
save your Childrens Souls, by instructing and teaching them out of his holy
Word, as it was to have his Body anointed with precious Ointment. 3. The Name
of God and Christ is like precious Ointment, Cant. 1.3. Thy Name is as Ointment
poured forth: -- Yea it is more precious than any Ointment in the World. And
when you bring your Children acquainted with the Name of God and Christ, by
instructing them out of the Word of God, you convey that to them which is
beyond all the precious Ointment in the world. 4. The Ointment that was poured
on Christ's Body did bur little, if any thing, advantage the body of Christ, he
accepted it not so much for the advantage he had by it, as he did for the Faith
and Love which the Woman manifested in this work. But by instructing your
Children out of the Word of God, you shall greatly promote the good and welfare
of their precious Souls.


If the Lord Jesus did so kindly accept the Woman's anointing his body with
precious Ointment, that he recorded her praise in the Gospel, and will have the
Memorial thereof preserved in all Ages throughout the whole World: Then doubt
not, you that are Mothers, that if you instruct your Children in the knowledge
of his Word, but he will accept this very kindly at your hands, and cause this
good Work of yours to be had in eternal Remembrance.

CHAP. II.
Motives to stir up Parents and Masters of Families, to instruct their Children
and Servants in the Knowledge, and to train them up in the obedience of the
Scriptures.

IN the former Chapter I have proved it to be the Duty of Parents and Masters
of Families, to train up their Children and Servants in the knowledge and
obedience of the Scriptures: I shall now proceed to lay down some Motives to
stir up those that neglect this good work, to be diligent, constant and
conscientious in the performance of their Duty, in teaching and instructing
their Familier.

SECT 1. Instructing our Children and Servants out of the Scriptures will be a
means of their Conversion; Reasons why we should endeavor their Conversion.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19.7. And, The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. The Commandment is a Lamp,
and the Law is Light, and Reproofs of instruction are the way of Life, Prove.
6.23. Though they be such as walk in sinful and destructive courses, by
teaching and instructing them out of the Scriptures, they may be converted from
their sins unto God, Psalm. 5.13. I will teach Transgressors thy ways, and
Sinners shall be converted unto thee. We read of Cornelius, that both he
himself and all his house were saved by the word wherewith they were instructed
by Peter, Act. 11.14. Who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house
shall be saved. In like manner if Governors of Families did carefully instruct
their Families out of the word of God, they might in so doing both save
themselves and all their house: With what diligence, with what speed, with what
alacrity, with what a resolved mind to persevere therein under all
discouragements, should you set upon this work, seeing there is hope that
hereby you may save your Children and your Servants Souls? That this argument
may have the greater force to persuade and prevail with you to set your hearts
to this work; Consider,

1. What great worth and excellency there is in an immortal Soul: The Soul of
the poorest Child or Servant in your Families, is more worth than all the
substance in your houses, than all the Riches you have gotten or can get as
long as you live; yea, than the whole world, Mark 8.36. What shall it profit a
man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? And therefore you
should spend more thoughts and pains about saving your Children and Servants
Souls, than you would do to gain the whole world, if there were a probability
that by your care and industry you might get into your possession all the good
things that are in the world. There is such an excellency in the Soul, that
when any one sinner is brought to repentance, whereby his Soul is put into a
state of Salvation, all the Angels of Heaven rejoice at this glad Tidings, Luke
15.10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents.

2. By converting your Children and Servants, you shall recover their souls
from the power of the Devil: Before their conversion he rules and carries them
captive to this and the other sin, as he pleases, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. But
when they are converted, they are freed and delivered from the power of Satan.
The Conversion of a sinner is the opening of his eyes, and turning him from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. It is Gods
delivering of a sinner from the power of darkness, and translating him into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. If your Children were under Turkish
Slavery, would you spare any pains or cost to redeem them from the hands of the
Turks? It is far worse to have them under the power of Satan, than under the
power of the Turks. Suppose the Devil had gotten possession of your Childrens
Bodies, and should torture them, as he did the woman of Canaan's Daughter, who
cried out to Christ, Mat. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil; or should rend and tear them, as he did that
young man whose Father made his moan to Christ after this manner, My Son has a
dumb Spirit, and wheresoever he takes him he teareth him, and he fometh and
gnasheth with his teeth, and he pineth away, -- and often times it has cast him
into the fire, and into the waters to destroy him, Mark 19.17, 18, 22. would
not this cause you to mourn, and fast, and pray, and to use all means possible
to get your Childrens Bodies delivered from the tyranny of Satan? And would you
not be restless until you had obtained their deliverance? To have your
childrens Souls under the power of the Devil, and to have them drawn sometimes
into one foul sin, and then into another, is far worse and more dangerous then
to have their Bodies at his command; and yet this is their case, as long as
they remain unconverted their Souls are under the power of sin and Satan. How
should this cause you to strive with God in prayer night and day, and labor
with your utmost diligence in the use of all means to get their Souls converted
to God?

3. By converting your Children and Servants, you shall prevent their dying in
their sins, and save them from the wrath of God, and the torments of Hell, Jam.
5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him,
let him know that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins: What a great,
what a good work is this, to save a soul from death? Shall we think any pains
too much to save immortal Souls from eternal Death? If you saw any of your
Children ready to fall into a fiery Furnace, which would consume them to Ashes
in a moment, you would suddenly lay hold on them, and prevent, if it were
possible, their falling into the furnace of fire: Hell is called A Furnace of
Fire, Mat. 13.42. As long as your Children live in ignorance, and in an
unconverted condition, they are in danger every day to fall into this furnace
of fire. And does it not concern you then, to prevent with all possible speed
their falling into everlasting burnings?

4. Consider what great pains Jesus Christ took to save and convert Souls: The
great end of his coming into the world and taking our Nature upon him, was to
save Souls, Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek and save that which was
lost: When he was upon the earth he was so diligent in teaching and instructing
the people, that he did not omit his work one day, Luke 19.47. He taught daily
in the Temple: He was so diligent to teach and instruct the people, that he
could not find spare time to eat his Bread, which cansed some of his friends to
think and say he was beside himself, Mark 3.20. He was not only very diligent
in preaching, but was content to lay down his life to save our souls. Shall not
this example of Christ provoke you to give all diligence to save both your own,
and the souls of all that are committed to your Charge?

5. God will give a greater degree of Glory to those that are instrumental to
convert and save souls, than to other Saints: For whereas they shall shine only
as the Firmament, they that convert others shall shine as the Stars in the
Firmament, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and
ever.

6. You cannot approve your selves to be Righteous Persons either to God or
Men, if you do not regard what becomes of your childrens and servants souls; A
righteous man regards the life of his beast, Prove. 12.10. If this be true,
how can they account themselves righteous persons who have no regard what
becomes of the souls of their Children? If a Beast go astray, though it be not
our own but our Neighbors, yea our Enemies, we must by no means neglect to
bring it back, Exodus 23.4. If thou meet thine Enemies Ox or his Ass going
astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. If we are bound so
straightly to bring back an Ox or an Ass of our Enemies when he goes astray,
then what obligations lie upon us to bring home to God our own Children, and
our household Servants, when we see them going astray from the Lord?

SECT. 2. Such as neglect Family-Instruction, are guilty of their Children and
Servants Blood. How great an Evil it is to be guilty of the Blood of Souls.
These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power:
Isa. 27.11. -- It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them
will have no mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor:
Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Now if the Lord will
condemn our Children and Servants for their ignorance, and their ignorance
proceed from our neglect of instructing them, are not we the cause of their
condemnation? Such as have the Rule and Government of Families are in the
nature and condition of Watchmen, as well as those that bear Rule in the
Church, and must give an account for those souls that are committed to their
charge, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account. And
as for those that are placed in the condition of Watchmen, if any persons over
whom God has made them Watchmen be lost through their neglect to instruct them
in their duty, or to reclaim them from their sins, the Blood of those that
perish shall be required at the Watchmans hands, Ezekiel. 3.17, 18. Son of man, I
have made thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel, therefore hear the word at
my Mouth, and give them warning from Me, when I say to the wicked, Thou shall
surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand: What Indictment is
brought in against the Jews? Jer. 2.34. In thy Skirts is found the Blood of the
Souls of the poor Innocents -- I have not found it by secret search, but upon
all these. The like may be said of many Masters of Families, In their Skirts
will be found the Blood of the Souls of their Children and Servants: In their
Skirts -- That is, it will plainly and evidently appear unto all men at the day
of Judgment, that they are guilty of the Blood of the Souls of their Children
and Servants, for want of instructing and training them up in the fear of God:
We cannot possibly be clear from the blood of those that are committed to our
charge, if either through wilfulness, or through sloth and negligence, we
forbear to instruct them in those things that are necessary to their Salvation;
but if we do our duty, and they perish in their sins, their Blood shall be upon
their own head, Act. 20.26, 27. I take you to record this day, that I am pure
from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
Counsel of God: Did Parents and Masters of Families seriously consider what it
is to have their Children and Servants die eternally, and that through their
neglecting to teach and train them up in the fear of God, did they also
consider what it is to have the blood of Souls laid to their charge, it would
stir them up to be diligent in instructing their Families, unless they be such
as have lost all regard to their own and their Families welfare.

To press home this consideration with the greater efficacy, I shall suggest to
you three or four things more under this head. As,

1. The death of a Child goes near a Parents heart. Hagar could not endure to
see her Child die, and therefore when she thought he would die, she gets a
great way off from him, and sat down and wept, Genesis 21.16. She said, Let me not
see the death of the Child; and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice
and wept. When tidings came to David of Absolom's death, he was exceedingly
troubled at it, 2 Samuel 18.33. And the King was much moved, and went up to the
chamber ever the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he said, O my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my
Son, my Son! When Jacob did but suppose that Joseph was dead, though he had
eleven Sons living, his sorrow was so great, that he refused to be comforted,
Genesis 37.34, 35. Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and
mourned for his Son many days; and all his Sons, and all his Daughters rose up
to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down
into the Grave unto my Son mourning: Thus his Father wept for him. If it be so
grievous to Parents to see their Children deprived of their natural life, how
should it pierce their hearts to have them deprived of eternal Life? If they
are so grieved at the death of their Bodies, how should they lay to heart the
death of their Souls? How should it wound them to have their Children cast into
the lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, which is the second death; where
they shall be always burning, and yet never be consumed; they shall be always
dying, and yet never be dead? yea, how should it affect them when they consider
that they themselves have through their negligence been the cause of their
Childrens dying the second death.

2. It would pierce a flinty heart to see Children dying in their Parents Arms
for want of Bread. When Jeremiah saw little Children in the time of Famine,
some dying in the streets, others breathing out their souls in their Mothers
Bosoms for want of Bread to sustain their Lives, it made him weep till his eyes
and his heart failed him with grief, Lam. 2.11, 12. Mine eyes do fail with
tears, my bowels are troubled, my Liver is poured upon the earth, for the
destruction of the Daughter of my People, because the Children and the
Sucklings swoon in the streets of the City; they say to their Mothers, Where is
Corn and Wine? When they swooned as the wounded in the Streets of the City,
when their Soul was poured out into their Mothers Bosom. This is a sorrowful
sight, but it is far more dreadful to see Children perishing to all eternity in
their Parents Houses, for want of their communicating to them the Bread of
Life, than to see them die by Famine.

3. It is an unspeakable loss for a man to lose one Soul: Though he do not lose
his Children and Servants Souls, though he lose not one Soul besides his own,
the gain of the whole world will not make up this loss; as appears from the
fore-quoted Scripture Mar. 8.36. What shall it profit a man if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own Soul? If it be such a great loss for a man to
lose his own Soul, what will it be for a man, besides the loss of his own, to
be charged with the loss of the Souls of his Children, and of all that ever
were committed to his charge.

4. Blood is a crying sin, the cry of it reaches to the Heavens, and calls to
God for vengeance, Genesis 4.10. What have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers
Blood cries unto me from the ground: And brings a great curse on those that
are guilty of shedding it, Verse. 11. And now art thou cursed from the earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy Brothers Blood from thy hand. Verse.
12. A fugitive and vagabond shall thou be upon the earth. Although all Blood
cries loud, yet none cries like the Blood of Souls. As much as the Soul
surpasses the Body in excellency, so much greater is their sin who are
accessory to the destroying of Souls, than theirs who only take away the life
of the Body. It is spoken of as a dreadful Judgment to have the Stones and
Timber of a Man's House crying out against him, (which will be the lot of those
that get or build Houses by unrighteous means) Hab. 2.11. The Stone shall cry
out of the wall, and the beam out of the Timber shall answer it. The man that
is in this case can have but little joy in his House, either by night or by
day. But what is this to the cry of such Souls as perish byour means, who will
be crying out against us to all eternity? What Zipporah said to Moses, by
reason of the Circumcision, Surely a bloody Husband art thou to me, Exodus 4.25,
26. The like will many women say to their Husbands, who perish for want of
their instructing them, Surely a bloody Husband have thou been unto me; and
Children will cry out against their Fathers, for suffering them to die and be
damned for want of instruction, Surely a bloody Father have thou been unto me;
and Servants will cry out against their Masters, Surely a bloody Master have
thou been unto me. To undo a man in his Estate by oppression, or violent taking
away his Goods, is a mighty sin, there are dreadful things threatened against
such as are guilty of this sin, Job 20.19. to 29. Because he has oppressed and
has forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken away an house which he
built not; surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save
of that which he desires, there shall none of his meat be left, therefore
shall no man look for his goods; in the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be
in straits; every hand of the wicked shall come upon him: When he is about to
fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain
it upon him while he is eating: He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the Bow
of steel shall strike him through; it is drawn and comes out of the Body, yea
the glistering Sword comes out of his Gall; terrors are upon him, all
darkness shall be hid in his secret place, a fire not blown shall consume him.
It shall go ill with him that is left in his Tabernacle, the Heavens shall
reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him: the increase of
his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
To undo a man body and Soul to all eternity in the world to come, is a far
greater sin, than to undo a man in his estate in this world: And if such
dreadful things are denounced against the Oppressor, what shall be done to the
Soul-murderer?

5. He that neglects or refuses to instruct his Family, is as certainly
guilty of the Blood of their Souls, as he that suffers his Family to starve
by neglecting or refusing to give them that food which should preserve their
Lives, is guilty of destroying their natural Life: for as surely as the Body
will perish without its food, so surely will the Soul perish without
instruction, Prove. 5.23. He shall die without instruction. Prove. 29.28. Where
there is no vision the people perish.

SECT. 3. Instructing our Children out of the Scriptures instills Wisdom into
them; the Advantages that will come to them by being endued with Wisdom.
Psalm. 19.7. The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: Psalm.
119.130. The entrance of thy Word gives Light, it gives understanding to the
simple: Prove. 1.1, 4. The Proverbs of Solomon -- To give subtilty to the
simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion: Prove. 19.20. Hear counsel,
and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy latter end. It was by
Gods word that David attained to such eminency in wisdom, that he became wiser
than the Ancients, and all his Teachers, Psalm. 119 99, 100. No Persons or
Nations under Heaven are so wise as they that are acquainted with, and give
heed to, the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep therefore and do them, for this is
your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all
these Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding
People. By being acquainted with the word, they shall attain to wisdom in Civil
Things, and Divine; in things pertaining to God, and to Men: Prove. 31.4. My
Son, forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments; so shall thou
find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and Man. Yea, by
instructing our Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures, we shall convey to
them the best wisdom that is attained by the sons of men, and that is, to be
wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Seeing then that instructing of our Families out of
the Scriptures, will be a means of enduing our children and servants with
wisdom and understanding, this may be of great force to stir us up to diligence
in teaching them Gods holy word, especially if we consider how many, and what
great advantages come to our children and servants by being furnished with
Wisdom and Understanding. I will mention a few.

1. To leave our Children endued wisdom, is better then to leave them great
Riches: For Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all the things that may be
desired are not to be compared to it, Prove. 8.11. How much better is it to get
wisdom than Gold, and to get understanding, rather to be chosen than Silver,
Prove. 16.16. Wisdom is a greater Ornament and a more lovely Jewel than a
multitude of Rubies and precious Stones, Prove. 20.15. There is Gold and a
multitude of Rubies, but the Lips of Knowledge are a precious Jewel. Wisdom is
of that excellency that it far surpasses all the Silver and Gold, and precious
Stones in the world: Job 28.16, 17, 18. It cannot be valued with the Gold of
Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphir, the Gold and the Crystal cannot
equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold; no
mention shall be made of Coral, or of Pearls: for the price of Wisdom is above
Rubies. How desirous are most Parents to leave their Children great Estates? If
Wisdom be better than all the Riches of the world, why should we not desire and
labor more to leave them endued with Wisdom, than to leave them great Riches?

2. If we leave them endued with Wisdom, though they be poor, we leave them
better than if we left them Kings and Princes destitute of Wisdom: Eccles.
4.13. Better is a poor and a wise Child, than an old and foolish King: Many
persons who have aspiring minds, would spare no pains to make their Children
Kings and Princes, if they saw any possibility to effect it; why then should we
be backward to convey that to our Children which will be a greater advantage to
them, than the promoting of them to be Kings.

3. Wisdom will make our Children of an excellent Spirit: Prove. 17.27. A man of
understanding is of an excellent Spirit. An excellent Spirit is a great
Ornament to a man, and to be preferred above Nobility of Birth, Beauty, Riches,
or any external Accomplishments. Darius finding in Daniel an excellent Spirit,
preferred him above all the Princes and Nobles in his Kingdom, Dan. 6.3. This
Daniel was preferred above the Presidents and Princes, because an excellent
Spirit was in him, and the King thought to set him over the whole Realm.

4. Wisdom and Understanding will make the Members of our Family useful in
their Generation, in whatsoever places and stations they shall be fixed by the
Providence of God. What blessing was prayed for on Boaz his behalf by his
Friends, Do thou worthily in Ephratah, Ruth 4.11. The same shall fall upon our
Children, if we train them up in acquaintance with God. They shall do worthily
in the places where God casts their lot, although their lot be cast in evil
times and sinful places, Dan. 11.32. Such as do wickedly against the Covenant
shall be corrupt by Flatteries; but the people that do know their God, shall be
strong and do exploits. By being endued with Wisdom and Understanding, they
will prove great Blessings to the Families, Cities, and Kingdoms, in which they
live. They will be blessings to the Houses and Families where they live, Prove.
24.3. Through wisdom is an house builded, and by understanding it is
established. Yea, they will be Blessings to the Towns and Cities wherein they
live, Eccles. 9.14, 15. There was a little City, and a few men within it; and
there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built great Bulwarks
against it; now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom
delivered the City. By the means of a wise Woman the City of Abel was preserved
from destruction; When Joab was come against it with a great Army, to destroy
the place, she by her wise carriage both mollified Joabs Spirit, and brought
over the men of the City to comply with his desire, and so saved the City from
ruin, 2 Samuel 20.15, 16, 22. Yea, more than this, they will be Blessings to the
States and Kingdoms in which they live; Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a
Land many are the Princes thereof; but by a man of understanding and knowledge
the state thereof shall be prolonged. Joseph being a wise and discreet man,
Genesis 41.39. was a great blessing to all the Land of Egypt, and not to Egypt
only, but to all the Countries round about, who were sustained by the
Provision, that he had laid up against the time of that great Famine.

5. Wisdom will cause our Children to live in good repute and credit all their
days: Prove. 3.35. The wise shall inherit Glory, but shame shall be the
promotion of Fools. Eccl. 8.1. A man's wisdom makes his face to shine -- It
will procure them favor and honor and respect from all sorts of persons,
Prove. 4.7, 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to
honor when thou do embrace her; she shall give to thine head an Ornament of
Grace, a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee: Prove. 14.35. The Kings
favor is toward a wise Servant.

6. Wisdom will keep our Children from imbezeling away, and mis-spending their
Estates which we leave them, and will help them to preserve, increase and use
well that portion of Goods or Lands, that we shall bequeath to them, Prove.
24.4. By knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all the precious and
pleasant Riches, Prove. 21.20. There is a treasure to be desired, and Oil in the
dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man spends it up.

7. Wisdom will keep them from falling into those troubles and snares wherewith
foolish and indiscreet persons are entangled, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man
fore-seeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple pass on and are
punished. And when they do fall into trouble, knowledge will help them to get
out of their troubles, Prove. 11.9. Through knowledge shall the Just be
delivered.

8. Wisdom will preserve them from keeping evil company, that they shall not be
entangled with the acquaintance either of lewd men or lascivious women, which
are the bane and destruction of many young men, Prove. 2.10, 11, 12, 16. When
wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant to thy Soul,
Discretion shall preserve thee, and Understanding shall keep thee, to deliver
thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward things,
-- to deliver thee from the strange Woman, even from the stranger which
flattereth with her words.

9. Wisdom will make our Children prove great Comforts to us, Prove. 10.1. A
wise Son makes a glad Father: Prove. 23.15, 16. My Son, if thine heart be wise,
my heart shall rejoice, even mine; yea, my reins shall rejoice when thy lips
speak right things: And verse. 24, 25. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly
rejoice, and he that begets a wise Child shall have joy of him; thy Father
and thy Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.

10. Wisdom and Understanding are means of leading them to life and salvation:
Prove. 16.22. Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that has it.
Prove. 3.21, 22. Keep sound Wisdom and Discretion, so shall they be Life and
Grace to thy Neck: John 17.3. This is Life eternal, that they might know Thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Do we not thirst after
the salvation of our Childrens Souls? If we do, then let us be diligent to
instruct them in the Striptures, which will make them wise to salvation.

SECT. 4. Many Benefits accrue to our Children by Instruction.


1. Acquaintance with the Word of God will furnish them with grounds of
Consolation, whereby they may be able to bear up cheerfully, and comfort
themselves under all the troubles of this present life. We know not what
troubles our Children may meet with, when we are at Rest in our Graves; we
leave them in a troublesome world, where they must expect to meet with variety
of afflictions, Job 14.1. Man that is born of a Woman is of few Days, and full
of trouble; especially if they walk in the path that leads to life, for there
is no getting to Heaven, but through much tribulation: Act. 14.22. We must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. And if our Children
have not somewhat out of Gods Word to comfort themselves withal under their
afflictions, they will sink under their sorrows, and be in danger to make away
themselves: Psalm. 119.92. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then
have perished in mine affliction. But if they be acquainted with the word of
God, they may from thence be furnished with grounds of Consolation under the
greatest troubles that can come upon them in this world, Jer. 15.16. Thy words
were found and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and the
rejoicing of mine heart. -- It was a time of great trouble with the Prophet,
and he was alone, and had none to comfort him, as we may see Verse. 10, 17, 18.
yet even then when he was a man of contention to the whole earth, and sat
alone, being filled with indignation, and looked upon his pain as perpetual,
and his wound as incurable, Gods word was the joy and rejoicing of his heart.
So David when his heart was ready to break with grief, Psalm. 119.28. My Soul
melts for heaviness -- found joy and comfort in Gods word, Verse. 49.50.
Remember thy word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
This is my comfort in mine affliction. -- And Verse. 143, 162. Trouble and
anguish have taken hold of me, yet thy Commandments are my delight; I rejoice
at thy word, as one that finds great spoil.

2. Acquaintance with the word of God will keep our Children from taking evil
and destructive courses, from going in those paths that will bring them to
destruction, Psalm. 17.4. Concerning the works of men by the words of thy Lips I
have kept me from the paths of the destroyers. The word of God laid up in their
hearts, will keep them from associating themselves with evil men and evil
women; It will so overawe their hearts, that they will not only not run of
themselves into evil Company, but also shun and avoid them though they use many
flattering speeches to entice them to that which is evil: Prove. 7.15. My Son,
keep my words, and lay up my Commandments with thee; That they may keep thee
from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her words: See
also Prove. 6.23, 24.

3. The knowledge of Godsword will keep them from falling into Errors, which
persons of weak Judgments and not well grounded in the Scriptures, are easily
drawn into. Errors arise from ignorance of the Scriptures: Mark 12.24. Do ye
not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of
God. Growing in knowledge is prescribed by the Apostle as a means to prevent
persons being led into errors, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. We had need be careful to
preserve our Children from Errors, especially in Fundamental Points of
Religion, as well as from gross sins: For, 1. Except they abide in the Doctrine
of Christ, they can have no enjoyment of God, 2 John 9. Whosoever
transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that
abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. 2.
Heresies are manifest works of the flesh, as well as Adultery, and Murder, and
suchlike sins, and will as certainly exclude men from the Kingdom of Heaven,
as the grossest sins; as we may see Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

4. If we instruct our Children in the knowledge of Gods word, that will guide
and direct them how to carry on all their undertakings, and how to manage the
great Turns and Changes of their Lives, and all their other affairs, Psalm.
119.105. Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path. And the
Lord has promised to such as converse much with his word, and treasure it up
in their hearts, that his word shall lead and guide them in all their ways, and
they shall have such plain direction from his word, how to order their Affairs,
as if they heard one talking with them, and saying this is the way, walk
therein: Prove. 6.21, 22, 23. Bind them continually upon thine heart -- When
thou go, it shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; when
thou wakest, it shall talk with thee: For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the
Law is Light, and Reproofs of Instruction are the way of life: Isa. 30.21.
Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in
it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

5. It will help our Children even whilst they are young, to reform their
lives. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, by taking
heed thereto according to thy word. It will keep them from sinning against God:
Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. It will cause them to do those things which are right in the sight of
God, 2 Kings 12.2. And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord all his days, wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed him. Now who is there
that fears the Lord, that would not most gladly have his Children reform
their lives, and be kept from sinning against God, and do that which is right
in the sight of the Lord?

6. By leaving our Children instructed in Gods word, we shall leave them better
than if we were able to leave them thousands of pounds of Silver and Gold: For
the Law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm.
119.72.

7. Godly Parents may have all that they can desire on the behalf of their
Children, if they do train them up in the knowledge and obedience of the
Scriptures. Do we desire that our Children should be brought to know and fear
the Lord? This may be effected by causing them to treasure up Gods word in
their hearts, Prove. 2.1, 5. My Son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my
Commandments with thee -- Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God. Would we have our Children continue in the ways of
God, walking with and serving God as long as they live? By instructing them
whilst they are young, we shall obtain our desire in this thing: Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. Would we have our Children instructed how to lead a godly and
righteous Life? And would we have them thoroughly furnished with abilities for
every good work? This may be done by acquainting them with the Scriptures: 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Do
we desire our Children should be prosperous men, both whilst we live, and after
we are dead, and gone into another world? This may be obtained by training them
up in the knowledge and obedience of Gods word, Deuteronomy. 29.9. Keep therefore the
words of this Covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. Do
we desire that our Children may be blessed with all manner of blessings whilst
they live here in this world, and do we desire to have their Souls saved when
they die? The way to obtain this, is to train them up in a godly sort, that
they may know and walk in the ways of the Lord, which he has prescribed to us
and to them in his holy word: For 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come:
Prove. 10.17. He is in the way of life that keeps instruction. See also 2 Timothy
3.15. John 17.3. Deuteronomy. 28. from verse. 1. to 24.

SECT. 5. We benefit our selves by instructing our Families.
Obed-Edom entertained the Ark of the Lord in his house, The Lord blessed
Obed-Edom and all his household, 2 Samuel 6.11. And the Blessings that God gave
Obed-Edom were so remarkable, that others as well as himself took notice
thereof, verse. 12. And it was told King David, saying, The Lord has blessed
the house of Obed-Edom, and all that pertained unto him, because of the Ark of
God. In this Ark were laid up the Laws of God, written upon two Tables, Deuteronomy.
10.2. If we treasure up Gods Laws in our own hearts, and teach the same unto
our Families, instructing them both in the Duties of the first and second
Table, that is, in their duty to God and to Men; the Lord will as surely, and
in as eminent a manner bless us, as he did Obed-Edom, for receiving the Ark,
wherein were the two Tables of the Law of God. I will instance in some
advantages and blessings which those Parents and Masters of Families shall
receive, that are diligent in training up their Families in the knowledge of
the Scriptures.

1. The Lord has promised a long and blessed Life to them and their Children,
that instruct their Children in his word; they shall enjoy a kind of Heaven
upon Earth, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19, 21. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in
your hearts and in your souls -- And ye shall teach them your Children,
speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up -- that your days may be
multiplied, and the days of your Children -- as the days of Heaven upon Earth.

2. They shall have a great reward in Heaven, who are diligent in instructing
those whom God has committed to their Charge, Mat. 24.45, 46, 47. Who then is
that faithful and wise Servant whom his Lord has made Ruler over his household
to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing: Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him Ruler
over all his Goods. If we teach our Families the Commandments of God, and do
also keep them our selves, we shall be great Persons in the Kingdom of Heaven,
how mean and low soever our condition be in this world, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever
shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall
be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Our Children and Servants will be great Comforts and Blessings to us if we
train them up in the fear of God. Onesimus before his Conversion was a great
cross to his Master, but after he was instructed by the Apostle Paul, and God
had wrought upon him, who was a more dutiful Servant than One simus? Philem.
11. Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to me and
to thee. They will be great Comforts to us in this world: Prove. 10.1. A wise
Son makes a glad Father: Prove. 29.17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee
rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy Soul. The Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic,
Greek, and Vulgar Latin, translate the word Erudi filium tuum, etc. Instruct
thy Son; and the Hebrew word (...) signifies to instruct -- as well as to
correct, as Psalm. 2.10. Be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. So that the words
may be as well rendered, Instruct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he
shall give delight to thy Soul. What greater Comfort can a Parent have, than to
see his Children walking in the ways of God? 3 John 4. I have no greater joy
than to hear that my Children walk in truth. They will also be a Comfort to us
in the world to come: What a Joy will it be to a godly Parent to present
himself and his Children before the Lord, and to say, Lord, here am I, and the
Children whom thou have given me. As it is with Ministers of the Word, they
shall have great joy in those they have instructed and converted to the Lord, 1
These. 2.19, 20. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even
ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our
Glory and Joy. So it will be with Parents and Masters of Families, they shall
have great Joy at the day of Judgment in those whom they have taught and
brought home to the Lord.

4. It will keep the memory and savor of Gods word upon our hearts, and breed
in us a spiritual frame of heart, to be often teaching Gods word to our
Families, Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul
diligently, lest thou forget the things that thine eyes have seen, and lest
they depart from thine heart all the days of thy life; but teach them thy Sons,
and thy Sons Sons; especially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy
God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I
will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that
they (hall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their Children.

5. It will be a great support and satisfaction to Governors of Families, in a
dying hour, if their Consciences bear them witness that they have been careful
to train up those whom the Lord has committed to their charge, in the
knowledge of his word. It was a comfort to Hezekiah, when he had received the
Sentence of Death, that he had done that which was good in the sight of the
Lord, Isa. 38.3. Now this is a good thing in the sight of God, to bring men to
the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. When the Lord Jesus was departing
out of this world, he mentions twice his giving Gods word to the men that were
given to him, John 17, 8, 14. Possibly for this reason, to teach us that it
will be a great comfort in a dying hour to all such as have had any persons
committed to their charge, to be able to appeal to God that they have taught
and instructed them in the knowledge of his holy word. When the Apostle Paul
took his leave of the Church of Ephesus, and knew he should see their faces no
more, though he knew that after his departing grievous Wolves would enter in
among them, not sparing the Flock, and also that among themselves some would
arise, speaking perverse things, yet having before been diligent in teaching
them the good word of God, he does with a great deal of satisfaction of mind
commend them to God, and to his word, knowing that Gods word was able to build
them up under all oppositions and discouragements whatever, Acts 20.32. And now
Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. In like manner, when Parents have taught their Children the word of
God, although they foresee that after their death their Children are likely to
fall into many temptations by reason of seducing spirits, or other evils, yet
they may with much comfort commend them to God, and to the word of his grace,
wherein they have been instructed.

6. Such Parents as are careful to instruct their Families, and to train them
up in the knowledge and fear of God, shall not only be blessed themselves, but
they shall be great blessing unto others, Genesis 18.18, 19. Abraham shall surely
become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him: And why? The Reason is rendered in the following words, For I
know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord
may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.

SECT. 6. The Evils that arise from the neglect of Family-Instruction.


1. They do shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against their Children and Servants.
For such as do take away the Key of Knowledge, do shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against those persons from whom they do take away the Key of Knowledge; as is
evident by comparing Mat. 23.13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites,
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men: for ye neither go in your
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in: with Luke 11.52. Woe
unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge; ye entered not in
your selves, and them that were entering in ye hindered. What a woeful crime is
this, for a man to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against his Family?

2. Such Parents as neglect to instruct their children are more cruel than the
Sea Monsters, Lam. 4.3. Even the Sea Monsters draw out the breast to their young
ones. The daughter of my People is become cruel as the Ostrich in the
Wilderness. Instruction is as necessary for the Soul, as the breast or other
food is for the Body. Yea, they are worse than Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any
provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own House, he has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. The providing those things
which concern the Souls of our Household is as necessary, and the neglect
thereof as dangerous, as the providing for their Bodies. Yea, they are more
unnatural than the damned in Hell, for they are desirous that their Relations
should be instructed, and that means should be used to prevent their eternal
damnation, Luke 16.23, 27, 28. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in
torments, and sees Abraham after off, and Lazarus in his bosom -- Then he
said, I pray thee therefore that thou would send him to my Fathers house, for
I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into
this place of torment.

3. God accounts those Parents haters of their Children, that neglect to
instruct and correct them, Prove. 13.24. He that spares the Rod, hates his
Son; but he that loves him chasteneth him betimes. Such as do not endeavor to
prevent sin in their neighbors, do hate them in their hearts, whatever show of
love they make in their words, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in
thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him. If they hate their Neighbors that suffer sin upon them, do not they
hate their Children that suffer them to live in ignorance of God, which is a
Soul-damning sin?

4. Children and Servants prove great crosses when they are not trained up in
the knowledge and fear of God. And this comes to pass both by the just Judgment
of God, who punishes Parents and Masters neglect of Family-Instruction, with
the disobedient undutiful carriage of their Children and Servants; and also
from the power of original corruption, which when it is not restrained by good
education, breaks forth with great violence, and causes persons to be of a
perverse and stubborn spirit. Eli neglecting Family-Government was punished in
his Children, by their proving exceeding great crosses to him, 1 Samuel 2.33. The
man of thine whom I shall not cut off from mine Altar, shall be to consume
thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart. And as God dealt with Eli, so he
ordinarily deals with those Parents that neglect to train up their Children in
the knowledge and fear of his Name; he suffers them to prove a reproach and
grief to their Parents, Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give wisdom, but a
Child left to himself brings his Mother to shame. Prove. 17 25. A foolish Son
is a grief to his Father, and bitterness to her that bare him.

5. The neglect of instructing our Families, and training them up in the fear
of God, causes God to inflict many great and sore judgments on our Families,
and such as shall continue upon them from Generation to Generation: 1 Samuel
3.13, 14. I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity
which he knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them
not; and therefore I have sworn unto the House of Eli, that the iniquity of
Eli's House shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for ever.

SECT. 7. Family-Instruction will propagate Religion to a thousand Generations.
King. 22.43. And he walked in all the ways of Asa his Father; he turned not
aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord. Solomon
gives this reason why he taught his Children, his Father taught him when he was
a Child, Prove. 4.1, 3, 4. Hear ye Children the instruction of a Father, and
attend to know understanding, for I was my Fathers Son, tender and only beloved
in the sight of my Mother; He taught me also, and said, Let thy heart retain my
words, keep my Commandments and live. That if we teach Gods Word unto our
Children, they will teach it to their Children, and their Children will teach
the next Generation, and so the knowledge of God and his holy Word, will be
transmitted from one Generation to another, is employed in Psalm. 78.2, 3, 4, 5,
6. I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter dark sayings of old, which
we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us, we will not hide them
from their Children, showing to the Generation to come the praises of the Lord,
and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has done: For he established
a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers that they should make them known unto their Chidlren, that the
Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be born, who
should arise and declare unto their Children, that they might set their hope in
God, etc. And as our Children, so also our Servants whom we have instructed,
when God shall give them Families, they will teach their Households the ways of
the Lord, and such as spring out of their Loins will tread in their steps, and
instruct their Families, whereby the Kingdom of Christ will be greatly
enlarged. Solomon instructed his Servants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are thy men,
happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy
wisdom. And we find the Children of Solomon's Servants, who were generally
reputed to be Profelites, that had embraced the Jewish Religion, spoken of in
the Scriptures, and giving evidence of their Piety for many Generations after
Solomon's death, they evidenced their Piety by adhering to the Jews, who were
the People and Church of the living God, and that when they were in a low
condition, and under great misery by reason of the Babylonish Captivity. 2. By
their returning out of Babylon to Judah and Jerusalem, Ezra 2.1, 55. after they
had dwelt in Babylon seventy years, where they had built Houses and planted
Vineyards, Jer. 29.4, 5. and could not leave those Houses and Vineyards without
much loss. 3. The Children of Solomon's Servants are reckoned up amongst those
that were most forward to come out of Babylon unto Zion, Neh. 7.5, 6, 57. 4.
They went out of Babylon to Jerusalem, to build the House of the Lord, which
was a great, costly, and difficult work, Ezra 1.3, 5. compared with Chap. 2.1,
55. and that is a further evidence of their Piety, that they went not up to
Jerusalem for their own ends, but that the Lord had stirred up their spirits to
go thither to build the Lords House. This example shows that Instruction is a
means to propagate Religion to many Generations; for from Solomon to the
carrying away of the Jews into Babylon, were thirteen Generations, Mat. 1.17.
and from their going into Babylon, till their return from thence, seventy
years, Jer. 29, 10. And we find the Children of Solomon's Servants retaining a
savor of true Piety, from Solomon's days till their return from Babylon. By
the means of Family-Instruction rightly managed, what is promised Isa. 60.22. A
little one shall become a thousand, may be verified of our Families; Religion
may be so propagated by training up our Families in the knowledge and fear of
God, that from one little Family that fears God, may in process of time arise
a thousand godly Families. And what is said of Israel, Isa. 27.6. Israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit: The like may be
said of those godly persons that train up their Families in the fear of God,
they shall do much toward the filling of the face of the world with the fruits
of Righteousness. Religion will be so propagated from one Family to another,
and from one Generation to another, by the means of Family-Instruction, that
hereby may be fulfilled what is spoken of, Isa. 58.12. They that shall be of
thee shall build the old waste places, thou shall raise up the foundations of
many Generations; and thou shall be called, The Repairer of the Breach, and the
Restorer of Paths to dwell in. And hereby we may become an Eternal Excellency,
the Joy of many Generations; and many Children that are yet unborn shall rise
up, and call us Blessed, and will have cause to bless God on our behalf to all
Eternity. It is said of Abraham, who instructed his Family, All the Nations of
the Earth shall be blessed in him, Now he became a Blessing to all Nations, not
only upon the account that the Messiah came out of his Loins, (of which the
Holy Ghost speaks Genesis 22.18. where he attributes the Blessing of all Nations
not to Abraham, but to his Seed; In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth
be blessed) but his being a Blessing to all Nations, is also attributed to his
instructing his Family, and training up his Children and Servants in a godly
sort, whereby the knowledge of God and the Seeds of Piety and true Religion
were conveyed from one Family to another, and from one Generation to another,
and from one Nation to another; as will appear from Genesis 18.18, 19. All the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him: (How so? How should it come about
that all Nations should be blessed in him? The following words will declare
this) For I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Lo here how
effectually Family-Instruction propagates Religion! By means whereof, from one
Family the Seeds of Piety are conveyed to many Nations.

SECT. 8. Family-Instruction greatly advances Gods glory.
John 17.4. I have glorified thee on Earth: And how did Christ glorify his
Father upon the earth? He tells us, Verse. 6. and 8. That it was by manifesting
the Name of God to those that were given to him by his Father, and by
instructing them out of his word; I have manifested thy Name unto the men whom
thou gave me out of the world -- I have given unto them the words which thou
gave me. When David was desirous to exalt and magnify the Name of the Lord,
the way that he resolved to take for the exalting and glorifying God, was to
teach his Children to fear the Lord, Psalm. 34.3, 11. O magnify the Lord with
me, and let us exalt his Name together. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I
will teach you the fear of the Lord. Family-Instruction advances the glory of
God several ways; I will mention only two or three.

1. Instructing our Children and Servants out of the word of God, will be a
means to bring them to lead holy, godly, and righteous Lives; and when our
Families walk in the fear of God, and live righteously, God is glorified, Isa.
60.21. Thy People also shall be all righteous -- that I may be glorified.

2. The good that our Children and Servants will receive by our instructing
them out of the word of God, will be so great, that they will bless and praise
God for it, as long as they live, yea to all eternity, so that hereby we shall
bring eternal glory to God, for then and as long as God is praised he is
glorified, Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers me praise, glorifieth me.

3. Family-Instruction glorifieth God, as it is a means to propagate Religion,
and increase the number of Converts, and to bring multitudes to become Servants
of the Lord; for the more godly Families are erected, the more the number of
Gods Servants is multiplied, the more God is glorified, Prove. 14.28. In the
multitude of People is the Kings Honor. What Solomon says of earthly Kings,
the same is true of the King of Heaven. The Prophet Isaiah also informs us,
Isa. 26.15. That the increasing of the number of Gods Servants, advances his
glory: Thou have increased the Nation, O Lord, thou have increased the Nation;
thou art glorified. And it has been shown before, that instructing our
Families will be an effectual means of their Conversion, and will greatly
propagate Religion, and the Power of Godliness from one Family to another, for
many Generations. Now seeing Family-Instruction glorifieth God, we should set
our Heads and Hearts on work how to carry on this duty in the most advantageous
and successful manner; for we were every one created, and are maintained in our
being for this very end, to glorify God, Isa. 43.6, 7. Bring my Sons from far,
and my Daughters from the end of the earth, even every one that is called by my
name, for I have created him for my glory: And Verse. 21. This people have I
formed for my self; they shall show forth my praise. And seeing we had our
Beings given us for this end, to glorify God, we ought to attend those
Services which glorify God with all our might.

And as the training up of our Children in the knowledge and fear of God,
greatly advances his glory; so the neglect of this duty may be said to rob God
of eternal glory. Hence God complains of such as neglect or hinder the
Religious Education of Children, that they take away his glory for ever, Mich.
2.9. From their Children they have taken away my glory forever: How did they
take away from their Children the glory of God for ever? Locceius gives this
interpretation of it, mala educatione; By their evil education of their
Children they robbed God of eternal glory. To the same effect Gualther expounds
the words, Institutione destituuntur, qua ad Dei gloriam educentur; They were
deprived of instruction, whereby they should have been trained up to the glory
of God. Corn. a Lapid. also gives the same sense of the words, Tulistis ab eis
meam laudem, tum quia eos a matribus avulsos, honest a piaque educatione
privastis, and in idololatria vestra educastis tam quia eos ad paupertatem
adegistis ob quam ad omnia scelera vestramque voluntatens and libidinem
inflexistis. Winckelman, D. Stokes, and several others, expound this Scripture
of the depriving Children of Religious Education. And they that neglect the
educating their Children in a pious manner, may well be said to take away from
their Children the glory of God for ever: For when Children are trained up in a
godly sort, they will glorify God all their days in this world, and also in
heaven to all eternity; and they would not only glorify God themselves, but
teach their Children to do so also; and they would teach the next Generation;
and so the knowledge and glory of God might be transmitted from one Generation
to another, as long as the world shall continue; all which glory is taken away
from God, where the pious Education of Children is neglected.

SECT. 9. We show our love to God by Instructing our Familiet.
Peter, that if he had any love to him, he would show it by feeding his Lambs
and his Sheep, John 21.15, 16, 17. Jesus says unto Simon Peter, Simon Son of
Jonas love thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea Lord, thou know
that I love thee: He says unto him, Feed my Lambs. He says to him again the
second time, Love thou me? He says unto him, Yea Lord, thou know that I
love thee: He says unto him, Feed my Sheep. He says unto him the third time,
Love thou me? -- And he said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee: Jesus says unto him, Feed my Sheep. After the
Command of loving God with all our heart, and all our soul, and all our might,
is immediately added the Command of laying up Gods Word in our hearts, and
teaching the same diligently unto our Children, Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6, 7. which
implies, That we cannot express our love to God better, than by lodging his
word in our hearts, and teaching it to our Children. As they are Pastors after
Gods own heart, who are diligent to instruct the people in the knowledge of his
word, Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding: So they are Parents and Masters
after Gods own heart, who feed their Children and Servants with the knowledge
of Gods word. It is said of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. Hezekiah spoke
comfortably to all the Levites; that taught the good knowledge of the Lord. In
the like manner at the day of Judgment the Lord will speak comfortably to all
those Masters of Families that have taught his good word unto their Families.

SECT. 10. Gods mercy in giving us Families, should stir us up to instruct them.
Exodus 1.21. And it be came to pass because the Midwives feared God, he made
them Houses. All the Members of a Family are Blessings and great Mercies, when
they are well-ordered, and rightly improved. It is a great Blessing to have a
good Wife, Prove. 18.22. Whosoever finds a Wife, finds a good thing, and
obtains favor of the Lord. Children also are accounted by God to be a
Blessing, and are given as a Reward: Psalm. 127.3, 5. Lo Children are the
Heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his Reward. Happy is the man
that has his Quiver full of them. It is no small Blessing to have Servants,
and that we are not put to do all toylsome and inferior works our selves, and
that we are not left alone to carry on our Affairs, but have Servants to be
helpful to us. When Abraham's Servant reckons up the Blessings which God had
given his Master, he mentions among the rest, Gods giving him Servants, Genesis
24.35. The Lord has blessed my Master greatly, and he has given him --
Menservants and Maidservants. -- Solomon also speaks of it as a mercy to
have a Servant, Prove. 12.9. He that is despised, and has a Servant, is better
than he that honors himself, and lacks Bread. Now if a Family, and every
Member in a Family be a mercy, and a blessing given us by God, it is but meet
that we should in way of gratitude dedicate our Families to God, and train up
every Member in the Family in the knowledge and fear of God. Especially if we
consider that our Children and Servants are committed to us for this very end,
that we should train them up in a godly sort, that will lay a further
obligation upon us to bring them acquainted with God, by instructing them out
of his holy word: Mal. 2.15. Did he not make one? Yet had he the residue of the
Spirit: And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly Seed. The Prophet
acquaints us in these words what was Gods end in the Institution of Marriage,
which was not simply the giving of a Seed, or the propagating of Mankind, but
the producing of a Godly Seed, and to that end he ordained Marriage to be
between one man and one woman; whereas when he created Adam he could have
formed many women for the use of one man, seeing he had the residue of the
Spirit; but he made only one woman, to the intent that Man and Wife might join
in their care and endeavor to train up their Seed in a godly sort, which would
be much hindered by multiplying of Wives, whereby a man's heart wonld have been
turned away from discharging his duty to God and his Family, Deuteronomy. 17.17.

SECT. II. We have the example of JESUS CHRIST, and the best men that ever
lived, for instructing their Families.
Abraham to instruct his Family, and train them up in the ways of God: And what
high Commendations does the Scripture give of Abraham? He is called, The Friend
of God, The Father of the Faithful, etc. How did God bless Abraham! He appeared
often to him, and gave him many precious Promises, and entered into a Covenant
with him, and sent Angels to his House, and revealed his Secrets to him, and
vouchsafed to talk familiarly with him, yea he blessed him in all things, and
with all manner of blessings, Genesis 24.1. Abraham was old and well stricken in
age, and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things. And that God in blessing
Abraham had respect to his teaching his Family, is evident from Genesis 18.17, 18.
And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do, seeing that
Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty Nation, and all the Nations of
the earth shall be blessed in him? For I know him, that he will command his
Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he
has spoken of him. The reason given in this Text why the Lord revealed his
Secrets to Abraham, and why he became a great and mighty Nation, and why he
became such a great blessing to the world, that in him all the Nations of the
Earth were blessed, and why he enjoyed all promised mercies, is fixed upon his
care in training up his Household in the ways of God; For I know him, that he
will command his Children and his Household after him, etc. If we would be
accounted Abraham's Children, and enjoy Abraham's Blessing, we must walk in the
steps of his Faith, Gal. 3.7. and do his Works, John 8.39.

Joshua follows Abraham's example, in that he did not only serve God himself,
but caused all his Household to serve the Lord, Josh 24.15. As for me and my
House, we will serve the Lord. And observe how the Lord blessed Joshua, who
trained up his Family to serve the Lord: God gave him his presence whether
soever he went, Josh. 1.9. and stuck to him all the days of his Life, verse. 5.
and honored and magnified him in the sight of all Israel, Josh. 3.7. He made
him Leader of his people, to carry them into the Land of Canaan; He subdued
mighty Kings under him, and gave their Kingdoms into his hand: At Joshua's
Request the Sun stood still a whole day, which thing God never did for any man
but Joshua, Josh. 10.12, 13, 14.

David, who has the character of a man after Gods own heart, he was also
careful to instruct his Children in the knowledge of God, and to bring them up
in the fear of God; especially his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon
my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and love him with a perfect heart and
willing mind. -- Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my Fathers Son, tender and only beloved in
the sight of my Mother; He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart
retain my words. -- And God did exceedingly bless both David and Solomon his
Son; the Blessings he gave them were so remarkable, that it is needless to
recount them.

Cornelius, who was a devout man himself, trained up all his Household in the
fear of God, Act. 10.1, 2. There was a certain man in Cesarea called Cornelius
-- A devout man, and one that feared God, with all his House -- This man was in
great favor with God, God sent an Angel to him to tell him his Prayers and his
Alms were come up for a Memorial before God, Verse. 4. and sent Peter to preach
the Gospel to him, and poured out the Holy Ghost on him and all that were
present with him, to the astonishing of the Jews that came along with Peter,
Verse. 44, 45.

Timothy was instructed in the Scriptures while he was a Child, 2 Timothy 3.15.
From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures -- And what an eminent man did
he prove? He was so eminent for Faith, that the calling to mind of his Faith
filled the Apostle with Joy, 2 Timothy 1.4, 5. He proved to be of such a public
spirit, and such a Lover of the Church of God, that of all the Apostles
Acquaintace and Companions, there was none like unto Timothy, Phil. 2.19, 20,
22. The Apostle does not only call him a godly man, but a man of God, 1 Timothy
6.11. Thou, O man of God -- Examples have a great influence upon most men, if
we see a multitude going before us, we are apt to follow them, though that
which they do be an evil thing, and that also notwithstanding we have a Precept
from God to the contrary, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many, to wrest
Judgment. Behold here is a Cloud of Witnesses, a multitude of Gods Saints and
Servants have gone before us in this good work of instructing their Families in
the knowledge of Gods word, and shall we be loath to follow a multitude of good
men, the best and wisest men that ever lived, in a good work, whenas we are
commanded to walk in the way of good men, Prove. 2.20. Heb. 13.7. If the
examples of the Friends and Favorites of God, of great men, of wise men, of
holy men, of men that have enjoyed the Blessing and Presence of God, will do
any thing with us, then let the Example of Abraham, Joshua, David, etc. prevail
with us to train up our Families in the knowledge and fear of God.

Besides these forementioned Examples, we have the Pattern and Example of our
Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, who is greater than Abraham, or David, or any
Princes or Potentates that ever lived upon the face of the Earth. The Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, that went whithersoever he went, that lodged where he
lodged, that eat and drank with him continually, were as I may so call them
Christ's Family, they called him by the name of Master, and he owned that name,
John 13.13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am: He went
in and out amongst them all the time after he had called them to follow him, as
a Master does amongst his Servants, Act. 1.21. Now if we look upon the
Disciples of Christ as his Family, then we have an excellent Pattern of
Family-Instruction in the Example of our Lord Jesus: For he was very diligent
in teaching and instructing his Disciples, John 17.6. I have manifested thy
Name unto the men which thou gave me out of the World. And that Christ
instructed them out of the word of God, appears from verse. 14. I have given
them thy word. See also Luke 4. from verse. 17. to 21. He did not only teach
them with others in the exercise of his Ministry, but did also instruct them in
private, when they were alone with him: Mark 4.34. When they were alone, he
expounded all things to his Disciples. And not only before his death, but also
after his Resurrection, his great work among his Disciples was, to teach and
expound to them the Scriptures, Luke 24.27. And beginning at Moses, and all the
Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself? And ves. 32. Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with
us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? And verse. 45, 46. Then
opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, and
said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, etc.
Now every one that professes himself to be a Christian, ought to imitate the
example of Christ, so far as he is placed in the same relation that Christ was
in, 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk
even as he walked.

SECT. 12. Gods Judgments that have lately been upon us, call for
Family-Instruction, and Family-Reformation.
etc. do call aloud upon us to set upon this work of Family-Instruction, and
that on several accounts.

1. The great and mighty Judgments of God call for Reformation of our Lives,
and learning of Righteousness, Isa. 26.9. When thy Judgments are in the Earth,
the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness. Now Family-Instruction
is the way to Family-Reformation: When Ephraim was instructed he repented, and
bemoaned his sins, and turned to the Lord, Jer. 31.18, 19. And
Family-Reformation would produce National Reformation: For if every Family did
begin to reform and turn to the Lord, how speedily would the Nation be
reformed? Family-Reformation will draw down a multitude of Blessings both upon
our selves and Families, and upon the whole Nation; It will bring a blessing
upon our Estates, Job 22.23, 24. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be
built up; thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles: Then shall
thou lay up Gold as Dust, and the Gold of Ophir as the stones of the Brooks.
Job's Family was broken, and his Estate all gone, yet Eliphaz tells him if he
did return himself to God, and put away iniquity from his Tabernacles, he
should be built up, and have plenty of Silver. It engages God to become our
defense, verse. 25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have
plenty of Silver. It breeds delight in God, and boldness in prayer, verse. 26.
For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy
face unto God. It causes us to be successful in prayer, verse. 27. Thou shall
make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy Vows.
It makes a man prosperous in his ways, and fills him with Comfort, verse. 28.
Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee; and the
Light shall shine upon thy ways. It will cause God to shelter us and our
Families in time of common calamity, verse. 29. When men are cast down, then
thou shall say, There is lifting up; and he shall save the humble person. Lo
thus shall the man and his Family be blessed, that returns to the Lord, and
puts away iniquity far from his Tabernacles! And therefore seeing
Family-Instruction will produce Family-Reformation, as is intimated Verse. 22.
compared with Verse. 23. how should this stir us up to instruct our Families in
the word of God. Besides these Personal and Family-Advantages,
Family-Reformation would remove National Judgments, and procure National
Mercies, verse. 30. He shall deliver the Island of the Innocent, and it is
delivered by the pureness of thy hands: This, as well as the foregoing Verses,
has relation to verse. 23. to the man that returns to God, and puts away
iniquity from his Tabernacles. In that day wherein the Families of Jerusalem
should go apart, and mourn for their sins, in the same day the Lord promises
great mercies, both spiritual and temporal, not only to those Families, but to
Judah and Jerusasalem, Zach. 12. 2. The late Pestilence made sore breaches in
many Families; it has cut off in some Families the Root, in others the
Branches, in others both Root and Branches: Many Children are become
fatherless, and Orphans, and have no Parents to teach them. It has made many
Parents childless, and they have now no Children to teach; it has swept away
many whole Families. And shall not we whose Families were preserved untouched,
or but gently visited, ply this work of Family-Instruction? It was one great
end why God spared us and our Families, that we should train them up in the
knowledge of his word, Isa. 38.13, 19. The Grave cannot praise thee, Death
cannot celebrate thee -- The Living, the Living, he shall praise thee, as I do
this day; the Father to the Children shall make known thy truth. From which
words we may observe these two things: 1. That one great end why God gives us
Children, and why he continues our Lives with our Children, and our Children
with us, is, That we should teach them his word; and to this agrees that note
which Calvin has upon this Text, Hinc colligenda est utilis monitio hac lege
sobolem dari mortalibus ut quisque liberos suos erudiendo pro sua virili
propagare ad posteros studeat Dei nomen. 2. When Parents have escaped with
their Lives from the Pestilence, or any other eminent danger, they should
express their gratitude to God, by teaching his Truth to their Children. This
was Hezekiah's case, he had been sick unto death, and his sickness was (as many
think) the Pestilence, but he was preserved from death, hereupon he praises
God, and tells us all living persons that had escaped the Pestilence should do
the like; and they should not only praise God in words, but every Father should
express his gratitude to God for preserving him and his from going down to the
Grave, by teaching Gods word to his Children.
SECT. 13. The Usefulness and Excellency of the Scriptures should excite us to
instruct our Families in the Knowledge of the Scriptures.
Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in Righteousness. The
Scriptures are so framed by the infinite wisdom of God, that they give
directions for the doing of all good works, for the avoiding of all Vices, for
the resisting of all Temptations, the bearing of all Afflictions, the
instructing all persons of all ages, whatever state or condition they are in.
Are our Children young? In the word of God there is milk for Babes, 1 Pet. 2.2.
As new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby: Are they come to some maturity, both in respect of their years and
their knowledge? In the word of God there is meat for strong men, Heb. 5.14.
Are the Members of our Families dull and backward, and sluggish in respect of
that which is good? Gods word is like a goad to prick and put them forward. Are
they fickle and inconstant in that which is good? Gods word prudently and
wisely applied, will be like a Nail to fasten and make them steadfast in every
good work: Eccl. 12.11. The words of the wise are as Goads, and as Nails
fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.
Are our Children or Servants in an unconverted condition? Gods word will be a
means to convert them: Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the Soul. Are they already converted? The word of the Lord will build them up:
Act. 20.32. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up. Are they hard-hearted? Gods word will melt and break the most
rocky heart upon the face of the earth: Jer. 23.29. Is not my word like as a
fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces. Are
they in a broken afflicted frame? Gods word will heal them: Psalm. 107.20. He
sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction. Are
they of a sorrowful spirit? The word of God will fill them with Joy: Psalm.
19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart. Are they
ignorant? The word of God will inlighten them: Psalm. 19.8. The Commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. In a word, whatever is needful and
profitable either for our selves or for our Children to be acquainted withal,
it is revealed in the Scriptures: Act. 20.20. I kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you. Neither we nor our Children need the knowledge of any
thing more than the whole Counsel of God concerning our Salvation, and this is
fully revealed in the word of God, Act. 20.27. I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God. Whatsoever Christ heard of the Father, that he
taught his Apostles, John 15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father, I
have made known unto you. And all things that Christ taught the Apostles, they
are written in the Scriptures: Acts 1.1, 2. The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach until the day in which
he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had given Commandments
unto the Apostles whom he had chosen. And therefore the Scriptures are a
perfect Rule of Righteousness, containing all things that are necessary for any
man to know, believe or practice, in order to his eternal salvation. And as the
Scriptures are profitable for instruction, in respect of the usefulness and
suitableness of the matter contained in them; so also in regard of the power
that is in them, to convince the Judgment, and to prevail with the Conscience;
and to bow and bend the will to a compliance with Gods will: For they carry the
Authority of God with them, and work efficaciously upon the stoutest hearts,
when God accompanies them with his Spirit: Act. 18.28. He mightily convinced
the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ:
The Jews were exceedingly prejudiced against Christ, they were so far from
believing that Jesus was the Christ, that they had crucified him as an
Impostor, and a Deceiver of the People; yet Apollos bringing clear
Scripture Proof for what he taught, the Jews were hereby mightily convinced
that Jesus was the Christ. The word of God is of a more piercing nature than a
sword, and carries greater power along with it: Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a
Discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. It astonisheth the minds of
men, and carries out their Souls to believe in and obey the Lord,
notwithstanding all Oppositions and Discouragements that lie in the way either
of Faith or Obedience. Elimas the Sorcerer was full of subtilty and mischief,
and he opposed all he could the word of God, which was dispensed by Paul and
Barnabas, and sought to turn away Sergius Paulus from the Faith, but the Word
of God had such power upon the Deputy, that notwithstanding all the endeavors
of Elimas, he became obedient to the Faith, Acts 13.12. The Deputy when he saw
what was done believed, being astonished at the Doctrine of the Lord. Of all
the Jews none were more opposite to believing in Christ, than the Priests; for
the Priests plotted and contrived Christ's death, Matt. 26.3, 4. They sent Judas
and a multitude of People with him to apprehend Christ, verse. 47. They suborned
false witnesses against him, verse. 59. They held a Counsel after he was
apprehended, by what means they should put him to death, Matthew. 27.1. The
Priests accused him with great vehemence before Herod, Luke 23.10. They stirred
up the multitude to ask Barrabas, when Pilate was willing to have released
Jesus, Matthew. 27.20. It was the cry of the multitude that were stirred up by
the Priests, and the voices of the Priests that prevailed with Pilate to
crucify Christ, Luke 23.23. After the death of Christ, the Priests took
greatest offense at the Apostles preaching, and were the chief Agents in their
imprisonment, Acts 4.1. And yet notwithstanding all the opposition that was in
the Priests against Christ, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, such was the power
of the Word of God, that thereby a great number of the Priests were converted
to the faith of Christ, Act. 6.7. The word of God increased, and the number of
the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the
Priests were obedient to the Faith.

Besides this, consider the excellency and weightiness of the matter contained
in the Scriptures: They reveal to us the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Gods eternal Counsel concerning our salvation, the gracious Covenant God has
made with man; They reveal to us Gods Attributes, his works of Creation and
Providence, the great Mystery of our Redemption, They show to us how we may
serve, glorify, and enjoy God, which is man's chiefest happiness: They treat of
the Torments of Hell, and of the unspeakable Joys and Glory of Heaven, and show
us how we may avoid the one, and get possession of the other: In a word, they
discover to us such excellent things as the eye of man never saw the like,
neither did ear hear, neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive
the transcendent worth and dignity of them: 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. They open such
Mysteries as the Angels of Heaven desire and delight to look into them: 1 Pet.
1.12. Which things the Angels desire to look into. And shall we hide such
excellent things as these are, from our Children? We should resolve with full
purpose of heart as the godly Jews of old did concerning those glorious things
which their Fathers had told them, Psalm. 78.4. We will not hide them from their
Children, showing to the Generations to come the praises of the Lord: I might
add further, There is nothing revealed in the Scriptures, but what is of great
and near concernment to us and to our Children, and that as long as we and they
shall live in this world, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord
our God, but those things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our
Children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. If those things
that are treated of in the Scriptures, did not belong to us, or to our
Children, we might have some excuse for not teaching them the word of God: But
what Apology can we make for our neglect of this Duty, seeing they were
revealed purposely for us and our Children to be conversant therein as long as
we live? They are of such near and great concernment to us, as that every man's
Judgment for his eternal state shall be given at the last day, according to
what is in the written word, John 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives
not my words, has one that judges him; the words that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day. Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great
stand before God; and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which
is the Book of Life; and the Dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the Books, according to their works.

SECT. 14. They deal unjustly with their Families who defraud them of the
Instruction that is due to them.


1. Because they have been instrumental to convey to them a sinful ignorant
nature, Psalm. 51.5. Job 14.4. If one man had hurt another, the Law of God
delivered by Moses, required that he should be at the cost and pains to get him
thoroughly healed, Exodus 21.19. -- He shall pay for the loss of his time, and
cause him to be thoroughly healed. Seeing Parents are instrumental to convey
that sin to their Children which has given their Souls a deadly wound, it is but
just and equal that they should be at the cost, and take pains to get them
healed of their ignorance, and do what in them lies to get their Souls
converted to the Lord.

2. It is just and equal that we should teach our Children, because God has
taught us his Word for this very end and purpose that we should teach the same
unto our Children: Deuteronomy. 4.10. The Lord said unto me, Gather the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, -- that they may teach their
Children.

3. Justice requires that we should give to every one that which is due to him:
He that detains from any one that which is his due, when it is required, and it
is in the power of his hand to render it, is an unjust man: Now Instruction is
due to our Children and Servants; for God commands us, as we have heard before,
to instruct them, and their necessity calls aloud upon us to be diligent in
teaching and instructing them; and therefore we cannot withhold instruction
from them, without being guilty of injustice: And it is a great crime to be
guilty of injustice; Unjust persons are accounted amongst the chiefest of
Sinners. And to withold from our Children or Servants that which is due to
their Souls, is greater injustice then to wrong them in their Estates, or in
those things which are due to to their outward man: If then we would fulfill
that Precept, Col. 4.1. Masters give unto your Servants that which is just and
equal, knowing that ye have a Master in Heaven: And that of the Apostle, Romans
13.7. Render to all their dues: And that of Solomon, Prove. 3.27. Withold not
good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do
it. We must not neglect this good work of teaching and instructing our Children
and Servants, seeing Instruction is due to them.

Let thus much suffice by way of motive, to stir up Parents and Masters of
Families to set upon a diligent performance of this duty of training up their
Children and Servants in the Knowledge and Obedience of the Scriptures.

CHAP. III.
Directions for managing of this work of Family-Instruction, so as to promote
the Conversion, Edification, and Eternal Salvation of all that are under our
Charge.

I Shall in the next place proceed to some Directions for the successful
managing of this work of Family-Instruction, and shall show how we should carry
it on, so as to promote the Conversion, Edification, and Eternal Salvation of
all such as are under our Charge.

SECT. 1. Such as would instruct their Families in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, must be diligent in studying the Scriptures.
day. Before the Lord commands us to teach his Word to our Children, he
prefixeth this Charge, That we should lay up his Word in our own hearts, Deuteronomy.
6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children. And the Apostle calls upon
those whom he would have teach others, to let the word of Christ dwell richly
in themselves; Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another -- A daily searching of the
Scriptures, attended with Meditation and Prayer, will greatly advantage us in
this work of Family-Instruction, and that in several respects; I will instance
in two:

1. Hereby we shall be furnished with wisdom and knowledge, Psalm. 119.98, 99.
Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine Enemies, for they
are ever with me: I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my meditation. And the more we are furnished with Heavenly
Wisdom, the more dextrous and ready we shall be to win those Souls that are
committed to our charge: Prove. 11.30. He that wins Souls is wise. 2 Cor.
12.16. Being crafty, I caught you with guile. And as wisdom will make us
dextrous in winning Souls to Christ; so also it will conduce much to the
inabling of us to edify and build up such as are brought home to him, Col.
1.28. Teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus. The Romans, who were filled with knowledge, were thereby made
able to teach and admonish others, Romans 15.14. I my self am persuaded of you,
my Brethren, that ye also are full of Goodness, filled with all knowledge, able
also to admonish one another.

2. By searching the Scriptures, and meditating on them night and day, we shall
become successful in this work of Family-Instruction, God will make this work
prosper in our hands to the Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of such as
he has committed to our care, to be instructed in his holy word: For the Lord
has promised that whatsoever that man does who meditates in his Law, it shall
prosper: Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of
the ungodly -- But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does
he meditate day and night: And he shall be like a tree planted by the Rivers of
water, that brings forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper: Ezra who was a ready Scribe in
the Law of Moses, Ezra 7.6. taught Gods Word to the people of Israel, verse. 10.
And what effect had his teaching? It had great power to humble and reform the
people, Ezra 10.1, 12. The people wept very sore. Then all the Congregation
answered and said with a loud Voice, As thou have said, so must we do. Apollos
who was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. was very successful in the
Conviction and Conversion of obstinate sinners: for he mightily convinced the
Jews, verse. 28. And in the edification of such as were converted to the faith,
verse. 27. Who when he was come helped them much which had believed through
grace.

SECT. 2. We must teach our Families the knowledge of the principles and the
practice of the Duties of Religion. Nothing but the Truth. Soul-saving Truths.
What are Soul-saving Truths? Seasonable Truths.
Tim. 4.16. Take heed to thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, continue in them, for
in doing this, thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee.

If any ask, What Doctrine should we teach our Families, in order to the
Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of their Souls.

I answer: In the general, teach them the holy Scriptures: I have proved
already that it is the Will and Command of God that we should instruct our
Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures, Chap. I. Sect. 1. And I have also
shown that teaching Gods Word to our Families will be a means of their
Conversion, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul,
and of their edification, Acts 20.32. I commend you to God, and the Word of his
grace, which is able to build you up -- And of their Salvation, Romans 1.16. I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto Salvation.
As the Reader may see more largely in the perusal of the first and second
Chapters.

If any say, Tell us more particularly what Doctrine we should teach our
Families out of the Scriptures in order to their Conversion, Edification and
Salvation?

Answ. 1. Instruct them in the knowledge of the Principles of Religion: As for
instance: Teach them that there is a God, and that this God is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him: And who is the true God: That there is but one
God, and that this one God subsisteth in three distinct Persons, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost: That God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him
must worship Him in Spirit and Truth: That God knows all things, is every
where present, Almighty, Eternal, Holy in all his Works, and Righteous in all
his Ways, Faithful, Just, Abundant in Mercy, etc. That God made the Heavens and
the Earth, and all things therein, and Rules and Governs all his Creatures by
his Wise and Gracious Providence: That Man was created in the Image of God, and
sinned against God by eating the Forbidden Fruit: That by Adam's Disobedience
all Men were made Sinners, and are by Nature the Children of Wrath; and that
Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation: That God out of his great Love
sent his only begotten Son into the World, to seek and save that which was
lost: That JESUS of NAZARETH, who was conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin MARY, suffered under PONTIUS PILATE, was the promised MESSIAH: That He
died for our Sins, and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven where
he sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for all that come to
God by him; from whence He shall come again to judge the World in
Righteousness: That God for Christ his sake has made a New Covenant, wherein
he has promised Remission of sins, Sanctification, eternal Life, and all other
good things freely to them that believe on his Son: That those whom God has
ordained to eternal Life he calls out of Darkness into Light, and turns
them from their sins unto God, and unites them to Christ by faith, and puts his
Spirit into them, and causes them to walk in his Ways, and to serve him in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of their Life: That there shall be a
general Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust, that after the
Dead are raised, the whole world shall appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive according to what he has done while his
Soul lived in his Body: That such as have lived and died in their sins without
Repentance shall be cast into Hell, where they shall abide with the Devil and
his Angels in everlasting fire; And such as have believed in Christ, and
repented of their sins, shall be received into Heaven, where they shall be ever
with the Lord. It is necessary that you should teach your Children and Servants
the knowledge of the Principles of Christian Religion: Heb. 5.12. Ye have need
that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.
For Knowledge is the foundation of Practice, Psalm. 119.34. Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole
heart. And Solomon tells us, Prove. 29.2. Also that the Soul be without
knowledge, it is not good. -- And as you must teach them the knowledge of the
Principles, so also the practice of the Duties of the Christian Religion, as to
believe in Christ, to repent of their sins, to love God with all their Hearts,
and to love their Neighbors as themselves; to do the same things unto others,
which they would that others should do unto them, to deny themselves, to love
their Enemies, to do good to them that hate them; to read, hear, and meditate
on Gods Words, to be contented in every estate, etc. Knowledge without
Obedience will be so far from leading them to everlasting life, that it will
make them have the greater condemnation: Luke 12.47. That Servant which knew
his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes. But by teaching your Families both to know
and do the will of God, you shall make them partakers of eternal Happiness:
John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them. Thus David
instructed his Son, he taught him both to know and serve the Lord, 1 Chronicles.
28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him
with a perfect heart, and willing mind. --

2. Teach them nothing but the Truth: Do not pervert and wrest the Scriptures
to their and your own destruction. Do not give them poy son instead of the
sincere milk of the Word: It was the practice of Christ and of his Apostles to
teach nothing but the Truth, Matthew. 22.16. Master we know that thou art true,
and teach the way of God in truth: 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not as many which
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ: By teaching them the Word of God in truth, you shall be
instrumental to their Regeneration: Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us,
with the word of Truth; and the rendering of them fruitful in good works, Col.
1.6. Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth
fruit, as it does also in you, since the day that ye heard of it, and knew the
grace of God in truth: And be a means of saving their Souls: for it is by the
knowledge and belief of the Truth that we are brought to salvation, 2 These.
2.13. God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. It is said, Prove. 14.25.
A true witness delivers Souls: By a true Witness we may understand one that
instructs those that are under his Charge in the knowledge of the Truth: The
Hebrew word (...) which we render a Witness, is sometimes used, as Kircher
observes, pro predicatore, for a Teacher; and we find the word Witness used in
this signification, Act. 26.16. To make thee a Minister and a Witness. And then
the words may have this sense, That teaching and instructing persons in the
knowledge of the Truth, is a means to deliver their Souls from eternal
destruction.

III. Teach them Soul-saving Truths. By Soul-saving Truths, I mean such Truths
as will be a certain and infallible means of saving your Children and Servants
Souls, if they be rightly understood, firmly believed, and sincerely practiced.

If you ask, What are those Truths which will be a means of saving our Children
and Servants Souls, if we teach them to our Families?

I answer: Such as these: 1. Teach them to know GOD and his Son JESUS CHRIST;
by so doing you shall guide them into the path of Life: For John 17.3. This is
life eternal, That they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent. 2. Teach them their lost and miserable condition by Nature;
their need of, and their misery without Jesus Christ, and the way and means by
which they may come to be partakers of Christ: For if you can draw them to
Christ, they shall not miss of eternal Life: 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son,
has Life. 3. Explain to them the Covenant of Grace, what great Mercies and
Blessings are contained in the Covenant; that their Souls may long to be
brought under the Bond of the Covenant; show them also how and by what means
they may get into Covenant with God: for if you can bring them to lay hold upon
the Covenant of Grace, you shall make them Partakers of Salvation: for eternal
Life and Salvation is promised to such as are in Covenant with God: 2 Samuel
23.5. He has made with me an everlasting Covenant -- and this is all my
Salvation. 4. Show them the nature, necessity, and excellency of faith in
Christ, and labor to bring them to believe in Jesus Christ: If they be brought
to believe in Christ, they shall certainly have everlasting Life: John 6.47.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me has everlasting Life.
5. Teach them the nature and necessity of Repentance, and press home upon them
such Scriptures as may stir them up to the practice and exercise of Repentance;
if you can by any means bring them to a true and unfeigned Repentance, you
shall thereby save their Souls: Ezekiel. 33.14, 16. Again, when I say to the
Wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he turn from his sin, and do that which is
lawful and right -- he shall surely live. 6. Teach them to serve and obey the
Lord Jesus Christ; for he will save all those that obey him: Heb. 5.9. He
became the Author of eternal Salvation to them that obey him 7. Teach them to
love God with all their Hearts and Souls; and to love Him above all Persons and
Things that are in the world: Eternal Life is promised to such as love God:
Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. 8. Teach them to fear and reverence the Lord; and that you may breed the
fear of the Lord in their Souls, acquaint them with the Power, Holiness,
Goodness, Justice, Omniscience, and Omnipresence of God, and his other glorious
Attributes: for the fear of the Lord arises from, and is produced by the
knowledge of God, Job 37.23, 24. Prove. 2.5. and put them in mind of Gods
Covenant, wherein the Lord has promised to put his fear into our hearts, Jer.
32.40. If you can bring your Families to fear the Lord, you shall save their
Souls; Prove. 19.23. The fear of the Lord tends to life; Psalm. 145.19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their Cry, and will
save them. 9. Teach them to hope in God, for all those good things which are
promised in the Covenant of Grace, and to keep up their hope in God under all
their troubles and temptations; by hoping in God, they shall obtain the
salvation of their Souls, Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope. 10. Teach them the
nature of Prayer, to whom they must pray, and for what; and how they must pray,
if they would find acceptance with God: The Lord Jesus taught his Disciples how
to pray, and John the Baptist did the like to his Disciples, Luke 11.1. One of
his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciples. By teaching your Families to call upon God in an acceptable manner,
you shall promote their salvation; For whosoever shall call upon the Name of
the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13. 11. Teach them to be sincere, and to walk
uprightly with God; for if they walk uprightly they shall be saved; Prove.
28.18. Whosoever walks uprightly shall be saved. 12. Teach them to wait upon God
in all his Ordinances, and to wait for the accomplishment of all his Promises.
They that wait on the Lord are under a promise of Salvation: Prove. 20.22. Wait
on the Lord, and he shall save thee. 13. Teach them the way to obtain the
Remission of their sins: for if they obtain the pardon of their sins, they
shall be in a blessed condition; Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven. -- And shall obtain everlasting life; Romans 8.30. Whom he
justified, them he also glorified. 14. Teach them to avoid evil company, and to
walk and converse with such as fear God, that may prove a means of their
salvation, Prove. 9.6. Forsake the foolish and live; and go in the way of
understanding: Prove. 15.20, He that walks with wise men shall be wise. 15.
Exhort them to persevere in the faith of Christ, and to continue in their
obedience of his Commandments as long as they live; for in so doing, they shall
assuredly obtain everlasting life, Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life: Matthew. 24.13. He that shall endure to the
end, the same shall be saved. In a word, whatever Duties have a promise of
Salvation annexed to the performance of them, instruct them in the nature, and
stir them up to the practice of those Duties.


IV. Teach them Seasonable Truths: The more suitable and seasonable the
Instructions are, which you give your Families, the more good they will receive
from them; Prove. 15.23. A man has joy by the answer of his mouth, and a word
spoken in due season how good is it? By teaching them seasonable Truths, I
mean, 1. That you should suit your Instructions to their state and condition,
whether they be in a state of nature or a state of grace; under temptations and
spiritual trouble, or free from it; in a sleepy secure condition, or in an
awakened, convinced condition, but not converted: or if converted, consider
whether they go forward, and walk as becomes the Gospel; or whether they
decline and walk unsuitable to their profession. 2. Caution them against the
sins of the times and places where they live, or where their lot is like to be
cast in time to come; and caution them against the sins that their age,
condition, constitution, or calling, are liable to be assaulted withal. Thus
the Apostle counsels Timothy, who was a young man, to flee youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. and cautions him against such sins as he would be incident to in the
discharge of his Calling, as Partiality, 1 Timothy 5.21. Rashness, verse. 22. etc.
3. Have an eye to the various Dispensations of Gods Providence, both toward
the Nation, and your own or other Neighboring Families, and instruct them how
to improve such Providence. As for instance, if the Lord send the Sword, or
Pestilence, or Famine, or any other great Judgment upon the Nation, teach them
what duties God expects from them under such Judgments, and what means they
should use that they may be hid in the day of the Lords anger, and be preserved
in time of common calamity. Or if God send sickness, or death or any other
affliction, into your own or your Neighboring Families, teach them what use
they should make of such afflictions. 4. If there arise any errors, or any
Seducers come into the places where you live, caution them against those
errors, and bid them beware of those Seducers, and establish their Judgments in
the belief of those Truths which are opposite to those Errors, that so they may
not be led away by them.


Suit your Instructions to their Capacities, and teach them such things as they
are most capable to understand. When our LORD JESUS CHRIST instructed the
People, he had respect unto the Capacities of his Hearers, Mark 4.33. With many
such Parables spoke He the Word unto them, as they were able to bear: John
16.12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. The
like also we may see in his Apostles, 1 Corinthians. 3.1, 2. And I Brethren, could
not speak unto you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in
Christ. I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat: For hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet are ye now able.

SECT. 3. What manner of Instruction is most edifying? What are edifying Duties?
conduces much to edification: Act. 14.1. They SO spoke, that a great
multitude both of the Jews, and also of, the Greeks, believed: There is an
emphasis in the word so, which respects the manner of their teaching; the
manner of their teaching was such, that it became successful for the converting
of great multitudes to the Faith of Christ.

If any say, In what manner should we teach our Families, so as to promote
their Edification?

I answer:

1. Search out suitable and pertinent Scriptures for proving and explaining
those points wherein you purpose to instruct them, and digest them into a good
method. Such a course as this the Preacher took in teaching the people, Eccles.
12.9. Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge, yea,
he gave good heed, and sought out and set in order many Proverbs. And by his
selecting choice portions of Scripture, and setting them in order, his words
became like Goads and Nails, that pierced deep, and stuck fast in the hearts of
his Hearers, verse. 11. The Word of God aptly and rightly applied, has great
force to work upon the Conscience; Job 6.25. How forcible are right words?

2. Explain the sense and meaning of those Scriptures which you teach your
Families, if they contain any difficulties that are above their understandings,
Neh. 8.8. So they read in the Book in the Law of God, and gave the sense, and
caused them to undersand the reading. The Lord commanded the Jews not only to
train up their Children in the use, but to teach them the meaning of his
Ordinances, Exodus 12.26, 27. It shall come to pass when your Children shall say
unto you, What mean you by this service? That ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice
of the Lords Passover, who passed over the Houses, etc. The plainer you make
the Truths which you teach your Families, the greater efficacy they will have
upon their hearts to produce Faith and Obedience: John 16.29, 30. Lo now thou
speak plainly, and speak no Proverbs: Now are we sure that thou know
all things. -- By this we believe. --

3. Teach them that the Scriptures are the word of God, and advise them to
receive those Counsels, Reproofs, and Exhortations, which you give them out of
the Scriptures, not as yours, but as the Counsels, Reproofs, and Exhortations
of God. Exhort them to look upon the Doctrines, Precepts, Threatenings,
Promises, etc. which are contained in the Scriptures, to be as truly and really
the word of God, and to be embraced with the same Faith and ready Obedience as
if they heard God speaking the same things with an audible Voice from Heaven.
This persuasion will make those Instructions which you give them out of the
Scriptures to take place, and work effectually upon their hearts, 1 These. 2.13.
-- When ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which works
effectually in them that believe.

4. Teach them to make a particular application to their own Souls of those
Instructions which you give them out of the Scriptures. As the Prophet Malachy
made a particular application of what he taught the Priests, Mal. 2.1. And now,
O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you: So must Parents deal with their
Children: O my Children, this Commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath day, of
loving God with all your heart, and your Neighbor as your self, etc. is for
you: And this Threatening, If you live after the flesh you shall die, the
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, etc. is for you; you shall die as well
as any persons in the world, if ye live after the flesh, and if ye will keep
evil company, etc. And this promise is for you, They that seek the Lord shall
want no good thing, etc. If you will seek the Lord he will give you all good
things: And the example of Gods Judgments on such as murmured, and such as
committed fornication, etc. was written for your admonition, to deter you from
committing those sins, 1 Cor. 10.8, 10, 11. When Eliphaz had been instructing
Job in several things concerning the misery of wicked men, the nature of
afflictions, the blessings that God bestows on godly men, etc. he concludes
his discourse thus, Job 5.27. Lo this we have searched it, so it is, hear it,
and know it for thy good; (or as it is in the Margin) for thy self. From the
different rendering of the last clause of this Verse, we may draw this note,
That then a man knows Divine Truths for his good, when he knows them for
himself; that is, the way for a man to get good by the knowledge of Divine
Truths, is to make a particular application of them to his own Soul.

5. When you instruct them in the performance of any duty, either toward God
or their Neighbor, teach them how and in what manner to perform that duty;
show them also the necessity of it, and the advantages and benefits that will
come to them if they follow your counsel, and the evils that will befall them
if they neglect it. Thus David instructed Solomon, he exhorts him to know and
serve the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve him -- Then he shows him in what manner he must serve the
Lord, willingly and sincerely, Serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind: He tells him why it was necessary that he should serve the Lord
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: He acquaints
him also with the benefit that he should receive if he would seek and serve the
Lord -- If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; and with the evils that
would come upon him if he forsook the Lord -- But if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever. It is said of Solomon, Eccles. 12.10. The Preacher
sought out acceptable words, or as some render it, verba desiderii, words that
might stir up desires after those things which he taught the people, words that
might win and gain upon their affections. Follow Solomon's example in teaching
your Children, seek out such Scriptures as may put an edge upon their
affections, and inflame them with a desire to practice those things which you
teach them to be their duty. Consider also what may dicourage or hinder them
from the performing those Duties which you press upon them, and endeavor to
remove those hindrances: for what the Apostle says in another case, 2 These.
2.7. the same is true here, That which now lets, will let, until it be taken
out of the way.

6. So teach them their duty, as also to direct them where they may have
strength to perform it. And to that end guide them to Christ, without whom they
can do nothing, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing; and by whose help they
shall be able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me. By which means, when they find no strength in
themselves, they shall be able to say they have it in Christ: Surely shall one
say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength, Isa. 45.24. And seeing
Christ conveys his strength to us in a way of Reliance upon him, (for it is
through faith that out of weakness we are made strong, Heb. 11.34.) and seeing
faith is helped much by the promises, when you instruct them in their duty,
guide them to some promise of the Covenant of Grace, where God has promised to
enable them to perform that duty; that so by the help of the promises they may
trust in Christ to work all their works in them and for them, and may through
faith in him receive strength to walk before God in newness of Life. Thus when
the Apostle taught the Romans that they should not let sin have dominion over
them, Romans 6.12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal Bodies, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof: He presently puts them in mind of a
promise, wherein the Lord has promised so to overruled us by his grace, that
sin shall not have the Dominion over us, verse. 14. Sin shall not have the
Dominion over you. for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

7. If you would so instruct your Families as to edify them in your Teaching,
then stir them up to the practice of those Duties which make for their
edification: As, First, To walk in the fear of the Lord, Act. 9.31. The
Churches were edified, walking in the fear of the Lord. Secondly, To live in
love and peace: 1 Cor. 8.1. Charity edifieth: Ephesians. 4.16. -- Makes increase
of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in love: Romans 14.19. Let us therefore
follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith we may
edify one another. Thirdly, To get Faith, and to live by Faith after they have
gotten it, 1 Timothy 1.4. Godly edifying, which is in faith. Fourthly, To pray in
a fervent, gracious, spiritual manner: Jude 20. But ye Beloved, building up
your selves, in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. Fifthly, To
meditate often on what you have taught them: 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all.


SECT. 4. What are the fittest times and seasons for instructing our Families.
Eccles. 3.1, 11. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under Heaven. -- He has made every thing beautiful in his time. The
seasonableness of a work renders it also the more successful, Psalm. 1.3. He
shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, that brings forth his
fruit in his season -- and whatsoever he does shall prosper. Such as are Rulers
of Families must not only provide meat for their Families, but meat in due
season; and by so doing, he that is the supreme Lord of all Families shall give
them his blessing, Matthew. 24.45, 46, 47. Who then is a faithful and wise
Servant whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household to give them meat in
due season? Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so
doing: Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him Ruler over all his goods.

Now concerning the times and seasons that you should take for the doing this
work: I shall give four or five directions.

1. Let this work be done when there is greatest quiet in the Family, not at
such a time as the Members of the Family are distracted or cumbred with variety
or a multitude of worldly business, or when their Spirits are royled with
passion or contention, but when they are in the most quiet and composed frame;
Eccles. 9.17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet. 1 Cor. 7.35. That you
may attend upon the Lord without distraction.

2. Let this work be done often; Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord
spoke often one to another: Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them diligently unto
thy Children. God works many ways and often times with us, to bring about our
salvation: Job 33.29, 30. Lo all these things works God often times with man,
to bring back his Soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the
Living. And shall we think much to be diligent and frequent in teaching our
Children and Servants that their Souls may be kept from falling into the pit of
Hell; and that they may be enlightened with that knowledge which will make them
wise to Salvation?

3. It will be convenient to have fixed and stated times for the doing of this
work, that so the Family may be the better prepared for it, and all
family-occasions may be so ordered, and all business set at such a stay, as
that every one may be at liberty and leisure to attend this work.

4. Avocations and Diversions should not be easily yielded to, for the putting
by our intended exercise at the appointed time. As for instance: If Company
come in, though they be great Persons, and such as are our Superiors, we
should not be ashamed to go on with our works Psalm. 119 46. I will speak of thy
Testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed. And if we be at any
time diverted by some unexpected and urgent occasions, we should redeem that
loss by taking some other time for their instruction, as soon as conveniently
we can.

5. We should take such times wherein both we and our Families are fresh and
lively, not over-tired with worldly business, not heavy with sleep; for we must
be fervent in spirit when we serve the Lord, Romans 12.11. and when the Body is
tired, or heavy with sleep, the Spirit is not likely to be servent.

6. The Lords day (which is to be spent in holy and Religions Exercises, Isa.
58.13.) is a very convenient time for this work. It was the Custom of the Jews
to read the Scriptures in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15.21. Moses
of old time has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. And we need not doubt but they did the same in
their Families, seeing they were commanded by God to read some portion of his
word every day as long as they lived; yea, their greatest men, even their
Kings, who had the weightiest business of all other men lying upon their hands,
were not excused from this Law of daily reading the Scriptures; Deuteronomy. 17.18,
19. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he
shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book -- And it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the
Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do
them. I shall not undertake to prescribe what other days, besides Lords days,
Masters of Families should take for this work, but shall leave that to their
own prudence and discretion: Only I shall say this, That they for whom God has
done much, and who have more spare time than others, should be more frequent
and abundant in this work: For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required, Luke 12.48.

SECT. 5. The Advantages that come by having the Word of God in our Memories.
Job 22.22. Receive, I pray thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words
in thine heart: Deuteronomy. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day, shall be
in thine heart: And because this duty of committing Gods Word to our Memories,
is much neglected both by Parents themselves as well as their Children, to stir
up both the one and the other to the practice of it, let me show you how much
this duty is urged upon us, and what advantages will come by it. The Prophets
of God charge us in Gods name to remember the word of the Lord, Mal. 4 4.
Remember ye the Law of Moses my Servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all
Israel, with the Statues and Judgments. Jesus Christ when he was in the world
charged us to remember his word, John xv. 20. Remember the word that I said
unto you. The Apostles also call upon us to keep in memory Gods word, Jude 17.
Beloved remember ye the words that were spoken before of the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Acts 20.35 I have shown you all things, how that so
laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord
Jesus: Heb. 2.1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
we have heard, lest at any time we let them slip. The holy Angels when they
appeared to those that came to Christ's Sepulcher, bid them remember the words
of Christ, Luke 24.6. Remember how he spoke unto you, when he was yet in
Galilee. One great benefit which we have by the holy Ghost, is, his helping us
to remember Gods word: John 14.26. The Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

We have seen how earnestly this duty is pressed upon us, now let us see what
advantages will come to us by remembering Gods Word.

1. It will be an help to Faith, John 2.22. When he was risen from the dead,
his Disciples remembered that he had said this unto them, and they believed the
Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

2. It helps us in our obedience; Numb. 15.40. That ye may remember, and do all
my Commandments, and be holy unto your God: Psalm. 119.55. I have remembered thy
name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law.

3. It is an help to Repentance, Matthew. 26.75. And Peter remembered the words of
Jesus, -- and he went out and wept bitterly.

4. It promotes our Comfort, Psalm. 119.52. I remembered thy Judgments of old, O
Lord, and have comforted my self.

5. It will breed a spiritual frame of heart; for if Gods word be treasured up
in our hearts, it will be in our minds night and day: Prove. 6.21, 22. Bind them
continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck; when thou go, it
shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; when thou awakest, it
shall talk with thee.

6. The abiding of Gods word in our hearts and memories, will help our
perseverance: 1 John 2.24. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall
remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Father and in the Son: The way to
abide in Christ, is to let his word abide in us, John 15.7. If ye abide in me,
and my words abide in you. --

7. It will help forward our salvation to keep in memory the word of God; 1
Cor. 15.2. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached
unto you. It is not only useful to such as are in a state of Grace, to treasure
up Gods word in their memories, but also to the Unconverted, for it may be a
means of their Conversion and turning unto God: Psalm. 22.27. All the ends of
the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord -- Seeing therefore it is so
advantageous for all sorts of persons to have Gods Word treasured up in their
memories, cause both your Servants and Children to commit to and keep in
memory, what you teach them out of the Scriptures, and to that purpose cause
them often to rehearse those Scriptures wherein they have been instructed. The
Hebrew word which we translate teach diligently, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach
them diligently to thy Children; signifies also to repeat often one and the
same thing, to inculcate it again and again with much diligence. And let not
the rehearsing of the same Scriptures by and to the members of your Family be
irksome and tedious to you, seeing it will prove beneficial to them: For what
the Apostle faith of writing the same things to the same persons, viz. to the
Church at Philippi, Phil. 3.1. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is
not grievous, but for you it is safe: The same I may say of repeating the same
things in our Families, it should not be grievous to you, seeing it is safe for
them.

SECT. 6. The necessity of watching over our Families.
Solomon speaking of a virtuous Woman, says of her, Prove. 31.27. She looks
well to the ways of her household: A Governor of a Family must not only
instruct his Household, but look, yea look well to the ways of his Household,
that he may see that none of them live in any vice, or in the neglect of their
duty to God or their Neighbor. We read of a man which sowed good seed in his
field, but while men slept, the Enemy came, and sowed Tares among the Wheat,
Matthew. 13.24, 25. Though we sow the good Seed of the word in our Families, yet
if we sleep when we have done, that is, if we be secure and careless, and do
not watch over them, the Enemy will come and endeavor to sow Tares; either the
Tares of Error, or the Tares of Strife and Dissension, or some other evils.

To quicken you to this duty of watching over your Families, consider,

1. How prone man's nature is unto that which is evil, our proneness to sin is
so great, that they which have had good and wholesome Instructions given to
them, are very apt to turn aside, and go astray, if they be left but a little
to themselves. A remarkable instance of this we have in the Children of Israel,
who upon Moses his absence by the space only of forty days, fell into the sin
of Idolatry, and made a golden Calf, and worshipped the same for the God that
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 32.1. to verse. 9. And yet Israel
had received many good instructions from Moses; yea, they had heard God himself
speaking to them from Mount Sinai, and delivering his Law to them, wherein he
had expressly charged them not to make to themselves any graven image, etc. And
to beget the greater Reverence of his Law, there were such Thundrings and
Lightnings, and such dreadful fire, as that Moses and all the people quaked and
trembled with fear. And notwithstanding this solemn delivery of the Law of God,
they quickly fell into this fearful sin of Idolatry, Exodus 32.8. They have
turned aside quickly out of the way that I commanded them. It was not above six
weeks, as some compute the time, after the delivery of the Law, that they made
this Calf; not above six months after they came out of Egypt, as Rivet
observes. This sin of theirs was the more to be wondered at, because they had
seen the mighty works of God upon the Egyptians, whose gods could not deliver
them out of the Lords hand; they had also seen his wonders at the red Sea;
besides, they bad in a solemn manner promised obedience to all the Commands of
God, Exodus 24.3. All the people answered with one voice, and said, All the
words which the Lord has said, will we do. And yet after all the Instructions
and all the Engagements that lay upon them to obey the Lord, they quickly fell
into that foul sin of Idolatry.

2. Consider what a mighty charge you have to look after: It is beyond Silver,
or Gold, or precious Stones, you have the Souls of your Families committed to
your charge, you have such a charge of them as that you must give an account to
God for them: Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Ruleover you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account.

SECT. 7. The Usefulness of Reproof, and Directions about giving Reproof.
Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and Reproofs of
Instruction are the way of Life: The sense of which, is this, the Law of God
gives us Light and Direction how to order our Conversations aright; and when
persons are instructed out of this Law, and reproved when they go astray from
it, this is the way to save their Souls. Although some persons in your Families
should be addicted to lying, and other heinous sins, and have been habituated
to them for a long season, yet you may hope by instructing and reproving them,
according to the Rules of Gods Word, that you shall reclaim them from their
Vices, and make them sound and sincere Christians. The Cretians were notorious
Liars, and so given to sensuality that they seemed more like Beasts than Men,
slothful persons that minded little else but their Bellies; yet the Apostle
would not have Titus despair of reforming them, and making these Cretians sound
and good Christians: And what course does he direct Titus unto, whereby he
might hope to effect this, but to instruct them in the faith of Christ, and
rebuke them sharply: Tit. 1.12, 13. The Cretians are always Liars, evil Beasts,
slow Bellies; This witness is true; wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they
may be sound in the faith.

If you ask, How shall we manage this duty of Reproof, so as to reform those
persons whom we reprove?

I answer:

1. Reprove not but upon just cause, and let that cause be for something you
know and can prove to be a sin against God. Thus God deals with us; when he
rebukes us, it is for sin; Psalm. 39.11. When thou with rebukes do correct man
for iniquity -- John 16.8. When he is come, he will reprove the world of sin --
If we commit sin, though it be secretly, God will not let it pass without a
reproof, Job 13.10. He will surely reprove you, if you do secretly accept
persons. If your Children or Servants be guilty of lying, swearing,
backbiting, or any other sin, by no means forbear to rebuke them for their
sins: Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. You must also know
and be sure that the person whom you reprove, is guilty of that sin for which
you reprove him. And therefore you must not reprove upon every slight and
groundless report, Isa. 11.3. He shall not reprove after the hearing of the
Ears: But you must inquire whether the thing that you hear be certain, and
whether it be altogether so bad as is reported. God teaches us this by his own
example, Genesis 18.20, 21. And the Lord said, Because the Cry of Sodom and
Gomerrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous, I will go down now
and see whether they have done altogether according to the Cry of it which is
come unto me; and if not, I will know. And he gives us a charge to be very wary
how we proceed in judging others, till we have made full and certain enquiry
into the matter of Fact, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 14. If thou shall hear say in one of thy
Cities -- Then thou shall inquire, and make search, and ask diligently, and
behold if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought
among you. --

2. The Lord does not always chide, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 103.9. He
will not always chide, but takes his set times for rebuking of us, such as he
in his wisdom judges most meet, Exodus 32.34. In like manner, we must not be
always chiding our Children and Servants, lest we either break or sink their
spirits, or else make them careless or regardless of our reproofs, but it will
be our prudence, when we meet with that which provokes us to anger, and
deserves reproof, to defer it to a convenient season; and when we reprove, to
do it effectually and to purpose: Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger.

3. When you reprove your Servants or Children, instruct and show them the evil
of those things for which you reprove them: And put them in remembrance of some
Scripture that does set out most fully and convincingly the evil and danger of
that sin for which you reprove them. And if they have no such Scriptures in
their remembrance, it will be good to cause them to take their Bibles and turn
to such Scriptures as are most pertinent to fasten upon their hearts that word
of reproof which you shall give them. The Apostle exhorts Timothy to join
Doctrine with Reproof, 2 Timothy 4.2. Reprove, Rebuke, -- with Doctrine. When
Christ reproved the Saduces for holding there was no Resurrection of the Dead,
he proves to them out of the Scriptures that they were in a great Error, Matthew.
22.29, 31, 32. Diverse instances we have of the like nature, in his reproving
the Scribes and Pharisees, wherein he joins the quotation of the Scriptures
with his Reproofs.

4. If you see no fruit, no amendment produced by those Reproofs which you give
your Family, you must not sit down discouraged, but reprove again and again,
and exercise much patience and long-suffering in the performance of this duty,
2 Timothy 4.2. Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine. What
God said to Moses, Exodus 4.8. And it shall come to pass, if they will not
believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will
believe the voice of the latter sign. The like may I say here, If they turn not
at the first Reproof, it may be they will at the second; if not at the second,
it may be the third will prevail; but if it should not, you must not cease to
do your duty, though God should deny success, but must be often dealing with
them, and set before them the great danger of going on in sin after they have
been often reproved, concerning which we meet with many awakening passages in
Scripture, as Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: Prove. 15.10. He that
hates reproof shall die: See also Prove. 1.25. to verse 33. Heb. 6.7, 8. Jer.
6.8.

5. Do not reprove them in a fury, or when you are in a passion: For the wrath
of man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1.20. We are all ready to
pray with David, Psalm. 38.1. O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten
me in thy displeasure. If we would not have our Lord and Father rebuke us in
his wrath, shall we rebuke our Children and Servants in our wrath? Let this be
far from us. We should put on a spirit of Meekness, when we set upon this work
of Reproof. Two Considerations may cause us to exercise a spirit of Meekness
when we are to deal with Offenders: First, When we consider what we our selves
have been; by nature we are as bad as others: Tit. 3.2, 3. -- Showing all
meekness unto all men, for we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another. Secondly, When we consider what we may
be, if we fall into temptation: Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be over-taken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness;
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Our Spirits may be meek, and
yet our Reproofs may be sharp, if either the nature of the Offense or Offender
require sharp reprehensions. If we would have our Reproofs sharp, such as may
enter and pierce deep into their hearts, the way is not to use bitter
Invectives, and railing Expressions, but rather, 1. To convince them plainly
and clearly of their sin for which we reprove them: Thus Peter dealt with the
Jews, he gives them clear and certain demonstrations that that Person whom they
had put to death was the promised Messiah, and that pricked them to the heart;
Acts 2.36, 37. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
the same Jesus whom you have crucified, both Lord Lord and Christ. Now when
they heard this, they were pricked in their heart -- 2. To demonstrate to them
out of the word of God the evil and danger of those things for which you rebuke
them: for Gods word is called the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. No sword
cuts and pierces like the sword of the Spirit. For the word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.

6. Reprove with wisdom, for when a Reproof is managed wisely, it becomes more
amiable and successful, Prove. 25.12. As an ear-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of
fine Gold, so is a wise Reprover upon an obedient ear. Our wisdom must be
discovered in taking the fittest time for giving a Reproof, and doing it in a
judicious manner, Eccles. 8.5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and
judgment: We must take the fittest time, we must not defer too long: We must do
it when we are in the best capacity to give, and the offending party to receive
a Reproof: We must reprove with Judgment, which will teach us to weigh and
consider the nature of the Offense, and the Offender. Some persons are of a
more softly yielding disposition than others; a word will do more with one,
than many blows with another; Prove. 17.10. A Reproof enters more into a wise
man, than a hundred stripes into a fool. Some Offenses are more heinous for
their own nature, and for their circumstances, than others. In some cases we
are to rebuke secretly, Mat. 18.15. -- Go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone. -- In some cases we are to rebuke publicly in the presence of
all, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.
Wisdom will direct us what to do in these and other such like Cases, Eccles.
10.10. Wisis profitable to direct. And that we may manage this work the more
wisely, we must not go about it rashly, but consult with our selves about the
fittest season and best manner of giving a Reproof: Neb. 5.7. Then I consulted
with my self, and rebuked the Nobles, Prove. 13.10. With the well-advised is
wisdom.

7. Look to God for Direction, Courage, and Success, in giving a Reproof, and
rest upon him for his blessing; for the success of every work we take in hand,
depends upon Gods blessing: And therefore we must pray to God to assist,
accept, and prosper us in this work. And as we must pray, so also rest upon God
for his blessing in the administering a Reproof; whether it be to such as are
unconverted, or to such as are in a state of Grace; for God has promised to
bless Reproof to both sorts: To such as are gracious, Prove. 19.25. Reprove one
that has understanding, and he will understand knowledge: To such as are yet
in their sins, Pro. 24.25. To them that rebuke him (that is, a wicked person
spoken of ver. 24.) shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.

8. Reprove and tell them of their faults with a tender compassionate heart,
not in an insulting way, or in a way of jesting or jearing, but rather mourning
over them, and for them; Phil. 3.18. Many walk, of whom I told you often, and
now tell you even weeping, that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ. --
When the Apostle wrote an Epistle to the Corinthians to reprove them for their
indulging the incestuous person, he tells them, Out of much affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you, with many tears, 2 Cor. 2.4.

SECT. 8. The Benefits of Correction. Directions for Correcting Children.
Prove. 19.15. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom, but a Child left to himself
brings his Mother to shame. It makes Children prove great blessings and
comforts to their Parents, Prove. 29.17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee
rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy Soul: Correction will be a means of
preventing their eternal Damnation, by effecting their Reformation, Prove.
23.13, 14. Withold not Correction from the Child, for if thou beatest him
with the Rod, he shall not die: Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall
deliver his Soul from Hell. Though they be never so much addicted to any sin,
which seems to be deeply and fast rooted in their Souls, Correction prudently
and rightly administered, will be a means to reform them, and make them leave
their sins: Prove. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the
Rod of Correction will drive it far from him: Prove. 20.30. The blueness of a
wound cleanses away evil, so do stripes the inward parts of the Belly.

If any ask, How should we correct our Children so as to make our Corrections
become effectual for their good?

I answer:

1. Begin with them betimes, before they have got too great an head, or are
habituated to sin: A Twig is easily bent and made straight whilst it is young,
but being let alone for some years, it becomes inflexible: Prove. 19.18. Chasten
thy Son while there is hope: Prove. 13.24. He that spares his Rod, hates his
Son, but he that loves him chasteneth him betimes.

2. Be not overcome with fond pity, either by their crying or pleading with you
to withold correction from them when you see it meet and necessary to correct
them; Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy Son while there is hope, and let not thy Soul
spare for his crying: They had better cry and roar under your Rod, than roar
under Gods wrath in Hell to all Eternity.

3. Join Faith and Prayer with your Corrections. Pray to God to bless the
Corrections as well as the Instructions which you give your Children; and
though you see no present fruit of your Corrections, yet be not discouraged,
but rest upon Gods promises, who has promised that Correction shall make our
Children leave their sins, Prove. 22.15. and be a means to save their souls,
Prove. 23.13, 14.

4. In correcting your Children, imitate God in correcting his Children: As for
instance, 1. God joins Instruction with Correction, and thereby his Corrections
come to have a blessed effect upon his Children: Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the
man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and reachest him out of thy Law: Deal thus
with your Children; when you chasten them, teach them out of the Scriptures the
evil of those things for which you correct them. 2. When God chastens, he does
not only show us our sins, but lays his commands upon us, to leave off our
sins, Job 36.8, 9, 10. If they be holden in cords of affliction, then he
shows them their work and their transgression that they have exceeded; he
opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. So should you charge and command your Children that they sin no more
when you correct them. 3. God is not extreme to correct for every small fault,
Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? If
any thing be done ignorantly, he is ready to wink at that, Acts 17.30. The
times of this ignorance God winked at -- 4. God distinguishes between his
Children: Such as are dutiful diligent Children, shall not be corrected so
smartly as those that are careless and negligent, Mal. 3.17. I will spare them
as a man spares his own Son that serves him. 5. When Gods dearest Children
need Correction, and he sees it is for their good, they shall have it as well
as others: So should you do; If you have any Child which is dearer and more
delightful than the rest, you should correct that as well as the others, when
it needs Correction. Prove. 3.12. Whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a
Father the Son in whom he delights. 6. The Lord corrects in measure, Jer.
30.11. I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether
unpunished. He is careful not to break or sink his peoples Spirits by his
Corrections; Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth, for the Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul which I have made. In
like manner, you should be careful that you do not correct your Children out of
measure, or so as to sink and quench their Spirits. 7. God does not correct his
Children in anger, but out of love, Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten: And as he corrects in love, so he does aim at their good, Heb. 12.10.
They verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. In like manner, when
you correct your Children, let it not be in passion, but out of love to their
Souls, and with a desire and design to do them good. 8. God tries to reform his
Children first by lesser and more gentle afflictions; and when they will not
prevail to reform them, then he deals more severely with them, and will not
leave following them with one correction after another, till he has humbled
and reformed them, Isa. 9.1. At the first he lightly afflicted the Land of
Zebulun and Naphthali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the
way of the Sea: Lev. 26.23, 24. If ye will not be reformed by these things, but
will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will
punish you yet seven times for your sins. So should you first try more gentle
means, and if that will not prevail, chastise them more severely, and be not
discouraged from instructing and correcting them, till you have humbled and
subdued their spirits, and caused them to reform their lives.

SECT. 9. How to keep up our Authority over our Children and Servants.
Mat. 7.28, 29. The people were astonished at his Doctrine, for he taught them
as one having authority -- And what followed hereupon? His word became very
powerful, Luke 4.32. They were astonished at his Doctrine, for his word was
with power. When persons reverence those that teach them, it causes their
Doctrine to work the more effectually upon their hearts and lives, Mark 6.20.
Herod feared John -- and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him
gladly.

If you say, What course should we take that we may keep up our Authority, and
be reverenced in our Families?

I answer:

First, Be careful to honor God, to submit and subject your selves unto him,
and then he will cause your Families to honor you, and to submit and subject
themselves to your Commands; It is God that inclines men's hearts to honor us,
1 Chronicles. 29.12. Both Riches and Honor come of thee: And when we are vilified,
flighted, and disregarded, this also is of God, Psalm. 44.13. Thou make us a
reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about
us: It is God that subdues the hearts of Children and Servants, and other
inferiors, and makes them subject to their Superiors, Psalm. 18.47. It is God
that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me. And it is a Judgment which
the Lord lays upon us, when our Children or Servants carry themselves proudly
or disobediently toward us: Isa. 3.5. The Child shall behave himself proudly
against the Ancient, and the Base against the Honorable. Now if we be careful
to glorify God, he will cause us to be honored; if we slight or disregard
him, he will cause us to be despised: 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will
honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. If we submit our
selves to God, he will cause our Wives, and Children, and Servants to submit
themselves unto us, James 4.7, 10. Submit your selves therefore to God, --
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up: By
lifting up, is not only meant deliverance out of trouble, but it implies also
that God will cause those that submit themselves to him to be honored and
reverenced, he will lift them up in the hearts and estimation of all sorts of
men, that they shall carry themselves respectively toward them. But if we
rebel against God, he will raise up evil against us out of our own Houses, and
cause some or other of our Families to carry themselves rebelliously and
contemptuously toward us. Thus when David had despised the Commandment of the
Lord, God raised up evil against him out of his own House, 2 Samuel 12.9, 11.
Whilst he walked in the ways of God, all sorts of persons, strangers as well as
his own people, were subject to him; Psalm. 18.43, 44. A people whom I have not
known shall serve me; as soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me, the
strangers shall submit themselves unto me. But when he turned aside from God,
Sbimei one of his Servants curses him to his face, and his own Son Absalom
rises up in Rebellion against him.

Secondly, When your Children carry themselves undutifully or irreverently
toward you, or do any thing that is sinful and displeasing to God, reprove
them, and if Reproofs do not make them amend, correct them: This will make them
give you reverence: Heb. 12.9. We have had Fathers of our flesh, which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits and live?

Thirdly, Avoid frowardness, intemperance, and all other vices, and carry your
Souls in a holy gracious and exemplary manner: for if you be addicted to any
sin, that will bring you under contempt, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a
Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Yea, even such as have honored
you formerly, and had you in high esteem, if they come to understand that you
are tainted with any Vice, they will be ready to despise you: Lam. 1.8.
Jerusalem has grievously finned, and therefore she is removed: All that
honored her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. But by walking
in an holy gracious exemplary manner, you shall be reverenced not only by such
as are gracious themselves, but by those that are destitute of the grace of
God: Herod was not a good man himself, our Savior calls him a Fox, Luke
13.23. because he was a subtle and cruel Enemy to Jesus Christ, and to the
Christian Religion, Luke 13.31, 32. Yet John the Baptist being an holy man,
Herod reverenced him, Mark 6.20. Herod feared John, knowing that be was a just
man, and holy, and observed him: Prove. 22.4. By humility and the fear of the
Lord, are Riches, and Honor, and Life. And as an holy Conversation will
procure Honor and Respect, so also it will preserve the same; Prove. 11.16. A
gracious woman retains honor.

Fourthly, Carry your selves wisely and discreetly in the managing of your
Family Affairs: for, A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. But
foolish and indiscreet carriage will cause us to be slighted and disrespected,
Eccles. 10.1. Dead flies cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor, so does a little folly him that is in Reputation for Wisdom
and Honor.

Fifthly, Do not carry your selves lightly and vainly in your Families, but let
your deportment be grave and serious, that will be a means to keep your
Children and Servants in due subjection, 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his
own House, having his Children in subjection with all gravity. He cannot rule
his House well, that does not keep his Children in subjection, for if the
Children be unruly, the Servants will be so too; and a man shall hardly keep
his Children in subjection, if his carriage be not grave and serious.

Sixthly, Use not overmuch familiarity or delicacy toward your Children and
Servants, especially when your Children are grown up to some maturity, for
familiarity will be apt to breed contempt, and make Children and Servants to
cast off that awe and dread which they ought to bear toward their Parents and
Masters: Children are commanded not only to love, but to fear their Parents,
Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father: And Servants are
commanded to fear their Masters, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to them that
are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness
of your heart as unto Christ. Overmuch familiarity will cause them to cast off
this fear: Solomon gives us a caution against using too much delicacy toward
our Servants, as that which will spoil them, and make them prove great Crosses;
Prove. 29.21. He that delicately brings up his Servant from a Child, shall
have him become his Son at length. The vulgar Latin renders the words, Postea
sentiet eum contumacem; He shall find him to be stubborn and obstinate. Pagnine
renders the words, In novissimo crit superbus perinde ac filius; He will become
proud, and expect to be dealt with as if he were a Son, and not a Servant: When
instead of that gravity and distance which ought to be in the carriage of
Masters and Parents, they will be so familiar as to play with their Servants
and Children, this makes them to lose their authority, according to the Proverb
in use among the Arabians, Collusio sive jocus aufert reverentiam; Playing and
Jesting takes away a Man's Reverence: If we use to jest and sport with our
Servants or Children, we must expect no more Reverence from them. And therefore
the Son of Syrach gives this Advice to Parents, Ecclus. 30.9, 10. Cocker thy
Child, and he shall make thee afraid; play with him, and he will bring thee to
heaviness; laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest thou
gnash thy teeth in the end. And Plato speaking of our carriage toward our
Servants, in his Dialogue de legibus, gives this prudent Advice, Neque jocus
ullus, cum illis habeatur, quod multi stulte facientes, dum delicatius eos
nutriunt, difficiliorem viam and sibi ad imperandum, and illis ad obediendum
reddunt. Do not use at any time to jest with your Servants, which thing many
doing foolishly, do make it more difficult for themselves to govern, and also
more difficult for their Servants to obey, by their training them up
delicately. Only here it will be needful to hint, that whilst you labor to
carry your selves with gravity, and to avoid too much familiarity, you had need
be careful that you do not become morose or austere, but rather endeavor to
express much sweetness and candor in your carriage toward your Children and
Servants. There was laid up in the Ark Aarons Rod, and the Pot with Manna, and
the Tables of the Covenant: Greg. mag. has an observation hereupon to this
effect, He that would govern well, must be furnished with the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and must make use of the Rod of Correction, yet so, as there must
be the sweetness of Manna with it. We should labor if it be possible to win
our Children by love to observe the Commandments of God, but if they will not
be drawn with Manna, then we must make use of Aron's Rod, and when we are
necessitated to use severity, it must be tempered with mercy.

SECT. 10. How to gain our Childrens and Servants affections.
Paul knowing Philemon loved him, was confident he would follow the counsel he
gave him, Phil. 7.21. We have great joy -- in thy love, -- having confidence in
thy obedience, etc. The like confidence he had of the These alonians, 2 These.
3.4. We have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do
the thing which we command you. And they were such as bore a great affection to
the Apostle, 1 These. 3.6. If there be a disaffection to the person that
instructs, his Doctrine will do little good. Ahab hating Micaiah, received no
good by his Prophecies, but went on in his own way, contrary to the good
counsel of Michaiah, whereby he brought destruction upon himself.

If any say, How should we so carry our selves as to get the Love and Affection
of our Children and Servants?

I answer:

First, Show your selves loving to them. Love will draw love from the worst of
men, Luke 6.32. Sinners also love those that love them. Show your love to them
by speaking kindly to them, and by seeking their welfare: Hereby Mordecai got
the love of the Jews, Esth. 10.3. Mordecai the Jew was -- accepted of the
multitude of his Brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace
to all his seed.

Secondly, Be kind to them, as you see occasion; give them some gifts to
encourage them to learn those things that are for their good: this will win
much upon their affections: Prove. 19.6. Every man is a friend to him that
gives Gifts.

Thirdly, Give ear to their just Complaints, and be willing to redress their
grievances. Job was ready to hear the cause and complaint of the meanest
Servant in his family, even when and wherein he himself was concerned; Job
31.13, 14. If I did despise the cause of my man Servant, or of my maid Servant,
when they contended with me; what then shall I do when God rises up? And when
he visits, what shall I answer him? And who was more loved and respected than
Job? Job 29.8, 9, 10, 11. Absalom by his courteous carriage and kind speeches,
and by expressing his readiness to redress the grievances of the people, stole
the hearts of the men of Israel, 2 Samuel, 15.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. When the people of
Israel came to Rehoboam with a desire to redress their grievances, his wise men
counseled him to answer their desires, for thereby he should engage their
affections to him for ever, 2 Chronicles. 10.7. If thou be kind to this people, and
please them, and speak good words unto them, they will be thy Servants for ever.

Fourthly, Answer their Requests, when they defire those things that are for
their good, and which may conveniently be granted them. As Gods answering our
Requests makes us love God, Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard
the voice of my Supplications: So our answering those Requests which our
Children or Servants make to us, will engage them to love us.

Fifthly, Cover their failings and infirmities. Prove. 17.9. He that covers a
transgression seeks love; or (as it is in the Margent) procures love: By
covering a cransgression, is not meant that we should forbear reproving them:
for Reproof prudently administered, will not hinder, but increase love: Prove.
9.8. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: But by covering a transgr^^son,
is meant, 1. That we should not twit and upbraid them with their faults, and be
often repeating them, as the manner of some is, especially when they are in a
passion, for this is a great hindrance of love, and causes discord between
inward Friends, as appears by the following words; But he that repeateth a
matter separateth very friends. 2. That we should not divulge or blaze abroad
their infirmities, but endeavor to conceal them.

SECT. 11. How to ingraft the Word of God in the hearts of our Children and
Servants. How we may bring them in love with the Word.
Jam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your Souls.

If you say, What shall we do that we may get the word of God ingrafted in
their hearts?

I answer:

First, Acquaint them with Gods Covenant, wherein he has promised to engrave
or write his word in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts. And stir them up to plead this
Covenant, until they find that God according to his promise, has engraven his
Law upon their hearts.

Secondly, Cause them to understand those Scriptures which you teach them; and
to that end, when there is any difficulty therein explain them, and labor to
beget in them a clear and right understanding of the word of God. When the
understanding is enlightened with the knowledge of Divine Truths, there is way
made for their entrance into and their abode in the heart, Prove. 14.33. Wisdom
rests in the heart of him that has understanding. -- By wisdom we may
understand the grace of God, Job 28.28. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom.
Now the grace of God does not only enter into, but rests and makes its abode
in the heart of him that has understanding. If your Instructions be never so
good, though they be drawn out of the word of God, yet if they be not
understood, they will not abide in their hearts whom you instruct, but will
quickly vanish out of their minds, Matthew. 13.19. When any one hears the word
of the Kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and
catches away that which was sown in his heart.

Thirdly, Endeavor to fix the word of God in their memories, cause them often
to rehearse what you have taught them, exhort them to meditate and ponder upon
those Instructions they have received from you: This will be a means of
ingrafting the word of God in their hearts. As the remembering of our sins is a
means of engraving our iniquities upon our hearts, Jer. 17.1, 2. The sin of
Judah is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, it is
graven upon the Table of their Hearts, and upon the Horns of their Altars,
whilst their Children remember their Altars and their Groves: So remembering and
pondering upon the Word of God, will be a means of graving or writing the Word
of God upon our hearts. Prove. 3.1, 3. My Son forget not my Law, but let thine
heart keep my Commandments -- Bind them about thy Neck, write them upon the
Table of thine Heart: The binding of the Commandments about the Neck -- is the
same with not forgetting the Law, mentioned verse. 1. This binding of the Law
about the Neck, was used by the Jews as a Memorial to help them to keep the
Commandments of God in remembrance, Exodus 13.9. Now Solomon joining these two
together, Bind them about thy Neck, write them upon the Table of thine Heart;
implies that the binding of the Commandments about our Neck, that is, the
keeping them in remembrance, will be a means to write them upon our Hearts.

Fourthly, Inure them to godly Discourse. When they are in your presence, speak
often to them of the word of God; and when they are discoursing one with
another, exhort them to discourse of what you have taught them out of the word
of God. Discoursing out of the word will be a means of imprinting the Law of
God upon their hearts, Psalm. 37.30, 31. The mouth of the Righteous speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment: And what is the fruit and effect of
this good discourse, is declared in the next words, The Law of his God is in
his heart, none of his steps shall slide.

Fifthly, Bring them in love with the word of God; love to the Word will root
and ground the Truths of God in their hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. Rooted and grounded
in love. Love to the word of God will root it so deeply and firmly in their
hearts, that no troubles will cause them to depart from the word of God, but
they will stick and cleave to it unto their dying day: Cant. 8.6, 7. Love is
strong as death, -- many Waters cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods
drown it.

If you ask, How shall we bring our Children and Servants to love the Word of
God?

I answer: 1. Show them the purity, excellency, and amiableness that is in the
word of God; Psalm. 119.140. Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves
it. 2. Stir them up to practice the word of God, that will cause them to love
it, Psalm. 119.167. My Soul has kept thy Testimonies, and I love them
exceedingly. 3. Show them what a dangerous thing it is, not to love the word.
God is wont to send down sore Judgments upon them that do not receive his Truth
in the love of it, 2 These. 2.10.11, 12. Because they received not the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned
who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 4. Exhort them
to put away and hate their sins, and then they will love and delight in the
word of God, Psalm. 119.163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I love. 5.
Counsel them to feed daily upon Gods word by Meditation and Faith, for this
will cause them to taste the sweetness of it: Jer. 5.16. Thy words were found,
and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my Heart:
Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet. And when they taste the
sweetness of Gods word, they will love it above all things in the world: Psalm.
119.103, 128. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea sweeter than Honey to
my month; therefore I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold.


SECT. 12. How to draw our Families to close with Christ. How to ortifie them
against the offense of the Cross.
John 5.12. He that has not the Son of God, has not Life. But if you can
prevail with them to come to and to close with JESUS CHRIST, they shall become
the Children of God, and shall assuredly obtain everlasting Life: John 1.12. As
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to
them that believe on his Name: 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life:
John 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me has
everlasting Life.

If you ask, What shall we do that we may draw our Children and Servants to
come to and close with JESUS CHRIST?

I answer:

First, Show them their miserable lost and undone condition without Christ. The
misery of Man without Christ, is set out by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.12. That at
that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no Hope, and without God in
the world. In this Text the misery of such as are without Christ, is set forth
several ways: 1. They are Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; that is, they
are none of the People of God. 2. They are Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise; that is, they have no part or portion in any of the promises either of
the first or second Covenant, the Covenant of Works, or the Covenant of Grace.
3. They are without hope; They have no hope of mercy either in this world, or
in the world to come: They may have much presumption, and much carnal security,
but they have no hope. 4. They are without God; that is, without the love and
favor of God, without the grace of God, without any communion with and
enjoyment of God. There is much also said in few words toward the setting
forth of the misery of a man that is without Christ, in that forementioned
Scripture, 1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son of God, has not Life. He has
not the Life of Grace here, but is dead in his sins; he has not the Life of
Glory hereafter, but is debarred of all hope of entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven for ever. The conviction of their misery and perishing condition without
Christ, will draw them to seek after Christ, Luke 15.17, 18. I perish with
hunger, I will arise and go to my Father: Mat. 8.25. His Disciples came to him,
-- saying, Lord save us, we perish. Inform them also that salvation from their
miserable perishing condition, is to be had in Christ, and no where else but in
Christ, Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none
other Name under Heaven given among men whereby they may be saved. When the
people of Israel saw that salvation was to be had in the Lord, and no where
else, this caused them to come to him, Jer. 3.22, 23. Behold we come unto thee,
for thou art the Lord our God; truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the
hills, and from the multitude of mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the
salvation of Israel.


Secondly, Acquaint them with the amiableness and excellency of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and with what benefits they shall receive from him, if they embrace
him, as namely, that all their sins shall be pardoned, Act. 10.43. and their
Souls shall be taken into Covenant with God, Isa. 55.3. and they shall be
blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. and that they shall have all
the blessings of Heaven for ever, John 3.16. When the Spouse had set forth
Christ's excellencies, that he was the chiefest of ten thousand, altogether
lovely, etc. Cant. 5.10, 16. They that before saw no beauty or comeliness in
him why they should desire him, verse 9. What is thy Beloved more than another
Beloved? etc. fell in love with Christ, and began to enquire where they might
find him, and how they might come to enjoy him; Chap. 6.1. Whether is thy
Beloved gone, O thou fairest among women, whether is thy beloved turned aside,
that we may seek him with thee?

Thirdly, Cause them to understand that God is very willing to bestow his Son,
and Jesus Christ is very willing to bestow himself upon all those that feel
their need of him, and are willing to receive him; as is evident from such
Scriptures as these: Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let
him that hears say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever
will, let him take of the Water of Life freely: Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no money, come ye buy and
eat, yea come and buy wine and milk without money and without price: Joh. 7.37.
In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If
any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: John 6.37. Him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast out. The understanding of Christ's love, how willing and
ready he is to receive such as come to him, will be a powerful means to draw
their Souls to Christ, Jer. 31.3. With loving kindness have I drawn thee: Hos.
11.4. I drew them with the Cords of a man, with the bands of love.

Fourthly, Inform them what Jesus Christ expects from those that come to him,
and close with him, if they would be owned by him for true Disciples, and such
as shall partake of his saving benefits: As, 1. They must abandon all their
sins, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. 2. They must deny themselves, and take up their Cross, and follow
Christ, Mark 8.34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow me: Luke 14.27. Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and
come after me, cannot be my Disciple. 3. They must love and prefer Christ above
all their Relations, and whatsoever else is dear to them in the whole world,
Matthew. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; and he that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. 4.
They must take his yoke upon them, and submit to his Government, and obey his
Commands; Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart, and you shall find rest unto your Souls: John 14.15. If ye
love me, keep my Commandments: John 15.14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. 5. They must continue believing in Christ, and
walking in his ways as long as they live, John 8.31. Then said Jesus unto those
Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my words, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. Let them know also that the Lord Jesus does not expect that
they should do these things in their own strength; but that if they look up
unto him, he will give them his holy Spirit to enable them to do all these
things, and whatsoever else he requires of them: Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments and do them.


Fifthly, Fortify them against the Offense and Scandal of the Cross of Christ,
that they may not revolt and depart from Christ after they have embraced him,
when they shall meet with troubles and persecutions for the Gospels sake, as
many are apt to do; Matthew. 13.21. Yet has he not Root in himself, but dureth
for a while; for when tribulation or persecution arises because of the Word,
by and by he is offended.

If you ask, How shall we fortify our Families against the offense of the
Cross, that when troubles arise for the Gospels sake, they may not fall off
from the ways of CHRIST?

I answer:

First, Tell them at their entrance into Christianity what they must expect to
meet withal, if they will be Christians indeed. Let them know they shall be
hated in the world, 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution. Luke 21.12. Ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake, and must look for Reproaches, Confiscation of Goods, Imprisonment,
and all sorts of persecution. This was the means that Christ used to keep his
Disciples from being offended at the troubles should come upon them: He told
them before hand what they must expect to meet with, John 16.1, 2. These things
have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended: They shall put you out
of the Synagogues; yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you will think
that he does God service. As it is with those that build an House or a Tower,
they should first sit down and consider what will be the cost and charges that
they must be at in building, Luke 14.28, 29, 30. Which of you intending to
build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost, whether he have
sufficient to finish it? Lest happily after he has laid the foundation, and is
not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man
began to build, and was not able to finish. So they who have a purpose to
become Christians, had need count what it may cost them to be Christians
indeed; they must count upon it, that for ought they know, it may cost them the
loss of all things, even of their Lives, and see whether they are willing to
become Christians on these terms, lest after they are entered into the ways of
Christ, they should depart from them when they meet with persecutions for the
Gospels sake, and so become a reproach and and scandal to Religion.

2. Inform them that unless they be willing and resolved to suffer the loss of
all things for Christ, when they are called to it, they cannot be the Disciples
of Christ, Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he
has, he cannot be my Disciple. And if they go about to save their Lives, when
the Lord Jesus calls them to lay them down, they shall lose eternal Life:
Mark 8.35. Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it.

Thirdly, That they may not be discouraged from embracing the Lord Jesus, and
the Christian Religion because of those sufferings that they must expect to
meet with in the profession and practice of the ways of Christ, propose to them
such considerations as may encourage them to embrace the Cross of Christ with
cheerfulness: As, 1. Whatsoever losses they sustain on the Account of Christ or
his Gospel, shall be made up to them with an hundredfold advantage in this
life, and if not in the same kind, yet in some other thing which is as good or
better, besides the recompense that they shall have in the world to come, Mark
10.29, 30. Verily, I say unto you, There is no man that has left House, or
Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for
my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time,
Houses, and Brethren and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands, with
persecution, and in the world to come life everlasting. 2. The sufferings of
this present life will increase our glory in the world to come: 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. The glory of Heaven does so far exceed
the sufferings of this present life, that they are not worthy to be compared
together, Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. -- 3. It
is our happiness and not our misery, to suffer Reproaches and persecutions for
Christ's sake, and it should fill us with joy, rather than cast us down with
sorrow, when we meet with any sufferings for Righteousness sake: Matthew. 5.10,
11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall speak all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven: 1 Pet.
4.13, 14. Rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when
his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy: If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of God and of
Glory rests upon you. There is a greater excellency in suffering for Christ,
than in enjoying all the riches of the world, and it is far more eligible to
endure the sharpest afflictions, than to enjoy the delights and pleasures of
sin, Heb. 11.25. Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of GOD,
than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season; esteeming the Reproaches of
Christ (even those things that are most hard to be born) greater Riches than
the Treasures of Egypt, or all the enjoyments in the World. 4. God will not
suffer any man to be afflicted for Christ or the Gospels sake, above what he
will enable him to bear: 1 Cor. 10.13. God is Faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above what ye are able, but will also with the Temptation make a
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. And when we do suffer for
Christ's sake, the Lord will be with us in all our sufferings: 2 Cor. 4.9.
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not in despair: Isaiah 43.2. When
thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee: Psalm 91.15. I will be
with him in trouble, etc. 5. The more we suffer for Christ, the more abundant
consolation we shall have from Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ; And we shall find
more delight in our Consolations, than we do grief in our sufferings, Psalm.
94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.


Fourthly, Put them in mind of the great things which Jesus Christ has
suffered for them: He became poor for our sakes, 2 Cor 8.9. He gave his Body to
be broken for us, he made his Soul an offering for our sins, etc. The
consideration of what Christ has suffered for us, and how willingly he
suffered for us ( I gave my Back to the smiters, and my Cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and spitting, Isa. 50.6.)
will make us willing to suffer for him, and keep us from fainting under our
Sufferings: Heb. 12.3. Looking unto JESUS, the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God: for consider
him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest you be
wearied, and faint in your minds.

SECT. 13. The advantage of knowing the state of our Families. How we may come
to know their state.
Prove. 27.24. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy Flocks, and look well
to thy Herds. If a man must be diligent to know the state of his Flocks and
Herds, whether they be sound or diseased, how much more does it concern him to
know the state of his Wife, and Children, and Servants, whether they be in a
state of Grace, or a state of Nature. Estius and Beda, and some others, apply
this passage of the Proverbs to those that have the care of Souls committed to
their Charge; The Arabian Translation favors this interpretation, Cognosce
animos gregis tui cognitione perfecta: And the Sept. (...).

The knowledge of the state of our Families will help us, 1. To instruct them
in those things that are most suitable to their state, and will conduce much to
their edification: Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love
and good works: By considering and observing wherein they are deficient,
whether in Love, or any other Grace, as Meekness, Patience,
Heavenly-mindedness, Temperance, or the like, we have an advantage to apply our
selves to them, in a way suitable to their necessities, that we may provoke
them to seek after those things wherein they are most defective. 2. The
knowledge of their state will enable us to apply suitable comforts to them, if
they be dejected and cast down, either by inward or outward troubles: Col. 4.8.
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate,
and comfort your hearts. 3. It will tend much to our own comfort, if they be in
a good estate; Phil. 2.19. That I may be of good comfort when I know your
state. 4. It will help us in our Prayers for them, and praising God upon their
account. When the Apostle understood the good estate of the Thessalonians, it
did greatly excite him to thanksgiving and prayer, 1 These. 1.2, 3. We give
thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of Faith and labor of Love, and patience
of Hope, etc. The like we may see on the behalf of the Colossians, Col. 1.3, 4.


If any say, How should we come to know the state of our Families?

I answer: 1. By communing with the several members of our Families, and
examing them whhat workings they have had upon their Souls, and whether they
have any enjoyment of God in his Ordinances, and putting searching questions to
them, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart: and verse. 1. O Lord,
thou have searched me and known me. As Joseph inquired into the state of his
Brethren, Genesis 43.7. The man asked us straightly of our state -- saying, is your
Father yet alive, have you another Brother? So should we inquire diligently
into the state of our Children and Servants, by questioning with them about
their conditions: As examining our selves, is the way to know our own estate, 2
Cor. 13.5. So examining of others, is the the way to know another state; but
of this more in the next Direction. 2. By observing their carriage and
conversation, we may know their state; Prove. 20.11. Even a Child is known by
his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. As the Tree, so
also a man is known by his Fruits; Matthew. 7.20. Wherefore by their fruits ye
shall know them. The Apostle Peter by observing Simon Magus his carriage,
plainly perceived, That notwithstanding he made a profession of faith, yet he
was in an unregenerate condition, Acts 8.23. I perceive that thou art in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And David, by observing the
sinful carriage of some men in his days, concluded that they were wicked men,
and that they had no fear of God before their eyes, Psalm. 36.1. The
transgression of the wicked says within my heart, there is no fear of God
before his eyes.


SECT. 14. Of communing with our Children and Servants about their spiritual
state. What questions we should put to them.
1. Try whether they understand those things which you have taught them. Thus
Christ examines his Disciples, Matthew. 13.51. Jesus says unto them, Have ye
understood all these things? See what apprehensions they have of Jesus Christ,
of his Person, his Offices, his Design in coming into the world, Matthew. 16.15.
Whom say ye that I am? Matthew. 18.11, 12. The Son of man is come to save that
which was lost: How think ye? 2. Examine them about their Faith, John 16.31. Do
ye now believe? Luke 8.25. He said unto them, Where is your Faith? 3. Enquire
whether they do believe and apply the Promises, John 11.26. Whosoever lives
and believes in me, shall never die; believe thou this? And whether they
believe that Christ is able and willing to help them in all their straights,
Matthew. 9.28. Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? 4.
Enquire whether they are convinced of their impotent condition, that they are
unable of themselves to do or speak any thing that is good: Matthew. 12.34. How
can ye, being evil, speak good things? 5. Commune with them about their love to
Christ, whether they love Jesus Christ above all things and persons in the
world? John 21.15. Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, Son of Jonas, love thou
me more than these? 6. Ask them about their ability and willingness to suffer
for Christ, as, Whether they are willing to take up his Cross, whether they
could lay down their lives, and suffer the loss of all they have for Christ:
Mark 10.38. Jesus said unto them, -- Can ye drink of the Cup that I drink of,
and be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with? 7. Enquire what frame
of heart they have; whether they have hard or soft, earthly or spiritual,
ignorant or understanding hearts: Mark 8.17. Perceive ye not yet, neither
understand? Have ye your hearts yet hardened? 8. Ask them what ground they have
to hope that God will deliver them from eternal Damnation? Matthew. 23.33. How
can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? 9. Enquire how they spend their time when
they are alone, and what manner of discourse they have, when they are with
others; whether it be savoury, profitable, and such as makes for Gods glory?
Luke 24.17. He said, What manner of Communications are these, that ye have one
to another, as ye walk and are sad? 10. Enquire if they read the Scriptures,
and how and in what manner they read the Word of God; whether they do it with
an attentive mind, with a desire to profit by it, etc. Luke 10.26. He said unto
him, What is written in the Law? How read thou? 11. Examine what they aim at
in going to hear the Word of God, as Christ did those that followed John the
Baptist into the Wilderness, Matthew. 11.7. What went ye out into the Wilderness
to see? 12. Try whether they are able to resolve the objections that may be
brought against the main Articles of their Faith: Thus our Lord Jesus tried his
Followers with a difficult question, How Christ could be the Son of David, when
as David called him Lord? Mark 12.35, 36, 37. David himself calls him Lord,
whence is he then his Son? 13. If any of them are of a doubting troubled
spirit, perplexed with fears, enquire into the Grounds and Causes of their
Fears and Doubts, and whatever other troubles are upon their minds, Luke 24.38.
He said unto them why are you troubled? 14. Ask them, Wherein they excel others
that want a Principle of Grace? What they do more than a natural man, a man
that has nothing more than a Form of Godliness? Matthew. 5.47. What do you more
than others?


These and what other questions you shall judge meet, you may put to them, when
you are discoursing with them: As, Whether they pray? How and in what manner
they pray? Whether they have any answer of their prayers? What temptations they
meet with? Whether they are prepared for Death? Whether they enjoy communion
with God in his Ordinances? Whether they find Sin decaying, and Grace
increasing? etc. And when you put any questions to them, cause them to return
an answer; as Christ, when he was reasoning with the Jews, called upon them to
answer the question that he put to them, Mar. 11.29. Jesus said unto them, I
will ask you one question, and answer me. This communing with our Families
about their spiritual estate, is seasonable at all times, but more especially
when any of them are in affliction, and when they are under some eminent
workings and stirrings of the Spirit of God, or when they are assaulted with
temptations, or when they are to partake of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

SECT. 15. How to instill Grace into the Unconverted. What Counsel to give to
such as profit by our Instructions. How to deal with such as do not profit by
our Instructions. How with such as rest in a Form of Godliness. How with such
as are in a declining condition.


First, If you find any of your Children or Servants to be in an unconverted
condition, endeavor as far as in you lies to instill Grace into their hearts,
and to convert them to God; Psalm. 34.16. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I
will teach you the fear of the Lord. We should not only teach our Children to
know the Lord, but we must also teach them to fear the Lord. It may be you will
say, Can we instill Grace into our Children? Can we put the fear of God into
their hearts? Can we give them Repentance? I answer, No; but we may use the
means, and in so doing we may hope for Gods blessing.

If you ask,

What means should we use to instill Grace into, and convert such of our
Families as are in a graceless unconverted condition?

I answer: 1. Warn them of the danger of a graceless unconverted condition;
tell them, That except they be converted, they cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 18.3. and that if they do not repent, they will most certainly
perish, and be cast into everlasting burnings, Luke 13.3. Mat. 13.41, 42. And
therefore warn them often of the danger of living and dying in an impenitent
condition. Warning persons of the danger and damnable nature of sin, is an
effectual means to prevent their dying in their sins, and to bring them to
repentance and salvation: 2 Chronicles. 19.10. Ye shall warn them that they trespass
not against the Lord: Ezekiel. 3.21. He shall surely live because he is warned,
Ezekiel. 33.5. He that takes warning shall deliver his Soul. If you find that
after many warnings there is no amendment, yet cease not to warn them day after
day, and year after year, and that with much tenderness, till you see some
fruit of your labors, Act. 20.31. By the space of three years I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. 2. Take all occasions to discourse
with them about the things of God, especially of those things wherein you have
formerly instructed them out of the Word of God. Good Discourse is a means of
conveying Grace to those with whom we converse; Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister Grace to the Hearers. 3. Reprove them when they
do that which is contrary to the Will of God; and if Reproofs will not make
them reform, join Correction with Reproof: Reproof and Correction are means of
instilling grace into our Children: Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give
Wisdom. 4. Stir them up to consider their ways, how contrary they are to the
Word of God, and what will be the fruit and effect of their sins, if they
repent not. A serious consideration of our ways, is a means of leading us to
repentance, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
Testimonies: Ezekiel. 18.28. Because he considers and turns away from all his
transgressions. 5. Stir them up to read and meditate upon the Word of God, that
may be a means of converting their Souls; Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul. 6. Cause them to attend upon the Public Ministry
of the Word: The preaching of the Word is the usual means of working Grace in
our hearts, Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us with the Word of Truth, Acts
10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the Word. 7. Exhort them to forsake ungodly company, and to walk and
converse with them that fear God, Prove. 9.6. Forsake the foolish and live, and
walk in the way of understanding: Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men
shall be wise. 8. Be earnest with God to give them saving Grace: By prayer to
God, we may obtain Grace for others, as well as for our own Souls: 1 John 5.16.
If any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and
he shall give him life, for them that sin not unto death.


Secondly, If upon discoursing with your Families you find they profit by the
Instructions you give them, and that they obey from the heart that Form of
Doctrine which you deliver to them, and that they grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of JESUS CHRIST: Then, 1. Be thankful to God for blessing your
Labors, Romans 6.17. God be thanked that ye were the Servants of sin, but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered you. 2.
Love the Lord for causing your Family to flourish and prosper by those
instructions that you give them: Cant. 7.11, 12. Come my Beloved, -- let us go
up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine flourish, whether the tender
Grape appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth; there will I give thee my loves.
Our Families may be compated to Vineyards; the Wife is resembled by the
Psalmist to a Vine, and the Children to Olive-Plants, Psalm. 128.3. The
Governor of the Family is placed in this Vineyard as Adam was in Eden, to
dress it and to keep it: Now such of us as are made keepers of Vineyards,
should be often looking whether the Vine flourish, whether the tender Grape
appear; and when we go about this work, we should call to CHRIST, to go with
us, and assist us: And if we find any Grapes, though they be but tender; yea,
if we perceive but any Buds, any thing that gives us hope of Fruit, we should
give the Lord JESUS not only our love, but our loves; that is, we should love
him abundantly; for it is He that gives a Blessing to our Labors; 1 Cor. 3.6. I
have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. 3. Exhort them to look
to themselves, that they do not lose what you have by Gods Blessing wrought in
them, that so neither you nor they may lose your Reward; 2 John 8. Look to your
selves, that ye lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we may
receive a full Reward. When Jesus saw some of the Jews believing, he exhorted
and encouraged them to continue in his word; John 8.30, 31. As he spoke these
words, many believed on him; then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on
him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. 4. Endeavor
to make them more Fruitful. Thus God deals with his Children that bring forth
fruit; he teaches and helps them to bring forth more Fruit, John 15.2. Every
Branch that bears Fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit.
The more fruitful any Christian is, the more glory he brings to God: verse. 8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. 5. Direct them to the
right end in bearing Fruit, which is not any selfish interest; for that Fruit
which is brought forth for selfish ends, is in Gods account as good as none;
Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself. The
glorifying and pleasing God, is that which we must aim at in our bearing fruit;
Romans 7.4. That we should bring forth fruit unto God. 6. Endeavor that they may
bring their fruit to perfection; and to that end, put them in mind that it is
the will of God that we should not only labor to be holy, but that we should
labor to perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. And caution them
against those things which do hinder the seed of the Word from growing to
perfection, as the cares of this life, pleasures, unmortified lusts, Luke 8.14.
Mark 4.19. Keeping company with men of corrupt minds and corrupt conversations,
1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good manners. Giving
heed to such as teach false Doctrine, will endanger their overthrow, and prove
destructive to them, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits
-- Seducers are those Foxes that spoil the Vine that has tender Grapes,
against whom the Church prays, Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes
that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have tender Grapes. 7. Counsel them well to
consider into what Families they dispose themselves, when God shall by his
providence remove them out of your Family; That they do not for the gaining of
more wages, or easier work, put themselves into such Families where they shall
have no instruction; lest that good Work which is begun in them cease, and come
to nothing: While Jehoash was instructed, he did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, 2 Kings 12.2. Jehoash did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord all his days, wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed him: But when
Jehoiada that instructed him was dead, Jehoash fell into Idolatry, and other
great sins: 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18, 19, 21. 8. If any of the Members of your Family
do find that God has done their Souls good by the Instructions that you have
given them, counsel and exhort them by way of gratitude, if ever God shall give
them Families, to teach and train up their Families in the knowledge of Gods
Word.


Thirdly, If upon communing with your Families, you find they have gotten no
good by those Instructions and godly Lessons which you have given them: Then,
1. Inform them what a great sin, and how dangerous it is, to enjoy great means
of Grace, and to remain graceless and barren under them. Heb. 6.7.8. The Earth
which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God; but that
which bears Thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned. Matthew. 3.10. And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of
the Trees, therefore every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down, and is cast into the fire. 2. See whence their unprofitableness proceeds,
whether the cause of it be in your selves, that you teach them things that are
too high for them, or that you do not make things plain to their
understandings, or that you do not teach them by your Example as well as
Doctrine, or that yo do not water your Seed that you sow, with your Prayers and
tears, or that you teach them so seldom, or in such a slight manner. Or whether
the cause of their unprofitableness be in themselves; as their not minding what
you teach them, their forgetfulness, etc. And wherever the ground of their
unprofitableness lies, endeavor to get it removed. 3. Direct them what means
they should use, that they may profit by what you teach them: as, 1. To look up
to the Lord who alone can teach them to profit, Isa. 48.17. 2. To mingle the
Word of God with faith, Heb. 4.2. 3. To meditate often on those things wherein
they are instructed: Meditation on the Word of God will be a great help to
their profiting both in knowledge and grace: 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate on these
things -- that thy profiting may appear unto all.


Fourthly, If upon discoursing with them, you find they rest in a form of
Godliness, and have only a notional knowledge of the word of God, without the
favor and practice of those Truths that you have taught them: Then, 1. Inform
them that knowledge without practice will never make them happy: Joh. 13.17.
but will aggravate their condemnation, and cause God to beat them with many
stripes, Luke 12.47. And that the form of Godliness will profit them nothing,
but the life and power of Godliness will be profitable for all things, and give
them an interest in all Gods promises, whether they concern this life, or the
life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. 2. Direct them what means they should use, that they
may not only have a barren and unfruitful notional knowledge of the things of
God, but that they may relish, savor and practice what they know. As namely,
1. Exhort them to get Faith, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness, and Charity: The Apostle having spoken of these Graces, says, (2
Pet. 1.8.) If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that you shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2.
Exhort them to plead Gods Covenant, where God has promised not only to put his
Laws into our minds, that is, to give us the knowledge and remembrance of his
will, but also to write them in our hearts; that is, to incline our wills to
embrace, love, and obey his Laws; Heb. 8.10. I will put my Laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts. 3. Stir them up to cry unto God who has
taught them to know his will, to incline their hearts to do his will, and to
keep his Commandments: Psalm. 119.36. Incline mine heart unto thy Testimonies:
Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will.


Fifthly, If you find any of your Family in a declining withering condition: 1.
Warn them betimes of the evil of a decaying declining frame of spirit. The
Church of Ephesus had many things for which Christ gives her great
commendations, Rev. 2.2, 3. yet having lost her first love, he gives her a
sharp rebuke, verse. 4. 2. Exhort them to remember whence they are fallen, and
to repent and do their first works, lest God send some sudden and sore Judgment
upon them, Rev. 2.5. 3. Stir them up to act their faith upon such promises
where God has promised to heal our backslidings and restore our souls, and to
recover us from a decayed frame of spirit, by causing us to grow in grace; as,
Hos. 14.4, 5. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely -- I will
be as the dew unto Israel, he shall be as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots
as Lebanon. This promise is made unto Israel, that was fallen into great decay:
Verse. 1. O Israel, thou have fallen by thine iniquity: Israel was so far
fallen, that God complains, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self: Yet to
Israel, that was fallen thus low, God promises to heal their backslidings,
and to love them freely, and to be as the dew to them, and to cause them to
grow as the Lily.


SECT. 16. Six Arguments for diligence in instructing our Families.
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children -- This work is
a good work, and every good work must be followed with diligence: 1 Timothy 5.10.
If she have followed diligently every good work: The Apostle speaks there of
Widows; now if Widows, whose condition is often attended with many difficulties
and encumbrances, must follow every good work with diligence, how much more are
they who have greater abilities and opportunities for doing good works, than
desolate Widows, obliged to be diligent therein. We read of David, that when he
prepared Materials to build the Temple, he did it with all his might; 1 Chronicles.
29.2. I have prepared with all my might for the House of my God, the Gold for
things to be made of Gold, and Silver for things of Silver. -- The building up
of our Children and Servants a spiritual House for the Lord, is as great and
acceptable a work as the building of the material Temple, and thefore we should
set upon it with all our might. To quicken your diligence herein, consider

1. You know not how short a time you have to live with your Families, and you
can do nothing for them when you are in the Grave; and therefore what you see
necessary to be done for them by way of instruction before you die, do it with
all your might; Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave, whither thou go.

2. To set your hearts to this work, and do it with your might, is the way to
prosper in what you take in hand; 2 Chronicles. 31.21. In every work that he began
in the service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to
seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.

3. There is a curse pronounced against them that do the work of the Lord
negligently, Jer. 28.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully, or (as it is in the Margin) negligently.

4. This work is to be done out of love to Jesus Christ, John 21.15. Love
thou me? Feed my Lambs. Now our love to Christ must not be a cold and weak
love, but such a love as must engage all our hearts and strengths in his
service: Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

5. Consider how diligent Satan and wicked men are to do evil, and to draw
others to sin. Some wicked men are so eager of doing mischief, that they cannot
sleep in the night, if they have done no mischief in the day time: Prove. 4.16.
They sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away
unless they cause some to fall. Solomon describes the great diligence of
Harlots to corrupt young men, Prove. 7.12, 13, 15, 21. Now is she without, now
in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner, so she caught him, and
kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, -- Therefore came I forth
to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee, etc. With
much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she
forced him. Satan is no less active and diligent than his Instruments to tempt
to sin, and destroy men's Souls, 1 Pet. 5.8. And shall not this provoke us to
use all diligence to do good, and to save their Souls that are under our charge?

6. After there is some good work wrought in their hearts, they will be in
danger of falling into an hardened frame of Spirit, if we do not with great
diligence instruct and exhort them to shun that which is evil, and to follow
after holiness. Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you
an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God: but exhort one
another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin.

SECT. 17. Seven Arguments to persuade us to teach and watch over every Member
of our-Family.
Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own Blood.

To provoke you to be careful of every Member of your Family, even of the
meanest Servant and Apprentice, as well as of your Children, and to seek after
the Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of every one that the Lord has
committed to your Charge and Care: Consider,

1. The Example of Christ; He was careful not to lose one of those Souls that
were committed to him by his Father: John 17.12. While I was with them in the
World, I kept them in thy Name: Those that thou gave me, I have kept; and
none of them is lost but the Son of Perdition. It is true, Judas the Son of
Perdition was lost, but not through the want of Christ's care, for Judas was
instructed as well as the rest, but through his own wicked and perverse spirit.

2. The neglecting of any one person in the Family, may trouble and pollute the
whole Family, and prove a very great hindrance to the good of the Family,
Eccles. 9.18. One sinner destroys much good. Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently
lest any man fail of the Grace of God, lest any Root of bitterness springing
up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

3. The Soul of the meanest Servant is of more value than the whole world: Mar.
8, 36. and therefore ought to be minded and regarded above all worldly things.

4. God is so careful of that which we commit to his keeping, that he will lose
or neglect nothing that we commit to him. After we have committed our selves to
God, he does not only look after our persons, but after every hair of our
heads: Matthew. 10.30. The very hairs of your head are all numbered: Luc. 21.17,
18. Ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, but there shall not a hair
of your head perish. And shall we neglect any of those immortal Souls which the
Lord has committed to our keeping, when God is so careful of us, as to look
after every hair of our heads?

5. The poorest and meanest persons in the Family, that have the lowest
employment and weakest parts, may belong to the Election of Grace as well as
those that are of a higher degree; 1 Co. 1.27, 28. God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of
the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, yea and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are. And shall we think much to spend a
little time and care for the saving of their Souls whom the great God has made
Objects of his Love and Care from all Eternity? We find that God looks after
simple as well as wise men; Psalm. 116.6. The Lord preserves the simple -- And
shall we think much to look after those of whom the Lord himself takes care?

6. It is the will of God that means should be used for the saving of every
man's Soul; that the least as well as the greatest, the young as well as the
old, should be brought to repentance, that so they may obtain salvation by
Jesus Christ: Matthew. 18.14. It is not the will of your Father which is in
Heaven that one of these little ones should perish: 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise, (as some men count slackness) but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.

7. If any man have an hundred sheep, and but one of them go astray, he does
not say, I have ninety and nine remaining with me, I will not trouble my self
to seek up that one sheep that is gone from me; but he looks up his lost sheep,
though it be but one, till he find it: Luke 15.4. What man of you having an
hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninety and nine in
the Wilderness, and go after that which is lost until he find it. One man is of
more value than all the sheep in the World, Matthew. 12.12. How much then is a
man better than a sheep? Suppose a man has in his Family an hundred persons,
and ninety and nine of them should be godly, and but one should go astray, he
should not rest satisfied that he has ninety and nine in his Family truly
gracious, so as to neglect that person that goes astray, but should use all
diligence for the converting and saving of that one Soul that as yet remains in
a sinful perishing Condition. And what I have said of extending your Care and
Diligence unto every Member of your Families, is to be understood as well of
those that sojourn with you for a shorter Time, as of those that do dwell
constantly with you, For as Moses said, in another case, Numbers 15.16. One Law
and one Manner shall be for you, and for the Stranger that sojourneth with you.
The like may I say here, You should take one and the same care as well for them
that sojourn with you, whilst they are with you, as for those that are
constantly with you. It may be the Lord sent them under your Roof for a season,
that you might instill those things into them that may do them good for ever.

SECT. 18. Our Families must be kept from strife, and preserved in Love and
Peace. The way how this may be done.
Solomon (who was the wisest of men) tells us, Prove. 11.29. He that troubles
his own House shall inherit the Wind: That is, First, All his Labors and
Endeavors will be fruitless, and come to nothing: Wind is taken often times for
that which is unprofitable and fruitless: as, Job 15.2, 3. Eccles. 6.16. Isa.
26.18. Secondly, He shall inherit the Wind; that is, he shall have an unruly
disordered Family: such as he shall not be any way able to govern, or to keep
in any good order: Who can rule or keep in order the Wind? John 3.8. The Wind
blows where it lists: Where there is strife and contention, there is
confusion; and instead of good, all manner of evil; Jam. 4.16. Where envying
and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. The Lord has promised
to give his blessing, not to such as live at variance, but to those that live
in love and peace: Psalm. 133, 1, 3. Behold how good and pleasant it is for
Brethren to live together in unity! -- For there the Lord commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore. The God of Love will dwell with those that
live in love and peace; 2 Cor. 13.11. Be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you: 1 John 4.16. God is Love, and he that
dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. But such as live in wrath
and strife, give place to and suffer the Devil to dwell in their hearts, Ephesians.
4.26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
Devil.

If you ask, What should we do to prevent discord and contention, and to
preserve love and peace in our Families?

I answer:

1. Instruct them out of the word of God what a great evil it is to live in
strife and variance, that so they may fear this as well as other sins. Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, are accounted amongst the works of the
Flesh, and do as certainly exclude men from the Kingdom of Heaven, as Murder,
Adultery, Idolatry, or any other sins, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. To sow discord among
Brethren, is reckoned up amongst those six things which the Lord hates, and
the seven things which are an abomination to him; Prove. 6.16, 19. Discord and
strife are contrary to Gods Nature, who is a God of Love and Peace, and
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, Romans 16.17.

2. Advise them to take heed of the occasions and beginnings of strife; and
therefore when they feel any motions to strife or wrath, arising in their
hearts, let them stifle those motions, before they break out into action; for
wrath and strife are more easily kept down, than appeased after they are
stirred up: Prove. 17.14. The beginnings of strife is as when one lets out
water: therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with: Prove. 18.19. A
Brother offended is harder to be won than a strong City, and their Contentions
are like the bars of a Castle.

3. Counsel them to be of an humble lowly spirit, to think and esteem better of
others than themselves. This will prevent their contending one with another:
Prove. 13.10. Only by pride comes contention. Prove. 28.25. He that is of a
proud heart stirs up strife: Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife
or vain glory: How shall we attain to this, to do nothing through strife? The
following words will resolve you; But in lowliness of mind let each esteem
other better than themselves.

4. Exhort them to abstain from all provoking speeches, Prove. 15.1. Grievous
words stir up anger; and from all provoking carriages one toward another, as
scorning each other: Prove. 22.10. Cast out the scorner; and contention shall go
out, yea strife and reproach shall cease. A froward carriage that also kindles
strife. Prove. 15.18. A wrathful man stirs up strife, but he that is slow to
anger appeaseth strife. Talebearing is another evil that occasions much discord
and contention: Prove. 26.20. Where no need is, there the fire goes out; so
where there is no Talebearer, the strife cease. Those persons that do not
learn to bridle their tongues, they will set the Famimilies where they live at
variance among themselves, and also with other Families, and not Families only,
but kingdoms also; Jam. 3.6. The tongue is a fire. -- A world of iniquity --
and sets on fire the course of Nature.

5. Teach them to bear one with another, let the stronger bear with the weak;
and when any ones passion is stirred, let the other seek to appease it by mild
speeches and gentle carriage. It is not good to answer passion with passion,
that will blow up the fire to a greater flame. But if either the Husband or
Wife be angry, or one Servant be angry with his Fellow Servants, the way to
assuage anger is to speak in a mild gentle manner to the person that is
provoked; Prove. 15.1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir
up anger: Prove. 25.15. By long forbearing, a Prince is persuaded, and a soft
tongue breaks the bone.

6. Admonish them to be of a self-denying yielding spirit, and not to be stiff,
and self-willed, Eccl. 10.4. Yielding pacifieth great offenses: By this means
Abraham prevented the strife that was like to have been between him and Lot, by
receding from his own Right, and yielding to Lot, who was the younger, to make
his choice which way be would go with his Flocks and Herds, Genesis 13.8, 9, 10.

7. When any strife or contention does arise, take up the difference that is
between one party and another, and endeavor to reconcile each to other, and
judge with equity and impartiality between him that does, and him that
suffers the wrong. Thus Moses, when he saw two Israelites striving together,
endeavored to bring them to an agreement, Acts 7.26. This is a blessed work to
make peace, and therefore though it be attended with some difficulties, we
should endeavor, as much as in us lies, to make peace between such as are at
variance one with another, Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they
shall be called the Children of God.

SECT. 19. The necessity of joining Prayer with Family-Instruction: The Case of
such as have prayed long for their Childrens Conversion, and see no answer of
their prayers, considered.
Act. 6.4, 7. We will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
Ministry of the Word: And what followed hereupon? The Word of God increased,
and the number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great
company of the Priests were obedient to the faith.

To stir you up to give your selves unto prayer for assistance and success in
this work: Consider,

1. All your sufficiency for the right performing of this work, is of God: 2
Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. And as our sufficiency for this work, so our success in
it is from God, 1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the
increase. Paul was an able Minister of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. and
Apollo was an eloquent man mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18.24. yet neither
Paul's Abilities, nor Apollo's Eloquence could convert or edify any, but where
God gave a blessing to their Labors.

2. Consider how the Servants of Christ who have been Teachers of others, have
longed and labored with God in prayer night and day, for the conversion,
edification and salvation of those that have been committed to their Care and
Charge: Phil. 1.8. God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ. The Apostle had a longing desire after the
sanctification and salvation of the Philippians; He did not only long, but
longed greatly, not after some, or most of them, but after them all, and that
in the bowels of Christ; that is, with such earnest and ardent desires as Jesus
Christ has toward the conversion of Sinners, and their eternal salvation; or,
In the Bowels of Christ Jesus, may signify those bowels, that tender and
ardent affection which Jesus Christ had implanted in his soul: And what was it
that the Apostle did thus long for on their behalf? It was, that their love
might abound more and more, in knowledge, and in all judgment, that they might
approve the things that are excellent, that they might be sincere and without
offense till the day of Christ, that they might be filled with the fruits of
Righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God, ver.
9.10, 11. How earnestly did the Apostle thirst after the conversion of the
Galatians, Gal. 4.9. My little Children, of whom I travail in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you: As it is with a travailing woman, she is full of
sorrow and heaviness, and cries out, and is pained, till she be delivered: John
16.21. A woman when she is in travail has sorrow: Rev. 12.2. She being with
Child cried, traveling in Birth, and pained to be delivered. So it was with
the Apostle, he wept, he cried out, he was pained, he could not be at ease
until Christ was formed in their hearts. This is a good pattern for Parents to
follow, as soon as God has given them Children, they should travel in birth
again, till Christ be formed in their Childrens hearts. The Apostle was so
affectionately desirous of the Thessalonians welfare, that he could have
imparted his own Soul to them: 1 These. 2.7, 8. We were gentle among you, even
as a Nurse cherishes her Children, so being affectionately desirous of you, we
were willing to have imparted unto you not the Gospel of God only, but also our
own Souls, because ye were dear unto us. And as the Apostle did earnestly long
after their welfare whom he instructed, so he prayed exceedingly for them night
and day; 1 These. 3.10. Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your
face, and perfect that which is lacking in your Faith: Phil. 1.4. Always in
every prayer of mine making request for you all with Joy: He put up no prayer
at any time, but he remembered them all; and it was not irksome to him so to do,
but he did it with Joy.

And as the Apostle Paul, so also others of the Servants of Christ have been
wont to labor and strive mightily with God in Prayer for those whom they have
taught and instructed in the ways of God, Col. 4.12. Epaphras, who is one of
you, a Servant of Christ, saluteth you, always laboring fervently for you in
prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in the whole Will of God. He
did not only pray, but labored in prayer, and that fervently, not sometimes,
but always; and that not for his own concernments, but for you: besides, it is
not said in prayer, but in prayers; intimating that he put up a multitude of
prayers for them; and it was no small measure of grace that he labored thus
earnestly for on their behalf, but that they might stand perfect and complete
in the will, in all the will of God.

3. Prayer will do great things with God for others, as well as our own Souls;
Jam. 5.16. Pray one for another that ye may be healed; the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much. By praying in faith, and with
fervency, we may obtain converting grace, remission of sins, and eternal life,
for our Children and Servants, and others, as well as those of our own
Families, 1 John 5.16. If any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto
death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. This promise may give us great encouragement to pray in faith for the
conversion and salvation of such as are visible and open sinners. If any see
his Brother sin, etc. If we consider,

1. The persons to whom this promise is made, and they are every one that
believes in the Name of Jesus Christ: It is not a privilege that did belong
only to the Apostles, or extraordinary men of God; but it is said, If any man
-- that is, any man that believes in Christ, as appears from the thirteenth
verse.

2. The persons for whom Believers may obtain Life and Salvation upon praving
to God for them, and they are his Brethren, sinning Brethren, If any man see
his Brother sin, -- he shall give him life for them -- He first speaks of a
Brother in the singular number, and then says, Life for them, in the plural,
which shows that the word Brother is to be taken collectively (as Beza
observes) for all or any Brother for whom a Believer shall pray to God. If you
ask, Who is meant by a Brother? I answer: The Apostle seems to use the word
Brother in this Epistle in the same latitude with Neighbor, which may be
proved from several passages in his Epistle, as Chap. iii. 14, 15, 16. Chap.
iv. 20.21. And Piscator expounds the word Brother, Fratris nomine intelligit
proximum, qui eandem nobiscum fidem ac proinde eundem in coelis patrem
profitetur.

3. He excepts no sins but the sin unto death; that is, as most expound the
place, the sin against the Holy Gaost, which is a sin that shall never have
forgiveness: As for any other sins, if Believers ask of God Repentance and
Forgiveness of sins for them that have sinned, that so they may have Life and
Salvation, God will grant them their desire.

Another Scripture that shows the efficacy of prayer, in order to the
obtaining for others forgiveness of sins, and Grace whereby they may be
qualified to receive forgiveness of sins, we have Jam. 5.15. The prayer of
faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have
committed sins they shall be forgiven him. Ishmael was a wild Child, Genesis
16.11, 12. yet when Abraham prayed, Genesis 17.10. O that Ishmael might live
before thee! God answers him, verse 20. As for Ishmael I have heard thee: And
though the Lord adds afterward, But my Covenant will I establish with Isaac;
Yet this, as Rivet observes, seems rather to be an excluding of Ishmael's
Posterity, than his Person, from the Covenant; unto whom, the same day that God
gave him this answer, Abraham administers Circumcision, the Seal of the
Covenant. When the woman of Canaans Daughter was grievously vexed with a Devil,
her prayer prevailed with Christ to deliver her Daughter from the power of the
Devil, Matthew. 15.22, 28.

Objection.

I have prayed often to God to give my Children Grace, and to convert and turn
them from their sins; but I do not see that my Prayers avail any thing with God
for my Children, they abide still in a graceless condition.

Answer.

1. Do you instruct them diligently, as well as pray for them? Do you watch
over them? Do you show them a good example? Do you reprove them? Do you give
them due correction? If you do not use other means as well as prayer, possibly
that is the reason why your prayers avail not for their conversion. The Apostle
Paul who earnestly desired and prayed for the salvation of the Jews, Romans 10.1.
Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
saved; joined with his prayers the use of all means to effect their salvation;
Romans 11.14. If by any means I might provoke to emulation them which are my
flesh, and might save some of them. So must we join the use of all other means
with prayer, if we would have our prayers become effectual for the conversion
and salvation of our Children.

2. Though we see no present return of our prayers, yet we should continue
praying, and not faint or be discouraged, until we have obtained what we pray
for: Luke 18.1. He spoke a Parable unto them, to this end, that men ought
always to pray, and not to faint. Though the Lord may be silent for a season,
and seem not to regard our Prayers, to try our Faith and Patience, yet he may
purpose to give us all that we pray for. He dealt thus with the Woman of
Canaan, when she came to him with a Request on the behalf of her Daughter; at
the first he answered her not a word, Matthew. 15.23. And when the Disciples
intercede for her, he seems to discourage them from making any farther request
for her, by saying to them, ver. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
House of Israel; and afterward, when she continued to cry after him, he seems
to beat her off, and reject her prayer, by telling her, Verse 26. It is not
meet to take the Childrens Bread, and cast it to Dogs: Yet she still holding on
her suit, at length Christ yields her the whole desire of her heart, Verse 28.
Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith; Be it unto
thee even as thou will: And her Daughter was made whole from that very hour.

3. If God should not answer our Prayers for our Children whilst we live, yet
he may answer those Prayers after we are dead, which we did offer up to him
whilst we lived with them. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST prayed for the Jews, that were
so vile and wicked as to put him to death, Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And as an answer of Christ's
Prayer, thousands of those Jews that were not wrought upon either by Christ's
Doctrine, or Miracles, or Godly Life, but continued in an impenitent condition
till after his death; yea, were so hardened as to have an hand in the
crucifying of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Life and Glory, were
notwithstanding converted by the preaching of the Apostle Peter, Acts 2, 23.37,
41. Suppose neither your Instructions, nor godly Example, nor Prayers should
prevail for the conversion of your Children whilst you live, but they should be
vile, and stubborn, and disobedient to God and to you, unto your dying day; yet
cease not praying for them: It may be the Lord will answer your prayers by
making use of others to convert them, when you are laid in your Graves.

4. We should sin against God, if we should cease praying for our Children,
because we see no effect of our Prayers, but do behold much stubborness and
perverseness in them. The people of Israel were a perverse people, Samuel saw
little fruit of his Instructions or Prayers on their behalf, they were set upon
their own way, and he could not dissuade them from desiring a change of
Government, although therein they did not only reject Samuel, but God himself,
from reigning over them, 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 7, 8. yet he would not cease from
praying for them, lest he should sin against the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.23. Moreover
as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for you. If Samuel was afraid to cease praying for a stubborn perverse people,
lest he should sin against the Lord, ought not Parents to continue praying for
their graceless and disobedient Children, for fear if they should cease to pray
for them, they also should sin against the Lord?

5. If you have prayed for your Childrens Conversion, and cannot prevail, join
fasting with prayer: Sometimes mercies cannot be obtained from God, unless we
fast as well as pray, Mark 9.29. This kind can come forth by nothing but by
Prayer and Fasting. If we have a Child that is sick unto death, we do not stick
at seeking God by Fasting and Prayer for its Recovery: 2 Samuel 12.15, 16. The
Lord struck the Child that Vriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick;
David therefore besought God for the Child, and David fasted. -- And shall we
not much more seek to God by fasting and prayer, to recover our Children and
Servants from the power of sin and Satan, and to deliver them from everlasting
Burnings? This duty of Fasting, rightly performed, is of great use, both for
the obtaining direction from God in the management of our undertakings, Ezra
8.21, 23. I proclaimed a Fast -- that we might afflict our selves before our
God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for our
substance, so we fasted, and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of
us. And also for procuring of success in what we take in hand, as we may see in
the case of Esther, Nehemiah, and several others, who setting upon their
undertakings with fasting and prayer, prosperously effected what they took in
hand, though their work was very great, and attended with very great
difficulties. God seldom lets any Fast, that is performed in a right manner, go
without a remarkable Reward, Matthew. 6.17, 18. And therefore it will be very
much for our own and our Families advantage, to set apart some days of
humiliation, with our Families, to seek God by fasting and prayer to bless and
succeed us in this Work of Family-Instruction.

SECT. 20. The usefulness of Faith in reference to Family-Instruction. Several
sorts of Promises relating to our Families. The Case of such as are discouraged
from acting Faith upon the Promises, because they see no Fruit of their Faith
or Labors.
Isaac that he blessed his Children in faith, Heb. 11.20. By faith Isaac
blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. As Isaac blessed his Children
in faith, so should we instruct our Children in faith, believing that God will
bless our Instructions for the doing their souls good. To do our work in faith,
believing in God, and resting upon God for his blessing, is the way to prosper
in what we do; 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be
established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. By believing in the
Lord, we may obtain salvation for our Household, as well as for our own Souls,
Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy
House: Which is not to be understood as though the Governors faith would avail
for the salvation of such of his House as live and die in an unregenerate
condition; but that upon his believing, and using of the means of Grace in
faith, he shall obtain conversion, and so consequently salvation, for his
Household.

Wherefore seeing Faith is of such prevalencie with God, as to obtain
converting Grace and Salvation for our Families, I shall put you in mind of
several sorts of Promises which may encourage and help you to trust in God for
Family-Mercies and Family-Blessings; and that not only Temporal, but Spiritual
and Eternal Blessings: As for instance: 1. God has promised not only to be a
God to his People, but also the God of their Families; Jer. 31.1. At the same
time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the Families of Israel, and they
shall be my People. 2. The Lord has promised to bless the several Members of
his Peoples Families, as the Wife, the Children, the Servants. He has promised
to bless the Wife, and to make her as a fruitful Vine; Psalm. 128.1, 2, 3.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways; for thou
shall eat the labor of thy hands, happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee: Thy Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine by the sides of thine House. --


Now that we may understand what is couched under this phrase, Thy Wife shall
be as a fruitful Vine: Let us consider what the Scripture says of the Vine in
other places:

The Vine brings forth Wine, which cheareth God and men, Judge. 9.13.

It casts forth a pleasant delightful smell, Cant. 2.13.

To dwell under a Vine, implies safety and confidence, 1 King 4.25. Also a
dwelling in peace, without Wars, Jars, and Contentions, Mich. 4.34.

The Vine has no prickles on it, or any thing that may hurt a man, and is
opposed to the pricking Briar and grieving Thorn, Ezekiel. 28.24, 26.

The Vine is fruitful, which is that which the Psalmist mentions, She shall be
as a fruitful Vine; and further he adds, By the sides of thine House; To show
that she shall resemble the noblest and choicest Vine. Men do not use to plant
wild Vines by the sides of their Houses, such as bring forth sour Grapes, but
the best and choicest Vines that they can get, such as yield sweet and pleasant
fruit.

The Lord has promised also to bless our Children with his Grace and good
Spirit. He has promised to be a God to our Seed, Genesis 17.7. I will establish
my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee:
And to give them his holy Spirit, Isa. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed,
and my Blessing upon thine Offspring. He has promised to circumcise their
hearts to love him in sincerity and truth: Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and all thy Soul, that thou may live. He has promised
that our Children shall be like Olive plants, Psalm. 128.3, Thy Children like
Olive Plants round about thy Table: By which we may understand (as Mollerus
observes upon this Text) that Children shall be Comforts and Ornaments to their
Parents; (for Oil is used to signify joy and gladness, Psalm. 45.7. and was
used by the Jews by way of Ornament and Beauty, Psalm. 104.15. Luke 7.46.) And
also that they shall be furnished with the Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit,
(which are compared to Ovl, Matthew. 25.3, 4, 8.) And that they shall be useful
Instruments to do service for God in their Generation, either in the Church or
State, ( Zach. 4.12, 13, 14.) And be of a quiet, peaceable disposition; for the
Olive is used as an Emblem of Peace, Genesis 8.11. And that they shall be of an
heavenly disposition, resembling the holy Cherubims. (When Solomon made
Cherubims within the Oracle, he made them of the Olive Tree, 1 King. 6.23.)
Lastly, By this Metaphor may be signified their constant progress and
perseverance in Grace and Holiness all their days; (the Olive continuing full
of green Leaves all the year long, Psalm. 52.8.) The Lord has promised also to
give his Grace and good Spirit unto our Servants, Joel 2.28, 29. I will pour
out my Spirit upon all Flesh, -- and also upon the Servants, and upon the
Handmaids in those days will I pour out my Spirit.

3. God has promised to bless his Peoples Families with peace, and to prevent
Jars and Discords, which are a great hindrance to the good of a Family, and
that he will help them to govern their Families in a holy manner, Job 5.24.
Thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy
Habitation and shall not sin.

4. God has promised to give his People flourishing Families, by which we are
not only or chiefly to understand their flourishing in respect of outward
prosperity, but rather their flourishing in respect of the abundance of
heavenly and spiritual Blessings, wherewith the Lord will bless them: Prove.
14.11. The House of the Wicked shall be overthrown, but the Tabernacle of the
Upright shall flourish.

5. The Lord has promised to bless his People in every work of their hands,
and to prosper them therein, and so consequently in this work of
Family-Instruction: Deuteronomy. 15.20. The Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto. Isa. 65.22, 23. Mine Elect
shall long enjoy the work of their hands: They shall not labor in vain, nor
bring forth for trouble; for they are the Seed of the blessed of the Lord, and
their Offspring with them.

Thus we see there are variety of Promises for us to act our faith upon, in
reference to our Families.

But it may be some will be ready to say, I see all things in my Family running
cross to these Promises; My Children are not Olive-Plants, but rather like
Briars and Thorns: I can see no fruit of my Labors either upon my Children or
Servants: Instead of knowing that my Tabernacle shall be in peace, I find Jars
and Discords arising daily; Instead of flourishing, I find withering and
decaying; I find luke-warmness and deadness growing upon my Family, and
therefore I finding all things running contrary to these Promises, I know not
how to rest upon God for blessing, converting, sanctifying, and saving of the
Members of my Family.

1. If you find God withholding Family blessings, and that he does not
accomplish Family-promises, enquire into the cause why God deals thus with you;
and to that end let me put to you these following Queries: 1. Do you not
harbor some unmortified sins in your hearts? Is there not some evil in the
managing of your Callings, or in your Conversations, which causes God to
withold these good things from you? Jer. 5.25. Your iniquities have turned
away these things, and your sins have withheld good things from you. 2. Are
you careful and diligent to obey the Voice of the Lord? If not, that may be the
reason why you do not enjoy these promised mercies, Zach. 6.15. And this shall
come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God. 3. Do
you get up betimes that you may have opportunity to pray with and pray for your
Family, do you pray hard, and cry mightily to God for them? Do you labor to
purify your selves as God is pure? Do you walk uprightly? If you would do
thus, God would soon make your Families flourish, Job 8.5, 6. If thou would
seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplications unto the Almighty, if thou
were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the
habitation of thy Righteousness prosperous. 4. Are you diligent in teaching
your Families? Do you set your hearts, your whole hearts to this work? You
ought to do it if you would prosper in it; 2 Chronicles. 31.21. In every work that
he began in the service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in the
Commandment, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered. 5.
Are you not deficient in the duty of Meditation? If so, possibly that may be
the reason why God blasts your Labors, for the promise of success is made to
such as meditate on Gods word, Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart
out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou
may observe to do according to all that is written therein, for then thou
shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. 6. Do you
apply these promises to your selves, and believe in God, that he will give you
the good things that are wrapped up in these promises? If not it is your
unbelief that hinders your reaping the benefit of these Promises: For if you
did believe them, they should be performed in due season: Luke 1.45. Blessed is
she that believes, for there shall be a performance of those things which were
told her from the Lord. 7. Are you not in a backslidden condition? And is not
your forsaking of God, the cause why God forsakes you, and gives no blessing to
your Labors? 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Thus says the Lord, Why transgress ye the
Commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? Because ye have forsaken the
Lord, he has also forsaken you.


Secondly, Though you do not see the promises which relate to your Families
accomplished, but all things seem rather to run contrary to them, yet you must
not give over hoping in them, and waiting for them. After God had promised
Abraham a numerous Seed, it was twenty five years before Isaac was born; for he
was but seventy five years old when he departed out of Charan, which was the
time God promised to make of him a great Nation, Genesis 12.2, 3, 4. And Abraham
was an hundred years old when his Son Isaac was born unto him, Genesis 21.5. It
was so long before this promise began to have any accomplishment, that if he
had considered the deadness of his own Body, or the deadness of Sarah's Womb,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 4.19. natural Reason would have told him it was a
vain thing for him to hope for Children: But Abraham having a promise of God to
ground his faith upon, believed in hope against hope, and did not stagger at
the Promise through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God,
verse 18, 20. Suppose you have waited for the Promises that relate to your
Families twenty years, and see nothing of them made good, suppose you see
nothing in your Children or Servants to encourage you to hope, but rather many
discouragements; yet having promises to ground your Faith and Hope upon, you
must imitate Abraham, who against hope believed in hope that it should be
according to what was spoken and promised by God; you must not stagger at the
Promises through unbelief, but continue strong in faith, and thereby you shall
give glory to God: We are oft-times admonished that we have need of Patience as
well as Faith, to wait for the accomplishment of the Promises; as we may see
Heb. 10.35, 36. Cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of
Reward: for ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God
ye might receive the promise: Heb. 6.12. That ye be not slothful, but followers
of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promises.

Thirdly, That Promise in Hos. 14.7. They that dwell under his shadow shall
return, they shall revive as the Corn, they shall grow as the Vine, the scent
thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon, may be of great use to such godly
persons as find their Families to be in a languishing condition, some
unconverted, others that gave hope of a work of grace wrought in them, declined
and gone backward, deadness and unprofitableness upon most of the Members of
the Family. And therefore I shall open the promise, and show how we should come
to enjoy the blessings that are contained in it.

The Lord having promised several blessings to his people, verse 4, 5, 6. does
promise verse 7. to make them blessings to others; They that dwell under his
shadow -- hat is, under Israel's shadow, mentioned verse. 5. By Israel,
understand all the servants of God, Isa. 44.21. To dwell under ones shadow, may
signinifie to be in the same House or Family, as Genesis 10.8. Only unto these men
do nothing, for therefore came they under the shadow of my Roof; that is, into
my Family, or my House. So that this Promise, though it be of a larger extent
than particular Families, may be safely and warrantably applied by every
Israelite indeed who has a Family, in reference to all that dwell under his
Roof.

Now let us see what is promised concerning those that dwell under a godly man's
shadow: 1. They shall return -- Returning is sometimes applied to the
Repentance and Conversion of such as are in a state of sin; as Isa. 55.7.
Sometimes to the returning of such as have backslidden from God after
Conversion, as Jer. 3.22. Both may be understood here; the impenitent and
unconverted shall be converted to God, and such as are backslidden since their
Conversion, shall be brought back again to the Lord. 2. They shall revive as
the Corn: They, that is, they that dwell under Isreal's shadow shall revive --
God will take off their deadness, and give them living and lively spirits in
his service: They shall revive as the Corn: How is that? The Corn lies dead
under the ground for a time, before it comes up; and after it is sprung up,
winter-frosts and cold winds make it hang the head, as if it would dye again;
yet by the warm beams of the Sun, and the blessing of Heaven, it revives again.
Are there any in your Families where the Seed of the word seems to lie dead,
nothing springs forth as yet, that speaks life? Are there others where there
did once appear some fruit, but it seems to be withered? Here is ground for
faith to act upon for both sorts in these words, They shall revive as the Corn.
3. They shall grow as the Vine: Here is promised to the Members of our
Families, 1. Growth in Grace: 2. Growth resembling the growing of the Vine: How
is that? The cutting and pruning of the Vine makes it thrive, and grow more
fruitful, and so it signifies a growing under afflictions and temptations;
losses and crosses shall not hinder but further their growth: Again, they shall
grow as the Vine; not as Briars and Thorns; they shall not grow worse and
worse, but grow in grace and goodness. We may know what we must do to obtain
these blessings for our Families mentioned in this promise, if we consider what
God required of Israel, and what he promised to do for Israel before he gave
Israel this promise, They that dwell under his shadow, etc. As, 1. We must
repent of all our sins, and return to the Lord; this God requires from Israel,
verse. 1. O Israel, return to the Lord thy God: When we our selves return to
God, God promises to bless us with reformed Families, Job 22.23. 2. We must
pray earnestly to God to be gracious to us and our Families, and to take away
all iniquity from us, this also is required of Israel, verse. 2. God expects
that his Promises should be sued out with prayer before he perform them, Ezekiel.
36.37. 3. We must renounce all self-confidence, and acknowledge our inability
to do good either to our selves or Families, verse. 3. 4. If we have been under
any backslidings, we must get them healed, verse. 4. 5. We must labor to grow
in grace our selves, and to be of savoury spirits, to express the beauty of
holiness in our Conversations, if we would have our Families grow in grace: For
before God promises that such as dwell under Israel's shadow should grow as
the Vine, he promises, verse. 5, 6. to be as the dew unto Israel, whereby he
should grow as the Lily, and that his smell should be as Lebanon, and his
beauty as the Olive Tree.



SECT. 21. A godly Life and good Example makes Family-Instruction powerful and
successful.
Tim. 4.12. Be thou an example of the Believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity: Tit. 2.7. In all things showing thy
self a Pattern of good works. -- Instruction from a good man is embraced more
readily, and works more powerfully than that which comes from one that
walks contrary to what he teaches. Barnabas being a good man was
instrumental by his exhortations to convert many to the Lord, Acts 11.23, 24.
He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord; for he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and of Faith, and much
People was added to the Lord. When Levi, who taught the people, walked with
God, he turned many from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. The Law of Truth was in his mouth,
and iniquity was not found in his lips: He walked with me in peace and equity,
and did turn many away from iniquity: A good conversation is such a powerful
means to convert Souls, that some who are not wrought upon by the Word, are won
to Christ by a good conversation; 1 Pet. 3.1. Wives be in subjection to your
own Husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be
won by the conversation of the Wives. When Governors of Families return to
God, and walk with God, the Lord has promised that their families shall be
reformed also and put away iniquity, Job 22.23. If thou return to the Almighty,
thou shall be built up; thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles:
This latter clause implies two things, 1. That it is our duty when we return to
God, to endeavor to reform our Families. 2. That when we do return to God, and
endeavor to reform our Families, God will so bless our endeavors, that
iniquity shall be put far from our Tabernacles. And accordingly we find that
when the Master of the Family fears God, and does according to his duty
labor to bring his Family to fear and serve the Lord, the Lord has blessed
the whole Family with the fear of his Name; as we may see in Cornelius, who
fearing God, and being a devout man, all his house feared God also, Acts 10.1,
2. And when Crispus the chief Ruler believed, all his house believed also in
the Lord, Acts 18.8. Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the
Lord with all his House.

SECT. 22. Family-Instruction must be continued as long as we live.
so doing as long as we live, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep
thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen,
and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life, but teach them
thy sons, and thy sons sons. So also verse. 10. Gather me the people together,
and I will make them hear my words that they may learn to fear me all the days
that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their Children. To
move you to constancy herein, consider,

1. That continuance in this work will be a means to promote your own and your
Families salvation: 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy
Doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall save thy self, and
them that hear thee: Isa. 64.5. In those is continuance, and we shall be saved:
That is, by continuing to work Righteousness, and to walk in Gods ways, (spoken
of in the foregoing words) we shall be saved. It is not enough to do well, but
we must continue with patience in well doing under all our discouragements, if
we would have eternal life, Romans 2.6, 7. Who will render to every man according
to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory,
and honor, and immortality, eternal Life.

2. Consider how earnestly God calls upon you not to be discouraged in the
doing of any good work; but to be steadfast and unmovable, and to abound always
in the work of the Lord, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in
due season we shall reap if we faint not: 1 Cor. 15.58. My beloved Brethren, be
ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord: forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

3. Consider how the Lord commends constancy in that which is good, Gal. 4.18.
It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. -- And what a great
sin it is to neglect doing good works, Jam. 4.17. To him that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin. To leave off doing good works, is the
way to run into all evil; Psalm. 36.3, 4. He has left off to be wise, and to do
good; he devises mischief upon his Bed, he sets himself in a way that is
not good. To leave off doing good works, will provoke God to send some heavy
Judgment upon us, Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the
Enemy shall pursue him.

CHAP. IIII.
Objections against instructing our Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures
according to the forementioned Directions, answered.

I Shall in the next place answer the most material Objections that are or may
be made against Parents or Masters of Families instructing their Children and
Servants in the knowledge of the Scriptures: In doing whereof, I shall remove
the principal Discouragements that may keep any person either from entering
upon, or continuing constant in this work of Family-Iustruction.

SECT. 1. The Plea of such as neglect Family-Instruction, because they say they
are not able to instruct their Families, answered.
Would instruct my Family in the knowledge of the Scriptures, according as you
have directed, if I were able to do it; but the work is difficult, and I am a
man of mean abilities: I have but little acquaintance with the Scriptures, I
have need to be taught my self, and how then can I teach my Family? It is
nothing but want of ability that hinders and discourageth me from setting upon
this work.

Answer: First, Let not your own weakness, or the difficulty of the work, keep
you from setting upon it: For, 1. It is a work that God calls you to do, as
you may see Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.4. And the plea of inability is not a
sufficient excuse for neglecting the work to which you are called of God. When
God called Jeremiah to be a Prophet, he would have excused himself by pleading
his inability, Jer. 1.6. Ah Lord! behold I cannot speak, for I am a Child. Did
God accept of this excuse? No, but reproves him, and tells him he should go
wherever he sent him, and speak whatever he commanded him, although he looked
upon himself as unable as a Child for the work he was called to, Verse. 7. But
the Lord said unto me, Say not that I am a Child, for thou shall go unto all
that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thoushalt speak. When God
called Moses to go and speak to Pharaoh to let the people of Israel go out of
Egypt, he would have refused, and pleads his unfitness, because he was not
eloquent, but of a slow speech, Exodus 4 10. Moses said unto the Lord, O my
Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore nor since thou have spoken unto thy
Servant, but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue. But what did God say?
He refused this plea, and commands him to go about his work, verse. 11, 12.
And the Lord said unto him, Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes the Dumb or
Deaf, or the Seeing, or the Blind? Have not I the Lord? Now therefore go, and I
will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. 2. God can do great
things by weak means, and and therefore your weakness should not deter you from
this work, Psalm. 8.2. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine Enemies, that thou might still the Enemy
and the Avenger: 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things
which are despised, has God chosen, yea and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are. 3. God will be with you in this work, and that may
strengthen you to set upon it, though the work be great, and your strength be
small: Hag. 2.4. Be strong all ye people of the Land, says the Lord, and work:
for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts. The Jews complained they were not
able to build, Neh. 4.10. but to take off this plea, God promises them his
presence and assistance, as that which was sufficient to strengthen them for
that difficult work which they complained they were not able to go on withal;
Be strong and work, for I am with you. What David said to Solomon, when he had
a great work to do, and might be discouraged because he was young, and unable
for such great service, 1 Chronicles. 22.5, 16. Arise and be doing, and the Lord be
with thee, (or as Junius and Piscator render the words) the Lord will be with
thee. So may I say unto you, Let not your unfitness for this work keep you from
it, but arise and be doing, and the Lord will be with you. You may be sure the
Lord will be with you in teaching and instructing your Families, for he
commands you to do this work, as I have already shown you out of Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
and several other Scriptures: And you need not doubt of having Gods presence in
every work and service which he commands you to do, Josh. 1.9. Have not I
commanded thee? Be strong, and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be
thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. 4.
Although your abilities be but small, yet if you teach and instruct your
Families according to the ability which God has given you, you shall by so
doing glorify God, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every man has received the gift, even
so minister the same one to another -- If any man minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ. 5. By improving those mean abilities which God has given you in
teaching your Families, you shall have them increased, The way of the Lord is
strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29. The man that had but two Talents, trading
with them gained other two, Matthew. 25.17. 6. He that has but very little and
mean abilities, if he improve those small abilities faithfully, in the place
and sphere that God has set him in, shall have a great Reward from God, as
well as they that have had greater abilities; Luke 19.17. Well, thou good
servant, because thou have been faithful in a very little, have thou authority
over ten Cities.


Secondly, Difficult works will be carried on successfully by weak means, where
there is a willing mind. The building of Jerusalem, after it had lain waste
seventy years, was a hard work; the strength and estates of the Jews were much
impaired by their long captivity. Their Adversaries scoffed at them, thinking
they went about an impossible thing, when they endeavored to build up the wall
of the City, and said, Neh. 4.2, 3. What do these feeble Jews? Will they
fortify themselves? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of Rubbish
which are burnt? Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even
break down their stone Wall. And not only their Adversaries, but many of the
Jews themselves thought they were unable to carry on this work, verse. 10. And
Judah said, The strength of the Bearers of Burdens is decayed, and there is
much Rubbish, so that we are not able to build the wall. Yet when they went to
it with a willing mind, the work went on prosperously, verse. 6. So built we the
wall, and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof; for the
People had a mind to work. It argues a slothful spirit to desist from our
duty, because there are some difficulties attend it: Prove. 26.13. The slothful
man says, There is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the streets. Get but a willing
mind, and then this work will not be difficult, but easy and delightful.

Thirdly, The Apostle acknowledges that the Hebrews had but little knowledge,
he says of them, Heb. 5.12. When for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have
need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the Oracles of
God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat: Yet he
calls upon these persons whom he confesses had need of teaching themselves, to
exhort one another daily, Chap. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Fourthly, Though some have more Talents than others, yet there is no man
without a Talent to trade withal, Matthew. 25.15. The Apostle tells us, Every
man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that,
1 Cor. 7.7. Now suppose your gifts are of the meanest sort, you must improve
them for the good of your Families. That man who had but one Talent, because he
hid it in a Napkin, was cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, Matthew. 25.24, 25, 28, 30.

Fifthly, If your want of abilities discourage you from this work, seek to have
your abilities increased; it is lawful to covet gifts for the edification of
others, as well as grace for the good of your own soul: 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet
earnestly the best gifts: 1 Cor. 14.1. Desire spiritual gifts.

If you ask, How you should get your Gifts and Abilities increased?

I answer: 1. Pray to God to endue you with such gifts as may fit you for the
work and service of the place and station that he has set you in; Jam. 1.17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights -- And he which is the Author of every good gift, will deny no
good thing to them that seek him, Psalm. 34.10. Matthew. 7.11. Though you have
little or no abilities, yet God can put power into those that have no might,
Isa. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he
increases strength. 2. Study the Scriptures, and other good Books, but the
Scriptures above all other Books; read them diligently, and meditate upon them:
Hereby you shall be enabled to instruct your Families, and be furnished with
abilities for every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 3. Employ those abilities which
God has given you in teaching your Families, thereby you shall have them
increased, Matthew. 25.29. Unto every one that has (that is, who improveth what
he has, as appears from the context) shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. 4. Walk in the fear of God; by so doing the Lord will increase both
the gifts and graces of his Spirit in you: Psalm. 115.13, 14. He will bless them
that fear the Lord both small and great. The Lord shall increase you more and
more, you and your Children. 5. Look unto Christ who has received Gifts to
bestow upon the sons of men, Psalm. 68.18. The Corinthians were endued with
excellent Gifts, they were enriched with all utterance and all knowledge, so
that they came behind other Churches in no gift. And how came they to be thus
enriched in gifts? They had all their gifts from Jesus Christ, as you may see 1
Cor. 1.4, 5, 7.


Sixthly, Though your gifts be small, yet if you be diligent, and do the best
you can, God will accept your work. They that offered for the Tabernacle Goats
Hair and Rams Skins, were accepted, as well as they that offered Gold, and
Silver, and precious Stones, Exodus 35.5, 6, 7, 8. Such as could not bring a
Lamb for a Trepass Offering, were permitted to bring two Turtle Doves, or two
young Pigeons, and such as could not do this, were allowed to bring the tenth
part of an Ephah of fine flower, and he that brought the smallest offering was
accepted, as well as he that brought the greatest, if he could bring no better;
Lev. 5.6, 7, 11, 13. God has always showed himself ready to accept of weak
service, where a man has a willing mind to do better, but wants ability, 2
Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind it is accepted, according to that a
man has, and not according to that he has not.

Seventhly, If you say you know not how, or in what way to teach your Children
and Servants the holy Scriptures; you may, if you are not provided of a better
help, make use of the Scriptural Catechism which I have published with this
Treatise; wherein I have selected such Texts of Scripture as are useful for the
grounding of younger persons in the knowledge and belief of the Articles of our
Faith, and to bring them acquainted with their sinful and miserable condition
by nature, the necessity of Regeneration, the Covenant of Grace, the way to
obtain peace with God, and remission of sins, etc. and direct and persuade them
to embrace a godly life, and draw them on to the practice of Repentance, the
love of God and our Neighbor, self-denial, contentment, etc. and to restrain
them from lying, swearing, the love of pleasure, idleness, uncleanness, and
such other sins as young persons are apt to be led into; and also to prepare
them for, and comfort them under such afflictions as they are liable unto:
Which I have endeavored to digest in such a method, and with that subserviency
each unto other, as may be helpful both to their Understandings and Memories,
and also work upon their Affections.

SECT. 2. The Plea of such as cannot read, answered.
NEither I my self, nor any of my Family can read, and how then can I instruct
them in the Scriptures, when neither I nor any in my Family can read the
Scriptures?

Answer: First, Bewail your sin, in neglecting to learn to read your self, and
in neglecting to cause your Children to learn to read the word of God. When St.
John saw a Book that no man was able to look into, it made him weep much, Rev.
5.4. I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the Book,
neither to look thereon. Ought not you in like manner to weep much, because
neither you nor any of your Family is able to read in the Book of God?

Secondly, If you cannot read, learn to read with all speed and diligence, and
cause all in your Family to learn also to read the Scriptures. Though you be
growing old, yet it is not too late to begin to learn to read Gods word. To
stir you up to learn to read, and to cause your Children and Servants to learn
to read, consider, 1. It is the Command of God that we should read his word
with great diligence, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures -- 1 Timothy 4.13. Give
attendance to reading: Isa. 34.16. Seek out of the Book of the Lord, and read
-- 1 These. 5.27. I charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all
the holy Brethren. Now they that cannot read live in the breach of these
Commandments; and their inability to read, will be no excuse to them at the day
of Judgment, for they might have learnt if they would have taken a little pains
herein. 2. There is a blessing promised to them that read the word, provided
that they practice what they read, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein. 3. It is a sign they have little or no love to, or esteem of
the word of God, who do not learn and teach their Children to read it. 4. The
want of ability to read, is usually accompanied with very gross ignorance of
God, and the mysteries of salvation.


Thirdly, If you cannot read, be swift to hear Gods word, and get your
Neighbors to read to you, and labor to retain in your memories what you have
heard others read, and teach that to your Families which God helps you to carry
away in your memories.

SECT. 3. The Plea of such as neglect Family-Instruction because they have
disordered Families, answered.
Mr Family is not well inclined, my Chil-Children and Servants are rude, loose,
and disorderly: If I had a Family as well ordered as some of my Neighbors, I
should be very willing to teach and instruct them: It is the want of good
inclinations and good order in my Family, that keeps me from setting on this
work.

Answ. 1. If your Families are not well inclined, but loose and disorderly,
they have the more need of instruction, 1 These. 5.14. Now we exhort you
Brethren, warn those that are unruly: Though they have no inclinations to that
which is good, but walk disorderly, yet you should not think much to bestow
your pains to instruct them. Did not Christ take great pains for us, in coming
from Heaven to seek and save our Souls, when we had nothing of good in us, but
were in a sinful lost perishing condition? The Son of man is come to seek and
save that which was lost, Luke 19.10.

2. Instruction will be a means to breed good inclinations in your Children and
Servants, and to convert them from their sinful courses unto the Lord, if they
be such as live in the transgression of the Commandments of God, Psalm. 51.13.
Then will I teach Transgressors thy Ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto
thee.

3. If your Families be disordered and given to any Vice, and you do not labor
to reform them by instructing, reproving, and praying for them, God will punish
both you and your Families for ever; them for their sins, you for not
restraining them: 1 Samuel 3.13. I will judge his house for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not.

SECT. 4. The plea of such as have dull Children or Servants, answered. How to
deal with dull Persons, and such as have weak Memories.
Mr Children and Servants are so dull, and have such weak Memories that I
cannot make them understand or remember any thing, and this discourageth me
from instructing them.

Answ. 1. Dullness of Understanding and weakness of Memory oft-times proceed
from the neglect and disuse of those Faculties; good Tools will grow rusty, and
unfit for service, if they be not used. It was the field of the slothful which
Solomon saw all grown over with Thorns, and covered with Nettles, Prove. 24.30,
31. Though a person may have good parts, yet if from his youth he neglect to
bend his mind to understand the things of God, and to get the word of God into
his memory, he will find his understanding dull, in apprehending, and his
memo-weak in retaining Divine Objects.

2. Though your Children and Servants seem to be very dull and simple, yet by
instructing them out of the word of God, they may become very wise and prudent
persons: Psalm. 19.7. The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple:
Psalm. 119.130. The entrance of thy word gives light, it gives understanding
to the simple. Solomon speaking of the word of God, says, It will give
subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4.
Though your children be so raw, dull, and ignorant, that they know nothing at
all of the things of God, yet by instructing them out of the word of God, you
may bring them to know and fear the Lord, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 13. Thou shall read this
Law before all Israel in their hearing, that their Children which have not
known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the Lord your God. --

3. If your Children and Servants be dull of apprehension, and have weak
memories, this should not cause you to desist from instructing them, but you
should rather take the more pains with them; Eccles. 10.10. If the iron be
blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to the more strength; but
wisdom is profitable to direct. The duller any persons are, the more need they
have of being taught. Heb. 5.11, 12. Ye are dull of hearing, -- ye have need
that one teach you. -- Though we are guilty of much folly, and ignorance, and
dullness, the Lord our God does not cease from teaching and instructing us, but
guides and directs us continually, Psalm. 73.22, 23, 24. So foolish was I, and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee; nevertheless I am continually with thee
-- thou shall guide me with thy Counsel. If God who is our Master, does not
leave off instructing us, because of our simplicity and dullness, shall we think
much to teach our Servants, because of their ignorance and dullness?

4. If your Children and Servants be dull, and have weak memories, you must
suit your instructions to their capacities; and seeing, as Solomon observes,
that when a man has to do with blunt tools, Wisdom is profitable to direct,
wisely consider by what ways and means you may so carry on this work of
Instruction, as may make most for their edification, in regard of the dullness
of their understandings, and weakness of their memories: And to this purpose I
shall suggest to you these following directions.

1. Let the Scriptures which you teach them be plain and easy: There are some
things in the Scriptures which are (...), hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
And there be other things that are plain and easy. Now they that are to deal
with dull persons, must wave those things that are hard to be understood, Heb.
5.11. and must teach them such things as are plain and easy, otherwise they
will profit little or nothing by the instructions which you give them: 1 Cor.
14.9. Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it
be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. And therefore if
there be any obscurity either in the matter, or in the words and phrases of
those Scriptures which you teach them, explain the sense and meaning thereof,
as the Levites did, when they read the Law to the people, Neh. 8.7, 8.

2. Let the Scriptures which you teach them be short, and such as may be easily
remembered, as well as easily understood. Let them also be comprehensive, such
as comprehend much matter in few words. As for instance: Solomon comprehends
the whole duty of man in few words, when he says, Eccles. 12.13. Fear God and
keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. Our Savior Jesus
Christ sums up all that is delivered by Moses in the Law, and by the Prophets,
in reference to our Duty to our Neighbor in a short sentence, Matthew. 7.12. All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them;
for this is the Law and the Prophets. The Apostle Paul comprehends all the
Commandments that are scattered up and down the word of God concerning our duty
toward our Neighbor, in one short saying, Romans 13.9. If there be any other
Commandment it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. The Apostles resolved that grand question, what a man
should do to be saved, in few words, Acts 16.30, 31. Sirs, What must I do to be
saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy House. Persons of the weakest memories may retain such short
Scriptures as these are, and by retaining such comprehensive Scriptures, they
may know and remember much of their duty, although they remember but few words.

3. If your Children and Servants be dull, inculcate the same things over and
over to them, that they may be the more imprinted in their minds, and be more
deeply rooted in their memories. The Apostle speaking of such as were dull,
Heb. 5.11. says verse. 12. Ye have need one teach you again which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God. Teaching of Truths once or twice, is not
enough for such as are dull; they must be taught the same things again and
again, Isa. 28.10. Precept must be upon Precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little, and there a little.

4. Direct them to, and put them upon the practice of those things that will
help the infirmities of their Understandings and Memories: As for instance;
First, Stir them up to pray to God to give them his holy Spirit: The Spirit of
God is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and will make a man of a quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2, 3. It is his work to lead us
into all truth, John 16.13. And to help the infirmities of our memories, by
bringing Gods Word to our remembrance, John 14.26. Secondly, Stir them up to
repent of their sins: It is sin which darkens our minds, and keeps us from the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. Silly women laden with sins, led away
with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth. Such persons as do not leave their sins, will abide in ignorance,
although they be Hearers and Learners of Gods word as long as they live. But as
for such as repent of their sins, and turn to God, though they be simple
persons, yea such as have loved simplicity and hated knowledge, the Lord
promises to make known his word to them, Prove. 1.22, 23. How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and
fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof; behold I will pour out my Spirit
unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Thirdly, Advise them to exercise
their minds in studying and searching into the Scriptures, and to exercise
their memories by committing some portion of Gods word to their memories every
day. Hereby such as have weak memories, and could remember little or nothing at
the first, will find their Memories improved wonderfully, and not only their
Memories, but their Understandings also. Use and Exercise of the Faculties of
the Soul, tend much to their improvement, which the Scripture as well as daily
Experience does testify, Heb. 5.14. Even those who by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil.


SECT. 5. The Plea of such as neglect Family-Instruction because their Children
or Servants are hard-hearted and rebellious, answered.
Mr Children and Servants are so hard-hearted that nothing that I say unto
them, takes any impression upon their hearts; yea, they are stubborn and
rebellious, opposite, and ready to contradict and gainsay those things which I
teach them out of the word of God: And to what end should I trouble my self to
teach hard-hearted, rebellious, gainsaying persons?

Answ. 1. Consider whether God be not calling your sin to remembrance, in
suffering your Children to be stubborn and refractory in their carriage toward
you. As for instance: Did not you in your your younger days carry your selves
in a disobedient stubborn manner toward your Parents? Or have you not been
stubborn and disobedient in your carriage toward God your heavenly Father? Or
did you not neglect instructing your Children, and too much indulge them in
their own wills and ways whilst they were young? Or have you not some other way
provoked God by your sins, to afflict you with stubborn and disobedient
Children? If so, then humble your Souls before God for your sins, and thereby
you may prevail with God to remove this punishment from you, and to bow and
bend your Childrens hearts so, as they shall come and humble themselves before
you, and submit to those instructions which you shall give them out of the word
of God. We know God can work wonderful changes in the hearts of men; he can
make those that have been an affliction to us, to come and humble themselves
before us, Isa. 60.14. The sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending
unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the
soles of thy feet. And what more likely way is there to bring this about, then
for us to bow down, and submit our selves to God?

2. The Lord vouchsafes to teach hard-hearted rebellious gainsaying persons,
Neh. 9.16, 17.20. They and our Fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
and hearkened not to thy Commandments, and refused to obey, neither were
mindful of the Wonders thou did among them, but hardened their necks, and in
their rebellion appointed a Captain to return to their Bondage. We see here
what a rebellious people the Israelites were, but did this cause God to give
over instructing them? No, for it is said verse. 20. Thou gave thy good spirit
to instruct them. And the like we may see Isa. 65.2, 3. I have spread out my
hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walked in a way that was not
good, after their own thoughts, a people that provokes me to anger centinually
to my face. -- So also Romans 10.21. To Israel he says, All day long I have
stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. Stretching
out of the hands was used by those that taught and instructed the people, Prove.
1.24. Acts 26.1. So that where the Lord says, I have stretched forth my hands
to a gainsaying and rebellious people; the meaning is, that he instructed them,
and invited them to repentance. Now if the Lord condescendeth to teach a
rebellious gainsaying people, shall we think much to teach and instruct our
Children or Servants, because they are stubborn and rebellious?

3. Though our Children and Servants should be hard-hearted and rebellious, yet
we should not forbear or cease to instruct and teach them the good word of the
Lord: For,

1. This will be a means to break their hard hearts, and lead them to
Repentance, and keep them from being rebellious for time to come: It will break
their hearts, though they be as hard as the Rock, Jer. 23.29. Is not my word
lik as a fire, says the Lord, and like a Hammer that breaks the Rock in
pieces? It will be a means to lead them to repentance, though they be of such a
refractory spirit as to oppose the the Truth, and should be such slaves to
Satan, as to be led captive by him when and to what he pleases, 2 Timothy 2.24,
etc. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive at his will. -- It may keep them from being rebellious for time to
come, Psalm. 78.5, 7, 8. He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a
Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that they should make them known
to their Children, that they might set their hope in God, and not forget the
works of God, and keep his Commandments, and might not be as their Fathers a
stubborn and rebellious Generation.

2. We should sin against God if we should leave off teaching our Children or
Servants because they carry themselves unkindly and disobediently toward us.
The people of Israel carried themselves stubbornly and rebelliously both
against God and against Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7, 19. yet Samuel tells them he would
not cease to pray for them and to teach them, lest he should sin against God, 1 Samuel 12.23. Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord,
in ceasing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good and the right way. It
is the Will and Command of God that rebellious and hard-hearted persons should
be taught his Word, as we may see Ezekiel. 2.3, 4, 7. where the Lord acknowledges
the Children of Israel to be rebellious, impudent, and stiff-hearted, and yet
he says to the Prophet, Thou shall speak my words unto them whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious. And if it be
Gods Command that the Rebellious should be taught his Word, it must needs be a
sin to forbear teaching our Families, though some or all of them are rebellious
persons; for then we sin, when we transgress any of the Commandments of God, 1
John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

3. Though our Children should for the present rebel against those Instructions
and Commands which they receive from us, yet afterward they may consider their
ways, and repent, and follow those Counsels and Instructions which we have
given them. The elder Son spoken of in the Parable at first refused to obey his
Father, but afterward he repented and did what his Father commanded him:
Matthew. 21.28, 29. A certain man had two Sons, and he came to the first, and
said, Son go work to day in my Vinyard; he answered and said, I will not; but
afterward he repented and went.

4. If your Children be hard-hearted, weep over them when you instruct them,
that may be a means to break their hearts; Acts 21.13. What mean you to weep,
and to break my heart? It is said Job 14.13. The Water wear the Stones: Seeing
waters will wear the stones, why may not you hope by your tears to dissolve and
break the stony hearts of your Children?

SECT. 6. The Plea of such as say their Children are too young to be
instructed, answered.
Mr Children are young, and it is too soon to begin to teach them the
Scriptures; they cannot understand any thing as yet, if I should go about to
teach them; and besides, I am afraid I should profane the word of God, and
take the Name of God in vain, if I should teach them whilst they are young; and
therefore I will let this work alone until they are grown up unto years of
discretion, then I will do it.

Answ. 1. We cannot begin too soon to teach our Children the word of God. As
soon as they have learned to speak, we should endeavor to learn them the
Scriptures, Isa. 28.9. Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to
understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned from the Milk, and drawn from the
Breasts. It is said of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the
Holy Scriptures -- (...), which is rendered by the Vulgar Latin, Ab infantia,
From thy Infancy, and by Schmidius, A prima infantia, From thy first Infancy,
the same greek word is translated Luke 18.15. Infants, and Acts 7.19. Young
Children, Luke 2.12. A Babe. The word imports, that Timothy was taught the
Scriptures very early, as soon as ever he was capable of learning them. That
Precept which is given Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go,
and when he is old he will not depart from it; implies that we should begin
betimes to teach our Children the ways of the Lord. The Hebrew word used there
for a Child, as Schindler observes, totam aetatem teneram complectitur,
comprehends all a man's tender years, as, Infancy, Childhood, Youth. It is
rendered a Babe, Exodus 2.6. The Babe wept; and it is applied to one that has
not capacity to discern between good and evil, Isa. 7.16. Before the Child
shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good. -- So that when Solomon
says, Train up a Child in the way that he should go, this Precept reaches our
youngest Children, and intimates we should begin very early with them, to teach
and instruct them as soon as there is any capacity in them to learn.

2. Satan begins betimes to corrupt our Children, and to teach them that which
is evil: We see many Children learn to lie as soon as they can speak, Psalm.
58.3. They go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies: Others learn to
mock the people of God, 1 King. 2.23. There came forth little Children out of
the City and mocked him; Others learn other vices. And shall not we begin as
early to teach them good things, as Satan begins to teach them wicked and evil
things?

3. There is a greater capacity in Children to learn and understand, than many
are aware of; They are capable of receiving the holy Ghost whilst they are in
their Mothers womb, Luke 1.15, 41. And such on whom God pours out his Spirit
whilst they are Infants, are capable betimes of knowing the things of God. We
read Psalm. 8.2. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained
strength, because of thine Enemies, that thou might still the Enemy and the
Avenger. And we find this Scripture applied by Christ to the little Children,
who cried in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David, Matthew. 21.15, 16. These
little Children by the Revelation of Gods Spirit knew and understood that Jesus
Christ was the promised Messiah, which thing was hid from many of the
Pharisees, who were wise and prudent men, Matthew. 11.25.

4. Suppose our Children should not understand for the present some of those
Scriptures which we teach them, yet they may understand them, and reap great
benefit from them hereafter, it may be after we are laid in our Graves, John
12.16. These things understood not his Disciples at the first, but when Jesus
was glorified, then remembered they that those things were written of him, and
that they had done these things unto him. And in another place we find that the
Disciples after Christ's death were much helped in their Faith, by remembering a
word that Christ had said to them in his Life time, about his building of the
Temple in three days after it should be destroyed, John 2.22. When he was risen
from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he had said this unto them, and
they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

5. It is not a profaning of Gods Name, or of his holy Word to teach our
Children the Scriptures whilst they are young, but it makes much for the
glorifying of God. When little Children cried in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son
of David, the chief Priests and Scribes were sore displeased; but what said
Christ to this? He justifies them, he says it redounded to Gods praise: yea,
so far was he from counting it a profaning of Gods Name, that he calls it a
perfection of praise, Matthew. 21.16. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings
thou have perfected praise. And therefore we should look upon this as a
Temptation of Satan, when we are persuaded to neglect instructing our Children
while they are young, lest we should thereby profane the Name of the Lord.

6. Jesus Christ has given a Charge for the feeding of his Lambs as well as
his Sheep, John 21.15. Love thou me? Feed my Lambs. He was much displeased
with those that would have hindered little Children from being brought unto
him, Mark 10.13, 14. They brought young Children to him, that he should touch
them, and his Disciples rebuked those that brought them; but when Jesus saw it,
he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little Children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. It is the duty of
little Children to praise the Lord, Psalm. 149.12, 13. Both young men and
maidens, old men and children, let them praise the Name of the Lord. -- And how
can they do this, except we teach them to praise the Lord? Amongst the
Offerings under the Law, we find several Creatures offered to God very young;
Samuel offered a sucking Lamb, 1 Samuel 7.9. And Aaron is required to offer a
young Calf, Lev. 9.2. And they that were poor, and could not go to the price of
a Lamb, were to offer two young Pigeons, Lev. 5.7. This may teach us, that we
cannot dedicate our selves or our Children too soon to the Lord; but the
younger our Children are, when we begin to train them up in the knowledge and
fear of God, the more acceptable it will be to the Lord, who desires the
knowledge of God more than Burnt-Offerings, Hos. 6.6.

7. We know not how little a time we may live with our Children, or our
Children may live with us, and therefore it is not safe deferring this work;
for, All flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6. and grass is of a fading nature, In the
morning it flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down and
withers, Psalm. 90.6. Man's life is set forth by a more transient fading thing
than grass, by the Apostle James, What is your life? It is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.16. Whilst
therefore God continues us with our Children, and our Children with us, we
should set upon this work of teaching and instructing them with all speed, and
with all our might, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with
thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
Grave, whither thou go.

SECT. 7. The Plea of such as neglect Family-Instruction because their Families
are endued with knowledge, answered.
My Family are all knowing persons, and are well acquainted with the Scriptures
already, so that it is needless for me to instruct them.

Answ. First, If the case be so indeed, that all the Members of your Family be
knowing persons, you have great cause to bless God, and to be thankful every
day on their behalf, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. I thank my God always on your behalf, for
the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in every thing ye are
enriched by him in all utterance and in all knowledge.

2. It may be if you examine the several members of your Family, you shall not
find all of them so eminent and abounding in knowledge as you think them to be,
before you have made trial. Who would have thought that Nicodemus who was a
Master in Israel, should have been so ignorant in the Mystery of Regeneration,
that when Christ spoke of a man's being born again, or else he could not see the
Kingdom of God, he should reply, How can a man be born when he is old? Can he
enter the second time into his mothers womb, and be born? Joh. 3.4. And when
Christ had explained his meaning, that he spoke of being born of the Spirit; he
replied afterward, How can these things be? Verse. 9. Insomuch that our Lord
Jesus wondered that such a man as he should show so much ignorance in such
things as these were, verse. 10. Jesus said unto him, Art thou a Master of
Israel, and know not these things? The Disciples of Christ, after they had
been a long time with their Master, and had been often instructed by him both
publicly and privately, were so ignorant in the Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection, that they did not know what his rising from the dead should mean,
Mark 9.10. They kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another
what the rising from the dead should mean. And as they did not understand the
Resurrection of Christ, so neither did they understand of a long time that he
was to die for our sins, Luke 9.44, 45. Let these sayings sink down into your
ears, for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men; but they
understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it
not. And they were not only his ordinary followers, but his twelve Apostles,
whom he chose to be with him continually, that understood not what he taught
them, when he spoke of his Death and Resurrection, as we may see Luc. 18.31,
32, 33, 34. Now if Nicodemus a Master in Israel, was ignorant of the nature of
Regeneration, which is a work that must pass upon every one that shall be
saved; if the Disciples of Christ, yea his Apostles, after they had been a long
time with him, were ignorant of those plain and fundamental Truths of the Death
and Resurrection of Christ; had not those Masters of Families that think all in
their Families are endued with such a great measure of knowledge that they want
no instruction, need make enquiry into their Children and Servants knowledge,
whether they are indeed so knowing as they think them to be?

Thirdly, Suppose all the Members of your Families be wise understanding
persons, endued with a great measure of knowledge, yet it is your duty to
instruct them, that they may get more wisdom, and it will be a benefit and
advantage unto them to be instructed, Prove. 9.9. Give instruction to a wise
man, and he will be yet wiser; teach a just man, and he will increase in
learning: For, 1. Though you should teach them nothing but what they knew
before, yet thereby you may edify them, whilst you stir up their Faith, Hope,
Love, Joy, Thankfulness, and Obedience, etc. by putting them in remembrance of
known Truths. They to whom the Apostle Peter wrote, knew and were established
in the Truth; yet he resolved as long as he lived to stir them up by putting
them in remembrance of what he had taught them before, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. I will
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of those things though ye
know them, and be established in the present truth; yea, I think it meet as
long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up by putting you in remembrance:
But, 2. There is no man knows so much, but he may and ought to labor to grow
in knowledge. David knew more than the Ancients, and more than all his
Teachers, and yet how often do we find him praying after this manner, Give me
understanding, Teach me thy Statutes, etc. In the 119 Psalm, where he speaks of
the great measure of knowledge whereby he excelled his Enemies, his Teachers,
and the Ancients, he prays 24 or 25 times to God, to give him knowledge. You
should not rest satisfied that your Families do know the will of God, but you
should desire and endeavor as the Apostle did in the behalf of the Colossians,
that they may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9, 10. You should not only labor to bring them
acquainted with the word of God, but endeavor that it may dwell richly in
them, and that it may dwell in them in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom. --


SECT. 8. Family-Instruction must not be neglected, because we have but a small
Family.
My Family is so small, I do not think it worth my time and pains to instruct
them: If I had many Children, or many Servants, I would take pains to instruct
them; but having so small a Family, I do not think it worth the while to bestow
my time on one or two, because I can employ my time better.

Answ. 1. If you have but one Child, or one Servant to instruct, it is worth
much time and pains to instruct that one person, for one Soul is more worth
than the whole world, Mark 8.36. Now you have spent and do spend much time and
pains to get a little of the world; and will you then grudge the spending a
little time or pains to save a Soul, which is more worth than the whole world,
when as you willingly spend much time to gain a little of the world.

2. To instruct persons in the knowledge of Christ, is such a great and
glorious work, that the holy Angels did not think much to go to a few Shepherds
to acquaint them with the time and place of Christ's birth; Luc. 2.8, 9, 10, 11,
12. And when one Angel was publishing this message to the Shepherds, there
suddenly descended a multitude of the heavenly Host, as being desirous to do
the same work, verse. 13, 14. And shall any of us think much to do that which
the Angels of Heaven do, and rejoice to be employed in?

3. The Lord Jesus spent much time and pains in teaching and instructing one
poor woman, the woman of Samarla, who was a sinner, and a woman of a churlish
disposition, that in an upbraiding manner denied him a Cup of Water,
notwithstanding the Well was deep, and she saw that he had nothing to draw
withal; and this he did at such a time as he had been wearied with his journey,
and was both hungry and thirsty, John 4.6. to 28. Now one hour of Christ's time,
was more worth than our whole lives; and shall we then think much to spend a
little time in teaching one Child, or one Servant, whenas the Lord Jesus did
not think much to spend his time when he was weary, hungry, and thirsty, in
teaching one poor woman?

4. Though you have but one Child or Servant to instruct, if God bless your
labors so as to convert that Child or Servant, that one person may be
instrumental to bring great glory to God, and to do good to many others. When
the woman of Samaria was converted by Christ, she was a means of drawing a
great part of the City where she lived, unto Jesus Christ; John 4.28, 29, 30.
she did not only draw a great part of the City to hear him, but also was a
means of their conversion, verse. 39. Many of the Samaritans of that City
believed on him for the saying of the Woman, which testified, He told me all
that ever I did.

5. Faithfulness to God, and such as are under our charge, is shown in
discharging our duty to a few, as well as to many; and he that is not faithful
to a few, would not be faithful if he had many committed to his charge, Luc.
16.10. He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much,
and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. They that have but
a few things committed to their trust, if they are faithful in them, shall have
a great and glorious Reward, as well as they that have been entrusted with
much, Matthew. 25.23. His Lord said unto him, Well done good and faithful
Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over
many things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

6. Whereas you say you could spend your time better than in teaching so few as
you have in your Family, you should do well to consider, That we are not to
spend our time in those things which seem right in our own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Ye
shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man
whatsoever is right in his own eyes. But we are to spend our time in doing
those works which God has given us to do, and in so doing we shall glorify
God, and follow the Example and Pattern of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
John 17.4. I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do. Now this is one work which God has given you to do, to
teach his Word to your Children, and has commanded you to be diligent in it,
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

SECT. 9. The greatness of a Family is not a sufficient Plea for the neglect of
Family-Instruction.
My Family is so numerous, that I am not able to instruct them; if I had a
lesser Family I would do it, but I know not how to carry on this work in such a
great Family as I have.

Answ. 1. The more Souls you have in your Family, the more diligent you had
need to be in this work of Family-Instruction, for you will have the greater
account to give to God at the day of Judgment: The account we must give to God
at the day of Judgment, is very strict. He will call us to an account for every
word, yea for every idle word, Mat. 12.32. I say unto you, That every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of
Judgment. Now if we must give an account for every word, every idle word that
we have spoken, shall we not much more give an account for every person whom
God has committed to our charge? Is not a man of far more value than a word?

2. If you neglect teaching your Family because of the multitude of persons
that are in it, you are not like Christ, you are not of the same mind and
spirit that Christ was of, for the greater the number of people was which
resorted to him, the more his Bowels of Compassion were stirred up to teach
them, Mark 6 34. And Jesus when he came out saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, -- and he began to teach them many things. Neither are
you like the Righteous, concerning whom Solomon says, Prove. 10.21. The Lips of
the Righteous feed many.

3. Your Family is not greater and more numerous than Acraham's Family was, for
he was able to raise more than 300 fighting men out of the Servants born in his
own house, Genesis 14.14. When Abraham heard that his Brother was taken captive,
he armed his trained Servants born in his own House, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan. And notwithstanding Abraham had such a
numerous Family, yet he taught them all to keep the ways of the Lord, Genesis
18.19. I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment. And
those three hundred and eighteen Servants whom he carried with him to rescue
Lot, mentioned Genesis 14.14. were trained (or as it is in the Margin, instructed)
Servants, which may be understood of their being religiously trained up; that
they were instructed in the grounds of Religion, as well as of their training
to civil or military Employments, as Ainsworth and Calvin observe: Vatalbus his
Note upon that Text is, Pueros quos (ut quidam volunt) instruxerat Art Bellica
ac etiam Lege Divina: And that which will confirm this exposition, that these
trained men were trained up in the knowledge and fear of God, is this, The same
Hebrew word which is used here for trained men, is used for Religious Education
Prove. 22.6. Train up (or as it is in the Margin, catechize) a child in the way
that he should go.

4. If your Family be numerous, you may render the work of instruction the more
easy, by calling the whole Family together, when you instruct them, and then
you may at the same time, with the same ease, instruct many as few. Israel
being a numerous people, and they being all to be instructed, Moses counsels
the Levites to gather the people together, that the work might be done with the
more ease, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. Thou shall read this Law before all Israel in their
hearing; gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn,
and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this Law. Do you
thus, if your Family be numerous, at certain stated times appoint your whole
Family to come together, and then you may with ease instruct all of them.

SECT. 10. Great as well as mean men must instruct their Families.
Am a great man, and this work is beneath me, to teach my Children and Servants.

Answer: 1. Art thou greater than Abraham, who was a great Prince, Genesis 23.5,
6. The Children of Heth answered Abraham, saying, Hear us my Lord, thou art a
mighty Prince amongst us -- and who is styled the Father of the Faithful, and a
Father of many Nations? Yet he did not think it to be beneath him to teach his
Family, Genesis 18.19. Art thou greater than David, who was King of Israel? Yet he
did not think much to teach his Family; Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my Fathers Son,
tender and only beloved in the sight of my Mother; He taught me also: He did
not only teach Solomon, but his other Children also, Psalm. 34.11. Come ye
Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Yea, he did
not think much to teach Transgressors the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 51.13. Then
will I teach Transgressors thy ways. --

2. The Great GOD condescends to teach the meanest and poorest of men, Psalm.
25.8. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners in the way:
John 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God:
Isa. 54.13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, Does the Great
GOD condescend to teach all sorts of men, the Poor as well as the Rich,
Children as well as grown Men, yea such as are Sinners; and shall any man think
himself too great to teach and instruct his Family?

3. It is an honor to be employed in doing any work or service for God and
Jesus Christ. John the Baptist was a great man; Christ says of him, Among them
that are born of women there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist,
Matthew. 11.11. Yet this great man did not think himself above the meanest
service that he could be employed in for Christ, but thought himself unworthy
to carry Christ's Shoes after him, Matthew. 3.11. He that comes after me is
mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear. To teach the word of
Christ unto our Children and Servants, is more honorable work than to carry
Christ's Shoes after him. Now if John the Baptist thought himself unworthy to
carry Christ's Shoes after him, what great pride of spirit is it for any man to
say or think it is a work beneath me, for such a great man as I am to instruct
my Family?

4. Riches, and Honor, and worldly Greatness, should be so far from taking off
any man from any good work, that they should cause him to be more abundant in
every good work, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Charge them that are rich in this world --
that they do good, that they be rich in good works. -- Jehoshaphat, who was a
good, as well as a great man, was so far from neglecting any of the ways of the
Lord because of his Greatness, that his heart was more elevated and encouraged
to lay out himself for God, by the Honor and Greatness which God had conferred
upon him, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6. The Lord stablished the Kingdom in his hand, and
all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat Presents, and he had Riches and Honor in
abundance, and his heart was lift up (or as it is in the Margin) was encouraged
in the ways of the Lord.

SECT. 11. The Plea of such as say they have no spare time to instruct their
Families, because they are poor, or have much business, or are often abroad,
answered.
They have no spare time to instruct their Families; some because they are
poor, others because they are often from home, a third sort because they are
full of business, who are ready to say, On the week days we must attend our
worldly occasions, and on Lords days we must attend public Ordinances, and
take some time for our private Communion with God, so that we can find no time
to instruct our Families.

Answ. 1. Do you not find time to eat and drink with your Children? If you can
find time notwithstanding all your business to eat and drink with your
Families, if you had as great a delight in the word of God as Job had, you
would also find time to instruct them out of the word of God; for he esteemed
Gods word more than his food, yea more than his necessary food, Job 23.12. I
have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. Are not your
Childrens Souls infinitely better than their Bodies? And will you then spend
all your time in providing for their Bodies, and spare no time to instruct
their Souls? Your Childrens Souls are in as great danger to perish without
Instruction, as their Bodies without Food and Raiment; their Bodies will die if
they have no Food prepared for them, so will their Souls if they be without
Instruction: Prove. 5.23. He shall die without instruction, and in the greatness
of his folly he shall go astray: Hos. 4.6. My People are destroyed for want of
Knowledge.

2. Suppose you are poor, your Poverty should be so far from keeping you from
teaching Gods Word unto your Children, that you should be the more diligent to
study Gods word your selves, and to teach the same unto your Children: And that
for several Reasons: As, First, Gods Word will help you and your Children to
bear your Poverty with Patience and Contentment. The Apostle Paul exerercised
much patience in his Afflictions, Necessities, and Distresses, and the help
which he had to bear his Necessities with patience, was from the Word of God, 2
Cor. 6.4, 7. Increasing in the knowledge of God, will strengthen a man with all
might to suffer all sorts of afflictions, with all Patience, Long-suffering,
and Joyfulness, Col. 1.10, 11. Secondly, If you be poor, and can leave your
Children nothing, you have the more need to leave them instructed in the Word
of God; and if you leave them well instructed in the Word, you leave them a
good portion, better then if you left them thousands of pounds in Silver or
Gold; Psalm. 119.72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of
Gold and Silver. Thirdly, By laying up Gods word in your hearts, and teaching
it your Children, and practicing it in your Lives and Conversations, you may
come to be delivered from your Poverty, and be blessed with Riches: Prove.
10.22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich; and who are more likely to
obtain this Blessing, then they that treasure up Gods word in their hearts, and
teach it to their Children? Job 22.22, 24. Receive I pray thee the Law from his
mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart; then shall thou lay up Gold as
dust, and the Gold of Ophir as the stones of the brook: Prove. 24.4. By
knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant Riches.
Fourthly, If the Lord should see it best for you and your Children to be kept
in a poor and low condition, and should deny you the Riches of this world, yet
by conversing much with the word of God, and instructing your Children in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, both you and your Children may come to be rich in
faith; and by being rich in faith, both you and they shall become great Heirs,
Heirs of a Kingdom; Heirs not of an earthly, but which is far better, of an
heavenly Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith, Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them that love him?


3. Multiplicity of Business is not a sufficient Plea for the neglect of this
duty of Family-Instruction: For, First, Next to the working out of our own
salvation, we can have no Business of greater importance than the training up
our Families in the knowledge and fear of God. Secondly, A good man must order
all his affairs with discretion, so as one Business may not hinder another;
especially that which is of lesser moment must not hinder that which is of
greater concerment. Thirdly, When a man has an heart for this work, he will
easily find time to do it. Want of time may be pretended, but want of an heart
to the work, is the real cause why it is neglected. Fourthly, No men can have
more or greater Business than Kings, who have the Affairs of an whole Kingdom
lying upon their hands; yet David, who was a King, found time to teach his
Children, Prove. 4.3, 4. yet he had much other Business besides governing the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, who were a very numerous People; as, preparing
Materials to build the Temple, composing of Psalms, fighting of Battles, there
being both Civil Wars, and War with foreign Enemies in his days, etc. Fifthly,
They that have most Business, if they take a view of their time, shall find
that much of their time is lost and misspent, either in idleness, or vain
unprofitable Discourse, or unnecessary thoughts and cares about the affairs of
this life, or in some other kind. Do but spend so much time in
Family-Instruction, as you have been used to spend unprofitably, and you shall
find time enough for this work.


4. Suppose you be full of Employment, that you can find no spare time on the
week day, to instruct your Families, yet on every Lords day, wherein you are to
lay aside all your worldly Business, you may find time and leisure enough to
instruct your Families.

If you say, On the Lords day we must attend upon the public Worship and
Service of God, and we must take also some time for private Communion with God,
so that we have no spare time on the Lords days.

I answer,

It is true, it is our duty to attend upon the Public Worship and Service of
God, Jam. 1.19. Let every man be swift to hear: And in so doing, we may expect
Christ's presence with us, Matthew. 18.20. For where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. It is our duty also to
keep up private Communion with God, to pray to God in secret, and to read and
meditate on the word of God when we are alone, but both these may be done; we
may attend on Gods Ordinances in public, and also perform secret and
Closet-duties, and yet have time sufficient for to instruct our Families every
Lords day.

5. That the plea of other business may not take you off from teaching your
Families the word of God; consider how acceptable this work is to Jesus Christ.
No work or business does more please him, than to see us learning his word our
selves, and teaching our Families what we have learnt. When Christ came to
Martha's House, she received him, and took great care and pains to entertain
Christ, and those that came with him, and this was a very good and pious work;
but Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word. Hereupon Martha goes to Christ,
and complains that Mary had left her to serve alone: But what answer did Christ
give her? It was this, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many
things; but one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good part which
shall not be taken away from her, Luke 10.38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Where we see
Christ commended Mary's choice, who sat at his feet, and heard his word, above
Martha's, who received him into her house, and provided for his entertainment
and his followers. And yet how good a work was it to receive and entertain
Christ! There was cost, and care, and pains attending this work. And as Christ
is highly pleased with such as give their minds to hear and learn his word,
more than with those that were able and willing to feast him and his Apostles;
So also it is a very acceptable work unto Christ, to see us instructing and
teaching our Families; which does plainly appear from his answer to the man out
of whom the Devils departed, when he desired to be with him, Luke 8.38, 39. Now
the man out of whom the Devils were departed, besought him that he might be
with him; but Jesus sent him away saying, Return to thine own House, and show
how great things God has done unto thee: The man desired that he might be with
Christ. Now to follow Christ, this was a good work, it might have conduced very
much to the good of his Soul, for to have sat under Christ's Ministry, and to
have heard his Doctrine; possibly the man desired this to express his
gratitude, by ministering to Christ, and attending his person, to do such
service on all occasions as he should command him; yet the Lord Jesus chooses
rather to send him home to his own house to instruct his Family, than to answer
his desire in suffering the man to be with him, which shows the great
acceptance that this work has with Christ, in that he chose rather to have
this man go home and instruct his Family, than to attend upon and minister to
his own person.

6. As for such whose occasions call them to be much abroad, and to tarry long
from home, I shall only hint two or three things: 1. When you are at home, be
the more diligent and frequent in teaching your Children and Servants, by how
much the oftener your occasions necessitate your absence from your Families. 2.
Let your Charge at home cause you to dispatch your Business abroad with what
expedition you can, that you may hasten to your Families; and withstand all
solicitations of one or other that would detain you from returning with all
convenient speed to your own home. 3. Make up by Prayer what you cannot do by
personal Instruction: Be earnest with God to take the care of them, and to
teach them in your absence. 4. If your occasions do necessitate you to be often
and long absent, depute some person in your absence that may do this work for
you: Or if you have none that you can depute in your room, allot them such
tasks as you shall see meet to exercise themselves withal whilst you are
detained from them, and at your return take an account how they have improved
their time therein.


7. If nothing that has been said will prevail with you to lay aside this vain
excuse, I have no spare time to do this work; I shall only add this further,
That God will find a time to punish, and pour out his wrath upon those persons
that cannot find a time to perform Family Duties, as to instruct them, to pray
with their Families, etc. Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that
know thee not, and the Families that call not upon thy Name.

SECT. 12. The Plea of such as are afraid they should wrest the Scriptures,
answered. How to come to the true and right understanding of the Scriptures.
Am afraid I should wrest the Scriptures if I should go about to teach my
Family, because I am a man of small learning; and the Apostle tells us, There
are some things in the Scriptures hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned do wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

Answer: 1. Ought you not to be afraid of bringing the guilt of your Childrens
blood upon your heads, by neglecting to teach them, and nursing them in
ignorance, as well as fear wresting the Scriptures? If your Families be not
instructed, but live and die in ignorance, they will perish eternally, but
their Blood God will require at your hands, as has been showed before.

2. As there are some thing in the Scripture hard to be understood, so there
are other things plain and easy: As, That we should love God with all our
hearts, and love our Neighbor as our selves; That we should trust in the Lord
at all times, and for all things; That we should do unto all men as we would
that they should do unto us; That we should be contented in every condition:
With many other Precepts and Directions pertaining to an holy Life: Which are
so plain and easy to be understood, that persons of very mean capacities may
understand them. The Prophet speaking of the way of Holiness, says, Isa.
35.10. The wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. And as the
Practical part of Christianity is easy to be understood, so there are many
Principles so clearly and plainly revealed in the Scriptures, that persons of
mean abilities may understand them. As, That God made man upright, and created
him after his own Image, in Righteousness and true Holiness; That Adam did not
continue in this estate, but sinned against God by eating the forbidden fruit;
That all men have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; That the wages of
sin is death; That Jesus Christ died for our sins; That he rose again from the
dead the third day; That he ascended into Heaven, and sits there at Gods
right hand to make Intercession for us; That whosoever believes in Jesus
Christ, shall receive remission of sins, and have eternal life; That the dead
shall be raised, and be all judged at the last day; That at the day of Judgment
they that have done evil shall be cast into Hell Fire, where they shall remain
for ever; and they that have lived godly in Christ Jesus shall be taken into
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Now if you have not ability to teach them the more
abstruse and mysterious points of the Christian Religion, teach them those
things which are plain and easy; and whilst you do so, God will open your
Understandings, and give you farther insight into the Mysteries of the Gospel.

3. Your fear of wresting the Scriptures, should make you diligent in using the
means to get a true and right understanding of the Scriptures; but it should
not make you neglect your duty in teaching your Children the knowledge of the
Scriptures. That man who had but one Talent, and out of fear did not improve
his Talent, but went and hid it in the Earth, was not excused by his having but
a mean Talent, or by his pleading his fearfulness; but is called by his Lord a
wicked and a slothful servant, and was cast into outer darkness, where there
was weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Matthew. 25.24, 25, 26, 30. He which had
received the one Talent, came and said, Lord, I knew thee, that thou art a hard
man, -- And I was afraid, and went and hid thy Talent in the Earth; lo there
thou have that is thine: His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and
slothful servant, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where
I have not strawed; thou ought therefore to have put my money to the
Exchangers, that I might have received mine own with usury. Take therefore the
Talent from him -- And cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

If you ask, What means should we use that we may come to the true and right
understanding of the Scriptures, and be kept from wresting them?

I answer:

1. Be sensible of your own inability to understand the Scriptures of your
selves, and pray to God to open your understandings, and to guide you into the
true and right meaning of his holy word. It is Gods work to open the eyes of
our understandings, whereby we may understand his word, Luc. 24.45. Then opened
he their understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures: Prove.
20.12. The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of
them. And seeing it is Gods work to enlighten our minds, we must pray to God to
reveal to us the meaning of his word, when we give our selves to the reading of
it, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of
thy Law. And when we do with humble and lowly minds seek unto God, he will
teach us, and lead us into the knowledge of the truth, Prove. 28.5. They that
seek the Lord understand all things: Psalm. 25.9. The meek will he guide in
judgment, the meek will he teach his way. They are usually proud and
self-conceited persons that fall into error, Psalm. 119.21. Thou have rebuked
the proud, that are cursed, that do err from thy Commandments.

2. Read the Scriptures diligently, and mark the coherence of what you read,
with that which went before, and that which follows after; observe the scope,
and consider well both the words and matter of those places which have any
difficulty in them, this will help you to a right understanding of the
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things.

3. Compare one Scripture with another, that which is more obscure with that
which is more clear, that is the way to come to know the mind of Christ in the
Scriptures: 1 Cor. 2.13, 16. -- Comparing spiritual things with spiritual -- we
have the mind of Christ.

4. Consider what is the general design and scope of the whole Scripture; and
if you would not wrest the Scriptures, understand and expound particular Texts
so as they may agree with, and not contradict, the general scope and design of
the whole Scripture. Now the general scope and design of the Scripture, is, 1.
To bring us to believe in Christ, and to teach us to expect eternal Life by
believing on Christ, John 20.31. These things are written that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life
through his Name: Prove. 22.19, 20. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have
made known to thee this day, even to thee: Have I not written to thee excellent
things in counsels and knowledge? 2. To keep us from sinning against God, 1
John 2.1. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not --
And to direct and help us to live holy and godly lives, Tit. 1.1. According to
the faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after
Godliness: 1 Timothy 6.3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness. 3. The general design of the Scriptures, is, to comfort
and to encourage us in all estates and conditions to hope in God, Rom 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.


5. Receive such Truths as God reveals to you out of his word, with love, and
yield sincere obedience to them: When persons do not love and obey the Word,
God gives them up oft-times to strong delusions, that they believe lies instead
of truth; 2 These. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie. But as for such as do sincerely obey
the voice of the Lord, and continue therein, the Lord is wont to give them good
understandings, and the spirit of a sound mind; Psalm. 110.10. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his
Commandments, John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

6. Lean not to your own understandings, but trust in the Lord with all your
hearts, rely upon him to keep you from Error of Judgment, and to lead and
guide you into all Truth; you have several promises to encourage you to rest
upon God to teach you the truth, and to preserve you in the knowledge and
belief of the truth: I will mention some of them: John 16.13. When he the
Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: John 8.31, 32. Then
said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free. John 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, And ye shall be all
taught of God.

7. Take some convenient times for chastening your Souls by fasting and
humiliation for your sins, and bewail before the Lord your ignorance and
dullness, and all your other sins, and cry mightily to him for that wisdom which
comes from above; hereby Daniel obtained a great measure of Divine Illumination
and Knowledge in the Mysteries of Salvation, Dan. 10.12. Fear not Daniel, for
from the first day that thou did set thine heart to understand, and to
chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy
words. And at another time, whilst he was humbling his Soul for his sins, and
calling upon God, the Lord sent an Angel to give him skill and understanding,
Dan. 9.20, 21, 22, 23.

SECT. 13. How to taste the sweetness that is in Gods Word. The feeling of a
dry unsavory Spirit will not excuse the neglect of Family-Instruction.
Do not find my own heart affected with the Word of God, and how then can I
hope that God should accept my work, or that I should edify my Family by
instructing them? If I could relish and savor the sweetness that is in Gods
Word my self, I should delight to instruct my Family; but because I find my
heart in an unsavory frame, this discourageth me from this work.

Answ. I. There is an exceeding great sweetness in the word of God; it is, as
David expresses it, sweeter then honey, and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. And
we should labor to taste and feel the sweetness thereof, and to keep always
the savor and relish thereof upon our spirits.

If any say, How may this be done?

I answer: 1. We must put away all our sins, for sin vitiates the Palate of the
Soul, that it cannot find any delight in the word of God. Jeremiah speaking of
the Jews that had greatly corrupted their ways, says of them, Jer. 6.10.
Behold the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no delight in
it. As long as a man remains in the band of iniquity, he is in the gall of
bitterness, Acts 8.23. I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the
bond of iniquity: And it is no wonder that a man who is in the gall of
bitterness, does not taste the sweetness of the word of God. When we do
seriously set our selves to reform our hearts and lives, and do refrain our
selves from every evil way, we shall find unexpressible sweetness in the word
of God, though we found none at all before; Psalm. 119.101, 103. I have
refrained my self from every evil way -- How sweet are thy words unto my taste?
Yea sweeter than honey to my mouth: No earthly thing excels Honey in sweetness,
Judge. 14.18. What is sweeter than honey? Now David who did refrain himself from
every evil way, did find a sweetness in Gods word, not which was equal to, but
such as did far exceed the sweetness of Honey; Yea sweeter then Honey to my
mouth.

2. We must by the help of the word labor to find out Jesus Christ, which we
may soon do, if we be diligent in searching the Scriptures, John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures -- they are they which testify of me. And when we have found
Christ, let us through the help of the word rest and repose our Souls upon him,
then shall we find great sweetness and joy in his word, Cant. 2.3. I sat down
his under shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. When
Philip preached Christ to the City of Samaria, they that heard him found great
joy in the word of God, Acts 8.5, 8. Philip went down to the City of Samaria,
and preached Christ unto them, and there was great joy in that City.

3. We must feed upon the word of God by faith and meditation, and make
applications of the precious promises to our own Souls, and then we shall find
great joy and delight in the word of God, Jer. 15.16. Thy Words were found, and
I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and the rejoicing of my heart.
As the way to find and taste the sweetness which is in God, is, to have our
hearts and thoughts much exercised in meditating on him, Psalm. 104.34. My
meditation of him shall be sweet -- So meditation on the Scriptures will cause
us to delight and taste sweetness in the Scriptures; delight in the Law will
accompany a diligent and serious meditation on the Law of God, as we may see
Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night.

4. If we would relish and taste the sweetness that is in Gods word, we must
practice what we read and hear, we must take counsel from the Scriptures how to
order our Conversations and all our affairs according to the mind and will of
God, and walk according to the counsels and directions which are given us in
the word of God, and then Gods Testimonies will be delightful to our souls,
Psalm. 119.24. Thy Testimonies are my delight and my Counselors. After David
had spoken of his obedience that he yielded to the word of God, he speaks of
the sweetness he found in it, verse. 102, 103. I have not departed from thy
Judgments, -- How sweet are thy words unto my taste!

II. Though you cannot get your hearts into so good a frame as you desire, but
are sensible of much dryness, coldness, deadness, and unsavouriness, yet you
must not neglect the instructing your Families, because you do not find such
sweetness and delight in the word of God as others do, and that for several
Reasons: As, 1. God can convey the water of life through a dry and barren Reed.
He makes use of earthen Vessels to convey the heavenly treasure of knowledge
and grace, that the glory may not be given to the Instruments, but that it may
appear that it is his excellent power whereby the Sons of men are enlightened
and sanctified: 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen Vessels, that the
excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us. 2. Though you find your
hearts out of frame before you go to your work, God may come in with his
spirit, and move and warm your hearts whilst you are opening or rehearsing some
portion of the Scriptures to your Children, Luke 24.32. And they said one to
another, Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures. If you endeavor to water your
Families with the dew of heaven, God will water your souls, Prove. 11.25. He
that waters, shall be watered also himself. 3. If you do this work out of
obedience to the command of God, and act your faith on the Lord Jesus for the
pardon of the imperfections that attend this work, though you do not find so
much comfort and delight in the doing thereof as you wish you could, but are
sensible of some dryness and flatness of spirit, yet your work shall be
accepted of God, Acts 10.35. In every Nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him. 4. If you apply your selves to Jesus Christ,
he will take away your dryness, and refresh and replenish your Souls with the
Graces of his Spirit. It is said of Jesus Christ, That he shall be as Rivers of
Water is a dry place, Isa 32.2. And he has promised such of his Servants as
find their Souls to be like the dry ground, that he will pour out his Spirit
like floods of water upon them; that is, in an abundant measure, Isa. 44.3. I
will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I
will pour out my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Off spring.


SECT. 14. The Plea of such as say It Is the Ministers work to instruct their
Children, answered.
THis is the Ministers work, not mine, to catechize and instruct my Servants
and my Children, and why then should I take it in hand?

Answer: Besides what the Ministers of Gods word are to do in this kind, it is
the duty of Parents and Masters of Families to teach and instruct their
Children and Servants, as has been proved already by many clear Texts of
Scripture; I shall re-mind you of some of them: Isa. 38.19. The Father unto the
Children shall make known thy truth: Psalm. 78.5. He established a Testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that they
should make them known to their Children: Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers provoke
not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be
in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children. -- This
Precept is not given only to the Priests or Levites, but to the whole House of
Israel, verse. 4. So that it is a frivolous excuse for any man to think to put
off this work from himself, by saying, it is the Ministers work to catechize
his Children; for God commands all Parents to teach his Word to their
Children: Yea, it is a notorious falsehood for any man to say, This is none of
my work to instruct my Family, whenas the Lord has given so many and such
strict Precepts to every man to instruct his Children.

SECT. 15. Only such as are called of God, are to take upon them the work of
the Ministry. Family-Instruction will not bring the Ministry into contempt.
IF every man should take upon him to teach and instruct his Family, this would
be the way to make every man turn Preacher, and would cause the Ministers of
the Word to be slighted and despised; and this makes us not only forbear this
work our selves, but also to dislike it in others; because we would not have
any take upon them the work of the Ministry but such as are called to it, and
we would not have the public Ministry brought into contempt.

Answ. 1. Family-Instruction and the work of the Ministry, are two distinct
works; The one belongs to every Master of a Family, the other belongs only to
such as are called and sent forth by God to preach the Gospel, Romans 10.15. How
shall they preach except they be sent? And God has not called all men to the
work of the Ministry, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers -- Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all Teachers? We may learn from this Text, 1. That none are to be
Teachers in the Church, but those whom God sets there: 2. That God does set
some, not all, to be Teachers in the Church. Under the Law no man was to take
the Office of the Priesthood without a call from God, Heb. 5.4. And no man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron.
Yea, God made it death for such as were not called to intermeddle with the
Priests Office, Numb. 18.7. Thou and thy Sons with thee shall keep your Priests
Office, for every thing of the Altar, and within the Vail, and ye shall serve
-- And the stranger that comes nigh, shall be put to death. What work our Lord
Jesus did in and for the Church of God, he did not do it without a Call: Heb.
5.5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And God
has ordained under the Gospel that every man should improve those gifts which
he has distributed to him, within the sphere and compass of his Calling, 1
Cor. 7.17. As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every
one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches. Those works which are in
themselves good works, become sinful when they are done by those that have no
call to do them, and instead of being rewarded, they have been punished by the
Lord. To burn Incense upon the Altar of Incense, was a very good and acceptable
work. David wishes that his Prayer might be like Incense, Psalm. 141.2. Let my
Prayer be set before thee as incense: Yet when Vzziah undertook to burn
Incense, who had no Call to do it, it is called a Transgression, and he was
punished with Leprosy all his days, 2 Chronicles. 25.18, 21. It appertains not
unto thee, Vzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons
of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense, go out of the Sanctuary, for
thou have trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God:
And Vzziah the King was a Leper unto the day of his death. The more knowledge
any man has of the Scriptures, the less fear there is of his taking upon him
the work of the Minstry without a Call from God, (what this Call is, and how a
man may discern when he has it, would be too great a digression, if I should
here undertake the explanation thereof) because the Scriptures are so full, so
plain, so express in this point, That only they that are called of God should
take upon them the work and Office of the Ministry. So that this Objection,
Every man will turn Preacher if he take upon him to instruct his Family in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, is of no force to hinder this work of
Family-Instruction.

2. Neither will the training up our Families in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, cause the Ministry or Ministers of Gods word to be slighted; but on
the contrary, the more our Children and Servants are acquainted with the
Scriptures, the more they will prize and reverence the Ministers of Christ, for
the Scriptures do teach us to esteem very highly of Christ's Ministers, 1 These.
5.12, 13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake: Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good things. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. They are styled Christ's Ambassadors,
2 Cor. 5.20. Now we are Ambassadors for Christ. And who are more honored than
the Ambassadors of an Earthly Prince? The Scriptures show what a great sin it
is to despise the Ministers of Christ; the Lord Jesus counts himself and his
Father despised, when they are despised, Luke 10.16. He that hears you,
hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me: 1 These. 4.8. He that despises, despises not man
but God, who also has given unto us his holy Spirit. So that the training up
of our Families in the fear of God, and knowledge of the Scriptures, will be so
far from causing them to slight the Ministers of Christ, or the Ministry of the
Word, that it will cause them to reverence and esteem them.

SECT. 16. It is dangerous to neglect reading the Scriptures, or teaching them
our Children, from this Plea, That we need do nothing more than follow the
Light within us.
THere is a Light in all Men, Women, and Children, which will teach them to do
that which is just and right in the sight of God and men, and will lead them to
Life and Salvation, if they do but follow the Light that is in them: So that we
judge it needless to read the Scriptures, or to instruct our Families in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, we do enough if we call upon them to follow the
Light that is within them.

Answ. It is a great and dangerous mistake, for a man to neglect reading and
searching the Scriptures, and instructing his Family in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, from a persuasion that neither he nor his Family need to do any
thing more toward the obtaining Salvation, than to follow the Light that is in
them.

To make this evident, Consider,

1. There is no man has so much Light or Knowledge, but it is necessary that
he should give himself to the reading of the Scriptures, thas he may gain more
Knowledge. All men may be ranked under these two heads, either they are such as
abide in their natural unregenerate condition, or they are such as are
converted and endued with the grace of God. As for men in their natural
condition, they are destitute of saving knowledge, Romans 3.11. There is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God: 1 Cor. 2.14. The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned: Romans 1.31. Without understanding. They are said to be in darkness, 1
John 2.9, 11. He that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in
darkness even until now -- He that hates his Brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes. They are said not only to be in darkness, but to be
darkness it self, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye Light
in the Lord; walk as Children of Light. And therefore men in their natural
condition had need give themselves to reading of the Scriptures, that they may
be enlightened and converted to God: Psalm. 19.7, 8. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple; -- The Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes: And
that they may be made wise to salvation; for the knowledge of the Scriptures
will make men wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. From a Child thou have known the
holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

As for such as are enlightened, and converted to God, even those of them that
are endued with the greatest measure of saving knowledge, have need to read the
Scriptures daily and diligently, that they may get more knowledge; for the
wisest men are imperfect in knowledge. The Apostle Paul says of himself, that
he knew but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then
face to face. Now I know in part, but then I shall know even as also I am
known. David, who was wiser then his Enemies, Psalm. 119 98. and had more
understanding than all his Teachers, verse. 99. and understood more than the
Ancients, verse. 100. does acknowledge before God that he had much folly and
ignorance, Psalm. 69.5. O God thou know my foolishness: Psalm. 73.22. So
foolish was I, and ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee. And he prays with
great earnestness unto God, to give him knowledge and understanding, and to
teach him his Statutes, as we may see Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I
may behold wondrous things out of thy Law: Verse 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way
of thy Statutes: Verse. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law:
Verse 125. I am thy Servant, give me under standing that I may know thy
Testimonies: And in many other places. We are commanded to grow in knowledge,
as well as in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore seeing the Scriptures are the
means whereby we get knowledge, Psalm. 119.104. Through thy Precepts I get
understanding: And the means of increasing knowledge, verse 99. I have more
understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my meditation: It
is necessary that they who have the greatest measure of Light and
Understanding, should read and meditate in the Word of God night and day, that
they may grow in knowledge.

2. There are some sins which that Light which is in natural men cannot
discover, without the help of the Word and Spirit of God. As for instance: The
first motions of sin, though not consented to, are sin; for they are
transgressions of the Law, which says, Thou shall not covet: The Law does not
only say, Thou shall not consent to, thou shall not follow or yield to thy
inordinate desires, but it forbids the motions themselves, Thou shall not
covet. Now the Apostle Paul tells us he had not known these first motions
(which he calls by the name of lust) to be sin, if it had not been for the Law
of God, Romans 7.7. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law; for I had not known
lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Not to believe in Jesus
Christ, is a great sin, it is a sin for which God will damn men at the day of
Judgment, Mark 16.16. He that believes not shall be damned: Now the Light of
Nature does not convince a man that it is a sin not to believe in Jesus Christ;
it is by the Scripture, which holds forth the damnable nature of this sin of
not believing in Jesus Christ, John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. And by the help of the Spirit that we come to be convinced of the sin of
not believing in Christ, John 16.8, 9. And when he (that is, the Spirit, which
is the Comforter spoken of in the former verse) is come, he will reprove the
world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment; of Sin, because they believe
not in me. And as there are some sins of which natural Light does not convince
a man; so those sins of which it does convince a man, it does not convince with
such clearness and power as the Law does, which stops a man's mouth, and makes
him fall down before God as as a lost undone Creature, Romans 3.19, 20. Now we
know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the
Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God: -- By the Law is the knowledge of sin.

3. There are several Points of the Christian Religion of great moment, which
that Light that is in natural men discovers not, neither can we know them any
other ways, but by the help of the Scriptures, or by immediate Revelation from
God. As for instance: To know and believe that Jesus of Nazareth is the
promised Messiah, is of such moment, as that we cannot be saved unless we
believe him to be the Messiah, John 8.24. I said therefore unto you, That ye
shall die in your sins; for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins. Now this knowledge, Flesh and Blood, Nature in its highest
improvements cannot attain, it must either be by Revelation from God, Matthew.
16.15, 16, 17. Whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou
art Christ the Son of the living God: And Jesus answered and said unto him,
Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: Or by the help of the Scriptures. And
therefore when Apollos would convince the Jews that Jesus was the Christ, he
did it by the Scriptures, Acts 18.28. For he mightily convinced the Jews, and
that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ. And this way
the Apostle Paul took also, he alleged those Scriptures that spoke of the
Messiah, and explained them, and thereby proved to them that Jesus of Nazareth
was Christ: And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath
days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging that
Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this
Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ. It is of great moment to know what
that Righteousness is whereby a Sinner should come to be justified in the sight
of God: If a man be ignorant of this Righteousness, he will seek to establish
his own, and will not submit to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. For they
being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God. The
Light of Nature cannot find out this Righteousness, it is no where revealed but
in the Gospel, Romans 1.16, 17. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it
is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek; for therein is the Righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith; as it is written, The Just shall live by faith. That there
are Three Persons, and yet but One God, is plainly revealed in the Scriptures,
1 John 5.7. There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One. But without the help of the
Scriptures, the Light of Nature can attain to but little or no knowledge of
this great Mystery. And as there are some Doctrines, so also some Duties in the
Christian Religion, which the Light of Nature cannot discover. As for instance:
Baptizing of persons with water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, which he would have continued, and with
which he will afford his presence to the end of the world, Matthew. 28, 19, 20.
So also is eating Bread, and drinking Wine, in the Lords Supper, and Ordinance
of Christ, to be continued in the Church till his coming to Judgment; 1 Cor.
11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the
Lords death till he come. But natural Light does not teach a man that it is his
duty to be baptized, or to receive the Lords Supper: It is from the Scriptures
we learn that Baptism and the Lords Supper are Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and
that the use of these Ordinances is to be continued in the Church of Christ to
the end of the World.

4. The Light which we must attend unto, and follow, and by which we must order
our Lives and Conversations, is the Mind and Will of God revealed in the
Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto
ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place;
until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts. Observe here,

First, That the Light to which the Apostle would have us take heed, and says
they do well who take heed to it, is the Word of Prophecy; by the Word of
Prophecy, he understands the Scriptures, which were written, and delivered to
us by the Prophets, as is evident from the ensuing word, Knowing this first,
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures, etc.

Secondly, It is our duty to take heed to the word of Prophecy, as long as we
live in this world; Whereunto ye do well to take heed, -- until the Day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in your hearts: By the Daystar is meant Jesus Christ,
Rev. 22.16. I am the bright and morning Star: By the Day, is not meant only or
chiefly the day of Grace, or the day of the Gospel, for these days had already
dawned upon those persons to whom the Apostle wrote this Epistle, for he says
of them, They knew and were established in the present truth, verse. 12. They
were not only acquainted with the Doctrine of the Gospel, but were in a state
of Grace; they had Faith, as precious Faith as the Apostle himself who wrote
this Epistle, verse. 1. To them that have obtained like precious Faith with us.
-- But by the dawning of the Day, is meant the Day of Glory, which is called
the Day of Christ, Phil. 1.9, 10. Phil. 2.16. and by way of Emphasis, That Day,
2 Timothy 4.8. And by the Apostle Peter in this same Epistle, Chap. 3.12. The Day
of the Lord. It is the dawning of this day that the Church and People of God
long for, Cant. 2.16. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: turn my
Beloved, and be thou like a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether:
Rev. 22.20. Surely I come quickly, Amen: Even so come Lord Jesus. By the
Day Star arising in their hearts, is meant their full and immediate fruition of
the Lord Jesus in the Kingdom of Heaven; for they having like precious Faith
with the Apostle, had this Day Star the Lord Jesus already dwelling in their
hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith:
And the Apostle speaks not of what they had already, but of what they should
attain unto hereafter, which is their full and immediate enjoyment of Christ in
Heaven. Our entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, may well be set out by this
Phrase, the Day Star arising in our hearts, because when we come to heaven
there shall be great Glory revealed in us, as well as given to us, Romans 8.18. I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that shall be revealed in us. And the reason why the Saints
desire to be in Heaven, is, That they may be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. Having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ. The World may well be styled a dark
place, in opposition to the Kingdom of Heaven, which is called by the Name of
Light; Col. 1.12. -- The Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and because most
places and persons in the world are full of Ignorance and Darkness: In the
Psalmists days, all places of the earth, except the Land of Israel, were dark
places; Psalm. 74.20. The dark places of the earth are full of the Habitations
of Cruelty. And in Israel, which was a Land of Vision, the Prophet complains,
Hos. 4.1. There is no knowledge of God in the Land. Now as long as we are in
this dark place, the World, where we are compassed about with much ignorance,
we shall do well to take heed to the word of Prophecv which the Lord has given
us, as a Light to guide and direct our paths, till the Day of Glory dawn upon
us, and we are taken up into the Kingdom of Heaven, where there shall be no
need of the Sun, or Moon, or any Temple, but the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb, shall be the Light of His People for ever, Revelat. 21. 22, 23.

Thirdly, We may observe, That we cannot have a more sure Rule to guide us,
either in matters of Faith or Practice, than the holy Scriptures. What do we
desire to guide and direct us what we should believe, or what we should
practice? Do we desire a Vision, a Revelation, a Voice from Heaven? The Word of
Prophecy is as sure as these; Yea, the Apostle having been speaking of a Voice
from Heaven, gives the pre-eminence to the Word of Prophecy, and says, We have
a more sure Word of Prophecy -- Besides this place which I have already
produced to prove that the Light to which we must attend, and by which we must
order our Lives and Conversations, is the Mind and Will of God revealed in the
Scriptures; I might mention several others, as Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a
Lamp, and the Law is Light: Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and
a Light unto my path. The same also may be gathered from the discourse of
Christ with the Lawyer, and of Abraham with the rich man that was in
Hell Torments, Luc. 10.25, 26, 27, 28. There came a man to Jesus Christ, and
asked him this question, Master what shall I do to inherit eternal Life? And
whether does Christ send him for direction? To the Scriptures: He said unto
him, What is written in the Law? How read thou? Whereupon the man tells
Christ what he had found written, and what he had read in the Law; And he
answering said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy
Neighbor as thy self: To which Christ gives him this answer, And he said unto
him, Thou have answered right; this do, and thou shall live. Whence we may
infer, That reading the Scriptures, and practicing what we read, will guide us
into the right way that leads to everlasting life. When the Rich Man, who was
tormented in Hell, pleaded with Abraham to send Lazarus to his Brethren, to
preach to them, that they might not come into that place of torment; what
answer did Abraham give him? Did he tell them, They had a Light in them, if
they did follow that, it would lead them to Repentance and Salvation? No, he
refers them to the Scriptures, Luc. 16.29. Abraham says unto him, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. He does not mean they had Moses and
the Prophets alive, and conversing amongst them in their own persons, but they
had the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, and they were to attend to them,
and adds moreover, If the Scriptures that were written by Moses and the
Prophets would not lead them to Repentance, the coming of one from the dead
would not work upon them, verse 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

5. The danger of neglecting the Scriptures, and following our own Light,
without looking to, and regulating our apprehensions by the word of God, may be
further evidenced from the fallible nature of our understandings: We are all of
us, since the fall of Adam, subject to many and great mistakes, insomuch that
'David cried out, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his Errors? We are subject
to such great mistakes, that a man that walks (as he thinks) according to his
Light, may commit heinous sins, when he is pesrwaded in his mind that he does
nothing but what he is bound in conscience to do. When the Apostle Paul
persecuted the Members of Christ, he did not do it from malice, or to please
the Jews, or to get preferment; but he followed his Light, he thought verily
that it was his duty to oppose the ways and Members of Christ, Acts 26.9. I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth. A man may be so far mistaken, as that he may think
he does God good service, when he is committing abominable sins. It is an
abominable sin to kill the servants of Jesus Christ, yet some men's light does
so far misguide them, as that they think they do God service, when they kill
his servants, John 16.2. Yea the time comes, that whosoever kelleth you, will
think that he does God service. A man may verily think that his ways are right
and good, and yet they may be such as will lead him to destruction, Prove.
14.12. There is a way which seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are
the ways of death. And therefore we find God charging us not to lean to our own
understandings: Prove. 3.5. Lean not unto thine own understanding. And
commanding us to observe his Statutes, and not to do such things as are right
in our own eyes; Deuteronomy. 12.1, 8. These are the Statutes and Judgments which ye
shall observe to do: -- ye shall not do after all the things that we do here
this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

6. Satan can transform himself into an Angel of Light, and suggest his own
evil motions under the name and notion of the dictates and motions of the
Spirit of God: 2 Cor. 11.14. Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
Light. And because Satan can transform himself, and make as if he were an Angel
of Light, we are commanded not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits,
whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try
the Spirits whether they are of God. And by what shall we try the Spirits,
whether they be of God? This must be done by the Word of God; we must have
recourse to the Law and Testimonies; what is agreeable to the Scriptures, we
must own as the Will of God; what is contrary to them, we must reject, as
coming from the Spirit of Delusion. Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony;
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in
them. Whatever Light or Spirit would draw us off from, or persuade us to any
thing contrary to This Word, that is, the Law and the Testimony, is to be
rejected, as no true Light, nor true Spirit.

7. The Lord commands all sorts of persons to read the Scriptures, and that
not in a slight cursory manner, but with diligence and great attention, 1 Timothy
4.13. Give attendance to reading -- John 5.39. Search the Scriptures -- The
Greek word (...) signifies to weigh and consider diligently what we read, to
search into the understanding of those things that are hidden and abstruse. It
is the same word which is used Rev. 2.23. I am he which searches the heart and
reins: Such a search should we make into the Scriptures, we should labor to
have a clear and through understanding of the most abstruse and hidden truths,
that are wrapped up in the Scriptures. It is not only our duty to read the
Scriptures, but to do it daily, Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily. And to continue reading some portion of them
every day, as long as we live, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. -- He shall write him a copy of
this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests the Levites, and it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life. This is
spoken of the Kings of Israel, and if they were obliged to get a Copy of the
Law, and to read therein all their days, then surely other inferior persons,
that have nothing so much business upon their hands as Kings, are obliged to
spare some time every day, from their occasions, to read some portion of the
Scriptures. Besides our reading the Scriptures privately by our selves, God
commands them to be read publicly in the audience of all the people, both
Men, and Women, and Children, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. And we find it was the practice
of the servants of God in their public Assemblies, to read the Scriptures,
Josh. 8.34, 35. He read all the words of the Law, the Blessings and Cursings,
according to all that is written in the Book of the Law; there was not a word
that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the Congregation of
Israel, with the women, and their little ones, and the strangers that were
conversant among them. And this they did not at some extraordinary times only,
but it was their constant course to read the Scriptures in their Assemblies
every Sabbath day, Acts 1.13, 22. Moses of old time has in every City thens
that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. And our Lord
Jesus approved this practice by his own example, he read the Scriptures to the
Jews on the Sabbath days, Luc. 4.16, 17. And he came to Nazareth where he had
been brought up, and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and stood up for to read, and there was delivered unto him the
Book of the Prophet Esaias.

8. As all sorts of persons are commanded to read the Scriptures, so all sorts
of persons may reap great benefit by reading the Scriptures; Men, Women,
Children, Strangers, all sorts of people may learn to fear and obey the Lord,
by reading the word of God, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. Thou shall read this Law before
all Israel, Gather the people together, Men, Women, and Children, and the
Stranger that is within thy Gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn,
and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this Law.
Reading the Scriptures is an effectual means to beget Repentance, Neh. 8.8, 9.
So they read in the Book, in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading -- All the people wept when they heard
the words of the Law: And Faith, Acts 17.11, 12. They received the word with
all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so; Therefore many of them believed. The Lord has promised his Blessing
to those that read and practice those things which are written in the
Scriptures, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the Words
of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein.

9. The Light that is within us, if it be true Light, teaches us that we ought
to yield obedience to all the Commandments of God, and this is one of the
Commandments of God, which he does often inculcate upon us, That we should
teach his word unto our Children, and train them up in the knowledge and
obedience of his Laws, as has been already proved from Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall
teach them diligently to thy Children: Psalm. 78.5. He established a Testimony
in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that
they should make them known to their Children: Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers
provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And several other places. So that if we would follow
our Light which we have received from Gods word, that will teach us to instruct
our Children diligently in the knowledge of the Scriptures.

10. The great ignorance and folly which is in Children, shows that they have
need of more instruction, than to be called upon to follow the Light that is in
them; for how little Light have Children before they are instructed? God
commands his word to be read to Children, and why? Deuteronomy. 31.11, 13. Thou shall
read this Law before all Israel, in their hearing; Gather the People together,
men, women, and children -- And that their Children which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the
Land whither ye go to possess. See here how little knowledge is ascribed unto
Children, -- -- That their Children which have not known any thing. -- Observe
also what means God prescribes for the bringing Children to know and fear the
Lord, and that is, reading his Law to them; Thou shall read this Law before all
Israel in their hearing, that their Children -- may hear, and learn to fear the
Lord. Instead of knowledge, there is folly in our Children, and this folly is
bound up so fast in their hearts, that it cannot be fetched out without
instruction, Prove. 8. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise: Neither will
instruction do it alone, unless correction be joined with instruction, Prove.
22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of Correction
will drive it far from him: Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give wisdom: But
how will that Child prove, that is left to himself, and has neither
instruction nor correction? The next words will inform us; But a Child left to
himself brings his Mother to shame. As he that refuses to receive
instruction, regards not, but despises his own Soul, Prove. 15.32. He that
refuses instruction, despises his own Soul: So he that refuses to give
instruction to his Children, may be said to despise the souls of his Children.
For if he did regard them, he would seek after their salvation, and if he did
seek after their salvation, he would instruct them in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, which are able to make them wise to salvation. There being much
folly in our Childrens hearts, if we let them live without instruction, they
will go astray, and perish eternally: Prove. 10.21. Fools die for want of
wisdom: Prove. 5.23. He shall die without instruction, and in the greatness of
his folly he shall go astray.

SECT. 17. Heb. 8.11. explained: It does not imply Family-Instruction, or
Ministerial Teaching, to be needless.
IT seems a needless thing for Parents to teach their Children, or Masters
their Servants, seeing the Lord has promised in the times of the Gospel, And
they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest,
Heb. 8.11.

Answ. I. The sense and meaning of this Scripture, They shall not teach every
man his Neighbor, etc. is much perverted, when it is brought to prove either
Ministerial Teaching, or Family-Instruction, to be needless, and of no use in
the days of the Gospel: For, 1. As to the preaching of the Word, the Lord Jesus
will have that continued, and will afford his presence with this Ordinance till
the end of the world, Matthew. 28 19, 20. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Till all that belong to
the Election of Grace are brought home to Christ, and till all that are brought
to Christ are made perfect, and are arrived unto the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ, God will have the work of the Ministry continued, and
Pastors and Teachers to carry on this work, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. Now this work will not be fully done till
the end of the world. 2. Neither does this Scripture make void
Family-Instruction, for the same Apostle who wrote this Epistle to the Hebrews,
wherein he says, They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man
his Brother, etc. charge Parents in the days of the Gospel to bring up their
Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. yea, in this very
Epistle to the Hebrews, he says of such as are dull of hearing, Ye need that
one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb.
5.12. which he would not have done, if he had thought teaching by men to be
needless under the days of the Gospel.


II. When it is said, They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, etc. The
meaning is, they shall not only be taught by men, but they shall also have the
teaching of Gods Spirit, whereby the teachings they have from men shall be
blessed, and be made effectual for the conveying of the knowledge of God. Many
Examples may be given, where this word Not, is not an absolute negation, but
signifies not only; take one or two: Hos. 6.6. I desired mercy, and not
sacrifice; and the knowledge of God, more than burnt Offerings: Sacrifice was
commanded under the Law, and therefore the meaning cannot be, that God did not
at all desire Sacrifice, but that he did not desire Sacrifice only, but mercy
also; or that he desired mercy more than Sacrifice, as the following words
intimate, And the knowledge of God more than burnt Offerings: John 7.16. Jesus
answered them, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: That is, It is
not only mine, but also his that sent me.

III. This Scripture may be understood comparatively, of the abundance of
knowledge that should be in the times of the Gospel, above what was in the
times of the Law: Knowledge does so abound under the New Testament
Administration, that some mean and weak persons, in the time of the Gospel,
know as much of Christ crucified, and God reconciled in Christ, and other
Gospel-Mysteries, as they that were Teachers of others knew under the Law;
Zach. 12.8. He that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David.
Knowledge should so abound, that there should seem to be no need of teaching
every man his Neighbor, in comparison of what was under the Law, when the
Doctrine of the Gospel was wrapped up in so many Types and Shadows, that it was
a very hard matter to come to the knowledge of Christ Crucified.

IV. That this Scripture does not make void either Ministerial Teaching, or
Family-Instruction, besides what has been already said, may further be proved,
1. Because God teaches in the use of means. God could have revealed Himself
and his Son in an immediate manner unto Cornelius, but he puts him on sending
for Peter to instruct him, Acts 11.13, 14. Send men to Joppa, and call for
Simon whose surname is Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all
thy House shall be saved. And it is his Covenant to teach his People, not by
his Spirit only, or by his Word only, but by his Word and Spirit, and that as
long as the world stands, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them,
says the Lord, My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever. 2. We see by sad experience the great ignorance, and rudeness, and
dullness of those Children and Servants, and of those Families and Places that
have no instruction: Though they live in Gospel Times, and in the days of the
New Covenant, yet if they have no instruction, they are as ignorant as they
were that lived under the time of the Old Testament.


SECT. 18. Though some Persons are nothing bettered by instruction, yet we must
continue to instruct them.
WE see many Children and Servants that have good instructions, prove very vile
and corrupt, and are never a whit the better, but rather the worse for all the
pains that is taken with them, and therefore it is to no purpose for us to
instruct our Families.

Answ. 1. Though some are never a whit the better for the instructions and good
counsels which are given them, yet others are converted to God, and edified
thereby. And who can tell but God may bless your labor unto the Conversion and
Salvation of those that are under your Charge?

2. If any means under Heaven will do them good, instructing them out of the
word of God, is the most likely way and means to lead them to Repentance: We
think if a damned Soul should come out of Hell, and declare what torments it
has felt in Hell, or a Saint should come out of Heaven, and declare what Joys
he has possessed in Heaven, this would work wonderfully upon our Children,
toward the leading of them to Repentance; but the word of God, which is
contained in the Scriptures, will do more toward the bringing men to
Repentance, then the rising of one from the dead would do, Luc. 16.29, 30, 31.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: And he said, Nay father
Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead, they will repent. And he said
unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rise from the dead. If the Scriptures will not persuade
men to repent and believe, such men would not repent and believe, though Jesus
Christ himself were on earth to speak to them; John 5.46, 47. Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; but if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?

3. If you should not convert your Children and Servants, but they should still
go on in their evil ways, yet it is worth your time and pains to instruct and
warn them of the danger they are in by reason of sin, for hereby you shall
deliver your own souls from being guilty of their Blood, Ezekiel. 3.19. If thou
warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way,
he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul.

4. The word of God is to some men the savor of death unto death; yet the
Ministers of Christ must not cease to preach the word, because all that hear
them are not converted from their evil ways. And when they discharge their work
and duty faithfully, they are a sweet savor unto God in those that perish, as
well as in them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. We are unto God a sweet savor
of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are
the savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life.
So it is with Masters of Families, they must not desist from
Family-Instruction, though they should see their Children or Servants
continuing in their sins, for if they discharge their duty faithfully, and with
diligence, though they should have no success, they shall be accepted of God in
Christ Jesus.

SECT. 19. The fear of aggravating our Childrens Condemnation, should not make
us neglect Family-Instruction.
THe more light my Children have, the greater their Condemnation will be, if
they make not a good use of it; and I am afraid they will not, and therefore I
am afraid to instruct them, lest I should aggravate their condemnation.

Answ. I. It is true, that the more Light any man has, the greater his
condemnation will be, if he do not make a good use of it; Luc. 12.47. That
Servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

II. Though the case be so, that the more light any man has, the greater will
be his condemnation, yet this must not make you neglect instructing them, out
of fear that they should not improve their light, and so have the greater
condemnation: For, 1. Some men's sin and condemnation will be aggravated by the
coming of Christ into the world; John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin: Yet God
did well in sending his Son into the world. The preaching of Christ and the
Gospel, will make their condemnation more dreadful, where Christ and the Gospel
are not embraced, than the condemnation of the Heathen that never heard of
Christ: John 3.19. This is the condemnation, That Light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were evil. See
also Mat. 11. 23, 24. Yet the preaching of Christ and the Gospel to the world,
is a good work; and God pronounces a woe against those that he has called to
the Ministry of the Gospel, who preach it not, 1 Cor. 9. 16. For necessity is
laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel. Suppose it should
increase your Childrens misery in the world to come, to have Light, if they
make not a good use of it, yet you do well when you instruct them; yea a
necessity is laid upon you, and woe be unto you if you do it not. 2. You run a
greater hazard both of your own and your Childrens condemnation, by neglecting
to instruct them, than you do of aggravating their condemnation in case you
should instruct them, when as you do not know whether they will make a good use
of their Light: You hazard your own condemnation by neglecting your duty, and
your Childrens by nursing them up in ignorance; but by instructing them, you
may promote both your own and their salvation, 1 Timothy 4.16. The same argument
that the Apostle uses to persuade Wives to dwell with their Husbands, and
Husbands to dwell with their Wives, 1 Cor. 7.16. For what know thou, O Wife,
whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou, O man, but thou shall
save thy Wife? The like may I use with Parents to instruct their Children,
notwithstanding all their fears of aggravating their condemnation, What know
thou whether thou shall save thy Children?


III. Whereas Satan would beat you off from instructing your Children, by
putting you in sear that you shall thereby aggravate their condemnation, this
is but a vain suggestion, to hinder you in your duty; for you cannot take a more
effectual course to prevent your Childrens condemnation, and to promote their
salvation, than to instruct them in the knowledge of the Scriptures; for
Knowledge is a means to breed Faith, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name, will
put their trust in thee: and true Repentance, Jer. 24.7. I will give them an
heart to know me, -- for they shall return unto me with their whole heart: and
to obtain Remission of sins, Isa. 53.11. By his Knowledge shall my Righteous
Servant justify many -- Knowledge also is a means of obtaining eternal life,
John 17.3. And this is eternal life, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

SECT. 20. Family-Instruction will prevent, not spread Errors. How such as
teach others may be kept from perverting or corrupting the Word of God.
THis will be the way to spread and multiply Errors, for illiterate men to take
upon them to instruct their Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures.

Answ. I. It does highly concern all Misters of Families, as well as Ministers
of the Word, to be very careful that they do not teach any false and erroneous
Doctrine unto those whom God has committed to their charge. This would bring
down a curse instead of a blessing, yea though they should seem like Angels,
yet would they be accursed, if they perverted the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 7, 8.
There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ, but
though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you -- let him
be accursed.

The Apostle was so desirous to prevent the spreading of false Doctrine, that
he earnestly besought Timothy to stay on purpose at Ephesus, to charge in a
solemn manner those that he saw inclinable to Errors, to teach no other
Doctrine but what was agreeable to the Doctrine of the Gospel; 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4.
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia, that
thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine, so do. Such as
teach lies instead of truth, are accounted by God the bafest and vilest of men,
and therefore are compared not to the Head, but the Tail; Isa. 9.14, 15.
Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel Head and Tail, Branch and Rush in
one day: The Ancient and Honorable he is the Head, and the Prophet that
teaches lies he is the Tail. When they that are Leaders of others do cause
them to err, instead of promoting their salvation, they will be the cause of
their destruction, Isa. 9.16. For the Leaders of this People cause them to
err, and they that are led of them are destroyed.

If you ask,

What shall we do, that we may be kept from corrupting and perverting the word
of God when we instruct our Families?

I answer: 1. Pray to God with humble and lowly hearts to give you his holy
spirit; God has promised his holy spirit to them that ask it, Luc. 11.13. If
ye being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? And when
God has given you his holy Spirit, he will make and keep your minds sound in
the Faith: He is styled, The Spirit of Power, and of Love, and of a Sound Mind,
2 Timothy 1.7. 2. See that your hearts be right and sincere with God, and that you
walk before God in truth and uprightness; do all your works, and speak all your
words as in the sight of God, and then he will guide you by the Spirit of Truth
into all Truth, and keep you from corrupting his holy word, 2 Cor. 2.17. For we
are not as many which corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of
God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 3. Purify your hearts and minds
from all corrupt Lusts. When a man has a corrupt mind, he will be apt to put
corrupt glosses upon the word of God. When he cannot bring up his Will to
Gods, he will be ready to interpret Gods Mind according to his own Will. The
Apostle conjoyns these two, Men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, 1 Timothy 6.5. Now if you would purify your minds, 1. Have faith in Christ, Acts
15.19. And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
faith. 2. Obey those Truths which God has revealed to you, 1 Pet. 1.22. Ye
have purified your Souls in obeying the Truth. 4. Take heed of departing from
the simplicity of the Gospel, under the notion of seeking after more sublime
spiritual and mysterious Truths. The Apostle was jealous lest the Corinthians
should be corrupted this way, 2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your mind should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ. 5. Keep to the Analogy of Faith, Romans
12.6. Having then Gifts, differing according to the Grace that is given to us,
whether Prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the proportion of faith: By
prophesying here, most understand not the gift of foretelling things to come,
but the Gift of interpreting and explaining the Scriptures, as the word is
used, 1 Cor. 14.3. He that prophesies, speaks unto men unto edification, and
exhortation, and comfort. Now the Apostle advises that this prophesying be
according to the proportion or analogy of Faith; by prophesying according to
the analogy of Faith, we may understand that no Scripture should be so
expounded as to contradict any Article of our Faith, or Precepts of an holy
godly life. 6. Be sober-minded, and do not exercise your selves in those things
which are too high for you, Psalm. 131.1. Understand well your selves, what you
undertake to teach your Families. The Apostle gives this character of some in
his time, desiring to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. When we teach our Families those
things which we understand, and fully believe upon the evidence and
demonstration of the Word and Spirit of God, and also those things which we
know experimentally to be true, we need not fear leading them into errors. See
more Directions for getting a right understanding of the Scriptures, and
preventing our wresting of them, in the Answer to Object. 12. Chap. iv. Sect.
12. page 243, 244, 245.


II. This work of instructing our Families in the knowledge of the Scriptures,
wisely managed, will be so far from increasing errors, that it will be a great
means of preventing their falling into error, and will establish them in the
truth, that they shall not be shaken and carried to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine. The Lord Jesus, as has been already hinted, tells us, That the
errors of the Saduces did arise from their ignorance of the Scriptures, Matthew.
22.29. Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. And the same passage is recorded by another
Evangelist, Mark 12.24. Jesus answering, said unto them, Do ye not therefore
err, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God?

SECT. 21. There is more work lies upon Parents, than to teach or hear their
Children read the Scriptures.
WE do teach our Children to read the Scriptures, and we do read the Word of
God every day in our Families, and do call upon our Children to read the Word
of God both alone by themselves, and sometimes to us in our hearing, and is not
this enough? What would you have us do more?

Answ. All this is very good, yet it is needful that you should do somewhat
more than this, if you desire to train them up in the Knowledge and Obedience
of the Scriptures: As,

I. Choose out for them such plain Texts of Scripture as do prove and confirm
the Articles of our Faith, and such Precepts as may guide and direct them to
lead an holy life, and such Promises as may encourage them to trust in God for
all good things, and support them under all sorts of troubles, and such
Threatenings as may deter them from those sins they are inclined to, or are in
danger to be drawn to, when they shall be removed from under your Charge. Choose
out also for them such Scriptures as may show them their sinful and miserable
condition by nature, their need of Jesus Christ, and of the regenerating Grace
of God, the excellency, necessity, and advantage of a holy Life, etc. If you
set a whole Loaf, or a whole Dish of Meat before a Child that is not able to
carve for himself, he receives no benefit thereby; but if you cut out for him,
and lay before him what you judge to be convenient for him, he feeds on it, and
is nourished: So it is here, if you choose out some particular portions of
Scripture, such as you shall judge most suitable and fit to instruct your
Children either in matters of Faith or Practice: This will tend more to their
edification, than Reading of whole Chapters to them, without making application
of any particular passages therein, after you have read to them, or they have
read a Chapter in your hearing. The Apostle speaks of it as a great
commendation in a Minister, as that which does approve him both to God and men,
to divide the Word of Truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self
approved unto God, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the Word of Truth. Grotius gives this interpretation of the Greek word,
Evangelium (...), qui cuique accomodat ea monita quae ei maxim convenient: He
divides the Word of Truth aright, that applies to every one those Instructions
which are most suitable to him, and convenient for him. And as this is the
commendation of a Minister, so also of the Master of a Family, to apply such
portions of Scripture to all the Members of his Family, as are suitable and
proper for every one of them. Our Lord Jesus accounts it both wisdom and
faithfulness in a Steward, 1. To give out portions of meat to every one in the
House. 2. To give every one Their portion; that is, that which is allowed them
by their Master, that which belongs to them, that which is suitable and
convenient for them. 3. To do this in due season: Luc. 12.42. And the Lord
said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make
Ruler over his Household, to give them their portion of Meat in due season?


II. Open the sense and meaning of those portions of Scripture which you make
choice of for their instruction. Thus our Lord Jesus instructed his Disciples;
he did not only quote Scriptures out of Moses and the Prophets, to prove that
he was the Messiah, that he must suffer before he entered into glory, etc. But
he expounded the sense and meaning of those Scriptures, Luc. 24.27. And
beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself: And this opening of the Scriptures
which he produced, did much affect their hearts, verse. 32. Did not our hearts
burn within us, -- while he opened to us the Scriptures? The Eunuch who was a
man of great Authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, and had the
charge of all her treasure, (and if he had not been a wise man, it is probable
he would not have been placed in so great authority) who was also a devout man,
and came as far as Jerusalem to worship God, acknowledged that he could not
understand the Scriptures without being guided into the sense and meaning of
what he read: when he was reading in the Prophet Esaias, and Philip said unto
him, Understand thou what thou read? He said unto him, How can I, except
some man should guide me? Acts 8.27, 30, 31. If such a great man, such a devout
man as this Eunuch was, needed one to guide him into the understanding of the
Scriptures, what need have our Children and Servants of having those Scriptures
wherein they are instructed, opened and explained to them.

III. Endeavor to fix those things in their memories which you teach them, by
causing them often to rehearse those portions of Scripture wherein they have
been instructed. The Apostle Peter endeavored that they whom he instructed
might keep what he had taught them always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. Moreover
I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease to have these things
always in your remembrance. So should you labor to imprint those things in
their memories which you teach your Children, that after you are dead, and can
instruct them no more, they may remember what you have taught while you lived
with them.

IV. Apply the Word of God to them, when you read the Scriptures in your
Families, as the Prophet Malachy did his Message that he delivered to the
Priests, Mal. 2.1, 2. And now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you; if ye
will not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name,
says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse
your blessings. Whether it be a word of Command, or Promise, or Threatening, or
an Example of Gods Judgments on sinners, or of his blessing bestowed on his
servants, tell them, That these Commandments, O my Children, the great God that
made you, and that will bring you to Judgment, has given to you; if you obey
them, he will love you and bless you, and give you all good things in this
world, and great blessings in the world to come: But if you will not hearken to
his Voice, but cast his Law behind your backs, he will send many heavy
Judgments and great Plagues upon you in this world, and if they do not lead you
to repentance, he will cast you both Body and Soul into Hell Fire. And so for
the Promises, tell them, These great and precious Promises shall be your
portion, if you will believe in Jesus Christ, and live holy and godly lives,
Gal. 3.22. 1 Timothy 4.8. Do the like by the Threatenings, tell them, That these
will surely be executed on them, if they live in those-sins against which such
and such Judgments are threatened: For GOD is faithful, and able to perform his
Word, and is no Respecter of persons, and there is no lying hid from his
all-seeing Eye, nor any possibility to escape out of His Hand. When you meet
with Examples of Gods Judgments on impenitent sinners, tell them, Those
Examples are recorded on purpose to keep them from falling into such sins, 1
Cor. 10.5, 6. and to lead them to Repentance, Luke 13.1, 2, 3. And that if they
live in the same sins, they must expect to meet with the same Judgments. And so
also the Examples of Gods mercies toward his servants, tell them, That if they
will serve God, the same mercies and blessings that God gave Abraham, or David,
or any other of his servants, he will give them.

But of these things I have spoken before more largely in the Third Chapter,
and it will be needless to repeat them again. By what has been said there, it
is evident that there is much more work lies upon Parents besides teaching
them to read the Scriptures; as, Watching over them, Reproof, Correction, etc.

SECT. 22. Instructing Children while they are young, makes eminent Saints.
WE may teach our Children to know and remember the Scriptures, but we cannot
teach them obedience, that is Gods work; and what good will it do them to know
and remember the Word, if they do not obey it? And besides, if they should
whilst they are young walk in the ways of God, they will forsake them when they
grow old, and be the worse for their instruction, and make good the old
Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil.

Answ. 1. It is true, that it is Gods work to teach our Children Obedience, but
we must use the means. Shall the Ministers of the Gospel forbear preaching the
word, because the conversion of souls is Gods work, not theirs?

2. God does ordinarily bless the Endeavors of Parents and Masters of
Families, when they are diligent and faithful in their work, not only to the
breeding of knowledge, but also to the bringing of their Children and Servants
to obey the Lord, and walk in his ways, Genesis 18.19. He will command his
Children and Household after him, and they SHALL keep the way of the Lord to do
Justice and Judgment. -- Here God promises that upon Abraham's commanding his
Children and Household, they should keep the way of the Lord. And what God
promises to Abraham, he promises and will peform unto all that walk in
Abraham's steps. If persons that have had Religious Education, would consult
their own experience, they will find that generally God instills Principles of
Grace into such as are converted, by means of their Religious Education.

3. That Proverb, A young Saint and an old Devil, was of Satan's coining, to
deter persons from seeking and serving the Lord, for it is contrary to the word
of God, for that says, Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way that he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. None prove such eminent
Saints as they that begin to seek and serve the Lord whilst they are young. I
will give two or three instances hereof: Josiah was a very humble
tenderhearted Prince, he wept at the hearing of Gods Law, 2 Kings 23.18, 19.
He was very zealous in the Reformation of Religion, and destroying Idolatry,
Chap. xxiii. ver. 1. to 25. There never was such a Passover kept either in the
days of the Judges, or of the Kings of Israel or Judah, as Josiah kept, 2 Kings
23.22, 23. He excelled all the Kings that lived before him, and all that came
after him, verse 25. And like unto him there was no King before him, that
turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any
like him. And as he was thus eminent in Godliness, so he continued constant to
his dying day: 2 Chronicles. 34.2. He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, and walked in the ways of David his Father, and declined neither to the
right hand, nor left. And one reason why he proved so eminent and constant in
the ways of God, was this, He began while he was young to seek after the Lord,
as is expressed in the following verse, For in the eighth year of his Reign,
while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his Father.
Obadiah, who feared the Lord from his youth, 1 Kin. 18.12. I thy Servant fear
the Lord from my youth; attained unto a great measure of the fear of God, verse
3. Now Obadiah feared the Lord greatly: He kept his Integrity though he lived
in Ahabs House, who was such a wicked Prince, that he did sell himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord. He was a great shelter to the Lords
Prophets when they were persecuted, and some of them put to death by Jezabel,
he hid an hundred Prophets in a Cave, and maintained them with Bread and
Water, verse 4. David began to seek and trust in God while he was young, Psalm.
71.5. Thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my Trust from my youth: And we
know he proved a man after Gods own heart, the instances of his exemplary piety
are so many, that it would be too long, and so well known, that it would be
needless to mention them.

SECT. 23. How to deal with Servants that hold Erroneous Opinions.
SOme of my Servants are tainted with Erroneous Principles, which I knew not
of, when I took them into my Family; and I look upon it as labor in vain to
instruct persons that are infected with Errors.

Answ. I. It may be their Lot was cast under your Roof, that you might convert
them to the knowledge and belief of the Truth; therefore try both by convincing
Scriptures, and by a convincing Conversation, to recover them from the Error of
their ways. And for your better Encouragement, consider, 1. What a blessed and
glorious work it is to reduce a man from Error to Truth, and to bring back a
straggling sheep to the fold of Christ; by so doing you will be instrumental to
save a soul, Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and
one convert him, let him know that he which converteth a sinner from the error
of his way, shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.
2. If you set your hearts to this work, and labor diligently in it, it is very
probable that God will make you successful. There is a promise that such as
err, shall be brought to the knowledge of the truth, Isa. 29.24. They also that
erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn
Doctrine. And what is a more likely way to obtain this promise, than to be
diligent in using means to reclaim those that err from the Truth?


II. If you have not parts and abilities sufficient to convince them of their
Errors, and to persuade them to embrace the Truth, get some others that have
greater abilities then your selves to deal with them, especially some godly
Ministers who may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to convince the
gainsayers, Tit. 1.9.

III. If they remain obstinate, and either will not be instructed, or after
instruction persist in their erroneous Opinions, remove them out of your
Families, 2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your House. -- If persons that teach false Doctrine are
not to be received into our Houses, then such as have embraced false Doctrine,
and do pertinaciously adhere thereunto, are to be cast out of our Houses. What
the Apostle advises concerning Church Censures, Tit. 3.10. A man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject. The same may suit in
this case, if your servants hold dangerous Errors, and after several
admonitions, and much means used to reclaim them, do obstinately adhere to
their corrupt Principles, cast them out of your Families, lest they leaven the
whole Family with their evil Opinions, 1 Cor. 5.6. Know ye not that a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

SECT. 24. They that neglect Family Instruction are worse than Infidels and
Idolaters: Though others neglect this work, we must not.
NOne of my Neighbors do take this pains with their Families, and why then
should I? Would you have me singular? That is the way to be laughed to scorn,
and to be under reproach?

Answ. 1. Take heed of bearing false witness against your Neighbor; it may be
several of your Neighbors make conscience of this duty of teaching and
instructing their Families, though you know it not. It is a grievous slander to
say, None of your Neighbors take any care of their Families to teach them to
know and serve the Lord, it is in effect to say they are as bad or worse than
Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, especially for those of
his own House, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. The Soul
is of far greater value than the Body, and if so, then the neglecting to
provide for the Souls of those of our own House, is a greater sin than the
neglecting to provide for their Bodies. Idolaters train up and employ their
whole Families to serve their Idols, Jer. 7.18. The Children gather wood, and
the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their Dough, to make Cakes to
the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they
may provoke me to anger. Here are men, women, and children, all employed about
the service of idol gods: If Idolaters train up their children to serve their
idol gods, are not they worse than Idolaters, who will not train up their
Families to know and serve the true God? So that you charge your Neighbors
with a very great sin, and an high crime, when you say that none of them
instruct their Families.

2. Suppose none of your Neighbors should instruct their Families, yet you
must instruct yours: Joshua resolved that though all Israel should neglect the
service of the true God, and turn aside to idols, yet he and his House would
serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose you whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that
were on the other side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Lands
ye dwell; but as for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. Your Neighbors
neglect of their duty will not excuse you at the day of Judgment, nor shelter
you from the wrath of God, nor mitigate your Torments in Hell, if you suffer
your Families to die in ignorance, and so to perish eternally for want of
instruction.

3. You are not singular in this work, for the wisest, the most holy, the best
men that ever lived, have been careful to train up their Families in the
knowledge and fear of the Lord, as Abraham, Genesis 18.19. David, Psalm. 34.11.
Joshua, Josh. 24.15. Yea which of all the Saints and Servants of God ever
neglected it?

4. Suppose your Neighbors should reproach you for instructing your Families,
and call you by any odions names, this should not at all dishearten you from
this good work of Family-Instruction: For, 1. It is a blessed and happy thing
to suffer reproach for doing any work that Jesus Christ sets us about; 1 Pet.
4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit
of Glory and of God rests upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of, but
on your part he is glorified: Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven. 2. In this work you do Christ service, and those that serve Christ
shall be honored by God, John 12.26. -- If any man serve me, him will my
Father honor. And if God honor you, you need not care who despises or
reproacheth you.


SECT. 25. How to deal with such as refuse Instruction.
I Would very willingly instruct my Family, if they were willing to be
instructed, but my Family will not submit to instruction; and what can I do in
this case?

Answ. 1. Enquire whence it comes to pass, that God afflicts you with this sore
Judgment of rebellious Children and Servants, that will not submit to
instruction: When God makes any members of our Families prove Crosses to us, he
is usually bringing some sin to our remembrance, and chastising us for it, as
has been already hinted, Object. 5. Answ. 1.

2. Pray to God to turn and bow their hearts to be willing to embrace
instruction. What Solomon says of the heart of a King, Prove. 21.1. The Kings
heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he turns it whither
soever he will. The same is true of the hearts of all other men, they are in
the Lords hand, and he turns and disposes of them as he pleases. Though
your Children or Servants should be never so vile, perfect slaves to Sin and
Satan, opposite to all that is good, God can change their hearts and make them
come and submit themselves to you, and desire to be instructed by you in those
things that concern their salvation, Rev. 3.9. Behold I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, -- behold I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet. -- What a great and sudden change did God work on the Jayler's heart?
Before God touched his heart, he dealt harshly and ruggedly with the Apostles,
He thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks,
Acts 16.24. but when God came to awaken him, before one night had passed over
his head, he was so altered that he came trembling, and fell down at the
Apostles feet, and desired to be instructed what course he should take to save
his soul, verse. 29, 30. He called for a light, and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said,
Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

3. After you have prayed to God, watch your opportunities, wherein it is most
probable they will listen to you, as in sickness, or when they are under some
other affliction, or in a great storm of Thunder and Lightning, or under any
other awakening Providence, and when you find them in a tractable frame, deal
effectually with them, set home upon their hearts the greatness of their sin,
in refusing instruction, and to that end put them in mind of these Scriptures,
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31. and 15.32. Jer. 6.8.

In times of distress God is wont to open men's ears to discipline, which are
shut against good counsel in the day of prosperity; Job 36.8, 10. If they be
holden in the cords of affliction, he opens their ear to discipline. When
there were mighty thundrings and lightnings in the Land of Egypt, Pharaoh
though he was a man of a hard heart, sent for Moses and Aaron, and humbled
himself for his sins, and desired their prayers, Exodus 9.27, 28. The Prophet
Jeremiah likeneth unruly persons that will not listen to and obey such
Instructions as are given them out of the word, unto the wild Ass, Jer. 2.24. A
wild Ass used to the Wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in
her occasion who can turn her away? All they that seek her, will not weary
themselves: In her month they shall find her. As the wild Ass that is used to
the wilderness wanders up and down at her pleasure, and cannot be tamed till
her month come; that is, till she grows big with young, and is weary and heavy
pained with the burden that she carries, and then it is easy to find her out,
and deal with her. So it is with some sinners, though they be as wild and as
unruly as the Ass that is used to the Wilderness, and there is no turning of
them whilst they are in their prosperity, and when they have their occasions
and opportunities of sinning; yet when their month comes, when they are
burdened with afflictions, and involved in such streights and difficulties,
that they cannot tell what to do to wind out of them, then it is easy having
access to them. Wherefore if you have unruly Servants, or unruly Children,
watch your seasons to deal with them; and when God strikes fear and terror
into their hearts by any providence, do you strike in with your instruction.

4. If you cannot do any good to them by instruction, endeavor to win them to
Christ by a pious, heavenly, exemplary conversation. There is great force in a
godly conversation, to gain upon such persons as stand out against and show
much opposition to the word of God, 1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye Wives be in
subjection to your own Husbands; that if any obey not the Word, they also may
without the Word be won by the conversation of the Wives.

5. Desire some godly Ministers to deal with them, if you cannot prevail with
them your selves to submit to instruction. It may be God will bless the
Counsel, the Reproof, the Exhortations that his Ministers shall give your
Children and Servants, if you make known your cafe to them, and desire them to
deal with your Families, and to convince them out of Gods word that it is their
duty, and will conduce much unto their good, to submit to instruction. It is
said of John Baptist, who was one of Christ's Ministers, Luke 1.17. He shall go
before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers
to the Children, and the Disobedient to the wisdom of the Just. And the like is
promised Mal. 4.6. He shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and
the hearts of the Children to the Fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth with
a Curse. And what was promised to John the Baptist, the same good effect may we
expect from the endeavors of other godly Ministers, namely, that God will
bless their labors to the conversion of our Children.

6. If they be your Children that refuse to be instructed, correct them. The
Rod may do that which words will not do. Solomon advises to apply the Rod to
such as are fools, Prove. 26.3. -- A Rod for the fools back. Now if you would
know whom he accounts fools, you shall find they are such as refuse and despise
instruction, Prove. 15.5. A fool despises his fathers instruction: And Prove.
1.7. Fools despise wisdom and instruction. Now the Rod of Correction will fetch
this folly out of the hearts of your Children, Prove. 22.15. If they be your
Servants that refuse instruction, as soon as you can with a good conscience,
dismiss them from your service. David's care was to get good Servants, and if
any of them proved vicious, and would not be reclaimed, he cast them out of his
Family, Psalm. 101.6, 7. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that
they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me; he
that works deceit, shall not dwell within my House; he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight. Imitate this example of David, get godly Servants,
or at least endeavor to make them godly after they are come under your Roof;
and if they be such as will not be instructed and reformed, remove them; and
make this Covenant with all that you shall admit for time to come, That they
submit unto instruction.

SECT. 26. What they should do who find no success on their Labors in teaching
their Families? Several Encouragements to such to continue this work of
Family-Instruction.
I Have taken great pains in teaching my Family, but I see no success of my
Labors; I cannot find that any of them are reformed and turned from their sins,
or have got any saving work of Grace upon their souls, notwithstanding all the
pains that I have taken with them: And this discourageth me, and makes me think
sometimes to give over this work.

Answ. 1. If there be no success of your Labors in your Family, see if the
cause be not in your selves: Do you water your seed that you sow with your
Prayers and Tears? Do you wrestle with God for a blessing? Are you fervent in
prayer for the conversion and edification of such as are under your charge? Do
you show a good example to your Family, and walk convincingly before them, and
teach them by your conversation? Do you go about this work in the Name of the
Lord, relying on his strength, and depending on his assistance, and looking for
his presence with you? Do you watch over their Conversations, as well as teach
them? Do you reprove and correct your Children when they walk contrary to the
word of God? Do you instruct your Families diligently, seriously, frequently?
Or is this work done but seldom, and in a slight manner? Do you labor to know
their state, and to apply that which is suitable to them, and profitable for
them? If the ground and cause why you have no better success, be in your
selves, reform that which hinders your success, and you shall soon find the
blessing of God going along with your Labors.

2. If the cause of your Families unprositableness lie in themselves; 1. Show
them what a great sin, and how dangerous it is, to be unprofitable under the
means of grace; and turn them to such Scriptures as these, Matthew. 3.10. and
25.30. Luc. 13.6, 7. Heb. 6.7, 8. and press them home upon their consciences.
2. Direct them what means they should use that they may profit better by your
instructions: what they are, I have hinted already in Chap. iii. Direct. 15.
page 165.

3. There may be good success of your Labors though you perceive it not; the
Lord may have conveyed the seed of grace into their Souls, by your Instruction,
though you discover it not; and it may grow, though you discern it not; Mark
4.26, 27. So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground, and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and
grow up, and he knows not how. God many times distills his Grace like dew, in
a silent insensible manner, Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto Israel.

4. Your want of success should be so far from causing you to desist from this
work of Family-Instruction, that it should stir you up to ply your work with
greater diligence, and cause you to abound in actings of faith upon those
Promises where the Lord has promised to bless and prosper his peoples labors.
I will mention three or four to this purpose. Isa. 65.22, 23. Mine Elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands, they shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble: Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper. 1 Timothy 4.13,
16. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine: Take heed to thy
self, unto thy Doctrine, continue in them, for in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self and them that hear thee. Deuteronomy. 15.10. The Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto. The
less success and blessing you find attending your labors, be the more earnest
in pleading such Promises as these are, and the more abundant in acting faith
upon them.

5. Though you cannot see any fruit of your Labors either in the conversion or
edification of any that are under your charge, but do apprehend that your
labor has hitherto been in vain, yet you must not desist from this good work
of teaching and instructing your Families, but continue therein as long as you
live. And that you may not sit down under discouragement and give over
instructing your Families, because you do not find success in your work; Let me
propose to you these following Considerations.

I. Consider that God often renews and repeats the same means and ways to bring
about our Conversion, though former means have not prevailed with us to lead us
to repentance, Job 33.29, 30. Lo all these things works God oftentimes with
man, to bring back his Soul from the Pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the Living. God takes great pains with one and the same man, to bring back his
Soul from the Pit; He works, He does not only call, or counsel and persuade,
but He works, these things, all these things; that is, He works by his
Word, v. 23. and by variety of Providence, Mercies, Afflictions, etc. menriety
in the foregoing verses; and not only once or twice, but oftentimes: And there
is a note of attention prefixed to this, that we may give the greater heed to
it, LO! Now if God takes great pains, and works oftentimes by the same ways
and means, with one and the same man, to bring back his Soul from the Pit,
shall we think much day by day to instruct our Families, and to continue so
doing, that we may be instrumental to save their Souls, though hitherto we have
seen no success of our Labors?

II. Though you see no fruit of your labors for the present, yet you may do
before you die, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well doing, for in due season
we shall reap if we faint not. Yea though you should see none whilst you live,
yet after you are dead, your Children may remember what you taught them whilst
you lived, and may thereby be brought to believe in Christ, and repent of their
sins. After Christ was dead, his Disciples were much helped in their faith by
calling to remembrance what he had taught them in his lifetime: John 2.22.
When therefore he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he had
said this unto them; and they believed the Scriptures, and the word which Jesus
had spoken. Though the Seed of the Word seem to lie dead in their hearts for
the present, yet possibly God may quicken it by some affliction. Manasseh was
Hezekiah's Son, and so doubtless had good instructions from his Father, but yet
he proved very vicious, till he came into affliction; he shed much innocent
blood, he dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards, and used enchantments
and witchcrafts, he was a great Idolater, and built Altars for all the host of
Heaven, etc. But when the Lord brought him into affliction, he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Fathers, and was brought to Repentance, 2 Chronicles.
33.11, 12, 13. It is probable that there is mention made of his humbling
himself before the God of his Fathers, to show that his Fathers Instructions
were instrumental to bring him to Repentance, when he was in his affliction.

III. Though you should not convert your Children or Servants by the
instructions which you give them out of the word of God, yet possibly what you
do may prepare them for the Ministry of the Word; the Seed you have sown may be
quickened by the Ministry of the Word to their conversion and salvation. And
this is no small mercy to be instrumental to plow up the fallow ground, and to
prepare the hearts of your Children and Servants, for the public Ministry of
the Word. All that heard John Baptist were not brought to believe in Christ,
yet was not John the Baptist's labor in vain, for John's Labors did prepare
them for Christ; and when they came to hear Christ, the remembering what they
had heard from John, did help them to believe in Christ, as we may see John
10.40, 41, 42. And Jesus went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where
John at first baptized, and there he abode; and many resorted to him, and said,
John did no miracle, but all things that John spoke of this man were true. And
many believed on him there.

IV. Consider what pains the Husbandman takes in tilling the Earth, and what
long patience he exercises before he reaps any fruit of his Labors: He
ploweth often in order to the fitting and preparing the Earth to receive the
Seed, and after his Seed is sown it lies buried under the ground, and for a
season nothing appears; after his Seed comes up, it is a long time to the
Harvest; and many times by unseasonable weather, either immoderate Rain, or
Drought, or Blasting, or Mildew, all his Labor is lost: Yet he renews his
labor again year after year, as long as he lives, and ploweth and sows his
ground, in hope of the blessing of God. The Apostle puts us in mind of the
Husbandmans patience, to make us patient in waiting for better things, James
5.7. Be patient therefore Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord; Behold the
Husbandman waits for the precious Fruit of the Earth, and has long patience
for it, until he receive the early and latter Rain. What though you see no
fruit after much pains taken with your Families? And after some appearance of
fruit, there comes a blasting of your hopes, yet you must renew your Labors
day after day, hoping that at length God will bless your endeavors. The fruit
of instruction in the conversion and edification of your Families, is much
better than the fruits of the earth, and is worthy of more pains and patience
than the Husbandman exercises for obtaining the fruits of the earth. Remember
therefore and follow the counsel of Solomon, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand; for thou know not
whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike
good.

V. Though you should not convert the Souls of your Children and Servants, yet
you must go on to instruct them, for in so doing you shall deliver your own
Soul, Ezekiel. 3.19. If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness,
nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy Soul: And shall be clear from their blood, Acts 20.26, 27. I take you to
record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men; for I have not
shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God.

VI. Though you should take much pains in instructing your Families, and should
be instrumental to convert none of them, yet your labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord; for you shall have a great Reward from God: Your Reward shall be
according to your work and pains that you have taken, not according to your
success, Rev. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give
to every man according as his work shall be. As it is with the Ministers of
Christ, if they have taught the people diligently and faithfully the good word
of the Lord, though they have not converted them, they shall have their Reward
from God, and be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, Isa. 49.4, 5. Then I said, I
have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain; yet
surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work (or as it is in the Margin, my
Reward) with my God -- Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. So also it shall be
with Masters of Families.

Wherefore do not give over this work through any discouragement, but be
steadfast and unmovable, always abounding therein, inasmuch as you know that
your labor shall not be in vain; according to what you find recorded, 1 Cor.
15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord: forasmuch as you know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. V.
Considerations to quiet Parents whose Children died in such an estate as they
can have no hope of their Salvation.

IF any shall demand further, Suppose after all our endeavors to teach,
convert, and save our Children and Servants Souls, some of them should prove
vile and wicked persons, and should live and die in their sins, and so should
perish eternally; What Considerations may quiet our minds and support us under
such a trial as this, to see our Children, or any other Member of the Family,
for whose conversion and salvation we have put up many prayers, and have taken
much pains in teaching and instructing them, perish eternally.

SECT. 1. Answer.
1. THough our Children and Servants whom we have instructed, and for whom we
have prayed, should prove very vile and wicked, yet we should hope as long as
we and they live, that God in his due time may hear our Prayers, and bless our
Endeavors for the conversion of their Souls, Eccles. 9.4. For to him that is
joined to all the Living, there is hope. The Lord sometimes gives Repentance
unto Life, to the worst of men, to such as are the Devils slaves, and such as
are taken captive by him at his will, and to such as do oppose the means of
their salvation, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. And as God calls some of the chiefest
Sinners, so he calls some toward the latter end of their days. Some were
called into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour of the day, when they had spent
all the day in idleness, Matthew. 13.6, 7. About the eleventh hour he went out,
and found others standing idle, and says unto them, Why stand ye here all the
day idle? -- Go ye also into the Vineyard -- If we should die before them, and
see them continuing in their sins till our dying day, yet as Noah, though he
foresaw that the Gentiles who were the posterity of Japheth, Genesis 10.1, 5.
would continue a long time in their estrangement from God, yet he hoped that
God in due time would convert them, and cause them to embrace the true
Religion, which was continued in the Offspring of Shem, Genesis 9.27. God shall
enlarge (or as the word may be rendered, God shall persuade) Japheth, and he
shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. So should we hope concerning our Children,
that God will persuade their hearts to repent of their sins, though we should
see them go on in evil and destructive courses a long time together, and that
because of his promise to circumcise not only our hearts, but the hearts also
of our Seed to love him with all our hearts, and all our souls, that both we
and they may have everlasting life, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

2. If after all our prayers, and tears, and instructions, and endeavors after
their salvation, we should see any of our Children or Servants live and die in
such a condition as that we could have no hope of their salvation, we may quiet
our minds with such considerations as these:

I. Consider Gods Sovereignty: He has a sovereign power over all his
Creatures, to dispose of their temporal and spiritual estate according to his
own pleasure; we are in Gods hand as clay in the hands of the Potter, Jer.
18.6. O House of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter, says the Lord?
Behold as the Clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye in mine hand, O House of
Israel: And what is the power the Potter has over the Clay? Romans 9.21. Has
not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel unto
Honor, and another unto Dishonor? Jer. 18.4. The Vessel that he made of Clay
was marred in the hand of this Potter; so he made it again another Vessel, as
seemed good to the Potter to make it. If it be in the Potters power to make
every Vessel as seems good to him, if he may make of the same lump one Vessel
to honor, and another to dishonor; may not the great God do what he pleases
with his Creatures? May not He make of Children that are born of the same
Parents, and enjoy the same instructions, one a Vessel unto Honor, and another
a Vessel of his Wrath and Displeasure for ever? All Creatures in Heaven, and in
the Earth, and in the Sea, and in all other places, are disposed of by God,
according to his will and good pleasure, Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Seas, and in all deep
places. And shall we think much, or repine against God, when he disposes of
our Children, or any other Member of the Family, as seems good in his sight.
When the Lord said to Eli, I will judge his House for ever -- And I have sworn
unto the House of Eli, That iniquity of Eli's House shall not be purged with
sacrifice nor offering for ever, 1 Samuel 3.13, 14. This was sad tidings, yet
when Eli considered it was the Lord who had power to dispose of him and his
Family, as seems good in his sight, he quietly submitted his will to the will
of God, verse. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. No Parents
did ever thirst more after the salvation of their Childrens Souls, than Jesus
Christ thirsted after the salvation of fallen man; yet when he saw that it was
his Fathers good pleasure to hide the Mysteries of the Gospel from some persons
who were wise and prudent in worldly matters, with whom he had taken much pains
in preaching the Gospel, he rested abundantly satisfied in the will and
pleasure of his Father, Mat. 11.25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes: Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. From verse 19. to 24. Jesus Christ
upbraids the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they
repented not, and tells them what an heavy condemnation they should have at the
day of Judgment, more dreadful than Tire or Sydon, or Sodom and Gomorrah: And
at that time, when he had done upbraiding those Cities, he addresseth himself
to his Father, wherein he declares his perfect acquiescence in his Fathers
will, Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight; although he had hid
the Mysteries of the Gospel from the wise and prudent, (and we know that
eternal perdition follows the hiding of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost) and had revealed them only, or chiefly
at least, to such as were in comparison of the wise and prudent men in the
world, but Babes. Now seeing our Lord Jesus did acquiesce in his Fathers good
pleasure, when he saw many amongst whom he had preached and done his mighty
works, continuing in their unbelief and impenitent condition, and so perishing
eternally; It concerns us to submit our selves to the will and pleasure of
God, if after all the pains that we have taken to convert and save our
Childrens Souls, he should leave some of them to perish in their sins. We must
know that he is God, and so may dispose of us, and all that belongs to us, as
he pleases, and howsoever he is pleased to deal with us, we must be still and
silent under his hand, Psalm. 46.10. Be still, and know that I am God.

II. Others as good and better than we, have met with the same trial, viz. some
of their children and servants have degenerated and proved vicious and lewd
persons, and have lived and died in their sins, notwithstanding all the pains
that their Parents and Governors have taken to convert and save their souls.
Adam had a Cain, (who murdered his own brother, and was a fugitive and
vagabond in the earth, and has the brand of a wicked man set upon him by the
Holy Ghost, 1 John 3.12.) as well as righteous Abel: Noah had an Ham, who saw
and divulged his fathers nakedness, and had his fathers curse upon him and his
posterity, as well as a pious Shem and Japheth: righteous Lot had two daughters
that enticed him to drunkenness and incest: Ishmael in his younger time was so
vile, that Abraham cast him out of his family for a scoffer; Isaac had a
profane Esau who sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage, a man hated of God;
Esau have I hated, Romans 9.13. as well as a godly Jacob. Jacob met with crosses
in his Children, Reuben his firstborn defiled his Fathers Bed, Simeon and Levi
by their cruelty in slaying the Shechemites after they had drawn them to be
circumcised, made Jacob's name to stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, Genesis
34.30. Judah lies with his Daughter-in-law Tamar, supposing her to have been
an Harlot, with diverse other crosses in the rest of his Children, as the
selling of Joseph into Egypt, etc. Aaron lost two sons, Nadab and Abihu, In the
very act of sin, as they were offering up strange fire, fire came from the
Lord, and consumed them. Eli's children were such sons of Belial, that their
wickedness caused men to abhor the offerings of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12, 17,
David met with much affliction in his children; Amnon ravished his sister
Tamar, Absalom killed Amnon when his heart was merry with wine, Absalom was cut
off in the Act of his Rebellion, Adonijah seeks the Crown which his father had
devolved upon his son Solomon. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself had a select
Family, consisting of twelve Apostles, whom he chose out of all Israel, and
whom he often instructed with great power, ( for his word was with power, Luke
4.32.) and yet one of them proved little better than a devil, John 6.70. Have
not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? He proved so vile, that he
betrayed his Master for thirty pieces of silver, and then went and hanged
himself, and went to his own place. Elisha the Prophet had a lying servant,
Gehazi, who went in his Masters name, but contrary to his Masters mind, to
Naaman the Syrian, and demanded and received for his own use a great sum of
money, as much as two men could carry, and two changes of Garments, 2 Kings
5.20, 21, 22, 23. These examples, with several others which might be produced,
do show that though it be a great affliction to have evil children and evil
servants, yet it is a temptation common to men, even to good men, yea such as
have befallen the best men that ever lived upon the face of the earth, whose
persons have been very dear and precious in the sight of God, and their works
and labors have been graciously accepted of him. And therefore we should not
be disquieted or cast down without measure, because God does not bless our
labors with the converting and saving of all the members of our families,
neither should we conclude from hence that either our persons or our labors
are not accepted with God.

III. Our children are Gods creatures as well as our children: God has a
greater right to them, and a greater interest in them, than we have. We were
but Gods instruments to bring them into the world: It was (not we, but) God
created and gave them their beings, it was Gods hands that framed and fashioned
their Bodies when they lay in their Mothers womb, Psalm. 119.97. Thy hands have
made and fashioned me: 1 Cor. 12.24. God has tempered the body together: It is
God that gave them every part of their Bodies, as Skin, and Bones, and Flesh,
and Sinews; Job 10.11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have
fenced me with bones and sinews: And every member of their Bodies, as Eyes,
Hands, Feet, etc. Psalm. 139.16. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being
imperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, whenas yet there was none of them. It was God which created
their Souls, after he had formed their Bodies, Zech. 12.1. -- Says the Lord,
which stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the Earth, and
forms the Spirit of Man within him: Ezekiel. 18.4. Behold all Souls are mine; as
the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the Son is mine; the Soul that
sins shall die: It was God that drew them out of the womb, Psalm. 22.9. Thou
art he that took me out of the womb: It is God that has preserved them alive
ever since they were born, Psalm. 66.8, 9. O bless our God, ye people, -- who
holds our Soul in life. And seeing God has a far greater right to our
Children than we have, shall we be discontented when he disposes of them as he
sees good? May not he say to us, when we repine at any thing that he does to
our children, as the good Householder said to those that murmured at him, Matthew.
20.13, 15. Friend I do thee no wrong, -- Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with mine own? And as our children are the works of his hands, so his
mercies toward his works, are beyond our mercies toward those that proceed
from our bowels, Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies
are over all his works: He desires their welfare both here and for ever, more
than we can do, Job 14.15. -- Thou will have a desire to the work of thine
hands: Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their Children for ever! Now if the Lord, whose tender mercies are
over all his works, and who desires our Childrens welfare more than we our
selves do, saw cause to cast away the works of his own hands into eternal
torments, shall we by our discontent go about to control God in what he has
done, as though we were wiser or more merciful than He?

IV. Though there be a great depth in Gods Judgments, and such as we cannot
search out the reason of them, why sometimes he converteth one, and leaves
another to perish in his sins, although both are born of the same Parents, and
live under the same means of grace; Yet he is always Just and Righteous, and
True, and Faithful, in all his ways. The Apostle was a man of a deeper insight
into the mysteries of the Gospel than we are, yet he confesses some of Gods
ways to be unsearchable, Romans 11.34. O the depth of the Riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways
past finding out! Whatever Judgments God inflicts upon Nations, or particular
Persons, though we may not be able to fathom the reason of them, yet we must
believe that all that the Righteous God does, is Just and True, and that he
never acts contrary to the Truth of his Word, or against the Rules of Justice,
Rev. 15.3. They sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Just and
True are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. This Song was sung upon the pouring out
of the seven last Plagues, in which was filled up the Wrath of God, verse 1.
From hence it is evident that the Lord does nothing beyond the Rules of
Justice, or contrary to his Truth, when he pours out his wrath to the utmost
either upon a Nation, or upon particular persons. When the children of godly
Parents sin against God, and God casts them away for their sins, he does not
by this act pervert Justice and Equity; Job 8.3, 4. Does God pervert Judgment?
Or does the Almighty pervert Justice; If thy Children have sinned against him,
and he have cast them away for their transgression? Now when God does those
things which are Just and Right, we should be so far from murmuring, that we
should praise and honor God, although we our selves should suffer deeply by
those Judgments. After Nebuchadnezzar was driven from his Throne, and forced to
dwell among the Beasts of the field, where he was wet with the dew of Heaven,
and did eat grass with the Oxen, when his understanding returned to him again,
although he was about seven years under this great and unusual Judgment,
because he saw Justice and Truth in this stroke of God, he extolled and praised
the Lord, Dan 4 37. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the King
of Heaven, all whose Works are Truth, and his Ways are Judgment; and those that
walk in pride, he is able to abase.

V. God shall have eternal Glory from them that perish, as well as from them
that are saved: His Justice shall be glorified on them that perish, and his
Mercy in them that are saved. When ungodly sinners are cast into Hell in great
multitudes, God is glorified in their destruction, Isa. 5.14, 16. Therefore
Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, and their
glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices, shall
descend into it -- But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in Judgment, and God
that is holy shall be sanctified in Righteousness. Now seeing God shall be
glorified in them that perish, this may quiet our minds, and keep down all
murmuring thoughts, if it should be our portion to have any of our children cut
off in their sins. Aaron's two sons, Nadab and Abihu, were cut off in the act
of sin, while they were offering strange fire, there went out fire from the
Lord and consumed them, and they died before the Lord; yet when Aaron heard
Moses speak of Gods being glorified, he was silent under this heavy stroke,
Lev. 10.3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I
will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the People I will
be glorified: And Aaron held his peace. God made all things and all persons,
wicked as well as good men, for his own glory: Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil, Rev. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. And seeing
God made all things and persons for his own pleasure and glory, he may glorify
himself according to his own will and pleasure, upon every one of his
creatures, and none may say unto him, What do thou?

VI. The consideration of the great and wonderful mercy of God in bestowing his
grace upon our souls, and taking us into his everlasting Covenant, may quiet
our minds, however it shall please him to deal with our Families. David met
with great afflictions in his Family, some of his children proved perverse and
were very great crosses to him, and died in such a state as he could have
little or no hope of their salvation; Amnon was such a vicious person that he
ravished his own sister Tamar, and was slain when his heart was merry with
wine, 2 Samuel 13.28. by this phrase is signified that Amnon was little better
than drunk when he was slain, as may be gathered from 1 Samuel 25.36. where
Nabals drunkenness is expressed by his heart being merry; Nabals heart was
merry within him, for he was very drunken. Absalom who had caused his Brother
Amnon to be slain, rose up in rebellion against his Father, and sought to take
his Kingdom and Life from him, and was cat off in this act of sin? And how did
David quiet himself under these great afflictions that befell his House? It was
with the Covenant that God had made with his own Soul, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my
House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my vation, and all my desire,
although he make it not to grow. The mercies and blessings of the Covenant are
so great, and such unvaluable mercies, that when we conside the riches of Gods
grace, and his infinite love in taking our own souls into Covenant with
himself; this consideration may so fill our hearts with joy, as to swallow up
all our sorrows, arising either from personal or family-afflictions. Wine will
cheer such as are of a sorrowful spirit, and make them forget their miseries,
Prove. 31.6, 7. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to
them that be of heavy hearts: Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and
remember his misery no more. Gods love is better, and has more efficacy to
cheer such as are of heavy hearts, than wine; Cant. 1.2. -- Thy love is better
than Wine: And if Wine will refresh such as are of sorrowful spirits, yea such
as are ready to perish under their affliction, what efficacy is there in the
love of God, which he has manifested in taking our souls into Covenant, to
comfort us under our greatest sorrows and miseries, even such as lie heavy upon
our hearts, yea such as we think we shall perish under them?

SECT. 2. The Case of such as are overwhelmed with grief, because they fear
their Children are in eternal Torments, considered. Gods Justice in punishing
Sinners to Eternity, vindicated.
TO these Considerations I shall add a Reply to such Pleas as those Parents
whose Children have died in their sins may possibly make use of to excuse their
immoderate grief and discontent, and perplexity of mind, under this affliction
of losing their Children in such a state, as that they can have no hope of
their salvation: And so I shall conclude this Treatise.

1 Plea. My Children that are dead in their sins, are gone into everlasting
burnings, where their torments will be endless and intolerable; and it so
pierces my heart and distracteth my mind, when I think that those that came
out of my Bowels, my Children, for whom I had such a dear affection, should be
cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where they must remain
for eternity; that I am not able to bear it, but sometimes I am ready to fret
against God; and at other times my heart is so full with grief, that I think it
will break in pieces, and I shall die with sorrow.

Answ. I. If your Children be cast into eternal Torments for their sins, it is
God has done it; He keeps the Keys of Death and Hell: No person is cut off by
death, none after death are cast into Hell, but at Gods appointment, Rev. 1.18.
I have the Keys of Hell and Death: There is not so much as one Sparrow falls
to the ground, but at the will and by the appointment of God: Matthew. 10.29. Are
not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall to the
ground without your Father. If a Sparrow does not fall to the ground without
the will of God, then surely an immortal Soul does not fall into Hell
Torments, but at his appointment: for the meanest Soul that ever was created,
is of a thousand times more value than many Sparrows. And seeing it is God has
done it, how grievous and bitter soever it be unto your Souls, you must bear it
with patience: Psalm. 39.9, 10. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou
did it: And this was no small stroke under which David was dumb, because
the Lord gave him the blow; but it was so great, as that he was even consumed
with it, as the next words show, Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed
by the blow of thine hand: By his being consumed, we may understand the
greatness of his grief, as Psalm. 31.9. Mine eye is consumed with grief, yea my
soul and my belly; yet under this great stroke which consumed his Soul and his
Body with grief, he was dumb and opened not his mouth because God did it.
Whatsoever comes from the hands of God, must be born with silence and
submission to his will, although it be so sharp and bitter, as that it will
make us go mourning as long as we live, Isa. 38.15. What shall I say? He has
spoken unto me, and himself has done it, I shall go softly all my years in the
bitterness of my Soul. And as we must be patient under all our griefs, so we
must contentedly bear whatever grievous things befall our children, Jer. 10.19,
20. Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous; but I said, Truly this is a
grief, and I must bear it -- My Children are gone forth of me, and are not. --

II. God is righteous in what he has done to your Children, although he has
cast them into eternal torments. If you think it not consistent with
Righteousness and Equity, to punish the sins of a few years with endless and
eternal torments, consider 1. That the Scriptures assure us that the Lord is
righteous in all his vvays, Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works: And if the Lord be righteous in all his ways,
then also in this way of his Providence, when he condemns wicked men to
eternal torments for the sins they committed in that short space of time they
lived in the world. Yea, more particularly, we find the Scriptures ascribing
Righteousness to God in this very case, when he punishes ungodly persons
with everlasting torments, 2 These. 1.6, 9. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you -- who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. 2. The Angels are more glorious Creatures than the Souls of Men, yet
when they sinned against God, the Lord did not spare them, but for their first
sin cast them down into hell, 2 Pet. 1.4. God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness,
to be reserved unto Judgment: And that they shall be punished in Hell with
everlasting torments, is evident from Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And this he did
without affording them any means of their recovery from their sin and misery,
which was granted to fallen man, Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not on him the
Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham. Now seeing God cast
those glorious Creatures the Angels, into eternal torments for their first
transgression, and did not spare them one day, or afford them any means of
recovery after their fall, shall we think that God deals hardly with the Sons
of men, in condemning them to eternal torments, whenas he afforded them means
of grace and salvation, and gave them a long time and space for their
Repentance, waiting day after day, and year after year, for their returning to
him? Is not this far greater mercy, and less severity, then was shown to the
fallen Angels? 3. Sin is committed against an eternal God, against an
infinitely holy, great, and glorious GOD, and therefore deserves an infinite
and eternal punishment. We do not understand, or at least we do not consider,
what an odious thing Sin is, and what a great God the Lord is; and what an
infinite distance there is between the great and holy God, and a poor sinful
man, when we think that the Lord deals hardly with sinners in punishing
their sins with eternal torments. What an heinous crime is it for man, who is
but a poor worm made of dust and ashes, to affront, despise, and rebel against
the great GOD of Heaven and Earth, who gave him his Being, and loadeth him
with his Benefits every day? To tread the Laws of God under his feet, and to
cast his word behind his back, to slight all his Promises and Threatenings, to
contemn all his offers of Grace and Mercy, and though he wait with much
patience and long-suffering many days and years for his Repentance, to refuse
to return and obey the Voice of his Creator? Does not such a despising of the
Eternal, Immortal, Ever-Blessed God, deserve to be punished with eternal
Torments? 4. It is accounted no injustice among men to inflict a punishment of
long continuance for a crime that was committed in a very short time. If
Murder, Adultery, Treason, or some other capital Offense, which was committed
in the space of a few minutes, be punished with perpetual imprisonment, or
perpetual banishment, no man counts it injustice, or thinks the Offender is
hardly dealt with, because he is so long punished for an offense committed in
so short a time: Why then should any man think that the Righteous God deals
hardly or unjustly in punishing sinners with perpetual torments, for the sins
they committed those few years they lived in the world? 5. It was their own
choice to embrace eternal death. God set before them Life and Death, He told
them if they did evil, they should die eternally; but if they would repent, and
do that which is good in his sight, they should have everlasting life; and he
called upon them earnestly, to choose Life, rather than Death: Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19.
See, I have set before you this day life and good, death and evil -- Therefore
choose life -- He offered them Life in his Son, and they would not go unto him
for it, John 5.40. And ye will not come to Me, that ye might have life. He
protested solemnly to them, that he was loath they should die, and therefore
pleaded with them, Why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for
why will ye die, O House of Israel? And therefore they must blame themselves,
not the Lord, for their being cast into eternal Torments. 6. Had they been
permitted to have lived for ever upon the face of the Earth, they would have
sinned for ever: The heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11. They would always have gone on resisting the Spirit of God, and
doing those things which are grievous in the sight of God, Psalm. 10, 4, 5. The
wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God is not
in all his thoughts; his ways are always grievous: Acts 7.51. Ye do always
resist the holy Ghost: They would continually have sinned against God in their
hearts and lives, Genesis 6.5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon
the Earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually. Time would have been so far from leading them to Repentance,
that the longer they had lived, they would have been the more subtle and
obstinate sinners, and would have been longer accustomed to do evil; and the
longer a man has been accustomed to do evil, the harder it is to bring him to
Repentance, Jer. 13.23. Is there any inequality in punishing them for ever, who
would have sinned for ever? Now if God has dealt righteously with your
Children, why should you fret or be disquieted at the righteous dealings of the
Just and Righteous God? Was it meet that the Lord should have perverted Justice
for your sake, or the sake of your Children?


III. The Lord has fulfilled his eternal counsel, and declared his truth and
faithfulness in fulfilling his Threatenings denounced against impenitent sinners
by condemning your children, who died in their sins, unto eternal torments: God
has plainly revealed it in his holy Word, that it is his eternal and
unchangable purpose to cast into eternal torments all wicked and ungodly
persons, that live and die in their sins without Repentance. The Scriptures are
full of Threatenings to this effect; as, Psalm. 9.17. Luke 13.3, 5. Mat. 13.41,
42. Mat. 25.41. Rev. 21.8. with a multitude of other places; why then should
you fret at Gods fulfilling his eternal counsel, and at his faithfulness in
fulfilling his word? As Bildad said to Job 18.4. He teareth himself in his
anger, shall the Earth be forsaken for thee? And shall the Rock be removed out
of his place? The like may I say to you, Why do you tear your selves in your
anger? Should the Lord have forsaken his eternal counsels, which are more firm
than the Earth or Rocks, and would have brought greater confusion than the
removing the Earth, or the Rocks out of their places, for your sakes? Would you
have had him altered the way and course of man's salvation for the sake of your
Children? Would you have had him proved unfaithful in not fulfilling his word,
to spare your Children from eternal torments? This in effect is to have desired
that he would have denied his own Being, and ceased to be God, rather than to
have condemned your Children. For if God should depart from his faithfulness,
he should deny his own Being, 2 Timothy 2.12. He abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself.

IV. Murmuring and fretting against God for condemning your Children, who died
in their sins, unto eternal torments, is the way to fall into the same
condemnation with your Children. For those that resemble Dogs by their barking
and snarling, and being angry at what God does, shall be shut out of heaven,
Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs. The Apostle cautions us against murmuring, lest
we should thereby provoke God to destroy us, 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur ye,
as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. And
therefore instead of murmuring against God for destroying your Children, admire
his great and wonderful mercy, that you as well as they are not consumed, and
cast into everlasting burnings, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercies that we
are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

V. Your excessive sorrow for your deceased children, who died in their sins,
does not please God, nor any way benefit you or your children. It does not
please God, he is troubled that you do not joy more in having him for your God,
and Portion, and Savior, than you grieve at the loss of your children, but
that your grief for your children should swallow up your joy in God; and may
say to you as Elkanah did to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Why weepest thou? And why
eatest thou not? And why is thy heart grieved? Am not I better to thee than ten
sons? When any affection exceeds its due bounds, it is sinful; and that which
is sinful displeases God. Your excessive sorrow will no ways benefit your
deceased, children. If you could shed Rivers of Tears for them, they would
avail nothing for their Release, or the mitigation of their torments: Prayers
and Tears may do great things for the Living, but they are not any way
profitable for the Dead. And as Prayers and Tears profit dead men nothing, so
neither can any other work that is done by any man under the Sun, be any way
beneficial to the Dead. Solomon, speaking of the dead, says, Eccl. 9.6.
Neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under
the Sun. When once God has passed sentence upon them for their eternal state,
no Creature can prevail with him to change his mind, Job 23.13. But he is in
one mind, and who can turn him? Not one Soul that is cast into hell can by any
means be redeemed from thence again, Psalm. 49.8. For the redemption of their
soul is precious, and it cease for ever. And as your inordinate sorrow does
not benefit your deceased children, so neither do you your selves reap any
advantage by it; it is so far from doing you good, that it hurts you both in
body, and soul, and estate: It hurts your bodies as it dries and consumes them,
and hastens your death, Prove. 17.22. A broken spirit dries the bones. 2 Cor.
7.10. The sorrow of the world works death. It hurts your Souls, as it hinders
your communion with God, and your performing that service you owe to God, and
tends to the destroying of the Kingdom of God in your Souls, which consists
not only in righteousness, but also in peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
14.17. It hurts your Estates, as it unfits you for the works of your Calling.
And therefore seeing that your excessive grief does not please God, nor benefit
your Children or your selves, nor any other person, but you disquiet your
selves in vain, let this put a period to your immoderate sorrows.

VI. Turn your excessive sorrowing for the loss of your deceased Childrens
souls into zealous endeavors after the salvation of your own soul, and the
souls of your surviving Children. Instead of unprofitable mourning for the
dead, rise up and work out your own salvation, with fear and trembling, and
save, if it be possible, all that are committed to your charge. As the Lord
called off Samuel from mourning for Saul, to anoint an other King, 1 Samuel 16.1.
And the Lord said unto Samuel, how long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have
rejected him from reigning over Israel? Fill thine horn with oil, and go, etc.
So he calls you off from mourning for your children, whom he has rejected, to
make sure of your own and your surviving Relations Salvations.

VII. Turn your indignation which is apt to arise in your hearts against God
because he has cast away your Childrens Souls, into indignation against sin,
which was the cause why God cast away their Souls. Hate all sin in your selves,
and hate all sin in others, with a perfect hatred, and never be reconciled to
it as long as you live, for the mischief that it has done to you and your
Children. Seek by way of holy revenge the utter destruction of all sin. Root it
out of your hearts, and of your Families, and do what you can to hinder it from
growing any more.

SECT. 3. The Plea of such as are troubled, because they conveyed Original sin
to their Children, answered.
MY Children that died in their sins, and are now gone down into everlasting
burning, received their corrupt natures from me; I was instrumental to convey
unto them their Original Sin, and their Original Sin caused their Actual Sins,
which caused their Damnation, and this troubles me so exceedingly, that I know
not what to do, I am ready to curse the day in which I entered into a married
condition; I might have kept my self single, and then my wicked Children had
never been born; and sometimes I am ready to curse my Parents who conveyed a
sinful nature unto me.

Answ. 1. It is true that Parents do convey sinful natures to their Children,
Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.

2. Though it be thus, Children must not blame their Parents for the blemishes
they receive from their birth, Isa. 45.10. VVoe unto him that says unto his
Father, what begettest thou, or to the woman, what have thou brought forth?
Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or Mother, and all
the People shall say Amen. Neither should we blame our selves for entering into
a married state of life, For Marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.4. The Lord
Jesus honored it with his Presence, and working one of his first Miracles at a
Marriage Feast, Joh. 2.1, 2, 11. Though Parents convey sinful natures to their
Children, yet Marriage is no sin, 1 Cor. 7.28. But and if thou marry thou have
not sinned, and if a Virgin marry she has not sinned.

3. Your being instrumental to convey corrupt natures to your Children should
make you look more thoroughly into the odious nature of Original Sin, and to
loath your selves, and to be deeply humbled for it, but it should not make you
to repine that you were instruments of bringing Children into the World, for
Children are counted blessings of God, and the man is called happy that is full
of them, Psalm. 127.3.6. So Children are an Heritage of the Lord. And the fruit
of the womb is his reward -- Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them
--

4. The Lord did provide a remedy against your Childrens sinful natures which
they derived from you. He has sent forth his Son to save us from our sins, and
to make us partakerr of the Divine Nature; His blood is compared to a fountain,
which cleanses from all sorts of sins; it procures the pardon of Original as
well as Actual Sin. Zech. 13.1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened
for the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for
uncleanness. 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin. He was sent by God, not only to pardon our sins, but to give us grace
to turn from our sins, Acts 3.26. Unto you first God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities. And God made a free offer of his Son Jesus Christ with all his
saving benefits to your Children, Rev. 22.17. It was their refusal of the
remedy provided in and by Christ, which was the cause of their condemnation,
John 3.19. Their neglect of the great Salvation of the Gospel brought upon them
eternal destruction, Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation?

5. As God provided a Seviour for them so you (if you did not neglect your
duty) were careful to train them up in the knowledge of this Savior, and to
acquaint them with all the counsel of God, what he would have them believe, and
what he would have them do, in order to their salvation, and did exhort them to
wait upon God in all his Ordinances, and when you saw them do any evil, you
reproved them, and warned them of the danger of their evil ways. If thus you
have discharged your duty toward them, in warning them to turn from their evil
ways, and declaring to them the will and counsel of God concerning their
salvation, which may be reduced to these two heads: That they should repent and
turn from their sins unto God, and believe in his Son Jesus Christ, you are
clear from their blood although they died in their sins. Ezekiel. 3.19. If thou
warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way,
he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Acts 20.20, 21,
26, 27. I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you -- Testifying both to
the Jews, and also to the Greeks repentance toward God and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ -- Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure
from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God.

SECT. 4. The case of those who are troubled because their Childrens blood will
be required at their hands, considered.
MY Childrens Souls are lost through my negligence and carelessness; if I had
discharged my duty toward them, it would have been some relief to me, but I
have been wanting in my duty toward them; And now what can I expect but that
God should require their blood at my hands, and this is such a trouble to me,
that my Children through my negligence should be cast into everlasting
burnings, and that their blood should be required at my hands, that I know not
what to do; I cannot rest either night or day, by reason of my sin in
destroying my Childrens souls, and the misery which hereby I have brought upon
mine own soul?

Answ. 1. This is a great sin, and ought to be much lamented, that you should
be guilty of the loss of your Childrens souls. And it is a wonderful thing that
many Parents make so light of it, it is an argument that they are under a
spirit of slumber and judicial hardness of heart. How great an evil it is for
Parents to be guilty of the blood of their childrens souls, and how they ought
to be affected with it I have shown before, Chap. 2. Sect. 2. But though this
be a great sin, a sin to be lamented as long as you live, yet you must take
heed of being swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. Satan labors what he can to
keep us under blindness and hardness of heart, and to hinder us for mourning
for our sins, but when he cannot do that, because God has opened our eyes, and
affected our hearts with the sight of our sin and misery, he will endeavor to
make us mourn without measure, especially if we have been great sinners. The
incestuous Corinthian committed a great sin, such as was not so much as named
among the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5.1. And till he was brought to repentance the
Apostle advises the Church of Corinth to deal sharply with him, ver. 4, 5. but
when he was humbled, the Apostle advises the Church to comfort him, and why?
Least perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor.
12.7.

2. Though this be a mighty great and crying sin for Parents by their evil
example, or their neglect to teach them, or by any other means to be guilty of
the blood of their Childrens souls, yet it is not an unpardonable sin, but I
may say of it as Shecaniah did to Ezra in another case, Ezra 10.2. We have
trespassed against our God -- Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing. By Faith and Repentance you may obtain forgiveness of this as well as of
other sins. The blood of Christ being applied by Faith, cleanses us from all
manner of sin, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin; If Christ's blood cleanses from all sin, then from being guilty of the
blood of souls, as well as from other sins. The merits of Christ's blood are
sufficient to wash away the sins of the greatest sinners in the whole world,
John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world. And
all that believe in him shall for his sake receive the remission of their sins,
of what nature soever they have been, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you men
and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins; And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which we
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Acts 10.43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins. Such whose sins are of the deepest die, who have
committed scarlet and crimson sins, whose hands have been full of blood, have
the full and free remission of all their sins promised upon their repentance,
Isa. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. Your hands are full of blood, wash ye, make ye clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well -- Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like
crimson they shall be as wool. The Lord taxes the Jews with the blood of the
Souls of poor Innocents, and tells them their guilt herein was as evident as
what appears upon a man's skirts, Jer. 2.34. Also upon thy skirts is found the
blood of the souls of poor innocents -- Yet to these Jews that were guilty of
the blood of souls of poor Innocents the Lord promises mercy upon their
repentance, Jer. 3.12, 13. Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and
I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the
Lord, and I will not keep mine anger for ever, only acknowledge thine iniquity
that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God. Who were greater sinners
than they that shed the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ? Yet even to them that
were guilty of the blood of Christ, the Lord promises remission of that, and
all their other sins upon their repentance. Acts 3.14, 15, 19. Ye denied the
Holy One, and the Just, and desired a Murderer to be granted unto you, and
killed the Prince of life -- Repent ye therefore, and be ye converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. The like we have also promised, Acts 2.23, 38, 39. where
the Apostle tells them who had taken and with wicked hands had crucified and
slain the Lord Jesus, that they were not excluded from the promises of mercy,
but that upon their repentance they should receive remission of their sins.

3. Testify the truth of your repentance for suffering your deceased Children
to perish through your negligence, by doubling your diligence in doing what in
you lies to save the souls of your surviving Children, and Servants, and all
others under your charge, by praying to God for them night and day, and
instructing them in the knowledge of those things that make for their peace,
and showing of them a good example, and the use of all other means. This will
be a means to moderate your excessive sorrow, and to restore peace and comfort
to your souls. For all Gods ways are ways of pleasantness, and his paths are
paths of peace, Prove. 3.17. whilst we are in the way of our duty God is wont to
come in with comfort.

SECT. 5. The Plea of such as are cast down, because God has not answered
their Prayers, or prospered their labors, answered.
IT may be some will say, The ground of my trouble for my deceased Children
arises from hence, because I prayed often and earnestly for their conversion,
and took much pains in teaching them, and yet the Lord has cast them away; and
because he has not answered my prayers, nor blessed my labors, I am afraid I
am none of his Elect, because it is said, Isa. 65.22, 23. Mine Elect shall long
enjoy the work of their hands; They shall not labor in vain.

Answ. I. This is not so to be understood as though Gods Elect did convert
every soul whom they labored by their instructions to bring home to the Lord.
Jesus Christ is styled Gods Elect, Isa. 42.1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold,
mine Elect in whom my soul delights. Yet we find the same Prophet bringing in
the Lord Jesus speaking thus, Isa. 49.4. I have labored in vain, I have spent
my strength for naught. And when he was here upon earth, many that saw his
Miracles, and heard his Sermons remained in their unbelief and unconverted
condition, Luke 16.14. John 12.37.

II. You have not labored in vain, although your Children were not converted,
for, 1. Though you did not convert your Children, yet you have delivered your
own soul, Ezekiel. 3.19. If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou
have delivered thy soul. And the delivering of your own soul is worth all your
pains, although you had taken a thousand times more than you have done. 2. Your
labor is not in vain in respect of God, 1 Cor. 15.58. You know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord Although you did not convert your Children,
yet your work shall have a glorious reward from God, Isa. 49.4, 5. He smells
a sweet savor in your labors, and accepts graciously both your person and
your work, although your Children perished under those instructions which you
gave them out of the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2.15.


III. Your Prayers are not lost although they did not prevail for the
conversion and salvation of your Childrens souls, for they shall be returned
into your own bosom. When God does not answer those Prayers we make for others
by giving them the blessings we beg on their account, he answers them by
returning some blessing upon our own souls, Psalm. 35.13. But as for me when
they were sick, my clothing was Sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting,
and my Prayer returned into my own bosom?

SECT. 6. How God is faithful to his Promise, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy Seed, and yet condemns the wicked Children of godly Parents?
Am much troubled to reconcile Gods providence in casting away my seed, with
his promise, where he has said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed.
Sometimes I am ready to question Gods faithfulness, sometimes I am ready to
think that I my self am not in Covenant with God.

Answ. I. In all such cases where you are not able to reconcile Gods
Providence with his Promises, you must steadfastly believe that God is faithful
and righteous, although you cannot apprehend how such or such a Providence
should be consistent with his faithfulness, or with his righteousness. Thus
Jeremiah did firmly believe that God was righteous, although he stumbled much
at the prosperity of wicked men, Jer. 12.1. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I
plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments, Wherefore does the
way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? The Psalmist met with some Providence that seemed cross to Gods
faithfulness, Psalm 77.8. Does his Promise fail for overmore? Psalm. 89.39, 49.
Thou have made void the Covenant of thy Servant -- Lord, where are thy former
loving kindnesses which thou swearest unto David in thy truth? Yet he did
believe every word of God to be true, Psalm. 119.138, 160. Thy Testimones that
thou have commanded are righteous and very faithful -- Thy Word is true from
the beginning, and every one of thy righteous judgments endures for ever. And
there is good reason we should do thus, because we poor finite Creatures are
not able to comprehend the works of the infinite and incomprehensible God.
Diverse of his Works, as well as his Essence, are incomprehensible, Job 37.5.
God thundreth marvelously with his voice, great things does he which we cannot
comprehend.

II. It is good for you to view once and again the grounds upon which you
conclude God has taken your souls into his Covenant, because it is a business
of great moment, wherein you cannot make too sure work, and the heart of man is
full of deceit; yet withal know this, that it is not a sufficient cause for you
to conclude, That God is not your God, and has not taken you into this
Covenant, because you have had Children that died in their sins, for Isaac was
in Covenant with God, Lev. 26.42. Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
and also my Covenant with Isaac: And yet Esau, Isaacs Son, lived and died a
profane man, Heb. 12.16, 17. Lest there be any Fornicator, or profane person,
as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright, for ye know how that
afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, and
found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.

III. God fulfils his Promise in being the God of your Seed, if he take any of
your Seed into Covenant with himself, although he should not bestow his grace
upon all of them.

IV. If we should interpret that Promise made to Abraham, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy Seed, by Gal. 3.16, 29. And understand by the Seed of
Abraham, to which God promises to be a God, 1. Jesus Christ. Now to Abraham
and his Seed were the Promises made, he says not unto seeds as of many, but as
of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ. 2. Such as are Christ's being given to
him by the Father, and are in due time all drawn to him, If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to Promise. This will take off the
difficulty mentioned in the Plea about reconciling Gods Providence in casting
off your Seed, with his Promise, where he says, I will be thy God, and the God
of thy Seed; For God never casts off any of that Seed which he has given to
his Son, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Ver. 39. And this is the Fathers
will which sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day. John 17.2. As thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him.


V. If we understand that Promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed,
of Abraham's, and every godly man's natural Seed, and interpret the Promise
conditionally, provided that thy Seed walk in the steps of thy Faith, Romans
4.12. and walk before me with perfect and upright hearts, as I required thee to
do when I promised to make my Covenant between me and thee, Genesis 17.1, 2. This
also will reconcile Gods Providence with his Promise, and vindicate his
faithfulness in condemning the Children of godly Parents who live and die in
their sins. For it is their unfaithfulness in not fulfilling the Conditions of
the Promise, that was the cause of their condemnation. Had they followed their
Parents Faith, and godly Coversations, God would have been their God as well as
the God of their Parents, and have given them the same blessings he gave their
Parents. David was a man in Covenant with God, 2 Samuel 23.15. Now these be the
last words of David -- he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, yet he did
not expect his seed should be saved if they lived and died in their sins. No,
he told his Son Solomon plainly before his death, that if he expected the
blessings of the Covenant, he must seek and serve God with a perfect heart, but
if he forsook God, though he were David's Son, God would cast him off for ever,
1 Chronicles. 28.29. And thou Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches
all hearts and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek
him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off
for ever.

FINIS.

