A VINDICATION OF Their Majesty's Authority TO FILL THE SEES OF THE Deprived
Bishops;

In a LETTER out of the Country. Occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of the
Bishopric of BATH and WELLS.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

A VINDICATION OF Their MAJESTY'S Authority To fill the SEES of the Deprived
Bishops.

LICENSED,

MAY 29. 1691.
A VINDICATION OF Their Majesty's Authority TO FILL The SEES of the Deprived
Bishops.
SIR,
THE Account we have received here of Dr. B -- 's Refusal of the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells, has occasioned great Talk, and different Censures, as men are
divided in their Interests and Opinions. I know not what to think of it,
because I know not the Reasons for which he did it; but it is an unhappy
amusement at such a time as this, to which a Wise Man, who had well considered
Consequences, would not have given the occasion. I hope it may end all in
noise, without any mischievous Effects; but considering how many there are, who
are very watchful to improve every Accident to the Disturbance of the
Government, and to unsettle men's minds, I cannot forbear giving you my Thoughts
about it; tho my tender regard for the Person concerned, would have made me
silent at any other time.

I can easily apprehend several Reasons which might move Wise and Good men,
where there are no greater and more pressing Obligations to the contrary,
rather to choose an Ecclesiastical Preferment void by Death or Cession, than by
Deprivation; but our present Circumstances are such, as ought to overruled all
Niceties; the mischiefs of such a Refusal being so intolerable, as nothing can
excuse, much less justify it, but the absolute unlawfulness of succeeding in
such Preferments, while the Deprived Bishop lives; which would be very odd for
them to pretend, who have submitted to the present Government. To satisfy you
in this matter, I shall briefly consider the first sort of Reasons, and show
that they are no Reasons in our Circumstances; and then examine the Lawfulness
of the thing it self.

As for the first, It may so happen, that the person Deprived, and the person
to be Promoted, have been old and intimate Friends; and this may grate hard
upon the person to be Promoted, to succed in the Chair of one whom he loves,
whose Misfortune he pities; whom he greatly values for his other many good
Qualities: Now if to refuse such a Preferment, would keep my Friend possessed
of it, there were some sense in this; but I know no other case, wherein it is
thought a Breach of Friendship to succeed a Friend in a Preferment which he has
lost, and which the Law says is not, and shall not be his; when there is no
suspicion of foul play in supplanting him, any more than to succeed a dead
Friend: Friendship is so far from being any Reason against it, that it should
make it desirable to both; to one, That his Friend may get what he has lost; to
the other, That he may have opportunity, if there be occasion for it, to make
his Friend's Misfortune more easy, than a Stranger would do.

And if Friendship be no Objection, What should hinder any Man from taking a
Preferment, which another is legally deprived of? for I must take the Legality
of it for granted now and argue upon that Supposition. We must not take away
what is another's; but surely what is not his, we may accept from those who
have Power to give it. If one may give, the other may receive; for let the
Objection be what it will, it lies as much against the Giver as the Receiver.
They who have lost it, want it; And what then? so do a great many Men want what
is not theirs, what they never had, as well as what they have lost: And must no
Man take a Preferment in Church or State, which another wants? Must the good
Order and Government of Church and State be sacrificed to the Wants and
Misfortunes of private Men?

But there is a more material Consideration, which may influence prudent and
cautious Men, who are well preferred already. The Experience of the Revolution
in 1660 has taught them, how dangerous it may be in case such a Revolution
should happen, to change their old Preferments for new Ones, which may be
challenged again by their old Proprietors. But in our Case there is the least
to be said for this Caution, that can possibly be in any Revolution: for it is
as vain a thing to hope to secure our selves in such a Revolution, by Prudence
and Caution, as it is for a Man to fortify his House against the breaking in of
the Sea: If he take care of the Banks, and keep out the Sea, his House will
escape; but if the Sea break in upon him, he must perish with his Neighbors.
If there ever be such a Revolution as can unsettle what this has done, God be
merciful to this miserable Nation; the prudent and the cautious Sinner, and the
zealous Defenders of the present Government, will fare much alike: Nay, however
they may flatter themselves, the deprived Bishops will not long triumph over
their new Successors.

Thus in some Cases it may be a good Reason not to do a very lawful and
innocent thing, if it be greatly mistaken and misrepresented, and give a
general Offense and Scandal: But when it appears, that there is nothing but
Mistake and Passion, and private Interest, or ill Designs on one Side; and a
real Scandal, and great and public Mischief on the Other, no wise Man will
deliberate long which Side to take: None but the Enemies of the Government can
take offense at any Man's succeeding the deprived Bishops; and I think those
who have submitted to the Government, and sworn Allegiance to their present
Majesty's, ought not to be concerned at that: They have offended these Men
already, and are no better in their Opinion than Perjured Rebels; and all that
they can now gain by humouring them, is to be flattered, and to be laughed at.
They may for a while give them some good words, as our Dissenters did those
honest Men, who, as they thought, conformed against their Consciences; but they
will either secretly abhor them as Knaves; for swearing against their
Consciences, or despise them as Fools for refusing Bishoprics. And this is no
very good Reason for a wise Man to court their Favor.

But on the other hand, what an unpardonable Scandal does such a Refusal give,
both to the Enemies, and to the Friends of the Government, and to the
Government it self?

Whatever may be pretended, the World will not believe that Doctor B -- refused
a Bishopric, but either out of Fear or Conscience: The first calls in question
the Stability or Continuance of the present Government; the second the
Authority of it. Now this confirms the Enemies of the Government in their
opinion of the unlawfulness to submit to it, and encourages them to attempt its
overthrow; it weakens the hands of Friends, and makes them cautious of
embarking in a sinking Interest, and fills them with new Jealousies of the
lawfulness of it; and what just offense this must give to the Government, I
need not say.

The truth is, were I not better persuaded of the good Inclinations of their
Majesty's to the Church of England, and the general Inclination of the Nation
to support the Government, I should dread what might be the fatal Consequence
of such a miscarriage as this both to Church and State.

There are always too many, who are glad of such an opportunity to reproach the
Church, and to possess their Majesty's with an ill Opinion of the Clergy,
notwithstanding their Oaths of Allegiance; and I confess this gives too great
an Advantage to such Misrepresentations, were not the Zeal and good Affection
of wiser Men too well known, to be suspected; and then I hope a single Instance
of Folly can do no great hurt; for that is the softest Name I can give it, on
which side soever I view it.

This plainly proves, that supposing it lawful to have taken the Bishopric, no
other Consideration whatsoever can justify the refusal in our Circumstances;
and I know not how to suppose that Dr. B -- could think it unlawful.

He submitted to the Government, and took the Oath of Allegiance as early as
any Man; and never, that I heard, had the least scruple about it; and yet this
was the time to have been Scrupulous, if He would have been so; for it seems a
little of the latest, when He is become a sworn Subject to King William and
Queen Mary, to question their Authority to make a Bishop. And if the former
Bishops were Deprived, and New Bishops made, by such an Authority as he can
swear Allegiance to, I cannot understand, that it can be unlawful to accept a
Bishopric from the hands of those whom he owns, by his swearing Allegiance to
them, to have Authority to give it; for this is an Authority which belongs to
the Imperial Crown of England.

Besides this, Dr. B -- was one of those, who by Commission from the Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury, has exercised Archi-Episcopal Authority, during the
Vacancy of the Sea, by the deprivation of the A. B. as it is expressed in the
Commission; and I take this to be altogether as unlawful (if either of them
were unlawful) to seize upon the Authority of the A. B. upon the account of his
deprivation, as to take the Character, and exercise the Authority of a Bishop
in the Sea of a deprived Bishop. To receive the Consecration on of a Bishop, I
suppose, is not the thing he accounts unlawful, nor to exercise the Authority
of a Bishop; and then there is nothing he can think unlawful, but to exercise
the Authority of a Bishop in the Sea of a deprived Bishop; and then it seems to
me as unlawful for a Presbyter to do this, as for a Bishop to do it, unless a
Presbyter may do it without the Revenues of the Bishopric; but a Bishop must
not do it with them; but this can be no Ecclesiastical scruple, as so great a
Canonist must needs know; for if the Civil Power cannot dispose of such
Temporal Matters, it can do nothing.

But whatever he thought, his refusing a Bishopric upon great deliberation,
after an appearing forwardness to take it, has tempted people to think, that
he judges it unlawful; and to let him see, how inconsistent this is with his
owning the present Government, and his exercising the Archiepiscopal Authority,
I shall explain the meaning of it to him, which, I believe he never thought of.

If it be unlawful to succeed a deprived Bishop, then he is the Bishop of the
Diocese still; and then the Law that deprives him is no Law, and consequently
the King and Parliament, that made that Law, no King nor Parliament; and how
can this be reconciled with the Oath of Allegiance, unless the Doctor can swear
Allegiance to him, who is no King, and has no Authority to govern?

If the deprived Bishop be the only lawful Bishop, then the People and Clergy
of his Diocese are bound to own him and no other; then all Bishops, who own the
authority of a new Archbishop, and live in Communion with him, are
Schismatics; and the Clergy, who live in Communion with Schismatical Bishops,
are Schismatics themselves; and the whole Church of England now established by
Law is Schismatical, and Doctor B -- himself a Schismatic, if he communicate
with it. And thus we have no Church, or only a Schismatical Church, as well as
no King; and all that Dr. B -- has got by refusing a Bishopric, is to prove
himself a Schismatic, if he live in Communion; or to make a Schism, if he
separate from it.

Now will the Doctor say this? or if he dare not say it, will he dare to think
it? and yet if the deprived Bishops, though they retain their Episcopal
Character, have no Authority or Jurisdiction in the Church of England, then it
must be lawful for other Bishops to exercise that Authority, which they have
lost; and to succeed in the Government of such vacant Sees, unless such
Churches must be deprived of the Episcopal Authority, while their deprived
Bishops live.

And this brings me to consider the lawfulness of the thing it self, which is
so evident when set in a clear light, that it will admit of no dispute with Men
of Sense.

In a late Letter said to be sent to Doctor B -- and now printed on the
Backside of a scandalous Rhyming Libel upon his Sermon of Restitution, he is
threatened in Case he should accept the Bishopric, with the Fate of those
Ecclesiastical Schismatical Usurpers, Gregory and George of Cappadocia, who
unjustly invaded the Sea of Alexandria upon the deposing of Athanasius the
Orthodox Bishop there. What effect this might have on Doctor B -- I know not;
but those who have used themselves to good Sense, as well as to ancient Canons,
easily perceive a vast difference between these two Cases, as will presently
appear. But to represent this matter plainly and easily, I shall briefly State
the Case, and that I believe will satisfy understanding Men, without disputing.

1. First then in a Christian Nation and Government, the Church is incorporated
into the State, and the Sovereign Power has a Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical
Causes. To deny this, is either Popery or Fanaticism: It is plain, the
Reformation of this, Church was founded on this Principle; and it is the
constant Doctrine of our Articles, Homilies, and Canons, and they are our Rule
considered as Members of the Church of England.

2. This Supremacy, though it do not extend to the administration of Holy
Offices or Church Censures, yet it reaches the Persons and external
Jurisdiction of Bishops, and the other Clergy, and the Regulating and Ordering
the Externals of Religion: As the making and deposing Bishops, when there is
just Cause for it, belongs to the Supremacy; which Authority was exercised by
the Jewish Kings over the High Priest himself: and to resolve all this into a
mere Ecclesiastical Authority, is to set up a Pope, or a Presbytery, or a
National Synod, above the Supreme Power; and we may as well say at this day,
that the Supreme Power has no Authority to make a Bishop, because by the
ancient Canons and Practice of the Church, a Bishop ought to be freely and
canonically elected by the other Bishops of the Province, or by the Clergy and
People of the Diocese; as that it cannot depose a Bishop from the exercise of
his Episcopal Authority within their Dominions, without a Synod or Council.

3. When a Church is incorporated into the State, an offense against the State
is a just reason to depose a Bishop from the exercise of his Episcopal
Authority in such a State: Especially if such Bishop or Bishops wholly disown
the Authority and Government of the State, and refuse to submit to it: The
denial of the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Causes, was thought a good
Reason to depose Bishops; and to deny their Civil Authority, is somewhat more
than that. This is as certain and evident, as that the Church is and must be
Incorporated into the State; for if Bishops, who oppose and disown the
Authority of the State, must not be deposed from the Exercise of their
Authority in such a State, then the Church must be divided from the State, and
be independent on it; such Men may be Bishops of the Church who are no Subjects
of the State; which is a contradiction to the very Notion of a Church
incorporated with the State.

4. And therefore we must distinguish between an Ecclesiastical and Canonical
deposition of a Bishop for Heresy, or other Ecclesiastical Crimes; and a State
deprivation. The first concerns the Character, and Ecclesiastical Communion; it
is the censure of the Church, which concerns him as a Bishop; and when it is
ratified and confirmed not only by a Provincial or National Synod, but by a
General Council, such a deposed Bishop is no longer a Bishop of the Catholic
Church, and no Christian must Communicate with him as a Bishop: But a
State-deprivation does not concern the Character; such a Man may be a Bishop of
the Catholic Church still, if he do not fall under Church Censures, for
Heresy or other Crimes; but it only concerns the Exercise of his Episcopal
Authority in any Diocese within the Dominions of that State, or enjoying any
Ecclesiastical Benefice in it. And if we will not allow the Supreme Power of a
Nation to judge, who shall be Bishops in their Dominions, and enjoy the
Revenues of the Church, which are the Gift of the State; you leave the Supreme
Power no Authority or Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical Persons.

5. And this makes a great difference between succeeding an Orthodox Bishop
uncanonically deposed, and succeeding an Orthodox Bishop deprived by an Act of
State. If a Bishop be deposed by an Heretical Synod upon false suggestions, and
publicly known to be false and malicious, and be owned and acquitted by a
Council of Orthodox Bishops, it is Usurpation to invade his See, a breach of
Catholic Communion, and a Schism in the Catholic Church, which was the Case
of Athanasius and George of Cappadocia, who succeeded him: But if a Bishop
otherwise Orthodox, is guilty of such an Offense against the State, that he is
deprived of the Exercise of his Episcopal Office, neither the Faith nor the
Communion of the Church is concerned in it, but only the Authority of the
State, which obliges both the Clergy and the Laity in such cases; and when
neither the Catholic Faith nor Catholic Communion are concerned, it can be no
Ecclesiastical Offense to succeed in such a Bishopric, but a due submission
and compliance with that Authority, to which the Church in a Christian Nation
ought to be subject.

The reason why these Matters are not so acurately distinguished by some Men,
is because they were not at first distinguished when the Empire became
Christian, and the Church was at first Incorporated into the State. The Zeal of
the Christian Emperors for the Service of the Church, and that great Opinion
which at that time they deservedly had of the Piety and Prudence of the
Governors of the Church, made them leave the Government of the Church in the
same state they found it in, when the Church was a distinct Society from the
State; and in consequence of this, they reserved all Causes relating to Bishops
to the Cognizance of their own Synods, without distinguishing between Offenses
against the State, which properly belong to a Civil Cognizance, and those which
were of a pure Ecclesiastical Nature. This soon created great trouble to
Princes, and by degrees grew into the Omnipotent Power of the Bishop of Rome,
which domineered over Emperors themselves, and set the Church above the State.

The Reformation of our Church began with the Reformation of this Abuse and
Church-Usurpation, and restored our Princes to that Supremacy, which both the
Laws of God, and the reason and nature of Sovereign Power gives them over all
Persons, in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: And now an Offense
against the State, is as just a Reason for a State-Deprivation by the sole
Authority of the State, without the Authority of Synods or Councils; as Heresy
and Schism, and other Crimes are of Ecclesiastical Censures.

This Authority, as I observed before, the Jewish Kings exercised even over
their Highpriests, as Solomon deposed Abiathar for following Adonijah to make
him King, and placed Zadock in his stead; which was a pure State-Quarrel, and
done by his sole Authority, without consulting the Sanhedrim in it. Thus when
Judea was under the Government of the Romans, they changed the Highpriests
every Year; tho by the Institution of God it was for Life; and this in our
Savior's Days, who never reproved them for it, nor separated himself or his
Disciples from the Communion of such Schismatical Usurping Highpriests, who
succeeded in the places of their living Predecessors without a Canonical
Deposition. The Grand Signior at this Day makes and unmakes the Patriarch of
Constantinople at pleasure, and no Man blames the Patriarch who succeeds.

Dr. Sherlock in his Preface to the Case of Allegiance, took notice of this as
matter of Fact, without enquiring into the Reasons. His Answerer had nothing to
return to it, but by denying the legal Authority of this Government; which is
just nothing to the purpose: For if a legal Government, by their Authority and
Supremacy, can depose Bishops, and promote New ones; then all their Arguments
against succeeding in the Sees of such Bishops as are not Canonically deposed
by an Ecclesiastical Authority, are utterly lost; and besides that, if this
Answer be good, no man ought to question these new Promotions, who owns the
Authority of the present Government.

The truth is, the same Objections which are now made against the Promotion of
these new Bishops, are equally strong, and as eagerly urged at this Day by the
Papists against our first Reformers: For they were promoted to Bishoprics,
while the former Popish Bishops were living, and not Canonically deposed by any
Act of the Church, but only by the Authority of the State; and there denying
the Supremacy of the King, was one, and none of the least of those Doctrines,
which they were deposed for; and yet that only rejects the King's
Ecclesiastical Authority; and therefore as it is only an Offense against the
State, so it is a much less Offense, than utterly to renounce their Authority
in Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes, as our deprived Bishops now do.

I shall not need to enlarge on these things, which are plain and obvious at
the first Proposal: If you have any opportunity of seeing Dr. B --, desire him
to consider again of it; and though he may repent too late to do himself any
good; yet if he discover his mistake, common Justice to the Government, under
whose Protection he lives, and to Their Majesty's, to whom he has sworn
Allegiance, and who had placed such a Mark of Favor and Honor on him, had he
known how to value it, obliges him publicly to own his Mistake, which is the
only recompense he can now make. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
A New History of the Succession of the Crown of England, and more particularly
from the Time of King Egbert, till King Henry the VIII. Collected from those
Historians who wrote of their own Times.

A Discourse concerning the unreasonableness of a New Separation on account of
the Oaths; With an Answer to the History of Passive Obedience, so far as
relates to Them.

A Vindication of the said Discourse, concerning the Unreasonableness of a New
Separation, from the Exceptions made against it, in a Tract called, A Brief
Answer to the said Discourse, etc.

An Account of the Ceremony of Investing His Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh
with the Order of the Garrer at Berlin, June 6. 1690. By James Iohnston Esquire and
Gregory King Esquire His Majesty's Commissioners.

Dr. Freeman's Sermon at the Assizes at Northampton, before the Lord Chief
Justice Pollexfen, August 26. 1690.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon before he House of Commons, November 5. 1690.

Dr. Tenison's Sermon before the Queen, concerning the Wandering of the Mind in
God's Service, Feb. 15. 1690.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, of the Folly of Atheism, Feb. 22. 1690.

Dr. Fowler's Sermon before the Queen, March 22. 1690.

The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon, at the Funeral of the Lady Brook, Feb. 19. 1690.

-- His Fast Sermon before the King and Queen, April 29. 1691.

Mr. Fleetwood's Sermon at Christ Church on St. Stephen's day.

A True and Impartial History of the Most Material Occurrences in the Kingdom
of Ireland during the Two last Years. With the Present State of both Armies.
Published to prevent Mistakes, and to give the World a Prospect of the future
Success of Their Majesty's Arms in that Nation. Written by an Eyewitness to the
most Remarkable Passages.

A full and impartial Account of the secret Consults, Negotiations, Stratagems,
and Intregues of the Romish Party in Ireland, from 1660. to 1889. for the
Settlement of Popery in that Kingdom.

A Ground Plot of the strong Fort of Charlemont in Ireland, with the Town,
River, Marshes, Boggs, and Places adjacent. Drawn by Captain Hobson, price 6
pence.

An Exact Ground Plot of Londonderry, with the River, Woods, Ways and Places
adjacent, by the same Captain Hobson, price 6 d.

There is preparing, and will shortly be Published, A Prospect of Limerick,
bearing due West, exactly showing the Approaches of the English Army, with the
Batteries and Breach.

ANglia Sacra: Sive Collectio Historiarum, partim antiquitus, partem recenter
scriptarum De Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Angliae a Prima Fidei Christianae
susceptione ad Ann. 1540. Nunc primum in Lucem editum. Pars Prima de
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Ecclesiarum Cathedralium quas Monachi possederunt.
Opera Henrici Whartoni.

This Book will be ready for Publication by the Fourth of June next:
Subscriptions will be taken till the First of July. Proposals for the same may
be had of Richard Chiswell, and most other Booksellers in London and the
Country.


