A SERMON Preached before the KING, MARCH 13. 1666/7.

BY Edward Stillingfleet, B. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Printed by His Majesty's especial Command.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1667.

PROVERBS 14. 9. Fools make a mock at Sin.
WHEN God by his infinite Wisdom had contrived, and by a power and goodness, as
infinite as his Wisdom, had perfected the creation of the visible world, there
seemed to be nothing wanting to the glory of it, but a creature endued with
reason and understanding, which might comprehend the design of his wisdom,
enjoy the benefits of his goodness, and employ it self in the celebration of
his power. The Beings purely intellectual were too highly raised by their own
order and creation, to be the Lords of this inferior world: and those whose
natures could reach no higher than the objects of sense, were not capable of
discovering the glorious perfections of the great Creator: and therefore could
not be the fit Instruments of his praise and service. But a conjunction of both
these together was thought necessary to make up such a sort of beings, which
might at once command this lower world, and be the servants of him who made it.
Not as though this great fabric of the world were merely raised for man to
please his fancy in the contemplation of it, or to exercise his dominion over
the creatures designed for his use and service; but that by frequent
reflections on the author of his being, and the effects of his power and
goodness, he might be brought to the greatest love and admiration of him. So
that the most natural part of Religion lies in the grateful acknowledgments
we owe to that excellent and supreme Being, who has showed so particular a
kindness to man in the creation and Government of the world. Which was so great
and unexpressible, that some have thought, it was not so much pride and
affectation of a greater height, as envy at the felicity and power of mankind,
which was the occasion of the fall of the Apostate Spirits. But whether or no
the state of man were occasion enough for the envy of the Spirits above; we are
sure the kindness of Heaven was so great in it, as could not but lay an
indispensable obligation on all mankind to perpetual gratitude and obedience.
For it is as easy to suppose, that affronts and injuries are the most suitable
returns for the most obliging favors; that the first duty of a Child should be
to destroy his Parents; that to be thankful for kindnesses received, were to
commit the unpardonable sin; as that man should receive his being and all the
blessings which attend it from God, and not be bound to the most universal
obedience to him.

And as the reflection on the author of his being, leads him to the
acknowledgement of his duty toward God, so the consideration of the design of
it, will more easily acquaint him with the nature of that duty which is
expected from him. Had man been designed only to act a short part here in the
world, all that had been required of him, had been only to express his
thankfulness to God for his being, and the comforts of it; the using all means
for the due preservation of himself; the doing nothing beneath the dignity of
humane nature, nothing injurious to those who were of the same nature with
himself; but since he is designed for greater and nobler ends, and his present
state, is but a state of trial, in order to future happiness and misery; the
reason of good and evil is not to be taken merely from his present, but from
the respect, which things have to that eternal state he is designed for. From
whence it follows, that the differences of good and evil are rooted in the
nature of our beings, and are the necessary consequents of our relation to God,
and each other, and our expectations of a future life. And therefore according
to these measures, the estimation of men in the world has been while they did
preserve any veneration for God or themselves. Wisdom and folly was not
measured so much by the subtilty and curiosity of men's speculations, by the
finess of their thoughts, or the depth of their designs, as by their endeavors
to uphold the dignity of mankind; by their piety and devotion toward God; by
their sobriety and due Government of their actions; by the equality and
justice, the charity and kindness of their dealings to one another. Wisdom was
but another name for goodness, and folly for sin: then it was a man's glory to
be religious; and to be profane and vicious, was to be base and mean: then
there were no Gods worshipped because they were bad, nor any men disgraced
because they were good. Then there were no Temples erected to the meanest
passions of humane nature, nor men became Idolaters to their own infirmities.
Then to be betrayed into sin, was accounted weakness; to contrive it, dishonor
and baseness; to justify and defend it, infamy and reproach; to make a mock at
it, a mark of the highest folly and incorrigibleness. So the Wise Man in the
words of the Text assures us, that they are Fools, and those of the highest
rank and degree of folly, who make a mock at sin.

It is well for us in the Age we live in, that we have the judgment of former
ages to appeal to, and of those persons in them whose reputation for wisdom is
yet unquestionable. For otherwise we might be born down by that spightfull
enemy to all virtue and goodness, the impudence of such, who it is hard to say
whether they show it more in committing sin, or in defending it. Men whose
manners are so bad, that scarce any thing can be imagined worse, unless it be
the wit they use to excuse them with. Such who take the measure of man's
perfections downwards, and the nearer they approach to beasts, the more they
think themselves to act like men. No wonder then, if among such as these the
differences of good and evil be laughed at, and no sin be thought so
unpardonable, as the thinking that there is any at all. Nay the utmost they
will allow in the description of Sin, is, that it is a thing that some live by
declaiming against, and others cannot live without the practice of.

But is the Chair of Scorners at last proved the only chair of Infallibility?
Must those be the standard of mankind, who seem to have little left of humane
nature, but laughter and the shape of men? Do they think that we are all become
such fools to take scoffs for arguments, and raillery for demonstrations? He
knows nothing at all of goodness, that knows not that it is much more easy to
laugh at it, than to practice it; and it were worth the while to make a mock at
sin, if the doing so would make nothing of it. But the nature of things does
not vary with the humors of men; sin becomes not at all the less dangerous
because men have so little Wit to think it so; nor Religion the less excellent
and advantageous to the world, because the greatest enemies of that are so much
to themselves too, that they have learnt to despise it. But although that
scorns to be defended by such weapons whereby her enemies assault her, (nothing
more unbecoming the Majesty of Religion, than to make it self cheap, by making
others laugh) yet if they can but obtain so much of themselves to attend with
patience to what is serious, there may be yet a possibility of persuading them,
that no fools are so great as those who laugh themselves into misery, and none
so certainly do so, as those who make a mock at sin.

But if our authority be too mean and contemptible to be relied on, in a matter
wherein they think us so much concerned (and so I hope we are to prevent the
ruin of men's souls) we dare with confidence appeal to the general sense of
mankind in the matter of our present debate. Let them name but any one person
in all the monuments of former ages, to whom but the bare suspicion of Vice was
not a diminution to an esteem that might otherwise have been great in the
world. And if the bare suspicion would do so much among even the more rude and
barbarous Nations, what would open and professed wickedness do among the more
knowing and civil? Humane nature retains an abhorrency of sin, so far that it
is impossible for men to have the same esteem of those who are given over to
all manner of wickedness, though otherwise of great sharpness of Wit, and of
such whose natural abilities may not exceed the other, but yet do govern their
actions according to the strict rules of Religion and Virtue. And the general
sense of mankind cannot be by any thing better known, than by an universal
consent of men, as to the ways whereby they express their value and esteem of
others. What they all agree on as the best character of a person worthy to be
loved and honored, we may well think is the most agreeable to humane nature;
and what is universally thought a disparagement to the highest accomplishments,
ought to be looked on as the disgrace and imperfection of it. Did ever any yet,
though never so wicked and profane themselves, seriously commend another person
for his rudeness and debaucheries? Was any man's lust or intemperance ever
reckoned among the Titles of his honor? Who ever yet raised Trophies to his
vices, or thought to perpetuate his memory by the glory of them? Where was it
ever known, that sobriety and temperance, justice and charity were thought the
marks of reproach and infamy? Who ever suffered in their reputation by being
thought to be really good? Nay, it is so far from it, that the most wicked
persons do inwardly esteem them whether they will or no. By which we see, that
even in this lapsed and degenerate condition of mankind, it is only goodness
which gains true honor and esteem, and nothing does so effectually blast a
growing reputation, as wickedness and vice.

But if it be thus with the generality of men, who were never yet thought to
have too much partiality toward goodness, we may much more easily find it
among those, who have had a better ground for the reputation of their wisdom,
than the mere vogue of the people. He who was pronounced by the Heathen Oracle,
to be the wisest among the Greeks, was the person who brought down Philosophy
from the obscure and uncertain speculations of nature, and in all his
discourses recommended virtue as the truest wisdom. And he among the Jews, 1
Kings 4. 29, 30, 31.
whose soul was as large as the sand on the Sea shore, whose wisdom outwent
that of all the persons of his own or future ages, writes a Book on purpose to
persuade men, that there is no real wisdom, but to fear God and keep his
commandments: that sin is the greatest folly, and the meaner apprehensions men
have of it, the more they are infatuated by the temptations to it. But as there
are degrees of sinning, so there are of folly in it. Some sin with a blushing
countenance, and a trembling conscience; they sin, but yet they are afraid to
sin: they sin, but in the act of it they condemn themselves for what they do;
they sin, but with confusion in their faces, with horror in their minds, and
an earthquake in their consciences: though the condition of such persons be
dangerous, and their unquietness shows the greatness of their folly, yet
because these twitches of conscience argue there are some quick touches left of
the sense of good and evil, their case is not desperate, nor their condition
incurable: But there are others who despise these as the reproach of the School
of Wickedness, because they are not yet attained to those heights of impiety
which they glory in: such who have subdued their consciences much easier than
others do their sins; who have almost worn out all the impressions of the work
of the Law written in their hearts; who not only make a practice, but a boast
of sin, and defend it with as much greediness as they commit it; these are the
men, whose folly is manifest to all men but themselves; and surely since these
are the men, whom Solomon in the words of the Text describes,

(1.) By their character, as Fools, and,

(2.) By the instance of their folly, in making a mock at sin; We may have not
only the liberty to use, but to prove, that name of reproach to be due unto
them; and (2.) To show the reasonableness of fastening it upon them, because
they make a mock at sin.

But before I come more closely to pursue that, it will be necessary to
consider another sense of these words caused by the ambiguity of the Hebrew
Verb, which sometimes signifies to deride and scorn, sometimes to plead for,
and excuse a thing with all the arts of Rhetoric (thence the word for
Rhetoric is derived from the Verb here used) according to which sense, it
notes all the plausible pretenses and subtle extenuations which wicked men use
in defense of their evil actions. For as if men intended to make some
recompense for the folly they betray in the acts of sin by the wit they employ
in the pleading for them, there is nothing they show more industry and care in,
than in endeavoring to baffle their own consciences, and please themselves in
their folly, till death and eternal flames awaken them. That we may not
therefore seem to beg all wicked men for Fools, till we have heard what they
have to say for themselves, we shall first examine the reasonableness of their
fairest Plea's for their evil actions, before we make good the particular
impeachment of folly against them. There are three ways especially whereby
they seek to justify themselves, by laying the blame of all their evil
actions, either upon the fatal necessity of all events, the unavoidable
frailty of humane nature, or the impossibility of keeping the Laws of Heaven.
But that none of these will serve to excuse them from the just imputation of
folly, is our present business to discover.

1. The fatal necessity of all humane actions. Those who upon any other terms
are unwilling enough to own either God or Providence, yet if they can but make
these serve their turn to justify their sins by, their quarrel against them
then cease, as being much more willing that God should bear the blame of
their sins, than themselves. But yet the very fears of a Deity suggest so many
dreadful thoughts of his Majesty, Justice, and Power, that they are very well
contented to have him wholly left out; and then to suppose Man to be a mere
Engine, that is necessarily moved by such a train and series of causes, that
there is no action how bad soever that is done by him, which it was any more
possible for him not to have done, than for the fire not to burn when it
pleases. If this be true, farewell all the differences of good and evil in men's
actions; farewell all expectations of future rewards and punishments; Religion
becomes but a mere name, and righteousness but an art to live by. But it is
with this, as it is with the other arguments they use against Religion; there
is something within, which checks and controlls them in what they say: and that
inward remorse of conscience, which such men sometimes feel in their evil
actions (when conscience is forced to recoil by the foulness of them) does
effectually confute their own hypothesis; and makes them not believe those
actions to be necessary, for which they suffer so much in themselves because
they knew they did them freely. Or is it as fatal for man to believe himself
free when he is not so, as it is for him to act when his choice is determined?
but what series of causes is there that does so necessarily impose upon the
common sense of all mankind? It seems very strange, that man should have so
little sense of his own interest to be still necessitated to the worst of
actions, and yet torment himself with the thoughts that he did them freely. Or
is it only the freedom of action, and not of choice, that men have an
experience of within themselves? But surely, however men may subtly dispute
of the difference between these two, no man would ever believe himself to be
free in what he does, unless he first thought himself to be so, in what he
determines? And if we suppose man to have as great a freedom of choice in all
his evil actions (which is the liberty we are now speaking of) as any persons
assert or contend for, we cannot suppose that he should have a greater
experience of it, than now he has. So that either it is impossible for man to
know when his choice is free; or if it may be known, the constant experience of
all evil men in the world will testify, that it is so now. Is it possible for
the most intemperate person to believe, when the most pleasing temptations to
lust or gluttony are presented to him, that no considerations whatever could
restrain his appetite, or keep him from the satisfaction of his brutish
inclinations? Will not the sudden, though groundless, apprehension of poison in
the Cup, make the Drunkards heart to ache, and hand to tremble, and to let fall
the supposed fatal mixture in the midst of all his jollity and excess? How
often have persons who have designed the greatest mischief to the lives and
fortunes of others, when all opportunities have fallen out beyond their
expectation for accomplishing their ends, through some sudden thoughts which
have surprised them, almost in the very act, been diverted from their intended
purposes? Did ever any yet imagine that the charms of beauty and allurements of
lust were so irresistible, that if men knew before hand they should surely dye
in the embraces of an adulterous bed, they could not yet withstand the
temptations to it? If then some considerations, which are quite of another
nature from all the objects which are presented to him, may quite hinder the
force and efficacy of them upon the mind of man (as we see in Ioseph's
resisting the importunate Caresses of his Mistress) what reason can there be to
imagine that man is a mere machine moved only as outward objects determine him?
And if the considerations of present fear and danger may divert men from the
practice of evil actions, shall not the far more weighty considerations of
eternity have, at least an equal, if not a far greater power and efficacy upon
men's minds, to keep them from everlasting misery? Is an immortal soul and the
eternal happiness of it so mean a thing in our esteem and value, that we will
not deny our selves those sensual pleasures for the sake of that, which we
would renounce for some present danger? Are the flames of another world such
painted fires, that they deserve only to be laughed at, and not seriously
considered by us? Fond man! art thou only free to ruin and destroy thy self? a
strange fatality indeed, when nothing but what is mean and trivial shall
determine thy choice! when matters of the highest moment are therefore less
regarded, because they are such. Have thou no other plea for thy self, but that
thy sins were fatal? thou have no reason then to believe but that thy misery
shall be so too. But if thou ownest a God and Providence, assure thy self that
justice and righteousness are not mere Titles of his Honor, but the real
properties of his nature. And he who has appointed the rewards and punishments
of the great day, will then call the sinner to account, not only for all his
other sins, but for offering to lay the imputation of them upon himself. For if
the greatest abhorrency of men's evil ways, the rigor of his Laws, the
severity of his judgments, the exactness of his justice, the greatest care
used to reclaim men from their sins, and the highest assurance, that he is not
the cause of their ruin, may be any vindication of the holiness of God now,
and his justice in the life to come; we have the greatest reason to lay the
blame of all our evil actions upon our selves, as to attribute the glory of all
our good unto himself alone.

2. The frailty of humane nature: those who find themselves to be free enough
to do their souls mischief, and yet continue still in the doing of it, find
nothing more ready to plead for themselves, than the unhappiness of man's
composition, and the degenerate state of the world. If God had designed (they
are ready to say) that man should lead a life free from sin, why did he confine
the soul of man to a body so apt to taint and pollute it? But who art thou O
man, that thus find fault with thy Maker? Was not his kindness the greater,
in not only giving thee a soul capable of enjoying himself, but such an
habitation for it here, which by the curiosity of its contrivance, the number
and usefulness of its parts, might be a perpetual and domestic testimony of
the wisdom of its Maker? Was not such a conjunction of soul and body necessary
for the exercise of that dominion which God designed man for, over the
creatures endued only with sense and motion? And if we suppose this life to be
a state of trial in order to a better, (as in all reason we ought to do) what
can be imagined more proper to such a state, than to have the soul constantly
employed in the government of those sensual inclinations which arise from the
body? In the doing of which, the proper exercise of that virtue consists, which
is made the condition of future happiness. Had it not been for such a
composition, the difference could never have been seen between good and bad
men; i. e. between those who maintain the Empire of reason, assisted by the
motives of Religion, over all the inferior faculties, and such who dethrone
their souls and make them slaves to every lust that will command them. And if
men willingly subject themselves to that which they were born to rule, they
have none to blame but themselves for it. Neither is it any excuse at all, that
this, through the degeneracy of mankind, is grown the common custom of the
world; unless that be in it self so great a Tyrant, that there is no resisting
the power of it. If God had commanded us to comply with all the customs of the
world, and at the same time to be sober, righteous, and good, we must have
lived in another age than we live in, to have excused these two commands from a
palpable contradiction. But instead of this, he has forewarned us of the
danger of being led aside by the soft, and easy compliances of the world; and
if we are sensible of our own infirmities, (as we have all reason to be) he
has offered us the assistance of his Grace and of that Spirit of his, 1 John
4. 4.
which is greater than the Spirit that is in the world. He has promised us
those weapons whereby we may withstand the torrent of wickedness in the world,
with far greater success than the old Gauls were wont to do the inundations of
their country, whose custom was to be drowned with their arms in their hands.
But it will be the greater folly in us to be so, because we have not only
sufficient means of resistance, but we understand the danger before hand. If we
once forsake the strict rules of religion and goodness, and are ready to yield
our selves to whatever has got retainers enough to set up for a custom, we
may know where we begin, but we cannot where we shall make an end. For every
fresh assault makes the breach wider, at which more enemies may come in still;
so that when we find our selves under their power, we are contented for our own
ease to call them Friends. Which is the unhappy consequence of too easy
yielding at first, till at last the greatest slavery to sin be accounted but
good humor, and a gentle compliance with the fashions of the world. So that
when men are persuaded, either through fear, or too great easiness to disuse
that strict eye which they had before to their actions, it often times falls out
with them, as it did with the Soldier in the Roman History, who blinded his
eye so long in the time of the Civil Wars, that when he would have used it
again, he could not. And when custom has by degrees taken away the sense of
sin from their consciences, they grow as hard as Herodotus tells us the heads
of the old Egyptians were by the heat of the Sun, that nothing would ever enter
them. If men will with Nebuchadnezzar herd with the beasts of the field, no
wonder if their reason departs from them, and by degrees they grow as savage as
the company they keep. So powerful a thing is custom to debauch mankind, and
so easily do the greatest vices by degrees obtain admission into the souls of
men, under pretense of being retainers to the common infirmities of humane
nature. Which is a phrase, through the power of self-flattery, and men's
ignorance in the nature of moral actions, made to be of so large and
comprehensive a sense that the most wilful violations of the Laws of Heaven,
and such which the Scripture tells us do exclude from the Kingdom of it, do
find (rather than make) friends enough to shelter themselves under the
protection of them. But such a protection it is, which is neither allowed in
the Court of Heaven, nor will ever secure the souls of men without a hearty and
sincere repentance, from the arrest of divine justice; which when it comes to
call the world to an account of their actions will make no defalcations at all
for the power of custom, or common practice of the world.

3. The impossibility of the command, or rather of obedience to it. When
neither of the former plea's will effect their design, but notwithstanding the
pretended necessity of humane actions, and the more than pretended common
practice of the world, their consciences still fly in their faces and rebuke
them sharply for their sins, then in a mighty rage and fury they charge God
himself with Tyranny in laying impossible Laws upon the sons of men. But if we
either consider the nature of the command, or the promises which accompany it,
or the large experience of the world to the contrary, we shall easily discover
that this pretense is altogether as unreasonable as either of the foregoing.
For what is it that God requires of men as the condition of their future
happiness which in its own nature is judged impossible? Is it for men to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this world? Tit. 2. 12*
for that was the end of Christian Religion to persuade men to do so: but who
thinks it impossible to avoid the occasions of intemperance, not to defraud, or
injure his neighbors, or to pay that reverence and sincere devotion to God
which we owe unto him? Is it to do as we would be done by? yet that has been
judged by strangers to the Christian Religion a most exact measure of humane
conversation; Is it to maintain an universal kindness and good will to men?
that indeed is the great excellency of our Religion, that it so strictly
requires it; but if this be impossible, farewell all good nature in the world;
and I suppose few will own this charge, lest theirs be suspected. Is it to be
patient under suffering, moderate in our desires, circumspect in our actions,
contented in all conditions? yet these are things which those have pretended to
who never owned Christianity, and therefore surely they never thought them
impossible. Is it to be charitable to the poor, compassionate to those in
misery? is it to be frequent in prayer, to love God above all things, to
forgive our enemies as we hope God will forgive us, to believe the Gospel, and
be ready to suffer for the sake of Christ? There are very few among us but will
say they do all these things already, and therefore surely they do not think
them impossible. The like answer I might give to all the other precepts of the
Gospel till we come to the denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and as to
these too, if we charge men with them, they either deny their committing them,
and then say they have kept the command; or if they confess it, they promise
amendment for the furture; but in neither respect can they be said to think the
command impossible. Thus we see their own mouths will condemn them when they
charge God with laying impossible Laws on mankind. But then if we enquire
further into the judgments of those who it may be never concerned themselves
so much about the precepts of Christian Religion, as to try whether they had
any power to observe them or not; nay, if we yield them more (than, it may be,
they are willing to enquire after, though they ought to do it) viz. that
without the assistance of divine grace, they can never do it: yet such is the
unlimited nature of divine goodness and the exceeding riches of Gods Grace,
that (knowing the weakness and degeneracy of humane nature when he gave these
commands to men) he makes a large and free offer of assistance to all those who
are so sensible of their own infirmity as to beg it of him. And can men then
say the command is impossible when he has promised an assistance suitable to
the nature of the duty and the infirmities of men? If it be acknowledged that
some of the duties of Christianity are very difficult to us now; let us
consider by what means he has sweetened the performance of them. Will not the
proposal of so excellent a reward, make us swallow some more than ordinary
hardships that we might enjoy it? Has he not made use of the most obliging
motives to persuade us to the practice of what he requires, by the infinite
discovery of his own love, the death of his Son, and the promise of his Spirit?
And what then is wanting, but only setting our selves to the serious obedience
of them, to make his commands not only not impossible, but easy to us? But our
grand fault is, we make impossibilities our selves, where we find none, and
then we complain of them: we are first resolved not to practice the commands,
and then nothing more easy than to find fault with them: we first pass
sentence, and then examine evidences; first condemn, and then enquire into the
merits of the cause. Yet surely none of these things can be accounted
impossible, which have been done by all those who have been sincere and hearty
Christians; and God forbid, we should think all guilty of hypocrisy, who have
professed the Christian Religion from the beginning of it to this day. Nay more
than so, they have not only done them, but professed to have that joy and
satisfaction of mind in the doing of them, which they would not exchange for
all the pleasures and delights of the world. These were the men, who not only
were patient, but rejoiced in sufferings; who accounted it their honor and
glory to endure any thing for the sake of so excellent a religion; who were so
assured of a future happiness by it, that they valued Martyrdoms above Crowns
and Scepters. But God be thanked, we may hope to come to Heaven on easier terms
than these, or else many others might nevercome thither, besides those who
think to make this a pretense for their sin, that now when with encouragement
and honor we may practice our Religion, the commands of it are thought
impossible by them. Thus we have made good the general charge here employed
against wicked men, in that they are called Fools, by examining the most
plausible pretenses they bring for themselves.

I now come to the particular impeachment of their folly, because they make a
mock at sin. And that I shall prove especially by two things: 1. Because this
argues the highest degree of wickedness. 2. Because it betrays the greatest
weakness of judgment and want of consideration.

1. Because it argues the highest degree of wickedness. If to sin be folly, to
make a mock at it is little short of madness. It is such a height of impiety,
that few but those who are of very profligate conscienciences can attain to,
without a long custom in sinning. For conscience is at first modest, and starts
and boggles at the appearance of a great wickedness, till it be used to it and
grown familiar with it. It is no such easy matter for a man to get the mastery
of his conscience; a great deal of force and violence must be used to ones self
before he does it. The natural impressions of good and evil, the fears of a
Deity, and the apprehensions of a future state are such curbs and checks in a
sinners way, that he must first sin himself beyond all feeling of these, before
he can attain to the seat of the scorners. And we may justly wonder how any
should ever come thither, when they must break through all that is ingenuous
and modest, all that is virtuous and good, all that is tender and apprehensive
in humane nature, before they can arrive at it. They must first deny a God, and
despise an immortal soul, they must conquer their own reason, and cancel the
Law written in their hearts, they must hate all that is serious, and yet
soberly believe themselves to be no better than the beasts that perish, before
men can come to make a scoff at religion, and a mock at sin.

And who now could ever imagine that in a Nation professing Christianity, among
a people whose genius enclines them to civility and religion, yea among those
who have the greatest advantages of behavior and education, and who are to
give the Laws of civility to the rest of the Nation, there should any be found
who should deride religion, make sport with their own profaneness, and make so
light of nothing, as being damned? I come not here to accuse any, and least of
all those who show so much regard of religion as to be present in the places
devoted to sacred purposes; but if there be any such here, whose consciences
accuse themselves, for any degrees of so great impiety; I beseech them by all
that is dear and precious to them, by all that is sacred and serious, by the
vows of their Baptism, and their participation of the holy Eucharist, by all
the kindness of Heaven which they either enjoy or hope for, by the death and
sufferings of the Son of God, that they would now consider how great folly and
wickedness they betray in it, and what the dreadful consequence of it will be,
if they do not timely repent of it. If it were a doubt (as I hope it is not
among any here) whether the matters of religion be true or no, they are surely
things which ought to be seriously thought and spoken of. It is certainly no
jesting matter to affront a God of infinite Majesty and power, (and he judges
every wilful sinner to do so) nor can any one in his wits think it a thing not
to be regarded, whether he be eternally happy or miserable. Methinks then among
persons of civility and honor, above all others, Religion might at least be
treated with the respect and reverence due to the concernments of it; that it
be not made the sport of entertainments, nor the common subject of Plays and
Comedies: For is there nothing to trifle with, but God and his service? Is wit
grown so schismatical and sacrilegious, that it can please it self with nothing
but holy ground? Are profaness and wit grown such inseparable companions, that
none shall be allowed to pretend to the one, but such as dare be highly guilty
of the other? Far be it from those who have but the name of Christians, either
to do these things themselves, or to be pleased with them that do them:
especially in such times as ours of late have been, when God has used so many
ways to make us serious if any thing would ever do it. If men had only
slighted God and religion, and made a mock at sin, when they had grown wanton
through the abundance of peace and plenty, and saw no severities of Gods
justice used upon such who did it; yet the fault had been so great, as might
have done enough to have interrupted their peace and destroyed that plenty,
which made them out of the greatness of their pride and wantonness to kick
against Heaven: but to do it in despite of all Gods judgments, to laugh in
his face when his rod is upon our backs, when neither Pestilence nor Fire can
make us more afraid of him, exceedingly aggravates the impiety, and makes it
more unpardonable. When like the old Germans we dance among naked swords, when
men shall defy and reproach Heaven in the midst of a Cities ruins, and over
the Graves of those whom the arrows of the Almighty have heaped together, what
can be thought of such, but that nothing will make them serious, but eternal
misery? And are they so sure there is no such thing to be feared, that they
never think of it, but when by their execrable oaths they call upon God to damn
them, for fear he should not do it time enough for them? Thus while men abuse
his patience, and provoke his justice, while they trample upon his kindness,
and slight his severities, while they despise his Laws and mock at the breaches
of them, what can be added more to their impiety? or what can be expected by
such who are guilty of it, but that God should quickly discover their mighty
folly by letting them see how much they have deceived themselves, Gal. 6. 7.
since God will not be mocked, but because of these things the wrath of God
will most certainly come upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6.
Which leads to the second thing wherein this folly is seen.

2. Which is in the weakness of judgment and want of consideration, which this
betrays in men. Folly is the great unsteadiness of the mind in the thoughts of
what is good and fitting to be done. It were happy for many in the world, if
none should suffer in their reputation for want of wisdom, but such whom nature
or some violent distemper have wholly deprived of the use of their reason and
understandings: But wisdom does not lie in the rambling imaginations of men's
minds (for fools may think of the same things which wise men practice) but in a
due consideration and choice of things which are most agreeable to the end they
design, supposing the end in the first place to be worthy a wise man's choice;
for I cannot yet see why the end may not be chosen as-well as the means, when
there are many stand in competition for our choice, and men first deliberate,
and then determine which is the fittest to be pursued. But when the actions of
men discover, that either they understand or regard not the most excellent end
of their beings, or do those things which directly cross and thwart their own
designs, or else pursue those which are mean and ignoble in themselves, we need
not any further evidence of their folly, than these things discover.

Now that those who make a mock at sin are guilty of all these, will appear; if
we consider whom they provoke by doing so, whom they most injury, and upon what
reasonable considerations they are moved to what they do.

1. Whom they provoke by their making a mock at sin; Supposing that there is a
Governor of the world, who has established Laws for us to be guided by, we
may easily understand, whose honor and authority is reflected on, when the
violations of his Laws are made nothing of. For surely if they had a just
esteem of his power and Sovereignty, they never durst make so bold with him, as
all those do who not only commit sin themselves, but laugh at the scrupulosity
of those who dare not When Dionysius changed Apollos Cloak, and took off the
Golden Beard of Aesculapius, with those solemn jeers of the unsuitableness of
the one to the Son of a beardless Father; and the much greater convenience of a
cheaper garment to the other; it was a sign he stood not much in awe of the
severity of their looks, nor had any dread at all of the greatness of their
power. But although there be so infinite a disproportion between the artificial
Deities of the Heathens, and the Majesty of him who made and governs the whole
world; yet as little reverence to his power and authority is showed by all such
who dare affront him with such a mighty confidence, and bid the greatest
defiance to his Laws by scoffing at them. What is there, the Sovereigns and
Princes of the earth do more justly resent, and express the highest indignation
against, than to have their Laws despised, their persons affronted, and their
authority contemned? And can we then imagine, that a God of infinite power and
Majesty, the honor of whose Laws is as dear to him as his own is, should sit
still unconcerned, when so many indignities are continually offered them, and
never take any notice at all of them? It is true, his patience is not to be
measured by our fretfull and peevish natures, (and it is happy for us all that
it is not) he knows the sinner can never escape his power, and therefore bears
the longer with him: but yet his lenity is always joined with his wisdom and
justice, and the time is coming when patience it self shall be no more. Is it
not then the highest madness and folly to provoke one whose power is infinitely
greater than our own is, and from the severity of whose wrath we cannot secure
our selves one minute of an hour? How know thou, O vain man, but that in the
midst of all thy mirth and jollity, while thou art boasting of thy sins, and
think thou can never fill up fast enough the measure of thy iniquities, a
sudden fit of an Apoplexy, or the breaking of an Aposteme, or any of the
innumerable instruments of death, may dispatch thee hence, and consign thee
into the hands of divine justice? And wherewithal then will thou be able to
dispute with God? Will thou then charge his Providence with folly, and his Laws
with unreasonableness? when his greatness shall affright thee, his Majesty
astonish thee* his power disarm thee, and his justice proceed against thee:
when notwithstanding all thy bravado's here, they own conscience shall be not
only thy accuser and witness, but they judge and executioner too: when it shall
revenge it self upon thee for all the rapes and violences thou have committed
upon it here: when horror and confusion shall be thy portion, and the
unspeakable anguish of a racked and tormented mind shall too late convince thee
of thy folly in making a mock at that which stings with an everlasting venom.
Art thou then resolved to put all these things to the adventure, and live as
securely as if the terrors of the Almighty were but the dreams of men awake, or
the fancies of weak and distempered brains? But I had rather believe that in
the heat and fury of thy lusts thou would seem to others to think so, than
thou either do or can persuade thy self to such unreasonable folly. Is it
not then far better to consult the tranquillity of thy mind here, and the
eternal happiness of it hereafter, by a serious repentance and speedy amendment
of thy life, than to expose thy self for the sake of thy sensual pleasures to
the fury of that God whose justice is infinite, and power irresistible? Shall
not the apprehension of his excellency make thee now afraid of him? Never then
make any mock at sin more, unless thou art able to contend with the Almighty,
or to dwell with everlasting burnings.

2. The folly of it is seen in considering whom the injury redounds to by men's
making themselves so pleasant with their sins. Do they think by their rude
attempts to dethrone the Majesty of Heaven, or by standing at the greatest
defiance, to make him willing to come to terms of composition with them? Do
they hope to slip beyond the bounds of his power, by falling into nothing when
they dye, or to sue out prohibitions in the Court of Heaven, to hinder the
effects of Justice there? Do they design to out-wit infinite Wisdom, or to find
such flaws in Gods government of the world, that he shall be contented to let
them go unpunished? All which imaginations are alike vain and foolish, and only
show how easily wickedness baffles the reason of mankind, and makes them rather
hope or wish for the most impossible things, than believe they shall ever be
punished for their impieties. If the Apostate Spirits can by reason of their
present restraint and expectation of future punishments be as pleasant in
beholding the follies of men as they are malicious to suggest them, it may be
one of the greatest diversions of their misery, to see how active and witty men
are in contriving their own ruin. To see with what greediness they catch at
every bait that is offered them, and when they are swallowing the most deadly
poison, what arts they use to persuade themselves that it is a healthful
potion. No doubt, nothing can more gratify them than to see men sport
themselves into their own destruction, and go down so pleasantly to Hell: when
eternal flames become the first awakeners, and then men begin to be wise, when
it is too late to be so: when nothing but insupportable torments can convince
them that God was in earnest with them, that he would not always bear the
affronts of evil men, and that those who derided the miseries of another life,
shall have leisure enough to repent their folly, when their repentance shall
only increase their sorrow without hopes of pardon by it.

3. But if there were any present felicity, or any considerable advantage to be
gained by this mocking at sin, and undervaluing Religion, there would seem to
be some kind of pretense, though nothing of true reason for it. Yet that which
heightens this folly to the highest degree in the last place is, that there can
be no imaginable consideration thought on which might look like a plausible
temptation to it. The covetous man, when he has defrauded his neighbor, and
used all kinds of arts to compass an estate, has the fullness of his baggs to
answer for him; and whatever they may do in another world, he is sure they will
do much in this. The voluptuous man, has the strong propensities of his
nature, the force of temptation which lies in the charms of beauty, to excuse
his unlawful pleasures by. The ambitious man, has the greatness of his mind,
the advantage of authority, the examples of those who have been great before
him, and the envy of those who condemn him, to plead for the heights he aims
at. But what is it which the person who despises Religion, and laughs at every
thing that is serious, proposes to himself as the reason of what he does? But
alas! this were to suppose him to be much more serious than he is, if he did
propound any thing to himself as the ground of his actions. But it may be a
great kindness to others, though none to himself; I cannot imagine any, unless
it may be, to make them thankful they are not arrived to that height of folly;
or out of perfect good nature, least they should take him to be wiser than he
is. The Psalmists fool despises him as much as he does Religion: for he only
says it in his heart there is no God; but this though he dares not think there
is none, yet shows him not near so much outward respect and reverence as the
other does. Every the Atheist himself thinks him a Fool, and the greatest of
all other, who believes a God, and yet affronts him and trifles with him. And
although the Atheist's Folly be unaccountable, in resisting the clearest
evidence of reason, yet so far he is to be commended for what he says, that if
there be such a thing as Religion men ought to be serious in it. So that of all
hands the scoffer at Religion is looked on as one forsaken of that little
reason, which might serve to uphold a slender reputation of being above the
beasts that perish: nay, therein his condition is worse than theirs, that as
they understand not Religion, they shall never be punished for despising it:
which such a person can never secure himself from, considering the power, the
justice, the severity of that God, whom he has so highly provoked. God grant,
that the apprehension of this danger may make us so serious in the profession
and practice of our Religion, that we may not by slighting that, and mocking at
sin, provoke him to laugh at our calamities, and mock when our fear comes; but
that by beholding the sincerity of our repentance, and the heartiness of our
devotion to him, he may turn his anger away from us, and rejoice over us to do
us good.

FINIS.

