THE BEST INTEREST; Or a TREATISE Of a SAVING Interest in CHRIST.

Wherein is Showed How a Man may know that he has a saving Interest in Christ.
How they, that have not yet an Interest in Christ may get a saving Interest in
him. How they, that have an Interest in Christ, may improve it for their
Consolation, under Personal and National Calamities, and Persecutions of the
Church. How such as have an Interest in Christ, may find Comfort in Christ,
under all Spiritual Troubles.


With several other Practical Cases.

By OWEN STOCKTON, Late Minister of Jesus Christ at Colchester in Essex.

COR. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own
selves, Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye
be reprobates.

London, Printed for T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel, 1682.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the worthily Honored John Clarke Of Bury in
Suffolk, Esquire.
SIR,
PRopriety in Enjoyments adds a great Excellency to them, unto us; and the more
the better they be in themselves. Jesus Christ is the best of Enjoyments; he is
the gift of God; such, as he cannot vouchsafe a greater; an unspeakable gift,
and therefore Interest in him is the best Interest. To obtain that, to have God
and Christ ours, is to have the great, the principal blessing of the New
Covenant ours: grounded assurance thereof, is not unfitly called by some, a
Heaven upon Earth, and to promote this having two heavens, is the design of
this ensuing Treatise; of which, that Laborious, and faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ, Mr. Owen Stockton, is the Author. The first part being directed to your
self, entitled [Consolation in Life and Death] I should offer an injury and
not testify my due Respects, if I should not present this second and principal
part also to you, Entitled [The Best Interest.] I here present it, and doubt
not but both will find favorable Acceptance with you.

If the Lord has indulged clear Evidences of his Love, and of your own
Interest in Christ, yet you will be glad to have this Confirmation thereof; and
that others, even every Believer may have such a knowledge of it, as to be able
groundedly to say, My Beloved is mine and I am his.

You know, how disconsolate many real Christians are, and how mournfully they
walk every day, under their unbelieving Doubtings and Questionings concerning
it; they are afraid to draw up that Conclusion; and hereby they are greatly
obstructed in their Duty toward God, (which is not hindered but promoted by a
clear sight of propriety in him) Psalm. 63.1. O God thou art [my God] what then?
early will I seek thee. The most ardent seekings and thirstings after God,
issue and spring from a Soul's being able to say [my God.]

Some in this particular, are too like Scepticks (though in other matters they
are not) always doubting and complaining of their own Conditions: ever
enquiring, how they may know their own estate, and never determining, or not
duly. Those that sit in such thick darkness, that they can see no light, they
are concerned, to trust in the Name of the Lord, Isa. 50.10. i. e. to trust in
him, as the Lord God Gracious and Merciful, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin. Exodus 34.5, 6, 7, when they can draw up no Conclusion that Christ is
theirs, and they his, and that their sins are pardoned, yet they are to trust
in that Name, that he may be theirs, and that their sins may be pardoned: thus
they may put the great question out of doubt, by seeking more to get interest,
than to know it.

Others confidently, yet ungroundedly conclude that Christ is theirs, without
seeking a real interest in him: all which may be helped here.

That this Treatise may be blessed to your self, and to all (under whose eye it
may come) for its proper end, shall be the prayer of,

Honored Sir, Your Servant in the Gospel, Sam. Petto.
Nov. 2. 1681.
Errata.
PAge 11. l. 30 dele. at. p. 20. l. 28. r. singing. p. 23. l. 27. r. our. p. 33
l 13 waters l. 17 dele is p 35. l. 14. after you, add rest. p. 46. l. 16. r.
doubtful. p. 52. l. 11. dele of. p. 64. l. 1. r. to glorify. p. 75. l. 19. dele
he. p. 92. l. 20. r. he delivers. p. 106. l. 10. dele to. p. 110. l 1. r
national. p. 117. l. 24. r. national. p. 131. l. 20. r. As p. 135. l. 5. r. at.
p. 145 l. 10. dele ^ve. p. 158. l. 12. read in the morning. p. 176. l. 2. r.
we. p 200 l 16 r themselves: p 214 l 14 dele and. p 215 l 12 r thou: p 217 l 1
dele one: p 225 l 17 r give: p 242 l 8 r at all: p 255 l 12 r World: p 16^ l 4
r his life: l bi^: l 15 r leave. p 263 l 9 r Friends: p 264 l 10 r my: p 270 l
17 after saving, add interest: p 273 l 6 after but, add they: p 274 l 27 r
upon: p 289 l 2 r one: p 29^ l ^ 17 add down, ^^. adds: p 293 l 2 r this Ib. l
31 r as: Ib: l 31 r of Ib l 32 dele for ^^ r: p 298 l 18 add would: p 306 l 13
dele it: p 309 l 24 dele the. p 322 l 12 r uncertain: p 325 l 17 r it is a: p
327 l ^ r feasts: p 333 l 32 r backslidden: p 364 l 8. r. drought

THE BEST INTEREST,
Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his.


CHAP. I. Containing the Doctrine and Evidences, of saving Interest in Christ.
IT is said of our Lord Jesus Christ; Cant. 1.3. Thy name is as Ointment poured
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Among the several names given to
Christ to render him amiable, and desirable to the Children of Men, this is
none of the meanest, that he is styled, The Consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25.
The hearing and believing that, may cause us to love him, and long after him on
several accounts. For

1. Comfort is greatly desired and sought after by all men, we are all ready to
pray with David. Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness. Psalm. 86.4.
Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant. We are so desirous of comfort, that if it be
withheld from us but a little while, we scarce know how to bear the want of
it, but our Souls are ready to faint within us. Psalm. 119.82. Mine eyes fail
for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me? And if God grant us our desire
in giving us comfort, we rejoice greatly, and look upon our selves obliged to
bless and praise God. Act. 15.31. They rejoiced for the Consolation. Isa. 12.1.
O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

2. And as all men desire, so they have great need of comfort, both in respect
of the manifold troubles, that they are exposed, to while they live, and the
sorrows and terrors they are liable to, when they dye. The best of men, such as
live holy and righteous lives, do meet with many and great afflictions and
troubles. Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous. Yea, it is
the lot of some eminent servants of God, to have their whole life spent in
grief and sorrow. Psalm. 31.10. My Life is spent with grief, and my Years with
sighing. And David was a man of eminent Piety, yet we Read of him, that when he
was under the apprehensions of Death, he was under Trouble and Sorrow. Psalm.
116.3. The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Pains of Hell took hold upon
me, I found Trouble and Sorrow. And as he met with Sorrows, so also with Horror
and Terrors, and that to such a degree, as that he was even overwhelmed
thereby. Psalm. 55.4, 5. My Heart is sore pained within me, and the Terrors of
Death are fallen upon me, Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon me, and
Horror has overwhelmed me.

3. There is abundance, and there is a sufficiency of Consolation to be had in
Christ, and from Christ, under all the Troubles, that we are liable to, while
we live, and all the Terrors and Sorrows of Death. There is not only
Consolation, but abundance of Consolation to be had in Christ, and that when we
meet with abundance of Troubles in the World. 2 Cor. 1.5. For as the sufferings
of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ. There is
such abundant Consolation to be had in Christ, that a Christian may through
Christ Jesus not only be of good comfort, but he may at all times, both Living
and Dying, Triumph in and through Christ Jesus, whatsoever Troubles and
Distresses he be exercised withal. 2 Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be unto God, which
always causes us to Triumph in Christ Let it be considered what great troubles
the Apostle Paul went through. He gives us an account of his sufferings. 2 Cor.
11.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. In stripes above measure, in Prisons more frequent, in
Deaths often, etc. His Troubles and Persecutions were so great and sharp, that he
went continually in danger of his Life. 2 Cor. 4.9.11. We are troubled on every
side -- We which live, are always delivered unto Death for Jesus sake. Yet
under all his Troubles, he was enabled always to Triumph in Christ, and
Triumphing is the highest expression of joy.

Sect. 1. Interest in Christ is a ground of comfort, under all the Troubles of
Life, and against the Sorrows and Terrors of Death.
An instance of fetching comfort from Christ the Consolation of Israel, under
the Troubles and Sorrows both of Life and Death, we have in this Text
considered in its Coherence with the Context. For opening whereof, consider
these three things.

1. The Distresses of the Spouse, set forth in this, and the foregoing Chapter.
To pass over her inward troubles, set forth by her being sick of love. Chapter 2.5.
She met with anger and much hard usage from her Mothers Children, that is, from
those that professed the same Faith with her self, Chapter 1. ver. 6. My Mothers
Children were angry with me, they made me the Keeper of the Vineyards. Keeping
the Vineyards was servile laborious work, which they used to employ the baser
sort of People, and Strangers in. Isa. 61.5. The Sons of the alien shall be
your Plowmen, and your Vine-dressers. It was a burdensome, as well as an
ignominious employment, to work in Vineyards in those hot Countries, The
Laborers that were sent to work in the Vineyard, complained that they had born
the burden, and the heat of the day. Math. 20.1, 12, So that when the Spouse of
Christ says, they made me the Keeper of the Vineyard, it implies that her
Mothers Children laid heavy burdens upon her, dealt hardly and ignominiously
with her, exposed her to reproach and other sufferings. She was greatly
distressed by her Persecutions which she endured, which scorched like the Sun,
when it shined at noon day, and made her black in the eye of the World. Chap.
1.7. I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me. Persecutions arising for
the word, are set out by the scorching of the Sun, As we may see in the parable
of the seed that fell on the stony ground, which having no Root withered away,
when the Sun was up and scorched it. Mat. 13.5, 6. Some set on stony places,
where they had not much Earth -- And when the Sun was up, they were scorched,
and because they had no Root, they withered away. This rising and scorching of
the Sun the Lord Jesus interprets to be rising of Tribulation and Persecution
for the words sake. ver. 20.21. For when Tribulation or Persecution arises
because of the word, by and by he is offended. The Sun looking upon her, that
is, her Persecutions had made her black. I am black; what does this blackness
imply.

(1.) Her inward sorrow and pain of heart, and distress of mind, arising from
her troubles and persecution. For great grief and sorrow is frequently
expressed by blackness. Job 30.27, 28, 29, 30. My Bowels boiled and rested not:
the days of affliction prevented me. I went mourning without the Sun -- My skin
is black upon me. Nah. 2.10. The heart melts, and the knees smite together,
and much pain is in all the Loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.
The Prophet sets out his great grief and astonishment of mind by his being
black. Jer. 8.21. I am black, astonishment has taken hold on me. (2.) Her
being exposed to scorn and contempt, and derision, by reason of her manifold
sufferings and miseries. Look not upon me, because I am black -- That is, look
not upon me with a scornful eye, in a way of derision and contempt. It is the
lot of the people of God, sometimes to be made gazing stocks to the World. Heb.
10.33. Ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches, and afflictions. This,
Jobs portion when he was under great sorrows, his Friends looked upon him with
a scornful eye, and scoffed at him. Job. 16.20. My friends scorn me, but mine
eye pours out tears unto God.
The Churches distressed condition is farther set forth, in her being resembled
to a Lilly among Thorns. Cant. 2.2. As the Lilly among Thorns, so is my love
among Thorns. That is.

1. She was compassed with sharp and grievous afflictions, which pierced her,
as if she had had so many Thorns run into her Flesh. Sharp afflictions are set
out by Thorns. Hos. 2.6. I will hedge up her way with Thorns. 2. She was beset
about with cruel adversaries, that vexed and tortured her, as if she had so
many Thorns running into her side or eyes. It is usual to set out the
adversaries of the Church by Thorns. 2 Samuel 23.6. But the Sons of Belial shall
be all of them as Thorns. Now those adversaries of the Church are likened to
Thorns. (1.) Who are continually vexing and troubling the People of God. Number.
33.55. The inhabitants of the Land shall be pricks in your eyes, and Thorns in
your sides, and shall vex you in the Land wherein ye dwell. Ezekiel. 28 24. And
there shall be no more a pricking brier, to any of the house of Israel, nor any
grieving Thorn. (2.) Those enemies of the Church are likened to Thorns, that
would rend and tear the People of God in pieces, if the Lord should let them
have their will of them. Thorns are of a rending tearing nature. Judge. 8.7. I
will tear your Flesh with Thorns of the Wilderness. Such kind of Thorns are the
enemies of the Church, they would even rend and tear the Servants of God in
pieces, if the Lord should not deliver them out of their hands Psalm. 7.1, 2.
Save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me, least he tear my Soul
like a Lion, renting it in pieces, while there is none to deliver. Ps. 35.15.
The abjects gathered themselves together, and I knew it not, they did tear me,
and ceased not.

Another expression of the Churches distresses we have Chap. 2.15. Take us the
Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines -- She was molested with Foxes
that spoiled the Vines. And what were these Foxes.

1. False Prophets, that corrupted the Doctrine and Worship of the Church.
Ezekiel. 13.4. O Israel, thy Prophets are like Foxes in the desert. He does not
speak of the true, but of the false Prophets, when he says, thy Prophets are
like Foxes.

2. The Foxes signify subtle and bloody Persecutors, who seek to shed the
Blood of the Saints, and make havoc of the Church, Luke 13.31, 32. Herod will
kill thee, and he said unto them, go ye tell that Fox Herod is called a Fox,
because he sought by subtlety to kill Christ. These Foxes the Spouse speaks of,
did spoil the Vines; such a Fox was Saul before his Conversion. Act, 8.3. As
for Saul he made havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling
men and women, he committed them to prison.

2. The Spouse of Christ being in this distressed and persecuted condition,
prays to Christ to teach, and tell her with what comforts he is wont to
refresh, and support his people under their sorest and hottest persecutions.
Chap. 1.7. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves,) where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flock to rest at noon. The noon is the hottest time of the day,
signifies the hottest persecutions, when the rage of Persecutors is at the
height, then it is worthy our enquiry, where or how Christ comforts and
supports his persecuted Flock; His making his Flock to rest at noon, signifies
the inward and spiritual comforts and refreshments that Christ gives his
People in their greatest troubles. Mat. 11.28, 29. Take my Yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
Souls. That rest which Christ gives his Flock, when they labor under Troubles
and Temptations is rest for their Souls. And as the Spouse enquireth where and
how Christ makes his Flock to rest at Noon, so in her distressed condition,
she cries out for comfort and support. Stay me -- comfort me -- Chapter 2.5. Stay
me with flaggons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. This being
sick of love implies.

(1.) The deferring of those spiritual comforts and supports, that she prayed,
hoped and waited for. Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick. (2.)
Her being ready to faint for want of the presence of Christ, and the comforts
of his Spirit. Sickness is attended with faintness. Dan. 8.27. I Daniel fainted
and was sick. Such as are sick of love are often times in a fainting condition.
Psalm. 119.81. My Soul faints for thy Salvation, but I hope in thy word. (3.)
Her restless condition for want of the enjoyment of Christ. Sick persons are
very restless, when Job was sick he was restless, and full of tossings to and
fro; what Solomon says concerning a person whom God exercises with many
sorrows. Eccl. 2.23. His heart takes not rest in the night. The same may be
said of one sick of love, his heart takeeth not rest, either in the night or
the day, but is very unquiet as long as Christ hides himself. Psalm. 30.7. Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled.
3. We may consider the grounds of the Spouses Consolations under these
Troubles, and the hazard and danger of Death, and her inward Troubles
occasioned by her being sick of love. I will only mention these two.

(1.) Her Interest in Christ; When she was in her greatest dangers and
distresses, and wanted the presence of Christ, she quieted, comforted and
encouraged her self with this, that she had an Interest in Christ. My beloved
is mine, and I am his. (2.) She found great Consolation from her participation
of the benefits of Christ. ver. 3. I sat down under his shadow with great
delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my taste.
From the Spouses supporting and comforting her self under her afflictions and
persecutions, when she was in danger of her Life, with the consideration of her
interest in Christ, we may infer this Doctrine, which shall be the subject of
my ensuing discourse.

Doct. Interest in Christ is a ground of strong Consolation, under all the
troubles and persecutions of this Life, and the dangers and approaches of
Death. When the Sun of persecution is risen upon us, and scorcheth vehemently,
when we are become black, when our Mothers Children are angry with us, and deal
hardly with us, when it is Noon, the hottest time of persecution, when we are as
a Lilly among Thorns, compassed about on every side with sharp afflictions, in
the midst of adversaries that are ready to rend and tear us in pieces, when we
are sick and faint, because our hope is deferred and Christ absents himself
from us, when the Foxes are come out of their holes, that spoil the Vines, that
thirst after the blood of the Saints; at, then if we can say, My beloved is
mine, and I am his, we have cause to be of good cheer, for interest in Christ
is a ground of strong Consolation, under all the troubles of this Life, how
many and how great soever, and against the fears and terrors of Death; and this
I shall prove by several instances. The Apostle Paul was a man that went
through abundance of troubles and persecutions as was shown in part before,
and I shall now farther show you. He could go to no place, but he expected
either to be put in Prison, or to meet with some other affliction. Act. 20.23.
The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions
abide me. He was troubled and persecuted every where, and went in continual
danger of his Life. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 11. We are troubled on every side -- we are
perplexed -- persecuted -- cast down but not destroyed -- We are always
delivered unto Death for Jesus sake. Another account of his sufferings we have,
1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.13. I think that God has set forth us, the Apostles
last, as appointed unto Death; For we are made a spectacle to the World, and
to Angels, and to Men; we are fools for Christ's sake -- we are weak -- we are
despised -- Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are
naked and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place -- we are made as
the filth of the World, and are the off scouring of all things unto this day.
Now although the Apostle Paul met with abundance of afflictions and
persecutions, he was exceeding joyful in all his tribulations and as full of
comfort as his heart could hold. 2 Cor. 7.4. I am filled with comfort, I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulation. And whence was it that the Apostle
Paul had such exceeding joy in all his tribulations? It was in Christ, and from
Christ, as he himself tells us. Phil. 3.3. We rejoice in Christ Jesus. Romans
5.11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Virgin Mary who was the
Mother of Christ, met with sore afflictions, which pierced her as if she had a
Sword run into her very Soul. Luke 2.35. Yea a sword shall pierce through thine
own Soul also. Some understand this as a foretelling, that she should suffer
Death for Christ, and be slain with the Sword, others understood the words
Metaphorically, that she should be exposed to such sharp trials that should
pierce her, as if she had a Sword run into her; for reproaches and many other
afflictions, are like the piercings of a Sword. Psalm. 42.10. As with a sword in
my bones, mine enemies reproach me, while they say daily unto me, where is thy
God. Prove. 12.18. There is that speaks like the piercings of a Sword -- And
the Virgin Mary's Consolation under all her afflictions was, her interest in
Christ, her interest in him, not so much as he was the Son of her Womb, as the
Son of God, and the Savior of her Soul. Luke 1.47, 48. And Mary said, my Soul
does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. David
found great Consolation in his interest in Christ, and in God, under all his
troubles and sorrows, of which I might give many instances, but shall only
mention that distress he was in at Ziglag. 1 Samuel 30.6. David was greatly
distressed -- But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Observe here
the greatness of David's distress; Ziglag his City of refuge, was invaded by the
Amalekites, smitten and burnt with Fire; ver. 1. David's Wives, and the Wives
and Children of the men that were with him were taken Captives, and carried
away by the enemies. ver. 2.3. All their Flocks also, and their Herds were
carried away in a Triumphing manner, saying, This is David's spoil. ver. 20.
David's distress was so great, That David and the People that were with him,
lift up their voice and wept, till they had no more power to weep. ver. 4. And
which added to his sorrows was this, that he was now in danger of loosing, and
that by the hands of those that had fought for him to save his Life, they were
so enraged against David, that they spoke of stoning him to Death, and that was
an aggravation of his affliction, that besides his other losses, he was now
like to loose his Life, and that in a violent way, and that by the hand of his
Friends. And David was greatly distressed for the People spoke of stoning him.
ver. 6. And what was his comfort and encouragement in this distress? it was his
interest in God. But David encouraged himself in the Lord [his God.] And how
does the Lord become our God? it is in and through Jesus Christ, that he
becomes our God. 2 Cor. 5.19. That we may not only Triumph over all the
troubles of this Life, but even over Death it self, by virtue of our interest
in Christ, is evident from 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy sting, O Grave
where is thy victory? the sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law, but thuaks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. He speaks in a Triumphing manner, as having no dread of Death, but
having overcome the fear of Death, and the Grave; O Death where is thy sting, O
Grave where is thy victory? As if he should have said, we are not afraid of
thee, O Death, or thee, O Grave: thou have lost thy sting, O Death, and thy
victory O Grave. And what is the ground of this Triumph over Death, how came we
by this victory? this Triumph is grounded upon an interest in Christ, this
victory is given us of God, through Christ, as he is made ours; Thanks be to
God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Sect. 2. What is meant by an interest in Christ. How Christ becomes ours: How
we become Christ's.
There is a special saving interest in Christ, as our Redeemer, which is when a
man is made a partaker of Christ, united to Christ, and has a real and actual
right to all the saving benefits of Christ. Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of
Christ

How Christ becomes ours.

1. By the Fathers giving him to be a propitiation for our sins, and Christ's
giving himself to die for our sins. Joh. 3.16. 2. By an effectual calling. 1
Cor. 1.9. 3. By our recieving him. Joh. 1.12. 4. By our entering into Covenant
with God. Isa. 55.3.
How do we become Christ's 1. By Donation of the Father. Joh. 17.6. 2. By
Redemption. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 3. By the Spirits causing and enabling us to give
our selves to him. 2 Cor. 8.5. 4. By virtue of the Covenant. Ezekiel. 16.8.


See the matters of this Section, in a Book of this Author, Entitled
[Consolation in Life and Death.]

Sect. 3. Several grounds of Consolation against the troubles of Lsfe, and the
fears and terrors of Death, arising from an interest in Christ.
1. Jesus Christ has fully, perfectly, and for ever reconciled unto God all
that are his. Col. 1.19, 20. 2. Jesus Christ has obtained for all that are his
a free, full perpetual pardon of all their sins. 1 Cor. 15.3. 1 John 3.5. Joh.
1.29.
These and many other grounds, may be seen largely handled in the said
Treatise, by this Author, Entitled [Consolation in Life and Death.]

Motives to examine our selves, whether we have a saving interest in Jesus
Christ.
If it be so, that interest in Christ is a ground of strong Consolation, under
all the troubles of this Life, and against the fears and terrors of Death, then
let us examine our selves, whether we have a saving interest in Jesus Christ?
whether we have an actual right to, and a propriety in Christ and his saving
benefits? can we say that Christ is ours, and that we are his, and can we say
this upon good grounds? Have we Evidences, satisfactory, and sure evidences out
of Gods word, that Christ is ours and we are his? I shall here propose some
motives to stir us up to examine our selves about our interest in Christ. And
then mention some sure evidences of a saving interest in Christ, by which we
may examine and prove our selves, whether we have a real saving interest in
Christ.

1. All men have not a saving interest in Christ. Some men are Christ's. 1 Cor.
3.23. Ye are Christ's. and Christ is theirs. Joh. 20.28. Thomas said unto him,
my Lord and my God. But some men are none of Christ's, and Christ is none of
theirs. Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. There are multitudes that live under the hearing of the Gospel of Christ,
that have not the Spirit of Christ; and whosoever he be, that has not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Some men have a part in Christ, some have
no part in him, or with him. Joh. 13.8. Jesus answered him, if I wash thee not
thou have no part with me.

2. Such as make a profession of the Christian Religion, but are Hypocrites, and
have not sound and sincere hearts in the sight of God, they have no part nor
portion in Jesus Christ or his saving benefits. Act. 8.21. Thou have neither
part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.
Now there are multitudes that profess themselves to be the Disciples of Christ,
and are Baptized as Simon Magus was, whose hearts are not right in the sight of
God, and so have no part in Christ, and therefore we had need examine whether
it be not so with us. It is a reproach in the Christian World, not to own
Christ, and therefore to take away the occasion of reproach, many are content
to give their names to Christ, that deny him their hearts: Many are desirous to
be called Christians, that will not walk in the ways of Christ. Like those
women spoken of, Isa. 4.1. We will eat our own Bread, and wear our own Apparel,
only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach. So there are many
that desire to be called Christians to take away their reproach, but they will
walk in the way of their own hearts, and follow their own wills, and will not
walk in the ways of God, and fulfill the will of Christ.

3. A man may have recieved great gifts from Christ, and do many great things
in the name of Christ, he may prophecy in the name of Christ, be able to cast
out Devils, and do such works as may cause those, that behold them, to wonder
at them, and yet not have a saving interest in Christ. He may be one that
Christ does not, will not own for one of his. Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will say to
me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name
cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? and then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
Here are great pretenses, fair plea's, and there are many that will expect to
be owned by Christ, having so much to say for themselves, yet Christ will say
unto them, I never knew you, that I never owned you for mine, I never approved
you, I do not, nor ever did own you for mine.

4. There is nothing in this World of higher and greater concernment to every
one of us, than to get an interest in Christ, and to get the knowledge and
assurance, that we have an interest in Christ. Our Eternal Life depends upon
our having or not having Jesus Christ. If we have Christ we shall most
certainly have Eternal Life; but if we have not Christ, all that he or we ever
did or suffered, will avail us nothing, we shall not have Eternal Life. 1 John
5.12. He that has the Son, has Life, but he that has not the Son of God,
has not Life. There is nothing of higher concernment, than to get Eternal
Life, and this obtained only in Christ, and through an interest in him. He, and
he only that has the Son, has Life. And as the getting an interest in Christ,
is of the highest concernment in order to our Eternal Welfare, so the knowledge
of our interest in Christ, is of singular advantage for our comfort, and
well-being in this World. This was a great comfort to Job in his great
afflictions, to know that Christ was his Redeemer, and that he should after
Death and the Resurrection from the dead, live with him for ever. Job 19.23. I
know that my Redeemer lives. To know our interest in Christ and in God,
through Christ is a ground of the highest joy, and of everlasting joy and
gladness. Psalm. 89.1, 26. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever; He
shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my Salvation.
Sing is an expression of the highest joy, when a man cannot contain his joy
within his heart, but it breaks forth into singing. Isa. 65.14. Behold my
Servants shall sing for joy of heart. Now among those mercies which caused him
to sing for joy, and for which he was so filled with joy, that he resolved to
sing for evermore, this was a choice one, the clearing of his interest in
Christ, and in God through Christ, that he was enabled to cry, Thou art my
Father, my God, and the rock of my Salvation.

5. We may attain to sure and satisfying evidences of our interest in Christ.
We may attain to this knowledge that Christ is ours, and we are his. Cant.
2.16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. It is not spoken by way of desire, Oh
that my Beloved were mine, and I were his, nor by way of probability, it may
be, I have some hope that he is mine, and I am his, but by way of Confidence,
my Beloved is mine, and I am his. So David could with much confidence appeal
unto the Lord that he was his. Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me. So 1 John
2.5. We know we are in him. 1 John 5.19.20. We know that we are of God -- We
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.

6. Examining our selves by those Characters that are given in the Scriptures,
concerning such as have an interest in Christ, is the ready way to come to the
knowledge of our interest in Christ. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether
ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates. The Apostle here p^ts a
question; Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you? And
gives them direction how they should attain this knowledge, namely by examining
themselves, and tells what they should examine themselves about, namely about
their Faith, because Faith is one evidence of an interest in Christ. And it is
observable when he puts this question; know ye not how Jesus Christ is in you,
yea he adds, except ye be Reprobates, that is, except ye be blameworthy,
they are justly blameable that neglect the making sure such a weighty point as
this, whether Christ be in them or not. They that have Faith in their hearts,
have Christ dwelling in their hearts. Ephesians. 3.17. Our Souls when enlightened by
the word and Spirit of God, are able to discern, and to give a judgment of our
estate toward God, and of the most inward workings both of Sin and Grace. Pro.
20.27. The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward
parts of the Belly. By the inward parts of the Belly, we may undestand all the
secrets of the heart, the inclinations, dispositions, and motions of the heart
both to good and evil. These are all searched out, and discovered by the Spirit
of a man, which is as the Candle of the Lord; but to effect this searching of
our inward parts, this Candle of the Lord, must be lighted by the Word, and the
Spirit of the Lord: for till that be done, it gives such a dim and uncertain
light, that we can discern but little of our own state. Therefore besides
Communing with our own hearts, and making use of our own Spirits, we must make
use of the Word of God, that we may discern the state of our own Souls toward
God. Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light. Psalm.
119.130. The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the
simple. ver. 105. Thy word is a Lamp to my feet, and a light to my path. There
are plain and clear Characters laid down in the Scriptures, of such as are
Christ's, the knowledge of these (which I shall mention in the next Section) are
requisite for us to examine our selves by. And besides making use of our own
Spirits, and having recourse to the light of Gods word, it is needful that we
should implore the illumination and assistance of the Holy Spirit, because it
is his enlightening our minds that gives us light. Psalm. 36.9. In thy light,
shall we see light. Job. 32.8. But there is a Spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding The eyes of our
underderstandings are shut, till the Spirit of God does open them. Ephesians. 1.17,
18. And as we need the Spirit to enlighten our understandings, so also to
witness to and with our Spirits, or being the Children of God. Romans 8.16. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God

Evidences of a saving interest in Christ.
Seeing the knowledge of our interest in Christ, tends so much to our
Consolation, both against all the troubles of this Life, and the terrors of
Death, and seeing this knowledge is obtained by examining our selves by those
Characters that the Scriptures give of those that are Christ's. I shall lay down
several Characters out of the Scriptures, of such as have a saving interest in
Christ, those that I shall mention and explain are these.

1. Effectual calling. 2. Recieving Christ as he is offered in the Gospel. 3.
They that are Christ's, have the Spirit of Christ given to them. 4. They that
are Christ's are new Creatures. 5. They that are Christ's have Crucified the
Flesh with the lusts and affections. 6. They that are Christ's do love Christ,
and prefer Christ above all things, and persons in the World. 7. They that are
Christ's live to Christ, and dye to him.
1. They that are effectually called are Christ's, and Christ with all his
benefits are theirs. 1 Cor. 1.26. compared with 1 Cor. 3.23. Ye see your
calling Brethren -- ye are Christ's. Whom does the Apostle mean, when he says,
ye are Christ's? he means such as are effectually called. And speaking of
those that were called, he tells them that God had united them to Christ, and
made them partakers of the benefits of Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.26, 30. Ye see
your calling Brethren -- Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Eternal Life, and all
other saving benefits of Christ are promised, to them that are effectually
called. Heb. 9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by means of Death for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under
the first Covenant, they which were called might recieve the promise of the
eternal inheritance. But Eternal Life, and the saving benefits of Christ are
given only to such as have an interest in Christ. 1 John 5.12. He that has not
the Son of God has not Life. Now we may know that we are effectually called,
these ways.

1. When the Lord calls a sinner effectually, he calls him out of darkness into
light; whereas the mind and understanding was before full of ignorance and
blindness, the Lord enlightens the mind with saving knowledge, when he calls a
sinner effectually it is. 1 Pet. 2.9. That ye should show forth the praises of
him who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. Now in this
work of illumination we may consider these 3 or 4 things.

(1.) God calls a man to see his sinful, miserable, undone estate by nature.
Jer. 2.19. Know and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of Hosts; And his inability to help or recover himself out of his sinful and
miserable estate. Joh 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. (2.) God calls a man
to see, and to know that remission of sins and Salvation, is to be had in
Christ, and no where else, but in and from Christ Jesus. Act. 13.38. Through
this man is preached unto you remission of sins. Luke 19.10. The Son of Man is
come to seek and save that which was lost. There is Salvation for lost man to
be had in Christ, and in none but him. Act. 4.12. Neither is their Salvation in
any other, for there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby
we must be saved. As the Lord gives us to understand that we have destroyed and
undone our selves, so also he causes us to know that there is help for such as
are in a perishing condition, and also where this help is to be found, namely
in himself through Christ. Hos. 13.9. O If del thou have destroved thy self,
but in me is thy help. Thus is a material branch of saving illumination, the
giving as the knowledge of God and Christ. 1 Cor. 4.6. Joh. 17.3. (3) The Lord
enlightens his People to see and to know which way they should obtain Salvation
from Christ, out of their sinful and miserable condition, namely by Faith and
Repentance. For after a man is enlightened to see his lost estate, then he is at
a loss to know what he should do to be saved, and the Lord shows him that
Salvation is obtained by Christ, through Faith and Repentance. Act. 16.30, 31.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent, and turn your selves from
all your Transgressions, and so iniquity shall not be your rutine. (4.) Where
there is saving illumination, the instruction the Lord gives, is like that
spoken of by the Prophet. Isa. 8.11. The Lord spoke thus unto me with a strong
hand -- There is power goes with those instructions that he gives the Soul, to
bring it to do, what it is taught. The Lord does not only teach a sinner his
lost estate, and that Salvation is in Christ, and that this Salvation is to be
had by Faith and Repentance, but he bows the heart to comply with these terms
of alvation; with the illumination of the mind, there is the inclination of the
heart to repent and believe. Jer. 31.19. Surely, after I was turned, I
repented, and after I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh, I was asuamed,
etc. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted, after that you heard the word of
Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. And this leads me to the next head.
2. When the Lord calls a sinner effectually, he calls him to Repentance by
working Repentance in his heart. Luke 5.32. I came not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners unto Repentance. Now this effectual call to Repentance is discerned
these ways.

1. The Lord pricks the Sinner at the heart, by setting home upon the
Conscience the sight of his sinful and undone condition. Act. 2.37. And when
they heard these things, they were pricked at the heart and said -- Men and
Brethren what shall we do? Till God calls a man, he lies fast asleep in his
sins. He is like Jonah, that was fast asleep in the side of the Ship, when
there was a great Tempest, whereby himself, and all in the Ship were in danger
to be drowned. Jon. 1.6. So the sinner lies fast asleep in his sins, although
he be in danger of everlasting burnings, till God awakens him, by calling him
to a sight of his sin and misery. As it was with Peter, he was fast asleep,
when bound with Chains, and in the midst of two Soldiers, and was the next day
to be tried for his Life. Act. 12.6. So it is with many Sinners, they are bound
in the chains of their sins, and are in danger every day to be called to
Judgment, yet they lie fast asleep in their sins, till the Lord comes and
awakens them out of their dead sleep, and this he does by giving them a prick
at the heart with his word, which is called the Sword of the Spirit. And when a
sinner is pricked at the heart, then he awakes out of his dead sleep, and sits
down, and bemoans his sinful and miserable condition. Lam. 5.16.17. The Crown
is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned; for this our heart is
faint, and our eyes are dim. Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself.

(2.) When God calls a sinner to Repentance, he turns his heart from his Idols,
from his beloved sins, so that he resolves in his heart that by the help of
Gods grace he will for sake his sins for ever. Hos. 14 8. Ephraim shall say,
what have I to do any more with Idols? He is willing to leave off all known
sins, and also all unknown sins, as soon as they shall be discovered to him.
Job 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity I will
do no more.

(3.) When the Lord calls a sinner to Repentance, as he causes him to forsake
his sins, so also he causes him to turn to the Lord with his whole heart, so
that the bent of the heart is for God, the heart is inclined to please, serve,
obey, glorify and enjoy God. Jer. 24.7. They shall return to me with their
whole heart. Psalm. 119.112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes
always, even to the end.

3. When God calls a sinner effectually, he calls him to his Son Jesus
Christ. As he enlightneth him to see his undone estate out of Christ, and to
see that Salvation is to be had in Christ, so he draws the Soul to Christ, he
causes the Soul to come to Christ. Joh. 6.45. Every man that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes unto me. The call of God when it is effectual,
has this effect upon all that are called, it brings every one of them to
Jesus Christ. It is not some or many that hear, but every man that has heard
and learned of the Father comes unto me. Now we may discern that God has
called us to Christ these ways.

1. If he has called us off from all things that hinder our going to Christ.
Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away, Come away that is let
nothing detain thee from coming to me, cast away all lets and hindrances that
keep thee from coming to me, leave all to follow me. This effect Levi's call
had upon him, Luke 5.27, 28. He said unto him follow me; and he left all, rose
up and followed him. When God has brought us to this, that we are willing to
leave all for Christ, we need not doubt but we are effectually called to
Christ. This laying aside of all hindrances of our being made partakers of
Christ and Eternal Life, is that which the Apostle exhorts to. Heb. 12.1. Let
us lay aside every weight -- And run with pationce the race that is set before
us. I will instance in some hindrances of our enjoying Christ, which God calls
from, when he draws us to Christ. As the World, the profits of the world, the
honors of the world, the pleasures of the world, God loosens the heart from
all these, that the Soul can leave all the goodly, all the pleasant, all the
glorious things of the world, to cleave to Christ. Cant. 4.8. Come with me from
Lebanon my Spouse, with me from Lebanon. For the opening this Scripture, let us
consider what Lebanon was, that Christ was so earnest with his Spouse, to come
with him from Lebanon, that he calls twice, come with me from Lebanon, with
me from Lebanon. Lebanon was a very goodly place. Deuteronomy. 3.25. I pray let me go
over and see the good Land, that is, beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and
Lebanon. Moses had a great desire to see the Land of Canaan, which was the Land
of promise, a land above all lands, and of all places in that land, he had a
desire to see that goodly place mount Lebanon; Lebanon was a glorious place.
Isa. 35.2. The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it. Lebanon was a very
pleasant and delightful place, it cast forth a sweet seent to all places round
about it. Hos. 14.6. His be my shall be as the Olive Tree, and his small as
Lebanon. The meaning then is this, that we should leave all the goodly, all the
glorious, all the pleasant, all the delightful and des^^^able things of this
world to enjoy Christ. Christ calls us to come with him from Lebanon, which was
a goodly, a desirable, a glorious and delightful place. Another hinderance of
coming to Christ is, when a man is bound with the cords of his sins, his sins
have such hold upon his heart, that he is like a man bound with cords, that he
cannot stir from them; of such Solomon speaks, Prove. 5.22. He shall be holden
with the cords of his sins. And this was Simon Magus his condition. Act. 8.23.
I percieve that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. Now when God calls a sinner to Christ, he loses these bonds, so
that such an one can say with David. Psalm. 116.16. Thou have loosed my bonds.

2. When God calls a man to Christ he causes the soul to follow hardafter
Christ, to be both earnest and speedy in running after Christ. Psalm. 63.8. My
soul follows hard after thee. This following hard after Christ implies
earnest desires and endeavors to enjoy him, an unwillingness to be without
him, Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee. Running after Christ implies
earnestness and speed in following Christ, and unweariedness in seeking after
Christ, Isa 40.31. They shall run and not be weary. Is thy soul earnest? is thy
soul unwearied in following after Christ? then certainly the Lord has drawn
thee by his Spirit. For no man goes thus after Christ, till the Lord has
drawn him, Joh 6.44. No man can come to me except the Father, which has sent
me, draw him.

3. We may know that God has called and drawn us to Christ, if we follow
after Christ under all the difficulties and discouragements, that we meet with
in the ways of Christ. When God calls us to Christ effectually, he carries us
through all difficulties and discouragements, so that nothing shall hinder us
from following Christ. He makes good that wo^d, Luke 3.5. Every valley shall be
filled, and every mountain shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough ways shall be made plain. It is an allusion to the
Jews coming out of Babylon, in which journey they met with many difficulties,
they went through low valleys which oft-times are filled with ter, they went
over high hills and great mountains, they went through crooked and rough ways;
But God put such a spirit into them, that they went on with that courage and
chearfullness, as is if every valley had been filled, and every hill and
mountain brought low, and all crooked places had been made straight, and rough
places plain. So it is in effectual calling, God carries on the soul so
powerfully after Christ, that it is carried through all oppositions, all
difficulties and discouragements to come to Christ, Psalm. 18.29. By thee, I
have run through a troop, by my God, I have leaped over a wall. As it was with
the blind man that cried after Christ, Mark 10.48. Many charged him that he
should hold his peace, but he cried the more a great deal. Thou son of David
have mercy on me. So it is with those that feel their want of Christ, and are
called to Christ, when carnal people, and carnal relations would beat them off
from the ways of Christ, they are the more earnest to follow after. We read
of Saul, that when the sons of Belial despised him, There went with him a band
of men whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10.26, 27. If we go after Christ,
when he is despised by the world, it is a sign that God has touched our
hearts, and drawn us to his Son.

4. When God calls a sinner to come to Christ, he cannot be satisfied with any
thing besides Christ. He takes him from resting in any thing short of Christ.
After we are awakened to see our sin and misery, there are many things wherein
we would rest short of Christ, if God should let us alone. As for instance, we
are apt to rest in our privileges as the Jews, who cried out, the temple of
the Lord, we have Abraham to our Father, etc. And we are prone to rest in
Ordinances, and performance of Duties, in our convictions, humiliations,
affections, reformations, and the like, but he takes us off from resting in any
thing besides Christ when he calls us unto Christ. What Michah said unto the
Jews, Mich. 2.10. Arise ye and depart, this is not your rest. So the Lord says
to such as he calls effectually, when they are taking up their rest in any
thing short of Christ, he calls them off from those rests and says. Arise and
come unto my son, for this is not your rest. A soul effectually called is like
the dove that went out of the Ark while the waters covered the earth, she found
no rest for the sole of her foot, till she returned into the Ark, Genesis 8.9. So
the soul effectually called can find no rest any where but in Christ. Mary
Magdelen had seen wonders in the stone rolled from the Sepulcher, the linen
clothes in which the body of Christ was wrapped, she had a vision of Angels,
but the sight of the Angels did not satisfy her, because she could not find
Christ, but wept for him, Joh. 20.1, 11, 12, 13.

5. When God calls a sinner to come to Christ, he takes up his rest in Christ,
and rests on him only, for remission of sins and eternal life, Psalm. 37.7.
Rest in the Lord, Psalm. 62.6. He only is my rock and my salvation, Matthew.
11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you

IV. When God calls a sinner effectually, he called him unto holiness, 1 The.
4.7. God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. Now we may
know our effectual call unto holiness these ways.

1. By our earnest desires and endeavors after holiness. This call of God
begets earnest desires after holiness, a hunger and thirst after righteousness,
such an one has, oh that I were more holy, oh that I could serve and obey God
in a better manner, Psalm. 119.5. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy
statutes, ver. 20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thy
judgments at all times. And this call does produce strong desires, so also
earnest endeavors after holiness, so that a man makes his care, and continual
exercise to live an holy life, Act. 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self to
have always a conscience void of offense both toward God and toward men.

2. This call to holiness leaves such an impressiion upon the heart, that if
through temptation he fall into sin, and depart from the ways of God, he can
have no rest in his spirit, until he is risen up again, and has humbled his
soul before God, and be returned unto God, Prove. 24.16. A just man falls
seven times and rises again. A just man may fall, yea fall often, but he is
not to rest in his sins; but makes have to rise up again. It is the property
of unregenerate men to lie in their sins, 1 John 5.19. The whole world lies in
wickedness. They that are called out of the world may fall into sin by
temptation, but they do not lie in their sins, they make have to rise up again.
A sheep may fall into the mire, but makes have to get out. They are swine that
love to wallow in the mire.

3. We may know that we are effectually called unto holiness when we adhere to
the ways of God in difficult and troublesome times, when no persecutions, no
troubles will make us forsake the ways of God, and turn aside to crooked
paths, Psalm. 44.17, 18. All this is come upon us, (that is all the
forementioned troubles) yet we have not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in
thy Covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way, Psalm. 119.109, 110. My soul is continually in my hands, yet do I
not forget thy Law. The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from
thy Precepts.

4. When God calls a man to Holiness, he enclines his heart to be holy, not
only in some but in all things; Holy in Body and in Spirit, Holy in his
Discourse, and Holy in all manner of Conversation. They that are Effectually
called unto Holiness, are like the Unmarried Woman, spoken of by the Apostle.
1 Cor. 7.34. The Unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she
may be Holy both in Body and in Spirit. This is the care of Gods called ones,
they care for the things of the Lord, that they may be Holy in Body and in
Spirit. They are also careful to be Holy in their Discourse, remembering that
Exhortation of the Apostle. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out
of your Mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may
minister Grace unto the Hearers. They are also careful to be Holy in all
manner of Conversation. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he which has called you is holy,
so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation.

V. When God calls a sinner Effectually, he calls him to lay hold of Eternal
Life, he calls him unto the participation of his Heavenly and Glorious Kingdom.
1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace who has called us into his Eternal Glory by
Jesus Christ. 1 These. 2.12. That ye walk worthy of God, who has called you
unto his Kingdom and Glory. 2 These. 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our
Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Lay hold on Eternal Life, whereunto thou art called. As it was with the carnal
Jews, they despised the Land of Canaan, though it was a most pleasant and
delightful Land, and would rather have enjoyed the Fleshpots of Egypt, than
to go through difficulties to possess the Land of Canaan. Psalm. 106.24. Yea,
they despised the pleasant Land. So it is with carnal Christians, before God
calls them Effectually, they despise, they neglect Eternal Life, they prefer
this transitory vain World, before the Kingdom of Heaven. As profane Esau
despised his Birthright, and sold it for a Morsel of Meat, so do profane men
despise the means of Grace and Salvation, and part with the Kingdom of Heaven
for as inconsiderable things as a Morsel of Meat. But when God calls a man
effectually, then Heaven and Heavenly things are the chief things he seeks
after. Now we may know, whether God has called us to lay hold on eternal life,
these ways.

1. When God calls a man to obtain eternal life and Salvation, he gives hm the
knowledge and belief of the truth, reality and transcendant excellency of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that it infinitely surpasses all the good things of this
vain and transitory world. 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of
this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house, not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. And as the truth of the Heavenly Kingdom is
believed, so it is esteemed, and preferred above all things in this World. Heb.
11.16. But now they desire a better country, that is, an Heavenly. This World
is a miserable world, but Heaven is looked upon as a most blessed and glorious
place, by those that are Effectually called. Tit. 2.13. Looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior. In
Heaven they expect such things as eye never saw, the ear never heard, and
better and greater things, than the heart of man can concieve, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. When God calls a sinner to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, he stirs up in
his heart an earnest desire after Salvation, and causes him to make it his
great care and main business to get to Heaven. The great enquiry of such an one
is, what he should do to be saved, and how he may get eternal life? Act. 16.30.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Matthew. 19.16. And behold one came unto him
and said, good master, what good thing shall I do that I may have Eternal Life.
And they enquire diligently after the way to life, so they make it their main
and chief care to get to heaven, according to that command of Christ. Mat.
6.33. But seek ye first, the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness -- And that
of the Apostle; Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

3. When God calls a man to obtain Salvation, he discovers to him the way to
Life and Salvation; and bows his heart to walk in the path of life. Psalm.
16.11. Thou will show me the path of Life. He shows them that Eternal Life
and Salvation is to be had in Christ, and no where else but in Christ. 1 John
5.11. And this is the record that God has given to us, Eternal Life, and this
Life is in his Son. Act. 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for
there is no other name given under Heaven, whereby men may be saved. And he
shows them, that they that would have Salvation by Christ, must believe in
him, and obey him, and persevere in the Faith of Christ, and in their obedience
of the Gospel to the end of their lives. Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

4. When God calls a man to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, he leaves such
impressions of the glory and excellency of the Kingdom of Heaven, that he
presses more earnestly after the Kingdom of Heaven, than he does after any
thing in this world. Phil. 3.13.14. This one thing I do, forgetting those
things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. It was the main thing the Apostle aimed at, strove, and contended for,
pressed after the obtaining the Crown of Glory, and being found in that way
that leads to life. No oppositions from the world can beat off one
effectually called, from seeking eternal life, but he uses an holy violence,
and does as it were take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. From the days of John the
Baptist until now the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force.

5. They that are effectually called will go through any sufferings to obtain
the Kingdom of God. We are told in Gods word, that we must, through much
tribulation, enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. But this does not
dismay those that are called to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. They make
light of the sufferings of this life, in comparison of the glory, and the
felicity of the future life, Romans 8.^8. For I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us, Act. 20.23, 24. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City saying,
that bonds and afflictions abide me But none of these things move me, etc. As
it was with the Israelites when God called them out of Egypt, they were willing
to go through the Red Sea, and to go into a howling wilderness, where were
Scorpions and fiery Serpents, to get into the land of promise. So it is with
those that are called out of their natural state, they are willing to go
through any troubles and difficulties, though it be a resisting unto blood, to
get into the Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. To get the
possession, and make sure of this Kingdom, a man Effectually called will
readily and joyfully suffer the loss of all things that he has in this world.
Math. 13.44.

2. Recieving Christ as he is offered to us in the Gospel, is an undoubted
evidence of a saving interest in Christ. Upon our recieving Christ he becomes
ours, and we become his. Joh. 1.12. To as many as recieved him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God -- All that recieve Christ, how many soever
they be, have an interest in God as their Father, and in Christ as their
Savior. Christ is the gift of God. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son -- Joh 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, that
is, if thou knew me who am the gift of God; as the following words show, and
who it is that says to thee, give me to drink. -- Now what is it makes a gift
ours, but an offer from him that has power to bestow it, and acceptance by him
to whom it is offered. God has power to bestow Christ on whom he pleases, and
he makes an offer of Christ unto every one that finds his want of Christ, and
is willing to recieve Christ. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the
water of Life freely. Upon our accepting Christ on that offer, which God makes
of him in the Gospel, Christ becomes ours, and we become his; Recieving Christ
is believing on Christ. Joh. 1.12. To as many as recieved him -- to them that
believe on his name. And as for such as believe in Christ, Christ is theirs,
for he dwells in their hearts. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by Faith.

But here it may be enquired, how shall we know whither we have recieved Jesus
Christ in a true and saving manner.

A. 1. Such as recieve Jesus Christ aright, recieve him in all his offices,
they recieve him as their Prophet, as their Priest, and as their King. Col.
2.6. As ye have therefore recieved Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.
Here is mention of the 3 fold office of Christ. His Prophetical Office is
signified by Christ, which signifies anointed, he was anointed with the Spirit
to Preach the Gospel. Luke 4.18. Jesus signifies his Priestly Office, for
Jesus signifies a Savior, and he was called Jesus, because he was to save his
People from their sins. Mat. 1.23. And how does he save his People from their
sins, but by his offering up himself a Sacrifice for us? Lord signifies his
Kingly Office. These Colossians recieved Christ in all these Offices, as their
Prophet, as their Priest, and as their Lord, they recieve Christ Jesus the
Lord. And so do all that recieve Christ aright.

Now then we recieve Christ as our Prophet, when we make the word of Christ the
rule of our Faith, our Worship, and of our Conversations.

1. The word of Christ is the rule of our Faith, what we find in the word of
Christ, that we are to believe, though it seem hard to our understandings. Joh.
7.38. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said -- Our Faith must be
regulated by the Scriptures. And Abraham believed according to what God had
spoken to him. Romans 4.18. Who believed in hope against hope -- according to
that which was spoken. And so the Apostle Paul and the Church of Corinth. 1
Cor. 15.3, 4, 11. Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, and
rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures. -- So we preach, and so
ye believe. We are to believe all things according as they are held forth in
the Scriptures.

2. The word of Christ is to be the rule of our worship, whatever censures or
calumnies the world cast upon us, of Heresy or Schism or the like, yet we
must keep close to the written word of God. Act. 24.14. After this way which
they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and in the Prophets. The Passover was part of the
worship of God, and the Jews are blamed for neglecting and not eating the
Passover in that sort and manner as was directed in the written word of God. 2 Chronicles. 30.5. They established a decree that they should come to keep the
Passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem, for they had not done it of
a long time, in such sort as was written. And ver. 18. A multitude of People
had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the Passover, otherwise than it
was written. And that they sinned in eating the Passover in other manner than
was prescribed in the written word of God, is evident from the following words,
wherein Hezekiah prays for the pardon of their sin. The good Lord pardon
every one -- Our Lord Jesus would not go against the written word in matters of
Worship, for the gaining of the whole world. When the Devil carried him up into
an high Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and proffered
to give them all to Christ, if he would fall down and worship him, he rejected
the motion with disdain, because it was against the written word, to worship
any other but the true God. Mat. 4.8, 9, 10. The Worshipping of Idols being
forbidden in the word of God, the Three Children chose rather to be cast into
the burning fiery furnace, than to worship the golden Image which
Nebuchadnezzar had set up, and commanded all persons to worship, under the
greatest penalty, even present Death, and that a dreadful death, to be burnt in
a fiery furnace. Dan. 3.15, 18. If ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same
hour into the midst of a fiery Furnace. And what did they answer, when thus
menaced by the King? Be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy
Gods, nor Worship the Golden Image which thou have set up. Neither the hope of
the greatest gain, nor fear of the greatest punishment should make us go
against the word of Christ in things pertaining to the worship of God.

3. The word of Christ is to be the rule of our Conversations. We must not make
our gain our rule, our credit, or the example of others, but the word of
Christ. Ps. 119.105. Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path.
In doubtless cases we must make Gods Testimonies our Counselors. And after we
have consulted with the word, what we find agreeable to the mind of Christ, that
we must do though it be cross to our own interests, and what is contrary to the
word that we must avoid, though it would be very beneficial to us. Thus David,
Psalm. 119.24. Thy Testimonies also are my delight and my Counselors. Thus the
Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 13.7. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. It was an excellent speech of Balaam, and worthy our imitation, although
he did not do what he said. Numb. 22.18. If Balak would give me his house full
of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God to do less
or more.

We may know that we recieve Christ as our Priest, these ways.

1. If we look for remission of our sins and Eternal Life, not by any works of
Righteousness which we have done, but from the mercy of God, and the merits of
Christ, who offered up himself to God a Sacrifice for our sins. Romans 5.9. Being
now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Tit. 3.5.
Not by works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. Act. 15.11. But we believe that through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be saved even as they. See also Gal. 2.16. 2. When we ground
our Faith and Hope for audience and acceptance of our Prayers, upon the
intercession of Christ. Heb. 10.21, 22. And having an high Priest over the
house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith.
Dan. 9.17. O our God! hear the Prayer of thy Servant, and his Supplications,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, which is desolate, for the
Lords sake.
We may know that we recieve Christ as our Lord, these ways.

1. If we are willing to be ruled and governed by Christ. Many men are
unwilling to recieve Christ, for their Lord, to rule them, that would have him
for their Savior to save them from wrath to come. They say in their hearts, as
they did, Luke 19.14. We will not have this man to Reign over us. Then we are
willing to be Ruled and Governed by Christ, when we yield ready obedience to
his word, and the motions of his Spirit. For Christ Rules us by his Word and
Spirit. What Pharaoh said to Joseph, Genesis 42.14. According to thy word shall
all my People be ruled. So may I say here. They that recieve Christ as Lord,
they are all Ruled according to his word. Now we may know that we are willing
to be Ruled by the word of Christ.

(1.) When in doubtful cases we consult the word of Christ, and desire to know
the mind of Christ. When we say with the Apostle; Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Act. 9.6. When we say with David, Ps. 143.8. Make me to know the way
wherein I should go. Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, and I will walk in thy
Truth. And that we may find out the mind of Christ, we make his Testimonies our
Counselors, as was hinted before. (2.) Such as are willing to be ruled by
Christ, as soon as they understand this or the other thing to be the mind of
Christ, they yield obedience to it. Psalm. 18.44. As soon as they hear of me,
they shall obey me. Psalm. 119.60. I made have, I delayed not to keep thy
Commandments. (3.) Such as embrace Christ for their Lord, their hearts stand in
awe of the word of Christ, they are afraid of Transgressing his commands. Prove.
13.13. He that fears the Commandment shall be rewarded. Yea, there is greater
awe upon the word of Christ, than the word of Princes. If Princes command one
thing, and Christ another, and Princes will persecute us, because we are not
obedient to them, yet Christ's Subjects stand in such awe of his word, that they
will not swerve from his word, for avoiding troubles and persecutions, from the
greatest men on earth. Psalm. 119.161. Princes have Persecuted me without a
cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy word.
2. As we may know, we have received Christ for our Lord by our willingness to
be governed by his word, so also by our submiting our selves to all the
disposals of Providence-relating to us or any of ours. For it belongs to Christ
as King to govern the world. All power in Heaven and Earth is committed to him,
the Government is upon his should (...) the Father has committed all judgment
into the hands of the Son. Now such as receive Christ for their Lord, submit
themselves to (...) the disposals of Providence without fr^ or murmuring at
their losses and crosses, and that because it is the Lord that does all that
befalls them, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord let him do what seems him good, 2 Samuel 15.26. But if he thus say, I have no delight in him, Behold here am I, let
him do to me, as seems good unto him.

2. We may know that (...) recieve (...) aright, when we receive (...)
heartily. By receiving (...) mean, when we understand on what terms Christ is
willing to bestow himself upon us, what he requires from those that will become
his disciples, and when we judge those terms to be equal, to be good, to be
submitted to with cheerfulness. By receiving Christ heartily, I mean a cordial
and through compliance with those terms on which Christ will accept us for his
disciples. We must receive Christ judiciously, that is understand the terms on
which Christ will become ours, and accept us for his, and judge those terms
worthy of all acceptance. What these terms are on which he is willing to
receive us for his disciples, I will show out of two or three Scriptures, Mark.
8.34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross and
follow me, Luke 14.33. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not
all that he has, cannot be my disciple. And ver. 26. If any man come to me and
hate not his father and mother and wife and children, and brethren and sisters,
yea and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. Hating is not to be
understood absolutely, but comparatively. For it is not lawful to hate father
or mother or brother. He that hates his brother is a murderer, but hating is
less loving, as Genesis 29.30, 31. Matthew. 24.13. He that endures to the end shall
be saved. So that the terms on which Christ is willing to become ours, are
briefly these. That we love and prefer Christ above all persons in the world,
even our nearest and dearest relations. That we deny our selves, that we are
willing to under go all sufferings for Christ, that we forsake all that we have
for him, that we follow him, that we continue with him to the end of our days.
And as we must understand these terms, so also approve of them, and judge
Christ and salvation by Christ worthy of all acceptance in these terms, 1 Timothy
1.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners. And as we must receive Christ
judiciously, so also we must heartily and cordially accept of him on those
terms on which he is willing to bestow himself upon us. Christ and salvation by
Christ is not be embraced on any terms, Lam. 3.29. He puts his mouth in the
dust, if so be there may be hope. We should not stick at abaseing our selves
and lying in the dust which was used (...) taken of deep humiliation, Job 42.6.
Jos. 7.6. Or putting the mouth in the dust may signify full subjection,
submitting to any thing though in it self ungrateful and distastful, as licking
the dust is distastful, Is. 49.23. A man thoroughly convinced of his lost
estate, will submit to any thing, so there may be hope of salvation. The
returning Prodigal was willing to submit to any terms, so he might be received
into his fathers family, Luke 15.19. Make me as one of thy hired servants.
David was content rather with the lowest place in Gods house, than the highest
preferments in the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84.10. I had rather be a
door-keeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

3. We may know that we receive Christ aright, when nothing in Christ or of
Christ is offensive to us, but he is altogether lovely. Some are offended at
the Cross of Christ; Christ Crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, to the
Greeks Foolishness. 1 Cor. 1.23. Some are offended at the Doctrine of Christ,
and of some Doctrines of the Gospel, this is an hard saying, who can bear it.
But when nothing of Christ, nothing in Christ is offensive to us, that argues
we are in a blessed condition. Mat. 11.6. Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be
offended in me. When all of Christ is lovely and desirable, that is an
evidence that he is ours. Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved and my friend.

4. We may know that we have rightly received Christ, if we find that there is
virtue come out of Christ into our Souls. When a distressed woman did but
touch Christ's Clothes, virtue went out of the Lord Jesus, and healed the woman
of the Plague that was upon her. Mark 5.27, 28, 29, 30. If upon the touching of
Christ's Clothes, virtue came out of him to heal the Distempers of the Body,
then much more upon receiving Christ into our hearts, will virtue come out of
Christ to heal our Souls.

But some may say, what is that virtue that comes out of Jesus Christ, to
those that receive Christ by Faith.

A. 1. There comes a Sanctifying virtue from Christ. Act 26.18. Who are
Sanctified by Faith which is in me. They that do rightly receive Christ, do
from that fullness of grace that is in him receive grace for grace. John 1.16.
And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. All we, that is,
all we that have received Christ, ver. 12. have received of his fullness, grace
for grace, that is, grace answerable to those graces that are in Christ,
Humility answering the Humility that was in Christ, Meekness answering the
Meekness of Christ, the heart is disposed and inclined to imitate the example
of Christ. 1 John 4.17. As he was, so are we in this world. This is an evidence
that we have received grace for grace, from that fullness that is in Christ,
when our hearts are inclined to imitate the example of Christ.

2. There comes a sin subduing virtue from Jesus Christ, when he is received
by us. As Dagon fell down to the Earth when the Ark was brought into the house
of Dagon. 1 Samuel 5.3. Behold Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth,
before the Ark of God. And when the Philistines set up Dagon again, he fell
down again before the Ark, and his head and hands were cut off, there was
nothing but the stump of Dagon left. So it is when Christ is received into the
heart, the Idols of the heart are thrown down, the power of indwelling
corruption is subdued, though the stump of sin abide still, though the body of
Death is still carried about with us, yet the hands and the head as I may so
say, of the old man is taken away, the power of sin is destroyed, where Christ
dwells he will not let sin be in dominion. Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you, because you are not under the Law, but under grace.

3. There is a soul strengthening virtue comes from Christ, where he is rightly
received by Faith. The Soul is strengthened both to do and suffer the will of
God. Act. 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem
for the name of the Lord Jesus. When God has given us a suffering Spirit, that
we are willing to suffer for Christ, that is an evident token, that God intends
to give us Salvation. Phil. 1.28, 29. And in nothing terrified by y^^r
adversaries, which is to them an evident token o^ perdition, but to you of
Salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given in the behalf if Christ,
not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake.

4. We may know and be assured that we have a saving interest in Christ, if we
have the Spirit of Christ given to us. For all they that have the Spirit of
Christ, are united to Christ, he dwells in them, and they dwell in him. 1 John 3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us. 1 John 4.13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit. And all they that have not the Spirit
of Christ, are none of his, he does not, he will not own them for his. Romans
8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. We see it
is a plain case, if we have the Spirit of Christ, then we may know, we may be
sure that we are his, and that he abides and dwells in us, but if we have
not the Spirit of Christ, then we may know, we may be sure we are none of his.
But here some may say, how shall we know whither we have the Spirit of Christ
given to us or no?

A. 1. By the illumination of our minds and understandings to know Christ, and
the free grace of God, and those things which God has freely given us for
Christ's sake. By the light of nature we have some notions of good and evil, of
the punishment due to sin, and a reward of Righteousness, but the knowledge of
Christ, and the free grace of God, and the mysteries of our Salvation
proceeds only from the Spirit of God. Ephesians. 1.17. That the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him. Matthew. 16.16, 17. Thou art Christ the Son
of the Living God, and Jesus answered and said unto him, blessed art thou Simon
Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. Flesh and Blood, that is, all that man can attain to by his
own wisdom and understanding, without the help of the Spirit of God will not
bring a man to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. And as we cannot attain the
knowledge of Christ, so neither of the free grace of God but by the Spirit of
Christ. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God. Now we have received not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of God. And the
like may be said of the mysteries of our Salvation, we do not know the way and
means by which we should get to Heaven, till the Spirit of God gives us the
knowledge of the mysteries of the K. of Heaven. Mat. 13.11. It is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
given. But seeing some men are enlightened by the word and Spirit of God that
have no saving knowledge, it will not be amiss to show how we may know saving
illumination, from that illumination which is found in those that perish.

1. The saving knowledge of Christ is accompanied with Faith in Christ. When a
man has such a knowledge of Christ, as causes him to believe in Christ, he is
then made wise to Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. From a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Though a man have never such a great measure of
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, yet if he remain without Faith in Christ
Jesus, he is not wise unto Salvation. 2. Saving knowledge causes a man to do
those things which we know to be the will of God. If our knowledge be
accompanied with obedience, we need not doubt but it is saving knowledge. for
such as know, and do the will of God shall be Everlastingly happy. John 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Mat. 7.22. 3. Saving
knowledge makes a man to be pure and peaceable, and merciful, and to be easy
to be entreated to do good to others, and to be without partiality and
hypocrisy. Jam. 3.17. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
2. We may know that we have the Spirit of Christ, by those convictions which
the Spirit works in the Consciences of those to whom he is given. I will give
instance in these two, convictions of sin, and convictions of Righteousness.
Joh. 16.7, 8. When he is come, he will reprove (or as it is in the Margent)
convince the world of sin, and of righteousness and judgment. We may know that
Christ has sent his Spirit into our hearts, by the convictions of sin and of
righteousness, and of judgment; I shall speak only to the two first. Where God
gives the Spirit of Christ, he convinces of sin.

But seeing natural Conscience may convince of sin as well as the Spirit of
Christ, how may we distinguish the convictions of the Spirit, from the
convictions of natural Conscience?

A. 1. Natural Conscience may convince of sins against the Law, as
Unrighteousness intemperance, lying, uncleanness, etc. But the Spirit
convinces of sins against the Gospel, as not believing in Christ, not loving
Christ, etc. Joh. 16.8, 9. He will reprove the world of sin, of sin, because
they believe not in me. Such as have the Spirit of Christ are troubled for, and
mourn over their unbelief, as well as their sins against the Law. Mark 9.24.
The Father of the child cried out and said with tears, Lord! I believe, help
thou mine unbelief.

2. The Spirit of God convinces a man of his evil heart and evil nature, as
well as of his evil actions. Natural Conscience may convince a man of sinful
actions, but does not show a man the evil root whence these proceed. But the
Spirit of God shows a man the plague of his heart, and teaches him to bemoan
his Original as well as his Actual sin. Psalm. 54.5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. The Spirit of God shows a man
his sinful, corrupt and wicked heart, as well as his sinful life. Jer. 17.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it. The Spirit of God teaches a man to bewail the body of Sin and Death, as
well as the acts of sin. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver
me from the body of this Death.

3. When the Spirit convinces a man of his sins, he leads him to Christ, and
teaches him to seek remission of his sins from the blood of Christ. Psalm.
51.7. Purge me with hyssope and I shall be clean. Hyssope was dipped in the
blood of the Sacrifice, and sprinkled upon the persons and things that were to
be cleansed, a Type of our being cleansed by the Blood of Christ. It Is as if he
should have said, Lord! apply thy Sons Blood to my Soul, and then I shall be
cleansed from my sins. So the Apostle when distressed with the sense of sin,
fetches his Consolation from Christ Jesus, Romans 7.24, 25. O wretched man that
I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this Death, I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. But the convictions of natural Conscience either make a
man desperate, as we see in Judas, who hanged himself, or wear off by diverting
to the pleasures and businesses of the world. Saul when under trouble was
quieted by Music, or else Conscience is eased by the doing some good works,
and does fetch its ease from Christ.

And as the Spirit convinces those to whom it is given of Sin, so of
Righteousness also. Now where the Spirit convinces of Righteousness, he does
these things.

(1.) He shows a man the imperfection of his own Righteousness, that all the
works of Righteousness which ever he did, or is able to do, are full of
imperfections, and so takes him off from resting in his own Righteousness. Isa.
64.6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as
filthy rags.

2. He shows a man that there is perfect and complete Righteousness to be had
in Christ. Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord shall I have
Righteousness and Strength. 2 Cor. 5.22. He was made sin for us, that knew no
sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. And he shows us
that this Righteousness of Christ is for every one that believes in him. Romans
10.4. For Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness to every one that
believes. He gives us to understand that Christ by his death has fully
satisfied Gods justice for all our sins, and brought in Everlasting
Righteousness, because he rose from the dead, and went to the Father, and was
not sent back again into the world to do any thing more for our Redemption.
Joh. 16.8, 10. He shall reprove the world of Righteousness, -- of
Righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more.

(3.) He makes a man to renounce all confidence in his own Righteousness, and
to flee to Christ, that he may be found in him, and have his Righteousness
imputed to him. Phil. 3.8, 9. -- That I may win Christ, and he found in him,
not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

3. We may know if we have the Spirit of Christ, if we own Christ as our Lord,
and yield obedience to him as our Lord. For no man can call Christ Lord, and
obey him as Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. I give you to understand,
that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed, and that no
man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, that is, as Calvin,
per Spiritum sanctum inhabitantem and regenerantem, unless the holy Ghost dwell
in him, and has regenerated him. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, that
is, say it from his heart, believingly and obediently, so say it, as to believe
him to be our Lord, and obey him as our Lord. It is the Spirit put into our
hearts that bows our hearts to obey Christ, and causes us to walk in his
ways, Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. Do we walk in Gods
statutes? If so this proceeds from Gods Spirit, which he has put within us,
which causes us to walk in his statutes. Now we know that our obedience to the
Gospel of Christ proceeds from the holy ghost given to us these ways.

1. When it proceeds from the heart, when it is internal as well as external
obedience, Romans 6.17. God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you, 1
Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the
Spirit. The Spirit puts us on purifying our souls as well as our bodies, on
inward as well as outward obedience. 2. When it is universal, that we are
willing to obey Christ in all things, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends if you do
whatsoever I command you. If the heart be disposed to obey Christ in all things
we need not doubt of our interest in him, but may be assured we are his
friends, that he does and will own us for his friends. And though we cannot
attain to perfection in our obedience, yet it is a good sign of a sincere
heart, when we have a respect to all the commands of Christ, Psalm. 119.6. Then
shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments. 3. When we
obey Christ in supernatural duties, I mean in such things as are above the
power of nature, and are cross and contrary to flesh and blood, and contrary to
a man's interest, as self denial, forgiving injuries, loveing enemies, doing
good to them that hate us, plucking out our right eyes, cutting off our right
hands, our obedience in such cases proceeds from the Spirit of Christ, Mat.
5.44.45. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them that dispitefully use you, and persecute you, that
ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven. This does evidence us
to be the true children of God, endued with the Spirit of God, when we can obey
Christ in such commands as are so cross to our corrupt natures, as loving our
enemies, and doing good to them that hate us. 4. When our obedience proceeds
from the Spirit, he shows us the imperfection of our obedience, and teaches
us to look tothe blood of sprinkling, for the taking away the imperfections of
our obedience, and rendering our obedience acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. The
obedience of Gods Elect, which proceeds from the sanctification of the
Spirit, needs the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, Though our persons
be holy, and our services holy, yet there is need of Jesus Christ, to render
our most spiritual sacrifices, our best duties acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2.5.
You also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
(4.) We may know we have the Spirit of Christ, if he has rendered Christ
glorious in our our eyes, and causes us glorify Christ. The Spirit of Christ,
when, and where he is given, he debaseth man, and exalts and glorifieth
Christ, Joh. 16.14. He shall glorify me. He, that is, the Spirit of truth
spoken of in the foregoing verse, when he the Spirit of truth is come. -- He
shall glorify me. When Christ is glorified in us and by us, that is a good
evidence that we have the Spirit of Christ, and that we are Christ's, Joh.
17.10. All mine are thine and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. I
will show how the Spirit glorifieth Christ in those that are his.

1. They that are Christ's ascribe the glory of all that grace, which is in
them, unto Christ, they do not take the glory of it to themselves, but
acknowledge they have all from Christ, Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness have all
we received, and grace for grace. They are taught to look upon every grace, to
be grace received, not born with them, not obtained or gotten by their own
industry, but received from Christ's fullness, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God
I am what I am. Whatever excellencies we have above others, the Spirit of God
teaches us to ascribe all to the grace of God in and through Jesus Christ. 2.
The Spirit of God teaches us to ascribe the glory of all the good which we
think, speak, or do unto Christ. For he shows us, that without Christ we can
do nothing. Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. And therefore when ever we
do any good thing, it is done through the strength of Christ. Phil. 4.13. I can
do all things through Christ, which strenghtneth me. Yea, when ever we think
any good thought, the Spirit of God teaches us to ascribe this to Christ. 2
Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God. 3. Whatever good things we hope to
receive from God, either in this Life or the Life to come, the Spirit teaches
us to hope for them on Christ's account, and for Christ's sake, and not upon our
own account. 2 Cor. 3.4. Such trust have we through Christ to Godward. 1 Timothy
1.1. The Lord Jesus Christ which is our hope. Whatever we trust or hope in God
for, our trust and hope is or ought to be grounded on the merits of Christ, we
ought to trust and hope we shall have it through Christ, that is, on Christ's
account, and for Christ's sake. Now Christ is greatly exalted and glorified,
when he is made the foundation of our Faith and Hope, both for things
pertaining to this life, and the life which is to come. 4, The Spirit
glorifieth Christ, by begeting in us high and glorious thoughts of Christ, and
this he does by showing us his personal excellencies, that he is the Eternal
God as well as Man, God Man in one person, and has all the fullness of the
Godhead, dwelling in him bodily. That as Mediator, he has all power in Heaven
and Earth given to him, and is exalted above all the Angels of Heaven, and all
the Kings on Earth, etc. And also by showing to us those great and glorious
things which he has purchased for us by his blood, as pardon of sin,
reconciliation with God, the blessings of the new Covenant, Eternal Life, etc.
Joh. 16.14. He shall glorify me, for he shall take of mine and show it unto
you. Till God gives us his Spirit which renders Christ glorious in our eyes, we
are ready to despise him and think meanly of him. Isa. 53.2, 3. There is no
beauty that we should desire him, he is despised and rejected of men. That is,
of such men as have not the Spirit of Christ; they see no beauty in him, and
therefore they despise and reject him. 5. We may know that we have the Spirit
of Christ, if we can find in our selves the fruits of the Spirit. What Christ
says concerning false Prophets. Mat. 7.16. Ye shall know them by their fruits.
The like may I say here, a man may know himself by his fruits. If he bring
forth the fruits of the Spirit, then he may know that he has the Spirit of God
dwelling in him, but if he bring forth the fruits of the flesh, then he is a
carnal man. What Christ says of Trees. Luke 6.44. Every Tree is known by his
own fruit. So is every man known, he may be known to himself, and to others by
his fruits. Now what the fruits of the Spirit are, you may see, Gal. 5.22, 23.
The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Love to God and one another, joy in
Zions welfare, when it goes well with the Church and People of God,
peaceableness whereby a man endeavors to live peaceably with all men, and to
make peace among those that are at variance long-suffering whereby we bear
afflictions patiently, though they belong upon us, and are not easily provoked
to anger. Gentleness whereby we carry our selves with mildness; not like Nabal
churlishly, who was such a son of Belial that no man could tell how to speak to
him. Goodness, whereby we are ready to do good to all men. Faith, whereby we
rely on God, and keep faith with men. Meekness, whereby we carry our selves
humbly, and without fierceness toward others. Temperance which implies
moderation in eating and drinking, these are fruits of the Spirit.
But some may say, seeing Meekness and Temperance etc. are moral virtues which
have been found in the Heathen, that have not the Spirit of Christ, how shall
we know whether our Meekness, Temperance, Long-suffering, etc. are moral
virtues or fruits of the Spirit.

A. 1. When it is Conscience to the command of God that puts us upon the
exercise of Love, Meekness, Patience, Temperance, and the like, then our
Meekness and Patience and Temperance are the fruits of the Spirit. For what is
wrought in us by the word of God is wrought by the Spirit, the word is the
instrument by which ordinarily the Spirit works upon us. 1 John 3.23. This is
his Commandment, that we should love one another as he gave us Commandment. A
Christian has respect to the command of Christ in the exercise of love.

2. When we have felt in our selves the inclinations to contrary vices, as
Frowardness, Intemperance, Malice, and the like, and have by Faith in Christ
and Prayer, obtained victory over those natural inclinations, and obtained
Meekness and Temperance, etc. Then are they the fruits of the Spirit. Luke
11.11. Your Heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.
Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall
live. The mortification of any sin is obtained only by the Spirit. And
therefore if we were naturally hasty, but have mortified that hasty Spirit, and
got a meek and quiet Spirit, that is from the Spirit of God. And the like may
be said of the rest.

3. If in the exercise of Meekness, Temperance, and the like, we have a respect
to Christ, the honor and glory of Christ, and not at our own glory, or some
other selfish end, then our Meekness and Temperance are the fruits of the
Spirit. For it is the Spirit that causes us to seek the glory of Christ, as
was showed before. He shall glorify me. But where there are only moral
virtues, there is looking no further than self ends, as a man's own glory, or
health or the like.

6. We may know we have the Spirit of Christ by our minding spiritual things,
Romans 8.5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh,
but they that are after the spirit the things of the spirit. The disposition of
the mind is a discovery of a man's state. If he chiefly mind the profits and
pleasures of the World, or the honors of the World, and what gratifieth
corrupt nature, he is a carnal unregenerate man. But if he chiefly mind the
things of the Spirit, such as the saving his precious Soul, the pleasing,
enjoying and glorifying God, if his mind and heart be chiefly carried out after
Spiritual Blessings, and Spiritual things, that is an argument that he is
renewed by the Spirit of God. And therefore let us make enquiry into the
disposition of our minds. Now the disposition of the mind may be known.

(1.) By the pleasedness and frequency of our thoughts. No thoughts are so
pleasing and sweet as thoughts of God, and Spiritual things to a man that minds
the things of the Spirit. Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet.
(2.) By the ardency of our endeavors. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired and
that will I seek after. What is most desired will be most sought after.
4. We may know that we have an interest in Christ if we be new creatures. 2
Cor. 5.17 If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past
away, behold all things are become new. Nothing that any man has or does, no
privileges, no excellencies will avail a man any thing to the obtaining of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, unless he be a new creature. Gal. 6.15. For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision but a
new Creature. Circumcision was a privilege of the Jews, an Ordinance of God, a
Seal of the Covenant, a profitable Ordinance. Romans 3.1, 2. What profit is there
of Circumcision? much every way. It was a painful Ordidinance. They were sore
several days after they were Circumcised, yet Circumcision did not avail any to
Salvation, but such as were new Creatures. Uncircumcision was the badge of the
Gentiles, who sought after Wisdom, yet no wisdom, no excellencies that were
found in any of the Gentiles would avail them to Salvation, if they were not
new creatures.

But here some may say: How shall we know whether we be new creatures?

Ans. 1. By our loathing the lusts and deeds of the old man, that is, by our
loathing our sins, and loathing our selves for our sins. For it is an evident
sign that God has given a man a new heart and a new spirit, when there
membrance of his sins makes him to loath himself, Ezekiel. 36.26, 31. A new heart
also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you -- Then shall ye
remember your own evil ways and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. And for confirmation of this, that self loathing, and loathing of
our sins is an evidence of the renewing grace of God; we may take notice that
unregenerate men are full of self love, 2 Timothy 3.2. Men shall be lovers of
their own selves. And they may leave some of their sins, but they do not loath
them. The Psalmist speaking of a graceless person, says of him, Psalm. 36.4. He
abhors not evil. If any ask, How shall we know whether we loath our sins,
and loath our selves for our sins.

I Answer, 1. A man that loatheth himself for his sins, looks upon himself as
a vile and loathsome creature, and blusheth and is ashamed of himself, when he
comes into the presence of God, Job 40.4. compared with Job 46.6. Behold I am
vile -- wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Job who
abhorred himself, looked upon himself as a vile creature, and repented in dust
and ashes, abased himself before God, as more vile then the dust. Ezra blushed
and was ashamed to lift up his face to God. Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed
and blush to lift up my face unto thee my God, for our iniquities are increased
over our head, and our trespass is grown up to the heavens.

2. When a man loathes his sins, they are burthensom and troublesome to him,
Psalm. 38.4 Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as a heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me. He would fain be freed from his sins. We flee as far as we
can from things, and persons which we abhor. Job. 30.10. They abhor me, they
flee far from me. A man that loathes his sins, would not live in his sins,
though he should not be punished for them. As it is with a man that loatheth his
Life, he would fain be rid of it, he would not live always. Job 7.15, 16. My
Soul chooses strangling and death, rather than Life; I loath it, I would not
live always. So it is with a man in respect of his sins, his Soul chooses the
Death rather than the Life of his sins, and if he might have an indulgence to
continue in his sins, without being cast into Hell for them, yet he would not
live always in them.

2. A new creature is an humble creature, one that has very poor and mean, and
low thoughts of himself. When God makes a man a new creature, he takes down the
pride of his heart, and makes him an humble and lowly Spirit. Whatever gifts
and excellencies God has bestowed upon him, whatever services and sufferings
he has gone through, he looks upon himself as a poor inconsiderable creature,
of no worth or value. 2 Cor. 12.11. In nothing am I behind the very chiefest
Apostles, though I am nothing. The Apostles had great gifts, they could speak
all Languages, could work Miracles, were filled with the holy Ghost, did great
service for God, went through great sufferings, and the Apostle Paul did not in
any thing come behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, yet under all his
endowments, he esteemed himself to be nothing. See some instances of the
humility of those that are new creatures.

(1.) They have meaner thoughts of themselves than they have of any other men.
Prove. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish than any man. Ephesians. 3.8. Less than the
least of all Saints. 1 Timothy 1.15. To save sinners of whom I am chief. They
follow the counsel of the Apostle. Phil. 2.3. In lowliness of mind, let each
esteem others better than themselves. For they are privy to more of their own
sins, than they are to any other man's upon the face of the earth. They know
more of their own hearts than they do of other men's. (2.) They have meaner
thoughts of themselves then they have of the other creatures, and therefore
they liken themselves not to the Sun or Stars, but to the meanest of all the
creatures, as worms, fleas, dead dogs, and the like. Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm
and no man, a reproach of men -- 2 Samuel 24.14. After whom is the King of Israel
come out, after whom do thou pursue? After a dead dog? after a Flea?
3. They have such mean thoughts of themselves, that they judge themselves to
be unworthy of the very least of all Gods mercies. Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy
of the least of all the mercies, and all the truth that thou have showed unto
thy servant. And they look upon themselves as worthy of the greatest of Gods
judgments, even to be confounded and destroyed for ever. Dan. 9.7. O Lord!
Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces as at this
day. They look upon it as infinite mercy, that they are out of hell. Lam. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed. That they that are of an
humble Spirit are new creatures, appears hence, because God dwells with the
humble. Isa. 57.15. And saves the humble. Job 22.29. He shall save the humble
person. But God dwells with none, he will save none but such as are new
creatures; For except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
Joh. 3.3.

3. He that is a new creature has a renewed judgment, a renewed will, renewed
affections, and a renewed conversation. Grace is like Heaven, which dissuseth
it self into the whole lump. He has a renewed judgment, he judges sin to be
the greatest evil, whereas fools make a mock of sin. And he judges the
enjoyment of God the chiefest good, whereas carnal persons make light of God.
Israel would none of me. Deuteronomy. 32.15. He lightly esteemed the rock of his
Salvation He judges all worldly enjoyments to be but vanity, and heaven to be
the best riches and choicest portion. He has a renewed will; whereas before
his will was averse to holiness, inclined to that which is evil. Now the bent
of the will is toward God and against sin, so that a man chooses the things
that please God, and refuses that which is offensive to God. He has renewed
affections; whereas his affections were set on things below, now they are set
on things above. He has a renewed Conversation, and walks in newness of life.

4. He that is a new creature is taken off from his old foundation, and built
upon a new foundation. An house may have much repairs done it, the Windows may
be enlarged, the breaches that were made may be stopped up, the walls may be
whited over, and yet this does not make it a new house, unless there be a new
Foundation. It is he the old house repaired, and not a new house. So here, a
man may reform many things, as Herod did, he may have more light in his
understanding, he may be like the Pharisees, outwardly Righteous, a painted
Sepulcher, and yet be no new creature, the old man may lie hid under a form of
Godliness, he may be dressed up in a religious garb, and yet such a man is not
a new creature. Now a man is taken of his old Foundation in these respects.

1. He is taken off from expecting Righteousness and Life, by the old Covenant,
or the Covenant of works. For he is fully convinced, that by the deeds of the
law no flesh whatsoever can be justified in the sight of God. Romans 3.20. By the
deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight Now till God
takes a man off, till the Lord instill renewing grace into a man's heart, he
seeks for Righteousness and Life by the works of the Law. Romans 9.31, 32. But
when God makes a man a new creature, then he seeks after the new Covenant, and
expects Life and Righteousness by promise, 1 John 2.25. and upon terms of free
grace. Ephesians. 2.8. He lives upon the promises of the new Covenant. 2. He that is
taken off from his old foundation, is taken off from trusting in himself, in
any thing that he has done or can do, and trusts only in Christ, and in what
Christ has done and suffered for us. We naturally go about to establish our
own Righteousness Romans 10.3. But God takes us off from this, and shows us that
Christ is the Foundation on which we are to build our Faith and Hope. Isa.
28.16. 1 Cor. 3.11. Such as are new creatures place all there hope of Salvation
in Christ. Act. 15.11. Heb. 10.19. 3. When God has taught a man self-denial,
then he has taken him off his old Foundation. For an unregenerate man acts
from self and for self, self is his Principle he acts from, and self is his
rule he walks by, and self is the end he aims at. He seeks his own with his own
profit, his own interest, he is a selfish man, and prefers himself above God.
But when God makes a man a new creature, he teaches him to deny himself, and
to prefer God above himself, he is acted then by new Principles, and has new
ends in his actions. Obedience to Gods command is his Principle, and respect to
Gods glory is his end.
5. Jesus Christ is all in all to such as are new creatures. Col. 3.10, 11. Ye
have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Where there is
neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all. When may Christ be said to be all
and in all? How are we to understand it, that Christ is all, and in all, in
these that are new Creatures?

A. 1. They place all there confidence in Christ, and place no confidence in
themselves, or in their privileges or performances. 1 John 5.14. This is the
confidence we have in him -- Phil. 3.3. And have no confidence in the flesh.

2. They glory more in Christ than in any privileges or excellencies whatever.
Isa. 45. ult. In him shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and in him
shall they glory.

3. They place all their blessedness not in Riches, not in Friends, not in any
Worldly things, but in Christ. They reckon themselves blessed upon their
enjoyment of Christ. Isa. 65.16. He who blesses himself in the earth, shall
bless himself in the God of truth.

4. They esteem others not for their privileges, or outward excellencies, but
by what of Christ they see in them, and if they discern the grace of Christ in
any men, they will not slight them for want of outward things, but will honor
them, because they belong to Christ. Psalm. 15.4. He honors them that fear
the Lord. Psalm. 40.4. 2 King. 3.13.14.

Doubts, about our being new creatures, answered.
Obj. 1. It is said of those that are in Christ, and are new creatures, that
old things are past away, and all things are become new. Now though through
Gods mercy I find something of the renewing grace of God, yet I feel still some
remainders of the old man, I cannot say that all old things are past away, and
that all things are become new, and therefore I am afraid that I am not a new
creature.

A. 1. We must distinguish between a new creature and a perfect creature. We
may be new creatures though we be not perfect creatures, but have imperfections
adhering to us. There is no doubt but the Apostle Paul was a new creature, yet
he confesses of himself that he was not perfect. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I
had already attained, either were already perfect. Job was a new Creature, yet
he disclaimed the saying he was perfect, and if he had said it, his impatient
speeches under his afflictions would have proved his imperfection. Joh. 9.20.
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, if I say I am perfect,
it shall prove me perverse. Perfection of grace is the privilege of the Saints
in Heaven, not of the Saints on Earth. Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect.

2. Renewing grace is carried on gradually in those that are born of God. The
work of renovation is not finished in one day, but is carried on day by day. 2
Cor. 4.16. The inward man is renewed day by day. The mind is not fully
enlightened, nor the heart sully sanctified at once, but this work is carried on
by degrees, and it is a mistake to think we have no renewing grace, because the
work of renovation is not completed, but is carried on day by day.

3. Old things are past away, and all things are become new, initially in those
that are new creatures. God has begun to renew the whole Soul, and to mortify
all the lusts and members of the old man. Grace though it be but in part,
diffuseth it self into every part of a man, it is like leaven that leaveneth
the whole lump, the Mind, Will, Affections, Soul and Body, all are Sanctified
though but imperfectly. And as all things are begun to be made new, so they
shall as certainly be perfected as if they were already done. Such things as
shall certainly be brought to pass, are often in Scripture spoke off, as already
done. Isa. 9.6. Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given. This was
spoken many hundred years before the Birth of Christ, because it was certain
that he should be born, it is spoken as already done. Joh. 6.47. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has Everlasting Life. Eternal
Life is enjoyed in Heaven, yet because it is sure to such as believe in Christ,
it is not said he shall have, but he has Everlasting Life.

4. There is a relative and a real change in such as are new creatures. By a
relative change I understand a change of their state and relation to God. As
for instance, when a man of an enemy becomes a friend of God. When a man of a
child of wrath becomes a child of God. Whereas a man was under the curse he
comes under the blessing, whereas a man was in a state of Condemnation, he is
translated into a state of Salvation. In respect of this Relative change, all
old things are passed away, and all things are become new in him, that is a new
creature. For he that is in Christ is no more under the curse and wrath of God,
and in a state of Condemnation, but is passed from Death to Life. A real change
is the change that is made of the Heart and Life of him that is a new Creature;
This change is carried on gradually.

5. There are different degrees of grace in those that are new creatures, some
are Babes in Christ, some little Children, some young Men, some Fathers. Such
as are but babes in Christ are new Creatures, as well as those that are
Fathers, but have more weaknesses and imperfections than young Men or Fathers.
Such as are but babes in Christ, have such great imperfections, and are so weak
in grace, that they are more like to Carnal than Spiritual persons. 1 Cor. 3.1.
And I brethren could not speak unto you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal,
even as unto babes in Christ. Yet even in such as are but babes in Christ,
there may be discerned some workings and stirrings of the grace of God, as for
instance.

(1.) There are desires after the word of God in order to growth thereby. 1
Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby. As the babe cannot live without the breast, so neither can the new
creature live without the Milk of the Word. It is not any Preaching will
satisfy a new Creature, but it must be the Milk of the Word, the sincere Milk
of the Word, such as will further growth. It must be intelligible, sound,
profitable preaching that will quiet such a Soul. (2.) They that are but babes
in Christ show forth this grace, they cry after Christ, and cannot be satisfied
without Christ, as the babe cries after the Mother and cannot be satisfied
without her. They can say as David, Psalm. 143.6. My Soul thirsts after thee
as a thirsty land. Psalm. 84.2. My heart and my flesh cries out for the Living
God
Obj. 2. It is said, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin.
Now I cannot live without the Commission of sin, and therefore I fear I am not
born of God, I fear I am not a new Creature.

A. 1. The meaning of this Scripture is not that they that are born of God, are
wholly free from all sin, for then no man upon the face of the earth should be
born of God. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth that does good
and sins not. Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all. 1 John 1.8. If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us.

2. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin like as other men, who are
void of the grace of God. There is a great deal of difference between the sins
of Regenerate and Unregenerate men. As 1. Regenerate men do not allow
themselves in sin. Romans 7.15. That which I do, I allow not. Their will is
averse to sin, although by the power of indwelling corruption they are drawn to
sin. ver. 19. The evil which I would not, that I do. But the will of an
Unregenerate man is inclined and resolved to adhere to sin. Joh. 8.44. The
lusts of your Father ye will do. Jer. 2.25. We have loved strangers, and after
them we will go. 2. The sins of the Regenerate are sins of infirmity. Psalm.
77.10. I said this is mine infirmity. They fall through weakness, and are
overtaken with a temptation. Gal. 6.1. If any man be overtaken with a fault --
Psalm. 18.21. I have not wickedly departed from my God. But wicked men go on
presumptuously in their sins, and sin with an high hand. Jer. 8.6. Every one
turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. 3. Though
Regenerate persons may fall into sin, yet they do not love any sin, but do hate
and abhor sin. Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way. Romans 7.15. What I hate,
that I do. But Unregenerate men love and delight in sin. Isa. 66.3. Their Soul
delights in their abominations. Jer. 2.25. We have loved strangers. That is,
strange Gods. 4. Though a Regenerate man may fall into sin, he does not lie in
his sins, but rises up again, and renews his Repentance. Prove. 24.16. A just
man falls seven times and rises up again. But Unregenerate men lie and
continue in their sins. 1 John 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness. They
are like the Sow that walloweth in the mire. 5. The Regenerate make it their
daily care and endeavor to depart from sin. Psalm. 16.17. The high way of the
upright is to depart from evil. That is, it is his daily and constant practice.
Act. 24.16. But Unregenerate men give over themselves to do evil, and set
themselves in a way that is not good. Psalm. 36.4. He sets himself in a way
that is not good. Ephesians. 4.19.


3. If we find in our selves the grace of God as well as the remainders of
Corruption, we may conclude that notwithstanding our infirmities we are born
again. As for instance, if we find that God has given us hearts to love
himself, and to love one another, this love is a grace of God, and a manifest
token that we are born again. 1 John 4.7. Beloved let us love one another, for
love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God.

5. Crucifying the flesh with the lusts and affections thereof, is a good
evidence of a saving interest, Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have
Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. For the understanding of
this Scripture, we must enquire what is meant by Flesh, what by the affections
of the flesh, what by the lusts, and what by Crucifying the flesh with the
affections and lusts. By the flesh is not meant the body, but the corruption of
our natures, the works of the flesh spoken of ver. 19.20, 21. Now the works of
the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, etc. They that are
Christ's Crucify these works of the flesh. By the affections are meant sinful
affections, when we set our affections on things unlawful, and when we set our
affections inordinately on things that are lawful, all inordinate affections
are to be mortified. Col. 3.5. Mortify your Members which are on the earth --
inordinate affections. As for natural affections when kept in due bounds, they
are not to be Crucified, for it is no virtue, but a great degree of degeneracy
to be without natural affection. Such as are without natural affection are not
reckoned among the Saints, but among the chief of Sinners. Romans 1.31. Without
understanding, Covenant breakers, without natural affection -- By lusts
understand, the inclinations of the heart unto evil things. 1 Cor. 10.6. Now
these are our Examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as
they also lusted. Now to Crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, is
to mortify our corrupt natures, with the works that proceed from it, and not
only to mortify the works of the flesh, but all inordinate affections, and all
lustings after evil things, it is opposed to living after the flesh, which will
bring eternal death, and is inconsistent with the grace of God, and an interest
in Christ. Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. To
Crucify the flesh with the lusts and affectious, is to dye to sin, to put all
our sins to Death, a Metaphor taken from the Jews putting Christ to Death, let
us therefore consider what the Jews did to Christ when they Crucified him, and
see whether we have done the like to our sins, and thereby we shall know
whether we have Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

1. When the Jews Crucified Christ, they found him out, and had a token given
to them whereby they should know him. Joh 18.2. Judas which betrayed him knew
the place. Mat. 26.48. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying,
whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast. So they that have
Crucified the flesh with the lusts and affections, have gotten the knowledge of
their sins, they know the plague of their hearts. They can say as the Jews,
Isa. 58.12. As for our iniquities we know them. This is one step toward
Reformation, to discover what is amiss in our hearts and ways. Psalm. 119.59. I
thought on my ways, and I turned my feet unto thy Testimony. But if a man go no
farther than the getting the knowledge of our sins, and do not forsake them,
this will make us the greater Sinners by sinning against light.

2. When the Jews had found out Christ, they went with him to Caiaphas the high
Priest, and took counsel against Christ to put him to death, Matthew. 26.56. and
27.1. So they that have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, when
they have found out their sins, they ask counsel of God, how they may put them
to death, how and by what means they may be delivered from their sins, Romans
7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death.

3. When the Jews had taken counsel to put Christ to death, they carry him to
Pontius Pilate, and there they accuse him, and cry out to have him crucified,
Mark 15.3. The chief Priest accused him of many things, ver. 13. They cried out
crucify him. So they that have crucified the flesh and the lusts and
affections, accuse themselves before God, for their sinful hearts, and their
vile affections, and corrupt lusts, Isa. 64.6. We all are as an unclean thing,
Job 40.4. Behold I am vile. And they cry out to God to Crucify their lusts,
and to deliver them from all their Transgressions. Psalm. 39.8. Deliver me from
all my Transgressions.

4. They judged and condemned Christ before Pilate, and said that by their Law
he ought to dye, and would not let Pilate rest till he had condemned him, and
delivered him up to be crucified, Joh. 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he
ought to dye, Mark 14.64. They all condemned him to be guilty of death, Luke
23.24. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required. So they
that have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, judge and condemn
themselves in the presence of God, as worthy to dye eternally. And they judge
and condemn their sins, they are satisfied in their judgments that according
to the Law of God they ought to put their sin to death, and they will give God
no rest till he has sent his Spirit into their hearts, to Crucify the flesh
with the lusts and affections.

5. The Jews after Christ was Condemned, hung him up on the Cross, and made him
fast with Nails to the Cross, and would not suffer him to be taken down, till
he had given up the Ghost. So they that have Crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts, do lay hold on Christ Crucified, for the Crucifying their
flesh with all its corrupt lusts. And it is the sixed purpose of their hearts
by the help of Christ, to suppress all sinful lusts and inordinate affections,
and to refrain from all sinful speeches and practices. Thus David was careful
to suppress and keep down Pride in his heart. Psalm. 131.1. Lord my heart is not
haughty -- And to suppress the frowardness and discontent of his heart. Psalm.
101.4. A froward heart shall depart from me. If frowardness got into his heart,
under the disorders and crosses that were in his family, he would not suffer it
to abide with him, it should quickly depart from him, he was careful also to
suppress inordinate affections to the World. Psalm. 119.36. Incline my heart to
thy Testimonies, and not unto Covetousness. And all other evil inclinations of
his heart. Psalm. 141.4. Incline not my heart to any evil thing. And as he was
careful to suppress evil lusts in his heart, so to refrain from evil speeches
and sinful practice. Psalm. 49.1. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I
sin not with my Tongue, I will keep my Mouth with a Bridle, while the wicked is
before me. Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way. They
that seek by the help of Christ to suppress evil lusts and inordinate
affections, and refrain from sinful speeches and practices, have Crucified the
flesh with the lusts and affections.

6. The Jews having heard that after Christ was Crucified, he would rise again,
put him into a Grave, and rolled a great stone upon the mouth of the Grave, and
set a strict watch, and did all that they could to prevent his rising again. So
they that have Crucified the flesh with the lusts and affections do what they
can to prevent the rising of sin in their hearts, and the breaking of it forth
in their lives. They set a watch over their lips and lives. Psalm. 39.1. I said
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue. Psalm. 141.3. Set a
watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Psalm. 18.23. I kept my
self from mine iniquity. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out
of it are the issues of Life.

Obj. I am under doubtings whether I am Christ's, because it is said they that
are Christ's have Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Now though
I desire and endeavor to Crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, yet
I cannot say I have attained to it. Though I endeavor to suppress all evil
lustings, and all inordinate affections, and to refrain from every evil way,
yet I still find the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the law in my
members warring against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law
of sin and death. And therefore I fear I am none of Christ's.

A. 1. Such as are united to Christ, have Flesh as well as Spirit in them, and
do find the lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit, and the warring of the
law in their members, against the law of their mind, but they do not walk after
the Flesh but after the Spirit. Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit. The Apostle speaking of such as are in Christ Jesus,
says not, they have no flesh, nothing of corruption in them, that there is
nothing but the Spirit of Grace in them, but he says of them, they walk not
after the flesh but after the Spirit. The Galatians were the children of God.
Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Yet they
had in them, the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, whereby they were hindered
that they could not do that good which they were willing and desirous to do.
Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would. The Apostle Paul was Christ's, 2 Cor. 10.7. If any man
trust to himself that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that
as he is Christ's, even so we are Christ's. Yet this Apostle (who if any man upon
earth might be confident that he was Christ's, he would let him know that he was
Christ's also) saw and complained of a law in his Members, warring against the
law of his Mind, and leading him captive to the law of sin. Romans 7.23. But I
see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing
me into Captivity to the law of sin, which is in my Members.

2. They that heartily desire to have the flesh with the affections and lusts
crucified, they have already crucified their sins in their hearts. What we are
willing and desirous to do, that the Scripture accounts as if it were already
done. As it is in the Commission, what sins we desire to commit, God accounts
them to be committed in our hearts. Matthew. 5.28. Whosoever looks upon a woman
to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart. So it
is with the crucifixion of sin when a man looks upon his sins and says in the
sincerity of his heart; oh that my flesh with the affections and lusts were
crucified he may be said to have crucified his flesh with the lusts and
affections.

3. They that are Christ's have delivered up their corrupt natures, with all the
affections and lusts to be crucified. We read of Christ that he was delivered
to the Jews to be crucified, Joh. 19.16. Then delivered he him to be crucified.
The hypocrite spares his sins, and hides them, and is unwilling to part with
them, Job 20.12, 13. But it is not so with a true Christian, to deliver up all
his sins to be crucified, and begs earnestly of God, that he would not suffer
any sin to have the dominion over him, but that he may be delivered from all
his transgressions, Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any
iniquity have dominion over me, Psalm. 39.8. Deliver me from all my
transgressions.

4. We may be said to have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts,
when we have begun to mortify all our sins, when we make it our daily care and
endeavor to suppress evil lusts and inordinate affections, and to refrain our
feet from every evil way. Crucifixion is a lingering death. Our sins are
crucified, when they are dying, though not fully dead. Persons nailed to the
Cross had many struglings before they gave up the ghost, and yet they might be
said to be crucified while they hung upon the Cross, though not perfectly dead.
Paul says, I dye daily. So a Christian makes it his daily business to dye to
his sins. And what we are truly and heartily endeavoring to do, that the Lord
esteems and accepts as if it were done. Abraham in the sincerity of his heart
endeavoring to offer up Isaac, the Scripture speaks of it and accounts it, as
if it had been actually done, Heb. 11.17. By faith Abraham when he was tried,
offered up his son Isaac.

5. Then we have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, when the
reigning power and dominion of sin is taken away, that we are no longer the
servants of sin, Romans 6 6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. The old man is all one with the flesh and the affections and lusts
thereof, now this old man is crucified, when the power and strength of sin is
so far destroyed as that we are not servants of sin, when the dominion of sin
is taken away from all that are in a state of grace, ver. 14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, because ye are not under the Law but under Grace. Now
the dominion of sin may be taken away, though sin be not wholly dead in the
soul. As it was with those beasts spoken of Dan. 7.12. Their dominion was taken
away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a time. So the dominion
of sin may be taken away in that soul, where the life of it is prolonged for a
little season.

But here some may say, How may we know whether sin reigns in us, or whether
the dominion of sin be taken away?

I Answer, When we yield willing obedience to the motions and dictates of sin,
then sin reigns in us, Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that
you should obey it in the lusts thereof, and ver. 16. Know ye not that to whom
ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. When it is a
man's usual course to yield ready obedience to the motions and solicitations of
sin, it is a plain case sin reigns in such a man, and he is the servant of sin.
As it is an argument that a man is in Authority when his commands are obeyed,
Matthew. 8.9. I am a man under authority having soldiers under me, and I say to
this man go, and he goes, and to another come, and he comes, and to my
servant do this, and he does it. So it is an argument that sin is in authority,
when the motions of sin are are obeyed, when we go and come and do as we are
moved and inclined, by the lusts of our own hearts. But where the motions and
lusts of the flesh are resisted, striven against, suppressed, there sin is not
in dominion, though it may still abide and dwell in us.

6. If our doubtings of our interest in Christ arise from hence, that we fear
we have not Crucified the flesh with the lusts and affections thereof, let us
set our selves more vigorously about this work, to Mortify and Crucify the
lusts and affections of the flesh, and to that end let us make use of these
helps.

(1.) Let us walk in the Spirit. Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. There will be lustings
of the Flesh against the Spirit, as long as we live in this world, but if we
walk in the Spirit, we shall be thereby kept from the fulfilling of the lust of
the flesh. (2.) Put on Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it, that will be a means to mortify the corruption of your
natures. Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. (3.) Meditate on the passion and
sufferings of Christ, and rest upon Christ for the grace that he has purchased
by his death, to mortify the flesh with the lusts and affections. Gal. 6.14.
Romans 6.6. Tit. 2.14. (4.) Apply the promises which are effectual means to purge
out our corrupt natures, and to make us partakers of the divine nature, and to
help us to escape the corruptions that are in the world through lust. 2 Pet.
1.4. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption which is in the world through lust. Promises of renewing our
natures, and purging out the corruption of our hearts you may see. Ezekiel. 36.26.
A new heart will I give you And I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God shall Circumcise thine heart.
6. Loving Christ above all things, is a certain evidence of a saving interest
in Christ. If we can say of Christ with the Spouse, he is my Beloved, or as the
Dutch render it, my best Beloved; then we may say, he is mine and I am his. It
was the Spouses sincere love to Christ, that caused her to say with confidence
that Christ was hers, and she was his. My Beloved is mine and I am his. As we
may know that we are passed from Death to Life by our love to the Members of
Christ. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we
love the brethren. So we may also know our translation into a state of life, by
our love to Jesus Christ, and may say, we know we are passed from Death to
Life, because we love the Lord Jesus Christ. That a sincere love to Christ
(which is a loving Christ above all things) is a sure evidence of a saving
interest in Christ, will appear hence, because eternal life and all manner of
blessings are promised to those that love Christ in sincerity. Jam. 2.5.
Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich
in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them that love
him. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.
Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
But as for those that love any things or persons more than they love Jesus
Christ, though the dearest friends they have in all the world, they shall not
be owned of Christ for his. Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more
than me is not worthy of me, and he that loves Son, or Daughter more than me,
is not worthy of me. See also Luke 14.26.

But how shall we know whether we love Christ above all Things and Persons in
the World.

A. 1. By our valuing, esteeming and preferring Christ above all things in the
World. What we love most, that we esteem and value most. 1 These. 5.11. Esteem
them very highly in love. Now we may know that we have the highest esteem for
Christ of all things and persons in the World.

(1.) When we will part with any thing, rather than part with Christ, when we
are willing to suffer the loss of any thing, yea of all things, so that we may
win Christ. Mat. 13.45, 46. The wise Merchant showed that he esteemed the Pearl
that he had found to be of great price, when he sold all that he had to
purchase it. Phil. 3.8. The Apostle Paul showed his preferring Christ above
all, by his suffering the loss of all things for Christ, and this turned to him
for a Testimony that Christ was his, yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things. (2.) When all other things are counted
but as dross and dung in comparison of Christ. Phil. 3.8. For whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ. When other things are undervalued and made light of in comparison of
Christ. Eccl. 2.27. Solomon having spoken of Mirth, Music, Riches, Stately
Buildings, Gardens, Orchards, the peculiar treasure of Kings, etc. Says all is
vanity and vexation of Spirit. But speaking of Christ, says, Cant. 5.10. My
beloved is the chief among ten thousand. But when men have great thoughts of
the world, and make light of Christ, it is a sign they have no interest in him
suum cuique pulchrum. Every one valueth and prizeth his own things. (3.) It is
a sign that we esteem Christ above all things, when in matters of deliberation,
we prefer Christ's will above our own will, and Christ's interest above our own
interests, and the Glory of God above all our own concernments. As it was with
Christ, when he was in great danger, and deliberating what he should do,
whether he should pray for deliverance from Death, or expose himself to suffer
Death, he resolved upon what was most for the Glory of God, and preferred the
Glory of God above his own Life. Joh. 12.27, 28. Now is my Soul troubled, and
what shall I say, Father save me from this hour, but for this cause came I to
this hour. Father Glorify thy name. So the grace of Christ teaches every
Christian, in such cases as come under deliberation, to prefer the glory of God
above all worldly concernments.
2. We may know we love Christ above all things in the world, when we desire
Christ, and the favor of God in Christ, above all things in the World. For
what we love best, that we shall desire most; Our love is discovered by our
desires. Now there is no good in this World is so much desired by gracious
souls, as the favor of God in Christ. Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, who
will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
There is nothing in all the world, that is desired by gracious persons like the
enjoyment of God and Christ, and they that find such desires after Christ, may
conclude that they have a saving interest in Christ, and that God is, and will
be their portion for ever. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My Flesh and my Heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. That
desiring Christ above all things is an evidence of a gracious state, appears
hence, because Unregenerate men have no desires after Christ. Their Language
concerning Christ is, there is no beauty that we should desire him. Isa. 53.2.
If you ask, how shall we know that we desire Christ above all things.

A. 1. When the main thing that we seek after is to get Christ, and Salvation
by Christ. For what we truly and heartily desire, that we shall seek after and
pray for. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they may be saved. Where there is no seeking after Christ, and Salvation
by Christ, no praying to God for Christ, there are no hearty desires after
Christ.

2. Where Christ is desired above all things, if the Lord should give us leave
to ask what we would have given to us, as he did Solomon. 1 King. 3.5. Ask what
I shall give thee. What would we ask of God? would we not ask Salvation by
Christ? If we would choose Christ above Riches, above Honors and Pleasures,
above all the World, that shows that we desire Christ above all things.

3. We may know that we desire Christ above all things, when the enjoyment of
Christ is sweeter to us than the enjoyment of any thing in this World. Prove.
13.19. The desire accomplished is sweet to the Soul. Now do we find a sweetness
in Christ? Are not the fruits and benefits we have by his Death, sweet and
precious? Cant. 2.3. His fruit was sweet to my taste. Are not the thoughts of
Christ sweeter and more pleasing than the thoughts of Riches, or Honors, or
Pleasures? Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet. Is not the word
of Christ, his gracious promises, sweeter than all earthly delights? Psalm.
119.103. How sweet are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth.
When we find a greater sweetness in Christ than in all other things, it is a
sign that we desire him, and delight in him above all things.

3. We may know that we love Christ above all things, when he is our chiefest
joy and delight. For what we love most, as we desire it most when we want it,
so we delight and joy in it most, when we possess it. Cant. 7.6. How pleasant
art thou, O my love, for delights. Now we may know that Christ is our chiefest
joy and delight, these ways.

(1.) When we have greater joy from the apprehension of the love of God in
Christ, then from all riches or worldly enjoyments. Psalm. 21.6. Thou have made
him exceeding glad with thy countenance. David's joy and gladness, which he had
from the light of Gods countenance, was exceeding great joy, it did exceed all
the joy that the greatest confluence of worldly comforts could afford to him,
or any other man. Psalm. 4.6, 7. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us, thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their
Corn and Wine increased. (2.) Then Christ is our chiefest joy, when we can joy
in God and Christ, when our other joys and comforts are taken from us. Hab.
3.17, 18. Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be on the
vine, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat,
the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the
stall, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation. Isa.
24.11, 13, 14. All joy is darkened, and the mirth of the land is gone. When thus
it shall be in the midst of the land, among the People, there shall be as the
shaking of an Olive Tree, and as the gleaning grapes, when the Vintage is done.
They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the Majesty of the Lord.
(3.) Then Christ is our chiefest joy, when all other joys and comforts are as
nothing to us, when we want Christ, and the sense of the love of God in Christ,
but in the midst of all our enjoyments, we are in a troubled condition through
the hidings of Gods face. Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. It was not David's Riches, his Honors, his Crown and Kingdom that
could make up the want of the light of Gods countenance, but in the midst of
his greatest enjoyments, and highest preferment, he was in a troubled
condition, when he was under the hidings of Gods face. Mary wept for want of
Christ, when she saw and conversed with Angels. Joh. 20.11, 12, 13. The seeing
and conversing with Angels did not, could not satisfy her as long as she
wanted Christ.
7. We may know that we are Christ's, when we make it our great care to live and
dye to the Lord. For they are most certainly the Lords, that live and dye to
the Lord. Romans 14.7, 8. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to
himself. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye
unto the Lord, whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords.

But when may we be said to live unto the Lord, and to dye unto the Lord.

A. 1. When we do not live according to our own minds, and our own wills, but
we frame our lives by the will of God revealed in his word. 1 Pet. 4.2. That he
no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men,
but to the will of God They that live according to the will of God, have no
cause to doubt their interest in Christ. For Christ owns, loves and reckons
upon them as his Brethren. Mat. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father
which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister and Mother. Now we may
discern that we live according to the will of God, these ways, (1.) When we
are careful to know and find out the will of God; They that live according to
the will of God, observe that command of Christ. Ephesians. 5.17. Be ye not unwise,
but understanding what the will of the Lord is. And if they be in doubt which
way to steer their course, they are careful to find out the will of God, they
do not consult so much what will be for their profit, what their own
inclinations lead them to, what others would have them to do, but what God
would have them to do. Act. 9.6. Lord! what will thou have me to do? And they
are unwilling to engage in any business of moment, till they have consulted the
mind of God, and found out what is his will. They say to God as the Apostle did
to Philemon. Phil. 2.14. Without thy mind I would do nothing. (2.) When we
can and do resign up our wills to the will of God, in cases of greatest moment,
and highest concernment, when we deny our own wills, and prefer the will of God
before our own, then we live according to the will of God. Luke 22.42. Father
if thou be willing remove this cup from me, nevertheless not my will, but thy
will be done. Our Lord Jesus was very earnest to have the cup removed, and
therefore prayed that if it were possible it might pass from him, and it was a
case of the greatest moment, yet he resigned up his will to the will of God.
(3.) Then we live according to the will of God, when we make the will of God
the rule and the ground of our actions. By making the will of God the rule of
our actions, I mean this, when we are careful to do nothing, but what is
agreeable to the will of God, and shun those things that are contrary to his
will. By making the will of God the ground of our actions, I mean this, when we
do this or that, because it is the will of God. We find David in all that
service he did for his Generation had respect to the will of God, Act. 13.36.
David after he had served his own Generation, by the will of God fell on sleep.
The Apostle Paul in the exercise of his Calling and Ministerial work, as he was
an Apostle, had respect to the will of God. 2 Timothy 1 1. Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ by the will of God.


2. Then we live unto the Lord, when we do not live unto our selves, and seek
and carry on our own ends, but seek the honor, and pleasing and enjoying God.
2 Cor. 5.15. He dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them. They that live to the Lord do
not in some one particular action seek the glory of God, but they resolve by
the help of Gods grace, to show forth his praise and seek his glory as long as
they live. Psalm. 146.2. While I live, I will praise the Lord, I will sing
praises unto my God, while I have any Being

3. Then we live to the Lord, when the great end why we desire life, and the
main design that we drive on in the whole course of our lives is to service,
for Christ in our Generation, and to be fitted to live with Christ in Heaven.
This was the end the Apostle desired to live, and the great design he drove on
to do service for Christ. Phil. 1.21. To me to live is Christ -- And the main
thing the Psalmist had in his eye. Psalm. 118.17. I shall not dye but live, and
declare the works of God. And Learned Whitaker upon his deathbed, when he was
told that Death was approaching, replied, Vitam non expeto nisi ad promovendum
honorem Dei, and ecclesiae inserviendum, I do not desire life, but for the
promoting the glory of God, and to be serviceable to his Church.

4. Then we live and dye to the Lord, when we are willing to be at the disposal
of God for Life and Death, both for the time, manner, and all other
circumstances both of life and death. When we are willing to live any kind of
life that God shall call us to, though it be a poor afflicted distressed life,
and when we are contented to dye such a death, and at such a time as God shall
call us to dye, though it be a violent, a painful, a shameful death. When a man
is willing to lay down his life for Christ, that is a good evidence that he
lives and dies to the Lord. Joh. 13.37. I will lay down my Life for thy sake.
Act. 24.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for the
name of the Lord Jesus

Doubts about a saving interest in Christ, answered.
Having laid down several evidences of a saving interest in Christ, I shall now
resolve some doubts that hinder weaker Christians from being satisfied in their
minds about their interest in Christ.

. Imperfection in our obedience is consistent with a saving interst in Christ
Obj. I hope Christ is mine and I am his, but yet I have doubts and fears in
this case, because I come so short in my obedience to Christ.

May Christ be ours, and yet the obedience that we yield, be but imperfect
obedience.

A. 1. Obeying Christ is a sure evidence of a saving interest in Christ, for he
is the Author not only of Temporal but Eternal Salvation, not only to some, but
to all them that obey him. Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him.

2. Though you come short in your obeying the Precepts of Christ, yet cannot you
say, you have sought his Precepts? David concludes that he was the Lords,
because he had sought his Precepts. Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me, for I
have sought thy Precepts. Now when may we be said to have sought Gods Precepts?

A. 1. When we are desirous to know the Commandments of God, in order to doing
them, and therefore when any doubtful cases occurr, we will do nothing rashly,
till we have considered whither it be agreeable to the Commandments of God, and
when we cannot find out what the Lord has commanded, in this or the other
thing, we go to God to discover his will to us; Psalm. 119.12, 19. Teach me thy
Statutes -- hide not thy Commandments from me. When we thus seek to God to
teach and reveal his will to us, we may be said to seek his Precepts.

2. We seek Gods Precepts, when we seek to him for grace to keep his Precepts,
and say with David. Psalm. 119.5. Oh that my ways were directed, that I could
keep thy Precepts. Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will.

3. It is an argument that we love Christ, and so consequently that we have an
interest in him, when we set his Commandments before us as our rule, and walk
after them, though we be not able to walk up to them. 2 Ep. Joh. 6. And this is
love that we walk after his Commandments.

4. Though you cannot obey Christ perfectly, yet are you not willing and
desirous to obey Christ better, even to obey him in all things? It is an
argument that a man has a good Conscience, and is in a good estate, when he is
willing in all things to live Honestly. Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good
Conscience in all things, willing to live honestly.

5. If our obedience be sincere, though it be imperfect obedience, it is a sign
that we have a saving interest in Christ, and are his peculiar people. Exodus
19.5. Now therefore if ye will obey my voice in deed -- then ye shall be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all people. Grace, that is the love of God, and
all those blessings which he is wont to give out of his love and free grace to
the Children of men, shall be unto all them that love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, although they do not love him in perfection. Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be
with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Grace be with all
them, that is, shall be with them, and continue with them for ever.

See more in the last Chapter of this Treatise.

CHAP. II. Of the Grounds of Consolation under natural troubles and desolations.
IF Interest in Christ be a ground of Consolation under all the troubles of
this Life, then let us seek comfort in Christ and from Christ, under national
troubles; when ruin and desolation is coming upon the Nations, either by
Foreign Invasion, or by Tumults, Insurrections, or Massacres at home, when
dreadful judgments as the Sword, Pestilence, or Famine are upon us, in the
worst times imaginable, there is comfort to be had in Christ, as you may see
from such Scriptures as these. Mich. 5.5. And this man shall be the peace, when
the Assyrian shall come into the Land. The man spoken of here, is the man
Christ Jesus, who being the Son of God, became man for our sakes. That the
Prophet is here treating of Christ, who was to be born at Bethlehem, is evident
from ver. 2. And because what is said of this man, that he shall be the peace,
is applied to Christ. Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our peace. Now it is said of our
Lord Jesus, that he shall be the peace, when a Foreign Enemy should invade the
Land, namely, when the Assyrian should come into the land. And what manner of
People were these Assyrians. The Assyrians were Idolaters. 2 Chronicles. 28.23. And
Idolaters are bitter enemies to the Worshippers of the true God. They were
great enemies to Israel, and came with open mouth to devour the Israelites.
Isa. 9.12. The Assyrians were the rod of Gods anger, and the staff of his
indignation, who was sent by God to tread down a sinful people, like mire in
the streets. Isa. 10.5, 6. Yet Christ was the peace of his people in such a
dismal and bloody day, when the Assyrian was sent into the land, to tread down
all ranks and degrees of men, like mire in the streets.

Another Scripture that shows us there is comfort to be had in Christ in times
of greatest confusion, when all places and persons are in an uproar, and all
things are turned upside down, and there is no peace to be had either at sea or
land. We have Psalm. 46.4. There is a River, the Streams whereof make glad the
City of God. For opening this Scripture, let us consider. This River may
signify the Lord Jesus Christ; For it is said of him, Isa. 32.2. He shall be
as Rivers of water in a dry place. Is is frequent with the Scriptures to set
out Christ by a Fountain, and Rivers of Waters. As Isa. 33.21. The glorious
Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers. Zach. 13.1. In that day there
shall be a Fountain opened* Jer. 2.14. They have forsaken me, the Fountain of
Living Waters. All the gladness of the City of God comes from this River,
namely, from Christ the consolation of Israel. The streams that issue from this
River are the benefits that we have from Christ, as pardon of sin,
reconciliation with God, hope of eternal life, and the like, and all those good
things which God for Christ's sake gives to us, and does for us. The fruits and
benefits which we have by the death and intercession of Christ, are a great
refreshing to the people of God in their greatest troubles. When the Spouse of
Christ was under the scorching heat of persecution, She found great delight and
sweetness in meditating on those benefits she had by Christ. Cant. 2.3. I sat
down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste.
The benefits we have by Christ, comprehends all those great things which the
Lord has been wont to do for his People in all ages, which puts great gladness
into their hearts. Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof
we are glad. [The City of God] which is made glad by the streams of this River,
are the people of God in all ages, and all places of the world. Now let us see
[what dismal times] are pointed at, what great calamities are mentioned in this
Psalm, under all which the City of God is made glad, by the streams that issue
from this River.

1. He supposes such times wherein the earth should be removed, and carried
into the midst of the Sea, ver. 2. which signifies the utter and irrecoverable
destruction of mighty Kingdoms, for its usual with the Scripture to set out
States and Kingdoms by Mountains, and the destruction and desolation of
Kingdoms, by removing the earth, and removing the mountains. Isa. 24.1, 3, 19,
20. Jer. 51.25. The removing these mountains into the midst of the Sea, may
signify their perpetual and irrecoverable destruction.

2. The Psalmist speaks of the roaring of the waters, and their being troubled,
and the mountains shaking with the swelling thereof, and this may signify
great tumults and uproars among the people, such as may make the stoutest
hearted persons to tremble. Psalm. 74.4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy
Congregation. The Scripture sets forth multitudes of people by waters. As
Rev. 17.15. And the roaring of these waters make the mountains shake, that is,
make the stoutest and most courageous men to fear and tremble. Psalm. 18.4. The
floods of ungodly men made me afraid. When ungodly men that have no fear of God
before their eyes, were in an uproar, were gathered together, and bore down all
before them like a flood, it made even David himself to be afraid.

3. By the removing the earth and roaring of the waters are meant all places,
being full of trouble, wars at Sea and Land, the whole world full of stirs and
commotions, yet we will not fear.

4. What the Psalmist expressed Metaphorically ver. 2.3. he expresses more
plainly ver. 6. The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved, he uttered his
voice, the earth melted. That is, there should be such dreadful judgments
called for by God, such ragings of the Heathen, such commotions of the
Kingdoms, as should make men's hearts to melt with grief and fear. For the heart
is melted with grief. Psalm. 119.28. My Soul melts for heaviness. Luke 21.26.
Men's hearts failing them for fear.

5. He speaks of dreadful desolations to be made in the earth by the Lord,
such as might make men stand still and behold them. ver. 8. Come behold the
works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth Yet under all
these desolations, when the Heathen rage, and the Kingdoms are moved, when
there are such troubles as make men's hearts to melt within them, when the earth
is removed, and the mountains are carried into the Sea, when the waters roar
and are troubled, when the mountains shake with the swelling thereof, There is
a River, the streams whereof make glad the City of God. There is comfort in
Christ under the greatest ruins and desolations that come upon Kingdoms and
Nations, yea upon the whole world. And here we may take notice of some of these
streams of this River, some of these benefits we have by Christ, which are
matters of joy in our greatest calamities, which are hinted in this Psalm.

1. The Lords people shall through Christ and for Christ's sake have the Lords
presence with them in all the commotions and desolations that come upon the
world, and this makes glad the City of God, and settles the faith and hope of
the people of God, ver. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved,
ver. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us. This is three times mentioned, that the
Lord is with his people, as being a prime antidote to expel their fears, and
comfort their hearts, Is. 41.10. Fear not I am with thee, yea under dismal
calamities, when the Lord is pouring out his fury, and is pleading against us
with fire and sword, and is leading his people through the depths of trouble
and fiery trials, this is a singular comfort, to have God with us, Isa. 42.24,
25. compared with 43.1, 2. 2. Another of those streams which make glad the City
of God under calamitous times, is that they have a refuge to flee to, and that
this refuge is God himself, and that this God who is their refuge is the God of
Jacob. This is also three times hinted in this Psalm, ver. 1, 7, 11. God is our
refuge, -- The God of Jacob is our refuge, The God of Jacob is our refuge. It
is comfortable to have a refuge to flee to in a storm, a refuge to flee to
where we may be safe. But most comfortable to have God himself, the great God,
the eternal God, the Al-mighty, All-sufficient God, the faithful God, the
infinitely near and gracious, and loving God, for our refuge. And it is an
addition to our comfort, that this God who is our refuge, has styled himself
the God of Jacob. For that implies, (1.) That he that was Jacobs refuge when
he was in great distress, and afraid of his brother Esau, who hated Jacob, and
had taken up a resolution to kill him, Genesis 27.41. And to come against Jacob
with four hundred men, which made Jacob afraid that he intended to kill him and
his wives and children, Genesis 32.6, 7, 11. yet God was Jacobs refuge in this
great strait, and so overruled Esau's heart, that he did Jacob no harm. (2.)
That God is and will be a refuge to poor weak and shiftless creatures, such as
are but worms in their own and others account, despicable persons, he will help
and take care of them in the time of trouble, Isa. 41.13, 14. I the Lord thy
God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee fear not, I will help thee. Fear
not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee, says the Lord and
thy redeemer the holy one of Israel. (3.) That is, and will be a refuge to such
as are in a deserted condition, and are ready to say, they are forsaken of God,
for some of the seed of Jacob are ready to say their way is hid from the Lord,
yet the Lord is their God and their refuge, Isa. 40.27. Why say thou, O
Jacob, and speak. O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
passed over from my God, Compared with Isa. 41.8, 10. But thou Israel art my
servant, and Jacob, whom I have chosen, -- Fear thou not, for I am with thee,
Be thou not dismayed for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, I will help
thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
3. Another stream issuing from this river, which makes glad the City of God,
mentioned in this Psalm, is, that God will be his people's strength in
troublous times, and a present help both in trouble and out of trouble, v. 1,
5. God is our strength, a very present help in trouble -- God shall help her
and that right early. Now this is a great comfort to have God for our strength,
and help in all our troubles, Psalm. 21.1. The king shall cry in thy strength, O
Lord, Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in
him and I am helped, therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song
will I praise him. I will instance in some grounds of consolation, under
natural troubles, as invasion of Foreign Enemies, Massacres, Pestilence, or
other desolating judgments.
1. It is a great ground of comfort to all the members of Christ under national
calamities, that there is nothing done in the world, or to any Kingdom, or any
City, or any particular person but by the Providence, of God. I shall Prove
this, that all things that are done in the world, come to pass by the
providence of God, and then show how this is a ground of comfort in all Public
calamities, as well as private and personal afflictions. That there is nothing
done in the world, in any Kingdom, in any City, to any particular person, but
by the providence of God, is evident from such Scriptures as these. Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever. Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and
create evil, I the Lord do all these things -- Am. 3.6. Shall there be evil in
a City, and the Lord has not done it? Whatsoever evil comes upon a City, or
any person in the City, whether Sword, or Pestilence, or Famine, or Fire, or
any other evil it is the Lord that sends all those evils. When any destroyers
come against a Nation, that lay it wast, and make it desolate, it is the Lord
that raises up those wasters to destroy, and furnishes them with all their
slaughter weapons, and their instruments to carry on the designed destruction.
Isa 54.16. Behold I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire,
and that brings forth all instruments for his work, and I have created the
waster to destroy. Such calamities as seem to be carried on in a confused
disorderly way, are governed and overruled by the providence of God, so that
there is no damage done to any man's person or estate, but by the appointment of
God. Nahum 1.3. The Lord has his way in the storm, and in the whirlwind. That
is, the Lord orders all things that are done by the storm, and by the
whirlwind, and by all other judgments that come as suddenly as violently, as
confusedly as the storm or the whirlwind -- When the Sword or Pestilence come
upon any place, the Lord numbers all the persons that shall be slain by the
Sword, and that shall dye by the Pestilence. Isa. 65.12. Therefore will I
number you to the Sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. Jer. 15.2.
When any man suffers by Fire, Hail, Snow, or stormy Winds, he suffers nothing
but what God has appointed him to suffer, for the Fire, Snow, Hail, stormy
Winds, and all other creatures fulfill Gods word, they do nothing to any man
but what God has appointed them to do, Psalm. 148.8. Fire and Hail, Snow and
Vapor, stor my wind fulfilling his word. Mich. 6.7. Hear the rod, and who has
appointed it. Every rod has its whole work appointed by God. The Sea seems to
be a very unruly creature, especially when stormy winds causes it to rage, yet
the Lord rules the raging of the Sea, and suffers it to do nothing in its
greatest rage, but what he pleases. Psalm. 89.9. Thou rulest the raging of the
Sea, when the Waves thereof arise, thou stillest them. And he that rules the
raging of the Sea, rules and stilleth the tumults of the most unruly people.
Psalm. 65.7. Yea, he rules over all persons and all actions that are done in
any part of the world. Psalm. 103.19. The Lords Throne is in the Heavens, and
his Kingdom rules over all.

Now this is a ground of comfort to the People of God, in Tumults, and
Insurrections, and Massacres, and all other National judgments, that there is
nothing comes to pass, nothing befalls any Kingdom, City, or particular Person,
but by the providence of God. Psalm. 97.1, 2, 3. The Lord reigns, let the
earth rejoice -- Clouds and Darkness are round about him, Righteousness and
Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. A fire goes before him, and burns
his enemies round about. His Lightnings enlightened the world, the earth saw it
and trembled. The Hills melted like Wax. When we are under cloudy and dark
dispensations, when we meet with fiery trials, and God is burning up his
enemies round about, when he sends such judgments as make the inhabitants of
the earth to tremble, and the hills to melt like wax, that is, men of the
highest degree, Kings and Princes, their hearts faint through fear and grief,
yet then we may rejoice, when we consider it is the Lord reigns, and that all
things are done by his Providence. The Providence of God which rules and
disposes all things that are done in the world, is a ground of comfort to the
people of God, in public calamities, on several accounts. As

1. That God who rules and disposes of all things by his providence is our
God, and our Father in Christ. Psalm. 146.10. The Lord shall reign for ever,
even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations, praise ye the Lord. This is matter
of praise and joy to Zion, not only that God reigns, but that he which does
and shall reign for ever is Zions God. Thy God O Zion Reigns unto all
generations; praise ye the Lord. The consideration of our Fathers hand in
ordering all our afflictions may sweeten the bitterest cup which he at any time
puts into our hands. Joh. 18.11. The cup which my Father has given me shall I
not drink it?

2. Whatsoever the Lord does is done in Righteousness, when he breaks in pieces
Kingdoms and Nations, this is matter of comfort, God will do nothing to any
place or people, but what is consistent with Righteousness. Ps. 48.10, 11. Thy
right hand is full of Righteousness, let Mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters
of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.

3. The Lord who rules the world by his providence is a merciful and gracious
God, that will compass his own people with mercy, at such a time as he is
distributing sorrows in great abundance to wicked men. Psalm. 32.10. Many
sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall
compass him about. Even when he lets his own people fall into the hands of
cruel enemies, such as hate them, he is mindful of his mercy toward them.
Psalm. 106.42, 43, 45.

4. This God who rules and governs the world, and disposes all things that
are done therein by his providence, is a God in Covenant with us, that he will
never turn away from doing us good. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good -- This
was spoken to the Jews, when they were under very dark providence, the King of
Babylons Army had Besieged Jerusalem, and God told them by his Prophet that he
would give Jerusalem into the King of Babylons hands. ver. 2, 3. And besides
the Sword of the enemy, the City was visited with the Famine and Pestilence.
ver. 24. Yet under these sad providence God comforts his people with his
Everlasting Covenant, wherein he assures them that though they were surrounded
with all these evils, the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence, yet he would
not turn away from doing them good. Whatever aspect some of Gods providence
may have upon the world, and the Sinners in Zion, yet they are all mercy and
truth to the people of God, even when they have the greatest appearance of
severity. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth to such as
keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies.

5. The Lord has wise and holy ends in the changes and desolations that he
makes in the earth; And the consideration of the Holiness and Wisdom of God in
all his works, may be a stay to our minds, when he over-turns Kingdoms and
Nations. Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, give thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness. Dan. 2.20.21. Blessed be the name of God for ever
and for ever, for wisdom and might are his, and he changes the times and the
seasons, he removes Kings, and he sets up Kings.

2. That special care which the Lord takes of all his people at all times is a
ground of great comfort in times of danger and Public calamities. The Lord
takes a special care of all his people at all times, and this may quiet their
minds and free them from perplexing fears and cares, in times of greatest
danger and distress, 1 Pet 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares
for you. The persons to whom this Epistle was written were in great distress,
they were scattered abroad into several Countries, Chap. 1.2. To the strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia. They were in
heaviness through the manifold temptations, they met with in their persecuted
scattered condition, ver. 6. They were under great and sore afflictions, not
only the hand, but the mighty hand of God was upon them, Chapter 5.6. yet in this
scattered condition, when they were in heaviness through manifold temptations
when they were under the mighty hand of God, the Apostle comforts them with
this, that they had a God that took care of them, and therefore they needed not
to perplex and disquiet their minds with any kind of cares, but may cast them
all upon God. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. That we
may be the more comforted in time of danger, by the care that the Lord takes
of us, let us consider what manner of care it is wherewith the Lord cares for
us.

1. It is a special care which the Lord takes of his people. There is a common
care which he takes of all his creatures. He feeds the fowls of the Air, he
clotheth the grass of the field, he satisfies the desire of every living
thing, he preserves man and beast. But the care, which God takes of the
children of men, is far greater than what he takes of the beasts of the birds,
or any other creatures in this world. The care that God has of the sons of men
so far exceeds his care of other creatures; that it seems as no care compared
with that care which he takes for mankind, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for
oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is
written. And as God takes care of men above all other creatures, so he takes a
more special care of his own people than he does of all other men. They are to
him as the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. Het hat touches you, touches the
apple of his eye. They are his jewels, Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine says the
Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him. They are his peculiar treasure, Exodus
19.5. Ye shall be unto me a peculiar treasure above all people, for all the
earth is mine. They are his portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his
people. How careful are men of their portion, their peculiar treasure, their
jewels, the apple of their eye; so, and much more careful is the Lord of his
people. They are his children, Gal. 3.26. And in times of danger men are very
solicitous for their children. The first question that David put to both those
messengers that came with tidings from the battle was, concerning the safety of
his child. Is the young man Absalom safe, 2 Samuel 18.29, 32.

2. It is a particular care. The Lord does not only take care of his people in
general, but of every one of them in particular, and of every thing that
belongs to them. When God is destroying wicked men, he takes care for the
preservation of every one of his people, Psalm. 145.20. The Lord preserves all
them that love him, but all the wicked will he destroy. In times of greatest
calamity, when he breaks a kingdom in pieces, and scatters the inhabitants
thereof into all parts of the world, he will take care of every one of the
members of Christ, even the least and meanest, and most shiftless of all his
servants, Amos 9.9. For lo I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel
among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sive, yet shall not the least
grain fall to the ground. Say not in thy heart, God has so many to take care
of, he may forget me, or I am such a mean creature he will not regard me. For
it is all one with God to take care of many as few, and he takes care of the
lowest as well as the highest, Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord be high yet he has
respect unto the lowly. There are a great company of Sparrows, and they are
birds of but small value, yet not one of the Sparrows is forgotten of God, Luke
12.6.7. Are not five Sparrows sold for two farthings? and not one of them is
forgotten before God - Fear not therefore, ye are of more value than many
Sparrows. In the 4th. verse Christ says to them. Be not afraid of them that
kill the body. And gives two arguments to dissuade them from fearing them, that
can only kill the body. First, that is the worst they can do, after that they
have no more that they can do. And the other is, they cannot do this but by the
permission of God, for he that watches over every Sparrow does much more watch
over every man, who is of more value than many Sparrows. There are many devices
to take away the lives of the Sparrows, as Nets, Snares, Fowling-pieces, etc.
besides the danger they are in by the greater birds, who pray upon the lesser
ones, yet not one Sparrow is killed, but by the providence of God. Mat. 10.29.
Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the
ground without your father. Though we have many that lie in wait to take away
our lives, and the instruments of Death are prepared for us, yet not one man,
woman or child shall fall to the ground, and be cut off from the land of the
living, without our Heavenly Fathers appointment. And as the Lord takes a
particular care of every Member of Christ, so also of all the affairs and
concernments of all the Members of Christ. He sets the hedge of his providence
not only about their persons, but about all that they have on every side. Job.
1.10. Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has on every side. His care extends even to the least of all their
concernments, to the very hairs of their heads. Mat. 10.30. But the very hairs
of your head, are all numbered.

3. It is a constant and continual care. He takes care of them at all times,
both by night and by day, and in all places, when they go out and come in, at
home and abroad. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
moment, least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. This promise relates
to the Lords Vineyard, mentioned in the foregoing verse. And by his Vineyard is
meant all the members, all that belong to Christ, who is the true Vine. Joh.
15.1. I am the vine. Isa. 5.7. The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house
of Israel. This vineyard being exposed to many adversaries, if the hedge should
be removed from the vineyard, every one would be ready to pluck the vines.
Psalm. 80.12, 13. Therefore the Lord himself does and will keep it. I the Lord
do keep it -- I will keep it. And see the extensiveness of Gods care for his
vineyard, both as to the persons and times, he will keep it from being hurt by
any person at any time. Least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. And
consider the times to which this promise relates, and they are times of
greatest danger. When God is taking his sore, and great and long Sword into
his hand to punish his, and his Churches Adversaries, which are as subtle as
Serpents, as cruel as the Dragon, as strong and potent as the Leviathan. ver.
1. It relates also to that day wherein God is rising out of his place to punish
the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquities. Chap. 26. ver. 21. In that
day when he is punishing the inhabitants of the earth, and sending sore
judgments on such, as are like the Serpents and Dragons, he will keep his
vineyard night and day least any hurt it. Another Scripture that sets out the
constancy of Gods care for his People's welfare. We have Psalm. 121.5, 6, 7.
Behold he that keeps Israel will not slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy
keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The Sun shall not smite thee
by day, nor the Moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil. How
safe are they that have the Lord for their Keeper? when we sleep and can take
no care of our selves, he that keeps Israel neither slumbereth nor sleeps.
He keeps us from all evil by night and by day. For that is the meaning of the
Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night. For the Sun that rules
the day, and the Moon that rules the night. Genesis 1.16. It Is as much as to say,
he will keep us from all harms, he will keep us in safety day and night. The
care that the Lord takes of his people, is like the care that God took of the
land of Canaan, which was as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 11.12. A Land which the Lord
thy God cares for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the
beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year. Such is the care that the
Lord has of his people, his eyes are always upon them for good, from the
beginning of the year to the end of the year. The Lord takes care of all his
people from the day of their birth, yea from their being in the womb to their
old age, yea to the day of our death. Isa. 46.3, 4. Psalm. 48. ult. He will be
our guide even until death.

And as the Lord takes the care of his people at all times, both by night and
by day, so also in all places, whithersoever they go, he goes with them to
keep them in all places, and to preserve their going out, and their coming in.
Josh. 1.9. The Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou go. Genesis 28.15.
Behold I am with thee, to keep thee in all places whither thou go. Psalm.
121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from this time
forth, and even for evermore. What a comfort is this, when the way we are to
pass through is full of danger, either by reason of the Sword or Pestilence, or
any other evil, that we have a God, that will go along with us, whithersoever
we go.

4. That care which the Lord takes of his people is a wonderful great care,
the Lord Jesus is so careful of all his Members, that they are never out of
his eye, Job 36.7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, whether they
go into any parts of the earth, still his eyes are upon them for good, 2 Chronicles.
16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth to show
himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. And
the greater their dangers are, the more the eye of God is upon them, Psalm.
33.18, 19. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them
that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them
alive in famine. The Lord would have us take notice for our comfort, that when
we are in danger of death by famine or other judgments, his eye is upon us, and
therefore there is a note of attention prefixed, Behold the eye of the Lord --
The Lord is so careful of his people, that they are never out of his thoughts,
Isa. 442. O Israel thou shall not be forgotten of me. What the Lord said of
Solomon's temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. Mine eyes and mine heart shall be there
perpetually. The same may be said of all true Christians, who are the temple of
God, 2 Cor. 6.16. Gods eyes and his heart are upon them perpetually. The Lord
is so careful of his people, that they are never out of his arms, Deuteronomy. 33.3,
27. All his Saints are in thy hand -- The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms. He is so careful of his people that he
lays his lambs and carries them in his bosom, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his
flock like a shepherd, he shall gather his lambs with his arm, and carry them
in his bosom. When the Wolves are abroad, the lambs are safe as long as they
are in the shepherds bosom.

5. Ans. The Lord is exceeding careful of all his people himself, so also he
has sent forth all his Angels to minister to their necessities, and given them
a great charge to keep them in all their ways, and to enca up round about
them, and deliver them out of all their dangers, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them whoshall be heirs of
salvation, Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep
thee in all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
thy foot against a stone. The angels have a charge to keep us in all our ways,
whether soever we go, in all the ways of our general and particular calling,
they shall bear thee up in their hands, as nurses carry their children, having
them always in their eye, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. They have a
charge not only to keep us from great but from lesser evils, not only from
bruising our bodies, breaking our necks, or our bones, but from dashing our
feet against a stone. Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him, and delivers them. Suppose the times be very dangerous,
yet as long as we have a guard of Angels about us, we need not be afraid. One
Angel is a better guard and security to us, than an Army of an Hundred Thousand
Men. Angels have greater power than the greatest and most valiant Armies of
Armed men. We read of a great Army, an Hundred Fourscore and Five Thousand
Men, destroyed in a night by one Angel. Isa. 37.36. And therefore such as fear
God are in a safe condition in dangerous times, because the Angels of God
encamp round about them to deliver them.

Obj. How is this true, that the Lord takes such a special, continual
exceeding great care of all his Peopole, when many of the people of God fall
into very great straits and troubles, and though they cry to God, he seems
not to regard them, but they think themselves forgotten and forsaken of God.

A. 1. Eminent dangers, and great tribu lations, accompanied with a long
deferring of desired and expectd help, have staggered the Faith of eminent
Saints, and made them ready to think that God did not regard them, and took no
care of them. Job. 30.20. I cry unto thee and thou do not hear, I stand up
and thou regardest me not. When the Disciples were in a great storm, and ready
to perish, they were ready to think that Christ took no care of them. Mark
4.38. Master carest thou not that we perish? Isa. 49.14. Zion said, the Lord
has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me.

2. Sharp afflictions and long exercises of Faith and Patience are consistent
with the Fatherly love of God, and his tender care over us. He may chide us for
our faults, speak against us, write and act bitter things against us. and yet
have a dear love to us, and a continual and affectionate remembrance of us.
Jer. 31.20. Ever since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still,
therefore my bowels are troubled for him. God spoke against Ephraim, God acted
against Ephraim -- Thou have chastised me -- Yet Ephraim was his dear Son, his
pleasant Child, he had an earnest remembrance of him, and his bowels were
troubled for him. Rev. 3.19. Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten.

3. If we consult Gods word, and judge of Gods dealings with us by Faith, and
not by Sense, Faith will teach us to say God is with us, and takes care of us,
when Sense says God has forgotten and forsaken us. Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. Zion
was graven upon the palms of Gods hands, and her walls were continually before
the Lord, and God was more mindful of her, than any Mother of her sucking
Child, when she thought her self forgotten and forsaken of God.

Now this care which the Lord takes of his people is a ground of great comfort
in all their troubles. When Paul was a Prisoner at Rome, it was a great
comfort to him in his Bonds, when he understood the care that the Philippians
took of him. Phil 4.10. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the
last your care of me has flourished, again, wherein, you were careful; but ye
lacked opportunity. If the Apostle had great joy to see that the Philippians
took care of him in his Bonds, what joy may it be to us, to hear of the care
that the great God takes of us in all our troubles. What is the care of a man,
to the care of a God? The Philippians care of the Apostle was unconstant, one
while they were mindful of him, and then they either forgot or neglected him,
as appears by that expression, your care of me has flourished again, which
implies a decay in their care, and it was a good while before it flourished
again as is intimated in those words; now at last your care of me -- But Gods
care is constant without intermission. When the Philippians were careful of
Paul they lack^d opportunity to do what they desired to do for him, but God
never lacks opportunity of doing us good. If Paul then rejoiced greatly, of
the care the Philippians took of him, how ought we to rejoice in that care
which the great God takes of us. What the Apostle says to the Colossians;
Col. 2.1. I wish you knew what great care (so the word is expressed in the
Margin) I have for you. And why was he so desirous that they might know the
great care he had for them? That their hearts might be comforted -- ver. 2. So
may I say to all you that belong to Christ, I wish you knew what great care the
Lord takes for you at all times, it would wonderfully comfort your hearts in
all your dangers and troubles.

3. That God who rules and governs the world by his providence, and takes
such a great care of his, is an infinitely wise God, and the wisdom and
knowledge of God is a ground of great comfort under all Personal and National
Calamities. Psalm. 31.7. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have
considered my trouble, thou have known my Soul in adversities. It was a great
comfort to David, that God knew all his adversities, and considered all his
troubles. When Daniel foresaw the great changes God would make in the world,
in removing Kings and setting up Kings, and changing the Monarchies and
government of the Kingdoms of the earth, the consideration of the wisdom of God
manifested in those changes and revolutions, made him break out into blessing
and praising God. Dan. 2.20, 21. Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever;
for Wisdom and Might are his, And he changes the times and the seasors, he
removes Kings, and he sets up Kings, Yet Daniel who blessed God for
changing times and seasons, knew that sometimes when God makes changes in
Kingdoms, he sets up the basest of men to be Rulers. Dan. 4.17. The most high
rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets
ever it the basest of men. That we may see what comfort arises from the wisdom
and knowledge of God in times of great distress, let us consider these 4 or 5
things.

1. The Lord knows who are his, who they are that put their trust in him, and
make God their refuge, he can call them every one by their names, so that there
is no danger that any of his should perish through a mistake, in times of
confusion, when he is sending his judgments upon wicked men. 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that
are his. Some of the Lords People walk in darkness, and do not know that they
are the Lords, but there is no darkness with the Lord, he knows them that are
his. Nah. 1.7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows them that trust in him. The Lord has such perfect knowledge of all
that are his, that wheresoever they are dispersed or scattered into any parts
of the world, he can call them every one by name. Joh. 10.3, 14. He calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out -- I am the good Shepherd, and know my
Sheep. The Stars are so many that no man can number them, yet the Lord calls
every one of them by their name. Psalm. 147.4. He tells the number of the
Stars, he calls them all by their names. And he that calls the Stars by
their names he knows, and can call every one by his name. Now this is a great
comfort to us, that God knows us by name. Moses speaks of it as a great
favor, that God knew him by name. Exodus 33.12. Thou have said I know thee by
name, and thou have found grace in my sight

2. The Lord knows how to guide and direct his judgments, that they shall
fall upon, and take hold of those only that are marked out, and designed for
destruction. What is said of the Thunder and Lightning. Job. 37.3. He directs
it under the whole Heaven, and his Lightnings unto the end of the earth. The
Thunder and Lightning touch no person, do no damage to any man. but at the
direction of God. The same is true of other judgments also; When a certain man
drew a bow at a venture, it was God guided the Arrow to the King of Israel, and
that directed it to go between the joints of the Harness. 1 King. 22.34. When
the Lord sent several plagues on the land of Egypt, he so ordered and guided
his judgments, that they fell only on the Egyptians, and did not touch the
Israelites, yea he did not only distinguish between the persons of the
Israelites and the Egyptians, but also between their Cattle. Exodus 9.4. The
Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel, and the cattle of Egypt, there
shall nothing dye of all that is the children of Isreal's.

3. The Lord knows our conditions, what dangers we are in, what troubles and
sorrows we meet with, what straits and distresses are upon us. Exodus 7. And the
Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry by reason of their Taskmasters, for I know their
sorrows. Psalm. 38.9. Lord all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not
hid rom thee. When we are in great straits, and have friends that are able to
help us, we are ready to say, Oh that such a friend did but know how it is with
me. The Child is ready to say, Oh that my Father knew how it was with me, and
the Wife is ready to say in distress, Oh that my Husband knew how it was with
me! Our God who is our Friend, our Father, our Husband always knows how it is
with us, and may not this comfort us in our sorrows.

4. The Lord knows all our adversaries, their wrath and fury, their plottings
and contrivances against us, Psalm. 69.19. Mine adversaries are all before thee.
When the Assyrian came with great rage against Jerusalem, their doings and
contrivances were not hid from the Lord, Isa. 37.28. I know thy abode, and thy
going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

5. The Lord knows how to deliver us out of all our troubles, when we our
selves cannot see or think which way we shall be delivered, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations.

4. This God that governs the world, and takes care of his people, is
acquainted with all their troubles, is an Almighty God, able to succor, save
and defend them from their greatest danger and distresses, and this Almighty
power of God, is a ground of great comfort in times of greatest dangers and
distresses, Psalm. 2.1. The king shall joy in thy strength O Lord. David had
many enemies, and some of them very potent, Princes were his persecutors, and
what was his comfort under all his dangers, and troubles? The power of God. It
rejoiced his heart, when he considered what a strong God he had to be his
helper. The Lord himself proposes his creating power, as a ground of Comfort
to his people, against the fury and power of their adversaries, Isa. 51.11, 12.
I, even I am he that comforeth thee, who art thou, that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of man which shall be made as
grass. And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth the
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? This power of God is a ground
of comfort in times of greatest danger in several respects.

1. The power of God is an Almighty power. There is nothing so hard but the
power of God is able to do it. Jer. 32.17. He can do every thing that he
pleases. Job 42.2. I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought
can be withheld from thee. There are no dangers so great but God can deliver
us out of them. Daniel was in great danger when he was in a Den of Lions, yet
God delivered him out of the Lions Den. David was in greater danger than
Daniel, when he was in the Lions paw, yet God delivered him out of the Lions
paw. 1 Samuel 17.37. Paul was in greater danger than David, who was in the Lions
mouth, yet God delivered him out of the mouth of the Lion. 2 Timothy 4.17. I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. Jonah was in greater danger than Paul,
when he was in the fishes belly, yet God delivered Jonah out of the fishes
belly. Jonah 3.1.10. God can deliver us out of the hands of the strongest and
most enraged enemies. Nebuchadnezzar was the greatest Monarch in the world, all
People, Nations and Languages trembled before him. Dan. 5.19. And he was
greatly enraged against the 3 Children, because they would not worship the
golden image which he had set up, and he threatened the same hour that they
refused to worship his image, they should be cast into a burning fiery furnace,
yet hear what they said to him. Dan. 3.16, 17. O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not
careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve, is
able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out
of thine hand, O King.

2. This Almighty power of God is engaged for our defense, to take the care of
us, and defend us all the days of our lives. Job 23.25. Tea the Almighty shall
be our defense. Now this is a great comfort under greatest troubles, that we
have the Almighty God for our defense. Psalm. 94.19, 22. In the multitude of my
thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my Soul. And what were his comforts
when he had many troubled thoughts? Among other comforts this was none of the
meanest, that though he had mighty enemies, that thirsted after his blood, yet
he had the Almighty God for his defense. ver. 22. But the Lord is my defense,
and my God the rock of my refuge. Yea this is a ground of the highest joy, and
of everlasting joy, under all the changes and revolutions that come upon the
world, that the Almighty God is a defense to all that put their trust in him.
Psalm. 5.11. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, let them
ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them. Shouting for the joy is the
highest expression of joy, now they, all they that put their trust in God, have
cause not only to rejoice, but to shout for joy, and that for ever, because God
defends them.

3. That Almighty power which is engaged for the defense of all that trust in
God, is an everlasting strength. The Lords arm is not shortened that he cannot
save, he is able to do as great things for his people in these days, as he did
for our Fathers in former days. And this may unite and strengthen our Faith to
trust in the Lord at all times, though the times be never so dangerous and
troublesome, that his power is everlasting. Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

5. The gracious and precious promises of God, are a ground of strong
Consolation under all troubles, both Personal and National distresses. Jer.
15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and they were unto me the joy,
and the rejoicing of my heart. Observe Jeremiahs personal afflictions at this
time, when the word of God was the joy and the rejoicing of his heart. He was a
man of strife and contention to the whole earth, and every one railed at him
and cursed him, which made him cry out of his woe and misery. ver. 10. The Lord
had filled him with indignation, and he looked upon his pain as perpetual, and
his wound incurable. ver. 17.18. Besides his personal afflictions, there were
great judgments coming upon the Nation; the Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence,
and Captivity. ver. 2.3, 4. Yet under National and Personal calamities, the
word of God was the joy and rejoicing of his heart. So Psalm. 60.2.3, 6. Thou
have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it -- Thou have shown thy
people hard things, thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishment -- God
has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice. Gods promises were a rejoicing to
David's heart, when God sent such judgments as made the earth to tremble, and
broke Kingdoms in pieces; yea when God showed his own people hard things, and
made them stand astonished to see how he dealt with them, God has made several
sorts of promises to comfort his peoples hearts in difficult and dangerous
times, when he is bringing ruin and desolation upon the places where they
live. I will instance in some of them.

1. The Lord has promised to be an hiding place, and a refuge to his people,
when he sends his judgments upon the places where they live. Isa. 32.2, 18, 19.
Psalm. 32.6. Psalm. 9.9. Deuteronomy. 33.12. Prove. 18.10. Zeph. 2.3. compared with Chap.
1.2, 3, 17, 18. And not only to be a refuge to godly men themselves, but to
their children. Prove. 14.26. See also Isa. 8.7, 8, 13, 14. When the Assyrian
should invade the land, and overrun all parts of the land, the Lord promises
to be a Sanctuary to such as did make him their sear and their dread. Ezekiel.
11.16. 2. The Lord has promised to deal well wit his people in times of
public calamity, even when he sends ruin and destruction upon the places
where they live. Isa. 3.8, 10. Jerusalem is ruined, Judah is fallen -- Say ye
to the righteous it shall be well with him. Eccl. 8.12. Jer. 15.11. As the same
cloud which was dark and dreadful to the Egyptians, gave light to the
Israelites. Exodus 14.20. So God can make those providence which are dreadful
to wicked men, to be refreshing to his own people. 3. The Lord has promised to
bear up the Faith and Hope of his People, that their hearts shall not sink and
dye within them in evil days, though very dismal and dark days. Joel 3.15, 16.
The Prophet speaks of very dreadful judgments under Metaphorical expressions,
yet says, God shall be the hope and strength of his people in such a day. 4.
The Lord has promised to comfort his people in times of common calamity. Isa.
29.9, 19. At that day when the Lord visited Jerusalem with Thunder and an
Earthquake, and a Storm and Tempest, and devouring Fire, he promises that the
meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men rejoice in
the holy one of Israel. Job 5.22. At Destruction and Famine thou shall laugh.
Mal. 4.1, 2. 5. The Lord has promised to moderate the afflictions which he
lays upon his people, and what ever he lays upon others, he will lay upon
them no more than he will enable them to bear. Isa. 27.8. The Prophet had given
them warning, that he was coming out of his place to punish the inhabitants of
the earth for their sins. Chapter 26. ver. 21. And live for the comfort of the
people of God, he tells God would take a measure of his peoples strength and
sufferings, and that he would stay his rough wind in the day of his East wind.
Jer. 30.11. When the Lord is making a full end of all Nations, he will correct
them in measure. 1 Cor. 10.13. He will not suffer us to be Tempted above what
we are able to bear. 6. The Lord has promised to afford his gracious presence
with his people under their greatest troubles, not only at their entrance into,
but in their passage through the Fire and the Water. Isa. 42.1, 2. Fear not,
thou art mine, when thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, etc.
Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in trouble. 7. The Lord has promised his
people deliverance out of their greatest troubles. Jer. 30.7. Alas, for that
day is great. so that none is like it, it is even the day of Jacobs trouble,
but he shall be saved out of it. Psalm. 50.15. Psalm 71.20. Psalm 34.19. 8. The
Lord has promised to Sanctify National troubles to his people, and to make
them work together for their good. Jer. 24.5. Zech. 13.9. Romans 8.28.
6. It is a ground of comfort under National troubles, that God will by them
bring glory to his own name, advance the Kingdom of Christ, and promote the
good of his own people. Isa. 5.15, 16. When God stains the glory of the world,
then our Lord Jesus Christ, who is called the branch of the Lord, shall be
beautiful and glorious. Isa. 4.2. compared with Isa. 3.8. There were very
great commotions in Judea before the coming of Christ, God shook the Heavens
and the Earth, and shook all Nations, and the Scepter departed from Judah, and
then Christ the desire of all Nations came. Hag. 2.6, 7. There were great
overturnings, both in Church and State, before the coming of our Lord Jesus.
Ezekiel. 21.27. When God executed his judgments upon the Zidonians, it was for his
own glory. Ezekiel. 28.22. When such judgments begin to come upon the earth as
make men's hearts to fail for fear, then the people of God are exhorted to lift
up their heads, because their Redemption draws near. Luke 21.25, 26, 28.

Obj. 1. These are comfortable considerations may some say, but we see,
notwithstanding the providence and promises of God, and the care that God takes
of his people, that all things come alike to all men, the righteous perish as
well as the wicked, in times of common calamities.

A. 1. There are often times very signal providence in delivering Righteous men
in times of common calamity, as Noah, Genesis 7.1. and Lot, Genesis 19.16. And those
that sighed and cried for the sins of Judah and Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 9.4, 6.

2. Sometimes Gods People partake of the sins of the times and places where
they live, and then they partake in temporal punishments, though they be
pardoned as to their eternal state. Rev. 18.4. Psalm. 99.8.

3. When the Lord does not save his people with a temporal Salvation under
public calamities, but lets them fall by the Sword and Pestilence, and other
judgments, as well as other men, he saves them with an eternal Salvation. Isa.
45.17. Heb. 5.9.

4. When the people of God meet with the same sufferings that other men meet
with, and all things seem to come alike to them and others, yet there is a vast
difference between the sufferings of the people of God and other men. For

(1.) All the afflictions of the righteous come in love. Rev. 3.19. But the
troubles of the wicked come in wrath. Psalm. 2.5.

2. Righteous men have God with them in their troubles. Psalm. 91.15. But the
Lord is far from the wicked. Prove. 15.29.

3. The troubles of Righteous men do them good. Psalm. 119.71. But wicked wax
worse and worse under their afflictions. Isa. 1.5. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. 2 Timothy 3.13.

4. Righteous men have Gods blessing going along with their troubles. Psalm.
2.9, 12. Psalm. 94.12. But wicked men have Gods curse with their troubles. Isa.
34.5.

Obj. 2. If I knew that I were one whom God would take care off, and protect in
a time of common calamity, that would be a great stay and comfort to my mind,
but I do not know whither God will take care of me, and preserve me. And
therefore what has been said of the care of God of his people in an evil day,
is but of little use unto me.

A. 1. Do thou love God? If thou have set thy love upon God, thou may rest
satisfied, God will take care of thee, and preserve thee in an evil day. Psalm.
145, 20. The Lord preserves all them that love him. Psalm. 91.14, 15. Because
he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him.

2. Have thou committed thy self to God? desiring him to take the care of thee,
and do thou trust in him, and rely upon him to take the care of thee? then
thou may be satisfied in thy mind, that he will watch over thee in an evil
day. Psalm. 10.14. The poor commiteth himself unto thee, thou art the helper of
the Fatherless. Psalm. 91.2, 3. I will say of the Lord, he is my Refuge and my
Fortress, my God, in him will I trust, surely he shall deliver thee -- Psalm.
5.11. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice, let them ever
shout for joy, because thou defendest them.

3. Do thou lead a godly life? If so, know for thy comfort that God does, and
will take a special care of thee in an evil day. Psalm 41.3. But know that God
has set apart him that is godly for himself. Psalm. 32.6.

4. Is thy heart upright with God, and do thou walk in thine integrity? then
the Lord takes a peculiar care of thee. Psalm. 7.10. My defense is of God,
which saves the upright in heart. Prove. 2.7. He is a buckler to them that walk
uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.

5. Do thou mourn for the sins of the times and places in which thou live?
Then thou art marked out for preservation in a time of common calamity. Ezekiel.
9.4, 6.

Obj. 3. But I am such a poor simple shiftless creature, that I am afraid God
will not take care of me.

A. 1. Though thou art never so poor and shiftless and simple, yet if thou
committest thy self to God, he will take the care of thee. Psalm. 116.6. The
Lord preserves the simple. Psalm. 10.14. The poor commits himself unto thee,
thou art the helper of the Fatherless.

2. Though thou art never such a poor, shistless, simple creature, thou art of
more value than the birds of the air, yet none of them, no not the meanest of
them, not To much as a little Sparrow is forgotten or neglected of God. Luke
12.6, 7. Are not five Sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God. Fear not therefore ye are of more value than many
Sparrows.

Obj. 4. But I am a sinful creature, and therefore I am afraid God will not
take care of me in an evil day.

A. 1. If thou be an impenitent Sinner, then thou art in a woeful condition.
Isa. 3.11. Psalm. 11.6. Psalm. 75.8. When he flees from one judgment another
will overtake him. Job 20.24.

2. If thou have repented of thy sins, and humbled thy Soul for them, and fled
to the blood of Christ for the pardon of them, thou have good ground to hope
that the Lord will take the care of thee in an evil day. 2 Chronicles. 12.7. They
have humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy them. Job. 22.23, 25. If
thou return to the Almighty -- The Almighty shall be thy defense. And ver. 29.
When men are cast down, then thou shall say, there is a lifting up, and he
shall save the humble person. Such as have humbled their Souls for their sins,
and fled to Christ for the pardon of their sins, may say with David Psalm. 49.5.
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about.

. Grounds of Consolation in the hottest times of persecution
The Spouse enquireth, Cant. 1.7. where he makes his flock to rest at noon.
Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves -- where thou make thy flock to rest at
noon. By noon understand aestus persecutionis, as Mercer and others, the heat
of Persecution. The Noon is the hottest time of the day. By making the flock to
rest at noon, we may understand, how thou comfortest, how thou supportest thy
people; how and by what means thou give rest to the Souls of thy people, in
the hottest times of persecution. And what the Spouse enquired after, Christ
discovered to her, namely that her rest is in himself. Mat. 11.28. Come to me
all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. And having
found rest and refreshment in Christ, in the hottest day, she tells others
where she had her delights and comforts in the heat of the day, and that was in
Christ. Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. Upon these words, I sat down under his shadow with
great delight. Piscator has this interpretation; Cum sentio vel arixietatem
vel persecutionem, ad Christum confugio ut is me per Spiritum sanctum, and
verbum Dei consoletur. When I feel any distress or persecution I flee to
Christ, that he would comfort me by his Word and Spirit. The fruit which the
Spouse says was sweet, are the benefits we have by Christ, as remission of
sins, Eternal Life, etc. In the foregoing words Christ is likened to an
Apple Tree, and the benefits that we have by Christ are the Fruit of this Tree,
which yields much comfort and refreshing to the people of God. And to this
agrees Piscator's note upon the place. Consolationes Christi sunt dulces
animis fidelium; The comforts of Christ are sweet to the Souls of Believers.
There is comfort in Christ and from Christ, under the hottest persecutions of
the Church; if any say how may we be enabled by the help of Christ to bear up
cheerfully in times of greatest persecution, when we are called to resist unto
blood, and to undergo fiery trials.

A. 1. Get a right understanding of persecutions for Christ's and the Gospels
sake, look upon them not with an eye of Sense, but an eye of Faith, judge of
them as they are represented in the Scripture, and not as flesh and blood
represents them to you. For this will lay a Foundation for chearfullness under
the forest persecutions, if we have a right account of them. To this end
consider what account the Scripture gives of persecutions for Christ's sake, or
which is all one, for the Gospels sake, or for Righteousness sake.

1. Persecutions for Righteousness sake are Blessings, real Blessings, great
Blessings, for they confirm our title to a Kingdom, a more glorious Kingdom
than any is to be enjoyed in this World. Mat. 5.10. Blessed are they which are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. If a
man consult with flesh and blood that will tell him, it is a miserable thing to
be under persecution, to have our estates, liberties and lives taken from us,
but if we consult the Scriptures, they will tell us, that it is a blessed thing
to be persecuted, and that there are no men on earth more blessed, than they
that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, and none are so happy as they that shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Persecutions for Righteousness sake are matter of joy rather than sorrow. 1
Pet. 4.13. But rejoice in as much as ye are pertakers of the sufferings of
Christ. Yea they are a ground of exceeding great joy, for they increase our
grace here, and our glory hereafter. They are a ground of great joy, as they
increase our grace here. Jam. 1.2, 3. My brethren count it all joy, when ye
fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trying of your Faith
works patience. The Apostle writes to the twelve Tribes that were scattered
abroad, where being removed out of their own country, was some degree of
persecution, and when abroad among Heathens and Idolaters, they were
continually liable to persecutions for Righteousness sake, yet he bids them
count it all joy, when they fell into diverse temptations, because hereby their
Faith should be tried, and Patience increased. Persecutions for Righteousness
sake are a ground of exceeding great joy, because they will increase our glory
in Heaven for ever. Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Observe here our Lord Jesus
does not say to his Servants when under persecution, be not cast down, but
rejoice and be glad, and not only so, but be exceeding glad, and why, because
persecutions increase our reward in the other World. Great is your reward in
Heaven. Yea he would have us so exceeding joyful as to leap for joy. Luke
6.23. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your reward is great
in Heaven. That day wherein Christ would have us leap for joy, is the day of
persecution, spoken of in the foregoing verse.

3. Persecutions for Christ are honors and favors, and ought to be esteemed
as such as by all true Christians. Act. 5.41. And they departed from the
presence of the counsel, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his name. The Apostles counted it an honor to be beaten and
reproached for Christ. Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his name sake; We
see here, that it is a gift, a favor for a man to be called to suffer for
Christ.

4. Persecutions for Christ are not strange and unusual things, but are the
common lot of Christians, and are to be counted upon by all that will live
Godly in Christ, from the first day we give our selves to Christ, till we lay
down these Earthly Tabernacles. 2 Timothy 2.12. Yea, and all that will live Godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Sufferings for Christ are to be
expected from the first day, that we give our selves to Christ. Mark 8.34.
Whosoever will come after me -- let him take up his cross. And to the last day
of our continuance in this World, for we are liable to sufferings as long as we
continue in the body. Heb. 13.2. Remember them that suffer adversity, as being
your selves also in the body. Yea we must not think it a strange thing if we
should meet with fiery trials, and be burnt for our Religion as well as others
have been before us. 1 Pet. 4, 12. Beloved think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial, which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you.
That passage Heb. 12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood -- Intimates that
all Christians should count upon it, that though they had not hitherto, yet it
may be their lot to have their blood shed for Christ. They had suffered deeply
in their names and estates, and were eminent for grace, and had attained
assurance of their Salvation. Chapter 10.32, 33, 34. Yet for all this, though God
had spared them as to life, and they had not yet resisted unto blood, they knew
not, but that might also come upon them, to lay down their lives for Christ.

2. The knowledge and belief of Gods infinite, everlasting and unchangable love
to us in Christ Jesus, and of Christ's love in laying down his Life for us, will
carry us cheerfully through our greatest persecutions. and make us to triumph
over all manner of persecutions, even at such a time as we are killed all the
day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter. As we may see it excellently
set out, Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39, Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ! shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or
Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter) Nay in all these things we are more than
Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death nor
life, etc. nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus. Let us take notice in this Scripture of these
things.

1. The love of Christ, and the love of God in Christ toward his people, is so
fixed, so firm, so unchangeable, that no manner of troubles or persecutions, no
creature in Heaven or Earth is or shall be able to separate them from the love
of Christ, and the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, that is, which is
grounded upon the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ.

2. The apprehension and persuasion of Gods love to our Souls in Christ Jesus,
and the immutability of this love, will help us to overcome and triumph over
all manner of troubles and persecutions. Nay in all these things we are more
than conquerors through him that loved us, for I am persuaded that neither
death nor life -- nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus. In all these things, that is, all the
forementioned tribulations and persecutions, though we be flain by the Sword,
or are starved to Death by Famine, we are conquerors, yea more than conquerors,
and how? not by our own strength, but through him that loved us, and how does
he give us the victory. By giving us a firm persuasion of the unchangeable love
of God in Christ. For I am persuaded.

3. Observe the time and season when the servants of Christ are made to triumph
as conquerors over all their troubles, and that is, when it is noon day in
respect of their persecutions, when it is the hottest time of persecution, when
they are not only deprived of their goods, thrust into prisons, but killed,
killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter. And let us see
what is employed in these expressions. (1.) It is to be all the day long in
hazard and danger of death. When it is with us as it was with Hezekiah in his
sickness. Isa. 38.13. So it is with us in respect of our persecutors, we reckon
in the night they may come upon us before the morning, and the morning may come
before the night, and rend and tear us in pieces, or when it is with us as it
was with David. Psalm. 119.109. My Soul is continually in my hand, then we may
be said to be killed all the day long. (2.) When we are put to a lingering
death, that it may be the more painful, that we are as it were all the day
long in a dying condition; this some persecutors endeavored, ut sentiant se
mori, then we may be said to be killed all the day long. (3.) When persecutors
make no more of killing us, than they do of killing sheep, when the Saints are
killed in abundance, that it is a time of much bloodshed, yea when they joy in
the death of Gods Servants. Isa. 22.13. They are counted as Sheep for the
slaughter.


Now the knowledge and belief of the love of Christ, will help us to go through
all persecutions cheerfully, several ways.

1. As it leads to the filling our Souls with the graces and comforts of the
Spirit of God. Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God. The more we are
filled with the graces and comforts of the Holy Ghost, the stronger we shall be
to suffer for Christ, for the joy of the Lord is our strength.

2. As it draws out our love to Christ. 1 John 3.16, 17. We have known and
believed the love that God has to us -- Herein is our love made perfect -- And
the more we love Christ, the stronger we shall be to suffer for Christ. Cant.
8.6, 7. Love is strong as death -- Many waters cannot quench love, neither can
the floods drown it.

3. Get and keep a lively hope of eternal life and glory, for this will be a
wonderful support to you in your greatest persecutions. This caused our Lord
Jesus to endure the pain, and the shame of the Cross with much cheerfulness.
Heb. 12.2. Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the Right hand of the Throne of God.
The having the joys of Heaven in his thoughts caused him to endure the pain,
and make light of the shame of the cross. This caused the Apostles to glory and
triumph in the midst of their troubles. Romans 5.2, 3. -- And rejoice in hope of
the glory of God; And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also. The
respect which Moses had to the recompense of reward in the other World, carried
him with cheerfulness through his great sufferings. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. The
hope of Salvation is by the Apostles called an helmet. 1 These. 5.8. Putting on
the breast plate of Faith and Love, and for an helmet the hope of Salvation.
The helmet preserves the head in safety, as long as we keep on this helmet, as
long as we keep our hope of Salvation, we are in a safe condition.

4. If you would go cheerfully through all your persecutions, get and exercise
the graces of Faith and Patience, for they are of singular use in an evil day.
Rev. 13.7, 10. And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them -- Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. When the
beast makes war with the Saints, and overcomes them, that is, God permits him
to kill and slay as Conquerors those that they have overcome, then is a time
when there is great need, great use of Faith and Patience. I shall speak
distinctly to both these graces. 1. Get and exercise Faith; Faith is the most
useful, most necessary piece of the Spiritual Armor in an evil day, and
therefore we are called upon above all to take the shield of Faith, because
thereby we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one; Ephesians.
6.16. Above all taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Fiery darts are the most dangerous.
most destructive temptations, and contains both inward lusts, whereby the
heart is as it were set on fire, -- and fiery trials which are sharpest to the
outward man, now these are all quenched by the shield of Faith. Let me show you
how you should use this shield, how you should exercise your Faith, when you
meet with fiery trials. 1. Have Faith in Gods presence, believe that God is and
will be with you, according to his promise, when you pass through the fire and
through the waters. Isa. 43.2. For Faith in Gods presence will carry us
comfortably through our greatest trials. Act. 2.25.26. I foresaw the Lord
always before my face, for he is at my right hand, that I should not be moved,
therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad. To confirm your Faith
that you shall have Gods presence with you in your persecutions, see such
Scriptures as these. 2 Cor. 4.9. Persecuted but not forsaken. Jer. 20.11. Joh.
16.32. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. 2. Have Faith in Gods assistance; Believe that God
according to his promise for Christ's sake will help strengthen and uphold you.
Isa. 41.10. The believing that we shall have Gods help, will put great courage
into our Souls. Isa. 50.7. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not
be confounded, therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I
shall not be ashamed. 3. Have Faith in that glorious and unspeakable recompense
of reward which God will give you, if you continue faithful unto the death, in
a suffering day. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a crown of Life. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. It is a faithful saying -- If we suffer
we shall also reign with him. The believing and looking at our eternal glory,
which we shall have after we have suffered for Christ, will keep us from
fainting under the Cross. 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. For which cause we faint not --
while we look at the things which are not seen, which are Eternal.
2. As you should get and exercise Faith, so you should exercise patience also;
For patience is a very useful and necessary grace in times of persecution.
Heb. 10.32, 36. Ye endured a great sight of afflictions -- ye have need of
patience. Luke 21.12, 19. They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you,
delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before
Kings and Rulers for my names sake -- In your patience possess ye your Souls.
If any say, it is true, Patience is needful and useful in a suffering day.


But how shall we attain to patience in times of great persecution.

A. 1. Consider the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ in all his sufferings,
that will learn us patience in all our distresses. Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us, looking to Jesus -- Who for the
joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame -- For
consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, least
ye be wearied and faint in your minds. The looking to Jesus, and considering
the dignity of his person, the greatness of his sufferings, and the patience
with which he endured the pain and the shame of the Cross, and the
contradiction of sinners against himself, will help us to run our race with
Patience, and keep us from being wearied and fainting in our minds. An instance
of the patience of Christ under his sufferings, which all things considered,
were greater than the sufferings of any of the Martyrs; We have Isa. 53.7. He
was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth, he is brought
as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth. And as the example of Christ, so also the example of the
Prophets and other Saints and Servants of God, may cause us to be patient under
our persecutions. It has been the lot of the best men that ever lived, even of
the Prophets, to be persecuted for Righteousness sake. Mat. 5.12. So persecuted
they the Prophets. Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee. Jam. 5.10. Take my brethren
the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of
suffering affliction and patience.

2. Consider the desert of sin. They which suffer most in this Life, suffer far
less than their sins deserve; How great were Jobs afflictions of all sorts? yet
they were less than his sins. Job 11.6. Know therefore that God exacteth of
thee, less than thine iniquity deserves. Ezra 9.14. compared with Lam. 1.12.
No sorrows like what the Jews met with, yet were they punished less than their
sins deserved. This should silence all complaints. Lam. 3.39. Our sins have
deserved the Torments of Hell. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. The second
as well as the first death. Shall we not patiently suffer any Torments in this
Life for Righteousness sake, seeing our sins have deserved the Torments of Hell
for ever.

5. The blood of Christ, and the word of God, and preferring the glory of God
above our lives, are great helps to a cheerful bearing and overcoming all
persecutions. When the Dragon makes war with the Saints, we may see by what
means they overcome him. Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death. Here are 3 means by which they overcame the accuser of the brethren.

1. By the blood of the Lamb, that is, by the blood of Christ, who is the Lamb
of God that takes away the sin of the world. Now the blood of Christ helps us
to overcome. (1.) As it justifies us, and takes away all our guilt, and
reconciles us to God. Romans 5.9, 10. Joh. 1.7. For when sin is pardoned there is
comfort in the greatest sufferings. Mat. 9.2. And when God is reconciled there
is a Triumphing over all enemies. Romans 8.31. (2.) As it has purchased for us
victory over all the adversaries of our Salvation. Col. 2.15. (3.) As it gives
us solid grounds to hope with boldness to enter into Eternal Life. Heb. 10.19.
(4.) As he has left us an example to suffer for him, who suffered for us. 1
Pet. 2.21. 1 Pet. 4.1.
2. By the word of their Testimony, that is, the word of God which they had
owned, professed, gave Testimony unto in the worst of times. Now the word helps
us to overcome. (1.) As it comforts us in all our conflicts. Psalm. 119.49, 50,
94, 161, 162. (2.) As it reveals and promises glorious rewards to them that
overcome. Rev. Chapter 2. Chapter 3. Chapter 21.7.

CHAP. III. An Exhortation to such as are in a Christless condition, to seek
after an interest in Christ. Directions, Motives and Helps in order to the
getting an Interest in Christ. Hindrances removed.
SEeing it is thus, that an interest in Christ is a ground of strong
Consolation under all the troubles of this Life, and the terrors of Death, then
let all those that are yet in a Christless condition, seek after an interest in
Christ, and those that are in doubt whether they have an interest in Christ,
make sure work in this thing, that they get Christ for theirs, and that they
become his. What Solomon says of Wisdom, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy gettings get Understanding. That
may I say concerning Jesus Christ, who is styled the Wisdom of God. Christ is
the principal thing, therefore get Christ, yea with all thy gettings, get an
interest in Jesus Christ. The main, the principal thing that we have to seek
after, that we should employ our thoughts and our time in, is not how we should
get the World, the Riches or Honors of the World, but how we should get
Christ, and the Salvation of our Souls by Christ, and therefore we should be
more sollicitous to get Christ, than we are to get any thing in this World; we
are all desirous of comfort while we live in an evil and troublesome World, and
we are desirous of comfort when we dye, why then are we so cold and remiss, and
in seeking after Christ? The ready way: yea the only way to live and dye
comfortably is to get an interest in Christ, the Consolation of Israel. For
true and solid comfort is to be had only in and through Christ. To render this
Exhortation more effectual I shall, 1. Show you how and in what manner you
should seek to get your Souls made pertakers of Christ. 2. Lay down some
motives to stir you to a speedy, diligent, constant seeking after Christ. 3.
Propose some means and helps to your obtaining a saving interest in Christ. 4.
Remove several hindrances of our getting an interest in Christ.


Sect. 1. How and in what manner we are to seek after an interest in Christ.
I. Seek early and speedily after an interest in Christ; Put not off this work
one day. Heb. 3.7. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear
his voice. It is the counsel of the Holy Ghost, that we should not defer
seeking, embracing, obeying Christ one day. Hear his voice -- That is, come to
him, believe in him, obey him, close with him. When we are in distress we would
have Christ make have to help us. Psalm. 70.5. I am poor and needy, make have
unto me, O God -- O Lord make no tarrying. And shall not we make have to get
unto him, and make no tarrying. We should stir up our selves to seek early
after Christ. Psalm. 58.8. Awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self
will awake early. David here stirs up himself to an early and lively blessing
God, so should we to an early seeking Christ. Awake O my Soul, and all that is
within me, I my self will awake early, and seek early after Christ, and we
should stir up one another. Zech. 8.21. To stir us up to an early and speedy
seeking Christ. Consider.

1. The saving and losing of our immortal Souls depends on our having or not
having Christ. He that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son
has not Life. And where natural Life is concerned, we make have to preserve
it. When Lot was in danger of being consumed in the flames of Sodom, he ran, he
fled, he made no tarrying any where, till he was got to Zoar. Genesis 19.17.
Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain,
escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. Eternal Life is of greater
concernment than natural Life, and therefore more care should be taken to
preserve Eternal than Temporal Life, we shall be cast into Hell flames, if we
get not Christ before we dye, and therefore we had need run; ye flee, and not
tarry any where till we are got to Christ. When the Shunamite went to the
Prophet on the behalf of her dead Child, she made great have to get to him, and
said to her serve on. 2 King. 4.24. Drive, and go forward, slack not thy pace,
riding for me, except I bid thee. Thou have a business of greater concernment
to go to Christ about, than this woman had to go to the Prophet, she had a dead
Son, and thou have a Soul dead in sins and trespasses, and therefore make have,
go forward, slack not thy pace till thou have gotten to Christ, and Christ has
given thee Life.

2. The time of Life is the only time for seeking and getting Christ, and
Salvation by Christ. There is no getting Christ, no working out thy Salvation
after thou art dead. Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with
thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
Grave whither thou go. And therefore as the Nobleman said to Christ, Joh
4.49. Sir come down e're my child dye. So should we say to God, Lord give us
Christ, e're we dye. The time of Life being the only time for getting an
interest in Christ, we had not need defer this work, no not so much as one day.
Jam. 4.14. Ye know not what shall be on the morrow, for what is your Life, it
is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. The
stoutest and strongest men are but grass. Isa. 40.5. All flesh is grass. And
what is the condition of the grass? it is fresh in the morning, cut down and
withered before night. Psalm. 90.6. In the morning it flourishes and grows
up, in the evening it is cut down and withered. The grass is growing in the
field one day, and burning in the oven the next day. Mat. 6.30. The grass to
day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven. Such is the condition of all
flesh, like grass. A man may be in good health, in a flourishing condition in
the morning, and be dead and withered in the evening. He may be full of mirth
and jollity one day, and be burning in Hell the next. Therefore defer not the
seeking after Christ, and your Souls Salvation, one day.

3. Such as seek Christ early have a promise that they shall find him. Prove.
8.17. I love them that love me, and shose that seek me early shall find me. A
promise that we shall find Christ is great encouragement, yea good assurance
that our labor shall not be in vain; who would not seek a bag of Gold, if he
were sure he should find it? We have a sure word of promise, that if we seek
Christ early we shall find him; And to find Christ is better than to find an
house full of Gold, better than to find all the Silver and Gold in the world.

4. Seeking after Christ and Salvation by Christ, is work that the great God,
who is King of Kings, has given us to do. And as David said in another case. 1 Samuel 21.8. The Kings business required have. So may I say here; This business
being the Kings business, it requires have. When the Angels told the
Shepherds, that Christ was born in Bethlehem, and that they should find him
wrapped in swadling-cloths, and lying in a Manger, they made have to get a
sight of him. Luke 2.16. They came with have -- and found the babe lying in a
Manger. To be made pertakers of Christ and all his saving benefits, is of
greater concernment, than to have a sight of Christ lying in the Manger, and if
the Shepherds upon the invitation of an Angel, made have to see Christ when he
was a little Babe, lying in a Manger, then how much more does it concern us to
make have to be pertakers of Christ, and all his saving benefits, at the call
and command of the great God.

II. We must seek an interest in Christ diligently and earnestly, not remisly,
as if we did not much care whether we got Christ or no. We must say to God, as
Rachel did to Jacob. Genesis 30.1. Give me children or else I dye. We must beg
for Christ as for Life. Lord give me Christ or I dye: give me Christ or I am
undone for ever. The Apostle exhorts us to covet earnestly the best gifts. 1
Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly the best gifts. Christ is the best of all the gifts
that ever God gave to any of the Children of men, and therefore we should covet
earnestly the giving of Jesus Christ to our Souls. They that labor in a hot
and scorching day, do earnestly desire to get into the shadow. Job. 7.2. The
Servant earnestly desires the shadow. There is a hot and scorching day
approaching. Mal. 4.1. Behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven.
Earnestly desire to get under Christ's shadow before this scorching day, and hot
day comes. To be under Christ's shadow is more delightful and refreshing in the
hottest day of Gods vengeance, under the most scorching persecutions, than it
is to a laboring man to set under the shadow in the hottest day, and in the
hottest climate of the world. Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow with
great delight. Wicked men are very earnest and diligent in following after
their sins. Mich. 7.3. They do evil with both hands earnestly. And shall not we
be more earnest to get Christ, and the Salvation of our Souls, than wicked men
are to commit sin, and bring damnation upon themselves? This is a sure way to
find Christ, to seek him diligently. Jer. 29.13. And ye shall seek me and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your hearts. Heb. 11.6. He is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And what is the reward that God
gives to them that seek him diligently? He gives them himself for their
reward. Genesis 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward.

III. We must seek after Christ and Salvation by Christ above all things in
this world. Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness
-- First, that is, mainly, chiefly, make it your main care, your chiefest
business to get to Heaven. The Apostle Paul's desire and endeavor above all
things was, that he might win Christ, he was willing to do or suffer any thing,
so that he might win Christ, and be found in him at the great day of judgment.
Phil. 3.8, 9. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law. Jesus Christ is far better than all things
that are in this World; what Solomon says of wisdom. Prove. 8.11. Wisdom is
better than Rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to be
compared with her The same is true of Christ, the wisdom of God. Christ is
better than Rubies, and all things, that we can desire, are not to be compared
with him, and therefore to seek to get Christ above all things in the world.
With what eagerness do some men seek after the world, they rise early, they
set up late, there is no end of all their labor, and they never think that
they have enough of the world. Eccl. 4.8. He has neither child nor brother,
yet there is no end of all his labor, neither is eye satisfied with riches.
And some men that are not willing to take much pains, are exceedingly desirous
of the world. Prove. 21.25, 26, His hands refuse to labor, he coveteth greedily
all the day long. Oh that men would but take the like pains to get Christ, that
they do to get the world, that they would covet Christ greedily all the day
long, that there were no end of their labor, that they would never say they
have enough of Christ, but labor to get more and more of him.

IV. We must seek Christ constantly, we must seek him till we have found him,
and got possession of him. If we loose a piece of Silver, we look diligently
for it, and we look till we find it. Luke 15.8. What woman having ten pieces of
Silver, if she loose one piece, does not light a candle, and sweep the house,
and seek diligently till he find it. If there be such endeavors to seek a
little piece of Silver, that we will not give over looking and seeking till we
have found it, how much more should we seek after Christ, till we have found
him, seeing he is better than all the Silver and Gold in the world. Psalm.
105.4. Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore. We must not only
seek the Lord for a time, or for a long time, but for evermore. Hos. 10.12. It
is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon you. Though
it should be very long before the Lord comes, yet we must seek him till he
come. Now if we would continue seeking after an interest in Christ, till we
have obtained it, we must take heed of these two things. 1. Of resting
satisfied in any condition, in any gifts, in any enjoyments, till God has
given us Jesus Christ. What Abraham said concerning his being childless. Genesis
15.2. Lord God what will thou give me, seeing I go childless. So should we say
concerning a Christless condition. Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I
go Christless. None of all Gods gifts should satisfy us, unless he has given
us Christ. Though he has given us excellent gifts and parts, though he has
given us comfortable yoak-fellows, convenient habitations, plentiful estates,
beneficial callings, yet none of these nor any other gifts, can make up the
want of Christ, and therefore we should say, what will thou give me, seeing go
Christless. What is said of Booz in reference to Ruth. Ruth. 3.18. The man
will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day. The like
should we do in reference to seeking an interest in Christ, we should not be at
rest in our minds, till we have finished this thing, namely the getting a
saving interest in Christ. 2. We must take heed of giving over seeking after
Christ through discouragement. To such as are ready to give over seeking after
Christ; I shall give these two encouragements, to continue seeking after
Christ. (1.) If you continue seeking after Christ and do seek him with our
whole hearts, we shall assuredly enjoy him. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou seek him he
will be found of thee. Believe this promise of God, that if thou do seek him,
he will be found of thee -- and go on in the strength of this promise, to seek
in hope that thou shall find the Lord. Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we
follow on to know the Lord -- By knowing here is meant such a knowledge as is,
accompanied with the enjoyment of God, as the following words imply. He will
come unto us -- Jer. 29.13. And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your hearts. (2.) It will not be long before you find
Christ, if you go on to seek him. Though you do not find him for the present,
yet you shall find him in a little while, in his own due time. Cant. 3, 1, 4.
By night on my bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves, and I found him not -- It
was but a little -- and I found him whom my Soul loves. Isa. 54.7. For a small
moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.



Motives to get a saving interest in Christ.
Most persons that live under the Gospel, make light of Christ, and neglect
that great Salvation which he has purchased with his blood, and prefer their
worldly concernments before seeking after Christ. Mat. 22.5. They made light of
it, and went their way, one to his farm, another to his Merchandise. Our Lord
Jesus Christ offers Salvation to lost sinners, he does as it were stretch out
his hands to them, and offer them his help to save their Souls, but scarce any
man regards the offers of grace and mercy, that he makes to them. Prove. 1.24. I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. This stretching forth the hand
implies the offers of Salvation, that Christ makes in the Gospel, to
perishing Sinners. When Peter was in a boisterous Sea, and was afraid of being
drowned, and began to sink, he cried out to Christ, Lord save me! And
immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him. Mat. 14.30, 31.
Christless sinners are in a more dangerous condition than Peter was, they are
ready to sink down into Hell, sentence is passed upon them by the great God.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell Psalm. 9.17. And Christ stretches forth
his hand, and offers to save them, but most men are so stupefied in their sins,
and so busied in this present world, that they regard not the offers of
Salvation made to them by Jesus Christ; And therefore there is need of motives
to stir men up to seek after an interest in Christ, and to embrace that
Salvation which is offered to them by Jesus Christ.

1. Motive, The excellency of Christ should stir us up to get an interest in
him; For we covet things that are excellent, and there is nothing so excellent
as Jesus Christ. All the excellent things in the world, are but loss and dross
and dung, compared with Christ. Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung
that I may win Christ. Silver and Gold, Jewels and Precious Stones, and
whatever a man can desire, are not worthy to be compared with Christ. Prove.
8.11. For Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all things that may be desired, are
not to be compared to it. And as Christ is more excellent than all things, so
than all persons in the world. The wisest, the holiest, the best, the greatest
men that ever lived are not worthy to be compared with Christ. Cant. 5.10. My
Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among Ten Thousand. White and Red well
mixed make a beautiful countenance, white may signify the holiness of his
Life, ruddy his bloody passion; His holy life and his bloody death, render him
amiable to his people. If Ten Thousand of the most excellent persons that ever
lived, were set by Christ, he would be the chiefest of them all. Among all the
Angels of Heaven, and all the Kings of the Earth, there are none to be compared
to our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 89.6. Who in Heaven can be compared unto the
Lord, who among the Sons of the Mighty, can be likened unto the Lord. There are
all the excellencies of the Godhead in our Lord Jesus Christ. Col. 2.9. For in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And the excellencies that
are in the Godhead are unspeakable and unconceivable. Seeing then there is a
greater excellency in Christ than in all the whole world, we should labor more
to get Christ, than we did to get any thing in this world.

2. Get Christ for yours, and you shall get unsearchable Riches; For there are
unsearchable Riches in Christ. Ephesians. 3.8. -- That I should preach among you, the
unsearchable Riches of Christ. The Apostle had studied, preached, and enjoyed
Christ many years, and yet could not express or understand all the Riches that
were treasured up in Christ, but calls his Riches unsearchable Riches. By these
Riches of Christ, which he calls unsearchable, understand those benefits we
have by Christ. As Vatablus and others, immensa Christi benefitia, the
incomprehensible benefits of Christ. And though we cannot search out all the
Riches that are in Christ, and that we have by Christ, though we cannot fully
comprehend in this life, all the benefits we have by Christ, I will briefly
instance in some of these unspeakable benefits, which we shall get, if we get
an interest in Christ. 1. Get Christ, and you shall get into the love and
favor of God. Prove. 8.35. Whosoever finds me, finds Life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord. And the favor of God is an unspeakable blessing, better
than all things in this world; For a man prefers his Life above all that he
has in the world. Job 2.4. All that a man has, he will give for his Life. But
the favor of God is better than a man's Life. Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness
is better than Life. 2. Get Christ, and you shall get the pardon of all your
sins; Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness
of sins, according to the Riches of his grace. Though we be guilty of Hundreds,
of Thousands, of Millions of sins, if we get Christ for ours, his Blood will
cleanse us from them all. 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. 3. Get Christ, and you shall get an interest in all
the promises. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in
him, Amen. And it is by and through Christ that we are pertakers of the
promises. Ephesians. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and pertakers of his promise in Christ. When Christ is ours and we are
his, all the promises are ours. Gal. 3.29. If Ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the promise. And this is a great, a
wonderful, an unspeakable benefit to be heir of all the promises: For there
are exceeding many, exceeding great, and exceeding precious promises in the
holy Scriptures. 2 Pet. 1.4. And to be an heir of all these promises, is such a
mercy as exceeds all expression. 4. Get Christ for yours, and you shall get all
Spiritual Blessings, for they that are Christ's are blessed with all Spiritual
Blessings in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in
Christ. And Spiritual Blessings are far better than all manner of Worldly
Blessings. 5. Get Christ for yours, and you shall have the glory of Heaven, and
the joys of Heaven, and all the felicity of Heaven for yours for ever. 1 John
5.12. He that has the Son has Life. And if you get Heaven for yours, you
shall get greater felicity, better things than ever any man saw with his eyes,
or heard off with his ears, or can be conceived off by the heart of man. 1 Cor.
2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. 6. Get Christ
for yours, and then all good things shall be yours. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All
things are yours -- All are yours, and ye are Christ's. The Apostle doubles the
expression, all things are yours, all are yours, that we may take the greater
notice of the unsearchable Riches that we have in and by Christ, and that we
may be the better satisfied of the truth and reality of this rich inheritance,
that we have by our being Christ's, namely our having all good things.


3. The suitableness of Christ to the condition, wants and desires of our Souls
should stir us up to seek after him, Jesus Christ is every way suitable to thy
Souls condition, all that thy Soul wants, all that thy Soul does or can
desire is to be had in Christ. Art thou blind and ignorant, do thou want
saving knowledge? Jesus Christ is the light of the World. Joh. 8.12. I am the
light of the World; He that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of Life. He can open blind eyes. Isa. 42.6, 7. I will give thee
for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind
eyes. Christ can help not only dim eyes that see but little, but blind eyes
that can see nothing at all. Art thou under the sense of guilt, do thy sins lie
heavy upon thy Conscience? because of the multitude of them, or their heinous
nature, as being committed against much light, great mercies, and other
aggravating circumstances? Christ's blood is available for taking away all thy
sins, though thou be one of the greatest sinners in the whole world. Joh.
1.29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. The blood
of Christ washed away Noah's Drunkenness, Lots Incest, David's Murder and
Adultery, Peter's denial of Christ, and his Perjury, Paul's Blasphemies and
Persecutions. Do thou feel the plague of thy heart, and groan under the
corruption of thy nature, and find a great want of the Sanctifying grace of
God? Christ is made of God unto us Sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30 Of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us -- Sanctification. He suffered a
bloody death to purchase Sanctifying grace for us. Heb. 13.12. Jesus that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Art
thou held in the cords of thy sins? can thou not repent off, and forsake thy
sins? Jesus Christ was sent to preach deliverance to the captives Luke 4.18.
And exalted to give Repentance. Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of sins unto Israel. And was
sent to bless us, in turning us from our iniquities. Act. 3.26. Unto you first,
God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning you away,
every one from his iniquities. Is thy heart dead, do thou want Spiritual
Life? There is Life to be had in Christ, for such as have dead hearts, yea for
such as are dead in sins and trespasses. Joh. 11.25. Jesus said unto her, I am
the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet he shall live. Art thou in a lost undone condition? Jesus Christ is the
Savior of lost sinners. Luke 19.10. The Son of Man is come to seek and save
that which was lost. Art thou in a mourning condition, full of grief and
sorrow, either because of thy afflictions, or because of thy sins? Jesus Christ
was sent to comfort all that mourn in Zion, Isa. 61.3. Not to instance in more
particulars, whatever it is that thou want, there is a rich supply of all
thy needs, be thy needs never so many or great, to be had in and by Jesus
Christ. Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need, according to his Riches,
in glory by Christ Jesus. Whatsoever it is which thy Soul does or can desire to
have, there is a full supply of all thy desires to be had in Christ and from
Christ. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. There
is so much vanity and vexation in worldly things, that it is an hard matter to
find any good. Psalm. 4.6. Many say, who will show us any good? But in Christ we
shall find all good, all that good which we want, all that good which we desire
to have. And shall not this stir us up to seek after an interest in Christ?

4. It is not only a matter of expediency or convenience that we get an
interest in Christ, but it is of absolute necessity, so that we are undone for
ever, if we do not get an interest in Christ. We cannot live comfortably without
Christ, we cannot dye in peace without Christ, we cannot appear at the great day
of judgment without Christ, we cannot be admitted into Heaven without Christ. 1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son of God has not Life. We cannot have the
pardon of one sin, without the blood of Christ. Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of
blood is no remission. And no other blood will procure remission of sins, but
the blood of Christ. The absolute necessity of getting an interest in Christ,
will appear from the woeful and miserable condition of all thofe that are
without Christ, which shall be set forth in the next head.

5. To stir us up to seek after a saving interest in Christ; Let us consider
the woeful and miserable condition of all such as are without Christ. To this
purpose, weigh these following Scriptures. Ephesians. 2.12. That at the time ye were
without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.
Here is a fourfold description of the misery of such as are without Christ. 1.
They are Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; That is, they are none of the
people of God, they have no right too, no part or portion in any of the
privileges belonging to the people of God. 2. They are strangers to the
covenants of promise, or to the promises of the covenant. There are many
promises in the covenant, as I will be your God, I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and remember their sins and iniquities no more, etc. But they
that are without Christ are strangers to the covenant, and all the promises of
the covenant, they have no right too, no part in the precious promises. 3. They
are without hope. They have much presumption, but they are without hope, they
have no hope of the pardon of their sins, they have no hope of the Salvation of
their Souls, they have no hope of the mercy of God in this life or the life to
come. 4. They are without God. That is, without the favor of God, without the
blessing of God, without communion with God, and a man without God is a man
without all good. Here is much comprehended in few words, concerning the misery
of a man that is without Christ. He is without God, without Hope, without a
Promise, without any part in the privileges belonging to the people of God.
They that are without Christ, shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven for
ever. 1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son of God has not Life. They that are
without Christ, shall be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Rev. 21.8. The unbelieving shall have their part in the Lake, which
burns with Fire and Brimstone.


6. To get an interest in Christ is the greatest and chiefest business we have
to do in this World; This was hinted before, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy gettings get Understanding. This
is most true of Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom of God. Christ is the principal
thing, and therefore with all our gettings, we should endeavor to get Jesus
Christ. It is of greater concernment to get Christ than to get Riches; It is of
greater concernment to get Christ than to get peace and comfort; It is of
greater concernment to get Christ than to get power against some particular
corruption, greater than to get some particular grace, or than to get freedom
from some vexatious temptation. I shall speak distinctly to these heads.

1. It is off far greater concernment to get Christ, than to get Riches, and
that on several accounts. (1.) A man may have great Riches, and yet be a
miserable man. Jam. 5.1. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries
that shall come upon you. But whosoever gets Christ, gets true
blessedness, and is a blessed and happy man. Psalm. 84.12. O Lord of Hosts,
blessed is that man that trusts in thee. (2.) Riches will be no advantage to
a man in an evil day; They will not save a man from the Sword or Pestilence, or
other judgments. Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in a day of wrath. But Jesus
Christ is every way profitable in a day of wrath: For he will reconcile us to
God. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself -- And he
will be an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the storm. Isa. 32.2.
(3) A man may be a rich man, and yet go to Hell when he dies. Luke 16.22, 23.
The rich man dyed and was buried in hell, he lift up his eyes being in torments
-- But there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.
(4.) Though a man get much Riches, he must leave them all behind him when he
dies. 1 Timothy 6.7. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we
can carry nothing out. But such as get Christ shall enjoy Christ to Eternity.


2. It is of far greater concernment to get Christ, than to get peace and
comfort. Some persons that are under trouble of mind, and distress of
Conscience, make it their only care and great business to get comfort, they
would do any thing to be at rest and peace. But though persons under a troubled
Spirit, may Lawfully seek for comfort, yet it must not be their only or their
chiefest care to seek for comfort, but their main endeavor should be to get
Christ. We should seek for Christ more than comfort. For (1.) There is no way
to get true peace and comfort, but in and by Christ. Joh. 16.33. That in me ye
might have peace. Mat. 11.28. Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. We may seek and labor to find rest for our
Souls, but we shall find none, unless we go to Christ for it. 2. Christ is more
necessary than comfort, for if we could get comfort without Christ, those
comforts would end in sorrow, and we should be miserable for ever. Isa. 50.11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks,
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, this
shall ye have at mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. But if we get Christ,
though we should walk in darkness and in trouble all our days, we shall be
happy for ever and ever. Psalm. 144.15. Yea happy is that people whose God is
the Lord.


3. It is of greater concernment than to get victory over some particular
corruption. Some persons that are under the prevalency of a particular sin, all
their thoughts are how they may get that sin subdued. And it is the duty of
such as find the prevailing power of any sin, to labor to have those sins
subdued, but yet it concerns us more to get Christ, than to get the victory
over some particular corrruptio^ For (1.) Suppose thou could get rid of that
sin that troubles thee, yet if thou do not get Christ, thou will perish for
ever. For who shall satisfy for thy sins past? who shall satisfy for thy
corrupt nature? None but Christ can make expiation for the sins of our hearts
and lives. (2.) There is no getting any sin subdued but by Jesus Christ. Joh.
8.34.36. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, -- If the Son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. We may think our selves
free from the service of sin, but we shall not be free indeed, unless Christ
the Son of God make us free. (3.) If we get Christ, we shall be saved from the
guilt and power of all our sins. Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their sins.


4. We should labor more to get Christ, than to get some particular graces, as
a broken heart, or the like. It is a blessed thing to hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, yet we should hunger more after Christ. For (1.) If we get
Christ we shall have all the graces of his Spirit. Joh. 1.16. Out of his
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. (2.) We cannot attain to any
Grace but in Christ and from Christ. Isa 54.17. Their Righteousness is of me
says the Lord.


5. We should labor more to get Christ then to be freed from Satan's
Temptations. Some persons that are under vexatious temptations, all their care
is to be freed from their temptations, but though we may be earnest with God to
remove our temptations, yet we should be more earnest to get Christ, than to
get freedom from temptations. For (1.) To be tempted and to be in Christ, is
better than to be free from temptation, and to be under the power of the strong
man, keeping all in peace. (2.) A temptation may be removed, and yet a man may
be under the power of Satan. The irksome temptation may be changed into a more
pleasing temptation, which is more dangerous, though less troublesome. Satan
may keep a man Prisoner by silken cords, as well as iron chains. (3.) Get
Christ, and then Satan shall never prevail over you, to destroy you by his
temptations. The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head.


6. We should be more sollicitous to get Christ, then to get some particular
promise. For we can have no right to any of the promises if we live without
Christ. Ephesians. 2.12. And we shall gain an interest in all the promises, if we get
an interest in Christ, in whom all the promises are yea and Amen.

7. We should be more careful to get Christ, then to get parts and gifts, as
memory, utterance, etc. For (1.) A man may have excellent gifts, and yet be a
cast away, as the gift of prophesying and working miracles. Mat. 7.23, 24. He
may have excellent gifts, and yet if he have no grace, he is no better in Gods
account, than sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. 1 Cor. 13.12. Though a man
could speak and pray, and preach like an Angel, yet all is nothing if he be
void of the grace of God. (2.) Though a man have never such weak gifts and
parts, yet if he be found in Christ he is highly accepted of God through
Christ, even as well as those that have greater abilities. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3
11. Barbarians and Scythians were far short of the Greeks and Jews for their
accomplishments, yet all are alike acceptable to God in Jesus Christ.


Now seeing it is a work of the highest concernment to get an interest in
Christ, of more and greater concernment than to get Riches, or to get peace or
comfort, etc. we should mind this above all other things. Having proposed these
motives, I shall in the next place lay down some helps for the getting a saving
interest in Christ.

Sect. 2. Helps to get a saving interest in Christ.
Here some may say, we see it is a business of the greatest concernment that we
have to do in this world, to get an interest in Christ it is of everlasting
concernment, but what shall we do to get a saving interest in Christ.

1. Be sensible of, and lay to heart your sinful, miserable, lost and undone
state, whilst you remain without Christ. For a due sense of our sin and misery
will make us hasten to Christ, and cause us with all thankfulness to accept of
the Salvation that he has purchased for us. Mat. 8.25. His Disciples came to
him, and awoke him, saying, Master save us, we perish. If we saw our selves in
a perishing condition, we should be as forward and as earnest to go to Christ
to save us, as his Disciciples were, when they were in danger to be drowned. To
be in danger of damnation is a greater awakening to a man, then to be in danger
of drowning. For Hell is a worse place than the Sea; A man that is drowned in
the Sea is quickly dead, their pain is soon over, but such as go to Hell are in
everlasting burnings. And if the Disciples hastened to Christ to save them, when
they were in danger to be drowned, how will poor distressed sinners hasten to
Christ to save them, when they see themselves in danger of being damned. Luke
15.17, 18, 19. I perish with hunger, I will arise and go to my father, and will
say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired servants. When
the prodigal Son saw his sins, and saw himself in a perishing condition, then
he hastened to his Father, confesses and bewaileth his sin, judges himself
unworthy to be owned by his Father, and was willing to accept of mercy on any
terms, so he might be admitted into his Fathers family, he was content to
submit to any thing, though it were to be the meanest servant in his fathers
house, and to do the hardest work his father had for him to do. And as the
sense of a perishing condition, so also a due sight of our sins, will make us
willing to accept of mercy on any terms, willing to submit to any thing, so we
may be delivered from eternal death. Job. 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do
unto thee, O thou preserver of men? When Job was under the sense of sin, he was
willing to submit to any thing that God should require of him, to get his sins
pardoned. As it was with the Israelites, when they were under the sense of
their sin, and felt their misery by the oppression of their enemies, they were
willing God should do what he would with them, so that he would deliver them
from the Philistines. Judge. 10.15. The children of Israel said unto the Lord,
we have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us
only we pray thee this day. So it will be with us, when we have a through sight
of our sins, we shall be glad of mercy on any terms, we shall be willing that
God shall do to us whatsoever seems good in his sight, so he will deliver us
from wrath to come, and will not cast us into Hell for our sins. Now there are
but few men, even of such as live under the means of grace, and hear the word
of God often preached to them, that have a through sight and sense of their sin
and misery. A man may be a Church Member, yea a Church Officer, a Teacher of
others, and yet not be under an heart affecting sight and sense of his sinful
and miserable condition out of Christ. Rev. 3.17. Thou say I am rich and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. This is spoken to the
Church of the Laodiceans, and more particularly to the Angel of that Church,
that is, to such as were teachers of that Church, and amongst these were some
that had not their knowledge, that they were poor, miserable, wretched and
naked, but thought themselves in a good estate, to be rich, increased in goods,
and to want nothing. We see the deceit of a man's heart, how he may be blinded,
how he may delude and flatter himself, in thinking he needs nothing. when he
wants all things. If any say

How may we get a sight and sense of our sinful and miserable estate out of
Christ?
A. 1. Hear, and apply to your selves what the Scripture says concerning the
sinfulness of a man's heart and life, as long as he remains in a Christless
condition. Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it. The heart is not only wicked, but desperately wicked,
so desperately wicked that it is above our understandings, to know or conceive
all that wickedness that is in our hearts. The heart is as full of evil as it
can hold, yea of the worst sorts of sins, that if God should let a man alone,
he would carry himself like a mad man, regarding neither the Laws of God nor
men. Eccl. 9, 3. The heart of the Sons of men is full of evil, yea madness is
in their hearts while they live, and after that they go to the dead. What worse
sin then enmity against God, and his holy Laws and Commandments? yet this
enmity against God is in the hearts of all men, till God circumciseth our
hearts to love and obey him. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. The heart is so
vile and sinful that it is continually sinning against God, either by evil
desires, or evil thoughts and imaginations. Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil, and that continually. It is enough to
amaze a man, when he hears what God (who knows the sinfulness of our
hearts, better than we our selves) says of the sinfulness of our hearts; we
may wonder that he lets us live upon the earth, and does not send us down to
the Devils in Hell. Oh what need have we of Christ to mediate for us, and take
away our sins.

Besides the sinfulness of our hearts, let us hear what the Scripture says of
the sinfulness of our lives and conversations. While a man remains in a
Christless condition, every thing that a man does is defiled with sin. Hag.
2.13, 14. If one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these, shall it
be unclean? and the Priest answered and said, it shall be unclean. Then
answered Haggai and said, so is this people, and so is this nation before me
says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which they offer
there is unclean. An unclean sinner defiles every thing he has to do with,
every work of his hands is unclean, and that which he offers to God is unclean.
Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin. The Greek word is (...)
not only all men, but all things of all men, all their thoughts, words and
actions, all are concluded under sin, that is, God in the holy Scriptures
declares, all men and all things of all men, before they come to Christ to be
sinful. Tit. 1.15. Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure,
but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. If one sin cast Adam out of
Paradise, if one sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, and of Angels made them
Devils, what a woeful condition are they in, that have done nothing else since
they were born, and can do nothing else but sin against God. When we consider
our sinful and polluted estate, we may set down, and bemoan our selves, and say
as Job, Behold I am vile. Job 40.4. And to loath and abhor our selves in our
own sight, and in the sight of the Lord.

2. Hear and apply to thy self what the Scripture says concerning the misery
of all those that are in a Christless condition. As

1. They are under the wrath and curse of God. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others. All men by nature, one as well as another,
are the children of wrath. And as long as they abide in a natural, unbelieving
Christless condition, they abide under the wrath of God. Joh. 3.36. He that
believes not the Son shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
Now this is a most dreadful condition to be under the wrath of God. The wrath
of an earthly King is as a messenger of death. Prove. 16.14. And a messenger of
death will set a man weeping sorely. Isa. 38.1, 2. Hezekiah wept sore, when
Isaiah came with a message of death to him. It is like the roaring of a Lion,
Prove. 19.12. And when the Lion roars, all the beasts of the Forests tremble.
Amos 3.8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear. If the wrath of an earthly
King be so dreadful, how dreadful is the wrath of the great God, who is King
of Kings. Gods anger is unconceivable, we cannot understand the power and
dreadful effects of his wrath. Psalm. 90.11. And it is intolerable. Nah. 1.6.
Who can stand before his indignation.

2. They are under a sentence of eternal condemnation. Romans 5.18. By the
offense of one man, judgment came upon all men to condemnation. And this
sentence of condemnation abides upon a man as long as he abides in unbelief.
Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is condemned already. Now eternal condemnation
is far more dreadful than any troubles that any man ever met with in this
world. Job. 10.1, 2. When Job was in great bitterness of Spirit, and was weary
of his Life, he dreaded condemnation more than all his sorrows. I am weary of
my Life -- I will speak in the bitterness of my Soul, I will say unto God, do
not condemn me. The thoughts and apprehensions of eternal misery, make the
hardest hearted sinners in the world to fear and tremble. Of all sinners, such
as live under, and resist the means of grace, are the hardest hearted sinners,
and such as make a profession of Religion, and are but Hypocrites have very
hard hearts and seared Consciences, yet the sinners in Zion, and the hypocrites
tremble at the thoughts of everlasting burnings. Isa. 33.14. The sinners in
Zion are afraid, fearfullness has surprised the hypocrites, who among us shall
dwell with devouring fire, who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings.

2. Understand and believe that there is Salvation from your sin and misery, to
be had in Jesus Christ, and by no other way or means whatever, but by Christ.
There is Salvation to be had in Christ for sinful, lost, undone creatures, yea
even for the chiefest and most miserable sinners in the whole world. 1 Timothy
1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Luke 19.10. The
son of man is come to seek and save that which was lost. Hos. 13.9. O Israel
thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. There is help in Christ,
not only for such as have hurt themselves, for such as have wounded, sorely
wounded themselves, but for such as have destroyed them, yea though they be
Israelites, which is an aggravation of their sin and misery, for its worse for
an Israelite, then for a Moabite or an Egyptian to destroy himself. Here is the
extremity of misery, destruction, and the height of sin, which is for a man to
be the Author of his own destruction, yet there is help in Christ for such as
are undone, destroyed, and have been the Authors of their own destruction. O
Israel thou bast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. And as our Lord
Jesus came into the world purposely to save lost and undone sinners, so he is
able to save perfectly, those that come to him, and unto God by him, from all
their sins, and all their misery. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them
to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.

And as there is Salvation to be had in Christ for lost and perishing sinners,
so this Salvation is to be had no where else, and by no other way or means
whatsoever, but by Christ. Act. 4.12. Neither is their Salvation in any other,
for there is none other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be
savtd. Isa. 43.11. I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. We
are not able to save our selves, neither can all the men on earth, or all the
Angels of heaven save us. We cannot save our selves by any ways or devices of
our own, or by any works or duties that we can perform; if we could any way
save our selves, it must be either by fleeing from God, and hiding our selves
where God should not find us out, but that is impossible, for God fills
Heaven and Earth, and is present in all places, so that a man cannot flee from
God, or hide himself where God should not find him. Jer. 23.24. Can any hide
himself in secret places that I shall not see him says the Lord? Do not I fill
heaven and earth says the Lord. Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into
heaven thou art there. etc. Or else it must be by doing some works, whereby we
may procure the pardon of our sins, and the Salvation of our Souls. Neither of
these can be purchased with money. If a man would give all that he has in the
world to purchase the love of God, and the pardon of his sins, and the
Salvation of his Soul, it would be despised and contemned. Cant. 8.7. If a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned. Job. 36.18, 19. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee
away with his stroke, then a great ransom cannot deliver thee. Will he esteem
thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of thy strength. It is a most
detestable thought, for a man to think that the gifts of God can be purchased
with money. Act. 8.20. Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that
the gift of God may be purchased with money. And as we cannot purchase our
pardon and Salvation, so neither can we obtain it by any works of
Righteousness, that we are able to do. Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law,
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us -- And
as we are not able to save our selves, so neither can any men on earth, or
angels of Heaven save us. Psalm 60.11. Give us help from trouble, for vain is
the help of man, And if man cannot save us from troubles on earth, then much
less from the torments of hell. Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for
from the hills, or from the multitude of mountains, truly in the Lord our God
is the Salvation of Israel. By the hills and mountains we may understand either
(1.) Their Fortifications which were very strong, by reason of the hills and
mountains. There were many hills and mountains round about Jerusalem, which
made it very strong. Psalm. 125.2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem --
And therefore called the hill country. Luke 1.39. Or (2.) By the hills and
mountains may be understood the mighty Kings and Princes of other Nations, that
had promised them aid and assistance. Hos. 7.11. Hos. 5.13. Isa. 31.1. Or (3.)
The Idols which they worshipped on the hills and the mountains. Jer. 2.20. Jer.
3.6. It Is as much as to say, Salvation is to be had from no creatures, from
none of the Gods of the Heathen, but only from the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.


3. If you would get a saving interest in Christ, know and consider well, that
God makes a free and general offer of Jesus Christ, and all his saving
benefits, unto every one that finds a want of him, and is willing to receive
him. I say Jesus Christ and Salvation by Christ, as all things requisite to
Salvation, is offered freely to every one that finds the want of him, and is
willing to receive him. Rev. 22.17. And let him that is a thirst come, and
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. For opening of this
Scripture, let us observe.

1. Here is an offer of Christ, and Salvation by Christ; Let him take the water
of Life. By the water of Life understand Jesus Christ, and those saving
benefits we have by Christ? Christ, and Salvation by Christ, is set out by the
water of life; For as Christ is the bread of life. Joh. 6.48. I am that bread
of life. So he is also the water of life, and as he is called the bread of
life, because he gives eternal life to those that are pertakers of him. Joh.
6.51, I am the living bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. So he is called the water of life, because he
gives eternal life to those that are partakers of him, And as Christ himself
is signified by the water of life, so also are his saving benefits. Remission
of sins is set out by clean water. Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean. The Spirit of Christ and his saving graces,
are compared to water. Joh. 7.38, 39. Eternal Life and Salvation is set out by
Fountains of living waters. Rev. 7.17.

2. The offer of Christ and Salvation by Christ is general, it is to every one,
whosoever he be that finds his want of him, and is willing to receive him. Let
him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life.

3. This general offer of Christ, and Salvation by Christ, is made upon terms
of free grace; Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. And
Christ with his saving benefits being offered to every one that is willing to
receive him, he is offered to you, as well as to any other person in the world.
This free and general offer of Christ being a point of very great concernment,
I shall farther open and prove, that there is a free and general offer of
Christ, with all his saving benefits, to every one that finds a want of him,
and is willing to receive him. And that will appear these ways. 1, By the
command of God for preaching the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15, 16. Go
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
believes and is Baptized* shall be saved. That is, tell every creature that
God sent his Son into the world to save sinners, and make an offer of Christ,
and Salvation by Christ to every creature, and tell them that every one that
believes in him, and will be obedient to him, shall be saved by him. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Baptism lays an Obligation upon
us, to repent of our sins, Act. 2.38. Mar. 1.4. and to obey Christ, and walk in
newness of life. Romans 6.4. And as Christ commanded his Gospel to be preached to
every creature, so his Apostles where ever they came, preached the Gospel to
every creature, young and old, rich and poor, male and female, they made an
offer of Christ with his saving benefits to every creature. Col. 1.23. The hope
of the Gospel which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature,
which is under heaven. 2. There is a free and general offer of Christ, with all
his saving benefits, in those gracious invitations that are given to all
persons, in all places, and all ages of the world, to come unto Christ for
Eternal Life, and all things requisite to their Salvation. Isa. 45.23. Look
unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth. Be ye saved, that is, ye
shall be saved, I will give Salvation if you look to me. And the persons that
are invited to look unto Christ for Salvation, are all the ends of the earth,
that is, all persons in all places of the world, from one end of the earth to
the other. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Here is a general invitation of all that are in a
distressed and burdened condition, and laboring after Life and Salvation to
come to him, and he will give them rest. Isa. 55.1. Ho! every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and
eat, yea come, buy wine and milk, without money, and without price Here is a
free offer of Christ and his benefits, to every one that thirsts after him,
though they have nothing of any worth in them, they may take Christ and all his
benefits freely, and look on him upon their closing with him, as much, and as
surely their own, as they do look on those things to be their own, which they
have bought with their money. 3. It appears from the Types of Christ, under
the Old Testament. I will name three, the Manna, the Rock that gave forth
water, the Brazen Serpent. The Manna that fell in the Wilderness, was free for
all the Israelites to gather it and eat it, that found a want of food, and had
a desire to it. Exodus 16.16. This is that which the Lord has commanded: Gather
of it every man according to his eating. We see here, it was free for every man
to gather this Manna, that fell in the Wilderness. This Manna was a Type of
Christ, Joh. 6.33, 48. and it is as free for every man that finds his want of
Christ, and desires Salvation by Christ, to take Christ with all his saving
benefits, as it was for any Israelite to gather the Manna that fell in the
Wilderness. Joh. 6.50. This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a
man may eat thereof and not dye. There is a liberty given to any man to take
Christ, the bread of Life; A man may eat thereof, and not dye. The Rock that
gave water to the Israelites in the Wilderness, was a Type of Christ, and it
was free for any man that was athirst to drink of the water that issued out of
that Rock. 1 Cor. 10.4. And did all drink the same Spiritual drink? for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. So
it is as free for any man that thirsts after Christ and Salvation, to take
Christ with his saving benefits freely, as it was for any Israelite to drink of
the water of that Rock. Joh. 7.37. If any man thirst let him come to me and
drink. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will let him take the water of Life freely. The
brazen Serpent was a Type of Christ; And it was free for any man that was
bitten by a fiery Serpent, to look to the brazen Serpent, and every man that
looked up to the brazen Serpent lived. Number. 21.8, 9. And the Lord said unto
Moses, make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it upon a pole, and it shall come to
pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it he shall live; And
Moses made a Serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass,
that if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the Serpent of brass he
lived. So it is free for any man that sees himself in a perishing condition,
to look up to Christ (who was Typified by this Brazen Serpent) for Salvation,
and whosoever does look to Christ and believe in him, shall be saved by him.
Joh. 3.14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderderness,
so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have Eternal Life. 4. There is a free and general offer of Christ,
with all his saving benefits, in the general promises, of bestowing Christ and
all his saving benefits on all persons whatsoever, that do or shall believe in
him. Remission of sins, and Eternal Life (under which are comprehended all the
saving benefits of Christ, are promised to all, whosoever they be that do or
shall believe on him. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.
Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but should have Everlasting Life.


4. If you would obtain a saving interest in Christ, get the knowledge of the
terms on which God is willing to bestow Christ, and his saving benefits upon
you, and on which Christ is willing to bestow himself upon you. By these terms
I mean, what it is which the Lord Jesus requires of those whom he will own for
his, and on whom he will bestow himself, and all his saving benefits. These
terms are briefly comprehended under these two heads, Faith and Repentance.
They that believe in Christ and repent of their sins, shall undoubtedly be made
pertakers of Christ, and his saving benefits; All that believe in Christ, shall
assuredly be saved by him, Joh. 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believes on me has everlasting life. Joh. 3.15. That whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And so shall all they that
repent of their sins. Ezekiel. 30.18. Repent, and turn your selves from all your
Transgressions, and so iniquity shall not be your ruin. All persons in all
nations that repent of their sins, shall, for Christ's sake, have remission of
their sins. Luke 24.47. And that repentance and remission of sin should be
preached in his name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. I shall
briefly show you what Christ requires of those that he will own for his, and
to whom he will become a Savior. 1. That we love and prefer him above Father
and Mother, Wife or Children, the nearest and dearest Relations we have in the
whole world, yea and above our own lives. Luke 14.26, If any man come to me,
and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Hating Father and
Mother etc. is not to be taken in the usual and proper acceptance of the word;
For to hate any man in a proper sense is a great sin, it is Murder in the sight
of God. 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer, and ye know
that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. And our Lord Jesus does not
make any sin to be the condition of becoming his Disciple; And therefore hating
Father and Mother and other Relations, is to be understood improperly, for
loving Father and Mother, and other Relations, and a man's own life less than he
loves Christ; So it is explained Genesis 29.30, 31. He loved Rachel more than
Leah -- And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated. We are not to entertain such
thoughts of Jacob, as if he hated Leah, for it is not consistent with Gods
grace for a man to hate his wife. But the meaning is, Leah was not loved so
much as Rachel, as it is expressed in the former verse; The meaning of Leah's
being hated, is this that Rachel was loved more than Leah: So he that hates
not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, etc. cannot be my Disciple,
that is, he that loves not me more than his Father and Mother, and all
Relations, and his own life, cannot be my Disciple; and so it is explained,
Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me,
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And this
is but equal, that we should love Christ above all Relations in the world,
because he is better than all, he is more amiable, more excellent than Father
or Mother, or any other Relations, and he has done, and will do more for us
than Father or Mother, or Wife, or Children can do for us, for he dyed for our
sins, and will save our Souls, and that is more than all the men in the world
ever did, or can do for us. 2. That we deny our selves, and depart from all our
sins. Mar. 8.34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself -- There is
no being a Disciple of Christ for any man without self-denial. Now this denying
a man's self implies, (1.) That he must deny his own sinful inclinations, and
sinful affections. 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. (2.) That he must deny himself of things in themselves
lawful, when they come in competition with Christ. Joh. 3 Epist. ver. 7. For
his names sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles. It was lawful
for those that taught the Gentiles to receive maintenance from them, for the
Lord has ordained that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel:
But in some special cases, where it is more for the honor of Christ; these
persons spoken of by the Apostle, would take nothing of the Gentiles. (3.) We
must deny our selves in Religious duties, and works of Righteousness, not by
neglecting them, but these two ways. 1. By attributing nothing to our selves,
but ascribing all to Christ. 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am what I am,
I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God that
was with me. 2. By putting no confidence in any thing that we have done or can
do, but placing all our confidence in Christ. Phil. 3.3. We have no confidence
in the flesh. 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence we have in him. 3. That we
take up the Cross; Mar. 8.34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross. By taking up the Cross understand a willingness
to undergo any sufferings for Christ, that we shall be called unto, as
reproaches, persecutions, hatred of the world, loss of liberty, estate, yea and
life it self. Unless we are willing at the call of God to undergo the greatest,
as well as lesser sufferings for Christ, we cannot be his Disciples. Luke
14.33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot
be my Disciple. There must be a forsaking in affection, and resolution by every
one, and an actual forsaking when they cannot be enjoyed without sinning against
Christ. 4. That we be ruled and governed by him, and yield obedience to him as
our Lord, and then we shall assuredly be saved by him. Heb. 5.9. And being made
perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. Mat.
11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. By taking his yoke upon us is
meant submitting to his Government; To be under the yoke signifies, to be
under the rule and government of others. 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as
are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor -- Under the
yoke, that is, under the dominion and rule of others -- See also Genesis 27.40.
where the yoke signifies subjection. The Commandments and Ordinances of God
are called a yoke. Act. 15.10.




But here some may say, is it not derogatory to the free grace of God, to say
that he offers us Christ and Salvation upon terms? Does he not say whoever
will, let him take of the water of life freely? why then do you speak of terms
or conditions in Salvation by Christ.

A. 1. To speak of terms or conditions to be performed by those that are
justified and saved by Christ, and yet to say we are justified and saved by the
free grace of God, and are not at all inconsistent each with other: For the
Scripture asserts that we are justified by the free grace of God. Romans 3.24.
Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ
Jesus. Yet the Scripture requires Faith in Christ, and Repentance in order to
our obtaining Remission of our sins. Act. 10.43. and 3.19. The Scripture
asserts we are saved by grace. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved -- And yet it
tells us also if we would obtain Salvation we must believe in Christ. Act.
16.31. And repent of our sins, and that unless we do repent we shall surely
perish. Luke 13.3, 5.

2. There are no terms required by way of merit, for it is not possible that
any man should merit eternal life: If we were able to do all that is required
of us, we must confess our selves unprofitable Servants. Luke 17.10. When ye
have done all those things which were commanded you, say we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. How much more must we
confess our selves unprofitable servants, when we come exceeding short in doing
our duty. The greatest Saints are so far from meriting Heaven, that they are
not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. Who was a greater or more eminent
Saint then Jacob, of whom it is said, as a Prince have thau power with God and
with men, and have prevailed; Genesis 32.28. Yet he confesses himself to be
unworthy of the very least of all Gods mercies. I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies, and all the truth that thou have showed unto thy Servant.

3. It is no derogation to the free grace of God to say that God offers Christ,
and Salvation by Christ, upon such terms as these, if we will accept him for
our Lord and Savior, if we will believe in him, if we will forsake our sins,
take up our Cross and follow him. For (1.) God requires nothing of us, in order
to our being partakers of Christ, and his saving benefits, but what he himself
will work in us, and bestow on us, if we seek to him. He requires of all that
will be saved by Christ that they believe in him, but this Faith is not of our
selves, but is given to us by God. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through
Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. He requires
Repentance of all those that will be saved by Christ. Luke 13.3. But this
Repentance he himself will out of his free grace give unto us, if we seek to
him for it Act. 5.31. and 11.18. He requires of all that will be saved that
they obey Christ. Mat. 11.29. Heb. 5.9. But of his free grace he has promised,
that if we will seek to him, he will put his Spirit within us, and cause us to
walk in his ways. Ezekiel. 36.27, 37. He requires that we take up the Cross, but
out of his free grace he gives us to be willing and able to suffer for Christ.
Phil. 1.29. He requires of us that we endure to the end, and persevere in
Faith and Obedience if we would be saved. Mat. 24.13. But he promises out of
his free grace to give us perseverance, by putting his fear into our hearts,
that we shall not depart from him. Jer. 32.46. He requires nothing of us, but
what he himself will work in us and for us, if we seek to him. Isa. 26.12. Lord
thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us.
(2.) These things that God requires of us, as terms on which he will give us
Christ and his saving benefits, are not required as was hinted before, by way
of merit, to make us worthy of Christ, but as ways and means by which the Lord
conveys the saving benefits of Christ to our Souls, and makes us capable of
being partakers of Christ. As a man that offers one an handful of Gold, to one
whose hands are full of Dust, on condition he will let go the Dirt that is in
his hands, without he let it go he cannot receive the Gold. Or as a man that
offers a Beggar a new garment, on condition he will put off his old ragged
garment and put on his new one. (3.) Those things which I call terms of
Salvation, as Faith, Repentance, Suffering for Christ, Perseverance, are all of
them benefits and blessings purchased by Christ, as we may see if we consult
these Scriptures. 2 Pet. 1.1. We obtain Faith through Righteousness of God our
Savior. Repentance is a gift we have by Christ. Act. 5.31. And suffering grace
is purchased by Christ. Phil. 1.29. And perseverance. Heb. 10.14. And are all
given to the Elect for Christ's sake, with the same free and rich grace as
Christ was given for us. Romans 8.32. (4.) The Salvation of a sinner is infinite
Mercy, and infinite Grace, on whatever terms he is saved. For the torments of
Hell, from which he is saved, are unspeakable and eternal torments, and the
glory of Heaven, which they shall have that are saved, is unconceivable glory,
and that God against whom we have sinned is an infinite God, and therefore it
is infinite mercy and grace in him, to pardon and save a sinner, on whatever
terms he be saved.


5. Accept of Christ for your Lord and Savior, and you shall assuredly have a
saving interest in him. By accepting Christ, I mean these two things.

1. The consent of our wills to have Christ, and Salvation by Christ, on the
terms on which God offers him to us in the Gospel. 2. A relyance on Christ, and
trusting in Christ for all his saving benefits. By our consenting to have
Christ, as God offers him to us, and our trusting in him, he becomes ours and
we become his; Christ is the gift of God. Joh. 4.10. And what makes a gift
ours, but an offer on his part that has power to dispose of the gift, and
acceptance on his part to whom the gift is offered, on the conditions on which
it is tendered to him. All that receive or accept Christ on the terms on which
God offers him, have upon their receiving Christ this privilege conferred upon
them, to be the children of God. Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.
As the Shechemites by consenting to the terms of Union and Commerce, should
have become one people with the house of Jacob, and greatly enriched
themselves, if the sons of Jacob had dealt truly with them. Genesis 34.22, 23.
Only herein will the men consent unto us, for to dwell with us, to be one
people, if every male among us be circumoised, as they are circumcised. Shall
not their cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? Only
let us consent to them, and they will dwell with us. So upon our consenting to
have Christ as God offers him to us, we shall have Union and Communion with
Christ. We shall become one with Christ, and he will dwell with us, and his
blood shall be ours, to wash away our sins, and every benefit that he has
purchased with his blood shall be ours, only let us consent to have him as God
offers him to us in the Gospel. There may be a treaty about Marriage, a
proposal of terms, a woing a long time, but it is a mutual consenting and
engaging each to other, that makes the Marriage Union; So it is in our Union
with Christ, there may be frequent offers, an earnest woing, but it is
consenting that makes the match between us and Christ. When we consent to
accept of him, he will bestow himself and all his benefits upon us. Rev. 3.20.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and he with me. Christ standing
at the door and knocking, signifies the offers of grace that he makes to us in
the Gospel. He offers himself to us to be our Savior, to save us from
eternal misery, and is very earnest with us to receive and embrace him, when we
accept of him for our Lord and Savior, and consent to the terms on which he
offers Salvation to us, then we hear his voice, and open the door, and then he
will bestow himself, and all his benefits upon us, which is meant by his coming
in and supping with us, and taking us to sup with him.
But here some may say, are not men willing to have Christ for their Lord and
Savior, and to be saved by him in his own way.

Ans. No, all men are not willing to have Christ, and Salvation by Christ, on
the terms of the Gospel. There are very few that are willing to receive Christ
on the terms of the Gospel; Most men either neglect or reject him. Isa. 53.3.
He is despised and rejected of men. They are so few that regard the offers of
grace in the Gospel, that they seem as none at all, compared to the multitude
of those that neglect and reject thee. Prove. 1.24. I have called, and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. Even among those
that profess themselves the people of God, and are accounted Gods Israel, there
are many that will not accept of Christ for their Lord and Savior. Psalm.
81.11. My people would not hearken to my voice; Israel would none of me. It had
not been such matter of admiration, to have heard the Lord say, Moab would none
of me, or Egypt would none of me, but here this charge brought in against
Israel: Israel would none of me, that may startle us, and make us look well to
our selves, that we be not found guilty of rejecting Christ as well as Israel.
Most men are so wedded to the world, and to their lusts and own evil ways, that
though Christ offer them all the joys of Heaven, if they will accept him for
their Lord and Savior, yet they will not come to him, though thereby they
might have eternal life. Joh. 5.40. And ye will not come to me that ye might
have life. And though most men would be willing to be saved by Christ when they
dye, if they might have Salvation in their own way, namely, if they might live
in their envy, enjoy their hearts lusts, and be saved from hell torments when
they dye, yet they are not willing to accept of Christ, and Salvation by
Christ, in his way, and upon his terms; They are unwilling to have him for
their Lord to rule over them: They say in their hearts, Luke 19.14. We will not
have this man to reign over us. They are unwilling to forsake their sins, and
turn from their evil ways, though thereby through Christ they might escape
Eternal Death, and obtain Eternal Life. Ezekiel. 33.11. I shall therefore add some
motives to accept of Christ, upon the terms offered in the Gospel.

1. Jesus Christ, and Salvation by Christ, is worthy of all acceptance upon
any terms whatsoever. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. This
Salvation is worthy of all acceptance, that is, to be accepted by all men,
with all readiness of mind yea with all thankfulness, without objecting against
the terms on which this Salvation is offered to us. How readily would a blind
man accept of his sight, a condemned man accept of a pardon, a poor man accept
of riches, a dying man accept of life? Christ is all these and more, and yet
shall we be unwilling to accept of Christ? If we receive him, he will open our
blind eyes, he will give unsearchable riches to those that are poor, a pardon
to them that are condemned, life to them that are in a dying condition,
Salvation to them that are lost.

2. The Lord thinks nothing to much, nothing to great, nothing to good to give
to, and do for those that accept of his Son. If we will accept of his Son for
our Lord and Savior, he will give us himself for our God and Father, and will
bestow this wonderful privilege upon us to be his Sons. Joh. 1.12. As many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. And what a great, what an amazing privilege is this,
that such poor, such worthless creatures, such sinful creatures as we are
should be called the Sons of God. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? If we
accept of his Son for our Lord and Savior, he will bestow his Kingdom upon us.
Our Lord Jesus speaking to his little Flock that did accept him for their
Shepherd, and yield up themselves to be led, ruled and governed by him, tells
them it was their Fathers good pleasure to give them his Kingdom. Luke 12.32.
Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. And what a great, unexpressible, unconceivable gift is this, that God
should give us his Kingdom; What greater, what better things has God to give,
than to give us Himself for our God, and his Kingdom for our Inheritance? If we
will accept of Christ for our Lord and Savior, the Lord will with him give us
all good things freely. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All things are yours -- all are yours, and ye are
Christ's.

3. There is nothing in Christ but what is desirable, and worthy of all
acceptance. Cant. 5.16. He is altogether lovely. What the Apostle says of
every creature; 1 Timothy 4.4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with Thanks giving. I may say of Christ: Every thing
of Christ is good, and nothing to be refused, but Christ, and all that belongs
to Christ, is to be received with Thanksgiving. That which most men stumble at
in Christ, is his Cross, they hear that if any man will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, he must suffer Persecution, but if we rightly understood the advantages
of sufferings for Christ, we should esteem the Cross of Christ above all the
treasures of the richest Kingdom in the World. Heb. 11.25, 26. As shall be
shown more fully afterward.

4. The terms on which Jesus Christ with all his saving benefits is offered to
us, are reasonable, beneficial, advantageous terms, better than thou thy self
could have made for thy self, if God had left it to thine own contrivance,
better than all the Angels of Heaven could have made for thee. All the terms
proposed by God, on performance whereof we shall enjoy Christ, and Salvation by
Christ for ever, are real and eminent benefits, and have a singular worth and
excellency in them, as may appear if we consider all the terms required to our
enjoyment of Salvation by Christ. As (1.) Faith. That is a most precious grace,
more worth than the whole World. 2 Pet. 1.1. (2.) Repentance. There is such an
excellency in Repentance, that all the Angels of God rejoice when any one
sinner is brought to Repentance. Luke 15.10. (3.) Taking up the Cross. This is
an honor, and matter of great joy to be called to suffer for Christ. Act.
5.41. The trying of our Faith with crosses, is much more precious than all the
Gold in the World. 1 Pet. 1.7. (4.) Serving and obeying Christ. It is a greater
honor to be a Servant of Christ, than to be the greatest King in the World.
For Kings are Honored only by men, but the Servants are Honored by God. Joh.
12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father Honor.


6. If you would have a saving interest in Christ, as you must accept him for
your Lord and Savior, so you must give your self to Christ to be his. Cant.
2.16. My beloved is mine and I am his. We must become his, if we would have him
for ours. If we do in truth of heart give up our selves to Christ to be his, he
will assuredly become ours, and we shall be saved by him. Isa. 63.8. For he
said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie, so he became their
Savior. Children that will not lie, that is, that do not dissemble in their
hearts when they gave themselves to me, that will not deal disloyally with me,
and there upon, when they in truth of heart gave themselves to the Lord, he
became their Savior. As the Prophet said to the woman, with whom he made a
contract. Hos. 3.4. Thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not play the
harlot, thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. The like
contract is Christ willing to make with us, if we will become his Servants and
abide for him, and not be for the world or our selves, so he will be for us,
and will be our Savior. We must imitate the Churches of Macedonia, of whom it
is said, They gave their own selves unto the Lord. 2 Cor. 8.5. And why should
we stick at this? He gave himself to death for us. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity -- And shall not we give our
selves to him, that we may have Life and Salvation by him? How or which way can
we bestow our selves better, than to give our selves to Christ, who so loved
us, as to wash us from our sins in his own blood? What Master can we serve,
that is like Christ? But some may say, How should we give our selves to Christ,
so as he will receive and accept us?

1. Give thy self to Christ with judgment and understanding. Know and
understand what it is to give thy self to Christ to be his. It is to join thy
self to Christ, to love him, and serve him, and to be one of his servants. Isa.
56.6. Also the Sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve
him, and love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, -- If thou will give
thy self to Christ to be his, thou must no longer be thy own, to live to thy
self, and to follow thine own will, or do that which is right in thine own
eyes, or to go in the way of thine own heart. 1 Cor. 6.19. Ye are not your own
-- 2 Cor 5.15. He dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them. If thou will give thy
self to Christ, thou must not be the Worlds. Joh. 15.19. Ye are not of the
World, but I have chosen you out of the world. And therefore being not of the
world, you must not set your hearts upon the World, nor the things of the
World. 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, if any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Neither must we be
conformable to the world. Romans 12.2. And be not conformed to this world --
Neither must we be Servants to sin or Satan any longer, if we would be the
Servants of Christ. Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters -- 2. Count your
cost before you give your self to Christ, to be one of his Servants and
Disciples. Consider what it may cost you to be a Disciple, a Servant of Christ,
and see whether you are willing to engage with Christ, under all those hazards
and troubles, and difficulties that you may meet with in your way to Heaven. I
will tell you what cost you must count upon; You must count upon losing the
love and good will of the world, and to be hated of all men for Christ's sake.
Luke 21.17. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. You must count upon
many troubles. Joh. 16.33. In the world ye shall have Tribulation. Act. 14.22.
We must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. You must count
upon all sorts of persecutions, reproaches, confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, banishment, etc. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all that will live Godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. You must count upon forsaking
Friends, Estate, Liberty and Life, all that you have, if you will be a Disciple
of Christ. Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he
has, cannot be my Disciple. Are you willing to be at all this cost to be a
Disciple of Christ? If so, then he will embrace you for one of his. It is
Christ's own advice, that we should count our cost, before we engage in his
ways. Luke 14.28, 29, 30. For want of this, many that fall in with the ways of
Christ in a day of peace and prosperity, fall off when trouble and persecution
arises for the Gospels sake. 3. Give your selves freely and willingly to
Christ. Let it be your choice after you have weighed and considered all things,
whether it will be best for you to give your self to Christ, or to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, and to pursue this present World; For if it be
our own choice, then it is most likely that we shall stick and cleave to
Christ. Psalm. 119.30, 31. I have chosen the way of truth -- I have stuck unto
thy Testimonies. As in giving Alms to the poor, we should give freely,
willingly, cheerfully, not grudgingly, or out of necessity because we cannot
avoid giving something. 2 Cor. 9.7. Every man according as he proposes in his
heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. So much more in giving our selves to Christ, we should not
give our selves to Christ grudgingly, or out of necessity, but out of choice,
because it is best for us to be Christ's, willingly and cheerfully, for in this
as well as in other cases, God loves a cheerful giver. 4. Engage your selves
to Christ, by Covenant to be his, wholly his, only his, his for ever. It is
said of Jehojada, 2 King. 11.17. Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord and
the King, and the People, that they should be the Lords people. So should we
make a covenant with Christ, that we will be his people, and that we will be
his for ever. We should join our selves to Christ by covenant, and this
covenant should be an everlasting covenant. Jer. 50.5. Come and let us join our
selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shall not be forgotten. We
should engage our selves to Christ to be wholly his; 2 Chronicles. 15.18. And they
entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their
heart, and with all their soul. And to be only his. Psalm. 62.5. My Soul wait
thou only upon God -- Mat. 4.10. Him only shall thou serve. This engaging our
selves to Christ by covenant is very acceptable to God, and beneficial to our
selves. It is so acceptable to God that it is a means of turning away his
wrath, when his anger is kindled against us. 2 Chronicles. 29.10. Now it is in mine
heart to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may
turn away from us. And it is very beneficial to our selves, many ways, I will
instance only in two. (1.) It will more strongly oblige us to adhere to Christ
when we have obliged our selves to be his, in an everlasting covenant. (2.) It
will be a good evidence and testimony that Christ is ours and we are his, when
we find that we have chosen him for our Lord, and obliged our selves to him to
be his by covenant. Psalm. 119.30, 94. I have chosen the way of truth -- I am
thine. Psalm. 16.2. O my Soul! thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord.
Isa. 44.5. One shall say I am the Lords -- and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord -- When they made covenants to be the Lords People,
sometimes they that entered into covenant subscribed their hands to their
covenants. Neh. 9.38.

7. If we would be made partakers of Christ and his saving benefits, after we
have received Christ as God offers him in the Gospel, and have given up our
selves to Christ to be his, we must continue and abide with him all the days of
our lives; we must continue in his word and in his ways, we must continue
believing in, loving, and obeying the Lord Jesus Christ, and walking in his
ways; For if we abide in the Doctrine of Christ, if we continue to believe in,
love, serve and obey Christ, he will own us for his, and we shall assuredly be
made pertakers of Christ, and all his saving benefits. To assure us of this,
let us consult such Scriptures as these. Joh. 2d. Epist. ver. 9. He that
abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. Joh.
8.30, 31. As he spoke these words many believed on him. Then said Jesus to
those Jews that believed on him, if ye continue in my word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. Heb. 3.14. For we are made pertakers of Christ, if we hold
the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end. That is, if after we have
begun to believe, we continue steadfast in the Faith of Christ to the end of our
days, we shall certainly be partakers of Christ. And because it is a difficult
thing to abide with Christ, and continue walking in his ways, when troubles and
persecutions arise for the Gospels sake, I will give you some encouragements to
continue with Christ in an hour of temptation.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ will greatly reward our fidelity in continuing with
him in his temptations, and will assuredly give us eternal life. Luke 22.28,
29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations, etc. Our
Lord Jesus Christ observes who they are that reject him, and who they are that
continue with him in his temptations, and he takes it very kindly from us, when
we continue with him in an hour of temptation. He speaks it to his Disciples
commendation -- Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And
see how he rewards their fidelity in adhering to him in a time of trouble. He
promises to give them no less reward than a Kingdom; I appoint unto you a
Kingdom: And in that Kingdom they shall have joy unspeakable and full of glory,
and Royal dignity. That ye may eat and drink at my Table. It is a great honor
to set with the King at his Table, that we shall not only set at the Table
where Angels sit, but at Christ's Table. Not that there is eating and drinking
in a proper sense in Heaven, but in as much as there is delight in eating and
drinking, ( Isa. 55.2. Eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight it
self in fatness) especially what is set on Kings Tables, by these expressions
is hinted to us, that such shall enter into the joy of their Lord. And besides
their unspeakable joys, they shall have royal dignity conferred on them, and
sit on Thrones -- See some other Scriptures to this purpose. Mat. 24.13. But he
that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved. In the foregoing verses
the Lord Jesus foretells great National calamities, Wars, and Pestilences, and
Famine, ver. 7. And great persecutions against his Members. ver. 9. Then shall
they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated
of all Nations for my names sake. And then tells us that when suffering days
come, many will be offended and prove treacherous. ver. 10. But to encourage us
to continue faithful to the death, he assures us that whosoever endures to
the end of his life in times of trouble, and persevereth in Faith and Holiness,
the same shall be saved. But he that endures to the end the same shall be
saved. And if we may but obtain the Salvation of our Souls, whatever we loose,
whatever we suffer for the obtaining the crown of glory, we shall be happy for
ever. Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Behold the
Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall
have Tribulation ten days, be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

2. Abide with Christ in an hour of temptation, and he will abide with you;
Joh. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you. And if Christ will abide in us and with
us, we need not be troubled though all that we have be taken from us, for
Christ is better than all the World. If Christ abide with us, we need not fear
though all the World be set against us. Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I
will not fear; what man can do unto me! If Christ abide with us, the
Consolation of Israel abides with us, yea all good abides with us.

3. Abide with Christ, and you shall become powerful and prevalent in Prayer,
and shall bring forth much fruit. Joh. 15.5, 7. He that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit. If ye abide in me, and my words abide
in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. This is a
large grant, Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. We must
understand it of such things as are agreeable to the will of God, such things as
are for the glory of God, such things as are consistent with our eternal
welfare, when our will is thus regulated, we may ask what we will, and it shall
be done for us. And is not this a great encouragement to abide in Christ, that
we shall be so powerful in Prayer, as even to obtain what we will from him?

Sect. 3. Hindrances of an interest in Christ removed.
I shall in the next place mention several Hindrances which keep men from
being made partakers of Christ, and his saving benefits, and endeavor the
removal of them.

First Hinderance. Ignorance is a great hinderance to most men, that keeps them
from getting a saving interest in Christ. They are ignorant of the worth and
excellency of Christ, and their own want of him, and so do not seek after him.
And they are ignorant of Gods willingness to bestow Christ upon them, and they
are ignorant of the way and means whereby they should come to enjoy and attain
to an interest in Christ. There is a great deal of ignorance in many people
that live under plentiful means of Grace; The Jews had Moses, and the
Prophets, and Priests in abundance to teach and instruct them, yet the
generality of them were very ignorant of the things of God. Jer. 4.22. My
people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish children, and they
have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. See how the Prophet multiplyeth expressions to set out the ignorance
of the Jews. He says they were foolish, sottish, had no understanding, did not
know God, had no knowledge to do good. And as people that have great means of
knowledge may be very ignorant, so also are many that take upon them to be
teachers of others. Jer. 2.8. The Priests said not where is the Lord? and they
that handle the Law know me not. And that ignorance is a great hinderance to
our seeking after and obtaining Christ, and Salvation by Christ, we may see
from such Scriptures as these. Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, and
who it is that says to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water. Ephesians. 4.18. Having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their mind. Romans 10.3.
If any say, what should we do to get this ignorance removed.

1. Search the Scriptures, read them diligently, and meditate on what you read,
thereby you shall come to the knowledge of Christ. Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures -- They are they which testify of me. The Scriptures set out the
excellency of Christ, and show us that all things are but dross and dung in
comparison of Christ. Phil. 3.8. They set forth our miserable and undone
condition without Christ. Ephesians. 2.12. They set forth Gods willingness to bestow
Christ freely, on every one that is willing to have him. Rev. 22.17. They show
how, and by what means we are made partakers, which is through Faith. Ephesians.
3.17. Heb. 3.14. By searching the Scriptures we shall be made wise to
Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child thou have known the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus. If we do search the Scriptures daily, and meditate on
what we read, we shall greatly increase in knowledge. Psalm. 119.99. I have more
understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my meditation.

2. Turn from your sins, and then God will pour out his Spirit upon you, and
enlighten your minds, and open your understandings, that you may understand his
word. Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you. Continuance in sin darkens the mind,
that though a man have means of knowledge, and set himself to get
understanding, he will be ever learning, and not be able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. -- Laden with sins, and led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. What is said of hating our Brother? 1 John 2.11. He that hates his
Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. The same is true of other
sins also, they blind the eyes of our understanding, and keep us in darkness,
although we have great means of light and knowledge. But when we forsake our
sins and turn unto God, he will take away our ignorance, and give us saving
knowledge. Joh. 8.12. I am the light of the World, he that follows me shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of Life.

3. Pray to God to give you Wisdom and Understanding in the mysteries of your
Salvation, and he will give it to you. Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it
shall be given him. Observe here, (1.) The persons to whom God promises to
give wisdom, such as find their want of it, and ask it of God. (2.) The
extensiveness of this promise; It is any one, whosoever he be that lacks
wisdom, and asks it of God. (3.) The great readiness that is in God to give
wisdom to all that ask for it. He gives to all men, he gives liberally, he
gives without upbraiding; He will not upbraid us with our unworthyness, with
our dullness, our frequency or importunity in Prayer. (4.) The certainty of
success to such as ask wisdom of God. It shall be given him. What an
encouragement is this to all that find any want of wisdom and knowledge, to
pray to God for it, and to pray in Faith, that we shall obtain what we pray
for. We have more promises to this effect. Prove. 28.5. Evil men understand not
judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all things. Joh. 6.45. It is
written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. Isa. 29.18. The
eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. And let not
any say I am such a sinful creature, I am afraid God will not teach and
instruct me, though I should pray to him. For good and upright is the Lord,
therefore will he teach sinners in the way. Psalm. 25.8. Neither let any say, I
am so blind and ignorant there is no hope that I should attain to saving
knowledge; For God can make the blind to see. Psalm. 146.8. The Lord opens the
eyes of the blind.


4. Converse with the Servants of Christ, that have acquaintance with Christ,
and they will bring you acquainted with him. Prove. 13.20. He that walks with
wise men shall be wise. The Daughters of Jerusalem that could see no greater
excellency in Christ than in other things, and wondered that the Spouse should
be sick of love for him, and give them such a charge concerning him. Cant. 5.9.
What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women, what
is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou do so charge us? After
they had heard the Spouse discoursing concerning Christ, and setting out
Christ's excellencies, ver. 10. to the 16. they were in love with him, and had
their hearts stirred up to seek after Christ. Cha. 6.1. Whether is thy beloved
gone, O thou fairest among women, whether is thy beloved turned aside, that we
may seek him with thee.

Second Hinderance. Many men are willing to have Christ, and Salvation by
Christ, if they might have Christ, and Salvation by Christ in their own way,
and upon their own terms, as if they might be exempted from the cross, if they
might have liberty to continue in their sins, and the like, but they stick at
the terms of the Gospel, on which Christ is offered to them. To remove this
obstacle, I shall propose these following considerations to thy Soul.

1. Consider who thou art, that thou should stand upon terms with the great
God, about thy Salvation. Thou art a condemned creature, a child of wrath, a
lost creature, an undone creature, a sinner, a miserable creature, a poor worm.
And shall a condemned creature refuse a pardon unless he may have it on his own
terms? Shall a child of wrath refuse reconciliation with God? Shall a lost
perishing creature refuse a Savior, an undone creature refuse help, a great
sinner refuse forgiveness of his sins, a miserable creature refuse mercy,
unless he may have it in his own way? Shall a poor worm that is not worthy of
the least of all Gods mercies, refuse Christ and all the benefits of Christ,
because he may not have them on his own terms? 2. Consider what the torments of
Hell are, from which Christ came to save sinners, they are intolerable and
eternal torments. And consider what the joys of Heaven are, which Christ has
purchased for us, they are eternal and unspeakable joys. And shall we refuse to
have deliverance from the torments of Hell, unless we may have it in our own
way, and upon our own terms? Shall we refuse a Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven,
unless we may have it in our own way, and upon our own terms? Did we
understand, believe and consider the reality, and greatness, and eternity of
Hells Torments, and Heaven's Joys, we should be willing to do any thing, and
suffer any thing, so we might escape the Torments of Hell, and obtain the Joys
of Heaven when we dye. What the Apostle says to the Galathians. Gal. 3.1. O
foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth
-- The like may I say to such as stick at receiving Christ on the terms of the
Gospel, O foolish sinners, who has bewitched you, that you should not accept
of Christ, and Salvation by Christ on the terms of the Gospel. O foolish
Sinners, who has bewitched you, that you should not accept of Christ and
Salvation by Christ in the terms of the Gospel. How gladly would the Devils,
and the damned in Hell accept of Salvation on the terms of the Gospel, if it
were offered to them; And will thou refuse that which a Devil would joyfully
accept, if it were offered to him. How earnestly did the rich man beg for a
drop of water to cool his tongue, when he was tormented in Hell fire; and if he
were so earnest for a drop of water to cool his tongue; how readily would he
have embraced deliverance? 3. Consider what great want you have of Christ to
justify, sanctify, and save your Souls. You have greater want of Christ, than
you have of Food, or Raiment, or any thing in this world. You are in such want
of Christ, that you are utterly undone to all Eternity without Christ. When men
are in want, they will comply with hard and difficult terms, to have their
wants supplied. Luke 15.14, 15, 16. When the Prodigal Son began to be in want,
he was willing to submit to a very low condition, to feed, and look after
Swine, and he was willing to fare very hardly, to eat husks, such as were given
to Hogs. He would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did
eat. And these difficulties he readily complied with as soon as he began to be
in want. We have been in want of Christ ever since we were born, and our want
of Christ is greater than our want of necessary food; for the want of food only
destroys the Body, but for want of Christ, our precious Souls perish for ever.
Why then do we stand upon terms with God about accepting Christ, that either we
must have him on our own terms, or else we will not have him all. We would
undergo much hardship to get bread for our Bodies. Lam. 5.9. We gat our bread
with the peril of our lives, because of the sword of the Wilderness. And shall
we not be willing to undergo greater difficulties to get Christ the bread of
Life. 4. If thou will not have Christ and Salvation by Christ in God's way, and
upon God's terms, thou shall never be saved by him, for God will not alter the
way of Life and Salvation for the saving of thy Soul. Job. 18.4. Shall the
Earth be forsaken for thee? And shall the Rock be removed out of his place.
God's Eternal counsels and purposes for the saving lost man, are firmer than
the Rock, and stand faster than the Earth. And therefore it is a vain thing for
thee to imagine that God should alter the way of Life and Salvation, decreed
in his eternal counsels, and proposed in the Gospel. When they that were
invited to the Marriage Supper, refused to come; the King was angry, and said,
none of them should so much as taste of his Supper. Luke 14.24. I say unto you,
that none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper. And if we
refuse and fall short of Salvation by Christ, our case will be worse than the
case of the Heathens, that never heard of Christ, and in some respects, worse
than the condition of the Devils, that never had an offer of Salvation by Jesus
Christ. 5. The terms of the Gospel on which Christ is offered to us, are all of
them beneficial and advantageous terms, and nothing in them be excepted
against, as I have in part shown already, and shall show more fully in speaking
distinctly to those terms, that carnal persons are most ready to except against
as suffering for Christ, obeying Christ, forsaking our sins, which were none of
them to be refused, as will appear in answering each particular distinctly.
3. Hind. Some men would willingly have Christ and Salvation by Christ, but
they stumble at the Cross of Christ. They are unwilling to suffer for Christ,
to take away this stumbling block out of the way. I shall propose some
considerations to make you willing to undergo any sufferings for Christ.

1. The Cross is the way to the Crown of Glory. As Christ suffered before he
entered into Glory. Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his glory? So must we bear our Cross, before we wear our
Crown. Our Lord Jesus Christ has assured us, that if we will suffer for him
here, we shall reign with him for ever hereafter. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. It is a
faithful saying. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him. And who would not suffer a little while
with Christ here, upon good assurance that he shall reign with Christ in Heaven
for ever. The way to the Kingdom of Heaven lies through much tribulation. Act.
14.22. We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. That man
has very mean thoughts of Heaven, that will go out of the way that leads to
the Kingdom of Heaven, for avoiding the troubles that are in the way to this
Kingdom. All the troubles that we meet with in this present life, for the sake
of Christ. are not worthy to be compared with the glory we shall have in
Heaven. Romans 8.17, 18. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Here are
two arguments to persuade us to be willing to suffer for Christ. 1. If we
suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together with him. 2. The Glory
that we shall have with Christ, and by Christ, is so great, that all the
sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with it.
2. Sufferings for Christ are, and shall be attended with abundance of sweet
and Heavenly Consolations. Usually Christians never have a greater abundance of
the joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost, than when they go through abundance of
sufferings for Christ. 2 Cor. 1.5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. When Persecution arose for
the Gospel-sake at Antioch, and the Persecution was so hot, that Paul and
Barnabas were expelled out of their Coasts, the Disciples were as full of joy
as they could hold. Act. 13.50, 52. The Jews raised Persecution against Paul
and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts, and the Disciples were
filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost. When we meet with great troubles,
God is wont to give great comforts, such as make the heart to sing for joy. Job
35.10. Where is God my maker, who gives Songs in the night. The night taken
figuratively, signifies a dark time, a time of trouble, now in the darkest
times, in the night of affliction, God gives his people Songs, that is, such
comforts as shall make them sing for joy. Isa. 65.14. Behold my Servants shall
sing for joy of heart. 3. Sufferings for Christ are a ground of joy, rather
than of sorrow. When God calls us to suffer for Christ, we should be far from
refusing the Cross, that we should esteem it a ground of great joy, that we are
called to suffer for Christ. 1 Pet. 4.13. But rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding joy. When the Apostles were beaten and exposed to
pain and shame for Christ, they took these sufferings joyfully. Act. 5.41. They
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing, that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. We should be so far from refusing and
shunning the Cross, that we should account it a great happiness to be exposed
to reproaches and other sufferings for the sake of Christ. 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye
be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory and
of God rests upon you. 4. The rough and narrow and difficult way of
sufferings, is better than the smooth, broad, and easy way of sin; For the
broad and easy, and pleasant way of sin leads unto destruction, it leads a
man unto the Lake, that burns with Fire and Brimstone. And who would be
tempted to go in a smooth and pleasant, and broad way, that is sure as soon as
he is at the end of his way, he shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire? But the
narrow, and difficult, and rough way of the Cross leads, as we heard before,
unto the Kingdom of Glory. Besides, they that walk in the smooth way of sin,
though they may have ease to the Flesh, yet they have trouble and pain in their
Consciences. Job 15.20. The wicked man Travelleth with pain all his days. Isa.
57.21. There is no peace says my God unto the wicked. But they that go in the
narrow and rough way of the Cross, though they meet with troubles in their
outward man, yet they have peace in their Consciences, and joy in their inward
man. Joh. 16.33. 2 Cor. 7.4. And it is far better to have peace of Conscience,
and comfort in our Souls with troubles in the Flesh, than to have the Flesh at
ease, and trouble and distress in our Consciences. 5. Sufferings for Christ
have a greater excellency in them, and are more to be desired than all the
Honors and all the Pleasures, and all the Riches that this World can afford
us. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Let it be observed here. 1. What an high esteem Moses
had of sufferings for Christ; He esteemed reproach for Christ greater riches
than the treasures in Egypt. Yet Egypt was a very rich Country, all Countries
coming into Egyyt to buy Corn in the time of Famine. Genesis 41.57. And he
esteemed sufferings for Christ above the highest honors and preferments of the
Court; For he was adopted by Pharoah's Daughter for her Son, and should as
Josephus observes, have succeeded Pharaoh in his Kingdom, who brings in
Pharoah's Daughter speaking thus to her Father; Hunc decrevi mihi adoptare in
filium, tibivero in Regno successorem. I have determined to adopt this Moses
for my Son, and your Successor in the Kingdom, yet Moses preferred sufferings
for Christ above this Honor and Dignity, and refused to be called the Son of
Pharoah's Daughter. He also preferred sufferings for Christ before the
Pleasures he might have had by living in the King's Court. 2. Observe how
freely and willingly Moses embraced a suffering condition for Christ, above all
the Honors and Pleasures and Treasures of the Court of Egypt; He refused to be
called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter. She did not refuse him, she did not out
of distaste disown him, but he voluntarily refused this Honor; Choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. He was not necessitated to undergo affliction, he might have
enjoyed all the delights of the Courts, but it was his own choice to suffer
affliction, and he chose this rather than the pleasures of sin. 3. Observe the
greatness of the afflictions Moses made choice off, the scoffs and reproaches
of the Court, the wrath of the King, living in a low condition, as a stranger
in a strange Land, where he kept Sheep for his livelihood, and afterward he
lived forty years in a Wilderness with the People of God. Moses who saw the
corruption of the Court, and their hatred and oppression of the Israelites,
knew he must expose himself to all manner of sufferings, if he would join
himself with the people of God, yet he chose a Shephards life in Median, rather
than a sinful life in Pharaoh's Court, he chose rather to live in the
Wilderness with the people of God, than in all the delights and honors of the
Court with a polluted Conscience. 4. Observe who it was that esteemed
sufferings for Christ above all the Honors, Pleasures and Riches of Egypt: It
was Moses a wise man, who had all the Learning that Egypt could afford him.
Act. 7.22. Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty
in words and in deeds. It was Moses who was brought up at the Court all his
days, and had full knowledge of what delights, honors, treasures, were to be
enjoyed at the Court; Add also the time when Moses made this choice of
forsaking the honors and pleasures for this comfort, to embrace an afflicted
life with the people of God, and that was when he was come to those years
whereby he was able to make a right judgment of the enjoyments of the World,
and of the nature of sufferings. Moses when he was come to years refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. What years he was come to is expressed
Act. 7.23. And wh^^^^^ map the comfort old, it came into (...), as well as an
hun^^^ the Children of Israel. And such a man as Moses who was learned in all
the wisdom of Egypt, and trained up from his Infancy in a Kings Court, was able
at forty years of age, to give a right judgment of things. 5. Observe what
carried out Moses to refuse the honors and pleasures of the Court, and to
choose affliction, and to esteem the reproaches of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of Egyyt, it was his Faith, and more particularly, his believing
and having respect to the recompense of reward, that should be given him in the
other World; It was not his learning, or his courage and magnanimity but his
Faith. By faith Moses refused, etc. for he had respect to the recompense of
reward. This instance and example of Moses may teach us to have an high esteem
of sufferings for Christ, and to be so far from stumbling at the Cross, that we
should esteem sufferings for Christ above all the treasures in the world.

But here some may say, methinks I could suffer something for Christ, I hope I
could suffer much for Christ, but I know not how to come up to this, to suffer
the loss of all things for Christ. For how should we do to live, if all we have
should be taken from us?

A. 1. We must come up to this, not only to suffer much, but to suffer the
loss of all (...), when called to it, else we (...) Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be
of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. Is it
not better to forsake all we have and to enjoy Christ, than to stick to our
worldly enjoyments, and go without Christ? Christ is the Pearl of great price,
and it will be our wisdom to part with all that we have for the purchase of
this precious Pearl. Mat. 13.45, 46. That which we have to lose is but dross
and dung compared with this Pearl of price; Phil. 3.8. And shall we not be
willing to suffer the loss of dross and dung, that we may win Christ, the Pearl
of price?

2. All losses that we sustein for Christ, shall be made up to us with an
hundred fold advantage, whether it be Houses or Lands, or Relations, all shall
be made up an hundred fold, if not in the same kind, yet in that which is an
hundred times as good or better than that which we forsake for Christ. Mat.
19.29. And every one that has forsaken Houses or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit Everlasting Life. Weigh this promise
of Christ, which is very encouraging in a suffering day. There is a bountiful
reward in this life, an hundred fold compensation, and an Eternal Reward in the
other World. Loss for Christ on Earth, will prove Treasure laid up in Heaven,
we shall reap the comfort of it in Heaven for ever, as well as an hundred fold
advantage in Spiritual comforts and blessings in this life; And this bountiful
reward is promised not only to some, but to every one that forsakes any thing
for the sake of Christ, be it Houses or Lands, or the dearest things or
Relations we have in all the World. And who would not willingly part with all
that he has upon good assurance, that besides an eternal compensation of all
his losses in Heaven, he shall have an hundred times as good or better things
given to him in this Life? And what better assurance can we desire for this,
than the word and promise of God, that cannot lie.

3. God can take away all we have from us in one day, if we refuse to suffer
the loss of all when he calls to it. He can take away what we have by Fire, or
by suffering Robbers and Oppressors to take away our estates. Psalm. 109.11. Let
the Extortioner catch all that he has, and let the Stranger spoil his labor.
Job was the Richest man in all the East, and yet had all his estate taken from
him in one day; And cannot God do the like by us? Now it is better to suffer the
loss of all we have for Christ, than to suffer loss by Gods judgments, for
there is no reward of such losses. And as God can take our estates when he
pleases, so he can curse them to us, if we refuse to part with them for
Christ; He can make our Table to become our Snare. Romans 11.9. And our Riches
prove hurtful to us. Eccles. 5.13. And prosperity to be our ruin. Prove. 1.32.
And we had better suffer the loss of our Estates, than to have them cursed to
us.

4. Death will take away all that we have from us. 1 Timothy 6.7. For we brought
nothing into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And why
shall we not part with all for Christ, when we must part with all we have at
Death: what we part with for Christ, shall be recompensed to us an hundred fold
in this Life, besides Life Everlasting in the other World: But we have no
reward for what Death takes from us. But here may be 2 pleas; why men would
rather part with all at Death, than part with all they have for Christ.

1. We shall have no need of these things when we dye, and therefore we are
willing to part with them when we dye, but we shall have need of them while we
live, and therefore we cannot tell how to part with them for Christ.

A. 1. If you part with all that you have in this World, you do not part with
the providential care and the promise of God: You have a Father in Heaven, that
knows all your wants. Mat. 6.32. Your Heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things. And as he knows all your needs, so he has promised
to supply them all. Phil. 4.19. But my God shall supply all your need.
according to his Riches in Glory, by Jesus Christ.

2. It argues little love to Christ, if we will part with nothing for Christ,
but what is useless and superfluous, what we shall have no more need of: we
will do as much, and more then this for one another, But some may reply again.
What Death takes from us, it leaves to our Children, but what we part with for
Christ, is gone from us, and from our Children for ever; and therefore we can
better part with all we have to Death, than to Christ. I answer,

1. We may design our Estates for our Children when we die, but we cannot tell
whither they shall enjoy them. We know not how the providence of God will
dispose of what we leave behind us, when we are gone out of the World. Luke
12.20. God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of
thee. Then whose shall those things be which thou have provided.

2. Suppose all we have should be taken from us and our Children, we must
prefer Christ above our selves, and love Christ, more than Son or Daughter, or
else we are not worthy of him. Mat. 10.37.

3. Sufferers for Christ, that part with all they have for Christ, leave their
Children a better Inheritance than Houses, or Lands; they leave them the
blessing of God. God blesses the Children of righteous men for what they part
with to the poor. Ps. 37.26. He is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is
blessed. How much more will he bless our seed, and return to them what we part
with for Christ?

5. If we do suffer the loss of all things for Christ, it is no more than what
others, and they better than we are, have done before us. Matthew. 19.27. Peter
said unto him, Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we
have therefore? Phil. 3.8. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things.

6 If we should suffer the loss of all things for Christ, we may live as well,
as holily, as cheerfully, as comfortably as we did when we had all those things
that we have parted with for Christ. When the Apostle Paul had suffered the
loss of all things, he was as contented, as cheerful, as if he had possessed
all the word. 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing -- as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. Neither the preservation, nor the
comfort of a man's life lies in the abundance of those things which he does
enjoy, but in the providence, and promise of God, Luke 12.15. A man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. When David
was persecuted by Saul, and forced to flee into the Wilderness, and hide
himself in the Dens and Caves of the Earth; and had nothing to live upon, but
the providence, and the promise of God; he found as great comfort in Gods
promises, as if he had enjoyed great riches. Psalm, 119.161, 162. Princes have
persecuted me without a cause, I rejoice in thy word as one that finds great
spoil. They that have suffered the loss of all things, have Gods providence,
and his promise for their security of providing them a livelihood. Ps. 111.5.
He has given meat unto them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his
Covenant. It is God's Covenant to give meat, that is, all things needful for
the bodies of his people, as well as grace for their Souls. Isa. 33.16. He
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks;
bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure. And what better
security can we desire for a livelihood, than the providence and promise of
God? How sweetly do the Birds sing, yet they have no barns, they know not one
hour, where they shall have provision the next. Matthew. 6.26. They have nothing
but what the providence of God gives them. Ps. 104.28. That thou give them,
they gather, thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. And may not a
Christian who has a more excellent Spirit than the Birds; be as cheerful as
the Birds, though he knows not one day where he shall have provision the
next, though he has nothing to live on, but the promise, and providence of God?

2. Though we should suffer the loss of all things, yet we may live cheerfully,
because we have a rich God for our Father, who has promised never to leave,
nor forsake us. Heb. 13.5. and that he will supply all our need according to his
riches in glory. Phil. 4.19. Though a Child has nothing, yet if he has a rich
Father, that has promised to take the care of him, and to supply all his
needs, so as he shall lack nothing, he rests satisfied in his Fathers
provision. The Lord is a rich God Ps. 24.1. The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof, the world, and they that dwell therein. Ps. 50.10, 11. Every
beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all
the fowls of the Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the field are mine. 1 Chronicles.
29.11. All that is in the Heaven, and in the Earth, is mine. And this God, who
is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all things that are therein, is our Father,
and a God in covenant with us, to provide, and take the care of us as long as
we live. And why shall we not rest satisfied in the bounty, love, faithfulness,
and tender care of our Heavenly Father, who has all things, though we our
selves have suffered the loss of all things?

But some say, if I had but little in the World, I should be willing to forsake
all I had for Christ, but I have a great estate, and I find it difficult to be
willing to forsake a great estate for the sake of Christ.

A. It is true it is harder for those that have much of the world, to part with
all for Christ, than it is for those that have but little; and that is one
reason why it is so hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. An
instance of this we may see in the young man in the Gospel, who when Christ bid
him fell what he had, and give to the poor, and he should have treasure in
Heaven, went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Matthew. 19.21, 22.
The greatness of his possessions was the cause that he would not part with them
to follow Christ. I shall therefore lay down some arguments to persuade such as
have great Estates to be willing to forsake them for Christ.

1. Christ forsook more for our sakes, than we can forsake for him. He was
rich, he was Lord of all the World, yet for our sakes he left all, and became
very poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye know
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes
he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. Yea, he became
poorer than the Birds and Beasts, for they have holes and nests to go to, but
he had not where to lay his head. Matthew. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, but the Sun of man has not where to lay his head.
2. Though we forsake never so much for Christ, he is able to make up all the
losses we sustain on his account; 2 Chronicles. 25.9. What shall we do for the
hundred talents, which I have given to the army of Israel, and thee man of God
answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. An hundred talents
is a vast sum of money, sufficient to defray the charges of an Army of an
Hundred Thousand men. ver. 6. When Amaziah was afraid of losing an Hundred
Talents by following the Prophets Counsel, the Prophet tells him, the Lord was
able to give him much more than an Hundred Talents. 3. We shall lose greater
and better things by forsaking Christ, than we can lose by embracing Christ,
and adhering to him, though we should lose a Crown, a Kingdom, the whole world
for adhering to Christ. For, (1.) We shall lose our own Souls, for Salvation
for our Souls is to be had no where else, but in Christ. Act. 4.12. And to lose
our Souls, is a greater loss than to lose the whole world. Mark. 8.34. (2.) By
forsaking Christ, we shall lose the favor of God. Heb. 10.38. If any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And we had better lose the favor
of all the men in the world, yea, better lose the whole World, than lose the
love and favor of God. (3.) If we forsake Christ, we shall lose the Kingdom of
Heaven. 1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son of God, has not life. And a man
had better lose all the Kingdoms of this World, if he had them all in his
possession, than lose the Kingdom of Heaven.

But some may say, I hope I could suffer the loss of all that I have for
Christ, only the laying down my life, that seems a hard matter, I do not know
how to be willing to lay down my Life for Christ.

A. It is true that it is hard work to Flesh and Blood, for a man to lay down
our lives for Christ, harder than to part with our Estates, Job. 2.4. Skin for
skin, yea, all that a man has, will he give for his Life. But though this seem
very difficult, yet it must be submitted to, else we cannot be Christ's
Disciples. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his own life also,
he cannot be my Disciple. Now to persuade you to a willingness to lay down your
lives for Christ, Consider,

1. That if you will love Life for Christ's sake, you shall save it, but by
saving your Life when Christ calls you to lay it down, you shall lose it.
Mark. 8.35. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, but whosoever
shall lose his Soul for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. That
is, he that will save his Natural Life, and refuse to lay it down for Christ,
shall lose Eternal Life, and that will lay down his Natural Life for Christ,
shall have Eternal Life. And it is of universal concernment which Christ
speaks here: Every man, whosoever he be that will lay down his Life for
Christ in this World, that same man shall have Eternal Life in the other
World. And every man, whosoever he be that will not lay down his Life for
Christ in this World, when called to it, that same man shall lose Eternal in
the other World. And what a good, and what a happy Exchange is this, to
exchange a short and temporal Life, for an Eternal Life; a miserable sinful
Life on Earth, for a glorious Life in Heaven?

2. If we refuse to lay down our lives for Christ when he calls us to it, he
can take them away from us when he pleases; He can take them by the Svvord,
or Pestilence, or some violent sickness, that shall make us a terror to our
selves, and to all that are round about us. He has the Keys of Hell, and of
Death. Rev. 1.18. He kills, and saves alive whom he pleases. Ps. 31.15. My
times are in thy hands. Job 12.10. In whose hand is the Soul of every living
thing, and the breath of all mankind. If we were to live for ever in this
World, we might have some cloak for our sins, in being unwilling to die for
Christ. But seeing we must die within a few days, when Christ pleases, and of
what Death he pleases, is it not better dying for Christ, than to dye of the
Pestilence, or dye of a Fevour, or any other kind of Death? Is it not
inexcusable folly for to lose Eternal Life for the enjoying our Life here on
Earth a few days, when as we know not whither we shall onjoy it one day, or one
hour after we have refused to lay it down for Christ: And if we do enjoy it
for some time, we must never expect to have any comfort of our Lives after we
have refused to die for Christ.

3. If we refuse to lay down our lives for Christ, he can make our lives such a
burden to us, that we shall count it a great mercy to be rid of them. The Lord
can lay such troubles upon us, that we shall be burdens to our selves, and long
exceedingly to be in our Graves. Job speaks of some men that are in such
misery, that they seek for Death, as for hid Treasures, and rejoice exceedingly
when God will take away their lives. Job 3.20, 21, 22. Wherefore is light given
to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in Soul, which long for
Death, but it comes not, and dig for it, more than for hid treasures, which
rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find a grave. Yea, it was Job's
own condition, to be a burden to himself. Job 7.20. Why have thou set me as a
mark against thee, so as I am a burden to my self. He was in so much misery,
that he prayed earnestly to God that he might die. Job 6.8, 9. O that I might
have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for: Even
that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let lose his hand, and
cut me off. He was in such distress, that Life was loathsome to him, and if
it had been lavvful, he would have strangled himself. Job 7.15, 16. My Soul
chooses strangling and death, rather than life. I loath it, I would not live
always. And who can tell, but God may lay as heavy affliction upon us, if we
refuse to die for Christ, as he did to his Servant Job, who was an upright man,
that feared God, and eschewed evil? Who can tell, but God may deal with us, as
he did with Pashur. Jer. 20.4. I will make thee a terror to thy self, and to
all thy Friends. Now is it not better to die for Christ, than to live in such
misery as to be a burden to our selves, and to be a terror to our selves, and
all our Frinds?

4. If we will not lose our lives for Christ, we shall lose that which is the
life of our lives, yea, that which is better than life. What is that which is
the life of our lives, and which is better than our lives? I answer. The love
and favor of God. Ps. 30.5. In his favor is life. Ps. 63.3. Thy loving
kindness is better than life. Now if we draw back from Christ in a suffering
day, because we are not willing to lay down our lives for him, we shall lose
the love and favor of God. Rebeccah was so concerned for Jacob, that if he
miscarried in his match, she thought she should be weary of her life, and her
life would do her no good. Genesis 27.46. I am weary of my life, because of the
Daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a Wife of the Daughters of Heth, such as these
which are the Daughters of the Land, what good shall my life do me? If the
miscarriage of a Child in a match will make us weary of our lives, what will
the loss of the love and favor of God, which is the fountain of all mercies.
May not such say, I am weary of my life, what good will my life do me, seeing
God has taken away his loving kindness from me?

5. Our Lord Jesus Christ laid down his life forus. 1 John 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. His Enemies
could not have taken his life from him, if he had not been willing of himself
to lay it down, and his laying down his life was upon our account, and for our
sakes. Joh. 10.15, 18. I lay down my life for the sheep. -- No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self. And what the Israelites said of David, 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us. The same may be said of Christ,
he is worth ten thousand of us, yea, more worth than all the men that ever
lived, more worth than all the Angels of Heaven, yet he laid down his life for
us. And shall we that are his Servants, poor worms, stick at the laying down
our lives for him?

6. It is a blessed thing to dye for Christ. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord. The dead which die in the Lord, and which die for the
Lord are in a most blessed condition. There is a peculiar honor promised to
those that suffer Martyrdom, for Christ. Rev. 20.4.

It may be some will say, I could be willing to dye for Christ, so I might dye
an easy death, but I cannot tell how to endure such tortures and pains, as some
have met with for Christ. I cannot tell how to undergo burning at a Stake, or
how to bear tormenting pains.

A. It is true that tormenting pains are hard to be born, yet we must be
willing to undergo any kind of tortures for Christ, not only to dye, but to
submit to the most painful death, if God shall call us to it, and to persuade
us to be willing to undergo torments for Christ; Let us consider.

1. Our Lord Jesus did not only dye for us, but he suffered a most painful,
shameful, accursed Death of the Cross for us. Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself,
and became obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross. What Death is more
painful than the Death of the Cross? Our Lord Jesus was in such extremity of
pain when he hung upon the Cross, that he was like a man that had all his Bones
out of joint, his heart melted like wax that is brought to the fire, his
strength and the moisture of his body, was dried up like a Potsheard, his
tongue cleaved to his Jaws, as we may see, Psalm. 22.14, 15. I am poured out
like water, and all my bones are out of joint, my heart is like wax, it is
melted in the midst of my bowels, My strength is dried up like a potsheard, and
my tongue cleaves unto my jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of
death. That this relates to Christ's sufferings on the Cross, is evident from
the last clause, his bones were out of joint, his heart melted like wax, etc.
when? when he was upon the Cross; Thou have brought me into the dust of Death.
And from several other passages in the Psalm, which relate to Christ's
sufferings on the Cross. As ver. 1.7, 8, 16, 17. And besides that anguish which
our Lord Jesus felt upon the Cross, when he was in the Garden, he was in such
an agony as made him sweat drops of blood. Luke 22.24. Now seeing our Lord
Jesus Christ endured such torments and pains for us, seeing he suffered the
painful, shameful, accursed Death of the Cross for us; Shall not we be
willing to suffer any shameful or painful Death for him? Seeing he bore the
wrath of God for us, shall not we be willing to bear the wrath of our
Persecutors for his sake.

2. If we refuse a painful and tormenting Death for Christ, God can inflict
worse pains upon us for our sins, than men can inflict upon us for our fidelity
to Christ. For (1.) God can send racking and tormenting pains into our bones
and bodies. that shall be more grievous to us than any men can lay upon us.
Rev. 16, 10, 11. They gnawed their Tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of
Heaven, because of their pains and their sores. These are worse pains then the
pains of Martyrs, for they have gone singing to the Stake, and have glorified
God in the fires, but these sinners selt such anguish, as made them gnaw their
own Tongues, and to blaspheme the God of Heaven. We find greater disquietness
in David, through the pains he felt in his sickness, than many of the Martyrs
expressed in the Flames. Psalm. 38.6, 8. I go mourning all the day long, I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. (2.) God can wound our
Spirits, and the pains of the Soul when that is wounded, are far greater then
all the pains that can come upon the body. Prove. 18.14. The Spirit of a man
will sustein his infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? When God
inflicts his terrors upon the Soul, they are so insupportable, that many times
they cause men to fall into destruction. Psalm. 88.15. While I suffer thy
terrors I am distracted. (3.) If for fear of being tormented, we forsake or
deny Christ; God can inflict on us the torments of Hell; And all the torments
that man can inflict, are but Flea-bites compared to the torments of Hell. We
should fear offending God, who has power to cast us into Hell, more than we
should fear all the men of the World: For the worst that they can do is to kill
the body, and after that is done, they can do us no further hurt. Luke 12.4, 5.
And I say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall
fear: Fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea I
say unto you, fear him.


3. We are willing to endure great pain for the preservation of our Temporal
Life; We are willing to let the Surgeon cut and lanch our Flesh, yea, to cut
Legs and Arms or other Members, when the whole body is in danger to perish, And
shall we be unwilling to go through a painful Death for the obtaining Eternal
Life? Though the pains of Martyrdom are sharp, yet they are but short, and the
joy that follows those short pains is Eternal and unspeakable. What are a few
Minutes of pain to an Eternity of Joy and Glory.

4. The more torture and pain we endure for Christ here, the greater glory we
shall have in Heaven for ever hereafter. Heb. 11.35. Others were tortured not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. The more
we are tortured, the more glorious shall we be at the Resurrection, for we
shall have a full recompense for all our sufferings, as well as our services. 2
Cor. 4.17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

5. They that have been far better than me, even such as the World has been
unworthy of them, have gone through great torments for Christ. Heb. 11.37, 38.
They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
Sword, they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, of whom the World was not worthy. How many Martyrs in
all ages, men of eminent piety have laid down their lives for Christ, and
endured all kind of torments cheerfully; And why shall we then think much to
endure a painful and tormenting Death for Christ?

6. The Lord will uphold us by his Divine power, under all the pains and
torments that we shall undergo for Christ; If we were to go alone through fiery
trials, we might be afraid lest we should sink, and not be able to bear them.
But seeing God will be with us and strengthen and uphold us, when we are to
pass through fiery Trials, this may dispel all our fears, and make us go
willingly through any sufferings for Christ. Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not for I am
with thee, be not dismayed for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the Righthand of my Righteousness. Isa.
43.1, 2. Fear not, thou art mine, when thou passest through the waters I will
be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou
walk through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee. God will proportion our strength to our troubles, and when we
meet with days of great trouble, he will give in great strength. Deuteronomy. 33.25.
And as thy days so shall thy strength he. And that weaker Christians may not be
dismayed when they see great troubles coming, he has engaged his
faithfullness, that he will not suffer them to be tried above their strength. 1
Cor. 10.13, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man.
But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, but will with the temptation, also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

3d. Hinderance of a saving in Christ, is unwillingness to leave our sins,
either from the delight we have in them, or some profit we have by them, The
hearts of Unregenerate men cleave fast to their sins, and are exceeding
unwilling to part with them. Jer. 8.5. They hold fast Deceit, they refuse to
return. Let me show some instances of this, how men love and cleave to their
sins, and how unwilling they are to part with them.

1. Many men love their sins as they love their lives, they will as soon part
with their lives, as part with their sins. Ezekiel. 7.13. Neither shall any
strengthen himself in the iniquity of his Life; It is rendered in the Margent,
whose Life is in his iniquity; That is, who love their iniquities as they love
their lives, yea, they love their sins above their lives, for though God tell
them if they live after the flesh they shall dye, but if through the Spirit
they mortify the deeds of the body, they shall live, yet they choose to go on
in their sins, and dye rather than to turn and live. 2. Many men do so cleave
to their sins, that no commands, no threatenings, no promises of God will
prevail with men to leave their sins. The Lord sent often by his Prophets to
the Jews to command them to turn from their sins, yet they would not leave
their evil ways. Jer. 25.4, 5, 7. The Lord has sent unto you all his Servants
the Prophets; They said, turn ye again every one from his evil way, and from
the evil of your doings -- yet ye have not harkned unto me. Jer. 2.25. With
hold thy feet -- but thou said no, for I have loved strangers, and after them
I will go. 3. Many men are so unwilling to leave their sins, that none of God's
judgments nor mercies will prevail with them to forsake their sins; Great
judgments will not do it. Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a
Mortar among Wheat, with a Pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him. Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and
more. Amos 4.6. to the 12th. verse. Neither will great mercies prevail with
many men to leave their sins. Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. Yea there is a very great
unwillingness in most men, to leave their sins, now I shall lay down some
arguments to persuade you to be willing to forsake all your sins, in order to
your being partakers of Christ, and all his saving benefits. 1. Either you must
leave your sins or leave Christ; You cannot have Christ and his saving
benefits, and continue in your sins. Math. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters,
for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to
the one, and despise the other; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. The like may be
said of enjoying Christ, ye cannot enjoy Christ, and enjoy your sins too, for
either you will hate your sins and love Christ, or you will hold to your sins
and despise Christ. And therefore what Christ said to the Jews concerning his
Disciples. Joh. 18.8. If ye seek me, let these go their way. That may I say to
you concerning your sins, if ye seek Christ and would have Christ, ye must let
these go away. That we must part with our sins, or part with Christ for ever,
is evident these ways. (1.) Because he requires of all those that will become
his Disciples, and have Salvation by him, that they depart from Iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord
knows them that are his; And let every one that names the name of Christ
depart from iniquity. Our Lord Jesus Christ will not own any one man for his,
that does not depart from iniquity, it is the immutable purpose of God, that no
man shall have Salvation by Christ, that does not depart from his sins. Luke
13.5. I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.. (2.)
Our iniquities separate between us and our God. Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God. And if we continue ever in our sins, there
will be an eternal separation between God and our Souls. (3.) At the great day
of judgment, he will not own one Man, Woman or Child for his, or admit any into
his Kingdom, that have been workers of iniquity, but that would not depart from
their sins, shall depart from Christ for ever, though they have prophesied in
Christ's name, and cast out Devils, and done many other wondrous works, Math.
7.23, 24. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name, etc. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me, ye workers of Iniquity. Now is it not better parting with our sins,
than parting with Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven for ever. What is there in
sin, that should make us more willing to part with Christ, than to part with
our sins.
2. God makes great proffers, and great promises of very great things that he
will give to us, and do for us, if we will forsake our sins, that he may
persuade us to be willing to leave our sins. If any ask, why what will God do
for us, what will he give to us, if we will forsake our sins.

A. 1. If we will forsake our sins, God will receive us into his love and
favor, and will bestow himself upon us for our God, and accept us for his
people, he will become our Father, and own us for his Sons and Daughters. Jer.
7.24. Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

2. If we will forsake our sins, the Lord will forgive us all our sins for
ever, and will not so much as mention any of our sins unto us. Ezekiel. 33.15, 16.
When I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, if he turn from his sin. None
of his sins which he has committed shall be mentioned to him -- he shall
surely live. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Cease to do evil, and learn to do well -- Come
now, and let us reason together says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be white as snow, though they have been red like crimson, they shall
be as wool. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and return unto the
Lord, for he will abundantly pardon.

3. If we will leave our sins, God will pour out his Holy Spirit upon us, to
dwell in us for ever, to enlighten, quicken, sanctify, and comfort us under
all our troubles. Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my reproos, behold I will pour out my
Spirit unto you. Act. 2.38. Repent, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

4. If we will turn from our sins, God will take us into covenant with himself,
and give us all the blessings of the new Covenant. Isa. 59.20, 21. The Redeemer
shall come to him, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob. As for
me, this is my covenant with them. See here with whom God makes his Covenant,
his Covenant is with them that turn from transgression in Jacob. And when he
makes a Covenant with us, his Covenant is to give us Grace and Glory, and to
withhold no good thing from us.

5. If we will forsake our sins, the Lord will save us from the torments of
Hell for ever, and give to us his Heavenly Kingdom. Job. 33, 27, 28. He looked
upon me, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and
it profited me not, He will deliver his Soul from going down into the pit, and
his life shall see the light, What is there in sin, that we should refuse all
these great things, rather than leave our sins?

3. Consider that Sin is the greatest evil in the world, that there is nothing
does us so much mischief, and is so prejudicial to our welfare as sin is, and
that may make us willing to forsake our sins. See what an evil thing sin is.

1. Sin is worse than any affliction, as the Sword, Pestilence, Famine,
Poverty, noisome Diseases, etc. For neither Sword, nor Famine, or any other
affliction can separate us from the love of God. Romans 8.35. But sin makes us
hateful to, and hated of God. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of Iniquity.
No affliction can hinder our Salvation. Lazarus was exceeding poor, he begged
his bread, and was full of noysom sores, yet his Soul was carried by the Angel
into Abraham's bosom, but sin will hinder the Salvation of our Souls. Now we
flee from the Sword and Pestilence, and other Judgments, and shall we not much
more flee from sin, which is a greater evil than all these.

2. Sin is a greater evil than Hell it self; for God made Hell, but sin is the
work of the Devil. And therefore sin, which is the work of the Devil, must
needs be worse than Hell, which is the work of God. Hell sets forth the glory
of Gods Justice, but sin wholly dishonours God, and therefore sin is worse than
Hell. Now we are very desirous to be delivered from Hell, and why shall we not
be willing to leave our sins which are worse than Hell.

3. There is nothing in the world does us so much hurt and mischief, as sin
does. Sin separates us from God the chiefest good. Isa. 59.2. What poison is to
the body, that sin is to the Soul, the Souls poison. Romans 3.13. The poison of
asps is under their lips. Sin wars against our Souls. 1 Pet. 2.11. And will be
the Death of our Souls, if we do not forsake it. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is
death. We flee from Death, and those things that bring Death. When there was a
deadly herb in the pottage, the Sons of the Prophets would not eat thereof, but
cried out, O thou man of God, there is death in the pot, and they would not eat
thereof. 2. King. 4.40. I may say the like to impenitent sinners, O thou
sinner, there is Death in thy sins, O thou Drunkard, there is Death in thy Cup,
O thou Unclean Person, there is Death in the Harlots house, and to the
unrighteous man, there is Death in thy false weights, and false measures, and
deceitful-balances. And shall not this make us willing to leave our sins, that
there is Death in our sins.

4. If no consideration will incline your hearts to a willingness to forsake
your sins, look up to Christ that he would put forth his grace, and divine
power upon your Souls, to make you willing to forsake your sins, and willing to
serve and obey him. Ps. 110.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day
of thy power.

5. See what it is which makes you so unwilling to leave your sins, and get
those cords cut in sunder, whereby your wills and affections are hold entangled
in your sins. When men are unwilling to leave their sins, it is usually from
one of these two causes, either from the delight and pleasures they have in
their sins, or from the gain, and profit they have by them. Most men are very
unwilling to part with their sinful gain. Act 16.19, 20, 22. Act. 19.24, 25,
27. And with their sinful pleasures, in so much, that they love their pleasures
more than they love God. 2 Timothy 3.5. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God. I shall endeavor the removal of both these.

. Arg. To persuade us to be willing to part with our most delightful, and
pleasing sins.
1. God parted with his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased for us, and
delivered him up to death for us. Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased. Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all. And shall not we part with our beloved and pleasing sins for him,
and deliver them up unto Death. They that take most pleasure in their sins, and
have the greatest love for them, will, or ought to be ashamed to say, they love
their sins, and are pleased with their sins, as much as God loved Christ, and
was pleased with Christ, and therefore they should also be ashamed to spare
their sins, and not deliver them up to Death for the enjoyment of Christ.

2. God will give thee better pleasures than ever thou foundest in thy sins, if
thou will part with thy sins, he will give thee better pleasures in this life.
Job. 36.10, 11. He commands that they return from iniquity. If they obey and
serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in
pleasures. There are better pleasures to be found in Christ, and in the ways
and ordinances of Christ; than are to be found in sin. Prove 3.17. Her ways are
ways of pleasantness. Ps. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thine house, and thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy
pleasures. The comforts of the Holy Ghost are infinitely better than the
pleasures of sin. Now if you forsake your sins, and walk in the fear of God,
you shall have the comforts of the Holy Ghost. Act. 9.31. Walking in the fear
of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Besides the pleasures that God
gives you in this life, if you will leave your pleasing sins, God will give
you the pleasures of Heaven, where you shall live in fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Ps. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

3. Pleasing sins are like poison in sweet wine. What wise man will be allured
to drink a draught of poison, because it is put into sweet Wine. though it be
sweet in the mouth, it will torment and rack a man exceedingly. Job 20.12, 13,
14. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still in his mouth.
Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him. The
poison of asps is the most deadly poison. Those sins in which men find most
pleasure, will one day torture and torment their Consciences, as much as the
most deadly poison does their Bowels. Men's pleasing sins will be like the
little book the Angel gave the Apostle, which was in his Mouth sweet as honey,
but made his Belly hitter. Rev. 10.9, 10. Sweet sins will be bittterness in the
latter end. Take an instance in two sorts of sins, in which men find pleasure,
Uncleanness and Drunkenness. Prove. 5.3, 4. The lips of a strange woman drop as
an honey comb, and her mouth is smoother than Oil, but her end is bitter as
Wormwood, sharp as a two edged Sword. Prove. 23.31, 32. Look not upon the wine
when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it self
aright; At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder.

4. The pleasures of sin will cost a man dear without Repentance, for they
shall be punished with the pains and torments of Hell for ever; And from the
first day that a man comes into the torments of Hell, all the pleasures of sin
will vanish away for ever. The Rich man that had fared deliciously every day,
when he was in Hell could not get one drop of Water to cool his Tongue; They
are dear ^^^ght pleasures, that must be paid for in ^^^^^orments. Momentaneum
est quod delectal, E^ernum quod cruciat; The pleasures of sin are gone in a
moment, but the pains of Hell are for Eternity.

5. The pleasures of sin are such poor, vain, vile things, that bitter and
sharp afflictions are rather to be chosen than the pleasures of sin, which are
but for a season. Moses who was a wise man, preferred the afflictions of a
Wilderness with the people of God, before the delights and pleasures of a Kings
Court, when they could not be enjoyed without sin. Heb. 11.25. Choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season.

. Arg. To persuade us to leave gainful and profitable sins.
1. Such gain as is gotten by sinful and unrighteous means, will prove the
greatest loss in the World; For it is gotten with the loss of our Souls, and
with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? And what loss like the loss
of our Souls, and the loss of a Kingdom, even the Kingdom of Heaven? The
gaining of the whole World will not make up this loss. Mark 8.34. For what
shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul.

2. You shall gain greater and better things by forsaking your sins, and
leading a Godly Life, than you can gain by continuance in your sins; For what
you gain by Unrighteousness does you very little good, but Godliness will be
profitable to you for all things, both in this life, and in the life which is
to come 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise
of the life that now it, and that which is to come. If you will leave your
gainful sins for Christ, you shall in gaining Christ, gain unsearchable
Riches. Ephesians. 3.8. Yea in gaining Christ you shall gain all things. 1 Cor. 3.21,
22, 23.

3. Such gain as a man gets unrighteously will profit a man nothing, either in
a day of wrath, or in the day of death, or at the day of judgment. Prove. 10.2.
Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. Though a man has gotten a vast Estate,
though he has heaped up Treasures in great abundance, yet if he has gotten
them by wicked ways, they will profit him nothing; They will be so far from
profiting him, that they will hurt him exceedingly. What a man gets
unrighteously, he leaves behind him when he dies, but his guilt will follow
him into the other World, and will torment him like Fire. Jam. 5.3. Your Gold
and Silver is cankered, and the rust of them will be a Witness against you, and
shall eat your Flesh as it were Fire, ye have heaped Treasures together for the
last days.

4. Uprightness and Righteousness in our dealings, is a far better way to get
an Estate than Fraud and Unrighteousness. For (1.) Such as deal Truly, and
Righteously shall have God's Blessing in an abundant manner. Prove. 28.20. A
faithful man shall abound with Blessings: but sin and wickedness brings the
curse of God. Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked.
Now who is in the most likely way to thrive, they that have the curse, or they
that have the Blessing of God. (2.) If a man should get but a small Estate that
deals righteously and uprightly, yet a little estate gotten righteously, is
better, and has more comfort in it, than great Revenues gotten by unrighteous
ways. Ps. 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches
of many wicked. Prove. 16.8. Better is a little with righteousness, than great
revenues without right. For there is more comfort in a little gotten with Gods
blessing, than in a great deal gotten by sinful ways. Prove. 10.22. The
blessing of the Lord it makes Rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. (3.) What
is gotten Righteously abides longer than what is gotten by sinful ways. Jer.
17.11. He that gets Riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a Fool. Prove. 28.22. He that hastes to be
Rich, has an evil Eye, and considers not that Poverty shall come upon him;
That is, he that makes such have to be Rich, as that he will use undue courses
to get Riches, takes the ready way to become a Poor man; But when men get
Estates Righteously, that is the way to have their Estates blessed to
themselves. Prove. 28.10. The upright shall have good things in possession. And
to their Posterity for many Generations; Prove. 13.22. A good man leaves an
inheritance to his Childrens Children, and the wealth of the sinner is laid up
for the just.


Sect. 4 Obeying Christ even in the most difficult Precepts of the Gospel,
should not make us refuse closing with Christ.
A 4th. hinderance to our closing with Christ is unwillingness to come under
his Government, and yield obedience to the commands of the Gospel, especially
such commands as are cross to our interest, and contrary to our corrupt
natures, and in such commands as are like the pulling out of right eyes, and
cutting off Right hands; In such cases, and in reference to such commands; Many
are ready to say, this is an hard saying, who can bear it? Joh. 6.60. And say
in their hearts, We will not have this man to Reign over us. Luke 19.15. Now to
remove this stumbling block, I shall propose some arguments to persuade us to
be willing to receive Christ for our Lord, and to obey him in the most
difficult duties that he requires of us, even such as are like the cutting off
a right hand, and pulling out a right eye.

1. The Lord Jesus commands us to do nothing, requires nothing of us, but what
is for our own good. Mich 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. The Lord requires of us that we do justly, that we love
mercy, that we walk humbly with our God, and why? because these things are good
for us. Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God -- to keep the Commandments of the Lord,
and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good. Yea even such
commands of Christ as seem hardest to Flesh and Blood, are greatly for our
good. It seems a very hard matter to cut off our Right Hand or our Foot, or to
pluck out a Right Eye, when any of these Members cause us to offend: yet it is
really better for us to remove the impediments of our Salvation, though as dear
as our Eyes, as useful and beneficial to us as our Hands and Feet, and to
enter into Life, blind, and halt, and maimed, than to reserve the occasions of
offense and stumbling, and to be cast into Hell Fire. Mark 9.43. to the 48. ver.

2. If the work seem hard and difficult which Christ sets us about, yet the
wages he gives are exceeding great, which he gives to them that serve him and
obey him; He gives no less Reward to all his Servants, than a Kingdom. Luk
12.32. Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. He gives his Servants the same Glorious Kingdom which he himself has.
Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall
also my Servant be. He gives an Eternal Kingdom to them that obey his
Commandments. Heb. 5.9. Joh. 12.50. I know that his Commandment is Life
Everlasting. This may reconcile our hearts to the Commandments of the Gospel,
there is no Commandment of Christ but it is in order to our obtaining
Everlasting Life. Now this consideration that Christ will give us a Kingdom, an
Everlasting Kingdom that cannot be removed, should make us willing to engage in
any difficult service for Christ, and desirous to do him all the service we
can, and to serve him in a gracious and acceptable manner. Heb. 12.28.
Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us have grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and Godly fear.

3. You have a long time served and obeyed the lusts of your own heart; And sin
is a most cruel Master, a Master that kills and murders all his Servants, that
do not forsake his service; The wages that sin gives all his Servants is Death;
Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is Death. And will you rather serve a Murderer, a
cruel Master that will kill, than serve and obey Jesus Christ who is the Lord
of Life and Glory, who saves all his Servants from Eternal Misery?

4. Though some duties of the Gospel seem hard to Flesh and Blood, yet they
bring rest to the Soul. Math. 11.29. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for your Souls. Rest
is a desirable thing, especially rest for our Souls. Issachar underwent great
burdens for the obtaining of rest. Genesis 49.14, 15. Issachar is a strong ass,
couching between two burdens, and he saw that rest was good, and the Land that
it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulders to bear, and became a servant to
tribute. But rest for the Soul is much more desirable than outward rest, and
therefore we should be willing to submit to any burden that our Lord Jesus
lays upon us, seeing he will give us rest for our Souls.

5. Though Christ's Yoke may seem hard, and his burden heavy to Flesh and Blood,
yet in truth and reality it is easy and light. Mat. 11.29, 30. Take my yoke
upon you, for my yoke is easy, und my burden is light. Now Christ's yoke is
easy and his burden light in several respects. (1.) Because he requires
nothing of us, but what he by his Spirit will enable us to do. Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. (2.)
Because he writes his laws in our hearts. and when the law is written in the
heart, it makes the hardest service easy and delightful. Psalm. 40.8. I delight
to do thy will O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart. This will, spoken of
here, was God's will concerning Christ, that he should offer up himself a
Sacrifice for our sins, as appears from Heb. 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. which though it
was difficult service, Christ did with delight, having the Law of God in his
heart. (3.) Love to Christ makes all difficulties easy, and his service
delightful. Joh. 5.3. This is the love of God that we keep his Commandments,
and his Commandments are not grievous. (4.) His Yoke is easy, because it is
sweetened with the comforts of the Holy Ghost. Our Lord Jesus sends the Spirit,
the Comforter into their hearts that keep his Commandments, that dwell, and
abide with them for ever. John. 14, 15, 16, 17. If you love me, keep my
Commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth; and
by virtue of these comforts which they have from the Spirit of God, they can go
on singing in the ways of the Lord. Ps. 138.5. Yea they shall sing in the ways
of the Lord. (5.) His Yoke is easy, and burden light, compared with the burden
of the Law, and the burden of sin. The Law was a Yoke which was very hard to be
born. Act. 15.10. And the burden of sin is heavier than the burden of the Law,
it was such as David complained was too heavy for him. Ps. 38.4.


. 5. Loving, and preferring other things above Christ, and hindrance of our
being partakers of Christ. This Obstacle removed
5. Another hindrance of our receiving and accepting Christ, is, when there is
something or other that lies nearer our heart than Christ, which we love, and
prefer above Christ, and are not willing to part with for Christ. Now to such I
would say these things.

1. You can have no part in Christ, unless you love and prefer him above all
things in the world, and be willing to forsake all things for him. Math. 10.37.
He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he that
loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Our Parents, and our
Children may and ought to be loved, but not more than Christ, for if we love
the dearest Relations we have in the world more than Christ, we shall not be
partakers of Christ. Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all
that he has, cannot be my Disciple. For if a man love any things, or persons
more than Christ, when those things or persons come in competition with Christ,
he will forsake Christ, rather than those things or persons which he loves
above Christ.

2. A man may go far in the profession and practice of Religious duties, and
may prefer Christ above many things, and yet may have some one thingly nearer
his heart than Christ, and rather than part with that one thing, he may choose
to part with Jesus Christ. An example of this we have in the young man that
came to Christ to enquire how he might obtain Eternal Life. He spoke
respectfully, affectionately, and understandingly to Christ. Matthew. 19.17. Good
Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have Eternal Life? He showed his
respect to Christ, in calling him Master, his affection in calling him good
Master, his understanding in that he came to Christ about the weightiest matter
in the whole world, Eternal Life; and his good inclinations, that he desired to
know what good thing he should do to have Eternal Life. Moreover he had from
his youth up addicted himself to the observation of the Commandments of God.
All these things have I kept from my youth up. Yet this young man had one thing
that lay nearer his heart than Christ, and that was the love of the world.
Mark. 10.21. One thing thou lackest, go sell whatsoever thou have. And when
Christ put him on the Trial, he chose rather to part with Christ, than with his
possession, though it was some grief to him to part with Christ, yet he went
away from him rather than he would part with his possessions. Matthew. 19.22.
When the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great
possessions.

3. There is no person, nothing in the whole world that deserves so much of our
love as Christ. It is most equitable and reasonable that we should love Christ
above our dearest Relations, above all things and persons whatsoever On several
accounts. I will name two, or three.

(1.) None ever showed such love to us, as Christ has done. The love of Father
and Mother, and the dearest Friends we have in all the world, is short of the
love of Christ. The The greatest love that man can show, is to die for his
Friend. John 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that he lay down his
life for his Friends. This love Christ has shown to us, he laid down his life
for us; yea, greater than this, for he did not lay his Life for us when we were
Friends, but when we were Enemies. Romans 5.10. When we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. All earthly similitudes, as the love
of an Huband to his Wife, the love of Parents to their Children, the love of a
man to his Friend are too short to set out Christ's love to us, and therefore
he fetches a comparison from Heaven, and likens his love to us, as his Fathers
love to him. Joh. 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. As
Christ's love is greater to us than the love of any man in the world, so it is
of longer continuance. Our Parents love was not toward us till we had our
beings, and cease when we go to our Grave, for though there be grief and
sorrow for a season at our Death, yet in process of time, dead men are
forgotten both by them that loved, and hated, and envied them. Eccl. 9.5, 6.
The memory of them is forgotten. Also their love, and their hatred, and their
envy is now perished. But Christ's love to us is Everlasting. It was toward us
before we had our beings, even from Everlasting, and will be toward us, when
we shall cease to be in this world even unto Everlasting. Jer. 31.3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love. Now Christ having loved us more than any
man ever loved us, it is but reason that we should love him above all.

(2.) Jesus Christ is more amiable than any other persons or things in the
World. He is altogether lovely. Cant. 5.16. This cannot be said of any Creatures
since the fall of man, that they are altogether lovely, for there is something
of unloveliness in them. Whatsoever there is in any Creatures that may attract
our love, it is eminently and transcendently in Christ. As for Instance,

Is our love drawn by others love to us? Love will beget love in all sorts of
men. Luke 6.32. Sinners love those that love them. Never any man showed such
love to us, as Christ has done, as proved before. Does beauty draw our love,
it is said of Christ, Thou art fairer than the Children of men. Ps. 45.2. There
are all excellencies and perfections to be found in Christ. Is our love drawn
by beneficence and bounty? Thus does great things with most men. Prove. 19.5.
Every man is a Friend to him that gives gifts. None ever gave us such gifts as
Christ has given to us, none has been so bountiful and beneficial to us, as
Christ Jesus. Is it propriety that ingageth our affections? A man loves his
own Children above other Children, and his own things above other things. John
15.19. The World loves his own. There is nothing so much our own in this
World, as Christ is, if we be true Christians. He is our own Lord, and our own
Master, he has given himself for us, and given himself to us; He is ours by an
Everlasting Covenant, we are united to him, he is our Head, and we are Members
of his body, and he dwells in us by his Spirit. And we are more his, than we
are our own, or any other man's. He made us, and he redeemed us, and bought us
with a price, and has betrothed us to himself.

(3.) We are under greater Obligations and Engagements to love Christ, than we
are to love our Parents, or any other Relations, or dearest Friends in the
world. For none ever did, or suffered such great things for us, of Christ has
done. He has reconciled us to God, He has obtained for us the pardon of all
our sins, he has saved us from the torments as Hell, he has purchased an
Everlasting for our Inheritance in the other World, he has made us Kings and
Priests to our God, He appears in the presence of God for us, and is
continually making intercession for us: The benefits we have by Christ are
innumerable. It is said of David. 1 Samuel 18.16. All Israel and Judah loved
David, because he went out, and came in before them. Christ the Son of David
does more than this for us, he sticks closer to us than David did to Israel, he
has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. How ought we then to love
Christ for this, and not only for this, but all the benefits we have by him.
which are far greater than we have by any man in the the World.

4. It is most equitable and reasonable that we should in all things give
Christ the pre-eminence, and prefer him above, and before all things in the
world, and that on these accounts.

(1.) It is the will and good pleasure of God, the Father, that his Son Jesus
Christ should be preferred by us above all things in the world, and therefore
he has made him head of the Church. Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the Body,
the Church, that in all things he might have the preeminence. (2.) Jesus Christ
is better than all things, and therefore to be preferred above, and before
them. Col. 1.17. He is before all things, and by him all things consist. He is
above all the Angels of Heaven, who are his Servants, and worship and adore
him. 1 Pet. 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God,
Angels and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him. Heb. 1.6. Let
all the Angels of God worship him, He is better than all things in the World.
All that is in the world, is but dross and dung compared with Christ Phil. 3.8.
And therefore we may say with David, Ps. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. (3.) The Lord Jesus
prefers such as love, and serve him, above all persons in the world. Exodus
19.5. If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then you shall be
unto me a peculiar treasure above all people. Deuteronomy. 7.6. The Lord thy God has
chosen thee, to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are
upon the face of the Earth. He calls his Church the fairest among women. Cant.
1.8. Now if Christ love and prefer us above all other persons in the world, is
it not reason that we should love and prefer him above all things and persons
in the whole world.?
5. It is dangerous loving and preferring any thing above Christ. For 1. What
we love and prefer above Christ, we make it an Idol, an abominable Idol. There
are Idols in the Heart, as well as Idols in the Temples. Ezekiel. 14.3. Son of man
these men have set up their Idols in their heart. Now that is an Idol in the
Heart, which is loved and preferred above Christ. What we love most, whither
it be the true God, or an Idol, that we make our God. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Now the Idolatry of the heart is
odious to God, as well as bowing the body to an Idol, for the Soul boweth to
the Idols set up in the heart. And such as set up Idols in their hearts, shall
be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, as well as they that bow their bodies to
Idols. Ephesians. 5.5. For this ye know that no Whoremonger, nor Unclean person, nor
Covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God,
and of Christ. A Covetous man is called an Idolater, because he loves the
World above God and Christ, and this Idolatry, as well as worshipping Graven
Images, will shut a man out of the Kingdom of God. 2. What we love and prefer
above Christ, shall either be quickly taken from us, or else the enjoying of it
shall become a curse to us. Often times when we Idolize Creatures, God takes them
away from us: To overlove any thing, is the ready way to lose it. When Jonah
overjoyed in his Gourd, the Lord prepared a worm the next day, that smote the
Gourd, and it withered. Jona 4.6, 7. Or else God curses those things which we
are overfond of, and makes them grievous crosses. When the Jews doted on the
Assyrians, God gave them into the hands of the Assyrians, to be spoiled and
destroyed by them. Ezekiel. 23.5, 12.


Sect. 6. Such, as complain of inability to come up to the terms of the Gospel,
answered.
It may be some will say, I wish I could close with the terms on which Christ
is offered in the Gospel, but I find I am not able to do it, I find in my self
an inability to believe and repent, I cannot obey Christ, and deny my self, and
suffer for Christ; I wish I could do these things, but I find no power, yea
sometimes I find opposition and reluctance in my will, against the terms of the
Gospel, what would you say to one in my condition.

A. 1. The main thing that God looks at, is that we should be willing to have
Christ, as he offers him to us in the Gospel; That we be willing to believe in
him, willing to repent of our sins, willing to obey Christ, willing to suffer
for his sake, willing to be saved by him, in his own way; For God is willing to
give Christ, and all his benefits unto every one that is willing to receive
him. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. As it
is in matters of charity, where there is a willing mind, God accepts it, though
there be not ability to do that which we are desirous to do. 2 Cor. 8.12. If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not. So it is in other Evangelical duties, if
there be a willing mind to perform what the Gospel requires, it is accepted
although there be not power and ability to do what is required of us. If there
be a willingness to leave our sins, and obey the Lord, it is accepted as
obedience. Isa. 1.16.19. Cease to do evil, learn to do well -- If ye be willing
and obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land. There may be a willingness to
that good which we want power to perform, and where there is such a
willingness, it is taken notice of, and accepted by God. Math. 26.41. The
Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

2. If you find a want of power to come up to the terms of the Gospel, this
should not keep you from Christ, but cause you to go to him, that he give you
power and strength to do what he requires of you. The Apostle of himself was
as weak as we are, he could do nothing, no nor think any thing that was good. 2
Cor. 3.5. But through Christ's strengthening him, he could do all things. Phil.
4.13. If we find we cannot believe, we must look unto Christ, that he would work
Faith in us. Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith.
If we cannot Repent, we must look unto Christ to give us Repentance, for he was
Exalted to give Repentance to those that cannot Repent, as well as Remission of
sins to them that do Repent. Act. 5.31. If we cannot obey Christ and walk in his
ways, we must look unto Christ to put his Spirit within, and to cause us to
walk in his ways. Ezekiel. 36.27. If we cannot love and prefer Christ above all
things, we must look unto Christ that he would Circumcise our hearts to love
him, with all our hearts and all our souls. Deuteronomy. 30.6. If we cannot deny our
selves for Christ, we must look to him to give us a self-denying heart. Ezekiel.
36.26. If we cannot suffer for Christ, we must look unto him to give us a
suffering Spirit. Phil. 1.29.

3. If you find some unwillingness as well as an inability to close with Christ
upon the terms of the Gospel, seek unto God to work in you both a will and
power to accept of Christ as he is offered in the Gospel. To encourage
thereunto, consider, (1.) Both are Gods work, which he works in us, out of his
free grace. It is God that makes us willing to close with Christ on the terms
of the Gospel, and it is God that gives us power to believe, repent, deny our
selves, take up our Cross and follow Christ. Phil. 2.13. It is God which
works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. (2.) Both are
promised and may be obtained of God, if we will seek for them. He has promised
to incline our wills to embrace Christ. Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be a
willing people in the day of thy power. And he has promised to give power also
to them that have no might. Isa. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to
them that have no might he increases strength. (3.) Both a will to embrace
Christ, and power have been sought with good success. Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we
will run after thee, the King brought me into his chambers. Draw me, that is,
make me willing and able to come to thee, and this request was answered, the
King brought me into his Chambers, that is, according to my desire, drew me
unto himself. Psalm. 119.36. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies. When we feel
any averseness in our hearts, to any of the ways of God, we must go unto God to
incline our hearts to walk in his ways.


Sect. 7. Men's not seeing their need of Christ, is an hinderance of their
closing with Christ; Several causes hereof, 1. Resting in a blameless
Conversation. 2. Resting in Church Privileges. 3. Resting in our own
Righteousness. 4. Resting satisfied with the World.
Another sort of hindrances that keep many from closing with Christ, besides
sticking at the terms of the Gospel, is when men do not see their need they
have of Christ, but rest satisfied with other things instead of Christ, and
that is occasioned several ways; I will instance in three or four. As 1.
Resting in a civil blameless Conversation, free from gross sins. 2. Resting in
Church privileges. 3. Resting in our own Righteousness. 4. Resting satisfied
with the World.


Seeing many men do rest in their being of a civil and blameless Conversation,
and being free from gross sins, and thereupon do not see any need of Christ to
save them, but hope to go to Heaven when they dye, because they live in a
blameless manner, I shall show that this is not sufficient to Salvation,
without an interest in Christ.

1. It is the duty of all that expect to go to Heaven when they dye, to
endeavor to live in an holy blameless manner. Phil. 2.15. That ye may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the World. 2 Pet.
3.14. Seeing ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him
in peace, without spot and blameless. 2. Though it be the duty of all that
expect to go to Heaven when they dye, to live in a blameless manner, and to
keep themselves from the pollutions of the World, yet a civil and blameless
Conversation, a Conversation free from gross sins is not sufficient to carry a
man to Heaven, without an interest in Christ; For a man may live civilly, and
be free from gross sins, and yet be in a dangerous and damnable condition, on
several accounts. As 1. He may be an ignorant man, and have no knowledge of God
and Christ, he may have no understanding in the mysteries of Salvation: And
such as live and dye without Understanding, God will have no mercy upon them,
and will show them no favor. Isa. 27.11. It is a People of no Understanding,
therefore he that made them will have no mercy on them, and he that formed them
will show them no favor. And they shall perish for ever on whom God will have
no mercy, and to whom he will show no favor. 2. A man may live civilly and be
of a blameless Conversation, and yet be an Unbeliever, be one that has no
Faith in Christ; And all such as do not believe in Christ shall be damned, and
have their portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Mark
16.16. He that believes not shall be damned. Rev. 21.8. The Unbelieving --
shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. 3. A
man may be free from gross sins and live civilly, and yet dye Eternally for
want of a new heart, and be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven for not being
born again. Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for why will
you dye, O house of Israel. Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. 4. A man may lead a civil
life, and be free from gross sins, and yet have no love to Jesus Christ: And
such as have no love to Christ are in a cursed condition. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; That is, let
him be accursed, and let him remain accursed till the Lord comes to take
vengeance on him. 5. A man may be free from gross sins, and yet be guilty of
Spiritual sins, and be in a damnable condition for his Spiritual sins. As for
instance; A Man may never touch a Woman, and yet be an Adulterer in the sight
of God, by the lustings of his heart. Math. 5.28. Whosoever looks upon a
woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery already with her in his heart.
A man may never strike his Neighbor, and yet be a Murderer in the sight of
God, by hating him in his heart. 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a
murderer, and ye know that no murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. A man
may never bow his body to an Idol, and yet be an Idolater in the sight of God,
by over-loving and trusting in his Riches. Col. -- Nor covetous man who is an
Idolater has inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and of ^^^ist. He may have a
civil life, and yet (...) Atheist in his heart. Psalm. 14.1. The (...) has said
in his heart there is no God.

Many persons rest in their Church privileges, as that they are born of
Religious Parents, are Members of Churches, have been Baptized, are frequenters
of Gods Ordinances, have received the Lords Supper, and therefore they hope it
shall go well with them. Thus the Jews bore up themselves, that they were
Abraham's Seed, were Circumcised, had the Temple of God among them. Joh. 8.33.
We be Abraham's Seed. Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying words, saying the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord -- But none of these things will avail me
to Salvation, unless they have an interest in Christ. As I shall make appear
these ways.

1. To be born of Religious Parents, of Parents in Covenant with God is a great
Blessing, but if they do not seek and serve that God whom their Fathers served,
but forsake him, and go in the way of their own hearts, though their Fathers
were as Holy men as ever lived upon the face of the Earth; God will cast their
impenitent, degenerate, disobedient Children into Eternal Torment. David was a
man after Gods own heart, yet he tells his Son Solomon, that if he forsook the
Lord, the Lord would cast him off for ever. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
willing mind -- If thou seek him he will be found of thee, if thou forsake him
he will cast thee of for ever. The Jews bore up themselves with this, that they
had Abraham to their Father, but John the Baptist takes them off from this.
Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father;
As if he should have said, you are apt to rest upon this, that ye are the
Children of Abraham, that ye have such a man as Abraham to your Father, who was
the Friend of God, but this will not avail you to Salvation, that you are
Abraham's Children. Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father. For Abraham's impenitent Children shall be cast into Hell, when as
their Father is in Heaven, and they shall not by all their entreaties, get so
much favor from Abraham, as to have one drop of water to cool their Tongues.
Luke 16.23, 24. 2. It is a great privilege, and an honor to be a Member of a
Church of Christ, but this will not avail a man to Salvation, that he is a
Member of a Church, unless he be also a Member of Christ; For there are
Hypocrites as well as sound Christians in the purest Churches in the World.
Christ had but a small Church, Twelve Persons selected out of the Twelve Tribes
of Israel, but yet amongst them few there was an arch Hypocrite, that differed
little from the Devil. Joh. 6.70. Have not I chosen you Twelve, and one of you
is a Devil. There are barren as well as fruitful Trees in the Lord's Vineyard,
and the barren Trees shall be hewn down, and cast into the Fire. Math. 3.10.
And now the ax is laid unto the root of the Trees, therefore every Tree which
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. There is
Chaff as well as Wheat in Christ's Floor, and when he purges his Floor, he
will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. ver. 12. Whose Fan is in his
hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, but he will burn up the Chaff with
unquenchable Fire. There are foolish as well as wise Virgins, that have their
Lamps as well as the wise, but have no Oil in their Vessels, whose lot will it
be to be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. 3. It is a duty and a privilege to
partake of the Sacraments, and attend upon the Ordinances of the Gospel, but
yet this will not avail a man to Salvation, if he do not accept of Christ as he
is tendered in the Gospel, as will appear these ways. (1.) No Privileges, no
Ordinances, no Sacraments will avail a man to Salvation, unless he be a new
Creature. Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature. Circumcision was an
Ordinance of God, a profitable Ordinance, Romans 3.1, 2. a painful Ordinance,
they that were Circumcised underwent much pain, and were sore for several days;
Genesis 34.25. It was a token and seal of the Covenant, Genesis 16.11. yet
Circumcision avails none to Salvation, but such as were new Creatures; Now
many that attend on Ordinances, and receive the Sacraments are no new
Creatures. (2.) Many that attend on the Ordinances of the Gospel, and have been
Baptized in the name of Christ, and do receive at the Lords Table, are workers
of iniquity. Isa. 58.1, 2. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. And it is not hearing the word
Preached, and frequenting the Lords Table will avail men to Salvation, if they
be workers of iniquity. Luk, 13.26, 27. We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, but he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence you are, depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. (3.) The
participation of Sacraments and Ordinances of the Gospel, is accounted as
nothing by such as are impenitent sinners. Romans 2.25. If thou be a breaker of
the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision. Jer. 9.25, 26. The
Uncircumcised in heart among the Jews, have the same lot with the Uncircumcised
Egyptians, Edomites, Ammonites and Moabites. The impenitent Jews offered up a
multitude of Sacrifices unto God, but the Lord accounted all as nothing. Isa.
1.11, 13. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices, unto me says
the Lord -- Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination to me --
Their Oblations are called vain Oblations, as being of no value in the sight of
God.

Many persons are kept from coming to, and closing with Christ, by resting in
the Law, or resting in their own Righteousness. They think they already have,
or hope that in process of time they shall attain unto that Righteousness,
which will commend them to God, and give them a right to Eternal Life, when as
they have no Union with Christ, or Interest in Christ; That many men do rest in
the Law, or in their own works of Righteousness, done in Conformity to the Law.
We may see from such Scriptures as these, Romans 2.17. Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the Law; That is, as Pareus observes; Fiduciam ponis in
lege, quasi ea te servaret, thou placest thy confidence in the Law, as if that
could save thee; Or as de Dieu. Non lassat te peccati onus, quippe qui ex lege
quietem capias: The burden of thy sins do not weary thee, because thou find
ease from the law. Luke 18.9. He spoke this parable unto certain, which trusted
in themselves, that they were Righteous. Romans 9.31, 32. Now the reasons why men
rest upon their own works of Righteousness, done in Conformity to the law of
God, for that Righteousness which should commend them to God, and bring them to
Eternal Life, are such as these.

1. A natural inclination and propensity in all men, to look for Righteousness
and Life on the terms of the first Covenant, which was to give life to such as
should obey the law of God. Do this and live; Gal. 4.21. Tell me, ye that
desire to be under the Law -- There is a desire in men to have Righteousness
and Life by the works of the law. 2. Their ignorance of the true meaning,
purity and spirituality of the law, whereby they are kept from seeing the
imperfection of their own Righteousness, and because they comply with the
outward performance of the law, they think they have that which will give them
life. Romans 7.9. I was alive without the law once, but when the Commandment
came, sin revived, and I dyed. That is, the Apostle, while a Pharisee, was
without the right understanding of the law, and then he thought himself alive,
in a good condition, one that should inherit Eternal Life, but when the
Commandment came, that is, when I came to have a right understanding of the
law, and it came to be applied to my Conscience; Sin revived, that is, I
discovered those sins which I knew not of before. I saw my self a lost sinner,
and I dyed, that is, my hope of attaining Righteousness, and the Life was taken
away. 3. Ignorance of Christ's being appointed of God to be our Righteousness,
is another reason why men go about to establish their own Righteousness, and do
not seek to Christ, to be found in him, to have his Righteousness imputed to
them. Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going
about to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to
the Righteousness of God.
That resting on our own Righteousness, or hoping to attain Righteousness and
Life from the works of the law, is an hinderance to our being made partakers of
Christ; We may see from, Romans 7 4. Ye are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him that is raised from
the dead. By being dead to the law we may understand dead to it, as it is a
Covenant of life, not as a rule of life, dead to the law in reference to our
hope and expectation of life from the works of the law, but not dead to the
law, in reference to our obedience and conformity to the law. And this being
dead to the law, as a Covenant of life, preceedeth our being Married to Christ.
Such as are Married to the law, and expect Righteousness and Life from the law,
they are not Married to Christ; Now we are said to be dead to the law by the
Body of Christ, that is, by that death which he suffered for us in his Body.
Both as his Death has purchased for us deliverance from the First Covenant,
and the establishment of a new Covenant, and also it plainly declares that
Righteousness is not possible to be had from the law, for then he needed not to
have dyed, to have brought in another way of Righteousness. Gal. 2.21. If
Righteousness come by the law then Christ is dead in vain.

If any say, how may we be taken off from resting in the law, from hoping to
attain Righteousness and Life by our own works, done in obedience and
conformity to the law of God, and be brought to see an absolute necessity of
going to Christ for Righteousness and Life.

A. 1. Let us see and consider, that it is utterly impossible for any man in
this fallen estate, to attain unto that perfection of Righteousness and
Obedience to the law of God, as to be justified and saved thereby. Romans 3.20.
By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Gal.
3.11, 12. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is
evident, for the just shall live by Faith, and the law is not of Faith, but the
man that does them shall live in them. That no man can attain such a
Righteousness from his observing the law as shall justify and save him; Is
evident these ways.

(1.) The law requires personal, perfect, constant obedience in all things,
else it pronounces a curse against us. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do
them. Now no man since the fall of Adam, Christ only excepted, ever did, or
could continue in all things required in the law, without transgressing any
command thereof at any time. Joh. 7.19. Did not Moses give you the law, yet
none of you keeps the law; And least any should say, Christ means the
carnal Jews only, when he says, none of you keeps the law. We may see from
other Scriptures, that the holiest men upon earth, cannot keep the law of God
without transgressing against it, at any time. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a
just man upon earth, that does good and sins not. 1 King. 8.36. There is no
man that sins not. (2.) If any man could have obtained Righteousness and
Life by the law, then there had been no need of Christ's laying down his life
for us. Gal. 2.21. If Righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in
vain. And such as go about to seek for Justification by the works of the law,
do make Christ's obedience, and his suffering death to be useless. Gal. 5.4.
Christ is become of no effect to you, whosoever of you are justified by the
law, ye are fallen from grace. (3.) God has made a new Covenant to give us
Life and Righteousness through believing in his Son. Joh. 3.16. Romans 3.21, 22.
And there had been no need of a new Covenant, of a new way to obtain
Righteousness and Life, if Righteousness and Life could have been obtained by
the law. For if it had been possible for fallen man to have had Righteousness
and Life by the law, fallen man should have been saved by a Covenant of works,
as well as Adam in innocence. Gal 3.21. Is the law then against the promises of
God? God forbid, for if there had been a law given, which could have given
life, verily, Righteousness should have been by the law. (4.) None, that ever
sought after Righteousness and Life by the works of the law, have been able to
attain thereunto. Romans 9.31, 32. Israel which followed after the law of
Righteousness, has not attained to the law of Righteousness; Wherefore?
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the law. It
may be some will think, the reason why Israel could not attain to the
Righteousness of the law, was because they were not zealous followers after
Righteousness, but were cold and lukewarm, but that is a mistake, for many of
them were zealous in observing the law. Act. 22.3. I was zealous toward God,
as ye all are this day. Act. 21.20. Or it may be some will think that the
reason why they could not attain to Righteousness, though they followed after
it, was because they rested in an External Righteousness, and did not seek
after Internal Righteousness, the Righteousness of the heart, but this was not
the cause, for though many of them did rest in External Righteousness, yet
others of them did look after an Internal Righteousness, they knew that God
called for the heart. Prove. 22.26. When they fasted, they did not only afflict
their bodies, but their Souls also for their sins. Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we
fasted, wherefore have we afflicted our Soul? They were sollicitous to have the
sins of their Souls pardoned, as well as their sinful actions. Mich. 6.6, 7.
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord -- Shall I give my first born for my
Transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my Soul. But the true reason
why Israel that followed after Righteousness could not attain unto
Righteousness, was because they sought not after that Righteousness which is by
Faith, but sought it by the works of the law. Romans 9.31, 32.
2. We mistake God's end in giving the law, when we seek for Righteousness and
Life by the works of the law; For the law was not given us to be a Covenant of
life, that is for this end, that we should expect Righteousness and Life by the
works of the law. As appears.

1. Because God had settled another way of justifying and saving sinners,
namely, by Faith in Christ, long before the giving of the law, and did confirm
this way (Salvation through Faith in Christ) by an Everlasting Covenant made
with Abraham and his Seed, 430 years before the giving the law by Moses. And
therefore the law which given 430 years after God had revealed it to Abraham,
that he would justify and save him and his Seed, through Faith in Christ,
could not make void that way of righteousness and life which God had before
confirmed by Covenant to Abraham and his Seed; As you may see, Gal. 3.6, 7, 8,
9, 11 -- 16, 17, 18. 2. The law when given by Moses, found man so weakened by
the fall of Adam, that it could not bring man to righteousness and life, but
notwithstanding the giving the law, man would have perished Eternally, had not
God sent his Son Jesus Christ to dye for our sins. Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.21.
But for what end then was the law given, if not to a Covenant of life?

(A. 1.) To bring us to the knowledge of our sin and misery. Romans 3.20. By the
law is the knowledge of sin. Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the law? It was
added because of Transgressions.

(2.) To be our Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, that when we see we cannot
attain that Righteousness which the law requires, we may seek for Justification
and Salvation to Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.24. The law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith.

(3.) The law was given to be a Rule of our lives, to direct us how to carry
our selves toward God, and toward all men. Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a
lamp, and the law is light.

3. Life and Righteousness is to be had in Christ, and no where else but in and
by Christ. 1 John 5.11, 12. And this is the record, that God has given us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son has Life, and
he that has not the Son of God, has not Life. And as Eternal Life is to be
had in Christ, so also is that Righteousness whereby we are justified and
accepted in the sight of God, to be had in Christ. Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one
say, in the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength. Jer. 23.6. This is the name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. For the better
understanding of this, that the Righteousness whereby we are justified and
accepted before God, is not any works of Righteousness which we have done in
Conformity to the law, but the righteousness which Christ has wrought for us,
let us consider these 3 or 4 things.

(1.) All our own righteousnesses are full of imperfections, and therefore
cannot justify us in the sight of God, who is a God of pure eyes, that cannot
behold iniquity. Isa. 64.8. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy rags. The Holiest men that ever lived, that have
been full of good works, have been afraid to appear before God in their own
righteousness. Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the law -- (2.) We not being able to bring unto God
a righteousness of our own, whereby we might be justified and accepted, God
provided a righteousness for us, in and by his Son Jesus Christ, whereby we
might be justified and accepted in his sight. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Righteousness. 2 Cor. 5.21. For he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. (3.) This righteousness of Christ, by and upon the
account of which we are accepted and justified in the sight of God, is his
Active and Passive Obedience. His Active Obedience in fullfilling all that
righteousness which the law required. Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
Righteous. And his Passive Obedience, whereby he suffered Death for our sins.
Romans 5.9. Being justified by his blood. It was by his being made a Sacrifice
for our sins, that we are made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.20.
(4.) This righteousness of Christ, consisting of his active and passive
obedience, is made over, or imputed to all that believe on him. Romans 10.4. For
Christ is the end of the law, for Righteousness to every one that believes.
4. A right understanding of the law would give us such a discovery of our
sins, and the imperfections of our best works, as to take us off from resting
in the works of the law for our justification before God. Gal. 2.19. I through
the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God. I will mention two or
three things concerning the law, that may convince us there is no hope for any
man whatever, to at tain righteousness and life by the law.

(1.) The law is Spiritual, and forbids Spiritual sins, and requires Spiritual
duties, and that may convince the Holiest man on earth of much sin, and make
him cry out of himself, that he is an undone sinner, without the mercy of God
and the mercies of Christ. Romans 7.14. We know that the law is Spiritual, but I
am Carnal, sold under sin. The Spirituality of the law convinces the Apostle
Paul, that he had in himself much Carnality, and by reason of the sad effects
of Original Corruption, he was not able to perform that Spiritual Obedience the
law called for, which is the meaning of that expression, sold under sin. (2.)
The law forbids all evil motions, and sinful inclinations of the heart. The
first motions of sin that arise in the heart, and all evil lusts in the heart,
though not consented to, though opposed are a Transgression of the law. Romans
7.7. I had not known sin but by the law, for I had not known lust, except the
law had said thou shall not covet. The Apostle did not understand the lustings
and inordinate desires of the heart to be sin, when not consented to, till he
considered, that the first motions of sin were forbidden by the law, and were
Transgressions of that command, thou shall not covet. If there be but a foolish
thought in our minds, though it be not allowed of, though it be not suffered to
lodge there, it is a sin against the law of God. Prove. 24.9. The thought of
foolishness is sin. (3.) The least omission at any time, of any duty that the
law requires, and the commission of the least sin that the law forbids, brings
us under the curse of the law. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the book of tht law to do them. If a man
were able to keep the whole law, and should offend but in one point, he is
guilty of Eternal Death by the law, as well as if he had broken all the
Commandments of God. Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
offend in one point, is guilty of all. So Grotius; Non minus morte punitur,
quam si omnia praecepta violasset. And Capellus; Aeque damnatur ac si in
omnibus deliquisset. (4.) There is no escaping this curse of the law, when we
have offended in any one point, but by Jesus Christ; All the good works we can
do in conformity to the law, will not exempt us from it, but do leave us under
this curse. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the
curse. The only escaping from the curse of the law is by Christ. Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.
And therefore there is no resting for any man in the law, or in his own
righteousness, no hope that any man should attain righteousness and life by the
law. But if we would have that righteousness whereby we may be accepted in the
sight of God, and would have Eternal Life, we must seek for both in Christ, and
if we close with Christ, we shall in him have righteousness and life.
Another great hinderance of closing with Christ, is this present evil world. A
worldly Spirit hinders our closing with Christ, several ways.

1. Because when men's hearts are set upon the Profits, and Honors and
Pleasures of the World, they make light of Christ, and prefer these things
above Christ. This is evident from the parable of the King that made a Marriage
for his Son, which was neglected by those that had their hearts set on the
World. Mat. 22.5. They made light of it, and went their ways, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandise. Many men's heads and hearts are so full of the
World, that they make light of the offers of Christ, and Salvation by Christ.
2. Some persons are at such ease in their Worldly enjoyments, and are so well
satisfied with the World, that they find no need of Christ, and Salvation by
Christ, and desire no other Heaven but what they have here on the Earth, and to
such men, their prosperity proves their ruin. Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of
fools shall destroy them. To such as these may be applied the woe. Luke 6.24. Woe
unto you that are rich, for ye have received your Consolation. 3. The love of
the honors and pleasures and profits of the World, keeps men from embracing
Christ, because there are several duties in Christianity which cannot be
performed, but they will expose us to reproaches and losses, and hardship, and
hatred in the World. Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only.
Now no worldly thing, either the honors or pleasures, or profits of the
World, should keep us from a sincere and hearty closing with Jesus Christ, and
that upon these grounds.

1. It is infinitely better to enjoy Christ than to enjoy all the honors, all
the pleasures, all the profits, all the goodly things in the World, as will
appear several ways. (1.) The good things of this World can be enjoyed no
longer than a man lives in this World; They may be taken away before we dye,
but the term of life is the longest time of their enjoyment. They may be taken
away by Fire, by Oppressors, by Foreign Enemies, that may strip us as naked as
in the day we were born; Yea if God do not continue them with us by his
Providence, they would of themselves flee away swiftly from us, and come at us
no more. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? For
riches certainly make themselves wings, they flee away as an eagle toward
Heaven; He does not say will thou set thy heart, but will thou set thine eyes.
The riches of the world in comparison of the Riches of Christ, are so far from
deserving our hearts, that they are not worth the looking after with our eyes;
He calls them things that are not, that is, are not what men think them to be,
are not abiding, they are gone in the twinkling of an eye; He adds farther,
that it is certain, riches are most uncertainly, for certainly they make unto
themselves wings, and flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven. But if they be not
taken away, if they do not flee away in the time of life, it is most certain,
we must leave them all behind us when we dye. 1 Timothy 6.7. For we brought
nothing into the World, and it is certain that we can carry nothing out. But if
we embrace Christ, Christ and his benefits shall be ours for ever. This God is
our God for ever and ever. Psalm. 48.14. He will not only stick to us, and bless
us as long as we live, but he will give us all the good things of Heaven for an
Everlasting Possession. Joh. 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believes on me has Everlasting Life. (2.) All the things of this World, while
they are enjoyed, are poor, vain empty things, that cannot give any true
satisfaction to the Soul, but create more vexation of Spirit, than they give
comfort. Eccl. 2.17. All is vanity and vexation of Spirit. The words are few,
but of large extent. All Worldly Enjoyments, Riches, Honors, Pleasures, all
are vanity, empty things, uncertain things, and all are vexation of Spirit. A
poor man that goes to his day labor, has more comfortable Nights and Days
than many Rich men, that have abundance of the World. Eccl. 5.12. The sleep of
a laboring man is sweet, but the abundance of the Rich will not suffer him to
sleep, Abundance of the World rather causes disquietment than comfort; But
now such as embrace Christ, have solid and Soul satisfying comforts in Christ.
Psalm. 13.5, 6. My Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness -- When I
remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. The night
is a solitary and uncomfortable time, yet in the night watches there are Soul
satisfying comforts to be had in Christ. Such as embrace Christ by Faith, have
in him and from him joy unspeakable. 1 Pet. 1.8, In whom believing ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. (3.) A man may possess much of the
world and yet be miserable here, Jam. 5.1. and be miserable in the other world
to all Eternity. Luke 16.22, 23. The rich man dyed and was buried, and in Hell
he lift up his eyes, being in torment -- while he lived, he was clothed in
Purple, and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day. ver. 19. but as soon
as he was dead he went to Hell, and was tormented in flaming Fire, and could
not get so much as a drop of water to cool his Tongue. But they that get
possession of Christ, and trust in Christ, are in a blessed condition whilst
they live, and shall be in a most blessed condition for ever in the World to
come. Psalm. 2.12 Blessed are all they that trust in him. All that accept of
Christ for their Lord and Savior, and are obedient to him, shall be saved with
an Eternal Salvation. Heb. 5.9.


2. The surest and best way to get the good things of this World, at least so
much of them as is good for us, is to receive Christ, and seek after our Souls
Salvation, and to live an Holy Life, rather than to neglect Christ, and our
Souls Salvation, and to give our selves wholly, or chiefly to mind the things
of the World, which may be proved several ways. (1.) They that serve Christ,
and seek chiefly after their Souls Salvation, have the promise of all things
necessary for this Life, as well as the Life to come. Math. 6.33. Seek ye first
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you. 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise
of the life that now is, and that which is to come. And a promise from God is
better security for the things of this life, than our own wisdom, or industry,
or present possessions though great, or what else the whole World can afford to
us. (2.) When Christ becomes ours, the world is ours, so far as God sees it
needful, and so far as he sees it good for us, it shall be ours. 1 Cor. 3.21,
22, 23. All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo -- or the world -- all are
yours, and ye are Christ's. All things in the world shall be for the furtherance
of our Spiritual and Eternal welfare, the crosses as well as the comforts of
the world. (3.) All things in the world are at the disposal of God, and he
gives them to whomsoever he will. 1 Chronicles. 29.12. Both riches and honor come
of thee -- and it is in thine hand to make great. Dan. 4.17. The most high
rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. And seeing
the whole world is at the disposal of God, is a likelier way to obtain the
world, to seek and serve the Lord, and his Son Jesus Christ, or to live in the
neglect of God, and to disregard his service?


Obj. But some may say, how is this the surest and best way to obtain the
world, to embrace and serve Christ, when as ordinarily the servants of God have
less of the world than other men.

A. 1. They that seek and serve the Lord have as much of the world as the Lord
sees to be good for them. Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord shall not want
any good thing: And it is far better being without, than having that which the
Lord sees would be hurtful for us. And Riches are of that nature, that to
have abundance of them proves a real hurt to some men. Eccl. 5.13. I have seen
Riches kept for the Owners thereof, to their hurt.

2. That little of the world which the servants of God have, is better than the
great possessions of other men. Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous man
has, is better than the Riches of many wicked. If any say, how can this be,
that a little that a righteous man has should be better than the riches of
many wicked? I answer.

(1.) The servants of Christ have more comforts in their little, than wicked
men have in their abundance; For they have their little with Gods Blessing,
which takes away the sorrow from what they possess Prove. 10.22. The blessing of
the Lord it makes Rich, and adds no sorrow therewith. But other men have a
curse and vexation added to what they have. Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord
is in the house of the wicked. (2.) The Servants of Christ have their little
with a good Conscience, and a good Conscience is a continual Feast. Prove.
15.15. a merry heart is a continual Feast. Rich men make Feasts sometimes,
which the poor servants of Christ cannot do, yet they excel the Rich man, for
they have a continual Feast. One of the greatest Feast made by Rich men that we
read of, was that which King Ahasuerus made, which lasted an Hundred and
Fourscore days. Esth. 1.4. But behold here a better, yea a continual Feast. But
now other men have their estates with an accusing Conscience, and that is a
continual vexation. (3.) The servants of Christ have more contentment in their
little, than other men have in their greatest abundance. Eccl. 5.10. He that
loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves abundance
with increase. Wicked men are in straits in their greatest abundance; Job
20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits. But the
servants of Christ have a sufficiency, and a contented mind in the midst of
their wants and straits. Phil. 4.11, 12. I have learned in whatsoever state I
am, therewith to be content: both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound
and suffer need. (4.) The servants of Christ have their little with the love
and favor of God. Deuteronomy. 10.18. He loves the stranger in giving him Food and
Raiment. When his People are strangers, and he gives them but little Food and
Raiment, yet they have it with his love. Psalm. 146.8. The Lord loves the
righteous. But other men are hated in their greatest abundance. Psalm. 5.5. Thou
hate all workers of iniquity. And a little with the love of God, is better
than great riches, and his hatred therewith. Prove. 15.17. Better is a dinner of
Herbs where love is, than a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. If the meanest
fare with love from men, be better than the choicest provision, and hatred
therewith, how much more is this true of the love and hatred of God.
Sect. 8. Doubts and scruples about our being under the offer of Christ, an
hinderance to our closing with Christ; These doubts answered.
It may be some will say, if I saw and knew that God offered Christ, and
Salvation by Christ to me, I would accept of him on any terms: but I have many
doubts and scruples upon my mind, whether God offers Christ to me, as my
unworthyness, the greatness of my sins, my being so little affected with my sin
and misery, my long neglect of Christ, and the like, and I cannot tell how to
think that God should offer Christ to such an unworthy creature, to such a
great sinner, to such an hard hearted creature as I am, to one that have
neglected and stood out so long as I have done. For satisfying these scruples I
shall lay down these following propositions, about the offer of Christ, and
Salvation by Christ, to all sorts of sinners, on the terms of Faith and
Repentance.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ with all his saving benefits, is offered to the
meanest and most worthless persons in the whole world, (when the Gospel comes)
that find their want of Christ, and are willing to receive him, though they
have no money, that is nothing of any value to commend them to God, yet they may
have Christ, and all his benefits freely. Isa 55.1. Ho! every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and
eat, yea come buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price.

2. There is an offer of Christ, and Salvation by Christ, to all sorts of
Sinners; The poor, and the lame, and the blind, and the halt, were called to
the Marriage Supper; Persons of the lowest condition, such as are in by-lanes,
highways and hedges, and such as are most despicable in the eye of the world,
the maimed and the blind are to be called and entreated with all earnestness to
come to Christ. Luke 14.21, 23. Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of
the City, and bring in hither the poor and the maimed, and the halt, and the
blind -- Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in. We
see here all sorts of sinners, even such as are most despicable in their own
eyes, and the eyes of the world, the poor, the maimed, the halt the blind,
sinners in all places, the Highways, Hedges, Streets, Lanes, all are called,
and that with such importunity, as if they were compelled, for this compelling
is to be understood of earnest entreaties, and using prevailing arguments; As
Luke 24.29.

3. Jesus Christ, and Salvation by Christ, is offered freely to the greatest
and chiefest of sinners, if they will accept of him, and repent of their sins.
1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Prove.
28.13. Whosoever confesses und forsakes shall find Mercy. Adam, all circumstances
considered, was one of the chiefest of sinners, for he was the cause of the
death of all the men that ever lived. 1 Cor. 15.22. In Adam all dye. He brought
sin into the World, and death, and by his disobedience made all men sinners,
and corrupted all Mankind. Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the World, and
death by sin, and so death passed upon all men. ver. 19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners; Yet Christ and Salvation by Christ was
offered to Adam in that promise. The Seed of the woman shall bruise the
Serpent's head. Genesis 3.15. It may be some are in a despairing way, because they
have not only been sinners themselves, but they have corrupted and made others
sinners, and have not only made others sinners, but have been the occasion of
the death of many persons. Though this be a woeful case, yet not desperate; By
Adam's disobedience many were made sinners, Hundreds, Thousands, yea all
Mankind, Christ only excepted; And Adam was the cause of the death of Hundreds,
Thousands, Millions of Men, Women and Children, yea in Adam all dye, yet
Salvation by Christ was offered to Adam.

4. Christ Jesus with his saving benefits is offered to children and old men,
bond and free, male and female; He is willing that little Children should come
unto him for Life and Salvation. Mar. 10.14. Suffer the little Children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. The giving of
the Spirit, which is one of the saving benefits of Christ, is promised to all
sorts of persons, Young and Old, Male and Female, Bond and Free, Menservants
and Maidservants. Joel 2.28, 29. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and
your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, your Old Men shall dream Dreams,
your Young Men shall see Visions; And also upon the Servants, and upon the
Handmaids, in those days will I pour out my Spirit. By dreaming Dreams, seeing
Visions, and Prophesying, we may understand that God in the days of the Gospel,
would reveal his mind and will to all sorts of Persons by his Word and Spirit,
as he did in old times to some peculiar Persons by Dreams and Visions.

5. Jesus Christ offers himself, and all his saving benefits, even to such as
have for a long time neglected and rejected the offers of grace, made to them
in the Gospel, and notwithstanding all former neglects and refusals, if now
they will come in, they shall be accepted. Romans 10.21. But to Israel he says,
all day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a rebellious and gainsaying
people. The stretching forth the hands signify the offers of grace made in the
Gospel, the offer of Pardon and Salvation upon their Faith and Repentance, and
this offer was made and continued from time to time, to a rebellious and
gainsaying people. To the Jews that had refused Christ, and preferred a
Murderer before him, yea, and had not only refused, but killed him that came to
save their lives: there is a promise of forgiveness of their sins upon their
Repentance. Acts 3.14, 19. Ye denied the holy one and the just, and desired a
Murderer to be granted to you, and killed the Prince of Life -- Repent ye, and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out -- Another instance of Christ's
offering himself, and his saving benefits to such as have neglected former
offers of grace: We have Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if
any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with
him, and he with me. This is part of the Epistle sent to the Church of
Laodicea, where there were many lukewarm persons, that deserved to be spued
out of Christ's Mouth. ver. 15. And many self-conceited persons, that thought
their Estate good, when they were in a most miserable condition. ver. 17. And
notwithstanding their luke-warmness, and self-conceitedness, he makes a
gracious offer of himself to them, Behold I stand at the door and knock -- The
Greek word is (...) in the Praeter-perfect Tense, which is used for the
Present. I have stood -- and I am not gone though neglected, though the door be
kept shut, I stand there still, and knock and call, if any man hear my voice.
One paraphraseth thus on the words; Siquis qualiscunque fuerit, peccator,
hypocrita, qui diu obstitit Evangelio, etc. What manner of man soever he has
been, though he has been a vile sinner, though he has been a hypocrite though
one that has long rejected the offers of grace in the Gospel. If any man hear
my voice and open the door, that is, accept of the offers of grace in the
Gospel, consent to receive me on the terms of the Gospel, no former neglects or
refusals of Christ shall hinder such a man's Salvation, for it follows, I will
come into him, and sup with him, and he with me, that is, I will bestow my self
and all my saving benefits upon any man that opens unto me, whosoever he be,
and whatsoever he has formerly been or done against me.

6. Remission of sins, and Salvation are offered by Christ to backsliding,
revolting sinners, upon their Repentance, though they have beakslidden often,
and done very heinous things after their backsliding from God Jer. 3.1.5, 22.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again unto me says
the Lord -- Behold thou have spoken, and done evil things as thou could --
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings.

But some may say, I once had the offer of Salvation by Christ, but I did not
embrace it, I fear now it is too late, and that my day of grace is past, and so
there is no hope for my Soul, that ever I should be made partaker of Christ.

A. No man ought to conclude his day of grace and Salvation to be past as long
as he is in the Land of the living. If Christ be not accepted before we dye,
then we shall miss of him for ever. The day of grace, and the day of Salvation
is gone for ever, if Christ be not embraced before Death comes. But as long as
we are in the land of the living, there is a door of hope stands open to us.
Eccl. 9.5. To him that is joined to all the living, there is hope. As long as
we are under the Preaching of the Gospel, which is the Ministry of
Reconciliation, it is an accepted time, and a day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 5.20.
Compared with 2 Cor. 6.2. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God --
Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the Day of Salvation. While God
is treating with us by his Ambassadors, who do in Christ's stead pray us to be
reconciled to God, so long it is an accepted time, and a day of Salvation. Upon
the last day of the Feast, when the people were to be dismissed, and sent to
their own home, the Lord Jesus made an offer of himself to all that did thirst
after him. Joh 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. This
Feast was the Feast of Tabernacles, ver. 2. which Feast lasted many days. Lev.
23.34, 36. Their dwelling in Tabernacles while in the Wilderness, till they
came to Canaan, was an Emblem of our Frailty, whilst we remain in the Body,
which is called a Tabernacle. 2 Cor. 5.1. 2 Pet. 1.14. I must put of this my
Tabernacle, that is, my body; As our Lord Jesus offered himself to every one
that was a thirst on the last day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, so he does
offer himself to us, even to the last day of our continuance in our Earthly
house of this Tabernacle. The penitent thief who embraced Christ, the last day
of his being in this Earthly Tabernacle, upon the day of his death, was
accepted of him.

But some may say again, the weary, and the thirsty, and the heavy laden, and
such as are of a broken heart, and are burdened with their sins, are invited to
come to Christ, but I am not affected as I ought to be, with my sin and misery,
I am not humbled for my sins, but I have an hard, dead, insensible heart, and
therefore I am afraid Christ is not offered to me.

A. 1. Even such as are not affected with their sin and misery, but have high
thoughts of their own excellencies, when as in truth they are wretched and
miserable, are invited to come to Christ for good and white raiment and eye
Salve, whereby they may have a true sight of their own state, and be made
sensible of their sin and misery. Rev. 3.17, 18. Because thou say I am rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked -- I counsel thee
to buy of me Gold and white Raiment -- and anoint thine eyes with eye salve,
that thou may see -- We see the poorest and most miserable, which are not
affected as they ought with their sin and misery, are called upon to repair to
Christ, and to be dealing with Christ, for the choicest of his benefits, Gold,
white Raiment, eye salve, that they might see, and be made rich, and have their
nakedness covered.

2. As Christ was sent to bind up, and heal the broken in heart; Isa. 61.1. So
he was exalted to give Repentance to hard hearted sinners. Act. 5.31. And it is
his work to take away the stony heart from those that have stony hearts, and
give them hearts of flesh; For it is the Lords promise to take away the stony
heart, and to give an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.26. And it belongs to Christ, as
he is Mediator and surety of the new Covenant, to see this as well as other
promises of the Covenant fulfilled.

3. Sleepy and secure sinners are called upon by the Gospel, to awake out of
their sleep, and to look to Christ for light and life. Ephesians. 5.14. Wherefore he
says, awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light.

4. Though you do not find such an hunger and thirst, such a weariness and
burdened condition as others find, yet if you are willing to have Christ on the
terms of the Gospel, willing to be ruled and saved by him in his own way, you
need not doubt but Christ with all his saving benefits is offered freely to
you, as freely as to any other person, for he is offered freely to every one
whosoever he be, that is willing to have him. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely.

Sect. 9. Doubting of Christ's willingness to receive us, an hinderance of our
closing with Christ. This doubt removed.
It may be some will say, I am willing to accept of Christ on the terms of the
Gospel, but I doubt whether Christ will accept of me because I have been such a
vile and sinful creature, and still find in my self such an unsanctified
heart, and such a corrupt nature.

A. They that are willing to accept of Christ on the terms of the Gospel, may
lay aside all their doubts of Christ's accepting them, of what nature soever
they be; And that on such grounds as these.

1. We have Christ's own word and promise, to assure that if we come to him, he
will in no wise cast us out. Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. Him, without exception of any person or any sin, him whosoever
he be, and whatsoever he has done, that comes to me, that is, that believes
on me, that receives me as I am offered in the Gospel, that in the sense of
his lost and perishing condition, comes to me to save him, I will in no wise
cast out; (...) Two Negatives, I will not, I will not cast him out; I will in
no wise -- no accusation that Satan shall bring against him, for the multitude
or greatness of his sins, or his long continuance in his sins, or any other
accusation shall prevail with me, to cast him out; I will in no wise cast him
out, that is, I will graciously accept him. Nonrepellam a me, a societate mea
and communione bonorum; I will bestow my self and all my benefits upon him, I
will not cast him out, that is, out of my Kingdom, I will receive him to be
with me where I am.

2. Though we have been sinners, yet if we be penitent sinners, the Lord Jesus
will receive us upon our coming to him. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. When Christ was on
earth, he received those that came to him, though they had been great sinners,
and though he incurred the censures of the Pharisees thereby. Luke 15.2. The
Pharisees and the Scribes murmured, saying, this man receives sinners, and
eats with them. And he is not less merciful now he is in Heaven, than he was
while he was on Earth.

3. The parable of the prodigal Son may satisfy us, that our Lord Jesus will
not only not reject penitent sinners, though they have been the chiefest of
sinners, but will receive them willingly and joyfully. Luke 15, 20, 24, 25. The
Father received his Son with all joy, when he returned home penitent, and yet
he had been a vile wretch, he had spent all his estate on harlots and riotous
living. ver. 13.30. And would have submitted to a base, low employment, rather
than return to his Father; It was pure want that drove him to go to his Father,
because he was ready to perish with hunger, yet this vile wretch that was
unworthy of the name of a Son, was entertained and received with great joy.

CHAP. IV. Such as have an interest in Christ, may find comfort in Christ under
all Spiritual troubles.
I Have showed how such as have an interest in Christ, may find comfort in
Christ, under all personal and national troubles, and under the persecutions of
the Church, I shall now show that there is comfort to be had in Christ, under
all Spiritual troubles. Cant. 2.5. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love. This being sick of love signifies foul
troubles, and where does the spouse seek for comfort under foul troubles, but
from Christ and the benefits we have by Christ. Stay me with flagons, comfort
me with apples -- By flagons we are to understand wine, which was wont to be
distributed in flagons. 2 Samuel 6.19. He dealt among all the people a cake of
bread, and a flagon of wine. Now the benefits that we have by the death of
Christ, are compared to wine which makes glad the heart of man, and are called
in Scriptures by the name of wine. Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters -- yea come buy wine -- Wine was appointed by Christ, to be
the representation and memorial of his blood, and the benefits purchased by his
blood, namely remission of sins, and confirmation of the new Covenant. Christ
speaking of the Wine which is drunk at his Table, says, Mat. 26.28. This is my
blood of the new Testament. which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
1 Cor. 11.25. This cup is the New Testament in my Blood. Under the law there
was Wine offered with the daily Sacrifice, every Morning and Evening. Exodus
29.38, 40. Now Wine being that which makes glad the heart of man. Psalm. 104.15.
We may learn hence, that all those comforts which make glad the heart of man,
they are the fruit and effect of Christ's being made a Sacrifice for us. Stay me
with flaggons, signifies support with those comforts and refreshments, which
are the purchase of Christ's Blood, stay me with the discovery of the remission
of my sins, and the promises of the New Covenant. Comfort me with Apples --
what are these Apples? The fruits and benefits we have by Christ's death, who
bore our sins in his own body upon the Tree. 1 Pet. 2.24. In the foregoing
verse our Lord Jesus Christ is likened to an Apple Tree; As the Apple Tree
among the trees of the Wood, so is my beloved among the sons, I sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. Now the
benefits which we have by the incarnation, the Death and Intercession of
Christ, are the Fruit growing on this Apple tree, which was sweet to the
Spouses taste, and are the Apples with which she desired to be comforted, when
she was sick of love.

That we are to seek our comfort in Christ and from Christ, under all Soul
troubles, we may see from several other Scriptures. As, Psalm. 42.5. Why art
thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him, for the help of his countenance. Countenance
signifies favor, because a man's favor is discerned by a cheerful
Countenance. Prove. 16.15. God's favor is toward us in Christ: Romans 8.39. So
that we see whence the Psalmist expected his Consolations, when his Soul was in
a perplexed, disquieted condition, it was from the help of God's Countenance,
that is, from that relief and support which he should find from the
manifestation of Gods love in Christ to his Soul. Psalm. 61.2. From the end of
the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the
Rock that is higher than I. Our Lord Jesus in Scripture is resembled to a Rock.
1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ. When David's heart was overwhelmed with
grief, and when he was in desolate places, where he had none to comfort him, he
begs to be led to Christ, who was the Rock that was higher than he, for he knew
there was support and comfort in Christ, under the greatest inward troubles,
though such as overwhelmed the heart, as appears from ver. 2. compared with
ver. 7. Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I -- so will I sing praise unto
thy name for ever. When David was in great heaviness through the hidings of
Gods face, and walked day by day with a sorrowful heart, he found joy and
comfort in Christ. Psalm. 13.1, 2. How long will thou forget me, (O Lord) for
ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take counsel
in my Soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? -- My heart shall rejoice in thy
Salvation. By thy Salvation here we may understand the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is called the Salvation of God. Luke 2.30. Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation;
That is, the Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 26. See also, Isa. 49.6. That thou may
be my Salvation unto the ends of the Earth. By thy Salvation we may also
understand that Temporal and Eternal Salvation, which he hoped that God for
Christ's sake would bestow upon him; So that it was from Christ, and the
benefits which come by Christ, that David fetched his comfort in all his Soul
troubles; And therefore all of us that are under any soul troubles, should
repair to Christ for comfort. It is said of David, 1 Samuel 22.2. Every one that
was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was
discontent (or as it is in the Margent) bitter of Soul, gathered themselves
unto him, and he became a Captain over them. Let us do the like by Christ, the
Son of David: let every one that is in distress, and every one that is in debt,
(our sins are debts to the justice of God. Mat. 6.12.) and every one that is
bitter in Soul, gather our selves to Christ, who is the Consolation of Israel,
and he will be the Captain of our Salvation, and comfort us under all our
troubles. I shall farther prove this, that there is comfort to be had in Christ
in our Soul troubles, by giving instance in several soul troubles, and show
that there is comfort under all of them to be had in Christ.

Sect. 1. Comfort to be had in Christ, against indwelling corruption.
In Regenerate persons there are remainders of Original Corruption. The Apostle
Paul complained of the indwelling of sin. Romans 7.17. Sin that dwells in me;
And he did not only find sin dwelling in him, but warring against the law of
his mind, and leading him captive to the law of sin, which was a very great
trouble and burden to him. ver. 23.24. And what was Paul's comfort against the
indwelling, warring, and captivating power of sin? It was Christ Jesus. Romans
7.24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. I will show what comfort
there is in Christ, against the remainders of Original Corruption.

1. Christ's blood is a Fountain set open on purpose for washing away the
Fountain of sin, and uncleanness that is in, and issues forth out of our
hearts. Zech. 13.1. In that day, there shall be a Fountain opened to the house
of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. This
Fountain is the blood of Christ. 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses from all sins. There is no other Fountain under Heaven set open for
the cleansing away of sin, but the blood of Christ, which is compared to a
Fountain, because of its sufficiency to supply all comers, and the continual
efficacy, the Fountain runs night and day continually. The day wherein this
Fountain is set open, is the day and time of the Gospel; For under the law it
was covered over with diverse Types and Ceremonies, it was veiled with the
Ceremonies, but now that vail, that covering is done away. It was a Fountain
sealed and concealed from the Gentiles, but now it is a Fountain opened to the
Jews and Gentiles, for though only the house of David, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem are named, yet the Gentiles are included in this promise, for they
are of the same body, and fellow-heirs with the Jews, of the promises of God.
Ephesians. 3.6. Observe farther, for what end this Fountain is set open, that is, for
sin and for uncleanness, that is, to wash away all sorts, and all manner of
sins, our Original and Actual sins, the uncleanness of our hearts and lives. It
may amaze us when we see and consider what a Fountain of sin and uncleanness is
in our hearts, but it may greatly comfort us, when we consider that Christ's
blood is a Fountain, set open on purpose to wash away sin and uncleanness.

2. Though sin does, and will dwell in us as long as we live, yet this may
comfort us, it shall not have the dominion over us. Romans 6.14. For sin shall
not have dominion over you, because ye are not under the Law but under Grace.
For our Lord Jesus Christ has by his death obtained deliverance from the
reigning power of indwelling corruption, so that though sin remain in us, it
shall not reign over us, we shall not be the servants of sin. Romans 6.6. Knowing
this, that our old man is Crucisied with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. And therefore though we
find sin not only dwelling in us, but warring against the law of our minds, and
sometimes prevailing over us, and leading us captive, yet we should believe
that God for Christ's sake, will both pardon and subdue our sins. Psalm. 65.3.
Iniquities prevail against me, as for our Transgressions thou shall purge them
away. The purging away of sin implies both the pardoning our sins by the blood
of Christ, Psalm. 51.7. Heb. 1.3. Heb. 9.22. and the mortification of sin, or
purging sin out of our hearts and conversations. 2 Timothy 2.21. Isa. 4.4. and
27.9. Now David did rest upon God for the purging away his Transgressions, even
when he found iniquities prevailing, that is, he did trust in God, that for
Christ's sake he would both pardon and subdue his sin.

3. As it is a ground of trouble that sin dwells in us, so it is a ground of
great comfort that we have the Spirit of Christ to dwell in us as a Fountain of
grace and holiness, and that this Spirit of grace shall dwell in us for ever,
and as a Well of water, springing up to Everlasting Life. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye
not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
And this Spirit of Christ which is given to us, to dwell in our hearts, shall
dwell and abide with us for ever, Joh. 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even
the Spirit of Truth, he dwells in you, and shall be in you. And he dwells
in us as a Fountain of Grace and Holiness, or as a Well of water springing up
to Everlasting Life. Joh. 4.14. The water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a Well of water, springing up into Everlasting Life.

4. Though sin dwell in those that are in the Members of Christ, yet it shall
not be imputed to them unto their Condemnation. Romans 8.1. There is therefore
now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. He does not say, there is no sin in them that are
in Christ Jesus, but though their be sin in them, there is no condemnation to
them. ver. 34, Who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed. Christ's death has
made satisfaction for our sins, and therefore such as are in Christ shall not
come into Condemnation, but are passed from death to life.

Sect. 2. Comfort in Christ for lapsed Christians, that have fallen into
heinous sins, that have wounded their Conscience, and broke their Peace.
Besides the great trouble that arises to the Servants of Christ from
indwelling corruption, they may through the Temptations of Satan, and their own
weakness, and want of watchfullness, fall into actual Transgressions of a very
heinous nature, that may break their Peace, and wound their Consciences, as
Peter who denied Christ, and curse and swore he did not know the man, which
caused him when he came to himself to weep bitterly. And David committed such
heinous sins in the matter of Vriah and Bathsheba, that caused such anguish of
Spirit, as if all his bones had been broken, and therefore being in a joyless
condition, as full of anguish as a man that has broken bones, he prays thus to
God. Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice. Now though this be matter of deep. Humiliation, for
Christians to fall into heinous sins, yet it is not a desperate case, for there
is comfort in Christ for lapsed Christians, though the sins into which they
have fallen be of an heinous nature, and that on these grounds.

1. Jesus Christ is our Advocate with the Father, and pleads our cause for us,
that our sins may not be imputed to us, but may upon our Repentance be forgiven
us; As Stephen interceeded for his Persecutors, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this
sin to their charge. So does Christ interceed with his Father for all his
Members, When they fall into any heinous sin, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge. Christ's love to his Members is infinitely above Stephen's love to his
Persecutors, yet Stephen prayed for them when they had committed an heinous
sin, the shedding of blood, the shedding innocent blood, the blood of a Martyr,
of a man full of the Holy Ghost, his own blood, yet Stephen interceeded for
them, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And the love of Christ being
infinitely above Stephens, will not be much more interceeded for his members,
his Servants, in their greatest falls, though their sins be of an heinous
nature; Lord lay not this sin to their charge, that our Lord Jesus does
interceed for us, when we fall into sin, that our sins may not be laid to our
charge; We may see, 1 John 2.1, 2. My little Children, these things write I
unto you, that ye sin not, and if any man sin we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World. The children of God
must be very careful they do not sin against God; But suppose they do sin,
must they despair? No, if any man sin we have an advocate -- it is not said we
had an advocate, as if he ceased to be our advocate when we fall into sin, but
we have an advocate with the Father, and he is a powerful and prevalent
advocate. Jesus Christ the Righteous, whom his Father never denied any thing in
the days of his Humiliation, Joh. 11.22, 42. much less will he deny him any
thing in the days of his exaltation, and the person with whom he interceeds, is
the Father, who is the Father of mercies, a God ready to forgive, waiting to be
gracious, who is Christ's Father, and our Father; And he uses a prevailing
argument when he pleads for us, he presents his own blood, which is the
propitiation for our sins; And he is advocate for all that do and shall believe
on him, in all places and all ages of the World. 1 John 2.1, 2. Compared with 1 John 5.12. If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father -- These things
write I unto you that believe. As David interceeded with his Captains, on the
behalf of Absalom, though an undutifull rebellious Son. 2 Samuel 18.5. Deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. Even so does Christ
interceed with his Father, for his Rebellious and Disobedient Children: deal
graciously for my sake with such and such persons, though they have rebelled
against thee.

2. The death of Christ has obtained pardon for all our sins, sins after, as
well as sins before Conversion, great and heinous sins as well as lesser sins.
1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin. Isa.
53.5. He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.
The two Hebrew words used by the Prophet, as Rivet observes, all sorts even the
worst kind of sins, (...) signifies superbam mandati transgressionem,
rebellionem and defectionem. A proud transgressing of the law of God, rebellion
and revolting from God. (...) signifies perversitatem, malitiam, a sinning out
of perverseness and malice; For such sins as these, was Christ wounded and
bruised, and by his stripes we are healed, and obtain pardon for our greatest
offenses.

3. There are mercies and forgivenesses with God, upon Christ's account, even
for such as have rebelled against him. Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our God belong
mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. To rebel
against the Lord, is more than to sin out of infirmity, it speaks willfulness
in sin, it is the highest degree of sin, likened to the sin of Witchcraft,
when men have to do with the Devil. 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft. Yet there are mercies and forgivenesses with the Lord, for such as
have rebelled against him, not only mercy and forgiveness, but in the Plural
number, mercies and forgivenesses to signify the abundance of mercies and
pardons that are with God, for such as have rebelled, though they have not
rebelled once or twice only, but many times; And therefore the Lord is styled a
God of pardons, who has pardons in store for rebellious sinners upon their
Repentance. Ne. 9.16, 17. But they and our Fathers dealt proudly, and hardened
their necks, and refused to obey -- and in their rebellion appointed a Captain
to return to their bondage, but thou art a God ready to pardon, (or as it is in
the Margent) a God of pardons, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and forsookest them not

4. The Covenant of grace, which is confirmed with Christ's blood, admits
Repentance, and promises pardon of sin to back-sliders, upon their Repentance,
though they have deeply and grievously revolted from the Lord. The children of
Israel were grievous revolters, Jer. 6.28. They are all grievous revolters, yet
they are called to Repentance. Isa. 31.6. Turn ye unto him from whom the
Children of Israel have deeply revolted. And have a promise of pardon upon
their Repentance. Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings. If any say it may be these to whom the Lord speaks here,
and promises to heal their backslidings on their return to him, had not they
back-slidden so often, and in such an heinous manner; To which I answer, that
they had back-slidden often, is evident from ver. 1. Thou have played the
Harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me. And besides he speaks of
backslidings in the Plural number; He says not, I will heal your
backsliding, as if they had back-slidden but once, but I will heal your
backslidings, intimating that though their backslidings were many, (which
they themselves acknowledge. Jer. 14.7. Our backslidings are many.) yet upon
their returning he would heal them all. And that they were guilty of very great
and heinous sins, as well as many backslidings, to whom God makes this
promise; Return O backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings, is
evident from ver. 5. Behold thou have spoken and done evil things, as thou
could.

5. When the servants of Christ fall into heinous sins, God will visit their
Transgressions with his Rod, and their sins with Stripes, but for Christ's sake
he will not cast them out of his love, nor break his Covenant with them. Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments, if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I
visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their Iniquities with Stripes;
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my Mouth.

Sect. 3. There is comfort in Christ for such as are but weak in grace.
Such as are but weak in Faith, and weak in other Graces, do usually walk very
uncomfortably, and are under much perplexity of Spirit, upon the account of
their weakness. We are exhorted to support the weak. 1 These. 5.14. which
implies that weak Christians are liable to faint and sink, now there is
comfort in Christ for weak and feeble Christians. I will instance in some
grounds of Consolation for weak Christians.

1. There is a sufficiency of Grace and Strength in Christ, for the weak as
well as the strong. What was said to the Apostle, when he was under the
buffetings of Satan; 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. The same may be said to the weakest
Christian, that conflicts with many fears, and strong temptations, Christ's
grace is sufficient for thee, and his strength is made perfect in weakness,
that is, the weaker we are, the more eminently his strength is put forth, and
manifested on our behalf. The Lord is wont in an eminent manner to put forth
his power in supporting and upholding weak Christians. Isa. 40.29. He gives
power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases strength.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ is very tender and careful of weak and feeble
Christians; He gathers his Lambs with his Arm, and carries them in his
Bosom. Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the
Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young. By Lambs we may understand young and weak Christians.
There is no Shepherd so tender and careful of his little Lambs, as the
Shepherd of Israel is of his Lambs. His gathering his Lambs with his Arm,
signifies his preserving them by his Divine power, his carrying them in his
Bosom, signifies his tender love to them, and his tender care over them. They
lie near his heart, he carries them in his Bosom, he gently leads those that
are with young, that is, such as are in a burdened condition, afflicted and
distressed Consciences. When Creatures are with young, they are burdened and
heavy; It may also signify such as are in the way to Conversion. Another
Scripture setting out Christ's tenderness to weak Christians, we have Isa. 42.3.
A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax, (or as it is in the
Margent) the dimly burning flax he shall not quench. That this is spoken of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is evident from Mat. 12.20. The Reed is very weak, a little
blast of wind makes the Reed to shake and tremble. Mat. 11.7. A Reed shaken
with the Wind. The Reed when bruised, is weaker than the Reed that is whole.
The Reed signifies the weak trembling Christian, the bruised Reed a weak
Christian bruised with afflictions and temptations, such an one Christ will not
break, that is, he will support and uphold them; The smoking or dimly burning
flax, he will not quench; That is, he will cherish weak, and recover lapsed
Christians; The wick of the lamp that burns but dimly, that has much smoke
obscuring the light, that has that which is offensive (for smoke is offensive
to the eyes) mixed with that little light, that little good which is in them,
such Christ will not quench, but will cherish and carry on his own in them.
Isa. 29.18. The eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of
darkness. Though there be much obscurity and darkness mixed with our knowledge,
when the Lord first opens our eyes, yet by degrees that dimness shall wear off,
and we shall have a more clear knowledge of the mysteries of our Salvation.
Isa. 32.3. The eyes of them that see, shall not be dim.

3. Weak Christians that build their Faith and Hope upon Christ, build upon a
sure and strong Foundation; For Christ is a sure Foundation to the weak as well
as the strong. Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a
tried stone, a precious cornerstone a sure foundation. Jesus Christ is such a
sure and strong foundation, that all the Devils in Hell shall not be able to
prevail against the weakest Christian that is built on this foundation. Mat.
16.18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

4. VVeak Christians have a strong and Almighty God to stand by them, who has
promised for Christ's sake to help, strengthen and uphold them. Isa. 41.10,
13.14. Fear thou not for I am with thee, be not dismayed for I am thy God, I
will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
Righthand of my Righteousness -- Fear not I will help thee, fear not thou worm
Jacob, I will help thee says the Lord -- What is weaker than a worm? yet to
Jacob that was but as a worm in his own and others apprehension, trampled upon,
and despised by the men of the world, the Lord calls out three times, fear not,
fear not, fear not, and why? because though Jacob was but as a worm; The God of
Jacob who is an Almighty God, says to Jacob I will help thee, I will
strengthen thee, I will uphold thee. The Almighty God is able to uphold the
weakest Christian under all oppositions and discouragements. Romans 14.1, 4. Him
that is weak in the Faith receive ye -- yea he shall be holden up, for God is
able to make them stand.

5. Where there are the weakest measures of Grace, they are taken notice of by
God, and shall have a great and glorious reward from the Lord. When there was
but some good thing toward the God of Israel in Jeroboam's Son, the Lord took
notice of it, and brought him to his grave in peace. 1 King. 14.13. All Israel
shall mourn for him and bury him, for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the
grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of
Israel, in the house of Jeroboam. They that have but weak gifts, and mean
talents, yet if they be faithful in that little which is committed to their
trust, they shall have a great and glorious Reward. Mat. 25.23. Well done good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make
thee Ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Sect 4. There is comfort in Christ for such Christians as mourn under their
decay in grace, and under their unprofitableness under the means of grace.
To be unprofitable under the means of grace, is a very uncomfortable
condition; Such have cause to cry out, my leanness, my leanness, woe unto me.
And especially it is matter of lamentation to be in a declining condition, to
decay in Grace, to lose our first love, and to grow weak in Faith, and abate in
our zeal and activity for God, a decaying, declining condition is a very
uncomfortable condition, yet there is comfort to be had in Christ for such as
mourn over their unprofitableness, and their decays in Grace; And that on these
accounts.

1, The Lord Jesus is able to make the most barren Soul to become fruitful. 2
Cor. 9.8. God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good work. These
Corinthians before God wrought upon them, were very Graceless, vile persons; As
we may see, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you -- That is, such vile sinners as
were mentioned, ver. 9.10. Unrighteous, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers,
Effeminate, abusers of themselves, with Mankind, etc. Yet he tells them, that
God was able not only to work Grace, but to make Grace, all Grace abound
toward them, and to cause them to abound in every good work. God can make
Faith to abound in the most unbelieving Soul, and brokenness of heart to abound
in the hardest heart of sinners, and love and zeal to abound in those that are
lukewarm, yea he can make all Grace to abound in the Graceless; The Lord makes
the dry Tree to flourish. Ezekiel. 17.24. I the Lord have dried up the green Tree
and have made the dry Tree to flourish. And he makes a barren Womb fruitful.
Psalm. 113.9. He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
Mother of children. Now he that does this by the barren Womb and dry Tree,
cannot he do the like by our barren Hearts. He that makes the dry Tree to
flourish, cannot he make our dry hearts flourish? and he that makes the barren
Womb fruitful, cannot he make our barren hearts fruitful also. And as the
Lord is able to make a barren Soul become fruitful, so also to recover such as
are gone back, and decayed in Grace Psalm. 23.3. He restores my Soul -- When
our Souls are gone back and declined, he can restore them again. After
Jerusalem had lain wast many years, God caused her wast places to be built
again. Isa. 61.4. They shall build the old wastes, and raise up the former
desolations. That God that did this for Zion, can do as much for the Sons and
Daughters of Zion, namely recover them from their inward decays and desolations.

2. The Lord Jesus is appointed by God to carry on, and finish the work of
grace, as well to begin grace in our Souls. Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, and as the author and finisher of our Faith,
so of our other graces also. Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ -- It is by Jesus Christ that we have
the fruits of Righteousness, and that we are filled with these fruits -- He is
appointed to be as Rivers of water in a dry place. Isa. 32.2. A man shall be as
Rivers of water in a dry place -- This man is none other, but the man Christ
Jesus, as he is called. 1 Timothy 2.5. who is God and Man in one person; What
Rivers of water are to the dry ground, that is Christ to our dry and barren
souls. The water will make the dry and barren ground fruitful. Job 38.26.27.
To cause it to rain on the earth -- to satisfy the desolate and wast ground,
and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring out. So does Christ cause
those that are dry and barren, to bring forth the fruits of Righteousness by
the dew of his grace. Water will recover those things that are withered and
greatly decayed, as we see in Trees of which Job speaks. Job 14.8, 9. Though
the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof dye in the ground
yet through the sent of water, it will bud and bring forth boughs like a plant.
There is not less virtue in the grace of Christ for recovering withered and
decayed Souls, then there is in water, to recover a withered, decayed Tree;
Therefore when we feel our dimness, and barrenness, and decayed condition, we
should go to Christ, that he would be to us as Rivers of water in a dry place,
that he would revive, carry on, and finish the work of grace in our Souls, and
that he would fill us with the fruits of Righteousness. Isa. 42.3. He shall not
quench the smoking flax. Ellychnium languescens, fere extinctum. Pisc. quibus
restat aliquid Pietatis, sed paene extinctum calamitatibus. Gro. Nutantes in
Pietate confirmabit and praeditos scintilla pietatis aliqua velut moribunda,
fovebit and excitabit Jun. It refers to languishing Christians, that where
Grace is so declined and decayed that it is ready to dye.

3. The Lord has promised for Christ's sake to give us the dew of his Grace,
which shall cause us to grow in Grace. Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto
Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly -- Consider what condition Israel was in
when God made this promise; I will be as the dew unto Israel, and he shall grow
as the Lilly. Israel was in a fallen, declined, backslidden condition. ver.
1.3. O Israel thou have fallen by thine iniquity -- I will heal their
backsliding. Chapter 4.16. Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer. Chapter 8.3.
Israel has cast if the thing that is good -- Yea Israel was so far declined,
and in such a miserable condition, that it is said of Israel, Hos. 13.9. O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self -- Yet to this Israel that was fallen by
iniquity, back-slidden from God, cast off that which was good, destroyed
themselves upon their Confession of their sin and prayer for Mercy, God
promises, I will be as the dew unto Israel, and he shall grow like the Lilly
-- There are two things observable in the growth of the Lilly, it grows
speedily. Mat. 6.28. Consider the Lillies of the field how they grow. It is
Pliny's observation concerning the Lilly, Lilio nihil foe^undius, no Flower is
more fruitful than the Lilly; It grows also Gloriously. Mat. 6.29. Solomon
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. See another promise of
giving growth in Grace. Hos. 14.7. They that dwell under his shadow shall
return, they shall revive as the Corn, they shall grow as the Vine. They that
dwell under his shadow, it may be understood, either of Israel's shadow, and so
is a promise to the Members of the Church of Christ, joining themselves to his
Church -- or else of the shadow of Christ. As Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his
shadow with great delight. So the Caldee -- In umbra Christi sui, under the
shadow of Christ, and then the sense is, they that betake themselves to Christ,
and abide with Christ, shall be made fruitful in Grace and good works,
consonant to that promise. Joh. 15.5. He that abides in me and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit. Now taking this shadow to be meant of Christ,
then it is a gracious promise to such as betake themselves to Christ, that they
shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine; How is that? The Corn lies
buried under ground for a while, and seems to be lost; And after it appears, it
meets with cold winds, and frost, and draught, that makes it hang the head,
turn yellow, look in a decaying manner, yet through the warm Sun and Dew of
Heaven, it reviveth again; So it is with them that dwell under Christ's shadow,
though they meet with many Pullbacks, and that which was springing up, seems to
wither and decline, yet they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine.
The pruning and cutting the Vine makes the Vine become the more fruitful, and
so it intimates a growth under afflictions. In the Winter the Vine looks like a
dead stick, has no Beauty nor Savor in it, but in the Spring it puts forth
and flourishes abundantly. Vines give a pleasant smell, and bring forth
pleasant fruit. Cant. 2.13. The Vines, with the tender Grape, give a good
smell; And the Fruit of the Vine is sweet and pleasant fruit. I might mention
more promises of growth in Grace; As Psalm. 92.12. Job 17.9. Now by virtue of
these and such like promises, when we find a decay of Grace, we may rest upon
God that he will come in with fresh supplies of Grace. Psalm. 92.10. I shall be
anointed with fresh Oil. David was sometimes sensible of great decays in
Spiritual Estate, as when he complains my moisture is turned into the drought
of Summer, yet then he did rest upon God for fresh supplies of Grace and
Comfort, which may be the meaning of those words, I shall be anointed with
fresh Oil: For the Graces of the Spirit are called an unction or an anointing.
1 John 2.20, 29. Ye have an unction from the Holy one -- The anointing which ye
have received of him abides in you. The Graces and Comforts of the Spirit are
compared to Oil. Psalm. 45.7. Thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness. Mat. 25.3. They that were foolish took their Vessels, and took no Oil
with them. When God pours out his Spirit upon us, then he is said to anoint us.
Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me --
Fresh Oil may signify renewed supplies of the Spirit of Grace. The restoring a
Consumptive person that was wasted to skin and bone, is called fresh Flesh. Job
33.21, 25. So the renewed supplies of Grace and Comfort, given to a decayed
soul, may be called an anointing him with fresh Oil.

Sect. 5. There is comfort in Christ, for such as are poor in Spirit and full
of want, and mourn under their Spiritual Poverty.
Such as are in a poor condition as to Spirituals, full of wants, when they
reflect upon their poverty and emptyness, it causes forrow and trouble of
Spirit. Psalm. 69.29. I am poor and sorrowful. Psalm. 119.22. I am poor and
needy, and my heart is wounded within me. Now there is comfort in Christ for
such as are poor in respect of their Spiritual Estate, and are full of wants,
and are in a troubled condition, because they find themselves to be so poor and
full of wants; And that on these grounds.

1. There is a fullness in Christ of all those Graces, and all those good
things which we find wanting in our selves. Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell. And that fullness which dwelt in Christ
was for our sakes, that out of his fullness he might Communicate to us Grace,
answerable to those Graces which are in him. Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness
have all we received, and grace for grace. The gifts which Christ received, he
did not receive to keep them to himself, or to bestow them on the Angels, but
to give them to the sons of men. Psalm. 68.18. Thou have received gifts for men,
yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them. These
gifts which Christ received for men, include gifts of Grace, as well as other
gifts, as namely the gifts of the Holy Ghost, the gift of Faith and Love, etc.
For the Psalmist speaks of such gifts as do make us meet to have the Lord dwell
with them. Now the Lord dwells in us by his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. and by
Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and by Love. 1 John 4.16.

2. All those good things which we find wanting in our selves, we have them in
Christ, they are ours in him. Though this seem strange yet it is true, that we
should have that which we want: we have those things in Christ, which we find
wanting in our selves. In him we have righteousness and strength, when we feel
weakness in our selves. Isa. 45.24. In him we have wisdom, sanctification and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. we are blessed with all spiritual blessings, even
while we complain of our want of them, we are blessed with them all in Christ,
though we have not the actual enjoyment of them. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in Heavenly places in Christ. The poorest Christian has all things
in Christ.

3. In the Lord's own time which is the best time, you shall have a full and
rich supply of all your needs, both for Body and Soul. Phil. 4.19. My God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches, in glory by Christ Jesus.

4. Though we are poor, and low, and full of wants, yet we are accepted of God
in Christ, and he thinks thoughts of love and mercy, and peace toward us.
Psalm. 40.17. But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me.

5. Those Christians that are poor in Spirit, and full of wants, are in a
blessed condition, for they are heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and as soon as
they come to Heaven, their wants shall be so fully supplied that they shall
never want any thing to Eternity. Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

6. The poorest Christian, that is poorest in Spirituals, has what God in his
infinite wisdom sees to be best for him, and has better things than the
richest man in the World. for he has God for his portion. Lam. 3.24. And the
Lord is the best portion in Heaven and Earth. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

Sect. 6. There is comfort in Christ for such as mourn under deadness, and want
of quickening influences.
Spiritual deadness is a great trouble to gracious souls, when the Apostle Paul
felt the body of Death, it made him bemoan his wretched condition, that he
should be under so much deadnss. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? That our comforter against spiritual
deadness is in Christ, the following words show, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Though there be cause of mourning when we look into our own
dead hearts, yet there is cause of thanksgiving and rejoicing when we look up
to God in Christ; And that on these grounds.

1. The end of Christ's assuming our nature and suffering death for our sins,
was to give us life, not only eternal life hereafter, but spiritual life here,
and that in a plentiful measure. Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have
life, and that they may have it more abundantly. Joh. 6.51. I am the living
bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall live
for ever, and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world

2. Though there be in us much deadness, yet in Christ and with Christ there is
a fountain of life. Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the fountain of life, and in
thy light shall we see light. As it is with Fountains of water, there is water
to be had at all times, and for all comers, in the Fountain; So it is with the
Fountain of life, there is life to be had constanly, freely, a sufficiency of
life for all comers, at all times to be had from this Fountain of life.

3. The Lord has given us many gracious and comfortable promises to encourage
us to hope in him for quickening grace, at such times as we find our selves
under deadness, as Joh. 11.25. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and
the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet he shall live. Joh.
6.57. He that eats me, even he shall live by me. Psalm. 69.32. Your heart
shall live that seek God. Psalm. 22. They shall praise the Lord that seek him,
your heart shall live for ever. Amos 5.4. Thus says the Lord unto the house of
Israel, seek ye me and ye shall live. We see here that Spiritual and Eternal
Life is promised to such as seek the Lord; These promises may be a great
comfort to us under our deadness.

4. Jesus Christ has provided us excellent helps against our deadness. I will
instance in two helps. (1.) His word, that has a quickening influence in it.
Psalm. 119.50. Thy word has quickened me. And ver. 93. I will never forget thy
precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. And as the Precepts so the
promises of the word have a quickening virtue in them. We may say of the
promises with Hezekiah. Isa. 38.16. O Lord by these things men live, and in all
these things is the life of my Spirit. (2.) His spirit is an excellent help
against deadness. Joh. 6.63. It is the spirit that quickneth. The spirit of
Christ is the spirit of life, and this quickening spirit shall be given to those
that ask it of God. Luke 11.13.


5. When Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall appear with him in
glory, and when we appear with Christ in glory we shall ive with him for
evermore, and shall never any more be troubled with deadness, but shall be
freed from the body of sin and death for ever. Col. 3.3, 4. Ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is our Life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Your Life is hid with Christ in
God: It may be understood of the life of Grace here, and the life of Glory
hereafter. Our life of Grace is hid not only from the eyes of the World, but
at sometimes and in part from themselves; As Davenant observes; Ex part quoad
quos sanctos, quippe qui vitam hanc sentiant in se esse valde infirmam,
obscuram, dubiam, obtentationes diaeboli and carnis. Yet the weakness of our
Spiritual Life, the deadness that is mixed with the life of grace, shall not
hinder our appearing with Christ in, and if we appear with him in glory, all
our deadness and imperfections shall be done away for ever.

Sect. 7. There is comfort in Christ for such as are troubled for the weakness
and imperfections of their services.
Many Christians finding their service they do for God and their Generations,
attended with very great weakness, and many imperfections, are much troubled
and discouraged thereby; But to such as go under this burden, there is comfort
to be had in Christ; and that in these respects.

1. Our persons and services are accepted of God, not for the worthyness that
is either in our persons or services, but for the sake and upon the account of
Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us accepted in the beloved. And as our
persons are accepted in Christ, so are our services also. 1 Pet 2.5. -- To
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. If any say,
how can imperfect services that have sin mixed with them be accepted of God; I
answer, by the merits of Christ the imperfections and sins that are mingled
with those holy services which we perform to God are done away, and the
services rendered acceptable to God. Exodus 28.38. And it shall be upon Aarons
Forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things of the children
of Israel, which the children of Israel shall hollow in all their holy gifts,
and it shall be always on his Forehead, that they may be accepted before the
Lord. Aaron was a Type of Christ our great High Priest. The Plate on his
Forehead that had graven on it Holiness to the Lord, was a Type of the merits
of Christ, who is the Lord our Righteousness; As Aaron bare away the iniquities
of the holy things Typically, which being done, they were accepted of God. So
Christ does really and truly bear away the sins of all services, and thereby
they are accepted of God.

2. Though our services have much weakness and many imperfections in them, yet
if they be performed with Upright hearts God will accept them. 1 Chronicles. 29.17.
I know also my God, that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure in
Vprightness. As little done by an Upright man is more acceptable to God, than
great services done by wicked men. Pro. 15.8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, but the Prayer of the Upright is his delight.

3. Would you serve God and your Generation in a better manner if you were
able? and is it your burden that you can serve God no better? then know for
your comfort that God through Christ will accept of your willing mind, though
you have not such abilities to serve him as others have, or as you your selves
desire to have. 2 Cor. 8.12. If there he first a willing mind it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

4. It is a great comfort to those that mourn over their imperfections, that
how imperfect soever they are in themselves, they are complete in Christ. Col.
2.10. Ye are complete in him.

5. Our imperfections shall not hinder us of the love of God here, nor of the
Kingdom of Heaven hereafter. Psalm. 73.22, 23, 24.

Sect. 8. There is comfort in Christ for such as are under the hidings of Gods
face, and are troubled because they cannot enjoy Communion with God.
It is the lot of some Christians to be under the hidings of God's face, and to
want Communion with God, and that is a great trouble to them. Psalm. 30.7. Thou
did hide thy face and I was troubled. Now there is comfort for such in
Christ, and that in these respects.

1. It was one great end of Christ's death to bring us to the enjoyment of God.
1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that we might be brought unto God. The great obstacle to our Communion
with God is our sins; For it is sin that separates between God and us. Isa.
59.2. Behold your iniquities have sepparated between you and your God. Now
Christ's death has taken away this obstacle of our Communion with God, for
whereas our sins had put us far from God, and caused God to stand afar off from
us, by the blood of Christ we are made nigh to God. Ephesians. 2.13. But now in
Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ. 2. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself was under the hidings of Gods face,
and that in time of great distress, when he was upon the Cross, when nigh unto
death he cried out, Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But
how does this make for the comfort of a Soul under the hidings of Gods face,
that our Lord Jesus Christ himself was in a deserted condition.
A. 1. Hence we learn that the hidings of God's face is consistent with a state
of adoption, and the special love of God; For Christ was the beloved Son of
God, in whom he was well pleased, yet he was in a deserted condition in a time
of trouble, in a dying hour, and therefore we should not question the Fatherly
love of God, because of the hidings of his face. Isa. 64.7, 8. Thou have hid
thy face from us -- But now O Lord thou art our Father.

2. Seeing our Lord Jesus has been under the hidings of God's face, he knows
how to pity and succor those that are in this condition. Heb. 2.18.

3. We have gracious promises, which are all yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, that
though the Lord be withdrawn from us, yet if we return, he for Christ's sake
will return unto us. 2 Chronicles. 30.9. The Lord your God is gracious and
merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him.
Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from mine
Ordinances, and have not kept them; Return unto me, and I will return unto you,
says the Lord of Hosts. Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and God will draw nigh to
you.

4. Though you want sensible influences from God, yet if you be one that has
closed with Christ upon the terms of the Gospel, God has Communicated himself
to you for your God and Father in Christ by Covenant, and has given you the
privilege to be one of his Sons, Joh. 1.12. and that is a higher degree of
Communion with God, than the giving insensible influences to that you ought not
to say, you have no Communion with God, because there is a suspension of
influences, when as the Lord has given himself for your God by Covenant, and
has taken you for his children.

Sect. 9. There is comfort in Christ for such as are troubled with fears of
falling away.
What David said concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. I shall now one day perish by
the hand of Saul. the like some Christians who have accepted Christ on the
terms of the Gospel, and have given themselves to Christ, are ready to say in
their hearts, I shall one day fall away from Christ, and perish for ever. My
heart is so treacherous, and indwelling corruption so strong, and Satan's
Temptations so prevalent, and the oppositions from the world may be so great
that I fear I shall not hold out to the end, but shall fall away, and this is a
great trouble to me. Now there is comfort to be had from Christ against these
fears of falling away, and that on these grounds.

1. The intercession of Christ is a ground of comfort to such Believers on
Christ as are troubled with fears of fallingaway; For he prays for us that
our Faith may not fail. Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat; But I have prayed for
thee that thy Faith fail not. And he that prayed for Peter that his Faith might
not fail, he has prayed for all that do and shall believe in him. Joh, 17.20,
21. Neither pray I for these alone. but for them also that shall believe on me
through their word, that they all may be one. etc. And what Christ prayed for
was always granted. Joh. 11.41, 42. Father I thank thee that thou have heard
me, and I know that thou hear me always.

2. The Members of Christ may be comforted against their fears of falling away
from God's Everlasting Covenant; For God is entered into an Everlasting
Covenant with them, that he will not turn away from them, and that he will keep
them from departing from him. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an Everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, and I
will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. See
Isa. 54.10.

3. The unchangeableness of Gods love is a good ground of comfort against fears
of falling away. Joh. 13.1. Jesus having loved his own that were in the World,
loved them unto the end. It is not said, having loved his own that are in
glory, but that are in the world, where they are liable to temptations and
corruptions, and troubles, he loved them to the end. Romans 8.38, 39. For I am
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus. God's love being unchangeable, we may rest satisfied that the
same love which called us to the knowledge and Faith of Christ, will keep us
from departing from Christ, seeing the gifts and the callings of God are
without Repentance. The same love that quickened us when we were dead in sins
and trespasses, will also preserve us unto Eternal Life.

4. The attributes of God may comfort weak Christians against their fears of
falling away. The name of the Lord is our strong Tower, whether we may run and
be safe against these fears; as for instance (1.) The power of God that is
engaged to keep and preserve us till we are brought safe to Heaven. 1 Pet. 1 5.
Who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. And though the
Lord lets us fall for our Humiliation, yet he will not suffer us to be utterly
cast down. Psalm. 37.23, 24. This power of God that keeps us, is able to
stablish the weakest Christians against all Oppositions. Romans 16.25. To him
that is of power to stablish you -- The Apostle speaking of such as are weak in
the Faith, says; Romans 14.1, 4. Him that is weak in the Faith receive you --
yea he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him to stand. (2.) The mercy
of God preserves us from falling away. Psalm. 94.18. When I said my foot
slippeth, thy mercy O Lord held me up, and this mercy stands fast with us for
ever! Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore. Isa. 54.8. (3.)
The faithfullness of God is a comfort against our fears of falling away. 2
These. 3.3. The Lord is faithful who will stablish you and keep you from evil.


5. The Lord Jesus Christ has assured his Sheep that they shall never perish,
but that he will give them Eternal Life, and that none shall pluck them out of
his hands. Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. Where observe, that all the sheep of Christ are
kept by the power of the Father and the Son, to Eternal Life, so that they
shall never perish. For our fuller satisfaction in this case, let us see what
are the grounds of those fears of falling away, which perplex our minds, and
see how we are secured against all of them. (1.) Is it the strength of Satan's
Temptations? The Lord has engaged his faithfullness, that he will not suffer
us to be tempted above what we are able to bear. 1 Cor. 10.13. (2.) Is it the
strength of indwelling corruption? The Lord has engaged himself by promise to
subdue our iniquities. Mic. 7.19. (3.) Is it the opposition that the World
makes against us, the troubles and persecutions of the world makes us fear
that we shall fall away? Christ has overcome the world for us. Joh. 16. ult.
And no men by all that they can do shall pluck any of Christ's sheep out of his
hands. Joh. 10.27, 28. 1 John 4.4. (4.) Are we afraid that God should leave us,
and that we being left of him should fall away? He has engaged himself by
promise, that he will never leave nor forsake us. Heb. 13.5. He has said I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. (5.) Are we afraid of our own
treacherous backsliding hearts? He has engaged to put his fear into our
hearts, that we shall not depart from him. Jer. 32.40.


Sect. 10. There is comfort in Christ for such whose heart is sick because
there hope is deferred.
Solomon tells us, Hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. And many
Christians find it true by experience, while hope for promised mercies, and
mercies begged in prayer, and their hope is deferred, their hearts grow sick,
and their spirits faint within them, Psalm. 143.7. Hear me speedily O Lord, my
spirit fails, Psalm. 119.81, 82. My soul faints for thy salvation. Mine eyes
fail for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me. Now there is comfort in
Christ for such as find their hearts fainting, when prayed for, promised, hoped
for mercies are deferred. And that on these grounds.

1. Promised mercies shall furely be given in God's time, which is the best
time for all things, Hab. 2.3. -- The vision (that is, the mercies promised to
the prophet in a vision) is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry. And the like I may say of mercies begged in prayer, they
shall furely come if they be such as are according to the will of God, 1 John
5.14.

2. Our Lord Jesus Christ intercedeth with his Father to give us all promised
mercies. For he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, and Mediates with God on
our behalf, that for his sake he would give us all the blessings promised in
the new Covenant. He also intercedeth for us with his Father to give us all
those mercies which we ask in his name agreeable to his will, Heb. 7.25. And
the Lord will not deny Christ any thing for which he makes intercession.

3. The longer hoped for mercies are deferred, the sweeter they will be when
they are given to us, Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but
when the desire comes it is a tree of life.

4. When hoped for mercies are delayed till the heart is sick, and begins to
faint, yet it is good still to keep up our hope in God, Lam. 3.18, 26. Psa.
119.81. For we please God when we hope in his mercy, Ps. 147.11.

5. The main and best of hope is for things laid up in heaven for us, Col. 1.5.
For the hope which is laid up in heaven for you. If in this life only we had
hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable. The best blessing which a
Christian hopes for are laid up in heaven. There we shall have an answer of all
our prayers, a fulfilling of all promises, a satisfaction of all our desires,
when that blessed hope is accomplished, it will make amends for the deferring
and frustration of all other hopes. Wherefore let us look after and wait
patiently for that hope, Tit. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.13.

Sect. 11. There is comfort in Christ for such as are assaulted with horrid
temptations, as blasphemy, self-murder, etc.
Some Christians are assaulted with grievous temptations, as blasphemous
thoughts, self-murder, etc. that they are even weary of their lives. Now to
such there is comfort to be had in Christ, in several respects, as

1. None of all the temptations of Satan can bereave a Christian of eternal
life. For a Christian's life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Ye are dead,
and your life is hid with Christ in God. And what is hid with Christ in God is
out of the devils reach.

2. Though Satan may temptthe members of Christ, yet he shall be never able to
overcome them, but they shall overcome him and all his temptations, Rev. 12.11.
They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all things taking
the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the
wicked. Col. 2.15.

3. The worst of Temptations are consistent with the Fatherly love of God. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, who was the beloved Son of God was tempted to cast himself
down from a pinnacle of the Temple, and to fall down and worship the devil, and
what worse sin than to worship the devil?

4. We are assured by God, that if we resist the devil he will flee from us,
Jam. 4.7. And therefore whatsoever Temptation he assaults us withal, let us
resist him, believing that he will flee, and if he come again let us resist him
again. We are also assured, that though the Lord suffer Satan to tempt us, yet
he will not suffer us to be tempted above what he will enable us to bear, 1
Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man:
But God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

FINIS.

