An ESSAY on a QUESTION Relating to Divine Worship.

VIZ.

Whether it be contrary to the Apostolical Laws of Decency and Reverence, for a
Man to have his Head covered in the time and place of Gods Solemn public
Worship? Aff.

By Samuel Stoddon, Minister of the Gospel.

Levit. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and Reverence my Sanctuary: I am the
Lord.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Maxwell, and Robert Roberts, for the Author, 1682.

To the Honorable Sir. H. F. Knight.
S. S. wishes all happiness of this, and of the better Life.
Honored Sir,
THE vanity of the creature, which is by daily, and sometimes by dear
experience taught us, has this happy influence on all pious minds, to raise in
them the greater reverence of, and closer adherence to the Creator; Whom to
know, is highest wisdom; whom to serve, is perfect freedom: whom rightly to
worship, is indispensible duty; and whom to enjoy is incomprehensible felicity.
But where there is a Reverential awe of the Supreme Deity formed in the heart,
there will be suitable expressions in the external deportment, especially in the
acts of solemn devotion; so that the irreverence of the outer man proclaims to
the world but the hidden Atheism of the inner. It has been always matter of
indignation with me, to see the Ludicra Fortunae, the Interludes of Fortune,
magnified with the honor of Courtly Ceremonies, and the Worship of that God
who dispenses all these little things as he pleases, vilified by those that
irreverently draw nigh to him. Though I am no Hyperaspistes of uninstituted
ceremonies; yet God forbid that I should not declare against profane
Indecencies. I confess I know not whose Successor I am in the province that I
have undertaken, or who has been before me in it. I am like one that is going
a pilgrimage over the Alps via aspera and consolita, in a rough and untrod
path; but that sacred thread of Scripture which I have taken with me, I trust,
will bring me safe to the Temple I aim at. I know I shall displease some, and
seem as an idle wanderer to others; but thanks be to God, who has instructed
me to live above the unjust censures of men, and to rejoice in the conscience
of my integrity. Sir, It is my duty and your deserts that oblige me to offer
you this little part of my Studies; and not only duty, but hope of acceptance:
Hope founded not on the Merit of the Action, but on the nature of the Subject,
and the known sutableneso of your apprehensions and practice: so that, by this,
I dare not so much as pretend to pay one mite of my debt, but to run further on
the score. Your favorable acceptance makes me more your debtor. The faults
which more or less always attend my best endeavors, I am conscious of, and
confess them both to God and man. As God has promised remittere confitenti, to
forgive the Confessor, so I hope will you. Certainly I have not wilfully
swerved from the Truth. If this poor Essay may interess it self in Gods
blessing, and your favor and good opinion, I may expect the success that will
fully answer the ends of,

Honored Sir, Yours heartily devoted in all Christian observance, S. S.

An ESSAY on a Question relating to Divine Worship, Viz. Whether it be contrary
to the Apostolical Laws of Decency and Reverence, for a Man to have his Head
covered in the time and place of Gods Solemn public Worship? Aff.
The INTRODVCTION.
CUSTOM has of old been famed, and always is found to be one of the touchy
Deities, as one calls it; he that presumes to profane her Altars, must expect
the severest Thunderbolt that her angry fist can dispense. And though she
pretends a claim in almost every thing that concerns humane life, and often to
the prejudice and disturbance of discretion, yet in no case is she observed to
be so tender and froppish as in the concerns of Religion, of what kind or
constitution soever the Religion be. It Is true, it is but a pedling kind of
Deity, occupied, for the most part, about the minutes and punctilio's of
greater affairs, but excessively fond of those her small Wares. He that sets
himself against a Custom, takes a Bear by the ear, and meddles with the Diana,
which is enough to pull the whole world, especially the interessed party, upon
his head.

It is now my hard Task (because I see no other that has or is about) to
appear against one of the younger Brats of this monstrous thing Custom. I
confess it is some encouragement, that it is a Brat of a late birth, for old
age is the main thing that gives this creature strength; wherein it is unlike
to most others. When it is grown gray headed, it begins to claim a veneration,
and is held Sacred. And the truth is, till it be full-grown, it is but a
novelty, or fashion; and deserves not the name of Custom.

Yet of Customs or Usages, as of most other Species, there are some good, some
evil, and some adiaphorous, or as chips in pottage. By how much the more any
Custom has of truth, of real decency, of necessary order, or tendency to
edification, by so much the more venerable and legitimate, of what age,
complexion, or sex soever it be; but by how much the more remote from these, by
so much the less to be regarded, yea by so much the more to be opposed. And
though the courtesy, or rather the corruptions of time have honored it with
gray-hairs, it is but like the hoary mustiness of many other things, the proper
livery or symptom of putrefaction.

As for those petty Novelties and Protean Modes that never pretend to soar
higher in their nature or use, than the orb of Civil conversation, they are
without the lines of our present consideration. These like the spawn of Frogs,
are sent out every spring, and brooded by an old wandering Hag, the ghost of an
indeterminate custom, or humor of keeping tack with the present fashions,
which like Almanacks or Insects, must change their shapes, and expire with the
year. These Butter-flies are not the things that I am now about to pursue,
though the poor Quaker thinks it as bad as the plague of Pharoahs flies; but
yet by their flaps and scuffles to drive them away, they have but stormed the
peevish swarm the more about our ears. It were well indeed if some wiser heads
knew how to antidate this piece of levity.

The matter of the proposed Question is a Ceremony, or gesture appertaining to
the external Worship of God, or at least, now on the Test, whether it so
appertain de jure, or no. And seeing it belongs not to Caesar, nor falls under
the cognizance of his Custom-Office, but appeal is made to an higher Court, of
Conscience, to Conscience we will go, where the Word of God is the sole Judge,
and infallible determiner of all such Questions as concern God, or another
world. And indeed it is the singular privilege and dignity of the Church, that
those unerring Oracles are committed to it, which may moderate and conclude
those endless wrangles and disputes, which the capricious humors, the
differing sentiments, and various interests of men dispose them to.

That God has discharged his Gospel Worship from the burdensome Law of
beggarly Ceremonies, is most evidently asserted in Scripture, and thankfully
accepted by all his true Worshippers. But therefore to abandon all Ceremonies,
would be at once to explode the Christian Religion, and banish the worship of
God out of the world; that is, all external worship, which cannot possibly
exist in actu exercito without the use of some such things as we have no better
name for than Ceremonies.

But of Ceremonies there are diverse kinds, some of a Civil, others of a
Religious use; with the first we have not to do at present. The Religious
Ceremonies are either of Humane or Divine Institution and Original. The Humane
are either Decretal or Traditional; the Decretal are such as on some pretense
or other have received the stamp of humane Authority or Injunction, of which
there are more than a good many; and in the rigid Imposition of which,
Church-tyranny does mainly consist. The Traditional are such as steal in, as
other fashions do, without the midwifry of any Authority, Humane or Divine, and
grow up with time into a custom or use, and are various according to the
variety of Times and Places; and ought to be called in question by those that
desire to preserve the Worship of God in its due chastity and integrity, and
that dare not miscere sacra prophanis.

Those of Divine Institution are either Judaical, or Evangelical. The Judaical
are such as were appointed of God, and calculated for the Church and Polity of
the Jews, and all dyed with it at the coming of the Gospel-ministration. The
Evangelical Ceremonies are either natural or instituted. The natural either
common or proper. The common natural ceremonies of Religion, are such as are
equally used in Civil and in Religious matters, as bowing the knee, uncovering
the head, and some other things which respect that civil order, reverence, and
decency, which ought to be observed in the external (and especially in the
public) worship of God. The proper are such as are not used but in the matters
of Religion. The Instituted ceremonies of the Gospel strictly and properly
taken in contradistinction to natural, and which are designed to be of
perpetual use, are only the two Sacraments, unless perhaps we may add the
Imposition of hands in Ordination. Though the Sacraments indeed are Ceremonies,
and somewhat more, viz. Seals of the New Covenant; yet in a large sense even
natural ceremonies, and matters of real decency and order, that is such things
as are ex natura rei, pro hic and nunc, necessary hereunto, and acceptable in
the Worship of God, are instituted too, i. e. commanded either implicitly or
explicitly; for nothing offered by man, especially in Worship, which is not in
obedience to God, by virtue of some command, is honorable or acceptable to
God; but what God has commanded, he has thereby instituted.

So then, the matter in hand will fall under the notion of a common, natural
ceremony of Religion, pertaining to the Decency or Reverence of Gods Worship in
the public Assemblies of his Saints. And what authority it brings from the
Supreme Lord and Lawgiver, we shall next enquire.

CAP. I. Of Gospel Worship.
DIvine Worship (says Mr. W. Bradshaw) is internal only, or external also.
Internal Worship is merely spiritual, and performed only within the temple of
man's heart, of which none are witnesses but God and a man's own conscience. All
the inward motions of the heart directed unto God, are parts of this Worship,
as Faith, Hope, Confidence, Love, Fear, and Joy in God, etc. which are all of
them diverse acts and parts of inward worship, in every one of which God is
honored. All which spring from the apprehension of our own wants, and Gods
infinite exeellency and goodness toward us. External Worship is an expressing
and setting forth of the internal, by outward signs and rites, by which, as by
outward bodily shadows and colors, the spiritual inward worship of God is made
visible and sensible to others.

The Internal Worship may be considered either as Habitual or Actual. As
Habitual, and so we are bound to worship God at all times, the obligation
holding both semper and ad semper. As Actual, and so we are bound to worship
him on all occasions, the circumstances whereof make it a duty so to do. The
External Worship is either public, domestic, or secret; in all which he ought
to be worshipped in spirit and in truth, as becomes his super-excellent
Greatness, and Infinite Holiness.

As God is the Origin and Fountain, so he ought to be the Center of all Honor
and Reverence, and the immediate and only object of all Religious worship and
adoration. And as Honor and Reverence is due to him at all times, so
especially in his Worship. I will be sanctified in all that come nigh me, Lev.
10.3. And the more public the Worship is, the more strictly all kinds of
Religious reverence are to be observed: And before all the people I will be
glorified. Ibid. But the more private the duties of Worship are, the greater
latitude is indulged in the external part, or signs of reverence and honor.
For though these outward expressions, compositions, or gestures of the body, be
the genuine effects of that inward reverence of the mind, and so due to the
divine Majesty; yet it is with special reference unto men, that others may see
how God is and ought to be feared of his Saints. So that such things which are
necessary in public worship, are not always so necessary in private or secret;
and that which a person finds to be most advantageous to the right performance
of his worship in secret, may not be so expedient in public, because there is
not the like reason in both.

Though Gospel Worship be (...), a Spiritual Worship, in opposition to the
irrational Idolatries of the Gentiles, and the Corporeal Sacrifices and
Services of the Jews; yet it is a worship of the Body, as well as of the Soul.
And though bodily exercises profits little, without true Godliness; yet while
we sojourn in the body, God expects that the body as well as soul and spirit be
offered up to him, and bear its part in his Worship. But of this more hereafter.

In Gods Worship there must be nothing tendered up to God, but what we have
(expressly or consequentally) warrant for from the Word of God; therefore to
worship him in body or mind, any otherwise than he has required, is to
adulterate, or profane his Worship, and to offer strange fire, and exposes the
Worshippers to his just indignation.

In the matters of Worship, the jealous God stands upon little things; that is,
what we, perhaps, call little, as modes and gestures, Lev. 10.2. Cap. 9.27.
and other circumstances, he calls great. Nadab and Abihu erred only in the
place from which they took their fire to offer, which should have been taken
from the Altar, where God himself first kindled the fire from Heaven, and we
know what this cost them. 2 Samuel 6.7. Number. 15.35.
Uzzah did but touch the Ark, and with an honest intention in the general, no
doubt; but for this he must die. For a poor man to gather a few sticks on the
Sabbath Day, might have seemed to us as no great matter; yet it was as much as
his life was worth, the sentence proceeding from God himself. 1 Samuel 6.19.
The Bethshemites did but look into the Ark, and they must pay for this, with
the lives of fifty thousand threescore and ten men.

Though God has allowed Christians a greater latitude in his Worship, and has
not left them bound under the yoke of Levitical Rites and servitude; yet far be
it from him to allow them to be irreverent in his Worship, this were to destroy
his Worship; for Worship and Reverence are almost synonimous terms, and so are
their opposites.

Matters of external order, decency, or reverence in the Worship of God, may
not be determined by the will of man, but by the Law of Scripture and Nature;
else what superstitions and novelties may not men introduce into the Worship of
God, under the displayed banners of pretended order, decency, or reverence, as
sad experience has been long witnessing?

CHAP. II. Contains a brief Exposition of the Sixteen first Verses of 1 Cor. 11.
Verse. 1. BE ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Wherein you have
these three things: 1. An Exhortation proposed. 2. The Duty limited. 3. An
Argument, or encouragement insinuated. The Exhortation is general, Be ye
followers of me. Which (perhaps) Janus-like, looks both forward and backward;
and is a transition and connection between this and the former Chapter. He was
last exhorting them to give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; even as he himself did please all men in
all things, not seeking his own profit, but the profit of many, that they may
be saved. And now, Be ye followers of me herein. Thus as it looks backward.
Next he minds them of their remembering him in all things, and keeping the
Ordinances, as he had delivered to them; wherein he praises them, ver. 2. yet
with a But, ver. 3. whereunto he very pertinently premises this Exhortation, Be
ye followers of me. Intimating that though they had followed him in some
things, for which he praises them; yet not in all; which made it necessary to
remind them of the duty, Be ye followers of me, of my Doctrine, and of my
Example, (...), Be ye imitaters of me, like me in all respects, as far as you
may, in spirit, in judgment, in practice and behavior. Not as Christ would
have his Disciples imitate the Scribes and Pharisees: Mat. 23.3.
All whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye after
their works, for they say and do not. But take ye me for your Pattern in
conversation, as well as in Doctrine.

But then, having stated their duty so largely, and foreseeing what ill use
they might make of it, he scarce stays to make a comma, but in the same breath
limits his words, and sets them their just bounds, even as I also am of Christ:
q.d. Be not so foolish as to imitate me in my Infirmities, as Alexander's
Parasite did him; and as many others have ridiculously done. This were indeed
to mock me, which vanity has given the word (...), its evil acceptance. Be
not so apish as to force your selves to an imitation of me in that which is
naturally and ideopathice, peculiar to me, as in my tone, cast of my eyes, etc.
these things are fitter for Monkeys or Parrots, than for rational souls. Be not
so wicked as to imitate me in my sins, wherein I transgress, or fail of my
duty, nor hope that my example shall justify you in such things. Make me your
Pattern, not your Idol; but follow me as far as I follow Christ. To the
Philippians he expresses it in more words: Those things which ye have both
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of peace
shall be with you, Phil. 4.9. And more particularly in the former verse:
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. In these words I imitate Christ; and in these be ye
followers of me. Thus is the duty limited. And then the argument or
encouragement is insinuated; in so following me you do indeed follow Christ; I
follow him, and you follow me, and so we follow him both. I am your Pattern but
at second hand, as I may make him a little more intelligible and imitable.
Christ the Original, I the Translation; Christ the Text, I the Comment. To
imitate Christ is both safe and honorable; and this is all I aim at. It is far
from my design to prosolyte you to a faction that you should be of Paul, or of
Apollos, or of Cephas; but to unite you all in the common center, Christ. Hence
I infer,

Inf. 1. That the Ministers of Christ ought to be examples of the believers in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, in all
things, wherein Christ is to be imitated; that they may be able boldly to say,
Be ye followers of us.

Inf. 2. That it is the duty of all Christian people to follow their faithful
Guides in all things, wherein they follow Christ, and no further.

Inf. 3. That in following the Doctrine and Examples of the Apostles, we follow
the Lord Jesus Christ. And are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.

Ver. 2. Now I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and
keep the Ordinances as I delivered them to you. Wherein you have these two
things expressed, 1. His Appellation, Brethren. 2. His Commendation; of which, 1.
The Form, I praise you. 2. The Matter, That you remember me in all things, and
keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you. The 3. is Latent and
concealed, which is his Design, viz. to make way for his intended reproofs. The
Appellation is full of sweetness and condescension. What an Honor is it, that
these poor converted Gentiles should be owned as Brethren, by so eminent an
Apostle of Jesus Christ: whereby he assures them of his love to them, his
imposing no unnecessary things upon them, or Lording it over them, but serving
in the same yoke of the Gospel with them, and their right to the same
inheritance with him? The Commendation is full of Honor, Comfort and Prudence.
Of Honor, as it came from an Apostle, and that not of the meanest note; and
through him, from the Lord Jesus Christ himself, the Fountain of Honor. Their
praise was of God, and not of man, full of Comfort, as it was a testimony and
assurance, that they were so far right in their way to Heaven, and by
Apostolical Approbation were confirmed in their hope. And full of Prudence, the
aim of it being to encourage them in what was good, to insinuate into their
affections; to make way for necessary and intended reproofs; and to remove the
prejudices which might enervate the power and success of his Reprehensions;
which seems to be his great design in it. In the Matter of his Commendations
are these two things, 1. That they remembered him in all things. Sometimes by
this Phrase, he signifies the remembrance of his wants, to supply them by their
Charity, as 1 These. 3.6. But this is not likely to be his sense here, if we
consider what he tells them 2 Cor. 11.7, and 9. though the Phrase indeed would
seem to bear it, (...) omnia mea, all my affairs and concerns, and how I shall
be provided for, and supplied in my Ministerial work. But I rather think that
this was least in his thoughts; but that they remembered him in his Doctrine,
Precepts, and Examples, what the had taught and left in charge with them to be
observed; and how he had carried himself among them. 2. That they had kept the
Ordinances as he had delivered them to them; that their remembrance was not
only notional, but practical. They had observed and held fast, not only the
Ordinances which he had delivered, but as he had delivered them (...), the
Traditions in general, whether written or unwritten; all things that concerned
them as a Christian Church, either in matters of Faith, Worship, Discipline, or
Manners.

Obj. But how can this large Commendation consist with this following
reprehensions?

Sol. 1. Either this must be restrained to the godly and sincere, who made it
their business to walk in all things according to Apostolical institution or
rules; or rather,

2. It must be understood in connection with the following exceptions. q. d. Ye
have done well, and deserve praise in all things; holding fast the Ordinances
of the Gospel for the main; only some few particulars I have to reprove you
for, and endeavor to set you right in. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That it is the duty and wisdom of all Christians, but especially of
Ministers, to palliate their reproofs with all gentleness and deserved
Commendations.

Inf. 2. That all the people of God, however dignified or distinguished by God
or man, are Brethren.

Inf. 3. That all Apostolical Precepts and Traditions ought to be remembered and
kept entire, according to their primitive Institution.

Ver. 3. But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ, and
that the head of the Woman is the Man, and the head of Christ, is God. But; Now
came his exceptions to his former general Commendations, q. d. I would gladly
praise you in all things as far as ye are praiseworthy; But there are some
things which I cannot pass without a reproof. I would have you know. Here he
implicitly reproves their ignorance, and yet palliates the reproof, by laying
the charge as low as possible he could. He does not condemn them of
presumption, or contempt, or wilful irreverence; but of weakness, and want of
better instruction. Therefore he wisely begins to rectify them in the
foundation of their error, and to set them right as to their Judgments; knowing
that it is in vain to urge a reproof upon the Conscience, till the Judgment be
informed. He does not fall rudely upon them with hard words, or harder blows,
to fright or club them into Conformity, but draws them with the Cords of a man,
in that rational way, which is proper for rational Creatures. Does not begin
with the Affections, which is the way of the Devil and of the Beast; but with
the Judgment, which is the surer way to fix them in what he is about to offer
to them. That the head of every man is Christ, (...), which denotes not the
species, but the Sex; the Man spoken in opposition to the Woman; as both the
word and the following Antithesis, do undeniably evince: Of every man, not
restraining it to Christian men, as some do; but more generally, because all
men, both in the Church and out of the Church, are put under this head Christ;
though he be not head alike unto all. (...), both these terms must be
explained, and the last first. Christ, not as God (though so he be the head,
not only of every man, but of every Creature) for this would not show that
order of Subjection, or sacred Hierarchy (if I may so speak) which God has
placed in the mystical Body; which is the thing the Apostle intends: nor can it
be taken so in the next use of the word in the same Verse; nor merely as Man,
for so he neither performed any of his Offices, nor had all things put by the
Father in subjection under him. But as Mediator, under which consideration,
Relation and Capacity, the whole concern of the new Covenant is devolved upon
him. The Head, (...). This cannot be taken properly, but tropologically: and so
he is the Head, either to every man in general, or in special, to every man
that is related to him, as a member of his mystical body. In general, he is the
head of every man. 1. In respect of Excellency and Dignity. Man, in respect of
that Image, in which he was made, is the most excellent of all Gods sublunary
Creatures. And Man, in respect of his Sex, more excellent than Woman; Psalm. 45
2.
but Christ the most excellent of all men, Thou art fairer than the Children of
men. 2. In respect of Inspection. The head is that which looks after, and
provides for every part, and which manages all the concerns of the whole body;
so does Christ inspect all the affairs, counsels and transactions of the
Children of men. 3. In respect of Domination. It is he that governs and rules
all, who is exalted above all Principalites and Powers; and has the Government
on his shoulders, both in his Political and Spiritual Kingdom. Thus he is the
Head of every man in general. In special, he is the Head of every man that is
related to him, as a Member of his mystical Body; and that 1. In respect of
Primogeniture. He is the firstborn among many Brethren. 2. In respect of
Influence, both of vitality and activity, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. All the influences of
Wisdom and Grace are from him 3. In respect of special Providence and Regency.
It is he that fore-sees, provides and disposes of all, for the good, and
according to the state and capacity of every member in his body.

Quest. But why is he said to be the Head of every man? Is he not the Head of
the Woman too, who are equally members of his body without, any distinction of
Sex?

Ans. The Answer is easy. He is indeed the Head of his Church, which is his
body, Ephesians. 5.23. Colos. 1.18. in which the Woman is comprehended, as well as
the Man. But (as I said) the Apostle is here showing the order of the
Superiority and Inferiority, which God has instituted in that (...), the Frame
or Fabric of the mystical body, wherein all the parts are sitly joined
together and compacted in their several places and spears; so that in respect
of order, Christ is the immediate Head of the Man, and Man the immediate Head
of the Woman; but mediately or immediately, Christ is the Head of both. And the
Head of the Woman is the Man. By this time I presume there can be no great knot
to untie here. We have another such Proposition as this, Ephesians. 5.23. The Husband
is the Head of the Wife.

Q. Now perhaps some one or other may think it worth his while to demand,
Whether Man or Woman in the Text, be just the same as Husband and Wife here?

Ans. In the original indeed, the words are the same in both places, Man and
Woman; but here translated Husband and Wife, as in this place indeed it ought
to be, and frequently elsewhere it is used; but not in our present Text, where
it is evident the Apostle speaks more generally of the Sex, not of the
Relation; else must the Virgins and the Widows be exempted, and that not only
here, but in all the following discourse, which cannot be. And the Head of
Christ is God. We are now come to the head of the Apostles Climax, the Fountain
and Original of all Dignity and Superintendency, which is God; that is, the
Father. Not God essential, for so he cannot be the Head of Christ as Mediator;
for then he must be Head to himself, which is absurd, but God Personal; and so
Christ as Mediator is subject to the Father, My Father is greater than I, John
14.28.

Quest. But if God the Father be Head of Christ as Mediator, how shall we
understand that of the Apostle Chap. 15.28. And when all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put
all things under him, that God may be all in all? Here he speaks as if he were
not yet subject to him, nor to be, till he has delivered up the Kingdom to him.

Ans. I confess this is a knot that has busied many wiser heads than mine; but
yet we need not take it for a Gordian-knot: for the Apostle does not deny that
Christ, as Mediator, is subject to the Father, as he that is sent and deputed
is (eatenus) inferior to him that sent and deputed him. But when he says, the
Son shall be subject unto him that put all things under him; it is no more but
this: He shall then lay aside his Mediatory Office, and give up his Commission
unto the Father, by virtue of which all power was given him both in Heaven and
in Earth, Matthew. 28.18. that he should reign as it were a vicarious King in the
midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110.1, 2. as he had said before, v. 24. He shall
deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. It is as when a King shall send forth his
Son into any of his Provinces with a Plenipotentiary power to suppress a
Company of Rebels, and to defend his good Subjects; and so to reign with full
power as Lord and King over them; but when the Rebellion is suppressed, and all
things secured, he is to return and deliver up this Commission to his Father,
from whom he received it. This is the case here. It Is true, the Father rules
now, but it is by the Son; but then this kind of Government, which is on the
Sons shoulders, shall be laid aside. And this is the Subjection the Apostle
here speaks of. Nor does this deny the Eternity of Christ's Kingdom. As the
Father now reigns by the Son, so the Son shall reign for ever with the Father,
but after another manner than now, That God may be all in all. There shall then
be no more need of a Mediator, but the Children of God shall have immediate
access to their Father, and immediate fruition of him. Now they see him in the
face of Jesus Christ, but then face to face. Christ as God, shall reign
eternally with the Father and the Holy Spirit. Christ as man, shall be as he
is, and ever from his first incarnation, was subject to him. Christ as Mediator
or Viceroy shall then cease to be. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That the greatest Commendations that are due to any Church here in
this world, may justly admit of some But's.

Inf. 2. That plain instruction is the surest way to a necessary Reformation.

Inf. 3. That God has instituted a decent order of superiority and inferiority
in the mystical body of Christ, which ought to be perpetually observed, and
kept inviolate.

Ver. 4. Every man praying or prophesying having his head covered, dishonors
his head. Now he comes more close to the business, of which he charges them.
Their guilt is implied, that they did not so pray and prophecy. The sin is
aggravated in this, That it was a dishonouring of their head. Every man (...).
The Sex, in contradistinction to the Woman, as in the former verse: Praying or
Prophesying. Of Prophesying there are these two kinds observed in Scripture. 1.
The revealing of secret and hidden things, either past, present, or to come, by
some extraordinary inspiration of the Spirit of God. 2. The ordinary preaching
of the Gospel, by such as are lawfully deputed thereunto, 1 Cor. 13.9. Chap.
14.3. etc. And in this sense especially we are to take it here; because that
which the Apostle in this place intends, must be something that is perpetual
and universal to all the Churches; and therefore joined with praying; which two
comprehend all the other Acts of Gods solemn public worship, as being the
principal parts of it. Praying or Prophesying, that is, either immediately or
mediately, comprehending both Speakers and Hearers; for the whole worship is
the common and united act of the whole Congregation. All are said to pray, when
but one speaks; so all prophecy, though only one be the Speaker. On this
account the Woman is put among them that prophecy, ver. 5. and yet we know, the
Woman was not permitted to speak in the Church, Chap. 14.34, 35. So then, Every
man praying or prophesying, is as much as to say, every man that is engaged in
the public worship of God, or any part of it; having his head covered, (...),
having [something] on his head; that is, an ordinary artificial Covering, more
than necessity, on the account of infirmities, does require. Which exception
must be allowed, as you may hear more hereafter; dishonors his head, (...),
shameth and casts a slight or reproach upon his head. And here lies all the
difficulty of this verse, viz. what we are to understand by his head. Some
would have it to be his head natural or proper, which is spoken of just before,
and ought to be uncovered in praying and prophesying; and so the dishonouring
is but to a man's self. But others with much better reason say, it must be the
Head mystical or figurative, spoken of in the precedent verse, which is Christ;
and so the dishonor reflects higher. And because the pinch of the Question
lies in this, I shall endeavor the more to clear the truth of it. 1. If a man's
being covered in the time of public worship, did only reflect dishonor upon
his own head, and no one else concerned in it but himself; it would have been
too mean a thing for the Apostle to have busied himself in it; to have appeared
with such a reproof, and to have entered it in sacred Writ. Were not God
interessed in the case, it would be but a profane thing, and unworthy of the
Divine Records. Therefore certainly there is some one more than man concerned
in this Dishonor. 2. What tolerable reason can there be given of this Aphorism
in the former verse, where he lays down this for a maxim, The head of every man
is Christ, and the head of the Woman is the Man, and the head of Christ is God;
if it be not to show us, as with a finger: what we are to understand by the
head of the man here; for that is the position which he proceeds on, and
improves in the following Discourse, and here fetches his Argument from? It Is a
dishonor to Christ, who is the head of the man. The truth is, I know not where
to seek a fuller and clearer Syllegism in all the Book of God, than this. The
head of every man is Christ; Every man that prays or prophesyeth with his
head coverd, dishonors his head. Erg. I wonder what Sophistry can fairly
avoid the Conclusion, viz. He that prays or prophesyeth with his head
covered, dishonors Christ. 3. The Relative (...), which is joined with
(...), will contribute much to the elucidation of the sense. It is not made by
the Possessive (...) caput suum, but by the Relative (...) ipsins, and that in
the Genitive; which is as much as to say, he dishonors him, that is, the
head of him; who, as he had said just before, is Christ. 4. It would appear
from the Antithesis in the next verse, But every Woman that prays or
prophesyeth with her head uncoverd, dishonors her head. Whom can we
reasonably understand here by her head on whom the dishonor is reflected, but
the man, who he said, is the head of the Woman? For the covering of the head
was a token of subjection, as will appear by several places of Scripture; for
which I refer you to the seventh verse. Therefore the uncovering of the head is
virtually and symbolically a denying of that subjection, which is a great
dishonor to him, whom the God of Nature and Order has made her head. And the
truth is, I wonder to see the learned Piscator of another mind. Now if her
head, ver. 5. must be expounded by ver. 3. so must his head too, ver. 4. Hence
I infer,

Inf. 1. That Praying and Preaching are the great Gospel Ordinances which
comprehend all other parts of Divine Worship.

Inf. 2. That for a man to have his head covered, while engaged in the solemn
public Worship of God, is a dishonor to Christ his Head.

Ver. 5. But every woman that prays or prophesyeth with her head uncovered,
dishonors her head; for that is even all one, as if she were shaven. Here we
have the duty of the Woman, which lies diametrically opposite to that of the
Man. For the different Sexs, are provided different Rules of Decency. That
which is comely and honorable in one, is as unseemly and shameful in the
other. Every Woman, that is, in the public Congregation, of which he here
discourses; that prays or prophesyeth: This cannot be understood of the
extraordinary gifts of Prayer or Prophecy, which some very few of that Sex had
attained unto, as Anna, Mary, the four Daughters of Philip; and in the Old
Testament, Miriam, and Deborah, and Huldah, etc. for then by the same reason we
must restrain it to the extraordinary Prophets of the Men in the precedent
verse; and so this Rule of Decency both for the Man and the Woman, must cease
with the cessation of these extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; and so the
occasion would have been too slender for so many words, and so sharp a rebuke
of so great an Apostle. Wherefore we must conclude, that the Apostle intended a
common Rule of Decency for ordinary Worship, as the Basis, or Reason stated,
ver. 3. is sufficient to evince. With her head uncovered. That is, without that
ordinary covering, which she uses at other times, as her Age, Place, Condition,
Custom of the Country, or the Climate does require. Dishonors her head. That
is, the Man, which ver. 3. was said, (sensu pelitico) to be her head; for
should we take it for her head simply and properly, the dishonor would be to
her self. But it is certain, the dishonor reflects primarily and immediately
on the Man, under whose Authority God and Nature has put the Woman in
subjection, and made the covering of the head, a token or badg of her
inferiority and subjection, as appears by the Apostles discourse here, and of
which, more below. So that in uncovering her head, she casts off that Symbol of
her subjection, and does in effect deny the Man's Authority and Dominion. Whom
then does she dishonor, but the Man; while she thus exalts her self? As the
Child is said to dishonor his Father in denying him due Reverence. It Is true,
it is a sinful and shameful thing for any one to deny the honor that is due to
a Superior, the shame reflects upon himself; and so it does upon the Woman in
this case. But it is the Man that is the immediate object of the dishonor,
though she be the Subject of it. Therefore it seems not to me, to be rational
to think, that the Apostle intends to tell us how she dishonours herself, when
he says, she dishonors her head. Hence then I measure back by the same line
of Reason, that it must also be Christ, the political or mystical head of the
Man, that is to be understood in the former verse. Though it is true also, that
with reference to this Symbol of Authority or Subjection, that is between the
Man and the Woman, the Man seems to degrade himself, and to forfeit his Honor
with the Woman, by having his head covered, and so he dishonours himself. But
this is not what the Apostle aims at. For that is even all one, as if she were
shaven. If she be uncovered of her ordinary artificial covering, and therein
change modes with the Man, and do that which is the Man's proper duty to do; she
were even as good put away her natural covering too, and be clipped or shaven, as
the Man is; else she looks like some odd monstrous thing, which is neither Man
nor Woman. The assumption we have in the next verse. Hence I infer.

Inf. 1. That for a Woman to habit or attire her self like a Man, is a sin; and
vice versa.

Inf. 2. That for a Woman to have her head uncovered in the solemn public
Worship of God, is a dishonor to the Man, whom God has made to be her Head.

Ver, 6. For if the Woman be not covered, let her also be shorn; but if it be a
shame for a Woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. Here by the way, I
observe, That the Apostle makes a clear distinction between the Natural and
Actificial Covering; and that when he speaks of covering or uncovering the
head, he intends only the artificial covering, which is various, according to
the Countries or Climates men live in; and therefore opposes it here to shaving
off the hair, which is the covering which nature has provided; and that nature
needs. This distinction may be of use hereafter. The main business of this
verse, is to state his Argument a turpi and indecoro, thus. If it be a shame
for a Woman to be shorn or shaven, it is a shame to be uncovered in the Worship
of God; But it is a shame for a Woman to be shorn or shaven: Erg. The Major he
had proved in the former verse, (...), for that is even all one, as if she were
shaven. It is as shameful for the Woman to be uncovered, as it would be to be
shaven or shorn. And if you will not take the Apostles word for this (which yet
I should take for a greater matter) his Reason is easily understood; because in
the one as well as in the other, the Woman transgresses the Rules of her Sex,
and assumes that which is peculiar to the Man; and so dishonours him whom God
has made to be her head, by casting off the token of her due subjection and
inferiority to him. For if she change habits and modes with the Man in one
thing, she may as lawfully do it in another. The Minor he proves in the
following verses from the Law of God, the Law of Nature, and the Law of
Ecclesiastical Custom. Some busy Critic or other, perhaps, may ask me, Why
the Apostle uses both these words here, (...), shorn or shaven, and whether
they be exegetical serving only to explain one another; I say no; because they
signify two things. The one is to clip or shear, as men do with Sizzars; the
other to shave as with a Rasor. By these two words then he expresses both the
usual ways of taking off the hair, either from the head or face. This then may
serve to aggravate the case, q. d. For a Woman to be uncovered, and
consequently for a man to be covered in the sacred actions of Gods Worship, is
as shameful a thing, as for a Woman to be trimmed head and face with Sizzars or
Rasor, as a man is. Another Question will be, On whom this shame reflects? And
it is quickly answered: As it is a sin in general, it reflects many ways. There
is no sin but reflects shame and guilt upon the sinner; so the Woman shames her
self, and shames her Sex too; yea, every sin reflects dishonor upon God,
against whom it is committed, and whose Law is thereby transgressed. But that
which we have to enquire, is, Who the the immediate Object of this shame or
dishonor is? and when I have asked one Question more, a Child shall answer
this. When the Master is deposed, and made to serve, and the Servant rules;
when the Servant shall sit down, and the Master wait, Who is that is
dishonored, the Servant or the Master? So then, if the Woman be not covered,
let her also be shorn; or (if you will give me leave to use the English
Proverb, which is the nearest of any that I know to the case) Let her wear the
Breeches too; which (though it would be an ugly sight, and very ill become the
Woman, yet) every one will say, is a disgrace to the Man. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That a breach of the Law of Decency in one part of it, is
interpretatively a breach of the whole.

Inf. 2. That it is a good way to aggravate such sins, as we look upon as
small, with the shameful Consequences of them.

Ver. 7. For a Man indeed ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the
Image and Glory of God; but the Woman is the Glory of the Man. Here the Apostle
asserts it to be the Man's duty to be uncovered. In what rank or file of Duties
soever any one may place it, though perhaps among the Minores, yet sure it must
be too great a presumption to disband it quite, or set it any where beneath the
Title and Dignity of a Duty. I confess, I cannot but smile at the quaint
Criticism of the Reverend Piscator here, Piscat. sckol. in lac.
upon the word (...) velare, which he says, is more than tegere or operire; and
therefore fancies that the Covering, which is here forbidden to the Man, is
some odd kind of Dress, which veils or mopps up his head, and face and all; but
as for any other covering, as Hat, or Cap, or Bonnet, etc. which does not hide
the face, he thinks this Text has no quarrel with. But (saving the reverence
of so learned and good a Servant of Christ) I must needs reply, 1. I know not
among what sort of people this blind fashion was ever in use, unless it were
the Pharisaei Mertarii; who (they say) to advance the esteem of their Humility
and Penitence, had their Caps made like a Mortar, covering face and all, as
though they were going to pay their last Devotions at a Gallows. But among the
Cerinthians, I never heard of any that did affect that antic garb; therefore
cannot in reason imagine, that the Apostle should go about to reprove it in
them. 2. This verse must be expounded by verse 4. as Piscator himself
confesses, where the word (...) is not used, but (...), to wear any thing upon
the head; which Periphrasis he seems to choose on purpose, that it might reach
all kinds of acquired Coverings, and to anticipate all quarrels about it. 3.
What is here forbidden to the Man, is commanded to the Woman; but if this be
the kind of Covering that is forbidden to the one, and commanded to the other,
then all those Women sin, that dare once show their faces in the public
Congregations without a veil over them; and so those are in good Condition that
wear Hoods, provided they pull them down over their eyes (which it may be, some
prudently do for the help of their Devotion, or toprevent the ensnaring of
others eyes) but woe be to those poor Country-women, whose Condition in the
world allows them but a Hat; or, it may be, not so much to cover their heads
with. But that it is the duty of the Woman so to blindfold her self, I think
the Doctor himself would not affirm. For as much as he is the Image and Glory
of God. Having asserted the Duty, he now gives the ground or reason of it. The
Image of God, at least, as he was at first created, and therein his Glory, or
the Image of his Glory. That which God glories in, say some, as the Masterpiece
of his Creation. But this exposition renders not the reason of the Proposition.
Wherefore the sense must be thus; God has made Man the Image of his Glory to
the Woman, set him as it were in his stead, to represent his Authority; as on
the same account Rulers and Judges are called Gods. God has invested them with
his Authority, to rule as Deputies for him over others; so God has given Man
his power to rule over the Woman, and set him in some respects, in the place of
God to her, as Moses was to Aaron in another case, Exodus 4.16. The Glory of God
is his infinite superexcellency and superintendency over all his Creatures; and
Man, in respect of that pre-eminence and superiority which God has given him
over the Woman, is she (...) the Image or Resemblance of this Glory of God.
Therefore she ought to be coverd in token of her subjection to the Man, and in
obedience to that God who has made them both: but the Man ought to be
uncovered, because he ows no subjection to her. But the Woman is the Glory of
the Man; or that which the Man has to glory in; both in respect of her
Creation; the matter of it being part of the body of Man, and the end of it
made for Man, as in the next verses; and in respect of her subjection to Man,
as Children are said to be the Glory of their Parents, and Subjects the Glory
of their Prince.

Ob. But now the next Question ought to be, How came this covering of the head
to be a token of subjection? and if it be so, why should not the Man be covered
too, in token of subjection to his head Christ?

Sol. This indeed is two Questions at once. I shall begin with the first, How
this covering of the head, became a token of subjection?

1. We need not be very inquisitive how it came to be so, if we can prove from
the Scripture that it is so; whether it were by Divine appointment or natural
instinct, it is all one as to the case in hand.

2. For my own part, I think it was not so in the state of Innocence; but it
was sin and shame, as the occasion, that brought it into the world. It Is true,
God ought to have been worshipped in Innocence, and the Woman was even then
inferior to the Man; but there was then no need nor use of veils, till by the
fall, sin and shame required it.

3. That the Woman was put in greater subjection to the Man after the fall,
than she was before, is evident from Genesis 3.16. Thy desire shall be to thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee; which was more than ever he had said
before. And in testimony of this subjection, it is rational to conclude, that
there was some token given perpetually to be observed; that the Woman might
always be put in remembrance of her sin, in disobeying her Maker, and ensnaring
the Man, and so pulling the yoke upon her own neck.

4. That this token of having the head covered, was of very early use in the
world, we have several intimations in Scripture, Genesis 20.16. Behold he is to
thee a covering of the eyes; which is a proverbial speech, alluding to the
known Custom which was then among the Women. Thus Abimelech reproves Sarah.
The same is this; He is thy Husband unto whom thou owe thy self, and under
whose Protection thou should have hid thy self, as a Subject under the wing
of her Sovereign. So Genesis 24.65. when Rebekkah came to meet Isaac, she throws
on her veil, in token of her subjection to him, as well as of her modesty. But
by the Apostles discourse, and argumentation all along these verses, we are now
treating of, it is most evident, that the very end and signification of this
Ceremony, is to testify the Woman's subjection and inferiority to the Man, ver.
3, 6, 7, 10. So then the covering of the head is, and ought to be the token of
her subjection.

The other Question, or part of the Question, is, Why should not the Man be
covered too, in token of his subjection to his head Christ? To which I answer,

1. We never find that God or Nature did so appoint the Man to signify his
subjection to Christ by such a Ceremony; therefore to presume upon it without
any warrant, is Superstition.

2. This token of covering the head, is ordained to signify the subjection and
reverence that is due from the Woman to the Man; and therefore unworthy to be
used as a token of that which man ows to God. Though a universal subjection of
soul and body be due to God, and all possible Reverence and Devotion, yet it
must be expressed by such outward tokens as God appoints. Man is Gods glory, the
Woman is Man's; but gloria Dei revelanda est, gloria autem hominis occultanda,
velari ergo debet mulier, non vir. Gods Glory must be open and revealed, but
man's Glory (especially having forseited it by harkening to the Woman) must be
covered and veiled; therefore the Woman ought to be covered, not the Man.

3. Should the same Symbol of reverence and subjection be observed by the one,
as by the other, it would be a Confusion; the series and order of this
Subordination would not be discerned; therefore as the immediate Object of this
veneration is different, and as the Subject is different too, in respect of Sex
and Degree, so is the sign or Symbol.

Quer. And here, perhaps, some body or other may start another Query; Whether
the Woman ought not to worship God in the Congregation as well as the Man?

Sol. I know nothing that ever I said to the contrary: They ought to worship
God with the same internal, spiritual religious Devotion; the common Object of
Divine worship being the same to both; but yet with this difference of external
habit, which relates immediately to the Man, who is her head, and that for the
reasons already given, and also for those that follow. The covering of the head
in general denotes guilt and shame, as well as subjection; and therefore
appointed to the Woman, who was first in the Transgression. The uncovering of
the head, signifies Power and Rule, and therefore appointed to the Man. But
observe (to prevent another Quarrel) this is only in sacris, between God and
Man, though it be otherwise (at least in some Countries, and among some people)
in civilibus, between man and man.

To conclude this verse then, we have here the Apostles Argument (both for the
Man's being uncovered, and the VVomans being covered; for what proves one,
proves both) from the Creation in General. The Man is the Image and Glory of
God, the Woman the Image and Glory of the Man; therefore this difference in
external habit or attire, ought to be observed, when they appear before their
Maker to worship him.

Ob. Yet once more; Was not the Woman made in the Image of God, as well as
the Man?

Ans. Yes, as to the internal Qualities of her soul, as Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness, but with this difference;

1. The Man is thus formed of God immediately, the Woman mediately of the Man;
and therefore may truly be called the Image of the Man.

2. The Man is the more principal and perfect Image of God; on which account
the Woman is called the weaker Vessel.

3. And which is most to the purpose. The Man was made in the Image of Gods
Superintendency and Dominion; Vir operiens caput, non seipsum modo, sed ctiam
Deum ded^corat. Synop. in loc.
but so was not the Woman. It Is true, she shares in the Dominion over the
Creatures, but it is with, and by, and under the Man. Wherefore God having
committed this Authority unto the Man, and appointed him the sign and token of
it, he ought to defend it; nor may he resign it to any other, till by Death he
resign up soul and all to him that gave it; and to do otherwise, is Treason
against the King of Heaven. The further prosecution of this Argument a
creatione follows, in the next verses. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That God has given the Man Power and Authority over the Woman, which
he ought prudently and faithfully to preserve.

2. That the subjection and obedience of the Woman to the Man, is the Man's
natural Right and Glory, and the loss of it his shame.

Inf. 3. That the reason of the Man's being uncovered, and of the Woman's being
covered in sacred actions, is founded on that order of Superiority and
inferiority, which God has by Creation established in them.

Inf. 4. That for men to violate the Law of their Creation, is a dishonor to
their Creator.

Ver. 8. For the Man is not of the Woman; but the Woman of the Man. In this he
pursues and amplifies his former Argument from the Order and Law of the
Creation. First the Man, then the Woman; and of the Man was the Woman. So that
here are two things to prove the superiority of the Man, and the subjection of
the Woman. 1. The priority of Creation; He was her Senior in the world, and
therefore ought to bear rule over her. 2. The fundamentality of her being, was
in the Man; and that both as to matter and substantial form. The Woman is of
the Man. The whole humane nature was created in Man, and did exist in him
without the Woman, and before she was, Of this living Man, God takes a living
part, and forms the living Woman. All that Parents conveigh in the act of
Generation ( viz Matter and Form) to their Children, did God separate (though
in another and miraculous manner) from the Man, to form the Woman of. It is not
necessary here to meddle with that Controversy concerning the original of the
rational Soul; whether it be propagated as the souls of other Animals are, or
immediately created, or whether it be in a middle way between both, or
partaking of both, as some will have it. This is enough to move the Apostles
assumption, That the Man being first created, and of him the Woman; therefore
he ought to have the pre-eminence. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That priority of being is a natural privilege, which claims Reverence
and Respect.

Inf. 2. That to whom we any way owe our Beings, we owe our Obedience.

Ver. 9. Neither was the Man created for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man.
Here he carrys on his Amplification from the end of the Creation. 'Twas for the
Man's sake that the Woman had her Being, that she might be a help meet for him;
but that which is the end, whereunto the means is appointed, is more excellent
than the means; therefore so is the Man more excellent, and ought always to be
acknowledged a superior to the Woman. Thus he reasons both from the order and
the end of the Creation, That the Woman ought to be covered in the worship of
God, and the Man to be uncovered; for that is the Proposition he is still
prosecuting. And hitherto he has managed his Argument from the first
institution of things, which is the same Method he takes again in this Chap.
where he reproves them for their profane abuse of the Lords Supper, from verse.
18. to the end; where after he had laid open their sin, he labors to set them
right, by reducing them to the first Institution of it, ver. 23. So you see he
has done here; when he would reconcileate that Reverence and Honor to the
Worship of God, and that decency and order among the Worshippers, which began
to be violated, he pleads with them from the first Institutions of the God of
Nature. Hence I infer.

Inf. 1. That the Woman, that is not according to her place and condition in
the World, useful unto Man, does not answer the end of her Creation.

Inf. 2. That for the Woman to exercise Authority or Dominion over the Man, is
wickedly to rebel against the Laws of her Maker; and to pervert the very end
and design of her Being.

If any peevish Frop should be ready now to cry Treason, Treason; as if I had
denied unto Queens and Princesses in Kingdoms or Commonwealths, or unto
Mistresses in Families, any of their just right of Royal or Despotical Rule and
Government over their Subjects and Servants: I shall stop his mouth with this;
That he understands not the Question. Where the Providence of God casts the
right of Civil or Domestic Government upon the hands of a Woman, as often it
does, she not only may, but ought to manage that Authority and Trust, according
to her place and capacity, as amply and as freely, as if it were in the hands
of a man. For she does not thus rule by the virtue of her Sex, but by virtue of
that power, which by the wheel of Gods Providence, is lawfully and justly come
into her hands; not as she is a Woman, but as she now stands in the place of a
Man, to those that are under her; or as she is empowered and allowed by the
Man, under whom she is so to do. But a few words are enough for so trifling an
Objection.

Ver. 10. For this cause ought the Woman to have power on her head, because of
the Angels. This verse may look either forward or backward, or ( Janus-like)
both ways. For this cause, that is, either the cause now already assigned; and
so it is but the Conclusion of his former Argument, and belongs to it: or for
this cause, which now follows; and so it is but his transition to another
medium for the proof of the same thing. Ought the Woman to have power on her
head; (...) debet, the same which was said before, ver. 7. concerning the Man;
and which makes it to be duty. So ought: therefore if she do otherwise, she
sins. To have power on her head. To obtain the true sense of this Phrase, we
must examine these two words, Power and Head. Power, this may be taken
figuratively or properly; figuratively by a Metonymy, for the sign of Power,
not her own; but that power, which the Man has over her. This figure is common
in Scripture, Ezekiel. 7.27. The Princes shall be cleathed with desolation, i. e.
with Sackcloth, the badg and token of Desolation. So here the power, that is,
the veil or covering, the token of the Man's Power, and of her Subjection.
Besides, it is observed, that the word which the Hebrews use for a veil, (...)
Cant. 5.7. and Isa. 3.23. springs from a root that signifies to have Power and
Authority; on which account, some translated (...) in the Text, not power, but
a veil; as also in some Versions it is sound. Or else Power may be taken
properly and without a figure; but then it must be passively, not that Power
which she exercises; but the power which she is under. Her head. this also we
may take either with a figure, or without. With a figure, and so her head is
the Man, as ver. 3. and then the sense is thus. She ought to have, that is,
acknowledge, Vid. synops. in loc.
that the power of ruling and governing her, is in the Man. Or without a
figure, her own proper head; and then the Power must be taken for the covering
or sign of that power, under which she is. So that when all is done, the sense
is the same; viz. she ought to acknowledge the Man's Power or Dominion, under
which God has set her; and in token of it, to have her head covered. Because
of the Angels. Here we have another Medium to prove his Assertion by. But
before we improve it Argumentatively, we must first explain it. And a great
pother is made by Expositors, what we were best to understand by the Angels
here. Some will have it literally, and others will cast a figure for it. Of
those that will have it literally, some are for the good Angels, others for the
bad; those that are for the good Angels, think the Apostle argues thus,

1. Those blessed Angels are our Superiors, both by the order of their
Creation, and the Superexcellency of their Nature; therefore both man and
Christ too, as Man, is said to be made a little lower than the Angels, Heb.
2.7, and 9. so that, if the Argument of Priority and Superiority, hold good
with reference to the Man, as he had reasoned before; the same Argument is good
still, to prove the same Reverence to be due, in respect of the Angels, and
that both from the Man, and from the Woman; because the Angels are before and
superior to them both, though not with the same external sign or token of the
Reverence; God having made the token of Man's Reverence, the uncovering of the
head (for this uncovering of the head, is not only a token of his power over
his Inferior, but of his Subjection to his Superior) and the covering of the
head, the token of the Woman's Reverence, as was said before.

Ob. But is not this to patronize an (...), worshipping of Angels?

Ans. No more than the other did patronize an (...), or worshipping of the Man.
A civil Reverence and Homage is due to Creatures, which are our Superiors, at
all times; nor ought to be neglected, when we come before God in sacred things.
Though God be the alone Object of religious Worship and Adoration, yet we must
not be rude and barbarous toward others; this would reflect dishonor upon God
himself; for Superiority and Authority is a Ray of the Divine Majesty, shining
in the Creature; and therefore on this account ought to be acknowledged by us.

2. These blessed Angels are our Inspectors, especially in the actions of
Divine Worship; they are present, as Witnesses to take notice of the Disorders
and Indecencies of the Worshippers, as well as to guard and defend them in
their Worship. And this, they say, was one signification of the Cherubim-work
in the Temple; so the Argument runs thus. If the Woman ought to be covered, to
testify her Reverence and Subjection to the Man, much more ought she to have
regard to the holy Angels, who are always present in the Assemblies of the
Saints, and ought to be had in Reverence, both for their own glory, and as they
are appointed of God to this Office, and set as Inspectors or Overseers of his
Worship.

3. These blessed Angels are our Examples and Patterns, Isa. 6.2. The Seraphims
were represented in the vision of the Lord with six wings; with two of which
they covered their faces, in Testimony of their Reverence and Subjection to
their Lord. But what that this was for our Example any otherwise than in
general to give our Superiors, and especially to God, that Honor and Reverence
that is due, I think will be somewhat hard to prove.

Those that will have it to be the bad Angels, sense it thus: When the Sons of
God come to present themselves before the Lord, Satan, by his evil Angels, is
wont to come among them, Job 1.6. who is always prompting to evil, and taking
all occasions to that end; therefore the Women ought to be veiled, that they
may not by their open beauty, be occasions of lust, or of wanton glances, from
those whose eyes are (...), full of adultery, or of the Adulteress; and so, as
it were turn the house of God into a Brothel-house. It Is true, it is an horible,
heathenish, shameful wickedness for any Woman to attire her self so, in any
respect, either by covering or uncovering, as that she may minister fuel to the
Lusts of others, and a Demonstration it is of a Woman that values not the
Reputation of her modesty. I would there were not too much of this, even among
some of the Professors of this wanton, lascivious Age. I do not censure every
thing that may accidentally feed lust in others; for where but reigns, it will
take occasion, where there is no just occasion given; but that which does
properly give occasion to lustful thoughts or motions, and may be prevented.
But that the Apostle should intend this sort of Angels here, seems not very
probable; because then, it is likely, he would have called them Devils or evil
Angels, as they are always called by some such name, when they are spoken of in
Scripture, as Instruments of evil.

Those that will rather take the word figuratively, refer it either to Men, or
to God himself.

1. To Men, so indeed we find the word often used for the Priests and Prophets
of the Lord, the Governors of the Church, and Preachers of the Gospel, Mal.
2.7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, for he is the Messenger (or
the Angel) of the Lord of Hosts. So Chap. 3.1. John the Baptist is called the
Messenger, or the Angel (for it is the same word) sent to prepare the way of
the Lord. And Christ himself, the Messenger, or Angel of the Covenant, Eccles.
5.6. Neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an error; that is, before
the Priest, who is to take cognizance of thy vows. So Rev. 2. and 3. the
Ministers and Governors of the seven Churches of Asia, are called the Angels
of those Churches: and then the Argument will run thus. If the Woman be bound
to pay her Reverence to the Man in general, much more to those men whom God
has made chief in the Congregation, and set, as it were in his stead, to
represent him as his Ambassadors to the Churches.

2. Some refer it more immediately to God himself, thus; God himself is present
in the Assemblies of his Saints, instructing, convincing, converting,
comforting, assisting, protecting, etc. by the intermediation and ministration
of his blessed Angels. For all Gods works ad extra, both in the Church, and out
of the Church, are done by their Ministry. The Law was given by the disposition
of Angels, Act. 7.53. And so the Gospel, which is called the Promise, was
ordained by Angels in the hand of the Mediator, Gal. 3.19. Therefore the name
of God, and the name of Angels, is often used promiscuously in Scripture, for
one another, Act. 7.35. It is said, The Angel appeared to Moses in the Bush;
but Exodus 3.6. says, it was God, that is God by his holy Angel. So it was the
Angel that appeared to Manoah and his Wife, Judge. 13.2. which is understood to
be the Lord himself, that is, by his Angel, ver. 22. Now according to this
sense the Apostle argues thus: If the Woman ought to behave her self with all
due Reverence to be covered, in token of her Subjection to a mortal Superior,
how much more ought she to reverence the glorious presence of the holy God, who
by his blessed Angels is always in the midst of the Congregation of his people?
Or thus: The holy God, who is always present in the Assemblies of his people by
his Angels, will be offended to see the Woman with her head uncovered, or the
Man with his head covered; (for both these stand together under the same
Condemnation, though only one of them be here expressed) but the holy God
cannot be offended with any thing, but with sin. Erg. for the Man so to be
covered, or the Woman uncovered, is sin. This Argument lies so clear in the
Text, that I think I need not bestow any labor on Major or Minor, to rub them
any brighter. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That God by his holy Angels, is invisibly present in the Assemblies of
his Worshippers.

Inf. 2. That external, as well as internal Reverence, is due to the worship of
God, on the account of the holy Angels.

Ver. 11, 12. Nevertheless, neither is the Man without the Woman, neither the
Woman without the Man in the Lord. For as the Woman is of the Man, even so is
the Man also by the Woman; but all things of God. In these two verses he
improves his former discourse, by way of Counsel and Comfort Of Counsel to the
Man, That he remember the need he has of the Woman. Though God has made him
her Superior, yet not to Lord it with rigor over her, but to exercise his
Authority with humility and love. Of Counsel and Comfort to the Woman, that she
do not grudg at that inferiority of place in which God has set her: and for
her Comfort minds her, That God has not put her altogether in the condition of
a servant to the Man, but so as in the same respect she is equal with him, at
least in the Lord, and in the matters of her Soul. Nevertheless: whatever I
have said of the Man's Authority, and the Woman's Subjection, Neither is the Man
without the Woman, neither the Woman without the Man. Though God has
subordinated one to the other, he has not divided them one from the other;
though one be above the other, yet one cannot subsist well without the other;
though there be a difference of Sex, and a difference of place and degree, yet
are they conjoined as one in the Lord; they are equal in Christ, as
joynt-members of his mystical body. The Woman as much as the Man, redeemed by
the same blood, saved on the same terms, and their souls of the same
preciousness. They are not without one another, but are joined together as one
flesh, in the Lord, or by the Lord; not only by the Law of Faith, but by the
Law of the Creation. They necessarily depend one upon the other. If either of
the Sexes should perish, the other must perish too, and cannot long survive.
For as the Woman is of the Man: that is, as to her first Original, as was said
before, ver. 8. even so is the Man also by the Woman. Not as it was with Adam,
who had his being by immediate Creation; but men now are continued in the World
by natural generation, which cannot be without the Woman. Though the Man were
at first the sole Parent, or instead of Parent to the Woman, yet now the Woman
is half-parent to the Man. The Man is by the Woman, both as to his being,
nutrition, education and well-being. But all things of God. That is, all these
things, both the Man and his Superiority, and the Woman and her Subjection.
They are Creatures of his forming, and of his disposing; it is God that has
placed them in this order. And of this, he admonishes them, That the Man may
not exalt himself, or despise the Woman, or turn his power into tyranny; and
that the Woman may not disdain to bear the yoke, which her Creator has laid
upon her; for in so doing they would both rebel against their Maker. Hence I
infer,

Inf. 1. That Man and Woman are all one in the Lord.

Inf. 2. That the Superintendency or power of the Man over the Woman, is of
Divine Right.

Inf. 3. That the yoke which we lay on Inferiors, should be no heavier than God
and Nature have made it.

Inf. 4. That in pressing flesh-displeasing Duties on others, we should
mitigate the rigor with all the sweetning Considerations we can.

Ver. 13. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a Woman pray unto God
uncovered? Or (which is all one) That a Man pray unto God covered? and if not
pray, then not prophecy; for the reason is the same in both; as ver. 4, 5. Here
is another Argument taken from the common sense of all men, at least of such as
are so far redeemed from the ruins and dregs of the most salvage barbarism, as
to have any natural sentiments of what is comely or uncomely. Judge in your
selves. Here his Rhetoric and his Logic meet together, both to convince and
persuade. He will force them to yield the Argument, or forfeit their Judgment
and Reason. Is it comely: (...), is it a handsome sight, is it becoming the
excellent Majesty of that God, with whom we have to do? Is it not piece of
shameful, irreligious, daring irreverence, That a Woman pray unto God
uncovered? Though only praying be mentioned, prophesying also is included; that
is, That a Woman be present in the Congregation, where these sacred actions are
in performing.

Ob. But if he intends both, why does he mention only the Woman's part?

Ans. 1. Because the Man's part is necessarily understood, and concluded from it.

2. He chooses this (perhaps) to the greater advantage of his Argument. The
foulness of a sin is not sometimes so apparently seen on one side, as on the
other; nor in it self, as in the natural consequences of it. His Argument then
will be reduced to this, That which is uncomely, disorderly or irreverent,
ought not to be admitted, or tolerated in the worship of God; but for a Man to
worship God in the Congregation with his head covered, or a Woman with her head
uncovered, are both alike uncomely, disorderly, and irreverent. Erg.

Ob. But you may say, this is a dangerous Argument, till it be agreed by what
Judge or Rule it ought to be determined, what is comely or decent in the
Worship of God.

Ans. That which is now started, is one of the Games of the times; I shall not
pursue it at length, nor do I hope to add any thing to what has been, by one
and another already better done on the case. All that I shall say at present to
it, I shall reduce to these three positions.

1. Should every thing pass for decent and comely, that any one phansies or
judges so to be, there would certainly be very few or no indecencies, or
matters of uncomeliness, found among men; for every ones own ways and conceits
(though never so ugly) are right and beautiful in their own eyes; and so the
foulest absurdities, and grossest fooleries, yea, and impieties too, must pass
for decent and lovely, because there is some or other that will have it so.

2. Every thing that is decent and comely enough in it self, and in its proper
place, use and season, is not so in the Worship of God; much less can that be
comely in Gods Worship, which is no where else comely. The first part of this
position, I think no one will deny. It is decent enough for a man to whistle
after his Cart, or to lift up a shout in harvest, or to strip himself naked to
swim; but that any of these, or the like, are decent in the Worship of God, no
sober man can think. The other part of the position is but the necessary
consequence of this. That which is every where ugly, is much more so in Gods
Worship, where the greatest Reverence and Decency is required. It Is true, those
things which God has particularly appropriated to his Worship, may not be
profaned by a common use; though we may not say, such things are ugly out of
Gods Worship, yet the profanation of them is ugly, because sinful; but
whatever God has appointed, is therefore decent because he has appointed it.
This is the Apostle's Argument here; for the Woman to be uncovered or attire
her head like the Man, or for the Man to be covered, or put on the Knots and
Tresses of the Woman, as if they were agreed to exchange Sexes, is a most
uncomely thing in Nature; therefore much more in the solemn Worship of God.

3. There is none that can make any thing comely or decent in the Worship of
God, but God himself who requires the Worship. For whatsoever is comely in Gods
Worship, is so, as he approves or accepts it; what he rejects cannot be
accounted comely in his Worship; but what he has not appointed, he rejects.
And to prove this, we can have no better evidence, than his own words, wherein
he declares what he approves, and what he rejects, Matthew. 15.9. In vain do they
worship me, teaching for dectrine the Commandments of men. That which has but
Man's Authority in Gods Worship, is a vanity; Jer. 7.31. And they have built the
high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the Son of Hinnom, to burn
their Sons and their Daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither
came it into my heart. The only reason that is mentioned here of Gods
Indignation against this thing, is, that he had not commanded it, Hes. 5.11.
Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because be willingly walked after
the commandment. And what Commandment was this? Be sure 'twas none of Gods;
then they would not so willingly have walked after it; nor would God have been
offended at their walking so. It must needs be some commandment of men. Most
Interpreters understand it of the Commandment of Jeroboans, who made Israel to
sin by his own idolatrous Inventions and Additions to the Worship of God; yet
doubtless the Inventer and Imposer thought these things to be decent and
comely; and so it seems did the people too; but God thought them not so, they
were no Commandments of his. Now God has commanded all the matters of his
worship, and consequently all that is to be accounted decent or comely in it,
one of these two ways, Expressly, or Consequentially.

1. Expressly, but these are not the things in dispute at present; though they
are not wanting that dare wrest and dispute against some of the plainest
expressions of his will.

2. Consequentially or Collaterally; so all those Circumstances of worship are
commanded, which are necessary to the orderly, serious, reverent and most
edifying performance of it; yet this necessariness or expediency is not left to
the Arbitration of man, but must be determined pro hic and nunc, by the nature
of the things, and the present dispensation of Providence, and the general
experience of the most spiritual and best discerning Christians. That which the
worship of God, or any part of it may be decently, orderly, spiritually and
edifyingly performed without, is not necessary in that worship, or part of
worship; and if not commanded, then superstitious and sinful. And so far for
this Digression. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That the pure spiritual simplicity of Gospel Worship, allows no
external uncomeliness or irreverence in it.

Inf. 2. That what the common suffrage of men determines to be uncomely in
nature, or in civil Conversation, is much more so in the worship of God.

Inf. 3. That it is the duty of Women to pray unto God, as well as of Men.

Ver. 14, 15. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a Man has long
hair, it is a shame unto him? But if a Woman have long hair, it is a glory to
her; for her hair is given her for a covering. This is but the illustration of
the Argument of the former verse, and not the stating of a new Question, as
some may opine. It Is strange to see what a coil is kept among Interpreters
about the sense of this Paragraph, as if they had a mind ex fulgore dare fumum,
to veil not only the Woman's, but the Text it self, or as if they had a humor
to trip and wrestle, rather than to follow the Ball. I shall take little notice
of one or other, but pass through the Crowd as quietly as I may, about my
business. And to make my way clear, these three terms of the Text must be
explained. 1. What the Apostle means by Nature. 2. What by having long hair. 3.
What by shame.

1. The first Question is, what the Apostle would have us to understand by
Nature. Some say the Law of Nature, others, the Law of Nations; others, the
light of natural Reason; others, general and ancient Custom; others the natural
inclination; others, the Sex it self, Male and Female, into which nature has
divided mankind. Others take it for that order which God has appointed and
found in Nature. Now if we would know whether of all these to choose, and how to
make a right Judgment, we must attend to the scope of the Apostles Discourse.
He has been all along proving that this difference of habit is founded ab
origin, in the difference of Sex, by the God of Nature, and so by him made one
of the Laws and Constitutions of Nature, for the distinguishing of one Sex from
the other, that there might not be confusion, and for the testifying of that
place of Superiority or Inferiority which they stand in toward one another. It
is Nature, or rather the God of Nature, that gives the Woman her hair for her
natural covering, and the same nature it is that teaches us so to judge in this
case.

2. The next Query is, What we ought to understand by having long hair, (...).
And here we shall find them as little agreed, as in the other. Some take it for
wearing the hair long; and of these, one will have it clipped all off close by
the head; another will have it just to cover the ears; another more advisedly
allows it to cover the temples and the neck; others are for a greater length,
usque ad habitum, but understand it of decking and adorning the hair, and never
quarrel at the length, so that it be worn carelessly and slovenly; and that
which proselyted them to this opinion, was the derivation of the word (...),
which, they say, comes from the Verb (...), curare to trim or trick up a thing
with curiosity. Now for my part, I do not find that the Apostle tells us either
here or any where else, what the standard or just size for length, must be of
the man's hair; (yet he might well conclude, that without an exact Rule to an
hairs breadth; so many heads were never like to agree upon it) yet I think the
nearer it comes to the ordinary length of the Woman's hair, the further it is
from the Apostles Rule. Nor do I think (though our English word Comb be derived
from the Greek (...)) that the Apostle does forbid any man to comb his head,
nor to powder it neither, nor yet to put on borrowed hair, when the defects of
nature make it necessary or expedient: for if all other parts of the body may
lawfully assume something of ornament, as well as bare covering, I know not why
the head alone should be neglected and devoted to a perpetual slovenliness; yet
it is most certain, that as far as any adorning of the head, or any other part
whether of Man or Woman, savours of Pride, or fantastical effeminacy, it is
sinful and shameful. The scope makes the sense plain enough. The Apostle does
all along oppose the attire of the Man to that of the Woman, particularly as to
their heads, which ought not to be the same, nor yet changed, either as to the
natural or artificial covering; as the Man ought not to cover his head with the
artificial or assumed attire, after the manner of the Women, so neither with
the natural.

3. The other Question is, What we are to understand by shame, (...)? In this
Interpreters cannot be of a mind neither. Some will have it be such a shame, as
is without sin, or such a disgrace as proceeds from a Man's neglect of himself
in indifferent and trivial matters; a shame which has not its soundation so
much in the thing it self, as in the opinion of those that judge it to be
shame, as was the case of David's Messengers to Hanun, 2 Samuel 10.4, 5. when
Hanun had caused their beards to be so misused. But this (I doubt) is to make
too light a matter of it. That which is a shame to Nature, which is contrary to
the (...) of a Christian, must needs be sin, and no small sin, especially in
the worship of God. Therefore some make this to be of the same nature with
those sins of the Gentiles mentioned Romans 1.26, 27. a changing of the natural
use of one Sex with the other.

Ob. But if the wearing of long hair be a sin against the light and dictates of
Nature, this will condemn the Nazarites, of whom Christ himself was one, who
were not only allowed, but required by the Law of God, to let the locks of the
hair of their heads grow all the days of their Separation, Numb. 6.5. And of
this sort of Votaries, some were Nazaraei seculi for the whole term of their
lives, as Sampson, John the Baptist and Christ; and others Nazaraei dierum, who
separated themselves by a vow unto the Lord for a certain number of days,
commonly thirty days.

Ans. 1. This was by divine appointment; and who questions, but that the great
Lord and Lawgiver may dispense with his own Laws, and make what particular
exceptions he pleases, without abolishing, or any way infringing the binding
force of his Law to others.

2. Yet we do not say, That it is simply long hair the Apostle is here
declaiming against, but the wearing it more muliebri, after the manner of the
Woman. And yet I am of the opinion, that the Nazarites themselves were good
enough to be known from the Women by the wear of their locks, as well as by
other things. Should I enter into a prolix discourse of long hair, I might
spend more time than the Argument is worth; and besides, outrun the intent of
my Text, which mentions it only by the by.

But if the Woman have long hair, it is a glory to her. That which is a shame
to the one (you see) is a glory, a lawful, decent, laudible ornament to the
other; and the Reason follows, for her hair is given her for a covering. And
who gave it her for a covering, but he that gave her her hair and her being
too? It Is true, he that gave hair to the Woman, gave the like to the Man; but
not to this end, or for this use; Not that this covering is enough for the
Woman (though it had been enough to answer its end, as a symbol of her
subjection to the Man, had she abode in innocence) but this shows that her head
ought to be covered proportionably, as all her other parts are, and the head
especially; because uature it self intimates it, and thereby teaches it. But
now to reduce this to the Argument in the former verse, where he was reasoning
ab indecoro. Judge in your selves, is it comely? The assumption he proves in
these two verses, by the indications of Nature, q. d. the very works of God in
nature are sufficient to convinceus, that the Woman ought to be covered; and
then by the same reason and rule of opposition, that the Man ought to be
uncovered, at least in the solemn public worship of God. Hence I infer,

Inf. 1. That Christians ought not to disregard the moral dictates and
indications of nature.

Inf. 2. That it is a shameful, unnatural thing, for men to pride themselves,
or to glory in the curiosities of hair, after the manner of Women.

Inf. 3. That length of hair is given of God unto the Woman, not only for her
covering, but for her ornament, though not for pride or levity.

Inf. 4. That for men and Women mutually to interchange modes and fashions in
wearing their hair, is unnatural and abominable.

Ver. 16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God. We are now arrived to the conclusion of this
Dissertation of the Apostle, where, for a close, we meet with three well
accoutr'd Arguments more in a breast; But if any man seem to be contentious.
Thus he speaks by way of Anticipation, if any one has a mind to quarrel, (...)
to maintain his contrary opinion; not for truths sake, but for satisfying of
his ill humor, that he may seem to prevail by his Sophisms and Fallacies, and
will not acquiesce in these our Arguments and Determinations, as every one will
do that is not of a contentious schismatical Spirit. Here we have one Argument
more insinuated, which may be formed thus: To dispute against a clear truth, or
plain duty, is the property of a contentious, wrangling person; but to dispute
against what has been here asserted and proved, is to dispute against a clear
truth and a plain duty. Erg. We have no such Custom. What Custom? Some will
tell you, No custom to be contentious, or to insist peremptorily or stiffly upon
frivolous matters. I believe it, this were indeed a great shame for an Apostle,
a Planter and Pillar of the Churches, to be once guilty of it; much more to
make a Custom or Trade of it. But what is this to his purpose? Can we imagine
that he would tell them thus, Well! notwithstanding all the Medimns I have
used, and all the words I have wasted, to prove my Argument, it is but a
frivolus thing; if any one seems he has any thing to object, I have done; it is
a business that is not worth the arguing; any one may do as he seems best,
whatever I have said to the contrary. Certainly, if this had been his mind, he
had done much better, both for the Churches peace, and his own credit, to have
took his pen and scratcht it all out again, and not to have troubled the sacred
Canon with so trifling a matter. But when he says we have no such custom; I
think he tells them quite another thing. He here informs them what the Custom
and Practice of the Apostles was in the case, whereof he had been speaking; and
assures them, that he had herein laid no other burden upon them, than he
himself, and all the rest of his Brethren the Apostles, had always born, and
took to be their duty; so that here in the close of his discourse, he seems to
look back on the first verse, where he began it, and so to knit up both ends
together. Be ye followers of me: And then the second Argument you have thus: It
is the duty of all Christians to follow the examples and practice of the
Apostles in all things that are according to the will of God; but this was the
practice of the Apostles, and according to the will of God, as was proved
before; Erg. Neither the Churches of God. That is, the primitive
Gospel-Churches planted by the Apostles. where we have the third Argument thus:
That which was the general practice of the primitive Churches of Christ, by
Apostolical institution, ought to be the practice of all succeeding Churches;
But this was the general practice of the primitive Churches, and that by
Apostolical institution. Erg. And now you have heard the Apostles sense of the
Question, and our sense of the Apostle: whence I conclude at once, That for a
Man to have his head covered, or a Woman to have her head uncovered in the time
and place of Gods solemn public Worship, is a disorderly, irreverent,
uncomely, unnatural, shameful, schismatical, antiapostolical and
unchristian-like practice. And thus much by way of Exposition, wherein I hope I
have not run beyond my Text.

CHAP. III. Answers a few Objections and Scruples upon the case.
NOtwithstanding what has been hitherto said, perhaps some may seem to be
contentious in our times, as well as in the Apostles; which I shall answer as I
am able. And truly I wish, I had now before me, all that the Art of Contention
could produce against our Thesis. But before we meddle with the Objections, we
will consider how far all, or most are agreed upon the matter.

1. Then I suppose that all, with whom I have to do, are agreed, That there is
a reverence of the body, as well as of the mind and soul, due to the Worship of
God, on the account of that God whom we worship and adore. The body is the
Lords as well as the Spirit, and by both he ought to be Worshipped with those
explicit signs and demonstrations of Reverence and Veneration, which are
proper to both. For ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. O come let us worship
and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker, Psalm. 95.6. The humblest
and most abject postures, and self-abasing prostrations of body, as well as of
soul, a covering of the lip, a laying the mouth in the dust, are all too little
to express the distance that is between the holy God and sinful Man. Besides,
where there is the truth of that inward fear and Reverence that is due to God
in the heart, it will naturally and necessarily seek to express its self
externally in such a way, and by such signs, as are apt and proper to shadow it
forth by. True Devotion is like fire, which cannot be shut up, but will
discover it self; but where there is no symptom of life in the exterior parts,
we rationally conclude, that the spark of life is extinct at the heart.

2. I hope it will be granted me too, without much begging, that for the Woman
to come into the Congregation of Gods Worshippers, with her head uncovered, or
attired after the manner of the Man, is a very uncomely and unchristian-like
thing. I do not think that all Women are bound to use the same manner of
covering. God has allowed latitude enough in these things, if we have but
Wisdom and Moderation to avoid extremes on both hands, and to keep within the
bounds of Decency and Modesty, that it be not affectedly, austere, sordid, or
ridiculous on the one side, or to vitile, extravagant, or meretricious on the
other; observing the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning let it not be
that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of
putting on of Apparel. Not that any of these are in themselves evil, or the use
of them simply forbidden, but the excess; the fond affecting of these toys, the
exceeding of their due measures and degrees of persons, the spending of too
much time, cost or care on them; or the feeding of pride or lust by them, this
is morally evil.

3. And I presume upon the observation of all that I have had to do with, that
it will not be denied, that in praying and in singing of Psalms, the Man ought
to have his head uncovered. I met with none that own these Ordinances, but are
ready to own it to be their duty to be uncovered in them, and take it as a
piece of profane irreverence, and contempt of Gods Ordinance, to be otherwise.
Though indeed there be some, who of late have learnt a new fashion of
uncovering the head, by hanging their Hats half way on one side, or on their
brows; these are uncovered by a Synecdoche partis, and show their readiness to
keep them quite on, if it were but the fashion; as if they were afraid of too
much reverence, or of abasing themselves too much in the sight of God. Of whom
this fantastical fashion was first learnt, I know not; yet thus much even
these seem to grant by that little they do, that in these duties the head ought
to be uncovered in whole, or in part.

And being thus far agreed, that which remains to be tried, is only this:
Whether it be the duty of the Man to have his head uncovered, while the word of
God is read or preached in the Congregation of his people? And having now
brought it to the Bar, let us hear what its Accusers have to say.

Ob. 1. I hear some allege thus, That it is in it self a matter of
indifferency, and to be determined by the custom of those particular Churches
or people, where any one has his Conversation, and not to be positively
asserted for a general duty.

Ans. 1. I confess, I never took it to be a fundamental of the Christian
Religion, nor would I press it upon any Man's Conscience, upon pain of
Damnation; yet that it is a matter of meey indifferency, I utterly deny; which
if it be not already sufficiently proved, I hope it may by that time the trial
is over.

2. This sounds like some poor put-off, of those that are conscious to their
own guilt, and are loath to have their ill manners corrected; pray have us
excused; thus and thus we have been used to do, and are ashamed now to do
otherwise. It Is indeed a hard matter to teach an old Tretter to p^^e, or to
obtain credit against a long used custom, though never so groundless or
indecent.

3. I would willingly learn what any sober wit can gather out of the Apostles
discourse, to prove this to be a matter of such indifferency, as that the
customs of Churches or Places must determine it pro or con. We have observed
that more than once he positively asserts it as a duty; for a Man indeed ought
not to cover his head, ver. 7. For this cause ought the Woman to have power on
her head, ver. 10. That which the Apostle says ought to be done, or ought not
to be done, I dare not call indifferent. That which he says ver. 16. We have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God; which is the only place where he
mentions any thing of custom, has been expounded already, and cannot in reason
be understood as if he had left it to be determined as to practice, by the
customs of every particular Church or people; for then had he miserably bassi'd
himself, and taught them to have replied thus: What means this great harangue
about putting off, or keeping on our hats? We have a custom among us to do as
we do; and this by his own Doctrine, is sufficient to justify us; and what
then is become of all the Apostles Argument? Certainly he does not leave it to
the customs of any particular Church, that then was, or that afterward should
be, but reduces all to that which was the custom of the Apostolical and
Primitive Churches.

Ob. 2. Others object, That the Reformed Churches in other Countries observe no
such thing, but generally practice the contrary in their Assemblies; but if it
were a duty, why should not they practice it as well as we?

Ans. 1. What other Churches do, I know not, but by hearsay; or how far they
conform to the Apostles rule in this case, is impertinent to enquire. It may be
they vary from us, and from their Rule too, both in matters of opinion and
practice; and wherein they deserve not to be commended, nor imitated; to their
own Master let them stand or fall.

2. God never made the judgments or practices of men, the Rule or Directory of
his Worship, but his written word. What wild work should we soon make in the
Worship of God, if our eves should be as the fools, in the ends of the earth,
upon the sushions of France, or Geneva, or Holland, or New England, or any
others? If we once forsake Scripture, and make men our Rule, we are in a fair
way to Idolatry, to Atheism, to any thing. This is an objection which becomes
no sober Christian. A few more words I should bestow on it, were it worth my
while

Ob. 3. Others are ready to plead thus; That it is but a bodily exercise, and
bodily exercise they are told, profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8. but God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth.

Ans. 1. It Is true, it is a bodily exercise, and because the Apostle says it
profits (...) a little, we may not say therefore it profits not at all;
yea, in some cases it profits very much.

2. It Is true too, that worship which consists only in bodily exercise,
profitteth so little, as not at all; it is a shadow without the substance, and
a dead carkase without life; the badg of Formality, the cloak of Hypocrisy. But
yet that bodily exercise which is joined with the inward Spiritual Exercise,
Veneration, Affection and sincere Devotion of the soul, and is properly and
aptly expressive of it, is both profitable and acceptable. The case is the same
as that of St. James, between Faith and Works; either being alone is dead and
unprofitable (that is, where both are required) but in conjunction they are
amiable and absolutely necessary to the right performance of the duty.

3. If it be unnecessary, because a bodily exercise, then all bodily exercise
must be condemned, by the same Law, as unnecessary in the Worship of God. The
giving of Alms, the visiting the Sick, the going to hear, the using of the
voice in Prayer, Preaching, Singing, Hearing, Reading, Conference, and the
like; or the bowing the knee before God, and many other things, are all but
bodily exercises; and if therefore unnecessary, this will at once throw all the
visible worship of a Deity out of the world, and turn it into mere Atheism. But,

4. God has required us to glorify him with our bodies, as well as with our
Spirits, 1 Cor. 6.20. and on this account, because both are Gods; both are his,
and by both he will be worshipped. Nay our bodies as well as our souls, are the
members of Christ, ver. 15. and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, ver. 19.
therefore it were very impious to deny him the Worship of both. But this is
more than enough for so triffing an Objection.

Ob. 4. Others there be that will allow it to be necessary, by the Rules of
Decency and Reverence, to be uncovered in prayer, and in singing and perhaps in
reading of the Scriptures too, but not in preaching: And their reason is,
because in preaching we have not the pure word of God, but mixed with men's own
private opinions and improvements.

Ans. 1. The truth is, I cannot but blush to look upon the wickedness of this
Argument; and the more, that any men of sobriety and learning should own it.
It Is a sign the cause is bad, when such poor shifts are made to uphold it. But

2. As for the venting of men's private opinions in their preaching. I answer
thus; 1. So they may, and often do in their praying too; and yet it seems the
Argument will not be allowed in that Ordinance, though the reason of the
Argument be the same. 2. Either those private opinions which they vent are true
or false; if they are true, then are they one where or other expressly or
consequentially contained in the Scriptures, and so are a part of the sense of
Scripture, and the very mind and will of God; though it may be impertinently
applied. If they be false, they ought to be reproved, and disciplined according
as such errors do deserve. But it is an hard case, if there be no other way to
correct another impertinencies or extravagancies, but by our own irreverence
and indecencies.

3. I would know what other reason can be given, why men should be uncovered in
time of praying or singing, etc. but this, because it is the Ordinance of God,
whose Worship we are bound to reverence both with body and soul. If this be not
the reason, I would fain learn what it is. And if so, I would as willingly
understand by what Rule in Divinity it is found, that preaching is not
altogether as much Gods Ordinance, as praying, or singing, or any other. For my
own part I ever took Preaching to be the great Ordinance of the Gospel; for I
never heard that Christ sent forth his Apostles to sing, or to pray; though
these indeed be included as parts of his Worship, but always sent expressly to
preach; the Denomination of their office being taken a Majori. Now if one
Ordinance be to be reverenced, because it is sacredly instituted, shall onother
which is more expressly instituted, be profaned as unholy? In prayer and
singing, we speak to God, or of God; in Preaching God speaks to us: is there
not as great a Reverence due, when God speaks to us, as when we speak to him?
Shall I speak to my Prince uncovered, but as soon as my tale is out, clap on my
Hat while he speaks to me, as if I owed the honor to my own words, not to his?
Methinks the bare mention of such unavoidable absurdities, should be enough to
make the frivilous Objectors blush.

4. It seems very strange and audacious, that Preaching should be excluded,
while the Apostle himself has expressly joined it with Praying; I wonder out of
what arbitrary Court this Bill of divorce first issued, for the putting asunder
what God had joined together; or how it came to pass, that prophesying has so
forfeited its Honor! What has Preaching done, that the Greeks scorn it, as
foolishness and babbling? The Jews look on it as a stumbling block; and
Christians themselves so degrade it and rob it of its due Reverence and
respect? what has preaching done to deserve this? Why! it has beaten down the
strong holds of the Devil in the World, and erected the Kingdom and Scepter of
the Lord Jesus Christ; and for this will the Devil be revenged on it, as he is
able; because he cannot banish it out of the World, he will pour what contempt
he can upon it. But it is sad, that such as call themselves Professors, should
be his Instruments in so cursed a Design.

Ob. 5. Others, it seems, argue after this fashion: This uncovering of the head
in Divine Worship, is a thing that has been so abused, and rested in by a
company of dead Formalists, and so zealously affected by such as dote on
foolish and superstitious Ceremonies, that to show our dislike of their ways,
we think it expedient to act contrary to them in this thing also, and not to
symbolize with their Superstitions.

Ans. Had I not heard it from some that pretended to sobriety, I could not have
expected such an Objection from any but a madman. For,

1. By this Rule we must cast off every thing that belongs to the external
Worship of God; yea, and the Worship it self too, because it has been abused
by such as are formal and superstitious. To argue the unlawfulness or
inexpediency of a thing, from the abuse of it, would make mad work in the
world; for what good thing is there, that has not been by some or other abused?

2. As for such things as are of our own device and appointment in the Worship
of God, for the more orderly and profitable performance of it; if any thing of
that nature, in length of time, come to be generally abused, and lose their
first end and use, and cannot be restored to their true intention and service,
it is expedient to lay them aside, and to supply the defect by that which is
more proper to reach the good end; and by this measure all humane institutions
ought to be dealt with. But the matter in question is no Humane, but a Divine
institution, and that express; therefore he that will cut this off from the
public Worship of God, had need first to cut it out of his Bible.

3. To rest in the bare external and outward Ceremonies of Worship, is gross
formality; and for a man to pray or prophecy with his head covered, is gross
irreverence; but what! is there no way to avoid one sin but by another? must I
needs run my self into the guilt of irreverence, to escape the contagion of
another's formality? This is the Devils work, to hurry men from one extreme to
another; and I doubt it proceeded from a secret Spirit of Faction, opposition,
and discontent; or Church-Atheism, and not honest Zeal. What though some
ceremonious Bigots, among many other things needless and vain, require also
what God himself by his Apostles has required; shall I rebel against God, to
show my dislike of superstitious men? God forbid, I will rather bless God for
any thing that is right in those, that in other things I dissent from.

Ob. 6. But there are yet others that think they have more to say than all
this. Their bodily infirmities are such as that they cannot bear it to be so
long uncovered, without hazard of their health: But God will have mercy, and
not sacrifice.

Ans. 1. It is true, God will have mercy and not Sacrifice, where he cannot
have both; Mercy rather than Sacrifice; and if the case be so, that the health
of the body cannot be preserved without the covering of the head, I know no
body that questions the lawfulness of covering it. But,

2. There is both a Natural and Artificial covering, which consist with the
Rules of Reverence and Decency. The natural covering is the hair. Now though
the Apostle requires the uncovering of the head in Divine Worship, yet he
allows the hair to be worn, though not after the manner of Women, as was showed
before. Therefore he does not absolutely forbid all covering, but only that
which is inconsistent with that Reverence which we owe to him whom we pretend
to honor; if then the infirmities of Nature be such, as that this natural
covering be not sufficient to answer its end, God allows us to supply the
defect by art, with succedaneous coverings, as Wigs or Caps; which may be in
the stead of the natural, so that the fantastical excesses of Pride or Vanity
be avoided. And that to have the head thus covered in case of Infirmity, is not
inconsistent with Reverence, no one that is well in his wits can doubt; for it
would seem an odd kind of Ceremony between man and man, if they should pull off
their Hats, and Wiggs, or Caps, and all, in complement to one another; this
would be a quaint kind of Caress. Now that which would be thought superfluous,
indecent, or ridiculous in humane Conversation, is no less in the Worship of
God. There are ways enough to avoid irreverence in Gods Worship, without
violating the sixth Commendment, or any other Moral Precept.

Ob. 7. Others think to say something in this, if this had been such a Duty;
wherefore have our Teachers been so long silent, Why had we not heard of this
sooner?

Ans. 1. I wish that such Objectors may not think it yet too soon to yield
their Obedience to the truth. What has been done ignorantly, may obtain mercy;
but obstinacy after admonition, makes the sin double.

2. How came it to pass, that this should be a secret, since that God has
delivered you from the Tyranny of Antichrist, and has given you the free use
of your Bibles, and in your own Mother Tongue; and the words of the Apostle
being so plain and express in the case?

3. The Reasons why the Ministers of Christ have said so little of it, may, be
1. Because in those late days of Confusion, they have had greater work on their
hands, to fix and establish the people in the fundamentals and essentials of
Christianity, for the preservation of their Faith and Comfort, and to support
the main buildings, while the house of God has been so shaken. 2. It may be
many of them have been guilty of the same error, being carried away by the
force of the Torrent, from one extreme to another, upon that fall of Episcopal
Ceremonies, which was in England almost forty years ago; since which time
especially, this piece of prophanity has obtained the fashion among
Dissenters. And perhaps the sense of their own guilt has made some the more
slow to speak in this matter.

4. The generality of Nonconforming, as well as Conforming Ministers, have
taught you, at least by their examples, what their sense of the Apostle has
been, and which the people should have observed, as their Patterns in it; yea,
some have adventured to reprove it publicly too; though the capricious humors
of the people have kicked at it; and such as think themselves wiser than their
Teachers, have made ill use of it, and been ready to show what fantastical and
schismatical Principles they are acted by. I know not at present what more has
been, or can be objected against our Thesis; and how little these objections
sigsignifie, I leave to the judgment of all sober minds.

CHAP. IV. Backs the Proposition with some further Reasons and Considerations.
IF all that has been hitherto said, be yet too little to reduce the Worship
of God to the Apostolical Rule in this particular; I shall offer but these few
things more, and leave them to consideration.

1. Suppose that Christ himself, the supreme Lord and Master of the Assembly,
were present in person among you in your places of Worship, Would you be
covered or uncovered? I hope you will allow him the reverence that you allow
your earthly Master or Prince. This Argument is but what God himself urges in
onother Quarrel about his Worship, Mal. 1.8. Offer it now unto thy Governor,
will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? If the best that we have,
must be taken for an offering to a Governor or Prince, who is but a man, is
the best too good for God? And if the humblest tokens of Reverence be due to a
Creature whom God has set in Authority over us, is it not much more due to
God, who is our Absolute and Supreme Governor and Lord?

Ob. But perhaps you may say, This is the way to bring in Superstition into the
Church; and makes, as if all those Modes of civil Worship or Reverence which
are due to Man, are much more due to God; so we may bring in Cirching, and
Bowing, and making a Leg, and a hundred other fantastical Gestures, and quaint
Goggles into the Worship of God, which are used in men's Courtly Addresses to
their Superiors.

Ans. 1. This Proposition is as far from favor of Superstition or any
uninstituted Ceremony, as that of the Prophet, before quoted, is from Idolatry;
where God says, Offer it now to thy Governor.

2. There are Ceremonies in Gods Worship, which are common, as was said before
Chap. 1. that is, such as are equally used in Civil and Religious Matters, as
bowing the knee, uncovering the head, etc. which signify the Reverence that is
due to God in his solemn Worship, and yet the same Ceremony is lawfully used
also toward the Magistrate; so that though it be in it self a civil Ceremony,
yet in the Worship of God it is sacred. And yet for all this it does not
follow, that all civil Ceremonies are so; but only such as God, by the Law of
Scripture or Nature, has made necessary or proper to express the inward
Reverence and Worship of the mind by.

3. Both Scripture and Nature (as has been showed before) has claimed this
Ceremony in question, as due to Gods solemn Worship; therefore it is a
Wickedness to neglect it. Now the Argument runs thus: If Reverence be due to
the presence of a Magistrate, much more is it due to God, whom he does but
represent, and by whom it is that he rules; and if those external shadows and
signs of Reverence, which Nature and Custom has made proper to signify the
Reverence of the mind by, be due to a Creature, much more is that which God and
Nature has made proper to express it by, due to God; Or, if you will, thus:
The Worship that we offer unto God, must be performed, as in the presence of
that God whom we worship (unless we hope to go behind his back to Worship him)
therefore if his visible presence would make us to be uncovered, his spiritual
and invisible presence should do no less. Yea, Christ is visibly present in his
Ordinances, though not personally, yet Representatively, as the King is in all
his Courts of Judicature by his Officers that represent him; so that what is
done in the presence of Christ's Ordinances and Officers, is done in his
presence. And if by the Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. we are to understand the
Messengers of the Gospel, (as some will have it) then this is but the same
Argument which the Apostle here urges, and must be allowed.

2. Let every one that yet resolves to be of a contrary practice in this
particular, consider how he can be assured, that he does not sin in it. If it
be matter of duty to be uncovered, then it is sin to be covered; and if it be
sin, it can be no little sin (were there any such thing) it being an irreverent
profanation of Gods solemn Worship, of which the Holy God is always wont to be
so very jealous. If it be such a sin, and wilfully persisted in after
admonition, with what confidence can such Worshippers hope for acceptance with
God? or indeed to escape his just vengeance? And who is there that would not
tremble thus to mock and dare the Almighty? Therefore the only way is to tell
us, as they do, that this is no matter of Duty, but of Liberty; and thus the
Question is easily answered, when it is well proved. We will not trouble our
Brains at present, to conjecture by what unheard of Medium they are ever like
to make it probable; but rather advise the Objectors to consider, whether their
security be such, as they dare venture the wrath of God, the loss of all their
religious Duties, and of their souls too, upon it. They suppose it to be a
matter of liberty; it is their Opinion; yet they hear there is something to be
said against it, and therefore but an Opinion and questionable; yea, they find
some that are as confident, that it is a matter of Duty. We no where find it
commanded to be covered, but here expressly forbidden by the Apostle, if we
understand him aright. Well! we will suppose the case to be doubtful, and the
Question shall be, which is the safer way; for in dubiis tutior pars est
eligenda. Will any one that has any regard to his soul, judge it safer to
adventure upon a supposed Liberty (and that in so easy a task as uncovering
the head) which is no where asserted in Scripture? or to comply with that which
seems (though it did but seem) to be an express command? If it be matter of
Liberty, then there is no sin on either hand. But what if this supposition
should be found false at last, and the great Judge determine against it? Where
are the forward Objecters then? surely he is worse than a mad man that will
adventure his soul at so cheap a rate.

3. That which does necessarily and per se, bring the Ordinances of God into
contempt, must needs be a very great evil; but for the Man to have his head
covered in any part of the public Worship of God, is that which does
necessarily and per se, bring the Ordinances of God into contempt. Erg. I hope
the Major will pass for Orthodox in any part of the World, whether Christian,
Jewish, or Pagan. And I doubt not but the Minor will be proved to be altogether
as true. Preaching is the Ordinance, and the great Ordinance of God; but this
Ordinance it does necessarily and per se bring into contempt. What is that
keeps up the Honor and Credit of any thing in the World, but that visible
respect and reverence that is paid it in the sight of men? The uncovering of
the head is the great visible sign and token of Reverence; if this then be
denied, how is the Reverence signified? And if there be no visible Reverence,
what follows but visible contempt? and that as necessarily as darkness follows
when light is gone. In vain is it to talk of the inward spiritual Reverence of
the mind. For 1. where there is indeed this holy Principle, and good frame of
Spirit within, it will naturally seek for vent, and express it self before men,
in such ways, and by such means, as are commonly used, and taken to be the
aptest and most proper to express it by. 2. Where there is this inward
Reverence of the soul, it will seek (as all other gracious habits do) to
propagate it self to others. He that loves and sears God, would have all others
to love and fear him too; and he that reverences Gods Ordinances, would that
all others should do the like; and therefore will be zealous and forward to
teach and encourage them so to do by his example, as well as precept. But now
who will say or believe that such a one does reverence Gods Ordinance, when
they see no more sign of Reverence than if he were only among his fellows, or
about his ordinary business in the World? and by this means others also are
taught, not only to behave themselves with the same irreverence, and so run
into the same guilt; but, which is worse, to have slight and base thoughts of
Gods Ordinance, yea, and of God himself too, who has appointed it. When the
Honor of an Ordinance is lost, the saving power of it is lost, and so becomes
to the wicked a matter of scorn. So that besides the wrong that is done to God,
how great is the wrong that is hereby done to souls! perhaps this has not been
the least thing that has helped to bring both Preaching and Preachers into
contempt in these our licentious days, while the elder sort have taught their
children to behave themselves with less reverence in Gods presence, than
Parents or Masters will allow them in theirs. What more effectual course could
be taken to breed up a new Generation of Scorners, and to join issue with the
Devil, to banish the Authority of preaching from among men? that it should be
the interest of any people so to do, is very strange!

CHAP. V. Concludes all with a serious and short address to the Non conforming
Brethren, both Ministers and People.
I Shall now shut up this Discourse (wherein I doubt I have not been very
welcome to some of my Readers) with a few words to my Brethren, both Ministers
and People.

1. To those that are in the Ministry. Reverend and Dear Sirs! It is
notoriously known, what hard things our Mothers Children, that are angry with
us for not complying with all their imposing-humours in sacred things, have
been long charging us with, and filling the ears of Authority with their harsh
Declaimings against us, as a company of heady, high-minded, schismatical,
self-wil'd, and ungovernable Creatures; as if we were such as pleased not God,
and were contrary to all men. And very uneasy it would be to bear it, did not
the Conscience of our simplicity make it light. But while we talk of
Conscience, and think to bear our selves upon the Gospel-rights and Privileges
of it, we do but abuse our selves, and harden them; and prostitute the very
name of Conscience to open contempt, while we plead Conscience to justify our
Disobedience in the case of a sew harmless (as they say) and gray headed
Ceremonies; and yet make no Conscience of that open prophanity and irreverence,
which the very light of Nature would teach the poor Heathens to condemn and
abhor in their Worship. Partiality in the matters of Conscience, is one of the
greatest Scandals and Reproaches of Religion, and that which gives the
Adversary the greatest advantage.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
I have long wished for a Rebuke to this irreverent, unscriptural practice,
from some graver, and more venerable hand or other; For I said, days should
speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. But I have not found any
that have hitherto meddled in this matter. And perhaps I shall be censured too,
for being busier than does become me; but that (as far as it respects my self)
shall be put on the private score, and be one of my least concerns; yet this is
that which is my defense. The Apostle himself has spent no less than 16.
Verses upon the case before me; and I have not spent half so many sheets. If
then I must pass for a Trifler, let it be because I have said no more, or said
it no better; which fault, I hope some wiser man or other will shortly mend;
and I shall patiently submit to any reasonable Correction.

Sirs! when I hear that voice of God himself to his Servant Moses, from Exodus
3.5. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand
is holy ground; and the same to Joshua too, Josh. 5.15. I dare not make light
of the external signs of Reverence in the special presence of the holy One, who
has declared, that he will be sanctified of all that come nigh to him. What
was it that made those places holier than others, but Gods special presence
there, which alone was able to consecrate it? I do not think that one place is
holier under the Gospel, than another, with what pompous Ceremonies soever men
may pretend to consecrate it; nor that there is any Reverence due to one place
more than to another, on the account of its supposed Consecration; but Gods
Ordinances, I am sure, are as holy as ever they were; and God is as much to be
reverenced as ever. Holy and Reverend is that name of his, which he will never
change. The uncovering of the feet was among some people a token of Reverence
and Subjection, and used in sacris; whence they had their Nudipedalia sacra:
and in token of their Reverence and Homage, this Ceremony was religiously
observed. The uncovering of the head is with us a token of the same thing;
therefore by a parity of reason, is due to Divine Worship. Is it not a shameful
thing, and hard to be born by any that are tender of Gods Honor, to see how
every ill-manner'd Boy, and daring Youth, that neither regard nor understand
their Duty to God or Man, rush into the presence of the great Jehovah, with
that wanton levity and unconcernedness, as if they were come about some of
their own Puerilia, their Games and Sports; and behave themselves with that
bold irreverence, which would be thought intolerable in the presence of their
Superiors? as if the places of Gods public Worship were the allowed Theaters
of Prophanity, and rudest Liberty? And for all this, they will plead the
toleration, yea, the example of their Seniors. Pudet haec opprobria, etc.

Now Sirs! the guilt of this is charged on us, who are their Teachers. And the
truth is, I know not how we can clear our selves, either to God or Man, without
our utmost and faithful endeavors to remedy it; which now will be the more
difficult, because by our long silence we have encouraged and settled them in
it. But seeing the difficulty is much of our own procuring, this should be so
far from discouraging, that it should quicken us to more. How can we expect
that God shall bless his word in our mouths, while we can see it thus
dishonored, and be silent? And what though you may expect the unjust Censures
and Frowns of some of your froward Hearers? it is not for the Messengers of the
Lord of Hosts to fear the displeasure of men. Nay, in the discharge of your
Duty, you have not only the peace of your own Consciences, but the promise of
Gods blessing. God may subdue men's wills to the obedience of the truth, beyond
what you expect. For my own part, I bless God for the success I have had, and
that with very little labor, and which has encouraged me to recommend it unto
others. And what if your Congregations should be the thinner? a handful of
humble, serious, reverent Worshippers, are better than a multitude of proud,
rude, profane, fantastical ones. Nor will this weaken the Interest you should
uphold; a few that lap, are a safer guard, and surer of victory, than a whole
Army of such as God does not choose. Nor need you fear of making more Divisions,
or raising fires among those, whose interest it is, especially at such a time,
to be united. It Is men's lusts and imperious wills that make Divisions, and not
Gods Law, nor the zealous pressing of Duty. As for those that will depart on
such a score, let them depart; we need them no more than the Wheat does need
the Chaff in the floor, or the good Figs needs the bad. I know no good such
Worshippers do in an Assembly, but hinder Prayers. God is now refining us, and
let us be refined. But perhaps all these fears may be but false suggestions of
the evil one, who is so pelased to see holy things profaned. For my own part,
I can testify, that I have found the quite contrary of these fears. But I must
consider to whom I am speaking. Pardon, Dear Sirs! this plainness and liberty
of Speech. Verbum sat sapienti. I will say no more, I could say no less.

2. To the people; If I have not yet answered all your Objections, I wish I
knew them, that I might endeavor to answer them; but if I have answered them,
I hope you will be persuaded. Sirs! Perhaps you still look on the matter I have
been now employed in, as a small thing; and truly were it not that, wherein the
Honor of Gods Worship and Ordinances were interessed, it would for me pass for
a small thing. Could we secure the glory of God, by taking the contempt to our
selves, it should be as little a thing, as you would have it to be. But alas!
these arrows of scorn fly over our heads, and wound that which is above us. Oh
Sirs! take heed, you have to do with a jealous God, and in a matter wherein his
jealousy has always been most tender. Never tell me of any awe or reverence
you have upon your hearts, while I see no visible signs of Reverence to attest
it. Judge in your selves; is it a comely thing, that the Messengers of Christ
that stand in his stead to you, and come on his message, and represent his
person, should stand bare before you, (as indeed we ought to do) and you sit
upon your seats covered, as if ye were set there to be our Judges, not our
Hearers? as if we stood to beg your approbation, and not to teach, and
admonish, and reprove you? Sirs! the credit of our Ministry is not ours, but
Christ's; therefore we are bound to magnify our Office. Are we your Teachers?
are not you then our Scholars? Shall the Master read his Lectures bare, and
every Boy in the School be covered? Would this be a decent sight? But that
which is not decent in Morality, is much more indecent in Religion. I confess I
am ashamed that the World should know, that any of those that call themselves
Christians, and Professors, should need so much ado to be reduced to Reverence
and good Manners in the Worship of their God. Methink I would bespeak you, as
the Servants of Naaman did their Master, 2 King. 5.13. If the Prophet had bid
thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather then,
when he says unto thee, wash and be clean? If the Lord should bid you sell
your Possessions, and lay down the price at your Teachers feet; if he shall
call you to mingle your Blood with your Sacrifices, will you not do it? how
much rather then when he bids you to be uncovered in his Worship? Certainly he
that will not uncover his head for-Christ, will hardly part with his head for
him. It Is true, some will rather part with their blood, than with their ill
humors; but with such Sacrifices God is not well-pleased. And now Reader!
having thus briefly, in the name of Christ advertised thee, I shall leave thee
to consider it; expecting either thy Obedience, or thy Reasons to the contrary.
I shall (...) all with the words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.28, 29. Let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; for
our God is a consuming fire.

-- siquid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.

