A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, March 23. 1689/90.
By the Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester. Published
by their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortclocke at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1690.

ECCLESIASTES xi. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment.
IF Solomon had said, Rejoice not, O young man, in thy Youth, neither let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth; walk not in the way of thine heart,
nor in the sight of thine eyes; for know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into Judgment, the Sense had been so easy and plain, that
there had been no Appearance of Difficulty in reconciling one part with the
other: For the whole had been looked upon but as a necessary and seasonable
Admonition to such who by the Heats of Youth, and Strength of Inclination, and
Allurements of the World, are too apt to be transported with the Love of
Sensual Pleasures. And this had been very becoming the Wise Man toward the
conclusion of his Book, wherein he had not only before set forth the several
Vanities of Humane Life; but so soon after, bids Men Remember their Creator in
the days of their Youth, Chapter 12. 1.
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh of which they shall say
they have no pleasure in them. i. e. in the days wherein they are most apt to
walk in the way of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes. For he knew
very well, that nothing is so powerful a Check and Restraint upon men's
inclinations to Sin, as the serious consideration of that God that gave them
their Beings, and will bring them to an Account for their Actions.

But how then comes he in this Verse to seem rather to give a Permission to
Young men in the time of Youth to indulge themselves in their mirth and vanity?
Rejoice, O young man* in thy Youth, etc.

Some think that the Wise Man only Derides and Exposes them for their Folly in
so doing; but that seems not agreeable with the grave and serious advice which
follows. And we find nothing like Irony or Sarcasm in any part of the foregoing
Book; for he begins it with a Tragical Exclamation against the vanities of
humane life; Chapter 1. 2.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities: all is vanity. And
he pursues his Argument by a particular induction of the most tempting and
pleasing vanities of Life; and particularly all sorts of Sensual delights; Chapter
2. 1.
as Mirth and Iollity in the first place, v. 3.
then Wine and Music, fine Palaces, v. 4, 5, 6, 7.
curious Vineyards, Gardens and Pools, a great Retinue, and, which was needful
to maintain all this, v. 8.
Abundance of Silver and Gold. But what a melancholy reflection does he make on
all these Pleasures of Life? Then I looked on all the works that my hands had
wrought, v. 11.
and on the labor that I had labored to do; and behold all was vanity and
vexation of spirit. What encouragement then could the Wise Man, after so much
experience of the World, give to Young men here in the Text, to Rejoice in the
days of their Youth, and to walk in the way of their hearts, and in the sight
of their eyes? i. e. to pursue Vanity, and to lay the Foundation for greater
vexation of Spirit, when they come to reflect on their own Follies.

What then is the meaning of these words? For this, we are to observe, that the
Preacher having declared his own main Scope and Design in the beginning and
conclusion of his Book, brings in sometimes the different senses which mankind
are apt to have concerning the Happiness of Life. And that is the reason that
we meet with such different Expressions concerning it.

In one place it is said, Chapter 8. 15.
that there is no better thing under the Sun, than to eat and drink and to be
merry; but in another, he says, Sorrow is better than laughter, Chapter 7. 3.
and by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.

In one place he says, Chapter 9. 2.
All things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked: Chapter 8. 12, 13.
But in another, That it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, but it
shall not be well with the wicked.

How can such Passages as these be Reconciled, if we look on them as expressing
the sense of the same Person? But if we allow them to be the different notions
of two sorts of Men in this World, they are easy to be understood, although
not to be reconciled. And the one sort is of those who place all Happiness in
this Life, without regard to Religion or Virtue, or another World; and the
other of those, who look on this Life only as a Passage to Another; and that
all Persons ought to behave themselves here, so as conduces most to their
Happiness hereafter.

And according to these different Schemes, we have in the words of the Text two
very different sorts of Counsel and Advice to Young men.

I. The first proceeds upon the Supposition that all the Happiness of Man lies
in this Life, and in the Enjoyment of the Sensual Pleasures of it; Rejoice, O
young man, in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth;
and walk in the way of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes. We have no
other Rule here given but the sight of the eye, and the way of the heart; i. e.
outward Appearance and inward Inclination; and these are the beloved Rules of
the most Sensual and Voluptuous persons, and they judge of Happiness only by
the pursuit of them. Here is nothing mentioned of Reason or Conscience, or a
regard to Virtue in the Restraint of Natural Inclinations: Nay, here is nothing
of that Severity which Epicurus himself thought necessary toward the
maintaining of a pleasant state of Life; which he granted could never be done
without some restraint of Men's Appetites and Inclinations to the Pleasures of
Sense; and it is not to be imagined, that Solomon should give Young men greater
Liberty than the corruptest Moralists did. Therefore I cannot look upon these
words as a Permission for them to do what is here expressed; but as a full
Description of that method of Living, which the jolly and voluptuous Corrupters
of Youth would instruct them in, Rejoice, O young man, in thy Youth, and let
thine heart cheer thee, etc.

II. We have here the most Powerful Check and Restraint laid upon all these
Sensual Inclinations of Youth. But know thou that for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment. Which Words are the Wise Man's Correction of the
foregoing Liberty, or the Curb which Reason and Religion give to the pursuit of
Natural Inclinations, wherein every Word has its force, and ought to make a
deep impression upon us: For,

(1.) Know thou: Thine is not then the same case with Creatures that have no
understanding; they are not capable of any Check from themselves, having no Law
of Reason or Conscience within them to control or govern their Sensual
Desires; but God has given thee not merely a Brutal Appetite, but a Rational
Soul, capable of understanding the differences of Good and Evil, and the
Reasons why some things which appear Pleasant are very disagreeing to the
Principles of Humane Nature; i. e. to that Order, Decency, Modesty, and
Regularity, which the more elevated frame and capacity of Mankind do require.

(2.) For all these things; as light and vain as you esteem them, as soon as
they are over and forgotten by you, as secretly and closely as they are
committed, as much as you endeavor to palliate and excuse them, yet but for
all these things God will certainly bring thee into Judgment. Therefore you
have all the reason in the world to consider what you do, Chapter 12. 14.
since every thing will be brought to judgment, whether it be good or evil, as
Solomon concludes this Book. Which shows the great Regard God has to the Good
or Evil of our Actions; and if the great Judge of the World has so, certainly
we ought to have it, and never think our selves at liberty to do what we
please, in gratifying our Lusts, and pursuing our Natural Inclinations to Evil.

(3.) God will do it. If there were no God to call thee to an account, yet
there are some Actions of Virtue so agreeable to Mankind, and some Vices so
loathsome and deformed, that there would be sufficient cause for them to love
the one and to abhor the other. If we could suppose such a frame of things and
such sorts of Beings as we now see, and no God to make them, (which is most
Absurd and Unreasonable,) yet we must suppose these Beings to have Natures and
Properties distinct from each other; so that we could not imagine Men to become
Beasts, and therefore they must not act like them, but preserve that Decorum or
Agreeableness in their Actions which is suitable to the peculiar Excellencies
of Humane Nature. And there are some Sins so much below the Dignity thereof,
that no Circumstances, no Suppositions, can make them fitting for Mankind to
commit them; which shows that the Nature of Good and Evil is no Arbitrary
thing, but is founded in the very frame of our Beings, and in the Respects we
owe to our selves and to one another. And since there is an Infinite and
Supreme Being which has Absolute Power and Command over us, and gives us both
our Beings and the Comforts of our Lives, it is most Absurd to suppose it not
to be a fault to hate his Goodness, or to despise his Mercy; or to slight his
Power, and to contemn his Authority: For in all these there is something
repugnant to the common sense of Mankind, and to all Principles of true Honor
and Justice. And there are such common Principles of Morality arising from our
necessary Relation to God and each other, which are of so clear and convincing
Evidence, that every one that considers them will grant that Wicked Men may as
well go about to dispute their Beings as their Sins; and may as easily prove
that they are not, but only appear to be, as that no Actions are really Evil,
but only by false Glasses appear so to be. But however vain men may deceive
themselves, God will not be mocked; for he not only sees and knows all our
Actions, but he will bring us to an Account for them.

(4.) God will bring thee into Judgment. It is a dreadful consideration to a
Sinner, that God knows all his false steps, all his secret Sins, all his
Falsehood and Dissimulation with God and Men: And there is nothing which men of
Art and Design hate more, than to be discovered and found out in all their
double and deceitful dealings; but to have these not only privately
discovered, but exposed and laid open to the view of the World; and not only
so, but to have every Circumstance examined, and every Action scanned, and that
by the great Judge of all the World, whom nothing can escape, nothing can
deceive, nothing can withstand; whose Justice is inflexible, whose Knowledge is
incomprehensible, whose Power is irresistible, and whose Vengeance is
insupportable: This we cannot but imagine must strike an awe and terror into
the Minds of Men, when they are pursuing the Pleasures of Sin, that for all
these things God will bring them into judgment. But notwithstanding these and
many other Expressions to the same purpose in Scripture, wherein God has
declared that he will certainly Judge the World in Righteousness at the Great
Day; Act. 7. 31.
that the Secrets of all hearts shall then be disclosed; Romans 2. 16.
that we must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ; 2 Cor. 5. 10
and that God will render to every man according to his Deeds: Romans 2. 6.
And notwithstanding it is a thing in it self very reasonable, from the
consideration of God's Justice and Providence, and the Nature and Consequences
of Good and Evil Actions; yet the generality of Mankind go on as secure and
careless as if there were no such thing, or that they ought not to be concerned
about it. Therefore I shall not spend time in the Proof of that which I take
for granted you all believe, and I am sure have Reason so to do; but I shall
enquire into these things which are most Practical and therefore proper for our
Consideration at this Time.

(1.) How a matter of so great Importance as a Judgment to come makes so little
Impression on the Minds of the generality of Mankind, who profess to believe it.

(2.) By what means the consideration of a Future Judgment may have a greater
Influence on all our Minds.

(1.) How a thing of so great Importance as God's bringing us into Judgment
comes to make so little Impression on the Minds of the generality of those who
profess to believe it, when we are so tender and sensible of small things with
Respect to this World.

For Resolving this, we must consider, that there is a great Difference between
the Not Disbelieving Doctrinal Points of Faith, and the Practical Improvement
of them in our Minds; without which, they remain there but as general and
confused Notions. Thus too many who abhor being thought Atheists, live as if
there were no God; not, that they deny or dispute his Being or Attributes, but
they have no Regard to them in the last Dictates of their Minds, or in the
Course of their Actions. To go about to prove such things to be true they look
on as lost labor, for they do not question them; but there is another thing
then which we are to give an Account of, viz. how it comes to pass, that so
great and so weighty Doctrines, being received and allowed to be true, make so
little Impression on the generality of Mankind; especially this of the Day of
Judgment; of which these seem to be the main Reasons.

(1.) Men's Impatience of Considering great and weighty things at a Distance,
which cannot affect and move our Senses.

(2.) The bewitching and stupifying Nature of Present and Sensual Pleasures;
which draw off the Mind from greater things, and weaken all the Impressions
they make upon us.

(3.) A General Presumption upon God's Mercy toward Mankind on the Account of
the Frailty of Humane Nature, notwithstanding the severity of his Threatenings
in Scripture.

(1.) I begin with Men's Impatience of Considering.

We flatter and please our selves with the thoughts that we are Intelligent and
Considering Beings, when, it may be, Considering (especially as to matters of
greatest consequence) is one of the things which Mankind have the greatest
Aversion to. For generally, they love to go no farther than the Outsides and
Appearances of things, and have their Minds wholly possessed with false and
flattering Imaginations, having neither Truth nor Consistency in them. And
those who account themselves of better Breeding than others, are often more
imposed upon than others in this way. The Pomp and Grandeur of the World, the
Gaity and Splendor of Living strikes their Fancies with such vehement
Impressions, that scarce any thing else gets into their Minds, or sinks deep
into them. There are many other things that seem to stand fair in their Opinion
at some times, but it is as they are thought Serviceable to Worldly Greatness
and Honor.

This, after all the Instructions of Philosophers, the Declamations of Heathen
and Christian Orators, and the far more Powerful Arguments of the Wisest and
Best of Men, recorded in Holy Scripture, is still the great Idol of Mankind,
which they serve and worship with the truest and warmest Devotion. All other
things, how great and weighty soever in themselves, yet are really looked on by
them as a sort of Metaphysical Abstracted Notions of things Invisible and
Immaterial, quite out of the reach of their Imagination, which may serve for
the Amusement of some, and the Affrightment of others, and the Entertainment of
Speculative Minds; but, how to raise themselves in the World, to appear Great,
and have many Dependents; to pursue and carry on their own Interests (though
without regard to Justice and Honesty) these they account Great and Noble
things, and fit to employ their Minds upon. But alas! How much are such imposed
upon by mere Shows and Appearances of things, which are really what God made
them, but are not what we fancy them to be! There are, no doubt, real
Conveniences of Life in Riches, and Honor, and Ease, and Plenty, or else they
could never be esteemed Blessings, nor could we have reason to thank God for
them; but there is a great difference between the Fitness of things for our
present use, and for our happiness; i. e. when we make them our End, and do not
employ them in order to a farther End. But it is good Advice of S. Paul, Using
the World as not abusing it; 1 Cor. 7. 31.
for the Fashion of this World passes away: it passes like a Ship under Sail,
while the generality of Mankind, like Passengers, lie asleep in it. Sometimes
when Storms arise, or Waves cross them, they seem to be awake, and to look
about them, and to think whither they are going; but those thoughts being
uneasy to them, they lie down again, and are carried they know not whither.
But still it is but the Fashion of this World; a mere Landscape, wherein there
is great Variety but little Satisfaction, the Show far out-doing the Substance.
When the Devil showed Christ the Kingdoms of the World, Matt. 4. 8.
and the Glory of them, the highest Mountain could afford but a small Prospect
of them, but as some think he caused a Representation in the Air of the most
tempting Splendor and Glories of them. And this was the truest Representation
of them, by glorious Appearances and bewitching Shows. But unless there be
something in Humane Nature which makes it very apt to be deceived by such
things, it were strange the Devil should think to prevail on our Savior by
them. We pity those who traveling in the Night are deceived by false Fires and
shining Meteors, and follow them into Bogs and Precipices; but the case of such
is so much worse who are deluded by the Deceitful Vanities of this World to
their own Destruction.

And can there be any greater Argument of the want of Consideration, than for
Persons to suffer themselves to be so easily and so fatally cheated? It is a
Wise Observation of Aristotle, (...). Not. Ausc. l. 7. c. 4. n. 15.
that True Knowledge and Wisdom lies most in settling and fixing the Mind. For
it is not the subtlety and fineness of Thoughts, not the quickness and
sharpness of Apprehension, not the close and mathematical Deductions of Reason
which make a Wise Man, but the having a calm and composed Temper of Mind, the
subduing our Passions, and governing our Actions with respect to our Chief End.
And in order to this, Consideration is absolutely necessary; without which that
which is nearest to us, and offers it self first to our Choice, must prevail
upon us. And here lies the main Difficulty to persuade Mankind to choose a far
greater Happiness at a Distance and Invisible, before a present Enjoyment of
things we are constantly conversant with, and have made an early Impression
upon us. But still we say, that it is nothing but Men's Impatience of
Considering, which makes them have so little Regard to another Life. For if
they would but lay both Worlds in the Balance one against the other, they would
soon discover the wonderful Folly of preferring that which this World accounts
Happiness before that which is offered to our Choice in another. For let us
make all the fair and reasonable Allowances that may be, as to our
Inclinations, and Appetites, and Circumstances in this World; as to the
Distance, Obscurity, Incomprehensibleness of the Joys of another World; yet
every considering man that regards true Happiness will be sure to choose that
which is to come. For,

(1.) Supposing the Happiness were Equal, yet there is no proportion in the
Continuance of them; and a considering Man will be sure to choose a Happiness
that can never have an End, before one that may be irrecoverably lost in a
moment; and can certainly be enjoyed but for a little time, if there were any
certainty at all in the Enjoyment of it.

(2.) The more any have considered, the more they have repented placing too
much of their Happiness here, because Reason and Experience shows them the
Folly of it. But the more they have considered, the better satisfied the Minds
of Good Men are in placing their Happiness above; where alone that Good is to
be found which can make us truly Happy, and is to be enjoyed in that Fullness,
that Purity, that Certainty which makes it fit for the wisest and most
considering Men to prefer above a present Happiness, if it were to be enjoyed
on Earth.

(3.) He that looks after a Future Happiness does not thereby lose any of the
Real Conveniences of Humane Life; but he that places his Happiness here,
cannot find it in this World, and is sure to be miserable in another: And this
makes a very considerable Difference in the Choice. Indeed, if God made it
absolutely necessary in order to Future Happiness for us to forgo all the
Natural Pleasures and Innocent Delights of this Life, the terms would be much
harder, and hardly possible to Humane Nature. For, if all Pleasures of Sense
must be renounced, we must not see the pleasing varieties of Nature, nor hear
the melodious sound of Birds, nor taste the Meat when we are hungry, nor drink
when we are thirsty; for there is really greater Pleasure of Sense when Nature
craves necessary Sustenance, than what the most voluptuous Epicurean enjoys in
all his Contrivances, first to raise his Appetite, and then to please it: For
what is most natural and necessary is the most Delightful; every thing of
Force must have something Uneasy in it. But God has not dealt thus hardly
with Mankind; He allows us all the reasonable Desires of Nature, and has only
forbid us what is unreasonable and unnecessary. And upon the forbearance of
what is so, joined with our entire dependence upon himself for it, Gal. 5. 6.
(which the Scripture calls Faith working by Love,) he has made the Gracious
Offer of Eternal Happiness. It is true, in Extraordinary Cases of Persecution
he requires more, but then he proposes Extraordinary Rewards to make abundant
Recompense for them; but in the common and ordinary Case of Mankind, he
requires no more than our avoiding those Excesses in Pleasing our Appetites
which Nature and Reason condemn. And those who consider, cannot but see how
unreasonable it is to place their Happiness in forbidden Pleasures; and to
think that nothing can make them happy, but what God has declared shall make
them miserable. It is a strange Crossness in our Desires, if nothing can please
them but what displeases God. It were no hard task to show, that God forbids
nothing but what is really repugnant to our Well-being here; and how then can
any such thing as Happiness be hoped for in such things? And when a man
ventures being Miserable for ever, for what can never make him Happy here, if
he had his full Liberty to pursue his Desires; he shows how far he is from
acting like a wise, rational, considering Being. So that Impatience of
Considering is one great Reason why the thoughts of a Judgment to come make so
little Impression on Men's Minds.

(2.) The Second Reason is the Bewitching and Stupifying Nature of Sensual
Pleasures. The Epicurean Philosophers, who managed the Theory of Pleasure with
the greatest Art, so as it might look like a proper happiness for Mankind,
found Two things absolutely necessary in order to it.

(1.) The Retrenching all inordinate Desires, viz. such as had more Pain
following them, than there was Pleasure in the Enjoyment of them.

(2.) The Removing the Fears of another World out of Men's Minds. For as long as
these sunk into their Minds, they must rob them of that inward Tranquillity,
without which it were a vain thing so much as to talk of Happiness. But it was
impossible, upon their Grounds, to do either of these. For,

(1.) It is unreasonable to suppose that the Happiness of our present Life
should consist in the Enjoyment of Pleasure, and yet the Pleasure of Opinion to
be taken away, since the Pleasure of Opinion is the far greatest part of the
Pleasure of Life; and that which is as much valued and esteemed by all those
who place their Happiness in Pleasure. If it were all to be reduced to that
which lies in satisfying the necessary Desires of Nature, then such as have
just enough for that, are far more happy than the Rich and Voluptuous, because
they have less Pains and Care. But if any allowance be made to the Pleasure of
Fancy and Opinion, then no stop can be given to inordinate Desires. For, who
can set bounds to Fancy, or lay a reasonable Restraint upon Desires, if the
Differences of Good and Evil be taken away? As they must be, if mere Pleasure
and Pain be to be regarded in our Actions.

(2.) As to the other, the Methods they used to remove all Fears of another
World were weak and trifling, and they had no Advantage in Point of Argument,
but what the Ignorance and Folly of the Idolatrous part of Mankind at that time
gave them. But there is a far greater advantage in point of Interest, which
makes men of Sensual Lives very willing to be rid of the Fears of another Life.
And a willing mind goes a great way in believing or not believing. Those who
place their Happiness in eating and drinking well (as they call it) and other
Sensual Delights, which can never be enjoyed when htis Life is ended, have but
a melancholy Prospect into another World; for they are shut out from the very
possibility of being happy in their own Sense, (unless they would believe the
Eastern Impostour;) but when they once come to apprehend that there is no
Pleasure to make them happy but what is seated in the Body, they are apt to
conclude that when that dies, there is an end of all, for their Imaginations
can reach no farther. And the true Reason is, they have laid Reason and
Conscience asleep so long, that it is very hard to awaken them; their Notions
of good and Evil are like the confused Apprehensions of Men half awake; they
see enough to perplex but not enough to satisfy them. And when their Fears
grow upon them, they have not the Heart and Courage to Examine them, whether
they be Reasonable or not; but rather choose to return to their former Opiates,
than undergo the trouble of an Effectual Cure by a hearty Repentance and coming
to themselves, Luke 15. 17.
as the Prodigal Son in the Parable did, when his Hardship had brought him to
Consideration. We do not know what had become of him, if he had been wise and
frugal in his Pleasures; if he had taken care of a good stock and a plentiful
Subsistence; but he first came to be pinched with want, before he was awakened
to Repent. But we have in Scripture a more remarkable Instance of the
Stupifying Nature of Sensual Pleasures; and that was in David after his Sins of
Adultery and Murder. It is a Wonder, how a Man of such a tender Conscience in
other things, should continue so long under the Guilt of these Enormities,
without being awakened to Repentance: Did he not know these to be great Sins?
And did not his Conscience charge him with the Guilt of them? How came he then
to need a Prophet to be sent to him, and to deal so plainly with him, as to
tell him Thou art the Man? 2 Samuel 12. 7.
But this is a plain Evidence, how much the Pleasures of Sin are apt to
stupifie Men's Consciences so far, that unless God by his Grace be pleased to
awaken them thoroughly, they never come to a sincere and hearty Repentance.
David saw nothing more as to the Guilt of his Sins, when he penned his 51st
Psalm, than his own Reason and Natural Conscience might inform him before; but
he had quite another Sense of his Sins then; his Heart was broken and his Soul
wounded under the Apprehension of God's Displeasure; and this makes him pray so
earnestly and so importunately to God for the Pardon of his Sins. And if it
were thus in the case of a Man otherwise after God's own heart, i.e. afraid of
offending him, and careful to please him; what may we imagine it to be in
those who in the time of Youth walk in the way of their hearts, and in the
sight of their eyes: i. e. allowing themselves in all Sensual Inclinations, and
pursuing Carnal Delights so far till they have lost all Sense of God and
another World; and such as these, nothing but the Powerful Influences of
Divine Grace can awaken and recover.

(3.) The Third Reason is, A General Presumption upon God's Mercy. The first
thing which Sinners, in the Heat of their Youth, and Pursuit of their Lusts,
aim at, is to think as little as may be of what they are doing, or what will be
the Consequence of their Actions. For every thought of themselves is very
uneasy to them, and every thought of God is much more so; therefore they drive
away all such thoughts by one means or other, by Sleep, Diversion, Company, and
such Public Entertainments, as rather heighten and inflame their Vices than
correct them.

If all this will not do, but there will be some Melancholy Hours, wherein
Conscience begins to rouse it self, and to awaken the Sinner to some Sense of
his Folly; then he is ready to hearken with Pleasure to any Raileries against
Religion and Morality; and admires the Wit of any one who dares say a bold and
sharp thing against the Wisdom of all Ages, and of the best Men in them. And
one or two such Sayings, without Proof, are cried up as far beyond the best
Rules of Morality, or the Evidence of natural and revealed Religion. Any
Skeptical Disputes are sufficient Demonstrations to them; and the most
unreasonable Cavils against Religion are embraced, because against the thing
they hate; and even a Jest against the Day of Judgment shall signify more with
them, than the strongest Arguments in the World to prove it. The true Reason
is, they love their Vices, and hate every thing which makes them uneasy to
them; and nothing does more so, than the thoughts of a Judgment to come.

But suppose after all, the terrible and frequent Expressions of Scripture
concerning the Day of Judgment, joined with the Reasonableness of the thing, do
make such Impression on their Minds that they cannot wholly shake off the Fears
and Apprehensions of it, then their last endeavor is to mitigate and lessen
them, from a General Presumption of God's Merciful Nature; and therefore they
are willing to suppose, that however God, to keep the World in awe, has
threatened them with the dreadful Severities of the Great Day, yet as a tender
Father who threatens his Disobedient Son, in order to reclaim him, with no less
than Disinheriting him for ever; yet when it comes to Execution he may Relent,
not from his Sons Deserts, but his own Compassion; so they hope, or believe,
(or are willing to do so) that God at the Great Day will not proceed according
to the rigor which he has threatened to use. And to comfort themselves in
these hopes they find out all possible Extenuations of their Sins: If we, say
they, had been created purely intellectual Beings, free from this load of
Flesh, and the Inclinations which are natural to it, then it had been more
reasonable to have called us to a strict Account for every Action of our Lives;
for then every Inclination to Evil must have come from our Minds; but now our
Bodies corrupt and draw them aside; and the Inclinations to Evil grow faster
than our Reason, which should check and restrain them. And when those
Inclinations are strongest, Men have not that Judgment which is necessary to
the Government of unruly Passions. So that the very frame of humane Nature
seems to plead for Sins committed in the Heat and Violence of Youth. Besides,
such is the Strictness and Purity of the Law of God, and so great the Weakness
and Disability, the Ignorance and Inadvertency of Mankind, that if God will
make no Allowance for humane Frailty, who can stand before his Tribunal? And,
if any Allowance be made for Sins of Infirmity, there are so many Abatements to
be made for Sins committed through sudden Passion, through Mistake, through the
unavoidable Impotency of humane Nature in this degenerate Condition, that the
Severity of that Day is not much to be feared.

This is the utmost of the Sinners Plea against the Severity of the Day of
Judgment; But, to show how faulty it is, I shall offer these Considerations;

1. That God will certainly Judge the World in Righteousness; Acts 17. 31.
and therefore none shall have Cause to complain of the Harshness or Severity
of his Proceedings. For, this Righteousness is not the Rigor of Justice, but
that Equity which has a Regard to the Circumstances of Actions, and the
Abatement and Extenuation of Faults which arise from them.

2. None shall suffer at that Day, but for their wilful Impenitency, and
obstinate Continuance in Sin. For, this is not only agreeable to the Merciful
Nature of God, to forgive Repenting Sinners; but it is one of the great Designs
of the Gospel to assure Mankind of it by the highest Testimonies, even by the
Death and Resurrection of the Son of God, and all the Miracles wrought in
Confirmation of it, and of the Truth of his Doctrine.

3. There are several Degrees of Wilfulness and Obstinacy, and Men's Judgment
shall be according to them. Some Men's Capacities, Opportunities and Helps have
very much exceeded others; some have broken through stronger Convictions and
more powerful Assistences of Grace than others; some have had more early
Instructions, more frequent Warnings, more obliging Favors from Heaven than
others. And as it is reasonable that Persons suffer for their Obstinate
Continuance in Sin, so that they should suffer according to the Degrees and
Circumstances of it.

(4.) It is not unjust Severity in God, to deprive Men of that Happiness which
they have wilfully refused; and to condemn them to that Misery which their Sins
have deserved. Has not God made the most condescending Offer of Mercy and
Salvation, that it is possible for Creatures to expect from him, after so many
and great Provocations? Could Heaven stoop lower than it has done to vile and
ungrateful Sinners? When the Son of God came down from Heaven on purpose to
reconcile God and Man together; When the Spirit of God warns and excites their
minds to the Consideration of their Eternal Welfare; When the Messengers of
this Reconciliation are to woo and entreat and beseech Sinners in Christ's
stead, as though God did beseech them by them, that they would be reconciled to
God; When the Patience and Goodness and Long-suffering of God is exercised so
much on purpose to lead them to Repentance; When God instead of perfect
Obedience, is willing to pardon and pass by so many Offenses, if they truly
Repent of them, and to receive them still into his Favor and Mercy; When after
all this men do rather prefer the present Pleasures of Sin, before all that
happiness which God so freely offers, is it any Injustice in him to suffer them
for ever to be deprived of that which they so wilfully, so ungratefully, so
obstinately refused? And supposing the Souls of Men to subsist in another World
free from all those Clouds of Error and Mistake, and the false Notions they
are deceived by here, as well as all the Diversions and Pleasures of this Life,
it is not to be imagined, but they must for-ever suffer an intolerable Anguish
within (called, Mark 9. 44.
A Worm that never dies, and a Fire that never goes out,) from the Reflections
upon their own Folly. What Vengeance beyond this God may inflict, we now know
not, (may none of us ever know it!) but we are sure it will never exceed the
proportion and desert of their Sins. Which is sufficient to clear the Justice
of God in his Proceedings with Mankind in the Day of Judgment.

2. It remains now only to show by what means God's bringing us to Judgment
may make a deeper Impression upon our Minds; By considering th^se two things;

1. That our not considering it will not make our condition b^tter, but much
worse.

2. That our Considering it is the best means to prevent the evil Consequences
of it.

(1.) Our not considering it will not make our Condition better. There were
great Reason indeed to walk in the way of our hearts, and in the sight of our
eyes, and never trouble our selves with what will happen at the great Day, if
the putting it out of our Heads would make our Accounts the easier when it
comes. But alas! Whether we think of it or no, the Account runs on, and we must
answer to every particular at last; and how unprovided shall we be, if we spend
no time here in examining, stating and clearing of them as far as we are able.
It is a mighty Privilege we have by the Gospel, that God allows us to clear
our Accounts with him in this World; 1 Cor. 11. 31.
For, if we would judge our selves we shall not be judged: i.e. If we call our
selves to a strict Account for our Actions; if we Repent heartily and sincerely
of our Sins; if we seek earnestly to God for Mercy; if we have our Consciences
cleansed by the Blood of Christ from the pollution of our Sins, then we may
with Joy and Peace in our Minds think of the Great Day of Recompense. But if we
never enter into our Selves, to search and examine our own Actions, never look
into the Habits of our own Minds, nor charge our selves with the Guilt of the
Sins we have committed, how can we ever hope to escape the Scrutiny or avoid
the Severity of that Day? For our Account continually increases by our neglect
of it, and the burden of God's Wrath must be so much heavier when we have taken
no care to lessen it, but after our hardness and impenitent hearts have only
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5.


(2.) Our considering that God will bring us to Judgment is the best means to
prevent the evil Consequences of it. For, although we cannot hope to plead
Innocence; yet, (which is next in point of Wisdom) this is the most effectual
Motive to bring us to Repentance: And that which makes us Repent makes us to
grow Wise in time, and to lay a good Foundation for Eternal Life. There are
many Arguments to induce us to it in the Folly and Shame of our Sins; the
Wisdom of Reflection and Reformation; the Instances of it and Exhortations to
it recorded in Scripture; but there is none more sensible and which touches Men
more in point of Interest and Concernment than this of a Judgment to come. Must
I then, says a Penitent Sinner, give a strict Account to God of all the evil
Actions of my Life, and suffer according to the Desert of them if I die in
Impenitency? How much does it then concern me to Repent betimes, to Repent in
good earnest, to Repent while there is hopes of Mercy! Away then all ye
deceitful Vanities of this wicked World, ye have too long deceived and seduced
me: what will all this vain show, this busy Seducer, this impertinent Outside
of the World signify, when I must be stripped of all, and stand guilty and
accused by my own Conscience before the Judgment Seat of Christ? Oh! how
wretched shall I be, if my Conscience condemns me before the Sentence of the
Judge! Therefore, I am resolved to prevent the Judgment of that Day; I will
accuse, judge, and condemn my self; nay, I will proceed to Execution, as to all
the vicious Habits and corrupt Inclinations within me. And although I cannot
wholly mortify them, yet I will crucify them; i. e. nail them to the Cross,
and allow them no longer Liberty; and albeit they may struggle for a time, yet
I will never give way to their Dominion over me any more; that so Death and
Judgment may find me prepared, if not with unspotted Innocence, yet with hearty
and sincere Repentance.

To conclude all; let the Consideration of this Day of Judgment to come enter
deep into our Minds, and awaken us out of our Lethargy and Security. We are
very apt to put off unpleasing things from time to time, and to pass away our
time here as easily as may be. But this is no part of Wisdom, and we shall
extremely blame our selves for it one time or other. The best we can do now, is
to recover what is past by Repentance, and to set our selves to the making up
our Accounts with God in this World: For, we are all walking on the brink of
Eternity, and know not how soon we may drop into it. But what Eternal Horror
and Confusion must follow us, if we go on to slight the Opportunities he still
affords us of making our Peace with him who is to be our Judge? May God
therefore of his Mercy awaken us all to a timely and serious Repentance, and
then our Iniquities shall not be our Ruin.

FINIS.

