A LETTER TO Mr Robert Burscough, In ANSWER to his Discourse of Schism.

IN WHICH, I. The Notion of Catholic Unity is Considered. II. The Separation
of Dissenters not Schismatical Proved. III. The Ordinations of Dissenting
Ministers Justified. IV. Pretended Pleas for Separation Examined. V. The Case
about Ceremonies Argued, etc.


Acts 24.14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
Heresy, so Worship I the God of my Fathers; believing all Things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets.

Christianus mihi Nomen est; Catholicus vero Cognomen; illud me Nuncupat, istud
Ostendit. Pacian. Epist. ad Sympron. LONDON: Printed for J. Clark, at the Bible
in the Old Change, near St. Paul's, 1700.

A LETTER TO Mr. Robt. Burscough, IN Answer to his Discourse of SCHISM.
Reverend Sir,
THE Discourse, which under a Pretense of Charity to our Souls, you lately
addressed to Us, who conformed before the Toleration, and have since withdrawn
our selves from the Communion of the Church of England; We think our selves
obliged, for our own Vindication, and the better information of such, as have
ill Thoughts of us on that Account, to acquaint you what Entertainment it finds
with most of us, and for what Reasons we can make it no better Welcome.

Your Introduction addresses us with a Declaration of a glorious Design you
have to do us all the good you are able; Introduct.
and thereupon think it very reasonable to desire our impartial and candid
perusal of what you offer us in order to that good End; though, as you say, it be
more than you can expect from those amongst us, whom your Charity judges as
biased with Prejudice, false Zeal and worldly Interest: But of all others you
assure your self of contributing something to their Satisfaction. And that they
are not like to meet with any thing from you that may give any just Cause of
Offense; yea nothing but what proceeds from a Spirit of Charity. But of what
sort this your Spirit of Charity is, and how well it agrees in its Virtues,
with that of the Apostle's, 1 Cor. 13. and how eminently it has appeared
throughout your following Discourse, every one that reads it may easily
discern. This Spirit of Charity is doubtless some rare Arcanum, a highly
refined volatile Thing; some fiery Tincture, which agrees not with every
Constitution, but prepared with a peculiar Art, as a Cordial for one sort of
the Choleric Church of England Men, with whose bilious Blood it agrees by
Sympathy. And as for your meek Endeavors herein, you hope that what use soever
may be made of them by some Men, yet that God will graciously accept them. Sir,
What Acceptance they find with God you will better understand in the Day that
you must give your Accounts to Him; but what Reason we have to accept them, you
and others, that will, may see by that time you are come to the other end of
these Pages. This Ostentation of the Meekness of your Spirit, and the Charity
of your Design to reduce us to the Truth, and to the way of our Duty, is the
Sum of your Introduction, besides an invidious Fling at parting, which we may
not pass by without some Animadversion.

You say, Your Business at present is chiefly with Us, who think we may
lawfully conform with you, and yet have deserted your Communion; a thing indeed
which is very agreeable to Flesh and Blood, and which may make several Turns of
Affairs more easy to Us; but wise and good Men would suspect an Opinion and
Practice, which are so much on the side of the World.

Sir, This is the first Specimen of that singular Charity you have for us; the
plainer English of which is this; That unless we will fully Conform to you, and
for ever abandon those Ministers of Christ whom we now hear (though we have so
much Charity for you, as not to censure You, as you censure Us) it is not fit
that we should be employed in any Office in Church or State, and in effect,
that none should Buy or Sell or Live, but such as have received your Mark. You
know what effectual Provision you have made for this (as far as the Times would
bear) by your Sacramental Test, whereby many Persons of good Figure and
Character have been precluded from Public Service; whose Consciences have been
too tender to surmount that Difficulty, and which perhaps the Government has
no great reason to be fond of. But now, to deliver our Brethren, who better
understand their Liberty in the Gospel, from this end of your Spear, wherewith
you strike at them; we have this to offer.

I. We do not think it utterly unlawful, or absolutely Sinful to Communicate
occasionally with the Church of England, at least in a Lay-communion; we have a
more Catholic Charity, than so to judge of it; though we know it to be a very
Faulty, yet we take it to be a True Church of Christ; and are ready to testify
(as need requires) our general Communion with it, as a part with us of the same
universal Body, though we enter not into a stated Communion with it, under those
unjustifyable Terms, on which it is offered us.

II. It is every Man's bounden Duty to serve God and his Country, as also to
provide for Himself and his own Family, with all those intellectual and
corporal Abilities, wherewith God has blessed him, according as there are
Occasions and Calls to it; therefore nothing that is tolerable, and not plainly
sinful, though burdensome and uneligible, ought to restrain us from the Service of
God or Man, which we are sitted for, and called to. For who knows of what
consequence the Service of such may be, especially in a public Post, to the
preservation of Religion and Property, or to the support and establishment of
the Government? Which are Considerations sufficient to preponderate all
tolerable Inconveniences.

III. That it may appear we are not acted herein, merely by the Principles of
Humane Policy, or Self Ends; we have the Example of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles to warrant our Practice. You may see what his Opinion was of the
Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, and how zealously he had, in several of his
Epistles, declared against them, as weak and beggarly Elements, and enslaving
Things, Gal. 4.9. Antichristian, Chapter 5.2. Inconsistent with the Liberty of the
Gospel, ver. 1. Another Gospel, than that which he had Preached unto 'em, Chapter
1.6, 7, 8. And pronounces Anathema on them that had troubled 'em with it, ver.
9. Besides what he writes in some other Epistles to the same purpose. This is
more than ever we heard from any Nonconformist against the Ceremonies of the
Church of Enggland; and yet for all this, the Wise and Holy Paul, to avoid the
offending his weak Brethren, would not scruple, for once, to Circumcise
Timothy, Act. 16.3. At another time, to shave his Head, and observe the Jewish
Rites of a Religious Vow, Chapter 18.18. And at another time, to save himself from
the Rage of a Company of Bigots at Jerusalem, appeared there as a Nazarite,
with all the Formalities the Law required in that Case, Chapter 21.24. This he
could do occasionally, according to the Liberty he had in Christ, which he was
careful to preserve, and not to be brought under the Power of these Things,
which is contrary to the Nature and free State of the Gospel. And having this
apostolical Precedent, our Consciences are at ease in this Matter. Yet,

IV. If there be any that have made these external Compliances, renuente
Conscientia, or but with a doubting Conscience; let them look to it, and repent
of their Sin, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. But to pass this Censure
on any, without clear Evidence, is far from that Charity, which thinks no
Evil.

Your first Section it but Preliminary to what you pretend to be more
Argumentative; Sect. 1.
wherein you tell us, that the Church of Christ, being but One, and that, in
the highest and strictest manner of Union that is possible for a Society of
Men; all the Question will be, wherein this Union does consist, or in what
things it ought to be maintained? To this you answer, That all Christians ought
to be united, 1. In Faith, 2. in Love, 3. in outward Worship and Communion. On
the Two former you touch lightly, because you perceive, that the stress of the
Question lies on the Third. So that though We Dissenters be One with you in Faith
and Love, which (whatever you think) we have always taken to be the main
fundamental Principles of our Christianity, and the strongest Nerves of our
Christian Union, and all that is (as absolutely necessary) required of us, 2 Timothy 1.13. Gal. 5.6. Philem. ver. 5. Yet we must, by the Rules of your Charity,
be all Damned, if we dare to dissent from you, in any of your outward Acts and
Modes of Worship and Communion. Here you run on a large and learned Harangue on
the excellency and necessity of Church-Concord in the external Forms of Worship
and Discipline; as if a few variable, unscriptural, and confessedly indifferent
Ceremonies, were the only true Cement and Badge of Christian Union; and without
which, it is impossible (as a visible Society) to appear in the Eye of the
World, as One. And for this you think you very pertinently quote both
Scriptures and the Fathers. Now as to what you say as to the necessity of Union
in Essentials, we are ready to say with you; and take Communion on in
Externalls and Circumstantialls (where it may be had without Sin) to be, on
several Accounts, as desirable as you can represent it to be. But when you say
that Faith and Love, being invisible Principles, are not capable of being a
public Badge of the Christian Profession; And Argue from thence, that it is
only Uniformity in the external Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, that evidences
the Oneness of Faith and Affection; as if Faith and Love had no other way to
express their Efficacy and Sincerity, but this; you do not only traduce those
Divine Principles, but shamefully expose the Church, of which you are so very
tender. For should it be said, that no one would ever believe the Members of
the Church of England, to be any of Christ's Disciples, did they not see them
so Zealous for the Ceremonies of their Church, how little would this be for the
Credit of their Christianity? And indeed this is lamentably too true of very
many, not only of the common Members, but of the Teachers and Leaders of the
Church, that have little else to distinguish them from Heathens, or to persuade
a belief of their Christianity, but an empty Name, and a blind Zeal for what
they call the Church.

That the Church Universal is One, and, in some respects may be said to be one
visible Society, and Political Body, we readily grant, so that the Unity be
made to consist only in what is Essential to it; else we must inevitably cut
the Catholic Church in Pieces, according to the variety and differences of the
external Rites and Communions of the many particular Churches, of which the
whole is constituted. And when we have done so, where shall we find that Oracle
that shall infallibly determine and assure us, which of all these Parts, is
that which we ought to own, and to Communicate with, as the Church of Christ,
in which alone Salvation is to be had? Must you be the Oracle? May not others
claim it as well as you? Or will you send us to Rome to be determined? Yet this
is that you so charitably direct us to, and are so strenuously contending for.
If then the Rending of the Church be Schism, let all the unprejudiced part of
the World judge, who are the Schismatics, You, or We. We are ready to
Communicate with you in all that is Essential to the Church of Christ, and
profess our selves to be so far One with you; but because we dissent from you
in some Circumstantials of your own devising, which God has no where required
of us, and which are justly Offensive to the Consciences of very many of the
Faithful; yet, which you make the indispensable Conditions of Communion with
you; therefore we must be cut off and cast out, as no parts of the Catholic
Church of Christ. Is not this to cut the Church in Pieces? and the (...) of a
Schismatical Church?

The Catholic Church of Christ indeed is One; therefore he that is duly
admitted, as a Member, in any one true part, or particular Congregation of this
Church, has a right of Communicating in all; and he that is justly
Excommunicated out of one, is cut off from all; because all are but the
integrating Parts of one and the same Body. But then they can be one, only in
those things, which are essentially common to all, and not in those peculiar
Forms, or accidental Differences, which are, one way or other, become proper to
'em, as particular Parts. Will you cut off the Foot, as no part of the Body,
because it differs in Form from the Hand? Are you offended with your Nose,
because it is not, in Figure, like your Ear? When you have dismembered all the
Dissimilar Parts, what a comely, useful, uniform Trunk will you have left? Yet
this is what you are Pleading for; Where then is your Charity? Or your Policy?
You say, You see not what just Cause there can be, that they should be divided
in Worship, who are united in Faith; And we say so too. But why then have you
thus divided us from you? Whose Fault is it that we do not Worship God
together, but yours, that will not suffer it, but on such Terms as we cannot
without Sin submit to; and which you have devised and imposed, with a design to
keep so many of us out of your Communion?

That the Church is a Regular Society, we grant. A Body fitly joined together,
consisting of many Members, of which all have not the same Office, as you quote
it from the Apostle. Neither have all the same External Form, or manner of
Operation in the Service of the Body. Order is to be preserved in the Church;
but how shall we agree what, and whose Order it shall be? Let us ask you
soberly; Is there no true Church in the World but yours? If there be, may not
every one of these Churches, which differ from you, and from one another, as
much as we, magnify their own Order as a Law to all the Rest, as you now do?
And then tell us, whether it be Order or Confusion that these Positions lead
to; or whether this be not the way to set all the Christian World by the Ears.

Here you complain that Men are generally averse from enduring any thing of
Subjection; to which we may add, and altogether as prone to Domineering and
Imposing. Now the Obedience, which is prescribed in the Texts of Scripture,
which you have cited, you say, is to be paid by the Faithful to those that are
over them in the Lord: But by the whole tenor of your Discourse, you plainly
insinuate, that the Wisdom (which is in effect the same with the Will) of those
that have obtained the Government of the Church, must be the Rule to all their
Inferiors. And by their being over them in the Lord, you give us to understand
nothing else but their Power de facto in the Church, where they sit in Moses's
Chair, as the Representatives of Christ in Government; so that they must be
obeyed, without asking any Question for Conscience sake. But for our parts, we
understand not how we can be secured against the danger of Church-Tyranny and
Superstition; if those Words of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.12. (...) in the Lord,
do not import the Bounds of our Obedience, as well as the general Matter of it,
and Motive to it. Church-Rulers may be forward to Labor, and to Admonish too,
but if it be not in the Lord, and according to the Lord, woe be to them that
are guided and influenced by 'em. But let the Apostle's Exhortation be taken in
the true intent and meaning of it, and we will be as forward to obey as you.
There Is nothing in the World that we covet more, than to see such Bishops and
Pastors in the Church of England, as the Apostle exhorts us to obey in the
Lord, that is (without any personal Reflection) such as require nothing of us,
but what the Lord requires, that the World might see, how much we would disdain
to be outdone by any, but Flatterers and Sycophants, in our Love and Obedience
to 'em.

What you say of the Oneness of Church Government, and of the People that are
under it, we agree to, if you will but stand to your own Distinctions; That
what you say of both is to be understood of them, so far as they agree to
Christ's Institution. And if Christ be not divided, neither are they. They are
not divided, I mean, so far as they act according to his Will, and the Rules of
their Order. If by these Rules, you mean the Sacred Rules, which Christ has
given them, and not the Arbritary Rules which they give us, We mean so too.
That the faithful People under their lawful Pastors (we hope you mean Lawful,
by the Law of Christ, and not only by the Law of Man) make up one Body: This,
you say, is evident, from their Duty; and from their Rights.

From their Duty, you plead, (1.) They are obliged to Honor and Obey their
Spiritual Rulers. Ay, Sir, In the Lord, and according to the Lord. (2.) It is
their Duty to join together in public Acts of Worship, with that Company of
Christians, which they sind Established (and in some Cases, though only
tolerated, yea, though Persecuted) under a lawful Pastor, where they reside.
This we acknowledge is their Duty, where they may do it without Sin.

From their Rights, which are the same every where; you Argue, That this Union
is founded on a Divine Institution, and the Baptismal Covenant, in which they
are all alike engaged, and not on a formal positive League amongst themselves.
No, Sir, nor on any thing that is merely Humane, or of an Indifferent, much
less a doubtful Nature, wherein the Substance or Essentials of Christianity do
not consist.

What you object against the Independent Congregational way, or any others of
the same Practice and Persuasion in this Point, we take not our selves to be
concerned in, unless you mistake us all for such who have not that Dependence
on, and Communion with you, which you are Quarrelling with us for.

Having been at great Labor to prove, what none of Us, nor perhaps any one
else, that is called Christian, ever denied, viz. That the universal Church is
One Body; you make your Application of this profound Doctrine, by way of
Encouragement to your selves, and draw a most delightful Contemplation from it,
That it is now the same Body that it was from the beginning. The same indeed is
every true Church of Christ, as it was from the beginning, that is, in all
things that are absolutely necessary to Salvation; but we would gladly
understand where that pure Church is now to be found, which has not at all
deviated, or degenerated from what the Church of Christ was in the beginning.
It Is true, every true Church of Christ now in the World is derived, by
Succession, from Christ and his Apostles; but dares the Church of England say,
that it is now the very same in all it is Circumstantials and external Modes and
Forms of Worship, Discipline and Ceremonies with those of the Apostles own
Planting? Where do you read your apostolical Rules, or Precedents for any of
those Things, which you so zealously Practice, and so arbitrarily impose on us,
as the Terms of our Communion with you, and which are the only Matters in
debate between us? Yet you would have the World believe, that without our full
Conformity to these Things, and our Communion with you in 'em, we cannot be one
Body with the Universal Church, nor in Communion with the Apostles. Nor is this
all; but that consequently we are out of Communion with the Father and the Son,
and so are in a state of Infidelity and Damnation. Have we not herein a special
Instance and Evidence of your Catholic Charity, just like theirs of the Church
of Rome, who call those only Christians, that are of their own Communion? Let
us be ever so Orthodox in all the Articles of the Christian Faith; ever so
right as to the Object of our Religious Worship, or Reverent and Devout in the
Acts of it; ever so Sober, Just and Righteous in our Conversation; or ever so
wiling to walk in Communion with you, as far as we may do it without Sinning
against God and our own Souls: Yet for want of Conformity to you, in all those
unnecessary Things which you would impose on us, we must be cut off from
Christ, and left to Perish with the Heathen World. But if we will tamely put
our Necks under your Yoke, and prostitute our Consciences to your Authority,
and adventure our All to Eternity on the safe Conduct of your Direction and
Benediction, let us be ever so ignorant of the Articles or Nature of the Faith
we profess, or ever so Scandalous in our Lives, yet if we Live and Die in your
Communion, you will on our Deathbeds bring us the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Savior, which you will pretend to Consecrate to us, and so
Absolve us, and tell us we are safe for the other World. May we not tell a
Popish Priest now, Mutato nomine, de te Fabula Narratur?

And now Sir, having taken this brief View of your first Section, wherein had
we followed you Line by Line, in every thing that might have offered us a just
Remark, it would have carried us too far beyond the due Bounds of a Letter.
Wherefore, for brevity sake, we will now sum up the Argument of it in this
categorical Form.

The Universal Church of Christ is One Body,

But the Church of England, and those of the Dissenters are Two, Erg.

Dissenters are not of the Church of Christ. Or which may be concluded
altogether as Logically, Erg. Either the Church of England, or the Dissenters
are not the Church of Christ.

Both of these are alike true. In what University learned you this Logic? Or
by what Pretense can you hope to hide the shame of so staring a Fallacy?

That we have not wronged you in the Syllogism, Sect. 2.
we have drawn upon your first Section, appears by your own Inferences in your
Second; where you conclude, That a Breach of Union in any of these Things, viz.
Not only in Faith and Love, but in External Communion, and particularly, with
the Church of England, in its present State, and in all its Rites and
Ceremonies, which is the main thing in dispute betwixt us, wherever the Fault
is, (as you express it with very good caution) must needs be Sinful, i. e. so
Sinful, as (according to your Hypothesis) cuts a Person off from all saving
Communion with the Church of Christ.

Now this Inference, so generally, yet cautiously stated, you begin very
Orthodoxly to defend in your next Paragraphs, where you say,

I. That if there be but one Faith delivered to the Saints, for which they must
earnestly contend, they grievously offend who add new Articles to it, or take
away from it such as are already revealed, or otherwise deprave it by a mixthre
of Falsehood. And so far as they do so, we ought to depart from them, and not
betray or deny the Truth in compliance with them. Sir, We sincerely thank you
for this, and wish that we may always sind you sixth on this good Principle.
This is all that We and our Teachers have been so long wrestling and waiting on
the Church of England for. Grant us but this, and then there will need but one
thing more (besides the Grace of God,) to reconcile and unite us. If we unite
with you in all that the Word of God requires us to unite in, the Fault will
not be Ours, if we depart and separate from you in those Articles, which are
not of the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, or in those Acts of
Worship and outward Communion, which we have no Warrant in the Scriptures for,
but general Cautions against; then our Separation will not (by this Principle
of Yours) be damned by you as Schismatical, but must be acknowledged (as we
verily believe it) to be a part of our bounden Duty. And when you speak with so
much keenness against our Division and Separation from you, do Us and the Cause
but so much right, as to prefix the Word Causeless, and you will find us ready
to say (as to the Theory of your Doctrine) much the same as you do. All that you
quote out of the Scriptures, or out of your Saints, or any other more modern
Authors of your own, or of our Persuasion, against Schism, is nothing at all to
us, unless you first prove our Separation to be Causeless, and consequently
Schismatical.

Now in order to this, you undertake, 1. To show us what the Nature of Schism
is. 2. What Grounds you have to apprehend that we are deeply concerned in it.
3. You examine the Arguments that have been offered on our part, to excuse us
from the guilt of it. 4. You represent to us the sad Consequence of it.


According to this Method we shall now endeavor to follow you.

I. You say, That Schism, in the Notion of it that we are now upon, is a
causeless Breach of outward Ecclesiastical Communion. By this Limitation of
your Desinition, whereby you warily explain your self, you give us to
understand, that what your Discourse is so hotly affected with, is not the
Whole, but only a Branch of Schism, and indeed one of the least and remotest
Branches of it; yet which, if Causeless, we will grant it to your Desinition,
to be Schismatical. And we again thank your Ingenuity in inserting the Word
Causeless, by which Specific Difference of your Genius, you leave us to
conclude, that there is a Breach of outward Ecclesiastical Communion, which is
not Causeless, but Necessary; and if we can prove this to be our Case, then are
you bound, by your own Definition, to Absolve us of that Guilt, with which we
stand charged by you.

This Schism, you say, is sometimes within a Church, sometimes from a Church,
sometimes sets up opposite Churches and Officers. All which, if the Separation
be Causeless, must needs carry the Schism to higher degrees of Guilt; And much
more, when it constitutes Pastors without any lawful Authority, or Ordination.
So that in all this we are like to agree in Notion, till it comes to be tried,
whether the Separation, with which we are charged, be Causeless or no; and
whether our Pastors be constituted without any lawful Authority or Ordination.

But before we come to the Examination of this part of the Question, wherein
the main stress of all lies, we are diverted by what you say, you need not
enter upon, viz. The Debate, Whether Episcopal Ordination, and Baptism
conferred in Schism be valid? And yet you so far enter upon it (whether you had
need to do it or no) as to resolve it in the Negative. Now we hope that you
would have us to understand Schism here, in the same Notion of it, as you give
it us in your Desinition, viz. A causeless Breach of outward Ecclesiastical
Communion, though in all other respects, wherein the Essentials of the Christian
Faith and Profession do consist, there be no Schism, but a good Agreement both
with the Holy Scriptures, and with the Catholic Church; and that all
Ordinances administered by such as are under the guilt of this piece of Schism,
are null, you conclude from the Notion you have conceived of Catholic Unity;
which newfound Notion of yours you strongly fancy is grounded on the
Scriptures you have before quoted ( i. e. as you understand and apply them to
the Service of your Hypothesis) and on the Judgment and Practice of the
Faithful in the purest Ages ( alias the most Popish Ages;) so that you presume
your Inference is clear; That all those who have separated without just Cause
from the outward Communion of that Church, with which they ought, (or with
which you will say they ought) to hold Communion, and so persisting in that
Separation, though otherwise never so Orthodox, or Holy, have hereby so cut
themselves off from the Body of the Universal Church, that they can do nothing,
that can qualify themselves or others for Communion with it. So that by this
your Rule of Catholic Unity in outward Communion, all those Persons and
Churches, that herein agree not with you, are not of the Body, nor united to
the Head, and then must necessarily be in a state of Damnation. Woe be then to
all those poor Churches that are to your Constitution, and way of Government
and Worship Strangers. But, by the way, give us leave to ask you, How it comes
to pass, that Baptism and Ordination received in the Church of Rome, are
accounted valid in your Church of England, and yet Ordination in any Protestant
Church, that is not of your Constitution, accounted Null? Or, for what politic
Reason is their Baptism allowed, and their Ordination only Condemned? Is it
because the Church of Rome never separated from you, nor you from it, as all
the other Protestant Churches have done? Who must therefore be all abandoned by
you, as Harlots that deserve to be stoned, while Rome is owned for your Sister,
or your Mother, and of the same Catholic Body with you? Either own the
Relation, or renounce the Title of Protestant.

Will you say that these Churches were never in Communion with you, and
therefore did not go out from you? Suppose this were true of the main Body of
them, that they were never in particular outward Communion with the Church of
England, though before the Reformation they were in the same Church with you; and
many of those, and of their Children, who were once actually in particular
Communion with you, went out from you, on the same Account as we do; yet,
supposing it otherwise, How little will this help Them more than Us, as to the
Oneness of the outward Communion of the universal Church, in the Sense that you
take it, and urge it on Us?

And now that we are upon Enquiries with you; Pray be not offended if we ask
you once more. What think you of our first Protestant Reformers? Before they
actually separated from the Church of Rome, were they not Members of that
Church, and in outward Communion with it If not, how could they be said to
separate from it? But if they were; let us ask you again; was that Church of
which they were then Members, a true Church of Christ, or not? If not, then
that Church, and all the Members of it, was not united to the Head, and
consequently was no Church, nor, by your Rule of Catholic Unity, could do any
thing to qualify themselves, or others for Communion with any part of the
Catholic Church; and from whom then did your Church of England, or any of the
Reformed, derive their Succession and Authority, from the Apostles? But if it
was a true Church, how could they, according to your Notion of Catholic Unity,
separate from it, without involving themselves in the guilt of Schism, with
which you now charge us? May we not hence conclude, that to separate from a
true Church of Christ, that retains the Essentials of a Church, is not always
Schismatical, nor a Solution of Catholic Unity. Will you tell us, that these
had a Warrant, by a Call from Heaven, to justify their Separation? Rev. 18.4. 2
Cor. 6.17. But on what Reason was this Call grounded? Come out of her my
People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins. And does not the same Call reach
Us, as far as the Reason is the same? Though the Sins of the Church of Rome were
greater than those of the present Church of England, yet what is Sin, is Sin
still, and will, by your own Concessions, so far justify our Separation; and on
no other Account do we desire or pretend to justify it.

The Separatists condemned in Scripture; and with whom you would sort Us, and
so represent us to the World, were Men of very ill Character, as to their
Morals; Persons given up to Sensuality, walking after their own ungodly Lusts;
though veild under a Form of Religion, yet by their corrupt Lives, they were
visibly to be discerned. Now let the impartial part of the World judge whether
this be so much our Character, as the Character of those, by whom we are thus
Censured.

That the Fathers and Bishops of the first Ages were very jealous of the Union
of their Churches, and an entire Obedience to their Ecclesiastical Rulers; very
Passionately, and sometimes Hyperbolically declaiming against Separation, or
setting up Pastors without the Approbation of their own Bishops, is not to be
denied; and for which they had some prudential Reasons. The Christian Church
was then in its Infancy, and therefore required a stricter Hand of Government
over it, for the preservation of its Unity in Communion; the Faithful were not
so well settled, and experienced in their Way; their Dangers were many ways
extraordinary, not only from the Heathen Persecutors, but from the Jewish
Bigots, which were in so many Places dispersed among them, and had so
troublesome and ensnaring an Influence on the young Gentile Converts. Besides
the many false and seditious Teachers, which the Devil had Sown, as his Tares,
almost every where among them; the Orthodox Presbyters too few, and generally
too weak to deal with so many, so potent, and so subtle Enemies, or to be
entrusted with the Conduct of the Church, without the Counsel and Direction of
its prime Guides and Governors: Besides, the Honor and Satisfaction of
Sovereign Rule and Dictatorship is what was ever very pleasing to Nature. So
that all these things considered, we have no reason to wonder at the Heat of
their Spirits in this Case. And indeed the Church had then very great Reason to
bless God for this their Zeal, and most religiously to observe them in it,
especially while they had no cause to dissent, or divide themselves on the
account of any Heresies they Taught them, or any disputable unscriptural
Impositions, that were required as the Conditions of their Communion with them.
There were no such Things exacted of Them, as have been of Us and our Teachers,
which made their Obedience easy and indisputable. And you may observe that the
great Reason of their Care to preserve the Unity of the Churches outward
Communion, was not to uphold a few unnecessary Ceremonies, but to preserve the
Purity of its spiritual Worship and Doctrine, which was infinitely more valuable
and consequential; a circumstantial variety of the external Forms of
Church-Administrations would have done the Church no more harm, than the
variety which we see in every Species of the Creation does do them, as long as
that wherein the vital Substance of Religion consists is preserved.

You having proved that a causeless Separation from the Church is highly
Schismatical, wherein we do not oppose you in the Theorie, but in the
Application of your Doctrine, in which you all along beg the Question; you tell
us, That for Separatists to set up opposite Churches and Officers, is a degree
of Sin much worse than Separation it self. And we will say as you do, when once
you have proved the Separation to be Causeless. But till then, we hope your
Christian Charity will allow us to provide for our own Souls, that we may not
be as Sheep without a Shepherd, when we are either unjustly cast out by you, or
most justly separated from you. And if you will not allow us this, we will
bless God, and thank our more merciful Governors that do allow us, without
your Leave, so to do.

Lastly, You proceed to a yet higher Degree of Schism, viz. When they that are
engaged in it, constitute Officers without Authority; or take to themselves
Pastors that have no lawful Mission or real Ordination. This is another of your
orthodox Hypotheses, which it is a thousand Pities, that it should be
dishonored by a Miss-application. Sir, We are as little for Uncommissionated
Preachers and Self-intruders into the ministerial Office, as You. Though bare
Mission, without Ministerial Qualification, make but an Idol-Shepherd, and
wherein the Church of England is more deeply concerned, than perhaps you are
willing to own, yet Qualification without a rightly derived Commission, makes
but a Thief or a Robber. So that herein You and We agree in Thesi. But when on
this Head you apply to Us, and to our Ministers that tragical Story of Korah
and his Accomplices, we cannot take it so kindly of you; though you are not the
first Man, that in great Wrath, has thrown this heavy Stone at our Heads;
however, we have not been hitherto hurt by it. The History of the Case we need
not repeat; the Principles by which they were acted, notwithstanding their
popular Pretensions, were Seditious, and sacrilegiously Rebellious; and the
Judgment of God on them and their Followers, as Just as it was Dreadful. But
before your Charity had applied this dismal Story and Guilt to Us and to our
Teachers, you ought to have drawn a true Parallel of the Case, and have pro'd
that our Ministers have no more Call nor Right to the Gospel Ministry, than
Korah and his Company had to the Priesthood; and that God has set as strict
Bounds about your English Episcopacy, as it is now Established, exclusively of
all others, as he then had done about Moses, and the Aaronical Priesthood. And
till this be done, there is no Man of sober Thought, but must suspend his
Judgment on us.

Out of this Preamble, you lead us to your third Section, where you tell us,
You are now come to our Case; for indeed we think you have hitherto been far
enough from it; here then we hope for a fair Trial, may we but be determined by
what is written in that Book, out of which both You and We must shortly be
judged.

And in Order to our Conviction, you are pleased to mind us how nearly it
concerns us to enquire

I. Whether we have not contracted the guilt of Schism in our Separation from
the Church of England. II. Whether we have not increased this Guilt by setting
up opposite Churches and Officers, or joining with them. III. Whether our
Pastors have any just Title to the Ministry.
Sir, Had we not, to the best of our Power and Skill, with the greatest
Diligence and Sincerity, inquired into all these Things long before this Day,
we had acted very precipitantly and dangerously; but yet such an Admonition as
this, however designed, shall never be out of Season with us. But seeing you
offer your Interrogatories not in the form of an Enquiry, but of an Indictment,
we are ready to answer to each Article, in our just Defense.

1. The first Article of our Indictments runs thus, That we have contracted the
Guilt of Schism, by our Separation from the Church of England; that is (to wave
all Disputes about the Ambiguity of the Word) what you are pleased to call the
Church of England. Though we have varied your Form of Speech, we have done you no
wrong, it being a known Rule in Rhetoric, that a Negative, Interrogation is
but a more vehement Affirmation. And to convict us of the Schism you charge us
with, you plead thus. Was your Communion with it lately Lawful, and have any
new Terms been added, to make it cease to be so? Or was Conformity then a Duty,
and is it now become a Sin? This you take to be a Dead Blow, which must needs
convince us, and make us cry Guilty, or stop our Mouths for ever. But be not
too Consident before you have heard our Defense.

1. By way of Concession, you shall have all that you here suppose, that you
may see we are not froward.

1. That we once thought our Communion with your Church of England Lawful, we
grant; for had we not been so persuaded, we had been self-condemned by our own
Practice. Yet whatever our private Thoughts were once of it, that was not it
that could make the thing to be in it self either Lawful or Unlawful, our
private Judgment being only a Rule to our selves. And if we were therein
mistaken, through our Weakness, or any Prejudices of our Education, we hope you
will allow us the Liberty of rectifying our Judgments upon better Information,
of which, if you think us incapable, what do all your Arguings with us signify?
But,

2. We will grant you yet a little more; that we are still of the same Opinion,
that it is Lawful to Communicate with the Church of England, i. e. that it is
not absolutely, and in it self Sinful so to do; But then we hope, that if your
Charity will not, your Logic must grant us, that what is to be considered but
as simply Lawful, is Matter of Liberty, and not of Necessity. We say Liberty,
granted us by the Nature of the Thing, without any Relation to what the
Government has pleased (so much to your regret) to grant us. But where we are
thus at Liberty, to Censure us for using it, is Inhumanity.

3. If this be not yet enough to please you, we will grant a little more; we
once thought the Conformity you contend for, i. e. our Lay-Conformity to be our
Duty; nor have we repented of these our Thoughts to this Day, nor acted any
thing that is inconsistent with them. We hope the Ingenuity of your cultivated
Reason will allow, at least in Thesi, that what is a Duty at one Time, and
under some Circumstances, is not always so at another Time, and under other
Circumstances. This you must grant, or you know with what a Crowd of senseless
Absurdities you will be pestered, and of which you will not be able to rid your
self. Now having granted you all this, we will see what we have left for our
selves, and Answer you,

2. By way of Confutation of your Supposition; you suppose.

1. That because our Conformity was once Lawful, therefore it is not only so
still, especially because there have been no new Terms added by you to alter
the Case, but that therefore it is still Necessary, which is Illogical enough.
But to this we say as the Apostle does in a like Case, 1 Cor. 6.12. Chapter 10.23.
All things are Lawful unto me, but all things are not Expedient, i. e. All
things that are Lawful to me, as all indifferent Things, in their own Nature
are, are not always Expedient; and when they come to be Inexpedient, they cease
to be, in their use, Lawful; for Quicquid non expedit, in quantum non expedit,
non licet. All Things are Lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
Power of any, q. d. In the use of all Lawful Things I have my Liberty, to do,
or to forbear, as it consists with the Expediency of my own, or others
Edification; and this Liberty I will not betray, by being brought under the
Power of any; of any what? Why, if it be Sense, it must be of any of those
Lawful Things he is now speaking of; for if he be, by any weak Scruples, or ill
Principles of his own, or any impoling Humor of others, brought under the
Power of 'em, or to look upon them as Necessary, he superstitiously enslaves
his Conscience, and renders himself incapable of serving the more noble and
useful Ends of his Liberty. Now in Conformity to this apostolical Rule, we
lately conformed to the Church of England, because we thought it in it self,
Lawful, and on some accounts, then Expedient, so to do; but under our present
Circumstances, and since that Providence has given us the Experience of other
Public and Peaceable Christian Communions, we find it Inexpedient to continue
where we were, with relation to the eternal safety of our own Souls, which is
the highest Concern we have under Heaven; though this be one of those Things
which in your next Section you upbraid us with. So that though it lately was, and
still is simply Lawful to communicate with you, yet we now find it to be on
some of the most important Accounts, very Inexpedient and Prejudicial, both to
our selves and others; and the use of our Christian Liberty herein no way
really injurious to the Edisication, or to the Peace of the Church; besides
those private Disorders it accidentally occasions in the uncharitable Spleens
of a few.

2. You suppose that what was once our Duty cannot now become a Sin to us to
do. But we wonder that this should be such a Paradox to a Person of your
Capacity; must you not allow it in Thousands of other Cases, that what is a
Duty at one time, would be very inexpediently, and sometimes scandalously
sinful at another? Why then should it look like such a Contradiction in our
Case? 'Twas indeed our Duty to provide for our own, and for the Souls of our
Families, in the best manner we could while we were in Communion with you, that
is, while we either knew no better, or could get no better; we thought it our
Duty, as we do still, rather to join with You, than to ly at Home on Lord's
Days, or do worse. But now that God has enlarged our Steps, and made a more
plentiful Provision for us, we should Sin against our own Souls, and theirs too
that are committed to our Charge, if we should not make use of what God has
given us in this kind, and not hazard the loss of our eternal All for the sake
of a few unnecessary, offensive Ceremonies and humane Institutions, wherein you
would Popishly persuade us to believe that the vital Union of the Catholic
Church does consist. And thus we briefly answer to the first Article of our
Indictment.

II. The second Article against us is, That we have added to our Sin, by
setting up opposite Churches and Officers, or joining with them; And this has
more alienated our Minds from those whom, you say, we have unjustly forsaken.
This you suppose is generally our Case, and that hence it is that you hear of
an Old Church and a New in so many Towns in this Kingdom, the latter laboring
to establish it self on the Ruins of the former. To this we reply,

That the Separate Churches, which we now commonly frequent, are not set up in
Opposition to Yours, but by a necessity which your obstinate Uncharitableness
has brought us under. Could we have enjoyed those Gospel-Privileges with you,
which our dearest Savior has, by his precious Blood purchased for us, and by
his Last Will and Testament bequeathed to us, we had never forsaken You. But
now, if the more we come to understand the Wrong you have done us, the more our
Minds are alienated from you, you must thank your selves for that. And wherein
you have wronged us, you have already often enough heard, and we are ready once
more to declare in part, according as the Discourse we are now waiting on you
in, shall give us the particular Occasions. All the Opposition that is between
our Churches and yours is certainly of your own making. And for our setting up
Church Officers, i. e. Teachers and Pastors over our selves, we flatly deny,
without a good Distinction. It Is true, we take it as our natural Right, that
the Pastor, to whom we are to commit the Care of our Souls, be of our own free
Election, and not imposed upon us against the majority of our Votes, by any
that shall pretend to a Power so to do, as the common manner of the Church of
England is, and which was not the least of our Grievances, while we were in
Communion with You. But if by our setting up of Officers you mean our
conferring the Pastoral Office upon them, or the Authoritative Investing them
with it, we deny your Supposition. If you know any such among Dissenters, let
them answer for themselves; we assure you, We are not the Persons.

And because you fear that we are Laboring to establish our Selves on your
Ruins; we openly declare your great Mistake of us. It Is our Union and joint
Establishment on a Reformation according to the Scriptures, that we are
Laboring, and have been so long praying and waiting for: And if such a
Reformation will be your Ruin, Miserere Deus.

In vain do you complain of our separate Churches (which yet are no Independent
Congregations, as you suggest, though they have not that Dependence on Yours
which you contend for) while your selves are the only Causes of the Separation.
For, let your calmer Reason tell us, Who are they that cause Divisions, and
destroy that Union and Communion of the Churches, which you seem to be so
Zealous for? Are they those that stick to the Primitive Apostolical Rules and
Institutions, or those that make their own dangerous Innovations the Terms of
Communion with them? What we have here to say in behalf of our Ministers, must
be referred to your Third and most consequential Article of our Indictment, as
its more proper Place, and which we are now next to enter on, and it runs thus,

III. That the Pastors, we have chosen, have no lawful Call to the Ministry.
This indeed, if it could be proved, were enough to convict both Us and Them,
for Schismatics. Those Dissenters, that think themselves unconcerned in this
Matter, we are not now to answer for, nor are we concerned in what you say of
them. And as for the Philadelphians; we know not what they are expecting; but
might we once see the Church of England, reformed according to the Scriptures,
we would expect a better Clergy than most of them now are.

I. The Ministers whom we profess to own and to follow, you confess to have had
(some of them) Episcopal Ordinations; and others only Presbyterial. Of the
former you are willing to allow (for the Honor of your own Church) not only
the validity of their Ordination, but an eminency of Personal Abilities; but in
the exercise of their Abilities, you fancy that they are some of those, of whom
Ignatius says, they serve the Devil; and your great Reason is, not that they
are Men of debauched and scandalous Conversation, or of false and corrupt
Doctrine, but because they refuse to obey their Ordinary, as you say they
solemnly promised to do; that is, you think they have broken their Oath of
Canonical Obedience. To this we answer for them; that if any of 'em have
inconsiderately enslaved themselves, and betrayed the Liberties of the Church
by an Oath, or Promise to any Man, Ordinary or Extraordinary, to obey them any
further than the Apostle required to be obeyed by the Churches, 1 Cor. 11.1.
viz. as far as he himself obeyed, or followed Christ, we think it is time for
them to repent of such an Oath. And whereas you tell us, They cannot expect a
blessing on their Work, while they continue in the Breach of such an
Engagement; We have as great Reason to think they cannot expect a Blessing in
keeping it, at least, being now persuaded of the Evil of it. But yet our
Charity obliges us to believe, that they took that Oath in no larger Sense,
than is consistent with the Rules of the Gospel, and are sure that it is no
otherwise binding to 'em. And this, we hope, you will not call a new or strange
Doctrine in the Christian Churches. Neither is this to degrade all Bishops, or
to abrogate their Office, or overthrow their Chairs, (as you with so ill Design
suggest) but to reduce them to that Scripture-Foundation, on which alone they
may be more gloriously and firmly Established.

We cannot but remark with how light a Touch you pass by the Foreign Protestant
Churches, as one that is afraid of burning his Fingers, pretending to have
nothing to do with them, on a Supposition (which you are willing to allow, that
you may so rid your Hands of 'em) that their Call to the Pastoral Office was
extraordinary, for which you quote something out of Calvin and Beza, though
little to your Purpose. In what Sense these Churches understand the
extraordinariness of their Call, they themselves are best able to inform you.
Did they ever, any of them, pretend to be rapt up into the third Heavens, where
Paul once was, there to receive a new Call and Commission, differing from what
Christ and his first Apostles delivered to, and left with the Churches? By what
Angel, or Bathkol, or Vision do they say this Extraordinary Call was given
them? When, and on whom was it that the Holy Spirit came down in the Form of
Cloven Tongues, to Seal them a Commission, to go out and Preach another Gospel,
and to lay a new Foundation of the Gospel Ministry? Can you bring us any
Tidings of any thing like this out of their Writings, or if you could, would
you not easily answer it by, Gal 1.8 But how far are they from such vain Dreams
as these? Mons. Turretin will tell you in what Sense they take their Call to
have been Extraordinary. Turretin. de Necess^ria Secessione (...) Eccles. Romans
p. 228.
Si Ordinarium dicitur, quod Ordini primitus and divinitus instituto est
Consentaneum, potest dici nostra Vocatio Ordinaria; sed si equivoce pro eo
sumi^ur, quod inveterata consuetudine, qualiscunque illa sit, public est
acceptum, extraordinaria dicenda erit; quia plurimum abfuit ab ea Consuetudine
and More, qui in Ecclesia Romana inoleverat. If Ordinary be taken for that
which is agreeable to the Order of Primitive and Divine Institution, then our
Call is Ordinary; but if it be taken equivocally for that which is by long
Custom, of any kind, commonly received, then may it be called Extraordinary,
because so very different from that use and manner which had so long obtained
in the Church of Rome. You see now in what Sense they take their Call to be
Extraordinary. The Deliverance of the Church out of Mystical Egypt and Babylon
was indeed an Extraordinary Deliverance; but their Call to the Ministry was the
Ordinary Call of the Gospel; that Spirit of Wisdom, Faith, Patience, Zeal, Self
denial, by which they were divinely influenced in their Reformation was
Extraordinary; and it had been better for the Church of England, if here is had
not been in this respect too Ordinary. In the same Sense as the Reformation of
Johosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah was Extraordinary in comparison of that of some
other Good Kings, who are noted for sparing the High Places, so may the Call of
these Foreign Churches be said to be Extraordinary; M. Claud History of the
Reformation, Part 4. p. 86. and 89.
but that they acted by the ordinary Rule of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Practice of the Primitive Church, they constantly affirm. O Sir! How poor an
Escape have you endeavored to make this way, that you may seem to be a little
more Courteous to Foreigners than to your own Countrymen; how pitiful a Go by
is this, and as foreign to Calvin's Sense, as these Churches are to Yours?
What a strain will it cost you now to deliver your self from the Horns of this
Dilemma, either to acquit Us of what you have charged us with, or condemn all
the Protestant Churches in the World, that are not of your Constitution and
Communion? And Excommunicate us all as Heathens and Heretics, that have no
Gospel Ministry, nor Ordinances among them, as the Church of Rome does, whom
you hereby justify in all their Persecutions and barbarous Severities against
them, which looks very ill in a Protestant, especially at such a Time as this.
But that our Ministers have not taken upon them the sacred Function in a new
Way, that was never approved in ancient Times, shall be proved (as you demand)
by a sight of their Patent and Commission (if you have Eyes to read it) in its
proper Place.

II. Next you prepare to bring on your Trial against a second sort of Teachers,
who claim a Title to the Ministry, as being Ordained by Presbyters. And indeed
when you shall have proved this way of Ordination to be Schismatical, you will
have done something in the Service of your Cause; wherein if Saying were
Proving, and Confidence were good Evidence, doubtless you would not fail. But
this being the main Hinge, on which the whole Controversy turns, it will be
necessary to spend a little more Time with you here. And first you make your
Trip at our Ministers Heels, by striking at the Stone on which they stand; but
you will find it is a Rock, against which you may dash your own Feet, but which
will not move for all the Kicks you can make at it. The main Scripture, which,
with all your might you heave at, is that of, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the Gift
that is in thee, which is given unto thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of
the Hands of the Presbytery.

Against the generally approved Sense of this Scripture, you are pleased to
Quote us Calvin himself, whom you mistakingly call the Father of our
Discipline; and would have us to believe that he could find no such Matter in
this Text; and that he thought Presbytery here signifies but the Office of a
Presbyter; and so read to us the Sense of the Text thus. That Timothy should
not neglect, but be careful to exercise that Presbyterial Office, or Power
which was committed to him by laying on of Hands. Now by the way, lest you
should hereafter forget, pray take notice that you have now granted that it was
to the Office of a Presbyter that Timothy was now ordained, not to that of a
Bishop, or an Evangelist. But as for what you refer us to out of Calvin's
Institutions: We find that he was there offering some Observations, which he
had gathered out of the Scriptures of the New Testament, concerning the
Ordination of such as are to serve in the Office of the Ministry; and tells us
that it is certain the whole Multitude of the People were not to impose Hands
on their Ministers in their Ordination, but only such as were themselves
Pastors in Office, to whom alone the ordaining Power belongs, though he leaves it
uncertain, whether the Hands of many were always laid on, in every solemn Act
of Ordination, but produces Scripture Instances that it was so done in the
Ordination of Deacons, Act. 6.6. and in the Ordination of Paul and Barnabas,
Act. 13.3. But that Paul here minds Timothy, that he had ordained him with his
own Hands (though not exclusively of all others, or with his own Hand only; but
rather that he was the principal Person, and the only Apostle concerned in that
Ordination) and therefore Admonishes him to stir up the Gift that was in him,
by the Imposition of his Hands. And afterward gives us his private Opinion,
that when the Apostle mentions to Timothy, in his other Epistle, the Hands of
the Presbytery, that he is not there minding him so much of the manner of his
Ordination by the College of Presbyters, of whom Paul was one and the chief in
that Action, but rather that he should mind lpsam Ordinationem, his Ordination
it self, and the great and glorious Ends of it. q. d. Fac ut Gratia quam per
manuum impositionem recepisti, quum te Presbyterum Crearem, non sit irrita.
That so the Grace which he had received, when he ordained him a Minister of the
Gospel, or a Presbyter, might not prove in vain. And now how far Calvin is like
to serve your Purpose, or to disserve ours, we leave to any competent impartial
Judge. And yet if you think your Notion of Calvin's Sense be the right, we must
tell you, you are a Dissenter from the generality of the most Learned of your
own Church. Mr. Herbert Thorndike will tell you; If we take not our Marks
amiss, we shall sind Argument enough, at least at the beginning, for the
concurrence of Presbyters with the Bishop in making of Presbyters, and other
inferior Orders In the first Place, those general Passages of the Fathers.
Wherein is witnessed, that the Presbytery was a Bench, assistent to the Bishop,
without Advice whereof nothing of Moment was done, must needs be drawn into
Consequence, to argue that it had effect in a particular of this weight. Then
the Ordination of Timothy, by Imposition of Hands of the Presbytery will prove
no less. Indeed, says he, it is well known that the Word (...) in Ecclesiastical
Writers, signifies diverse times the Office and Rank of Presbyters, which
Signification diverse here embrace; expounding Imposition of Hands of the
Presbytery to mean that by which the Rank of Presbyter was conferred. But the
Apostles Words running as they do, (...), oblige a Man to ask, when he is come
as far as the Imposition of Hands, of whom, or whose Hands they were he
speaks of, which the next Words satisfy. Had it been (...), the Sense might
better have been diverted, but running as it does, with the Article (...) with
Imposition of [the] Hands, it remains that it be specified in the next Words,
whose Hands were imposed. Thus this Word (...) in the Gospel, Luke 22.66. and
in Ignatius's Epistles signifies the College of Presbyters, which has the
Nature and Respect of a Person in Law, and therefore is read in the singular,
for the whole Bench; which being assembled and set, is called (...) in both
Places; and in Cornelius of Rome his Epistle to St. Cyprian, where he says,
Placuit contrahere Presbyterium. Now Sir here is your Mr. Thorndike against what
you would impose on our Calvin's. But besides this, we Answer,

1. If the Word Presbytery is here to be understood of the Office, then will it
follow, (as we have before noted) that Timothy's Office was the Office of a
Presbyter; What then is become of Timothy's Episcopacy, which you so learnedly
plead for in your Discourse of Church Government? Or When and by Whom was it
that he was created Bishop?

2. Camerarius tells us that it is (...), and not (...), which imports the
Office of a Presbyter. So that here is a foul mistake of the Presbytery for the
Presbyterate, the Persons for the Office.

3. Ignatius, who lived very near the Times of the Apostles, and therefore may
well be presumed to have understood the Meaning and Use of this Word, tells us,
(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Trall.
What is the Presbytery other than the Sacred Company, who are the Bishops
Counselors and Assessours? This Sense Clemens Alexandrinus, and some others of
the Primitive Fathers give of it; nor was it ever taken in any other Sense by
the Fathers till Origin; nor in any Place of the New Testament does it signify
any other than the Company of Presbyters, as Luke 22.66. Act. 22.5. And this
Mr. Seldom himself is fore'd to confess, though, De Synedr. l. 1. Cap. 14.560.
being an Erastian in his Judgment, he was loath to allow the Word in this Text
to signify a College of Presbyters, lest he should be forced to allow them the
Power of Excommunication.

4. To put this Sense upon the Word Presbyter in this Text, and to make it to
signify the Office, is such an Inversion and Disturbance of the natural Order
of the Word, as is never to be allowed but in case of plain Necessity, lest we
make the Sacred Scriptures a Nose of Wax, of which Mr. Thorndike was too wise
to be Guilty.

5. And yet if you will needs take Presbytery here for the Office of a
Presbyter, which Calvin does not do, but rather for the Solemn Act, by which
the Office is conferred; see how little it will be to your Advantage. Does it
not then clearly follow, that it is by virtue of the Office it self, and not by
any Degree that some have obtained in it above others, that Men are to be
Ordained into the Ministry? So that in whomsoever the Office of a Presbyter is
found, there is this Power of Ordaining others. Have you not then ingenuously,
or inadvertently, granted to our Ministers all that they demand in this Matter,
and proved it for 'em too from Calvin, whom you pretend to allege against 'em?

To what a pass now have you brought your Episcopal Ordination? Are these the
only Men that have Power to Ordain a Presbyter: Or have they any Power or
Authority at all to do it, but as they are themselves Presbyters? What is a
Bishop, but a Presbyter set in a higher Degree for Clerical Order and
Government sake, but as to Office, the same with the Presbyter? And therefore
it is that the Titles are so promiscuously and indifferently used in the Holy
Scriptures. Nor did the Apostles themselves Ordain, as Apostles, but as
Presbyters, which is the Title they own in their Epistles, and claim as their
Honor. And that it is the Presbyter, not the Bishop ( i. e. considered only as
such) that must Ordain, is put beyond Controversy by a ruled Case, that a
Bishop or Prelate Ordained per saltum, ( i. e. who never had the Ordination of
a Presbyter himself, but only of a Bishop) can neither Consecrate, nor
administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Body, nor Ordain a Presbyter. Though, for
the necessary Ends of Clerical Order and Government, the Bishop be set in a
superior Degree of Superintendency, and consequently his Presence and
authoritative Concurrence be necessary, with a select Number of his best
qualified Presbyters, to confer Orders, and to see the Laws of Christ duly
executed in his Church; yet where this Power is abused (than which nothing in
the World is apter, nor has been more abused) where the Churches are imposed
upon, and Presbyters tyrannically ravished of their just Rights and
Privileges, and causelessly cast out of Episcopal Communion; the Presbyter is
nevertheless a Presbyter, as to all the Parts and Purposes of his Office. He
may be robbed of his Pulpit, but not of his Office; robbed of his Maintenance,
but not of his Right to it; robbed of his Liberty, but not of his Relation to
Christ, nor to his Church. In the Holy Scriptures we find that Presbyters (as
such) are vested with the Power of Rule and Government in the House of God, 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 20.17. and 28. But of the Investiture of Prelates, or their
Ordination by Imposition of Hands, as of an Office distinct and different from
that of the Presbyter, we read not one Word in all the New Testament. By what
Law of Christ then does he claim a despotical Power over his Presbyters, any
other than as the Head and Moderator of their common Council, and in whose
Name, and with whose Concurrence (for Order and Government sake) all the
necessary Canons and By Laws that conduce to the Peace, Profit and Edification
of the Churches committed to their Care, ought to be issued and established?
Will you tell us; they are the Apostle's Successors in Power and Authority? So
are Our Presbyters too, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. both in Faith and Doctrine, and all
Things that are Common and Essential to the Office. Prelacy is not of the
Office, per se, but only per Accidens, and which, when duly exercised,
honorably conduces to the been Esse of the Church, but is not constitutive of
its Esse. We have heard indeed of no Bishop no King, and ever thought it
extravagant enough; but never heard of no Bishop no Church till now.

Again, you would have us to believe that, Presbytery, being a Name of Dignity,
is sometimes attributed to Ecclesiastical Officers of the highest Rank, as St.
Peter and St. John call themselves Presbyters, and therefore it must needs here
signify a Company of Bishops. To this we Reply,

1. That the Word Presbytery was never so taken for a Company of Bishops only,
(of which there was but one in one Church) which is the limited Sense, either
in the Times of the Apostles, or of the first Centuries of the Church, perhaps
not till Chrysostom's Time; but always for the Collegium Presbyterorum; and
before we can believe that it is to be otherwise taken in this Text, you must
prove it.

2. If the Word must be taken in your Sense for a Company of Bishops, then
either there is no particular Church, though Diocesan, that has any Presbytery
of its own, or there must be more Bishops than One in every such Church, or
else you must say that your one Bishop is a Company of Bishops.

3. What can you infer, in this Case, from Peter's and John's assuming the
Title of Presbyter, but that in all the common Acts of Ecclesiastical
Government and Discipline they acted as Presbyters, and not as Apostles, And
what then have you gotten by this Argument?

But you urge again, That Timothy was a Bishop, and had Jurisdiction over
Presbyters; therefore Presbyters could not Ordain him to his Office; for they
could not communicate a Power which they never received. To this we Answer,

1. That Timothy was an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. which, if it signified any more
than a Preacher of the Gospel, which was the Work of every Presbyter, then it
must signify something more than an Ordinary Bishop, to which he had no
particular Ordination, but the Apostles Election of him, as his Companion, and
his Mission to some particular Services in the Churches of Paul's planting. So
that the Presbytery Ordained him only as a Presbyter, not as an Evangelist, nor
as a Bishop, about which we have no Form, Rule or Precedent in the Scripture.

2. Whereas you say, They could not communicate a Power which they never
received; We Answer, That in this Case there was no need of it; they Ordained
him as a Presbyter, and what other Titles he afterward arrived to, were but
Accidental. But this Reason of yours seems to be bottomed on a great Mistake,
viz. That the Ordainers communicate the ministerial Power to the Persons
Ordained; whereas it is Christ that communicates the Pastoral Power and
Authority by his Charter of the Gospel; the Power is derived from Christ, not
from the Ordainers; As the Major of a City has his Authority from the Charter,
granted by the King, and not from the Recorder, who invests him in his Office.
And yet neither is this true, that an inferior Officer may not invest one of a
superior Order in his Office, else what have the Bishops to do at the
Coronation of Kings, unless you will make the Regal to be an Inferior Office to
that of the Bishop; which if you do, you may next pretend to an absolving and
deposing Power too.

But you tell us again, That we do not find in Scripture, That to mere
Presbyters any such Authority was ever committed; nor are there any Footsteps
of it in Antiquity. And we tell you, That we find not in Scripture, nor in
Antiquity, that this Authority was ever committed to any other than Presbyters:
But if you insist, That they must not be mere Presbyters, we Reply,

1. How do you prove that either Simeon, that was called Niger, or Lucius of
Cyrene, or Manaen, who were commanded from Heaven, Act. 13.1, 2. to ordain Paul
and Barnabas, were any of them, at that time, more than mere Presbyters as to
Matter of Office?

2. Where do you find, in all the Books of the New Testament, not only that a
mere Bishop, but that any one single Person, whether Bishop, or Evangelist, or
Apostle, or any other, besides our Lord Jesus Christ himself, did ever
celebrate this Ordinance of Ordination, without the assistance of some others,
more or less of the Presbytery? If you instance in Paul's ordaining Timothy
with his own Hands; will that prove that it was with his own Hands alone,
especially while he tells us so expressly, in words at length, and not in
figures, That it was done by the Hands of the Presbytery?

3. We will propose you a Case, which is possible, though we hope will never be
real. Suppose the Churches of Christ should be reduced to a very few, and the
Bishops of these few should all turn Heretics, or Persecutors of the Orthodox,
and cast them out of their Communion, the Presbyters retaining their Integrity:
These Presbyters, by your Doctrine, cannot ordain so much as a Presbyter, to
continue a Succession, much less can they create a Bishop to do it: Must the
whole Church then be extinct for lack of a Bishop to Head them? Or would you
expect to have one raised from the Dead, or sent back out of Heaven to do it?

4. As for Antiquity; There is nothing more clear than that in the Primitive
Churches the Bishops and their Presbyters always acted in Conjunction in all
Acts of Church Discipline, both of Excommunication, Restoration, Confirmation
and Ordination; And in the Banishment or Absence of their Bishops, the
Presbyters alone, without the presence of any other Bishop, did, by his order
and allowance (which he could not have done, had it not been a thing in it self
lawful) execute all that the Bishop was to have done in Person among them. Nay,
St. Jerome will tell you that the Presbyters have Power to Ordain a Bishop over
them, and invest him with his Episcopal Authority, as they did at Alexandria.
Sir, There was a Time within the Memory of Man, that Our Bishops were banished
from their Clergy in England, and what, was the Whole Church of England then
extinct, and cut off from the Head Christ? Does eternal Salvation go and come
with Lawn-Sleeves? Yet once more, you tell us, That the Office which Timothy
had was given him by Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.14. Or according to the Prophesies,
which went before of him, 1 Timothy 1.18. His Ordination therefore must have been
an extraordinary Thing, and not to be drawn into Precedent, except in parallel
Cases. But our Pastors, you suppose, do not pretend that they are marked out by
Prophecy.

1. We answer, These Prophesies, whatever they were, concerning Timothy,
respected his Person, and not the manner of his Ordination.

2. It is very probable that the Apostles had a more than ordinary Direction,
relating to the choice of Ministers, or Church Officers many times in their
Days, Acts 20.28. It is there said, That the Elders of the Church of Ephesus
were made Overseers of their Flocks by the Holy Ghost, i. e. as some think,
their Choice and Nomination was by Direction of the Holy Spirit of God. And
Clemens Romanus says, That the Apostles in those Days ordained Bishops or
Presbyters (...), etc. Discerning by the Spirit, and having a perfect Knowledge
whom they should Ordain. But what is all this to the way of Ordaining by
Presbyters is an extraordinary Thing, and not to be drawn into Precedent. It Is
probable that it had been foretold by some one or other, that Timothy would be
a faithful and eminent Minister of Christ; who but you would have concluded
from thence, That his Ordination by Presbyters was an extraordinary Case?

3. May you not as pertinently argue, That none of the Ordinations, done by the
Imposition of the Hands of the Apostles, are to be drawn into Precedent;
because these were extraordinary Cases, the Apostles being extraordinary
Persons, who had an extraordinary and immediate Mission from Christ himself;
nor do we know of any Bishops that now pretend to be marked out by an immediate
Call from Christ, or any Prophecy of their extraordinary Usefulness, that have
gone before of 'em.

But Sir, Before you had given your self and us all this Trouble to so little
purpose, you had done much better to have sat down and considered how you
could have answered Mr. John Owen's ten Arguments from Scripture and Antiquity,
Owen's Plea for Scripture Ordination.
proving Ordination by Presbyters, without Bishops to be valid; to which, (to
save Labor of Transcribing) we refer those that are willing to see much more
on this Subject.

III. The Declamation which you make against popular Ordination, we are not at
all concerned in, but join with you in our hearty Wishes, that they that are,
would deeply consider it.

Now to conclude this, your third Section, Having read out our Indictment in
all the Articles of it, and examined it after your manner; you come to sum up
the Evidence, or what you call Evident, and bring in the Bill against us; that
we have in all these Respects, exceeded the Novatians, Donatists and Meletians.
But before you proceed to your Damnatory Sentence, we hope your Charity will
take into Consideration what we have already, so briefly offered in our own
Defense, and what we have yet further to plead for our selves, as your
following Discourse shall give us Occasion.

Your fourth Section (in which you pretend to blow us wholly up, Sect. 4.
and to beat us out of all our Fasinesses, and not to leave us a Rag to cover
our Nakedness with) is a Collection of just half a dozen of some little Things,
which you have picked up some-where behind our Backs, and what you thought your
self able to deal with; and these you set up as so many Cocks of Clouts to try
your Skill upon, and to entertain your Self and your Readers with; and
represent it to the World, as the sum of what has been said in our Defense: But
if you would have done your Self and your Readers right, you ought to have
quoted the Authors, out of which you had taken those Things. Neither is it so
easy, as you seem to hope, to make the thinking part of the World, at this
time of the day, to believe, that a Man of your Figure and Reading, must not
needs be conscious to himself of other Things. But this, it seems, is what you
thought fit to make your Remarks upon; wherein you have not shown that
Christian Charity, nor common Ingenuity, which might justly have been expected
from the fair Pretensions of your Introduction. Yet what you are here pleased,
under this Form, to offer us, and to declare to the World in our Names, we must
take such notice of as it does deserve.

1. That which you thought fit to set in the Front of what you call Our
Arguments, is this. It has been said, That notwithstanding our present
Separation from you, yet we are One with you, because we both adhere to the
same Doctrine.

This, you say, is one Point gained of us, that now you are treated with softer
Language than formerly you were: And yet this does not please you neither, but
account ruder Language less dangerous; because this seems to represent
Communion with you an indifferent Thing. Sir, This is unaccountably strange,
that Communion with you should be the Thing you so zealously contend for, and
yet are afraid of our coming too near to you. It seems the Principles of
Moderation are too dull and phlegmatic to agree with your rectified Spirit of
Charity, whereby you declare your self to be no Trimmer, but a Tantivy.

Before you had given us your Comments on this Argument, you should have put it
into the Form of an Argument, and have shown the World what it is that we
pretend to prove by it. We suppose the sense of it must run thus:

If we are One with you in Doctrine, then our Separation from you in some other
things is not Schismatical.

But we are One with you in Doctrine: Ergo.

Here we might in justice have expected that you should have cited our Author
of this Argument before you had called it Ours: But in stead of that you tell
us, That you know nothing that has been more commonly urged of late in our
Vindication. Sir, This is not fair, much less charitable dealing with us; for
we know not who they are of us that will own this Argument. For,

1. The Consequence of the Major we deny, as well as you, and therefore disown
it; we do not think, nor do our Ministers teach us, That Oneness in Doctrine is
enough to justify a Separation in outward Communion from being Schismatical;
and had we no greater thing to warrant our Separation from you, we should not
think our selves innocent.

2. Neither do we own the Minor of this Argument, without some Exceptions. For
we dare not say, That we are perfectly One with you in Doctrine: There are some
things in the Doctrine that is commonly preached among you that is too Arminian,
and too Romish for us to be One with you in it. But this is what we say, and
will stand to; that as far as your Doctrine is One with that which is taught us
in the Holy Scriptures, the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints; so
far we are One with you. And as far as our Separation from you is not without
just Cause, so far it is not Shismatical. So then what you say, in approbrious
Descant,

1. On the Minor of this Argument, is but Petitio Principij, a shameful begging
the Question, 'till you have proved that to be true, which you say you think,
viz. That what is published by many of our Party in their printed Books, and
even in their Catechisms is Heterodox to the pure Apostolical Doctrine, and yet
generally embraced by us. What you upbraid us with from the Zeal of the
Independents, to secure to themselves their own Proselites, is but what your
selves are altogether as guilty of in your own Case; and which indeed is a
piece of Natural Politics, arising from the Principle of Self-preservation,
and common to all Mankind, and in nothing more than in Religious Society.

As for those useful Hints, which you suggest from the Heads of Arguments
subscribed by our Ministers of different Sects, we have reason to look upon as
Impertinent, further than the Cases are parallel; yet seeing you are willing to
make something on it, we will appeal to your selves, and to all the World, that
have observed the Grounds and Circumstances of the Breaches that have been made
upon us, and the Controversies that have been now almost these forty Years
depending between us, whether we or our Ministers did separate from you, before
the utmost Endeavors were used, by Remonstrances, Arguments, Petitions,
Entreaties and Accommodations, but all in vain to prevent our Departure, or
rather our Exclusion from you. You were resolved to kick us out of your
Communion, and now you upbraid us for leaving you without your Consent. And as
for what you quote us out of St. Cyprian, speaking of the Novatians, and out of
St. Chrysostom against the Separatists of those Times, we shall take our selves
to be concerned in when you have truly parallelled the Case, and proved your
selves and your Church to be as pure in Doctrine, and as far from a Tyrannical
Imposing of new Conditions of Communion as they were; and us to be as Heretical
and Corrupt in Doctrine and Manners, as the Schismatics of their Days were: But
'till this be done, you do but abuse your Authors and expose your self.

II. Having done with the Minor, you draw up your Forces against the Major; and
here you endeavor to choke us with your (...) of Catholic Union; and begin to
plead

1. From the Absurdity of saying we are One with you, being divided from you as
we are. And how is this? Not in Doctrine, any further than you are divided from
Christ, nor any more than you are divided among your selves; not in Affection,
unless the Division be wholly on your side; not in any thing wherein the
Vitality of Essence of the Catholic Christian Union does consist: Ay, but we
are divided from you as to outward Communion, and therefore can never be One
with you, whatever the Union be in any other Respects, as if Ens and Vnum did
now cease to be Convertible Terms, as heretofore they were always taken to be.
We are divided as to outward Communion, and that mortally destroys the Union.
True, Sir, we are, to our sorrow, thus divided from you and by you. And now
being thus divided; The Church, both Universal and Particular must be
considered as a Political Body; and then if a Company withdraw themselves from
it, and shake, off all Dependence on it and Communion with it (all Communion,
if you speak this to us, you must mean all outward Communion, in those
Ceremonious Acts of Worship, and Matters of Discipline that lie in Controvesie
betwixt us) they cannot be of the same Body that they deserted. And then it
must needs follow, That Your Church being Politically in Communion with the
CATHOLIC, and Ours out of Communion with you, we are but as so many dead
Branches that have lost their Union with the Body, and all the Influxes of Life
from the Head. How gladly then would you see us in the Fire, that you may warm
your selves by us? Sure it is well for those of us you are so angry with, that
the Act, De Haroticis comburendis is repealed. But this Inference of yours you
pretend to illustrate by several pat Instances. The Empire of Persia, you say,
was one Body under Darius; but was not so when divided into several Kingdoms
under the Successors of Alexander. Very critically observed; when thus divided,
they were not One particular Political Body as before, yet were they true parts
of One and the same Universal World still, though divided into particular
National Polities, yet united still in all the common Interests of Human Nature
and Society. So a City is one Body; but the Colonies that issue out from it,
and are formed into other Cities, under their own proper Laws and Jurisdiction,
cannot be Numerically, and perhaps are not Specificially one Political Body;
yet they are one Kingdom, and governed by the same common Laws and Statutes of
the Kingdom: And what the Kingdom is the worse for this Variety, or
Diversification of particlar Political Forms, no Man can tell. Nay, suppose
this Separation be made by a Revolt, or Dislike of the Constitution of the
Government of the City, or of their Manners and Formalities, and without the
Public Consent; we hope this will not Outlaw them, nor Disfranchize them of
any of their National Privileges and Rights, as long as they behave themselves
with due Loyalty to their Sovereign, and peaceably to their Fellow Subjects.
Now, you say, a Church has this Communion with a City, and with all
Corporations. Very true, so the Church at Jerusalem was once the Universal
Church and Gospel Metropolis: But if all those particular Churches that have
been separated from it, into Political Bodies, not only Numerically, but
Specifically distinct, under their own Laws and Forms of Government, Worship
and Discipline, and different from that of the first Mother Church, from which
they issued, be no more Churches because of these different outward Communions,
wherein they are not one with the first Church, nor with one another; then it
must needs follow that You are no more a Church of Christ than We; and so you
have thus far set us on even Ground with your selves; nor has any one need to
renounce the use of the Words, or affront the common Sense of Mankind to draw
this Conclusion from your Premises.

2. You plead from a supposed Inconsistency it has with Church Government, and
its Destructiveness of the Church it self; and a vain excuse, you say 'twill be
for Men to say, that they are at an Agreement with the Church in Doctrine,
while, by their Divisions they are tearing the Church in Pieces. And this you
are at the Pains to Illustrate, by Comparisons Military, Civil and Domestic,
as if it were an hard Matter to beat this Notion into Men's Heads. But when all
is done, you will not imagine how little We think our selves concerned in it; for
you have granted us, and we cannot forget it, that it must be a Causeless
Separation, or else it is not what you are declaiming on; therefore till it
appear that our Separation from the Church of England is Causeless, we are not
the Persons that are like to be hurt by your Arrows. And as for our Officers,
by whose Conduct we are guided in the Matters of God and of our Souls, they are
neither Mutinous, nor Seditious, nor Self-Intruders, as by your Comparisons you
would Insinuate, but generally as well qualified, and altogether as lawfully
called and commissioned, and as fully invested with the ministerial Office,
according to the Rules of the Holy Scriptures, as any of your Selves, as we
have already proved; so that this Argument you may now lay aside among your
broken Weapons, till you find a proper Occasion for it.

3. You argue from its Inconsistency with the Notion of Schism, as it is
expressed in the Holy Scripture, i. e. If the Scripture Notion of Schism were
the same with Yours. And for this your only Instance is the Schism that was
once in the Church of Corinth, where every one said, I am of Paul, or I of
Apollas, or I of Cephas. But this Faction among the Disciples at Corinth, you
told us in your second Section, was but a Schism within the Church, not from
it, and therefore will not give us the full Notion of Schism, according to your
own apprehension of it. But we will let this pass for an Impertinence, having
already granted you more than this Instance can pretend to prove, viz. that
Oneness in Doctrine is not always enough to justify a Separation from outward
Communion. It Is in your misapplying it to us that your great Mistake lies,
supposing that our Separation from you is as Causeless as were the Factious
Divisions of those in the Church of Corinth, which is the Thing that is yet to
be proved. But it seems to us by the Tenor of your Discourse from top to
bottom; that let a Church be what it will, either as to its Constitution, or
its individual Members, ever so Corrupt in Doctrine, Superstitious in Worship,
or Filthy in Conversation, and degenerated from Scripture Rules and
Institution; yet while they hold together in outward Communion, as the Church
of Rome has done, both before and since the Protestant Reformation, there is
nothing in it that deserves the Name of Schism, or that will justify a
Separation from it. Pray tell us plainly whose Cause it is you are pleading
under the Name of the Church of England? Have you never considered the
Differences that there were in the Apostle's Days between the Churches of the
Christian Jews and those of the Gentiles, in respect of Rites and Ceremonies
and outward Communion; and don't you know to what a height these Differences
were kept up by the Churches that were still so fond of their old Way, that
there was no Uniting them in this Point? That Paul, for his Nonconformity to
'em, could not show his Face among 'em at Jerusalem, without danger of his
Life? Have you not read what a feud there was once between Him and Peter on
this Account, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. And how much ado the Apostle Paul had to
preserve the Churches of the Gentiles from being bigoted to their
Superstitions? Now pray tell us, whether the Church at Jerusalem, or that at
Antioch were the true Church; or whether of these Two you will please to cut
off for the Schismatic; or whether the Catholic Union were preserved between
them both, notwithstanding these wide Deffences and Dissentions in external
Rites and Communion? But if these were still One in Catholic Union, we
understand not: How less Matters than these should make the Conformists and
Non-Conformists of England to be Two, so as that We must be condemned for
Schismatics rather than You.

4. You argue from the Scripture Distinction of the Schismatic from the
approved; and then tell us that those that live in Corformity to your Church
are the approved and the beloved of God; ay, Sir, the approved Drunkards and
Swearers, the beloved Woremongers and Adulterers, etc. for such are too many of
those who are allowed Communion with you; but we are the Schismatics, and the
Reprobates, because you have cast us out, and will not admit us to your
Communion without Conformity to your Ceremonies. Does not the Church of Rome
tell us the same thing? How generally and loosly do you talk of Conformity to
the Church, without making any difference of what is Good, or what is Evil in
it, or what will justify a Separation from it, and what will not; the same
Argument serves indifferently both Rome and You. The high Presumption you have
of your Purity, and the Inoffensiveness of your Terms of Communion is no more
than what is common to the Biggots of the corruptest Church and Faction in the
World; But till it be better proved than hitherto it has been, you must excuse
us that we cannot take You to be the Approved, so as to condemn our Selves for
the Schismatics, in not Communicating with you on such Terms as the Holy
Scripture does not require, and our own Consciences are not satisfied in.

II. Your Second, It has been said, which you call our Second Argument, runs
thus. That in the Apostle's Days there were independent and separate Churches
planted in the same City. But still you think it too much to be at the Charge
of producing our Author, or putting it into Form of Argument; without which you
do but juggle with us, and misrepresent us to the World. How far you intend to
stretch your Independency of Churches, we cannot Divine; or whether by
Independent Churches you mean Churches, or Congregations only Separate as to
outward Communion in the same City; How then shall we form this into an
Argument, but in your own ambiguous Terms? And then it will Hypothetically look
thus,

If there were Independent and separate Churches planted in the Apostle's Days,
in the same City, then are not the Independent and separate Churches now in
England Schismatical.

But there were Independent and Separate Churches planted in the Apostle's Days
in the same City. Erg.

And now that it is brought into this Logical Order for you, we know not who
will own it, either Major or Minor. If those that, among us, are called
Independents, will own it, let them Answer for themselves. But, as far as it
concers us, we doubt you will have no great Reason to triumph in it, by that
time we have examined it.

The Consequence of the Major we deny; because in the Apostle's Days, there
might be, and we have Reason to think there were, but too many Independent and
Separate Churches planted in the same Cities, by those false Teachers, who then
crept into the Churches, and drew Disciples after them, and of whom the
Apostles often complained, Act. 20 30. Jud. 19.3. Joh. 10. Yet thus your
invidious Charity represents us, that you may, if possible, persuade the World
to believe, that we are the Persons whom the Apostles prophesied and complained
of, and whom the Scripture condemns for Schismatics, etc.

As for your Minor, That there were such Independent Churches planted in the
Apostles Days; if you mean, by such as Schismatically Separated themselves, we
will grant it, but if you mean, planted by the Apostles themselves, as your
following Discourse on it plainly intimates, let them, that think themselves so
highly concerned in it, Dispute it out, for 'twill be even all one to Us on
whether side the Victory shall fall.

On this Argument you have left us little to do, but to expect the Issue of the
Squabble betwixt you and your Learned Dr. Hammond; who tells you, That as St.
Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision, and St. Paul of the Gentiles; so
whenever these Two great Apostles came to the same City, the one constantly
applied himself to the Jews, received Disciples of such, formed them into a
Church, and left them, when he departed that Region, to be Governed by some
Bishop of his own Assignation. And the Other in like manner did the same to the
Gentiles. And this is what you endeavor very Learnedly to Refute. Sir, We will
not presume to intrude our selves as Moderators, between you; however, you may
give us leave to gather up some of the great Spoils of the Field, at least a
few of the broken Arrows, to warm our selves by. Now, that the Apostles
themselves were free to Communicate, on all Occasions, both with Jews and
Gentiles, is most certain, knowing that the Partitian-Wall being now broken
down, they both made but One Catholic Church under Christ the Catholic Head.
But it is as certain, that it was long before the Old Bottles could hold the
New Wine, without bursting; Hence it is that there were, for the first Age,
such Differences and Distances between the Jewish and Gentile Converts; that
they could endure no Religious Communion with one another. It Is true, this Heat
arose on the Jew's Side, who were still so superstitiously Zealous for their
Old Ceremonies; and it is a common Observation, that the Weaker and more
Superstitious are always the more obstinately Hot for the Exteriors of
Religion, and more for the Shadow than the Substance of it. But so it was that
they would admit no other than a Jew, or Jewish Proselyte into their Communion,
or into any of their Synagogues, at least not into their Temple, as appears by
Paul's hard Case at Jerusalem, Act. 21.20. etc. So that whether or no they were
at first Apostolically Constituted, as distinct Churches, under their proper
Bishops in one and the same City; this is most evident, that they had their
different Forms of Woship and Religious Rites, and distinct Communions and
Assemblies, whether under one City or Diocesan Bishop or more. Neither do all
these Arguments wherewith the Apostle labored to defend his Gentile Converts
against the Old-Leaven of the Judaizing Zealots, and to convince the Jews of
their unchristian Bigottry against the Simplicity and Liberty of the Gospel,
and to maintain the sacred Bond of Union and Peace among them, prove that they
were not of different Outward Communions, yea else why should he say to the
Jews, I became as a Jew, etc. 1 Cor. 9.20. etc. But he only endeavors to calm
the Heats of their Spirits toward one another, that they should not lay the
mighty stress of eternal Salvation on these little Things; but notwithstanding
these Differences, which could not be cured but by Time, they should receive
and embrace one another, as Fellow Members of one and the same universal
mystical Body.

And now I will tell you in few words, how far You and We are concerned in this
your Dispute with the Dr.: Either there were Independent and Separate Churches
planted by the Apostles in the same City, or there were not, Utrum horum, etc.
If there were, then,

1. Your Dr. was in the right, and you under a mistake in opposing him.

2. What was done by the Apostles, rules the case under the like circumstances,
to Us, and to all other Churches to the World's end.

3. If there were such a Division of Outward Communion among the Churches of
the Apostle's own planting, and by their Allowance and Order; then the
Differences of Outward Communion destroy not the Catholic Union: But the
Church is truly One by some surer and more adequate Bond than that of
Uniformity of Outward Communion.

On the other side, if all the Churches of the Apostles planting were always
One in Outward Communion; then were not the Ceremonies in Controversy between
the Jews and Gentiles ever made the necessary Terms of their Communion; but
every one had his Liberty, according the Sentiments of his own Conscience, and
private Judgment, of using or not using them: Because otherwise Outward
Communion had been utterly impracticable. Now whether of these two you will
choose, is very indifferent to Us; because either of them will answer well
enough for Us in what you here Object against us. And what now is become of
your Notion of Catholic Unity, let any one judge that has but the command of
one sober Thought.

III. The next thing that you are pleased to produce in our Names, and call one
of our Arguments, is this; That Jesus Christ has declared, that where two or
three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of them: And that
we Assemble in this manner, and are therefore assured of his favorable
Presence. Here also Justice would have quoted us its Author, and Art would have
licked it into Form for us; that so we might have seen the proper Dimensions
and Strength of it as an Argument. Now, in Logical Form, we humbly conceive it
will look after this fashion, and speak to this effect.

Those that are gathered together, with Christ in the midst of them, are no
Schismatical Assembly.

But we are gathered together with Christ in the midst of us. Erg.

But because the stuff you have here laid together for Us, will not regularly
be comprehended within the compass of one ordinary Syllogism, it will be
needful to support the Minor, which seems to to be most in danger, with another
to this purpose.

Those that are gathered together in the Name of Christ, have Christ in the
midst of 'em.

But we are gathered together in the Name of Christ. Erg.

SIR, Though we own the Scripture out of which you quote us these Words, Matthew.
18.20. in the true sense and meaning of them, and bless God for the Gracious
Promise contained in them; yet as we never offered them as a Reason of our
Separation from your Communion, so neither do we own them as an Argument to
justify our so doing. You herein trifle with us. Had you durst to have engaged
our Arguments, you would not have made your self sport with these little
Things, which are justly enough liable to so many exceptions. But this, it
seems, is a Reed, which you have borrowed from the Old Novations to smite Us
with; and with these you should have left, it or some others of that Character;
and not in imitation of the Old Woman at Endor, have raised up the Ghost of St.
Cyprian to read us a Doom, till you had first substantially proved, that we are
the Persons of whom St. Cyprian spoke. But this indeed is an Argument that you
make light of, and so do we.

IV. Your Fourth, It has been said, is of the same Complexion and Value with
the former. The Postulatum that lies in quest between us, is, Whether our
Separating from the Church of England, in outward Communion, be Schism? And to
prove our Innocence herein, you pretend that we produce the words of the
Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.15, and 18. That Paul rejoiced that Christ was Preached
even by those Men that did it out of Envy and Strife; and if the Case of our
Preachers were as bad as this, as long as they Preach Christ, We have no reason
to be sollicitous about their Call, nor You to be offended at their Work. This
we suppose you put in to make up the Half Dozen: But if you would represent it
as one of our Arguments, you should have squeezed it into such a Syllogism as
this, that we might have known what to make on it.

If the Preaching of Christ, though out of Envy and Strife, were matter of
rejoicing to Paul; then the Preaching of Christ, though out of Envy, and
without a Call, (which you force into the Argument) is not Schismatical.

But our Ministers do Preach Christ, whatever their Principles, or their Call
to the Office be. Erg.

We wish you would do us the right to tell us, from whom of Us you got this
Argument: Possibly, some good Body or other, that was not so well-pleased with
your Rigours in stopping the Mouths of so many Hundreds of our Ministers at
once, may have said, That if Paul did rejoice that Christ was faithfully
Preached, though by such as envied his Fame and Liberty in the Gospel; then you
of the Church of England have done very unlike to the Blessed Paul, in
silencing so many of the Able and Faithful Ministers of Christ, who would have
Preached him Sincerely and Peaceably, and from a Principle of Love to the Souls
of Men; and that had as much a Call to Preach as You And if you will, as you
ought, take it thus, and call it an Argument, We will own it as a sober
Reasonning of the Case with you, whoever were the first Author of it. But when
you mock us with the Man of Straw of your own stuffing, you deal with Us, as
they dealt of old with the Christians, whom they put into Bears Skins and Fools
Coats, to be laughed at by the Mob, and worried by the Beasts: And so you deal
with our Ministers.

1. By representing them to be such as take on them the Work of the Ministry,
without a Call to that Office; the contrary whereof we have already proved.

2. In saying that Paul's Enviers Preached to none but the Infidels, (which is
more than you pretend to prove) intimating, that if you could but get our
Ministers banished into America, or any other Infidel part of the World, to
Preach the Gospel to them that never yet heard of it; then you will rejoice
too, as Paul did.

3. In accusing them of Envy and Strife, as the main Principle that sets them
on work to Preach Christ here so near to your Noses; wherein you make your self
a Judge of evil Thoughts.

4. By your implicit complaint, how much they exercise your Patience and
Self-denial, as those of old did Paul's. Yet would you but lay aside your own
Envy and Prejudices, you might, on much more comfortable Grounds, conclude, as
the Apostle there does, that this their Preaching would be to your Advantage,
and Beneficial both to the Church and to your selves too.

V. The next Argument that you can afford us, is this; That we are only
returned to those whom we had forsaken before; and that we might do this, since
we had the Indulgence, or the Liberty granted to us by the Law.

Before we meddle with this Argument, let us turn it into Form after its
Fellows, and see how it will look then, and who they are that will own it. But
in Syllogism it makes this Figure.

For a People to return to those Ministers whom they had forsaken before, when
they have Liberty granted them by the Law so to do, is no Schism.

But we have now Liberty granted us to return to those Ministers whom we had
forsaken before. Erg.

Sir, It would look very ingeniously, if you would now at last please to tell
us, from what Author of Ours you took this Topping Argugument, which perhaps
you think, and would have others to think, is one of the best we have to defend
our selves with. The truth is, were it not for the Law that protects Us, we
should be badly able to defend our selves against Church-violence; and
doubtless there are Summer-flies enough among Us, whose Devotion depends on
this Liberty which the Law has given us: But had we not better Reasons to
justify our Cause against your Argumentations, we should think our selves in
an ill Case.

It Is hardly worth our labor to follow you in all that you harrangue on this
Head. You say, If our Separation was Sinful before we Conformed, our return to
it must be Sinful; And we think so too, For the Law has not altered the Case,
as to the Nature of the thing. Wherefore your first Enquiry upon it is very
pertinent, viz. Whether our Separation before we Conformed were Sinful. But
instead of Enquiring, you take it for granted that it was so; and say, it is
clear from what went before, i. e. from your notion of Catholic Unity; which
we have examined, and think that by this time you have little Reason to Glory
in it. But if this prove to be no clear evidence against us, then it is not yet
clear that our Separation from you is Causeless, and therefore Sinful and
Schismatical. And we hope we have already said enough to destroy that
Infant-notion of Catholic Unity in your Sense, if we may but obtain an
unbyassed Judgment upon it. Neither do we need that Objection you here make for
us, That many of us were never Members of the Church of England, and therefore
no Deserters of it. We commend you that you will be careful to raise no
Objections, but what you think you can Answer. But you must first better prove
that our Separation is Causeless, and then we shall think our selves concerned
to take notice of what you say.

Sir, We are ashamed to hear a Protestant pleading so like a Papist for a
Priestly Succession; concluding that the Office of the Gospel Ministry is
utterly extinct, without your Episcopal Ordination. Had not this
Antiscriptural, Uncharitable, Church destroying Pretension been so long ago
baffled, and therefore deserted by the Wisest and most Learned of your own
Communion, as well as by the Judgment of all Foreign Protestant Divines, we
should not have wondered so much at you. Wherefore we shall not now Rem toties
actam agere, but leave you first to answer what has been by so many, and with
so convincing Evidence written on this subject; whose Names we need not mention
to one that is so well acquainted with Books as you are. In the m^an time we
cannot but make a very particular Observation on the Ebullition of your Gall
against the Liberty we now enjoy by the Benefit of the Law: it is well for us
that this was not granted us (as once) by a Dispencing Power, to which the late
Reigns pretended, but by a Better-design'd and Well advised Act of King and
Parliament. For to give us here a Taste of the Volatility of your Spirit of
Charity you are bold to suggest, that We are not the Persons that come within
the intent of that Act, and therefore can justly expect no savor from it;
because (you say) that Act was only designed to give ease to Tender
Consciences, but ours are not of that number, because not of the same Latitude
with yours. Oh how do your Fingers itch to be at your old Work with us again?
What a grief of Heart is the Indulgence, which our Governors have so
Graciously and so Necessarily granted us? How fain would you cut us off from
the Protection of the Laws, under which we live as Loyally and Obediently as
any of your selves? And all because we have forsaken your Ceremonies, and
desire to Worship God in a way more agreeable to the Scripture Simplicity of
the Gospel, and more experimentally conducive to the Spiritual Good and Eternal
Happiness of our own Souls. We see by this, that Paul was never in greater
danger at Jerusalem on the account of his Nonconformity, than We should be of
You should the Government but once more let you loose upon Us. But that We are
none of the Tender Consciences, that come within the intent of the Act, you
pretend to prove, by our former Conforming to you, and Communion with you;
wherein you presume that we were then satisfied, and thought it lawful. Ay,
Sir, we once thought it lawful ( i. e. not absolutely, or in it self Sinful)
when we either knew no better, or could get no better; and we are of the same
Mind still, as we have once already told you, and to which (to avoid
repetition) we would referr you; having (for illustration of the Case) first
given you this Familiar Similitude. 2 Kings 6.25.
There was a time in Samaria when an Asse's Head was sold for Fourscore Pieces
of Silver, and the fourth part of a Cab of Dove's Dung for Five Pieces of
Silver: There was nothing so Ceremonially or Naturally unclean, but was
Hungrily fed upon, and not one questioned the Lawfulness of it, so that there
were no Murder in the Case: To the Hungry Soul every bitter thing was sweet.
But when the Siege was broken up, and the Gates were opened, and a Plenty of
all Good Food was come, should the Princes have Monopoliz'd it, and by a severe
Edict interdicted the free use of it, and confined the People to the use of
such things for kind and measure, as they had found in their extremity would
pass down with them, and was just enough to keep Soul and Body together, and
condemn all such to Fines, or Prisons, or Banishment, that should dare, though
never so peaceably and temperately, to make use of the Plenty that God had
given them; would not your Charity think this to be a little hard? And truly,
while we think our Souls so much better and nearer to us than our Bodies, we
cannot take it very kindly to be so dealt with by You.

Lastly, To take your fair leave of this Argument, you tell us, that you are
far from derogating from the Authority of Secular Princes: But we must tell
you, that you are not so far as would better become you, from reflecting on the
Wisdom and Justice of those that are in Supreme Authority over you, and by
whose distinguishing Favor it is that you enjoy your Ecclesiastical
Preferments, and We our Christian Liberty of Conscience, and Immunity from the
rigor of Penal Laws.

VI. You have now brought us to what you Call our Sixth Argument; and that you
may show how bountiful you can be, and how willing to make the most of what we
have to say for our selves, you have subtly divided this One for us into
Three. The Bulk of the Argument we perceive lies thus.

That the way of the Separation is preferable to that of the Church, i. e. Of
the Church of England. Erg.

We Answer, that to choose that which is the more excellent, and having now
Liberty given us so to do, we hope is no Schism, at least in our Case. And to
suffult our Major, you have found out for us Three other Subservient Arguments,
which yet you say are cut off, by the Sinfulness of our Separation: So that it
seems your Goodness never intended they should do us any real Service. And thus
you could have found it in your Heart to have dismised them without farther
Consideration. But because you apprehend there is some stress laid upon 'em,
and to make your Triumph the greater, You thought fit to bring them under a
distinct Examination, wherein we shall follow you with a very obsequious
diligence.

1. It has been said, that in the way of Separation we enjoy purer Ordinances;
Ordinances that are freer from Ceremony, and the addition of things not
commanded, that set us at a greater distance from Popery, etc. But to rid your
self of this way of Arguing, you endeavor to smother it under a Heap of
Absurdities, which they fall into, who would exclude from Religion all things
not commanded; and who make the greatest distance from the Church of Rome,
(from which you seem Jealous of being drawn too far) the Standard of the best
Reformation. And then you make us a long Quotation of the gross Absurdities of
those Men, whom you call the more Rigid Separatists, out of Baylie's
Disswasive, and Paget's Arrow against Separation; wherein we are not concerned,
unless it be, as you well advise, to caution us against the like wild
Extravagancies. This we take kindly enough from you, and that we may not lie
long in your Debt in this kind, we think it as seasonable to desire you to
consider by what Means and Degrees the Church of Rome arrived to its (...) in
Superstition and Idolatry: Whether some such few uncommanded Ceremonies, which
you so zealously retain, and unwarrantably impose, were not the first
Nest-Eggs, to which all the rest were laid: Whether they are not now as
productive of more as ever they were, when an occasion shall offer; and whether
there are not enough now in England that do expect it, and have prepared their
Nests for it? Whether your few Ceremonies have not the same relation and
subservient tendency to the grosser Superstition and Idolatries of Rome, as the
High Places of the Jews, which some of their Reforming Kings, through the
instigation of their Priests were so loath to let go, were of the grosser
Idolatries of the Heathen? And whether you are not as much concerned to beware
of leading your selves and others into the Gulf of the foulest Superstition by
an abuse of your Power, as we have to beware that others run not out into
Extremes by our doing but our Duty.

You seem to grant us, with the generality of your Conformists, That there is
nothing to be admitted as an Essential part of God's Worship, that is not the
subject of a Divine Precept: But would you not then by an innuendo, have us to
believe, that some Integral Parts may be admitted without any such Precept?
Which you had need to prove, before we can be very forward to believe. But then
you say indefinitely, That External Rites and Circumstances of Worship (whether
English, or Romish, Jewish, Greek, or Barbarian,) are of another Nature; and
indeed we think so too, but being not forbidden of God, expressly, or by
consequence, are not Sinful. And herein we should agree too, could it but be
once agreed, what is by consequence forbidden. For our parts, we are apt to
think that the consequence of those first words of the Second Commandment, and
all those Scriptures of the Old Testament, that condemn the using of any thing
in God's Worship, which He has not commanded or required: That that of Matthew.
15.9. and that of the Apostle, Colos. 2.20, 21, 22. will go far to condemn all
those Rites and Ceremonies used in Divine Worship which are of Men's Invention,
and not necessary ex natura rei, whatever their pretended usefulness on the
account of their significancy be. Besides, for the aggravation of our Guilt,
and our fuller Conviction, you would have us to consider how few of these are
required of us as Private Men. To which we reply, that this brings to our
Minds, how Lot on a better Principle, and to better Purpose, once pleaded for
Zoar, Is it not a little one? But whether there be few or many, we know no
Power you have to require, nor any warrant we have to admit of any; for he that
may require one, may, on your Principles, require ad libitum, as many as he
will. But that it should be impossible to preserve Peace and Order in the
Church without a Conformity to these things, is owing only to the disorder of
your own Spleens, and your pertinacious Zeal for them. Would you but give every
one his Liberty in these things which your selves call indifferent, according
to the Apostle's Rule, Romans 14. and alibi, we know not who would disturb the
Churches Peace about them.

You say, That in the Primitive Church, as many Ceremonies were used, as now
are required by the Church of England; and what if we grant that there were as
many, and more; will you argue from the Primitive Churches using to your
Churches requiring and imposing? Or do you know which way to prove that their
Effects of Charity, or Kiss of Peace, or the Woman's Vail, were of the Apostles
Appointment or Institution? It Is true, the Apostle argues the Decency of the
Woman's being covered, and of the Man's being uncovered in the Place and Time
of God's solemn Worship, 1 Cor. 11. But as for the Matter or Mode of the
Covering, he has left this to every one's Liberty, for any thing we have yet
heard of; and this being a Matter of natural Decency, as he there argues at,
Ver. 14.15. we take it for our Duty to observe; as one of our Ministers in an
Essay on that Subject has, not long ago, taught us. But the Inference you drew
from this had need of a little better proof. Viz. That if the Church has Power
to lay aside such Rites, (for you confess they are Alterable, though yours be
like the Laws of the Medes and Persians) so it has Power also to appoint
others of the like Nature, and is obliged to do so, upon Emergent Occcasions,
as the Prudence (i. e. as the good Pleasure of your Bishops) may direct. But
for our parts, we cannot think that your Consequence is good, Viz. That because
the Church has Power to Purge it self of some unnecessary and offensive
Vanities, therefore it has Power to Introduce others, much less that it is
obliged so to do. For we cannot believe that because Hezekiah had Power to take
down the Brazen Serpent, and to cast it away as a Nehushtan, which had been a
Symbol of God's own Appointment, and of so long standing, that therefore he had
Power, or was under any Obligation to erect another Gambol of his own
Invention, to stand in the Room of it.

1. Then, we will say with you, It is certain that the public Worship of God
ought to be Celebrated with such Ceremonies as are suitable to the Dignity and
Solemnity of the Work, and agreeable to the general Directions of the Holy
Scripture, and (you might have added) to the Purity and Simplicity of the
Gospel, and which are Necessary to the right Performance of the Work.

2. That Ceremonies used in Divine Worship ought to be Significant of some
Spiritual Grace, or Expressive of some Christian Duty, is certain; because else
they are but Herb John, Useless and Impertinent, which would but Affront the
Deity we pretend to Worship. And so indeed we find, that all the Ceremonies of
Christ's Institutions were Symbolical and Expressive; but to argue, that
because Christ did institute symbolical Ceremonies in his Church, therefore you
may do so too, is what you may not expect our Assent to, till you have proved
your Power in and over the Church to be equal to that of Christ, or show us the
Patent he has given you to justify your so doing. The little Instances which
you produce, of Smiting the Breast, Lifting up the Hands, in Prayer, Kneeling
on the same Occasion, and the putting on some new Garment at the time of
Baptism, have been indeed things taken up into common Use as naturally
Expressive of some inward Devotion, or Affection of the Heart, or of outward
Decency, and almost common to all Mankind; and when you shall have discovered
and proved any Divine Institution of them, we will acknowledge our Sin, if at
any time we disuse them on such Occasions; but to Argue from the Antiquity of
their Use, to the Churches imposing Power, is as Orthodox and Valid in England,
as it is in Rome or Spain, or any other Church, true or false, in the whole
World.

3. That the H. Scripture directs us in general, to do all things Decently, and
in Order, we do as zealously own as you. But then, why should not that of the
H. Scripture, from which we take our Rules of Gospel worship, determine to us
what is Decent and Orderly? Or, if by the Old Testament you would justify your
Ephod, and Organs, and Festivals, and Ceremonious Consecrations, or any thing
else that the Christian has borrowed from the Jewish Church, why do you pick
and choose, and follow your Rule at halves? Are not the Harp, and the Trumpet,
and the Viol and Cymbol, the Holy Oil, and all the rest of the Priestly Robes,
and Utensils of the Divine Service, which you have left out, altogether as
Decent and as Significant, as what you have taken from thence, or have been
borrowed from any others, and which have as much to show of a Divine
Institution?

4. Your next Paragraph looks more like Banter than Argument; for you tell us,
in Effect, that we ought to satisfy our selves with an implicit Faith of the
Lawfulness of the Ceremonies imposed on us, and of their Consormity to the End
for which they are appointed, because it is not Necessary that every one that
uses them should know the Reasonableness of their Institution; so that we ought
to make no Question of the Lawfulness of what you require of us, even in the
High and Important Concern of God's Worship, and our own Salvation, how
Unreasonable soever it appears to us; and are we not like to be edefi'd much by
what we don't understand? Is this one Article of your Faith too, That Ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion? Must we put out our own Eyes, and make no Question
for Conscience sake either of the Lawfulness or Reasonableness of what you
require of us, but follow the Conduct of your Customs, believing, as the Church
believes? Is this (...) the Reasonable Service that God now requires of the
Gospel-worshipper? And is this some of your Protestant Doctrine? But to
satisfy our Consciences herein, you Instance in the customary Way of taking an
Oath by kissing the Book, which, you say, may safely be done by such as know
nothing of the Original of that Ceremony, nor are satisfied of the Fitness of
it; what, nor of the Lawfulness of it; nor whether the Common Prayer be in the
Book or no? If Custom will serve for a Rule in Civil Matters, must it be so in
the highest and most sacred Acts of our Religion too?

5. And this now brings you home to your main Topic Custom; from which you
profess to take the Significancy of your Ceremonies, and the Measures of
Decency, as that which gives Rules both for Words, and Actions, and Habits, and
Gestures. It Is true, Custom has a great stroke to conciliate a Decency and
Significancy to these things, and may serve very much to excuse the Use of them
in Civil Conversation; and to offer any thing to the holy God in Worship, which
Civil Custom has made Undecent or Ridiculous, is horribly Profane. But will
you hence argue, that what Custom has made Decent in Civil Conversation, is
therefore so in Religious Worship, and fit to be imposed as a Condition of
Christian Communion? Or that what Religious Custom has made Decent and
Significant in the Opinion of the Superstitious and Idolaters, is therefore
lawful to be used and imposed by you? Though the Apostle pleaded from the Custom
of the Churches, for what he called on the Corinthians for, 1 Cor. 11.16. yet
this was but one of his Arguments, and which, if you observe, he urges only
negatively; he does not plead for it, because it was a Custom, but pleads
against their contrary Practice, because they had no such Custom. And pray
which of those Ceremonies which you contend for, and make the indispensible
Condition of Communion with you; might not the Apostle have said, we have no
such Custom? So that this Argument recoils upon you, and flies very sorely in
your own face.

6. Your next Paragraph tells us what you have to say for the Sign of the
Cross, which you use in Baptism; for which you cannot pretend to any
Apostolical Institution, but an Old and General Custom; you fancy it to be
almost as Old as the Apostle's, or not above an Age short of them. It Is true,
the Image of the Cross crept very early into the Church: He that sows the Tares
is not wont to be long behind him that sows the Good Seed in the Field. But we
hope you will not say that the Earliness of a thing is enough to justify it:
And that it was very commonly (though we cannot say universally) used as an
Ensign among the Christians, and as a visible Badge of their Christianity,
especially before the Heathen, who were wont to upbraid them with their
Crucified God, we will grant; neither will we uncharitably censure the Zealous
Principles, or Prudential Reasons on which it was at first taken up by such as
foresaw not the ill use that would in After Ages be made of it. However though
it were taken up in those Days as a Testimony against the Infidel World, and in
token that they were not ashamed of their once Crucified LORD, and used by them
not as any part of their Worship, but only for distinction sake between Them
and Heathens; yet this is but a precarious kind of Apologizing for the using,
much less for the imposing of it now, when there is not, per ratio, the same
reason for it; especially after it has been so generally and so long as
idolatrously abused by such as have prevented the first Design of it, as ever
Gideon's Ephod, or the Brazen Serpent were abused. Nor does it yet appear how
our Protestant Reformers have, or ever can free it from the Pollution of those
Abuses whereby the Superstitions and Idolatries of Men have defiled it by
putting it into your Liturgy, and making it a significant Sign, and imposing it
on us as an Integral Part of the Sacrament of Baptism, without which that
Sacrament is not to be esteemed Perfect; and all this without any intimation of
instruction or warrant from him who instituted and left this Sacrament entire
with his Churches. Baptism, as our Savior himself instituted it, is but one
Symbolical Sign, but you by adding to it another of your own devising, have
made it Two; which to us appears like the setting of your Thresheld by God's
Threshold, and your Post by God's Post. Neither will the great Names in which
you boast of the Saints and Martyrs now with God, who in the Days of their
Flesh walked with God, and Worshipped according to their present Circumstances,
and the Light they had then attained to, justify your practice in this more
than in any other thing, which is now acknowledged to be the imperfection of
these more early and unexperienced Times.

7. You cannot yet have done with your beloved thing Custom, it being that on
which the Life of your Cause does depend. From Custom you take your measures of
Decency or Indecency in all things that you are pleased to call indifferent,
that is, all those things that may be by the Wit of Man superadded as
Accidental, or Integral Parts (for only the Essential Parts are by you
excepted) of God's Worship. And whether this Position do not open a wide Door
to all the Superstitions in the World, and justify all that has ever been
done of this kind in the most degenerate Churches, let any but a Bigot judge.

8. But now you begin to be more Orthodox, when you tell us, That things which
according to Custom are Signs of irreverence amongst Men, are Marks of
Profaneness and Contempt when they are used toward the Almighty: Though here
you might have remembered to have made an exception of some few things; but in
general what Custom represents as Undecent or Rude in Civil Conversation,
deserves a worse Name in Religious Worship. If we rudely rush into God's
Presence without an awful sense of his Majesty upon our Hearts, and such an
outward Behavior of Body, as either Nature or Custom has made expressive of
our inward Fear and Reverence, (though without any of those quaint Ceremonies
which are of Humane Institution) we may indeed justly fear the due punishment
of such Irreverence.

And now, Sir, if you lay all these things together, as you advise us to do,
you may find that what you call the Reverence and Decency of your Services is
indeed their Defilement; that in what you call your Laudable Customs, you act
against the Scripture Rules of Spiritual Worship and Gospel Simplicity, and
have deserted the way in which Christ and his Apostles walked, and deal with us
in that Tyrannical manner which the Holy Scripture condemns. As for outward
Bodily Worship, we own and practice as zealously as you, though not in your
Formal Ceremonious way, which seems to be more Artificial than Natural, and so
nearer of kin to Graven Images. You are for setting forth your Public Services
with Pomp and Art; we are for what is more Plain and Rational, and naturally
Expressive of the hidden Man of the Heart, and therein more Agreeable to the
Tenor of the Gospel. We are careful to avoid whatever Nature, Scripture or
Custom has made a Mark of Irreverence in the Worship of our God; but we know
no Authority we or any others have to prescribe particular positive Laws in
these things to others. Kneeling in Prayer we own as a Gesture which both
Nature and Scripture directs to, and so we practice; though not from a
Conscience of its absolute necessity, either in our own Private Houses, or in
the Public, because God has allowed us a Liberty in it, and all the Saints
before us have used the same Liberty; nor do we understand why you should so
strictly require it of us in Public rather than in Private, (which your selves
do not observe in every Prayer you put up to God there) unless it be from a
conceit you have that the Public House is more Holy than the Private; which is
a Notion too Jewish for us to entertain.

To conclude this Head, omitting, as you say, some other Particulars in debate
between us; which perhaps you are not willing to undertake the Defense of; you
think you have one thing that will demonstrate to us the weakness of our
Exceptions against the Ceremonies of the Church, and show as the Irreverence
that is used in our Meetings. And what you mean is the Lord's Supper, which in
our way is appointed to be received sitting. Now against this you begin to
demonstrate very gravely thus, Is there any Precept for this in Scripture? Or
if none can be found, is it not against the Second Commandment? Is it not an
Idol? This you offer us Ironically, but we reply to you in Earnest, that we
find that in Scripture, which warrants our Sitting at this Sacrament; but never
a word of Kneeling by Precept or Precedent of Christ or his Apostles, in all
the New Testament, nor in the Practice of the Churches, while they retained
their Primitive Purity; therefore you are as much concerned in the Second
Commandment on this account as we. You tell us for certain that this Matter is
not decided in Scripture: But why is it not there decided? Because it is not
expressly required or forbidden; and where the Scripture is not very punctually
express, there, no doubt, Men may devise, and do, and impose what they list,
without any regard to Scripture Consequences. But yet you find that it is not
for your Interest always to use this way of Arguing. The Practical Precedents
and Examples of Christ or his Apostles, which you find in Scripture, will
sometimes amount with you to the force of a Precept, when you apprehend it will
fall on the side of your Beloved Ceremonies? Nay, you can plead very stiffly
the Authority of an Old Custom of the Churches which has been taken up, and
perhaps superstitiously enough, long after the Apostle's Days: But now it seems
there is nothing to be taken for certain that has not a plain Scripture
command, wherein we think you are not so well aware at what an uncertainty you
have lest the Cause you have now undertaken.

Though you cannot be ignorant of what has been already said by so many of the
Learned of our Way in the Vindication of our Practice herein; yet let us once
more see if we may not find much more in the Holy Scripture for Sitting, at
this Sacrament, than for Kneeling.

Now it is certain, that this Sacrament, as to the Externals of it, is but a
Ceremony, though of the most Sacred Institution and Highest Importance, both a
Signifying and a Sealing Ceremony; and he that instituted it, did best
understand the Nature and Ends of it, and what Gesture and Circumstances would
best become the Celebration of it: And his own Example herein, we think is
sufficient to warrant, if not to require, our Imitation. But when we look back
to the Institution, we find that Christ sat down with the Twelve, and Eat the
Passover with them. Here the Gesture was expressed, and 'twas Sitting, not
Kneeling; Matthew. 26.20. And as they were Eating, without changing the Gesture,
he Instituted and Celebrated this Gospel Ordinance, and Administered it to them
with his own Hand, verse 26, 27, 28. Mark tells us, as they Sat and did Eat,
Mark 14.18. i. e. the Passover, and in the same Posture still. As they did Eat,
Jesus took Bread and Blessed it, ver. 22. Luke also tells us, That be Sat
down, and the Twelve Apostles with him, Luke 22.14. and in that Posture
Administered his Last Supper to them, verse 17, 18, 19, 20. These are the only
three Evangelists that particularly mention the manner of our Savior's
Administering this Ordinance; and they all speak expressly of their Sitting, but
never a word of Kneeling in either of them. Thus Christ and his Disciples did
Eat it together as they were wont to Eat the Passover which was the very same
Ordinance, of the same Divine Institution, Signification and Mystery, and
equally Sacred, though of a different Form, as this of the Gospel is. And will
you now say, that this was irreverently done? That it had too much of
Familiarity, and two little of Decency or Humility? Dare you thus Blaspheme the
Wisdom of your Savior? Did not he understand the End, and the proper
Signification of his Own Mystery, as well as you? Has he told you again and
again, that he and his Disciples did Eat it Sitting, and will you tell him that
it ought to have been done Kneeling? May he not then demand of you who made you
his Counselors, or his Correctors? And who has required this voluntary
Humility and Will Worship of you? But you tell us that there is a Prayer with
which you deliver the Elements to the People, and therefore it ought to be
received in a Praying Posture. A Prayer, viz. The Body and Blood of Christ
preserve thy Body and Soul unto Eternal Life. To which we answer,

1. This which you call a Prayer, sounds more like a Priestly Benediction, or
kind of Exorcism, being repeated over and over to every individual Communicant;
so that the Kneeling seems to be required rather in Honor of the Office, as in
Confirmation and Absolution, than in respect of what you call a Prayer.

2. Who made this Form of Words for you? Or required it of you? Is there any
mention of this, or of any thing like it, in the Institution? Though we grant
that the Heart ought to be full of Holy Ejaculations, Vows and Self-resignation
in so Sacred an Action, and which may be done every way as Decently and
Reverently Sitting or Standing, as Kneeling, and wherein every one ought to
have his own Liberty and Freedom of thought, in the Exercise of all Graces,
according as they find particular occasion in and from themselves; and wherein
the Minister from the Experiences of his own Heart, may piously and profitably
suggest to their assistance in it; and this reasonable Service we reject not.

3. Why do not You Administer on your Knees? For if it be a Prayer, it is you
that properly Pray, and the People say Amen. Does not your requiring it of
others condemn your selves? Why must you Pray Standing, and they Kneeling?

4. Though Kneeling be an ordinary Praying Posture, yet if you will excuse your
selves, you must grant that it is not indispensibly necessary. The Apostle bids
you Pray (...) continually, or without ccasing; but should you be bound to
Kneel continually, we doubt that would not be very pleasing. Judge now whether
your Practice herein be not irregular, to say no worse of it.

What the Reasons were of our LORD's Instituting this Sacrament with a
Table Gesture, and of what it is significant, we will not now enquire: It Is
enough for us that we know his Will in it by his Practice. But you know that we
have something else to Object against Kneeling in the Act of Receiving. This
Gesture is now become scandalous, at least to some, because it Symbolizes with
the Idolatry of the Church of Rome in Worshipping the Host; and by whom, as
some say, it was introduced and imposed to support their Bloody Doctrine of the
Real Presence, or, as others think, that this was the occasion of that
Idolatry; so that here is an unexcusable appearance of Evil in it; and
therefore having no Command of God for it, nor Apostolical Example, we ought
not to continue its use, much less to endure the imposition of it, as if it
were of necessity. Neither is your Churches declaring against the Idolatrous
use of it, enough to purge or to defend it, unless it were a matter of
particular Divine Institution. As for those that think it their Duty or their
Liberty so to express their Reverence to Almighty God in this Sacrament, with a
just Abhorrence of all Idolatrous thoughts or pretensions, we do not judge
them; but to do it as of necessity, we take to be a piece of Superstition, and
a weakness to be pitied.

II. The Second Branch of the last Argument you can afford us is this, That the
way of the Separation affords us Communion with a better People than those
which we have deserted.

It Is easily discerned from what sort of Dissenters you have raked up this
Argument, to cast it, without distinction, in our Faces. But we are not the
Persons so much concerned in it as you would represent us to be. However we
will not dismiss it without giving a short touch of our thoughts upon it, in
what you fancy that you have spoken very much to your own purpose, and
altogether as pertinent to our Case.

But first we will premise, that neither You nor We have any great Reason to
boast of our Goodness; it would better become us to lament every one his own
Faults, than to say to one another, Stand by thy Self, come not near to me, for
I am Holier than thou. That there is Wheat as well as Tares with You, and Tares
as well Wheat as with Us, we readily grant; though your Charity condemns us all
for Tares, and such as are fit to be burnt; and that not for any Heresy in
Judgment, or Immorality in Practice, or Idolatry in Worship, but because we
dare not bring our Consciences under the Yoke of your needless Ceremonies. We
do not pretend to be Churches without a Mixture of Good and Bad, nor do we hope
for any such in this World. Yet we must say, the more the necessary Discipline
is neglected, and Profaneness tolerated, yea, encouraged by the Examples of so
many of your Clergy; and the most Ignorant and Scandalous ones, not only
admitted, but pressed to come to the LORD's Table with you, we can have the
less comfort to join with you in these most Sacred Mysteries of our Religion.
But yet should we grant that all this were too little of it self, to justify
our Separation, we cannot think that what you offer us from Scripture on this
Head, does at all affect our Case.

It Is true, in the Church of Corinth there were Corruptions, Disorders, some
foul Immoralities, and neglect of Discipline; and yet the Apostle does not
advise them to purge themselves by a Separation, but endeavors to reduce them
to the Holy Rules of their Institution, both in Worship, Discipline and
Manners: And being a Church of his own Planting, his Authority was prevalent
there. what need then of Separation, when Reformation could be obtained without
it? But, O that this were our Case! Where is the Apostle now that shall judge
between us, and Authoritatively decide our Matters for us? To whom shall we go
with our Complaints, when those that call themselves the Apostle's Successors
will not hear our Complaints, nor hearken to the Apostle's Words, nor walk by
the Apostle's Rules, nor regard our Remonstrances and Petitions? If the
Foundations be removed, what can the Righteous do? If those that should head
the way will not go before us, must we not go alone? Had the Rulers of the
Church of Corinth refused to obey the Apostle's Orders, and insisted on their
own Authority, and the Purity of their way, as needing no Reformation, would
not the Apostle have advised to Separate from these Men? Though Separation be
never in it self desirable, yet it is sometimes necessary. And as for all the
ill consequences of Separation which you have mentioned with their Aggravations
here, we will concur with you, when once you have proved our Separation to be
Causeless or Unnecessary. But till then, we are not the Persons concerned, but
by your own Rule, are bound in Conscience to Separate from those, with whom we
cannot hold Communion without Sin.

III. And now we are come to your Third and Last. It has been said, That the
way of the Separatists conduces more to our Edification: And that if we would
provide what is best for our Bodies, we ought more especially to do so for our
Souls. That we are more Edified by the Dissenting Ministers, than by the
Conforming Clergy; and think it requisite to be Hearers of those, by whom we
profit most.

This Argument, you say, is Popular, and therefore the more Dangerous;
wherefore you have (according to your Art) bestowed it the more distinctly
under these Four Heads of Enquiry.

I. You Enquire, what is the true (i. e. your new) Notion of Edification; and
on very strict enquiry, you say that you have found, that Edifying, as applied
to Spiritual Matters, signifies the Advancement of Persons in some Spiritual
Good; and to Edify them is to do that Work of Charity, whereby we become
beneficial to their Souls. And thus far we think you are right as to the Active
and Transitive Signification of it: But would you have us to believe that
Edification is a thing that has relation only to others, and not to our
selves? And for this you cite us, 1 Cor. 8.1. Charity Edifieth, and several
other Scriptures where you find this word mentioned. Whence you conclude, That
it is the Edifying of our Neighbors that is required of us, and that of our
selves is never enjoined under this Expression, nor can it well be sought, but
in conjunction with the Public Good.

Sir, Whether the care we ought to have of our own Souls be enjoined us under
this Expression or no, if the thing we intend by it be enjoined, what you have
hitherto said of it, is but Logomachy. For we hope your Charity would not go
about to persuade us, that if we endeavor to Edify others, it is no matter
what becomes of our own Souls: And we have reason to think that where the
Edifying of others is required, the Edifying of our selves is necessarily
implied in it, and to be concluded from it a Majori. Thou therefore which
Teach another, teach thou not thy self? Romans 2.21. Lest when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. Should not
our own Souls be as dear to us, and as much the subject of our care, as the
Souls of others? Would you make us the Keepers of your Vine-yards to the fatal
neglect of our own, as the Spouse once complained, Cant. 1.6. Besides, it is a
Solecism in Nature for the Liver to prepare good Blood for the nourishment of
all the other parts of the Body, besides its own proper Parenchyma; and is not
the Parallel as great a Solecism in Divinity? Sir, If this be your Spirit of
Charity, and your way of Edifying, you may recommend it to those of your own
Tribe, that can Preach Faith and Repentance, Charity, Humility, Sobriety,
Continency and Mortification to others, but not to themselves; too well like
those of whom Christ spoke, Matthew. 23.4.

But by your Learning you have discovered, that Edifying signifies Building,
and Building has relation to a House; and you observe that Houses do not build
themselves, but must be built by others; and this House, you say (as the word
is here to be taken) is the Church; for which you quote us two pertinent
Scriptures, in which the Apostle speaks of Edifying of the Church: But can you
inform us why it is not as proper, and as necessary for Temples to be Edified
as Churches, and whether every individual believer be not called the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. Nay, do you not grant us in other words, as much
as we crave, when you say that the Polishing and Perfecting those Living
Stones, of which the Church is Built, is the Edifying of it; yea, and thus the
Church is said to Edify it self, Ephesians. 4.16. Well then, if Edifying be the Word
that does offend you, pray strike it out of our Argument, and put in Polishing
and Perfecting, and it will please us all as well. And thus we will conclude
with you, That if we bring new Proselites into the Church (i. e. by sound
conversion to God, and not to a Party, to the Church of Christ, and not merely
to the Ceremonies, and Peculiar External Rites, or Forms of this or that
Particular Church) and confirm those that are in it, in advancing any in
Knowledge and Piety in Faith and Practice, we shall be reckoned amongst the
Builder or Edifiers of the Church.

And farther to explain what you mean by Edification, you tell us, there are
these two things required in it, viz. Unity and Order.

1. Unity: And here you descant on the Benefits of Union, and the Mischiefs of
Schism, in the words of Clemens Romanus, and Mr. Baxter; wherein we would not
contradict you, would you but once better prove that this Union must consist in
those controverted things which you impose on us, as the indispensible
Condition of our Communion with you. We are as desirous of Church-Union as You,
and are sensible how much it would conduce both to the Ornament, Establishment
and Enlargement of the Church; but if it be your Tyrannical Impositions, and
your delivering up the Care of our Souls to such as have no Care of Ours, nor
of their Own, that has made and does keep open the Breach between us, let the
World Judge who are the Schismatics.

2. As for Order, you tell us not what you mean, more than what we can pick out
of Ephesians. 2.21. and Chapter 4.16. which Scriptures we own, but cannot learn from any
thing that is Written there, that our Dissent from such Impositions as yours,
and refusing to do what you would have us to do, is a breach of Order. If we
stand not in those Ranks and Files of Military Order as once we stood; if you
see our Seats forsaken in your Churches, and at your Communion-Tables, you must
blame your selves as the only Causes of this Disorder.

II. You next Enquire, What we understand by Edification, and whether we
rightly judge how it is best promoted. And here, we are also concerned to
Enquire, how rightly we are judged by you when you say, That we take that to be
Edifying, that raises in us some Sensible Devotions, that excites in us some
Religious Affections, such as Love, Joy, Fear, or the like: And these, you
suppose, we have chiefly in view, when we prefer the Service in our Meetimgs
before that of the Churches. The truth is, that which is not proper to raise
our Devotion in Religious Duties, and to excite Holy Affections in us, we
cannot think to be very Edifying. We know not how (in this our compound state)
to exercise the Spiritual Graces of Faith, Repentance, Love, Fear, Humility,
Joy, Delight in God, etc. but by the help of those Rational and Intellectual
Faculties of Understanding, Will and Affections, which God has given us. If
you understand the more Raptural Mysteries of Quietism, a more Stoical or
Seraphick way of contemplation, without concerning those Grosser Spirits in so
Divine an Exercise, we will not envy your Attainment; but for our parts, we
cannot be satisfied that our Hearts are concerned in Religious Duties, as they
ought to be, unless we are sensible that they are so.

But to come to Particulars, you instance in the two great ordinances of
Praying and Preaching.

1. You begin with the way of Praying used in our Meetings; and here again you
make your self a Judge of Evil Thoughts; and that in such a Case, wherein you
are in Danger of Blaspheming the Holy Spirit of God. For if it be by the Spirit
of Supplication, which makeh Intercession in the Saints, that we are taught
both what and how to Pray; it concerns you to take heed how you approbiously
oppose your Cant against our Common Experience of its assistance herein. The
Old and Often-repeated Harrangue by which you and others of your Way endeavor
to exalt your prescribed Forms of Prayer, and which has been so often answered
to silence, does but bewray your Inexperience of that way of Praying, which the
Holy Scriptures direct to, and in which all the Saints in all Ages have found
their greatest Reliefs. How impertinently do you tell us, That we are not to
think that God is at all wrought upon by the variation of Phrases, or the
modulation of them. No, Sir, we don't imagine that God is moved with Words or
Tones, or the most Eloquent or Artificial Composures of Matter or Expression
whether Prescrib'dor or Unpremeditated; Words are for our own sakes, not for
His; yet we have great reason to think, that the better the Affections are
exercised, and the Graces of the Spirit of God in the Heart, the better is the
Heart prepared, and the better grounds it has to hope to obtain Mercy from
him. And certainly, that way of Praying which we find most conducible to this
end, we have reason to prefer: Nor can any thing that we have ever yet heard
incline us to your contrary Opinion.

That the Gift of Prayer, which is in it self but a Common Gift, as that of
Preaching, etc. is, may be, and too often has been abused by ill Men, is what
we grant: But to censure all for ill Men that use it, is unbecoming a
Christian; and to argue from the Abuse, against the Use, is too Weak and Absurd
for a Man of your Figure and Learning. And may we not easily retort as many and
as great Abuses of your Way of Praying by Limited and Prescribed Forms, had we
a Mind to retaliate? Those Motions and Efforts of Devotion, which without due
Caution or Distinction you impute to Natural Causes, as, you say, a little
Philosophy would teach us, in such as use the Gift of Prayer, are censured by
you but one degree short of what the Spirit of God in our Savior Christ, was
censured by those that attributed the Power by which he wrought his Miracles,
to a Diabolical Cause, Matthew. 12.24, etc. which you will do well to read, and
spend some Second Thoughts upon.

But to moderare the matter, you are pleased to grant, that the Gift of
Elocution (which you seem to take for the whole of the Gift of Prayer) may,
upon occasion, be of Benefit to others: But if it chance to touch your Noli me
tangere, and seem, though but by consequence, to reflect on the Honor of your
Liturgy, and the Forms by which you Pray, that is enough, without any other
Fault, to render them most Dangerous Snares; and instead of promoting, cannot
but hinder their Edification. And this indeed is Canonical enough.

For your part, you say, you think a wellcompos'd Liturgy has much the
Advantage of our Way of Praying, and is much fitter in Public Assemblies; then
we hope you will bear with us in our Private Families; where, we thank God, you
cannot yet reach us. And for this your Opinion you produce several Reasons,
which are no new things to us, and which have been already Answered by such as,
on our side, have Written on this Subject. You say it secures the Honor of
Religion in the Solemnities of Worship, i. e. from such Expressions in Prayer
as agree not with the Genius of your Fancy, or the Fineness of your Style, or
which, on some account or other, you might be ready to ridicule, or to quarrel
at: And then it affords the greatest help in the part that you bear in it, i.
e. It eases you of one, and that the more Spiritual, half of your Ministerial
Work; so that you are more beholden to your Prayer Book than to the Spirit of
God in that Duty, which indeed is great pity, but yet ingeniously, enough
confessed. Again, by this means You have no occasion to be in Pain or Fear (as
you think we are) about the next words that shall fall from your Minister; as
you might have Reason enough to be, were it not for his Form which he has
before his Eyes, or which he has made as perfect as the Child has his Lord's
Prayer: Well may you be in Pain for one that never accustomed his Tongue to
Holy Discourse, more than what he has prepared for his Pulpit: That never
studied his own Heart, nor has been experimentally affected with the Cases of
Tender or Wounded Consciences: No wonder if such a one be at a loss, that is a
Stranger to these things. And,

Lastly, By the Benefit of your Forms, You have no Doubtful Expressions to
exercise your Thoughts, or disturb your Devotion with (as you suppose there are
in our Ministers Prayers) before you can say, Amen. And this you take as a
great Commodity, both to the Minister and to the People, for which it ought to
be preferred before our way of Praying. And why are not the same Arguments as
cogent for the use of Homilies? That so the whole Work may be cut out for him
that Officiates; which would be a great ease to his Studies; some charge saved
in Books: A small Sallary would serve to maintain him as a Curate; the more
time to spend all the Week in the Satisfying of his Lusts, and the Debauching
of his Neighbors: How happily would this conduce to the comfortable Assurance
of your performing an acceptable Service to God, and agreeable to his Will,
when the whole of the Ministerial Work is thus wisely prepared, that there can
be no Error in it if the Man can but read English?

What you quote us out of a Sermon of Dr. Beveridge, on 1 Cor. 14.26. in the
Praise of your own Liturgy, we shall not stay now to make Remarks upon, there
having been enough already said by others on this Point, and of which you
cannot be ignorant. How your Liturgy was compiled in that juncture of the
Reformation, or rather Accommodation, the true History of these Times would
inform you; but that this was that that was Defended, or Confirmed by the
Martyrdom of many, or of any, was the Doctor's great mistake, and yours too.
That it has been Established by Acts of Parliament, and fenced with the sharp
Thorns of Penal Laws, too often Arbitrarily and Despightfully executed, we have
known to our sorrow; but that ever it was yet established by an Act of
Scripture we could never yet learn.

2. You come next to Animadvert on our Ministers Way of Preaching, which you
represent as a Sect of Pharisees, in which they have no meaning, or a bad one;
and that we think our selves Edified by a Sound of Words, when we understand
nothing by it. Sir, this is Written with Scorn enough. Then you fall out (as
well you may) with the Antinomians. But to set us forth in such Bear-skins as
these, is but a trick of the old Enmity and Policy.

But yet, if (for Argument sake) you should suppose, that we have better
Praying and Preaching; yet, you say, we do not preetend that there is any thing
wanting with you that is necessary to Salvation. Sir, We do not pretend that
Salvation is not to be obtained in the Church of England; but whether there be
any thing wanting with the most of those that are set over our Souls in our
Parish Churches, which is necessary to our Salvation, or no, of this we are
sure, there is something wanting that is necessary to our Edification, or (if
you had rather have it in your own words) to our Conversion, and Advancing, and
Perfecting in Knowledge, and Piety, and Faith, and Practice. When we hear what,
for Airiness of the Notions, or the Affected Quaintness of the Language, we
cannot understand; or for the Obscurity of the Method which seems to be
generally affected, and is become the Mode amongst your Modern Churchmen, in
opposition to the more Plain and Instructive Method, which was once called the
Puritannical, and now (in derision) called DRUM Preaching, we cannot comprehend;
or, for the tumbling celerity of its utterance, we cannot remember; when we must
be Entertained with such jejune insipid stuff, as a Schoolboy would be ashamed
of in his Exercise; or have Stones given us instead of Bread, and Raileries
instead of sound Doctrine; or a good Sermon in the Pulpit, and a Vicious Life
all the Week after, we cannot think this to be very Edifying, or the Way to make
any great Advance Heavenward. And it is hard to persuade us thus to neglect our
own Souls, to keep up the honor of your Ceremonies. It Is true, a Public Good
is to be preferred to a Private of the same kind. We ought to deny our selves,
and to lay down our Lives for the Brethren; but we know not by whose Law,
besides yours, we are required to Damn our own Souls to please or to save
others.

III. Your next Enquiry is, Whether it be a good Rule, that we may, or ought to
follow those Teachers, whosoever they are, by whom we can most be Edified; or
whose Praying and Preaching we approve as most beneficial to our selves. To
which, as you have here (more tuo) stated it, we Answer, much as you would have
us to. do; Sir, We have no such Licencious Rule as this to walk by: We are for
Discipline and Order as much as you. But when we are driven out of your
Communion by your unconscionable Impositions; or have Wolves instead of
Shepherds set over us, and enforced on us; or such as are either unable or
unapt to feed our Souls with the Bread of Life, we think it our Duty, and Bless
God that we have now Liberty, and Allowance by the Law of Men, as well as of
God to make the best Provision we can for those poor Souls of ours which must
Live or Die to Eternity, by the more Charitable assistances of those whom the
good Providence of God has raised up for us, and sent to us to this End. So
that what you allege out of, 1 Cor. 3.3. is not to our Case, nor at all to
your purpose. Yet here again you lift up your cry of Unity and Order; That
which is against the Unity of the Church is against the Edification of it. That
is, without an entire Conformity and tame Submission to all your Impositions,
your Church is broken, and weakened, and convulsed, and undone. So that whoever
they be that could speak with the Tongues of Angels, or whatever their
Qualifications and Commissions to Preach the Gospel be, if they will not say as
you say, and do as you do, in those things wherein you Dissent from almost all
the Reformed Churches in the World, we must, for the preservation of your
Ceremonies, fly from them, and avoid 'em as most dangerous Fellows. And then,
what is against the Order of your Church must needs be against Edification; as
if there were no Order, but with you, or that yours were to give Laws and
Orders to all others. For what you seem to speak of the Church in general (to
carry with it a face of Orthodoxy (you design only for your own Church, from
which you condemn us as Schismatics for Dissenting, and in this Vein has the
Fallacy of your Arguings run throughout your whole Discourse.

IV. Your last Enquiry is of the same kind, and to the same purpose; Whether
our hopes of being better Edified, may justify our Separation; that is, say
you, if you have Stated the matter right (which indeed is one of the most
necessary Parenthesis in all your Book) whether our false Hopes may justify a
Sinful Practice. And this will as easily be resolved on your side as you can
desire or imagine, when once you shall have proved our Hopes to be False, and
our Practice Sinful; but till then, you do but beg the Question.

And now, Sir, Sect. ult.
we are come with you to your Last Section, wherein you lament the deplorable
consequences of Schism, in all which we have reason to think you much more
properly concerned as guilty than our Selves, who have been the Causes of all
the Separation you complain of, and of the ill consequences of it. You tell us
how it has hardened the Insidels in their Unbelief, and hindered their
Conversion, brought a Reproach on the Reformation of the Church, and hindered
the Progress of it, gives occasion to the spreading of many detestable Errors
in matters of Religion, and greatly encouraged Immorality. All which, if you
had as much Charity for your selves, as you pretend to have for us, you would
apply, as you ought to do, to your selves, unless you have a mind to be famous
among those Edifiers, that have more care of other Men's Soul's than of their
own. But being sensible how far we have run with you, though with as much haste
as we could beyond the ordinary Bounds of a Letter, we shall have done with
your Discourse, wherein we have found you better at Declaiming than at Arguing,
though this we would impute rather to the incapacity of your Subject, than to
the measure of your Parts or Learning, when we shall have shown a little of the
face of your Spirit of Charity, as it has here appeared in your own Glass, and
now in a truer Light.

Cast back your Eye now, and see with what Industry you have gathered up all
that has come to hand from the Fathers, and from any others, that has been
written in Aggravation of the Sin of Schism, that you might cast it as Stones
with all your might at our Heads. Have you not represented us here, who are
both your Christian and your Protestant Brethren, as the very worst of Sinners?
That our Sin in Dissenting from your Ceremonies, is worse than Murder or
Idolatry, and equal to the Crucifying of the Son of God; that we have hereby
cut our selves off from the Catholic, Church, and from Christ the Head of it?
Have made our selves some of the most Execrable and Hopeless Villains on the
face of the Earth? That our scrupling your Way of Worship, is much worse and
more dangerous than downright Popery, and therefore ought to be more severely
dealt with, and have no benefit of Protection from the Laws of the Land we Live
and were Born in? The Papists it seems are no Schismatics, as we are, and
therefore more tolerable, and deserve more favor. Have you not set us forth as
worse than Thieves or Traitors, that ought to be Punished with Death? That not
to Kneel at the LORD's Supper is a greater Sin than Drunkenness, or Whoredom,
or the foulest Immorality; not to wear a Surplice, more Vile than Idolatry or
Witchcraft; to scruple the Cross in Baptism, as bad as the Crucifying our Lord
himself; that our Blood, though in Martyrdom, will not expiate our Guilt;
though you should tear us in Pieces, or burn us in the Fire, and make our
Houses Dunghils, and rid the Earth of us, yet this will not satisfy, unless
you can Damn our Souls too; though all these be not your very Words, yet are
they not the direct and natural consequents of 'em? Besides, have you not laid
your Protestant Brethren in France and Germany, etc. who are the Suffering
Martyrs and Confessors of the present Age, under the same Condemnation with us?
O Sir, will you laugh at their Calamities, and justify the Barbarities of
their Enemies, and mock at their Tears and Groans, and yet call your self
Protestant? Will you clap your hands at them, and say, Ah! so would we have it,
down with 'em, down with 'em to the Ground, that the Names of Calvin and Geneva
may no more be had in remembrance? Is this your Spirit of Charity and Meekness
you told us of in the front of your Discourse? Frouti nulla fides. If these be
your Tender Mercies, what must your Severities be? We will now only mind you of
what one of your own Doctors once said to a Papist, Still. Ration. Account. p.
613.
and leave you to make the Application: When we consider, says he, how many
among you dispute for the possibility of the Salvation of Heathens, and yet
deny it to those who own all the Fundamentals of Christianity; what can we
otherwise Imagine, but that it is the Interest of your Church you more aim at,
than the Salvation of Men's Souls?

But before we dismiss you, we must crave your leave to do our selves more
right than you have done us, in producing those Six Arguments in our Names, and
which you would have the World to believe is all that we have to say for our
selves; which Arguments we have already replied to, and shown how far we own or
disown them.

Sir, If you were as ignorant of the Controversy that has now almost this
Forty Years been depending between us, and has past through so many Hands on
both sides, as your Discourse represents you to be, you were very unfit to
meddle in it: But if you have suppressed your own knowledge in it, you have not
rightly consulted the Honor of your Charity, Sincerity or Wisdom. What we have
further here to add in Defense of what you call our Schism, you shall have in
very few Words; that we may not fill up Paper with what has been by others
already Written. Something we must say for our Selves, and something for our
Ministers.

I. For our selves we say thus.

What we cannot do without Sinning against Christ, and against our own Souls,
we ought not to do:

But we cannot hold that Communion with the Church of England which is required
of us, without Sinning against Christ, and against our own Souls. Erg.

The Minor only is to be proved. And,

First, That we cannot hold that Communion with the Church of England which is
required of us, without Sinning against Christ. That is, that Stated Communion,
to the disowning or forsaking of the Nonconforming Ministers and their
Assemblies, without Sinning against Christ; which we prove thus.

To forsake the Ministers of Christ without cause, is to Sin against Christ.

But to forsake the Nonconforming Ministers whom we hear, is to forsake the
Ministers of Christ without Cause. Erg.

The Minor only is what you can except against; but if it has been already
substantially proved that our Ministers, whom you condemn as no Ministers, for
want of Episcopal Ordinations, or for not Conforming to the Laws and Rites of
your Communion, be in truth the Ministers of Christ, as we are abundantly
satisfied it has been, then is our Minor good: And to forsake them, especially
in their Sufferings, and when you have, without cause, cast them out of your
Communion, and out of their Places in their Master's Vineyard, we are in our
Consciences convinced is to forsake Christ; for so he himself has told us,
Matthew. 10.40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. And Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me;
and he that despises you, despises me; and he that dispiseth me, despises
him that sent me. Nor can we but tremble to think of that dreadful Doom
foretold us by that very Mouth that shall at last pronounce it, Matthew. 25.41,
etc. Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; for I was an Hungered, and ye gave me not Meat; I was Thirsty, and
ye gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; Naked, and ye
Clothed me not, Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not? For inasmuch as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. Sir, if you can
make light of these things, we cannot. It Is in vain for you to tell us, They are
none of Christ's Ministers, when we are assured they are. In vain to go about
to persuade us that you are the Men, when we see how you disown and hate your
Brethren. In vain for you, at this time of the Day, to call Light Darkness, or
Darkness Light, when our own Eyes are open to see the difference. In vain to
tell us, They are no Ministers of the Church of England, because you have so
unjustly cast them out, and keep them out. In vain to tell us, They are
Intruders, when we see who they are that have extruded them, and why. In vain
to insist with us on your Parish-Bounds, when we know by whom, and for what
Reasons these Bounds were first set; when we see and hear with what Stuff most
of our Parish Pulpits are filled; when we see in what a Condition our Parishes
generally lie, as to Ignorance and Immorality, and what crying Need there is of
more and better Ministerial Help; and when we know that the Ministers of Christ
are Ministers, wherever they be, and are bound to preach the Gospel to any
that will hear them. Yea, when we remember that they had once the Pulpits and
Parishes which you now possess, till you came upon them with the Advantage of a
Secular Power, and turned them Headlong by Hundreds, Ex Officio and Beneficio,
and exchanged their Pulpits for Prisons, and their Maintenance for Mulcts, and
Fines, and Confiscations. And in vain do you tell us of your Charity and meek
Spirit, when we taste and see what the bitter Fruits of it are. Sir, We dare
not thus to sin against Christ to please you, nor hazard his Favor to keep up
the Credit of those pitiful little things you are so fond of.

2. We cannot do what you require of us, without sinning against our own Souls;
and that both in respect of the Danger we are in, by turning our Backs on the
Ministers of Christ, and neglecting to hear them whom he has sent us, which is
not only a Contempt of his Bounty, but an Affront to his Authority, especially
when we read Matthew. 10.14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your
Words, when ye depart out of that House, or City, shake off the Dust of your
Feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrha in the Day of Judgment, than for that City. By what Names soever
you may now call them, and by whatsoever Glosses of yours, you may tempt us to
believe that this Scripture does not concern us in this Case, we know that you
shall not be our Judges, nor our Compurgators in that Day; nor can we think our
selves safe, should we refuse to receive and hear those Ministers of Christ
whom he has sent, but you have cast out. But, besides we dare not so despise
our own Souls, nor the Souls of our Families, which are committed to our
Charge, as to neglect that which we find to be the best, and most successful
Means to promote their Growth in Grace and Good Works here, in order to their
Eternal Happiness hereafter; nor ought we to be wheedl'd or ridiculed by you
from this our Way. And though we must suffer all the Reproaches and hard
Censures, that you can load us with for so doing, we will take it patiently and
thankfully at God's Hands, though unkindly at yours. Had we no more but this to
say for our selves, it were enough to justify our Non Communion with you, and
our owning and adhering to the Ministers of Christ, whom we hear; but you
cannot but know that there are many other things, with clear Evidence of Reason
and Truth, urged by several others, who have traveled in this Province, and to
whom (that we may not here be too tedious to you) we do referr you; assuring
you that we are not carried by a Sense of Liberty, but by a Sense of Duty, as
many of us as have any Religious Principles to act by, either in our, or in
your Communions; not because allowed by Men, but because commanded of God, to
do what you so uncharitably condemn us for.

II. For our Ministers, we say,

1. That it was never desired nor designed by those that influenced the
Revolution of Church Affairs, on the Restoration of King Charles the Second,
that any of those of the Presbyterian Way, should be comprehended in that Act
that was then made for Uniformity. And though they pretended to treat with them
about it, the Design was but to know what they would stick at, that so they
might be sure to shut them out, as appears not only by the Measures they took,
but by what is credibly reported of Archbishop Sheldon, that he should say, Now
we know their Minds, we'll make them all Knaves if they conform. Defense of Mr.
M. H. of Schism, Append. p. 143.
And of another Reverend Dean, that replied to a sober Gentleman, complaining
that they had made the Door of Admission too strait. If we had thought so many
of 'em would have conformed, we would have made it straiter. So then, they must
Sacrilegiously have renounced their Ministry, to have put their Necks under the
Yoke of your Tyranny; for into the Ministry you were resolved not to admit
them, if by any Means you could keep them out, as you did the far greater part
of them, to the number of about Two Thousand.

2. It is most certain that they neither could then, nor can now obtain their
Ministerial Communion with you, without sinning directly against their own
Consciences. For,

1. How can they, without the most horrid Perjury, declare upon Oath their full
Assent and Consent to such things as they are persuaded in their Judgments to
be unsound in Doctrine, and superstitious in Worship; can this be done without
lying to the Holy Ghost? And yet having thus shut them out of your Communion,
and hitherto kept the Door so strongly barred against them, will your Charity
accuse them for their Separation from you? How unsincere is this? You should
have spoken out the very Truth; that when you first threw them out of your
Communion, you repent you had not thrown them out of the World, could you have
found any Pretense for it? That when you stopped their Mouths, you had not stopped
their Breath too. Pray Sir, upbraid them no more with their Nonconformity, nor
charge them with Schism on that Account, till you can assure them which way
they can conform to you in their Ministerial Capacity, without Perjury; or in a
Lay capacity, without Sacrilege.

2. How can they submit to your Reordination, without condemning and renouncing
their first Ordination as null; and consequently not only condemn Themselves,
and all their former Ministerial Acts, but all those Protestant Churches in the
World, that have no other than Presbyterial Ordinations; which, while they are,
as they have Reason to be, otherwise minded, they cannot possibly do, without
sinning point blank against their own Consciences, against the Truth, and
against the greater part of the Church of Christ in the World. So that they
must either do this, which is tremendous to think, or must abandon their
Office, which they cannot do without a Sacrilegious Desertion, and sinning
against Christ, who has put them in Commission, and to whom they have sworn
Fidelity; and against so many Thousand Souls too that are perishing for want of
more and better Ministerial Help, almost every where throughout the Kingdom.
This (...), this little we think is enough to justify their Practice, in
preaching the Gospel of Christ to us, and to as many as will hear them: And for
you to brand Them or Us as Schismatics for so doing, is openly to fight
against God.

Sir, We wonder what you could propose to your self as the Merit of such an
Undertaking; what is the (...) you please your self with; the rare Discovery
you have made after the most inquisitive Researches, that have been made for
these 38 Years, by the most learned and sharpest Wits on both sides? What have
you to add to what has been by the greatest Names in your Church already
urged, and which has been over and over answered? If your Design had not been
to impose a Wheedle on such as never read much, nor are capable of making a
Judgment in controversial Cases; and under a Pretense of Charity and Zeal for
their Souls, to affright them with the black Name of Schism, and so to lick
them into your Communion, you would have taken other Measures. If you would
have pleaded the Case like a Man of Sense and Integrity, you would have taken
up the Arguments on our side in their Strength, as they have been offered, on
every part of the Controversy, by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Clarkson, Mr. Owen, the
Defender of Mr. M.H. Mr. Corbet, Mr. Rule, and many others, more than it is
needful for us here to mention, and too tedious to make Collections from, while
the Authors themselves may so easily be consulted. To conclude, In what you
have herein done, it appears to Us, that you have shown your Charity and your
Discretion much alike; who are,

Reverend Sir, Your Brethren in the Catholic Unity of the Christian Faith;
though those Dissenters, who (some of us) conformed before the Toleration, and
have since withdrawn our selves from the Communion of the Church of ENGLAND.
April 12th. 1700.
FINIS.

