A LETTER SENT TO A FRIEND Containing some Reflections upon a late Book
Entitled, The Roman Church Vindicated, and M. S. Convicted of a false Witness
against her.

Wherein is declared, That the Pope may excommunicate and Depose Kings
according to the Judgment of their greatest Doctors, Decrees and Practices of
several Popes, and Canons of their most approved Councils;

AND The Author convicted of most notorious Falsities. etc.

By J.S. B.D.

PRINTED In the Year 1675.

SIR
ABout three Months ago, I heard of an Answer to my Book, sent from Priest to
Priest for their Assistance and Approbation, before 'twas committed to the
Press. This News, seconded with the Victoria's of some Romanists, might well
put such a Freshwater Soldier, as I am, into a sad pickle. But when the Book
was published, and I had cast an eye upon the very first Page, where I found
these comfortable Expressions: That the Eagles of their Church scorned such a
Fly, and that the uncivilized Popish Priests would not vouchsafe to requite me
with Ink and Paper; nay, that I was fallen into the hands of a poor homebred
Countryman, who inherits his Mothers Compassionate Care for all that are in a
longing Condition (as he perceived I was, and yet no Pope Joan,) and that can
willingly part with a piece of his Heel to do them good. p. 2. I say, the
perusal of these words so far cheared me, that I could not but smile, when I
had read a little further, and came to that general Stop which he put to my
Foord, (most wittily alluding to my Name) with three or four false Quotations
out of Luther, Whitaker, Stillingfleet etc. After this, I proceeded to the Body
of his discourse, stuffed with various Citations, all which, though true and
pertinent, make very little against me; Yet, having already discovered him to
be a true Son of the Roman Church (one that will say any thing for the Honor
of his Holy Mother) I resolved to examine those Authors, and see, whether they
do really affirm what they are urged for, in the Places cited by him. This I
have done with great care and diligence, and can assure you, that most of his
Quotations are absolutely false, or wholly impertinent. But I Will come to
particulars.

In his first Chap. he endeavors to vindicate the Roman Church from all
Treasonable Doctrines, in confuting this Position; That the Pope has power to
excommunicate and depose Kings, and absolve their Subjects from their
Allegiance to them. And for this the Canons of Councils, Decrees of Popes, and
the Testimony of a few Doctors are urged by him.

He begins with the Canons of several Councils viz. 4, 5, 6. and 10. of Toledo,
the Council of Constance, Aquisgrane --. and very confidently tells his Reader,
That these are a sufficient evide^ce of their Church's Judgment, and enough to
convince me of my blindness, in asserting, That the Pope has power to
excommunicate and depose Kings. Were this Gentleman as dexterous in proving, as
he is confident in affirming, certainly the Church of Rome never had a more
worthy Champio^.

As to the Councils of Toledo three things may be offered, which not only
weaken, but quite destroy the Authority of them.

1. Where does he find, that the Pope called these Councils, presided in them,
and gave them his Blessing, I mean, Confirmed them. And you know without these,
Especially the two Latter, they were no more then a few private Doctors; and
consequently their Decrees not to be accounted the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome. Besides, in the greatest of these Synods, we find not above 70 Bishops
and Presbyters in and belonging to Spain. And that these, or at le^st their
immediate Successors were none of the most profound Divines, is clear from the
eight Council of Toledo, where Can. 4. they Decree, That Bishop^ shall not
marry; and urge these Scriptures 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be ye holy, as I am holy. and
Col. 3. 5. Mortify your members, which are on the Earth. And yet these
Scriptures are as much against the Marriage of Priests, as Romans 8 8. They that
are in the flesh cannot please God, once urged by Pope Siricius. Epist. 4. And
Can. 9. they Decree, That no man shall eat flesh in Lent, and give these most
powerful Reasons. 1. Because the forty days of Lent, are the Tithes of all the
days of the Year; and the Tithes should be consecrated to God. 2. Because,
that Christ by fasting forty days, expiated the Sins of Mankind. If so, to
what end did he suffer death? 3. Because it is convenient that Man, made of four
Elements, for breaking the ten Precept of the Decalogue, should afflict his
body four times ten days. By these Reasons you may judge of the Learning of
that Age.

2. These Places are not full to the point; for the Question is, Whether the
Pope in certain Cases, may not depose Kings, and absolve their Subjects from
their Allegiance? And all that these Councils say, is, That whosoever shall go
about by any means of Conspiracy, to violate the Oath of his Fidelity, which he
has taken for the preservation of his Country, or the Kings life; or who shall
attempt to lay violent Hands upon the King, or deprive him of his Kingly Power
-- let him be accursed in the sight of God. But when the Pope has
excommunicated and deposed a Prince, he ceases to be a Prince, his Subjects are
absolved from their Oath, and may, if Commissioned by his Holiness, lay violent
hands upon him.

3. Most unfortunately has he mentioned the 4 and 6 Council of Toledo. Had he
read them, and understood the Histories of those Times, certainly he had passed
them over. For in the 4. Council, those Bishops and Presbyters acknowledge
Sisenan^us, or Sisnandus for their King, who had rebelled against Suintila, or
Suinthila, their lawful Sovereign. Grimston History of Spain, lib. 5. p. 146.
147. Rodericus Histor. Hispan. lib. 2. p. 176. And as if this were not
sufficient they denounce Curses against any that shall endeavor to distu^b
him, Can. 74. Not 47. as he found it quo^ed. Thus you see, he urges a
vindication of Treason and Rebellion, to be the Doctrine of their Church for
Loyalty and Obedience.

And in the 6. Council of Toledo Can. 3. they Decree, That no man should be
tolerated to dwell in the Kingdom of Spain, who did not profess* the Catholic
Faith; and that Kings in all times to come, before they were placed in their
Royal Seat, should be bound, by the Obligation of a Solemn Oath, to interpose
their Authority, that this Act might be obeyed: Otherwise the King, refusing to
put this Act in execution, shall be Anathema Maranatha in the sight of God, and
become Fuel for the everlasting Fire; and likewise all that join with him.
This plainly shows in what sense, and with what limitations the Canon he
mentions, is to be understood; and consequently how little it makes for, nay,
how much against his present purpose. Can we imagine these Doctors to Decree
Loyalty and Rebellion with the same breath?

And to as little purpose is the Council of Constance urged; for many of their
Doctors (more likely to understand the sense of it, than a poor homebred
Countryman) tell us, That it is to be understood of a private Person before
Sentence is given. Suarez defens. Fidei Cathol. lib. 6. cap. 4. Azorius Instit.
Moral. Tom. 2. lib. 11. cap. 5. Quaest. 10. Gregor. de Valentia Tom. 3. Disput.
5. Quaest. 8. Cardinal Perrons Oration to the third Estate of France, with many
others. And that this is the sense of that Council, is sufficiently clear from
her own words, which this Gentleman has most prudently, but knavishly, passed
over. The words are these; Non expectata sententia, vel mandato Judicis. So
that all which the Council condemns, is, That Tyrants may be lawfully and
deservedly killed by any of their Subjects, non expectata sententia etc. before
the Judge has passed Sentence, or given his Command for it: which is no more,
than what those Doctors, which are most Zealous for the Popes deposing faculty,
do every where assert, and urge many arguments for. And if you desire to know,
what was the occasion of this Decree, I must refer you to our learned King
James in his Defense of the right of Kings p. 459 -- whose Historical Account
my designed Brevity will not permit me to transcribe.

In the next place (p. 29.) he tells his Reader, that the Council of Aquisgrane
under Ludovicus Pius, and that of Rhemes speak to the same purpose: But whether
he means the first or second of Aquisgrane, both which were held under
Ludovicus Pius: or the first, second, third, or fourth of Rhemes, he, not out
of an aversion from being too bulkish and tedious, but for other weighty
reasons, very wisely leaves us to conjecture. The two Synods of Aquisgrane, and
the first of Rhemes I have met with in Surius, and cannot find any thing in
them pertinent to his purpose.

After these Councils he musters up (p. 34.) a few Doctors; Covarruvias, Navar,
Salmeron Aquinas -- all which either affirm the contrary to what they are urged
for, or fay nothing to the purpose. Covarruvias asserts, That the Pope has
truly a temporal Power over Emperors, so far as it may be profitable and
necessary to the Government of the Church, and use of the Spiritual Power. apud
Bellarm. contra Barclaium p. 21. Navar. affirms That the Pope may depose Kings,
that are negligent in governing their Subjects, whereby they are kept from the
attainment of eternal life. Comment. ad Cap. Novit. de Judiciis Notab. 3. n.
99. Salmeron, in those Places cited by him, says nothing to the purpose, and
elsewhere maintains the contrary, Tom. 13. lib. 1. part. 3. disput. 12. That if
a King be an Heretic, or a favourer of Heretics, he may be justly deposed.
Nay Bellarmin himself must speak for him, de Romans Pontif. lib. 5 cap. 2, 3, 4.
which discovers, that either this Gentleman never read Bellar. or does not
understand him. And as little to the purpose is Sylvesters Testimony. p. 41.
That none are obliged to obey the Popes Commands (even under pain of
excommunication) when those that are so commanded, know his Commands to ^e
unjust; unless he tell us (as indeed he seems to do) that Sylvester denied this
do^^rine: But this great Divine and learned Canonist is a zealous Asserter of
it. The Pope may excommunicate an Emperor, that is worthy of Excommunication,
and depose him that is worthy of deposition. Again, The Pope has an universal
Jurisdiction (over all Christian Kings and Princes) in Spirituals and
temporals. Again, He can dep^se for a reasonable cause. In Summa. ve^bo. Papa.
number. 11.

From these Doctors he proceeds (p. 41.) to their Popes, and very gravely tells
us; All those Popes, whom virtue confined to the Primitive Rule, have taught us
Reverence and Loyalty to our temporal go^s by their own Example: and some of
them have upon occasion committed their faithful Thoughts to Writing for the
I^struction of Posterity. And here he instanceth first in Pope Innocent 3 -who
being consulted in a temporal Affair by a Subject of * This Pope excommunicated
and deposed the Emperor Otho, and ^^r King John.
France returned Answer, That he should make his Address to his King, who had
no Superior in Temporal Causes. apud Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 3.
But this is not only impertinent, but absolutely false; as any one may see,
that will cast his eye upon Bellarmin.

Well, but Pope Gregory the great will do his work, whom he brings in uttering
these words: That though he was furnished with all temporal Power to have
revenged the grievous Oppressions, wherewith the Princes of Lombardy afflicted
the Church for thirty five y^ars; yet was he over swayed by the fear of God, to
decline all violent defense, and recurre to that Apostolical Refuge of Prayers
and tears, as the sole Means of the Churches Redress. Epist. 1. ad Sabian.
diacon. Epist. 45. (43 it should have been) ad Phocam Imperator. But in the
first there is not one Jota to the purpose: And in the second no mention that
Prayers and Tears are the sole means of the Church's Redress.

Then, to prove that the Roman Church never claimed or knew of any temporal
Sword, or Prince-deposing Authority, he brings in Pope N^colas Cause. 33.
Quaest. 2. Cap. Inter haec.

But there he speaks of Husbands killing their adulterous Wives, and condemns
it; for (says he) Dei Ecclesia mundanis nunquam constringitur: Gladium non
habet nisi spiritualem. And the Gloss has these words: Gladium quoa
executionem. Hoc ideo dico, quia Imperator habet illud a Papa. That is, The
Church can only excommunicate Offenders; Temporal Punishments must be inflicted
by the Civil Magistrate. Then he brings in Pope John 8. Cause. 16. Quaest. 3.
cap. porro. But here we have not one word to the purpose; for that Pope only
says, That Clergymen may not put on Armor, and fight against their Enemies;
since Prayers and Tears are their Armor. So the Gloss expounds it. Then comes
in Pope Celestin 3. Extravagant. de Judiciis. Cap. Cum ab homine. But I cannot
find any such Chap. or any such thing asserted by him. Thus far he has not
brought one true and pertinent Testimony either from their Doctors, Popes, or
Councils. In his (p. 44) he tells us, That Lewis 12. in a Council at Tours, had
the Resolution of all the French Bishops, that he might contemn the Popes
unjust Censures. And that the Doctors of Sorbon condem^ed this Position: That
the Pope has power to punish Princes with temporal Penalties, and cast them
out of their Kingdoms p. 50 --. And these viz. The determinations of a few
French Bishops, and the Sorbonne Doctors, he makes the most fundamental Decrees
and Doctrines of the Roman Church, p. 54. But to these I answer.

1. In other Points, when we urge several Councils against them, their usual
Plea is, that either they were but Provincial, or not confirmed by the Pope;
and therefore no Doctrines of the Church: But here (according to this
Gentleman) a few Bishops in France and Doctors of Sorbonne, have power to make
most fundamental Decrees and Doctrines, without the Popes Approbation, nay,
against his express Will.

2. We find the French Bishops, and Sorbonne Doctors asserting the contrary
Doctrine. In the year 1589, the Leaguers propounded two Questions to the
Doctors of Sorbon. 1. Whether the People of France may not be discharged from
the Oath of Allegiance made to Henry 3? 2 Whether the People may with a safe
Conscience take up Arms against him? And, after earnest Prayers, that the
Spirit of God would direct them, a solemn Mass, and most diligent discussion of
the de Serres p. 870. * And that the greatest part of the Clergy of France were
of the same judgment, will not be denied by any that has looked into their
Historians.
Points, they answer. 1. That Henry both by the Civil and Po^t^fical Law is
fallen from his dignity. 2. That the People of France, may lawfully fight
against him. 3. That these Decrees be sent to the Pope for his Confirmation.
Boucher de justa Henrici 3. abdicatione. And accordingly a Letter was drawn up
and sent to Rome, in which they most humbly beseech his Holiness for three
things. 1. That they may be declared absolved from their Oath to Henry 3. 2.
That he would decree the War just, which they had undertaken against that
Oppressor of Public Religion and Liberty. 3. That in this necessary Work, he
would assist them with his Prayers to God Almighty, and with a Jubilee of
Indulgence, that others thereby might be provoked to join with them, Idem p.
393. To which the good old Gentleman returned a very gracious Answer, and for
their greater encouragement issued out his Bull against King Henry, and all his
Adherents Idem p. 403. And this Author tells us (p. 377) the Faculty of Sorbon
had done no more, than what is incumbent on Lawyers, Confessors, Parish
Priests, and Doctors, who ought to assert and vindicate the power and dignity
of the Roman See. Upon the publishing of this Bull, the people were greatly
encouraged in their Rebellion against their Sovereign whom they no more call
King, but only Henry de Valois, Heretic Tyrant, and what not? Nay, they ^ut
him out of the Canon, and declared it unlawful to pray for him in Public.
Boucher. p. 380. And this Author (p. 418) informs us, That so wonderfully
powerful was this Bull against Henry and his Adherents, that by a Miracle one
at Venice (but offering to speak in behalf of the King) sunk presently down,
and no sooner was carried home, but he died. And a little after, the same
Doctors returned these Answers to certain de Serres. p. 894.
Quaeries in reference to Henry 4. their lawful King. 1. That all Catholics by
Divine Law are forbid to admit any into the Throne, that is an Heretic, or a
favourer of Heresy. 2. That those who favor the said Henry, are deserters of
Religion, and continually in a mortal sin: so those, who for love to their
Religion do oppose him, do very much merit both of God and Men. And as on the
one hand, those who assist the King, will be Eternally damned; so on the other
hand, it is most meet to conclude, that they, who are slain in this Cause
against the said Henry, shall obtain an eve^lasting Reward, and be crowned with
the Trophies of Martyrdom. See them at large in Mr. Foulis History of Romish
Treasons etc. p. 566.

But about 4 years after, when the King had vanquished the Leaguers, and entered
Paris, those Sorbon Doctors change their Note, make void all former Decrees,
and profess great Zeal and Loyalty to King Henry 4. Idem p. 591.

And what was the Opinion of their Bishops -- in Lewis 13. time, is clear from
this following Story. Lewis 13. being come to his Majority, summoned the three
Estates to meet: Two of them viz. the Clergy and Nobles, presently concluded,
That the Council of Trent should be published, and received in France. But the
third Estate made this Decree: That his Majesty shall be humbly desired, that it
may be established by the three Estates for a fundamental Law; That, the King
being acknowledged Head in his Dominions, holding his Crown and Authority only
from God, there is no Power on Earth whatsoever, Spiritual or Temporal, that
has any Right over his Kingdom, either to depose our Kings, or dispense with,
or absolve their Subjects from the Fidelity and Obedience, which they owe to
their Sovereign, for any cause or pretense whatsoever. This startles the Clergy
who with the Nobles set themselves against the third Estate, with a Resolution
to quash their Loyal Deecre. And to effect this, they desired Cardinal Perron
(a man of great Eloquence and Learning) to discuss the Point in an Oration to
the third Estate. This Cardinal (being attended with some Lords and Bishops, as
Representatives of their respective Estates, and to signify that he spoke not
only his own, but their Opinions too) went to them; where he made a very long
And the Pope gave him thanks for his Speech, if K. James may be credited. p.
383.
Speech to show the unreasonableness and absurdity of the foresaid Proposition;
endeavoring to prove by Reason, that sometimes Kings should, and by Example,
that sometimes they had been deposed. He affirmed that this was the current
doctrine in France till the time of Calvin. And for the contrary doctrine viz.
That Kings are not deposable by the Pope, He calls a Doctrine that bre^ds
Shis^ns; a Gate that leads into all Heresy; and to be held in so high a degree
of detestation, that rather then yield to it he and his fellow Bishops would
choose to burn at a Stake.
Sir, By this you see, how Romish Doctors can alter their Judgments, and
preach contrary Doctrines, according to the present Exigency of Affairs; This
Cardinal Perron (says our King James p. 386) was a Follower of Henry 4. even
when deposed by the Pope; and in a certain Assembly holden at the Jacobins in
Paris, he withstood the Popes Nuntio to his face, when the said Nuntio labored
to make this Doctrine touching the Popes temporal Sovereignty pass for an
Article of Faith. But in this Speech to the third Estate, he confidently
affirms, that whosoever maintains this Doctrine to be wicked, that Popes have
power to depose Kings, they teach men to believe, that there has not been any
Church for many Ages past, and that the Church is the very Synagogue of
Antichrist. Herein has he very well acommoda^ed himself to the Times. ibid. And
that ingenuous Confession of the Jesuits in Paris is observable. The Court of
Parliament having censured Anto^ius Sanct^rellus his Book (which was printed at
Rome by Pe^mission of the Super^ours, and Approbation of Vitel^scus General of
the Jesuits) sent for these Gentlemen, and demanded, Whether they believed as
their: General did, concerning this Book? They answered, that their General
living at Rome, could not but approve that, which was agreeable to the Court of
Rome. But being again demanded, what they believed? Answered, that they
believed the clean contrary. Being again asked, And what would you do, if you
were at Rome? Answered, as they do at Rome. Which made some of the Court say,
Have these Men one Conscience at Rome, and another at Paris? God keep us from
such Confessors.

And, if we look back to Pope Innocent 4. his time, we shall find the Bishope,
and other Clergymen of France, in a Council at Lions, declaring for the Popes
Authority to depose Emperors --. But more of this after wards. Thus you see,
how Zealous even the French have been (when they saw it was convenient) in
asserting the Popes deposing faculty; and consequently the imprudence of our
Adversary, in urging this Testimony of the French Bishops and Sorbonne Doctors.

I will pass over the Petition of our English Catholics in King Charles 1. his
Reign p. 59. in which they make Solemn protestations of Loyalty (for such Stuff
will not pass with those, that know their Principles, or have read the
Declaration made to King James, even when they were plotting his ruin in the
Gunpowder Treason;) As also the great Braggs he makes of their Loyalty in the
late times of Rebellion p. 63. For I know you have read, The late Apology in
behalf of the Papists, answered in behalf of the Royalists printed 1667. Who
tells them, that in Ireland there were whole Armies of Irish and English, that
sought against his Majesty, solely upon the account of their Religion. That in
England some came in voluntarily to assist him, but many more of them were
hunted into his Garrisons, by them that knew they would bring him little help,
and much hatred. And of those that fought for him, so long only as his Fortune
stood; when that once declined, a great part even of them fell from him. From
that time forward, they that were always deemed Cavaliers, where were they? In
all those weak Efforts (1647. 1656. 1659) of gasping Loyalty, what did they?
They complied, and flattered, and gave Sugared words to the Rebels then, as
they do to the Royal^sts now. They addressed their Petitions to the Supreme
Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. They
affirmed, that they had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagements.
They promised, that if they might but enjoy their Religion, they would be the
most quiet and useful Subjects of England. And this they proved by real
Testimonies; which we have no pleasure in remembering, and they would have less
in hearing of them. p. 14. Are not these Petitions and Professions most
convincing demonstrations of Catholic Loyalty?

And thus, Sir, you see, how unsuccesful this Gentleman has been in his first
Attempt; what pitiful Witnesses he has brought to convict this Position of
falsehood viz. That the Pope has power to depose Kings, and absolve their
Subjects from their Allegiance.

Before I pass to his next Chap. give me leave to produce such Testimonies, for
your further satisfaction in this Point, as no Romanist can in reason and
Conscience except against: And these are, the Opinions of their greatest
Doctors, Decrees, and Practices of several Popes, and Canons of their most
approved Councils.

1. That the Pope has power to excommunicate and depose Kings, and absolve
their Subjects from their Allegiance, is most clear from the Opinions of their
greatest Doctors. And here, Sir, I will refer you to Mr. Foulis (knowing you
have the Book) who has amassed together about three hundred Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Schoolmen, Canonists, Historians -- that assert and
maintain this Doctrine. History of Popish Treasons p. 41 --. Some of these
Authors I have (which I find faithfully quoted) and could add others to the
Catalogue. I know this Gentleman ca^ them Brethren of iniquity, p. 36. Idle
wranglers, p. 47. aspiring Underlings, p. 56, seeming Members, p. 58. But let
him show me, when and where they were condemned, what Index Expurgatorius has
censured them. Nay, if he deal honestly, he cannot but confess, that these
Authors are generally approved, and had in great admiration among them, that
are the Guides of Laymens Consciences. But on the other hand, I find several,
who have opposed this Doctrine, censured, and their Books condemned by the
Church of Rome. Take a few Instances.

Petrus de Vineis, who collected the Epistles of Frederick 2. Emperor of
Germany, which contain a Defense of the Imperial Laws against the Popes
Usurpations. William Occam, and Marsilius of Padua, who defend the same Rights
in behalf of the Emperor Lewis 4. Antonius de Rosellis of the Power and
Authority of the Pope, who writ upon the same occasion in behalf of the Emperor
Frederick 3. Cardinal Zabarel of of Schisms, which should be taken away by the
Emperors Authority. The Monarchy of Dantes, who affirms that the Emperor
depends not upon the Pope, but holds his Empire from God. A Dispute betwixt the
Clerk and the Soldier, containing a Defense of the Royal Laws of the Kings of
France against the Popes Usurpations. They have not spared Pope Pius 2. though
he declared in his Bull, all that to be heretical, which he had written against
the Popes Authority, when he was called Aeneas Sylvius. The Speech of Anthony
Arnald in the Parliament of Paris against John Chastel, who attempted to murder
the King. Congregat. 10. Roger Widdringtons Apology against Bellarmin. Congreg.
12. And his Theological Disputation concerning the Oath of Allegiance. Congreg.
13. God and the King. Congreg. 16. The Explication of the Oath of Allegiance,
called Zentum ad Catholicos Anglos. Congreg. 24. Scutum Regium, i. e. against
all King-killers, and their Patrons. Congreg. 25. William Barclay of the Pope's
Power. Congreg. 10. But most severe they are upon our King. James his Apology
for the Oath of Allegiance, Congreg. 8. This Book, they say, contains
pernicious and execrable Heresies, contrary to the Truth and purity of the Holy
Catholic Faith. And all Persons are prohibited to read or keep it, upon pain
of Excommunication (from which they cannot be absolved but by the Pope) and the
Mulct of a thousand Ducats. Some of these (with many more, which I have no time
to mention) were censured by the Council of Trent; and others by the Pope,
Cardinals, etc. authorized thereunto by that Council. Sess. 25. sub. sin.

2. From the Decrees and Practices of their Popes. From their Decrees and
Constitutions. Gregory 1. gave great Privileges to S. Medard in Soissons, with
an express Order, That the King or Potentate should be degraded or deposed,
that did violate them. This is urged by Suarez, Bellar. Azorius -- for the
Popes Deposing Faculty. Baronius glories much in it. anno 593. n. 86. And
Gregory 7. made use of it, to justify his Deposing of Henry 4. Emperor of
Germany. Bellarmin con^ra Barcla^um p. 308. Becanus Controv. Angl. p. 128. Let
all know, that they are absolved from their Fidelity and Allegiance to those,
that are fallen into Heresy, notwithstanding all former Oaths and Promises made
unto them. Decret. Gregor. Lib. 5. Tit. 7. cap 16. Boniface 8. decreed; That
the Church has two Swords, Spiritual and Temporal; that the Spiritual Power
may institute and judge the Temporal, according to that of Jeremy; Behold, I
set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root, out, and to pull down
etc. And he declares it necessary to salvation, for every Humane Creature to be
subject to the Roman Bishop. Extrav. Lib. 1. Tit. 8. Cap. 1. We observing
(says Gregory 7.) the Decrees and Constitutions of our Holy Predecessors, do
absolve all from their obedience to Excommunicate Persons, whereunto they were
formerly obliged by Oath or any other way; and do strictly charge them, that
for the future they yield no Allegiance to them. Decret. 2. pars. Cause. 15.
Quaest. 6. Cap. 4. And the like Decree we find in the next Chap. made by U^ban
the second.

To these I will add the Bull or Breve of Pope Paul 5. against our Oath of
Allegiance; in which he declares. That they cannot, without most evident and
grievous wronging of Gods Honor, bind themselves by that Oath. And afterward,
That it cannot be taken with safety of the Catholic Faith, and of their souls
health; since it contains many things, that are plainly and directly contrary
to Faith and Salvation. And Pope Urban 8. in his Bull sent to the Catholics in
England 1626. calls it, That pernicious and unlawful Oath of Allegiance. And a
little after tells them: That which our Predecessor Paul 5. with so great
deliberation decreed, that ought ye altogether to observe as a Decree of Truth.
And again, Sonner ought the Sword of the Migh^y take from a Christian his Life,
than his Faith: Implying, that a man loses his Faith, when he takes this Oath.
And yet our King James has told the World, How careful he was, that nothing
should be contained in it, except the Profe^^ion of Natural Allegiance, and
Civil and Temporal Obedience, with a promise to resist all contrary uncivil
Violence. Monitory Preface to all Christian Monarchs. p. 292. Thus I have
cleared the Proposition from the Canons and Decrees of several Popes; which are
confirmed by that much admired Council of Trent Sess. 25. Cap. 20. Wherefore it
decrees and commands, that the Sacred Canons, and a^l General Councils,
together with other Apostolical Sanctions, made in favor of Ecclesiastical
Persons and Eccle^iastical Liberty, and against the Violators thereof (all
which it renewes by this present Decree) be precisely observed by all men.
This, you see, comprehend, all their Canons, Decretals, Clementines,
Extravagants, Bulls --. And they are sworn unto by every Priest at his
Ordination, according to the Bull of Pope Pius 4. I vow and swear true
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of Saint Peter Prince of the
Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. And all other things do I undoubtedly
receive and confess, which are delivered, defined, and declared by the Sacred
Canons and General Councils etc.So help me God.

And the Practices of several Popes have been agreeable to these Decrees and
Constitutions.

Gregory 2. rebelled against the Emperor Leo Isaurus, and made Rome and the
Roman Duchy to do the same; because he prohibited the adoration of Images.
Bellar de Roman. Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 8. Azorius Justit. Moral. Tom. 2. p.
1669. Sigonius Histor. de Regno Ital. p. 103.

Gregory 3. with the Consent of the Roman Clergy, deprived Leo 3. Emperor of
Constantinople; because he had taken Images out of Churches. Platina in vit.
Gregor. Azorius Instit. Moral. Tom. 2. p. 1610.

Pope Z^chary absolved the people of France from their Allegiance to Childerick
their King, and deposed him. Bellar de Roman Pontif. lib. 5. cap 8. Azorius
Tom. 2. p. 1669. Perrons Oration to the third Estate of France. That Pope
Zachary only consented to Childerick's deposition (as this Gentleman affirms p.
43.) is most false; which Bellarmin proves from the Annals of France, and the
Testimony of Eginarthus, Aimonius, Rhegino, Lambertus Schaph^aburgensis,
Sigebertus, H^rma^nus, Mar^a^us Scotus, etc. Contra Barclaium p. 318 --.

Steven 2. set on Pepin King of France, to expel the Exarchs out of Italy, and
obtained of him the Exarchat for himself, which belonged to the Emperor of
Constantinople, Platina.

Leo 3. translated the Empire from the Greeks to the Germans. Bellar. de Romans
Pontif. lib. 5. c. 8. Boucher de justa Henrici 3. abdicatione p. 17. Perrons
Oration.

Gregory 7. excommunicated Henry 4. Emperor of Germany, and translated the
Empire to Rodulph Duke of Saxony. Platina. in vit. Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib.
5. c. 8. Azorius Tom. 2. p. 1610. And give absolution of all their sins to
those, that adhered to Rodulph, and opposed Henry. Baronius an. 1080. Sect. 12.
The same Pope excommunicated and deposed Boleslaus 2. King of Poland. Azorius
Tom. 2. p. 1669. Boucher. p. 17.

Urban 2. excommunicated and persecuted Henry 4. Emperor of Germany. Platina in
vit. Urbani. The same Pope excommunicated and deposed Ph^lip 1. King of France.
Bellar. Contra Barclaium p. 29. Matthew. Paris an. 1095.

Paschal 2. made the Son of Henry 4. Emperor of Germany, to take Arms against
his Father, and deposed him in a Synod held at Mentz by the Popes command for
that purpose. Aventinus Annal lib. 5. And he commanded Robert Earl of Flanders
to destroy the Clergy of Cambray and Liege; because they adhered to Henry 5.
And he was to do it for the remission of all his sins. Bochel decret lib. 5. c.
6. de Pascal. and Leod.

Adrian 4. excommunicated William King of Sicily, and absolved his Subjects
from their Allegiance to him. Platina in vit. Becanus Controvers. Angl. p. 107.

Alexander 3. excommunicated Frederick 1. Emperor of Germany, and persuaded the
Towns of Italy to rebel against him. Platina in vit. Alex. This Pope
excommunicated William Duke of Apul^a, and engaged the foresaid Emperor to
fight against him, to gain that Dukedom to the Chair of Rome. Platina ibid. And
the same Pope excommunicated and deposed Frederick 2. Emperor of Germany
Platina ibid.

Celestin 3. gave Constantia a Nun to Henry 6. Emperor of Germany, and gave
him for her Dowry the Kingdom of both the Sicilies, upon condition he should
expel Tancred, who opposed his Election. Hereu^on a bloody War arose between
those two Princes. Platina in vita Celest. And he excommunicated Phil. Augustus
Boucher p. 210.

Innocent. 3. excommunicated the Emperor Otho 4. and deprived him of the
Empire. Platina in ejus vita. Bellar. de Sum. Pontif. lib. 5. c. 8. Azorius
Tom. 2. p. 1610. And the same Pope deprived our King John, and provoked his
Subjects to rebel against him. Azorius Tom. 2. p. 1669. and gave to Philip of
France the remission of all his sins upon condition of invading and conquering
England. Matthew. Paris p. 232. Where the Story is thus related: The Pope by the
Counsel of the Cardinals, Bishops, and other prudent men, gave a definitive
Sentence, that the King should be deposed; And for the execution of that
Sentence, the Pope writ to the most Potent King of the French, Philip, that for
the remission of his sins, he should take that labor upon him.

Honorius 3. and Gregory 9. excommunicated and deposed Frederick 2. Emperor of
Germany, and raised several Rebellions against him. Platina in vit. Honor. and
Greg. Matthew. Paris in Henrici 3. Angl. vita.

Innocent 4. excommunicated and depos*d the same Emperor, Platina in vit.
Innocent. Bellar. lib 5. c. 8. And the same Pope excommunicated and deprived
Conrade Emperor of Germany. Matthew. Paris p. 825.

Urban 4. prevailed with Charles Duke of Anjou to invade Sicilie, and deprive
Manfred the King. Onuphrius Annotat. in Platin. p 214.

Gregory 10. promoted the Rebellion of Michael Palaeologus against Baldwin 2.
Emperor of Constantinople, and gave him the Empire. Bozius de Jure status lib.
3. cap. p. 287 --.

Martin 4. deposed Peter King of Arragon, and absolved his Subjects from their
Allegiance to him. K. James his Works. p. 397. Becanus Controv. Angl. p. 107.

Boniface 8. subjected Philip of France, and his Kingdom to the Emperor Albert.
Azorius Tom. 2. p. 1663. And Platina gives this Character of him: That he
studied to give terror rather than Religion unto Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
Nations; and labored to give and take away Kingdoms according to his
pleasure. In vit. Bonif.

John 22 or 23. excommunicated Lewis 5. Emperor of Germany, and deprived him.
Platina. And Benedict 12. did the same. Platina in vit. Joh. and Benedict. And
the like was done by Clement 6. Platina. Azorius Tom. p. 1610. And he
excommunicated all the Bishops, that adhered to him, and fixed Bulls on all the
Churches doors to raise Rebellion against him.

Julius 2. excommunicated Lewis 12. of France, and gave his Kingdom to the
first Conqueror. De Serres p. 560. He excommunicated the V^netians, and gave
their Dominions to any, that would take them. He excommunicated the Duke of
Ferrara, and invaded his Country by Arms. De Serres. And he excommunicated the
King of Navar, and gave his Kingdom to the King of Arragon, who thereupon
invades and takes it. Azorius Tom. 2. p. 1670. Guicciardin lib. 11. p. 444.
Onuphrius in ejus vita. It Is thought he was the death of two hundred thousand
Christians in seven years time.

Pius 5. issued out a Sentence Declaratory against Q. Elizabeth of England;
wherein her Subjects are declared absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, and
every thing due unto her, and those that adhered to Her, are involved in the
Anathema Sanders de Schismate Anglican^. lib. 3. p. 815. de Visib. Monarch.
lib. 7. p. 706. Hereupon a Rebellion was design^d. Sanders ibid. Felton who
fixed this Declaratory Sentence of the Pope upon the Bishop of Londons Gates,
and suffered for it, is accounted a glorious Martyr. Sanders de Visib. Monarch.
p. 710. And so is the Earl of Northumberland, who hereupon raised a Rebellion,
and was executed for it at York. Sanders de Schism. Angl. p. 310.

Sixtus 5. excommunicated Henry 3. of France, and all his Adherents. Cicarella
in vita Sixti. Boucher. p. 403. This Pope excommunicated the King of Navarre,
and absolved his Subjects from their Allegiance, Cicarella ibid. And Gregory
14. sent great Sums of Money into France to pomote the Rebellion of the
Leaguers. Cicarella in vit. Greg.

Paul 5. excommunicated the Duke and Senate of Venice, and deprived them of
their Privileges. Bzovius in vit. Pauli.

Paul 3. issued out a thundering Bull against our Henry 8. in which he deprives
him of his dominions. Onuphrius in ejus vita.

To this Catalogue of excommunicated and deposed Princes, we might add Sanctius
King of Portugal, who left his Kingdom by the Command of Innocent 4. Greg.
Tholosanus de Repub. Lib. 26. cap. 4. Ladislaus King of Hungary deposed by
Alexander 5. ibid. Ferdinand deprived of the Kingdom of Naples by Innocent 8.
ibid. Georg. Pogebracius King of Bohemia deposed by Paul 2. ibid. Desiderius
King of Lombardy excommunicated by Pope Adrian. Becanus Controv. Angl. p. 107.
Rogerius King of Sicily excommunicated by Innocent 2. ibid.

Here, Sir, you have above forty Emperors, Kings, and Princes excommunicated
and deposed by Roman Bishops; and yet this Country-Gentleman has the
confidence to tell us p. 45. That the Popes are few that can be justly taxed
with this overreach of due limits.

3. I will now in the last place produce their most approved Councils for the
further confirmation of this truth. If Practice may be admitted to speak in
this Point (which with our Romanists is none of the weakest Arguments) we shall
find that Princes may be lawfully deposed, and that confirmed by the Grandeur
of such Meetings. Gregory 7. in a Synod at Rome, in which Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and an infinite number of the Clergy were present, solemnly
excommunicated and deposed Henry 4. Emperor of Germany. Baronius an. 1080.
Sect. 16. And this Decree or Sentence was confirmed by Gregorie's Successors in
several Councils. By Victor. 3. in a Council at Beneventum. Leo Ostiensis in
Chronico Cassinensi lib. 3. c. 7^. By Urban 2. in a Synod at the same place, an
1091. Bertoldus Constantiensis. In another Synod at Placentia before an
innumerable Multitude. an. 1095. And the same year in another at Claremont
Matthew. Paris ad an. 1095. p. 22. By Paschal 2. in a general Council at Rome an.
1102. Abbas Vrspergensis. By Gelasius 2. in a Council at Cologne. Idem an.
1118. By Callistus 2. in a Council at Rhemes, in which 400. Fathers were
assembled. Abbas Vrsperg. Sugerius in Vita Ludovici Reg. Francon. Rogerius in
Annal. Angl. All which we have attested by their great Bellarmin contra
Barclaium p. 108 --. Alexander 3. in a Synod at Claremont excommunicated
Frederick 1. Emperor of Germany, Platina in vit. Alex. And Urban 2. did the
like to Philip of France in a Council held at the same place. Spondanus. p.
969. And Innocent 4. in a Council held at Lions, excommunicated Frederick 2.
Emperor of Germany. and absolved his Subjects from all Homage and Fealty due
unto him. And further declared, That if they for the future owned him for their
Emperor, or any other assisted him, they were ipso facto involved in the same
Curse. Sexti Decret. lib. 2. Tit. 14. cap. 2.

I will pass by other Instances of this nature, and proceed to the Decrees of
their General Councils, which justify such severe proceedings against Kings and
Princes. Gregory 7. in a Council at Rome with the consent of those Fathers made
this Decree; That it was in the Pope's power to depose Emperors, and absolve
Subjects from Obedience to their Princes. Baronius, an. 1076. Sect. 31. In the
Lateran Council under Alexander 3. we find it decreed. That the Subjects of
Princes favoring Heretics are absolved from their duty of Homage and Fealty,
so long as those Princes Continue in such impiety. cap. 27. And in the next
Lateran Council under Innocent 3. we have this most Loyal Constitution. cap 3.
That if a Temporal Lord, being commanded and warned by the Church, should
neglect to purge his Dominions of Heresy, he should first be excommunicated by
the Metropolitan and the other Bishops of his Province; and if within a year he
refuse to give satisfaction, let the Pope be informed of it, that he may
declare his Vassals free from their Allegiance, and expose his Dominions to be
seized on by Catholics, who, having thrust out the Heretics, might thence
forward possess it without any Contradiction, and keep it in the true Faith:
Yet let not this be prejudicial to the Principal Lord, on condition that he no
way hinder this proceeding. And then they add, That the same Law is to be
observed against those, who have no principal Lords. From these words Becanus
inferres three things, and indeed they are expressly contained in them. 1. That
all Kings and Princes, whether Supreme or Subordinate, are obliged by Oath to
use their utmost endeavors for the Extirpation of those Heretics, which are
condemned by the Church; and particularly those, that deny Transubstantiation,
which Doctrine was here first determined. 2. That if, being admonished by the
Church, they neglect to do it, they are to be excommunicated by the
Metropolitan, and o^h^r Bishops of the Province. 3. That if they obey not
within a year, they are to be deprived of their Kingdoms and Countries, and
their Subjects absolved from their Allegiance by the Pope. And therefore (says
he) all that acknowledge the Authority of this Lateran Council, ought to
confess; That Kings and Princes may not only be excommunicated, but deposed by
the Pope. But this Council is received by all Catholics; and there is good
reason for it. 1. Because it was General. 2. Because 'twas approved by the
Pope, and received with the common Consent of the whole World. 3. Because 'twas
the greatest and most famous Council; For besides the Pope, there were present
in it two Patriarchs in person, and two by their Legates; seventy Archbishops,
four hundred Bishops, eight hundred Abbats and Priors; besides the Legates of
Emperors, etc. Controv. Angl. p. 110 --. The Council of Constance also has
appeared as zealous for this deposing Doctrine; witness her Decree, Sess. 17.
All that shall hinder their great Patron Sigismund from meeting with the King
of Arragon, whosoever they be, though King, Prince, Duke, Earl --. they are
besides Excommunication, deprived ipso facto of all their Secular Honor and
Dignity. And in the Bull of Pope Martin 5. read and approved in the last
Session of that Council, we find the same Doctrine asserted in these Words: All
Professors of the Christian and Catholic Faith, the Emperor, Kings, Dukes,
Princes -- are required to expel all Heretics out of their Kingdoms,
Provinces, etc. according to the Canon, Sicut ait etc. that is, the third
Lateran Council, which has been already mentioned. And the Penalty is
expressed toward the end of this Bull viz. That all Persons favoring
Heretics, though Kings or Queens, or Dukes, or whatever other worldly Dignity
they are possessed of, be not only excommunicated, but deprived of such their
worldly Goods and Dignities. What can be more fully expressed? and yet our
Country Gentleman has the Confidence (or rather the Impudence) to tell the
World, That the Council of Constance has condemned this King-deposing
Doctrine. I will add but one Council more, but that which our Adversaries
glory most in viz: that of Trent, which has passed this Decree. Sess. 25. c.
19. If the Emperor, King, Duke, Prince -- shall grant in their Dominions a
place for Duelling, they shall be excommunicated and deprived of the Dominion of
the City, Castle, or place where such a Duel has been fought, if they were
held in Fee from the Church. And that England is thus held since King John's
Grant, all Catholics affirm. And thus, Sir, I have Produced other kind of
Proofs for this Position: That the Pope in certain Cases may excommunicate and
deprive Kings; than our Adversary has, or can produce against it. It Is so
fully and frequently determined by their Popes and Councils, that I do not see
how any Man can be a sincere Papist, much less take Orders in that Church, and
profess a dis-belief of it. And this being so, I wish men would consider, what
little Assurance a Protestant Prince can have of the Loyalty of his Catholic
Subjects; since by their Religion they lawfully may, nay, in duty must (if an
opportunity be presented) rise against him, fight with him, assassinate and
murder him, when he is excommunicated by the Pope.

This Gentleman in the next place endeavors to vindicate his Church from that
bloody Complotment, the Gun-powder-Treason; telling us. 1. That only a few
inconsiderable Persons, and Malcontents were engaged in it, or consenting to
it; which is most notoriously false. 2. That Masses or Prayers were then
offered for the good Success of the Cathol^ck design, i. e. To obtain his
Majesty's gracious release from those afflictions they had long groaned under.
p. 65. A pitiful come off, and most groundless Suggestion; for what
afflictions did they then groan under? King James has long ago told the World.
That whatsoever was her just and merciful Government (meaning Q. Elizabeth)
over the Papists in her time, my Government over them since has so far
exceeded hers, in Mercy and Clemency, as not only the Papists themselves grew
to that height of Pride, in confidence of my mildness, as they did directly
expect, and assuredly promise to themselves Liberty of Conscience, and equality
with other of my Subjects in all things; but even a number of the best and
faithfullest of my said Subjects, were cast in great fear and amazement of my
Course and proceedings. How many did I honor with Knighthood, of known and
open Recusants? How indifferently did I give Audience and Access to both ^ides,
bestowing equally all favors and honors on both Professions? --. Apolog. p.
253.

Thus you see, if we may take the word of a King, that Masses were not offered
to obtain his Majesty's gracious release from sore afflictions. Besides, if
this was the design, why were not the People acquainted with it? what danger
could be supposed in telling them plainly, That Masses must be offered for a
release from their afflictions? King James in his Monitory Preface to all
Christian Monarchs p. 291 informs them, That a great number of his Popish
Subjects of all Ranks and Sexes, both men and Women, as well within as without
the Kingdom, had a confused Notion, and an obscure knowledge, that some great
thing was to be done in that Parliament for the Weal of the Church, although
for secrecies cause, they were not acquainted with the particulars; and that
certain Forms of Prayer had likewise been set down and used for the good
success of that great Work. Their Priests usually concluded their Masses and
Oblatory Sacrifices with their Prayers for the good success of the Catholic
design. And these Verses were made and used by Garnet.

Gentem auferte perfidam credentium de finibus,
Vt Christo lauds debitas persolvamus alacriter.
And others prayed thus: Prosper, Lord, their pains, that labor in thy Cause
day and night; let Heresyvanish away like smoke, let their Memory perish with a
Crack, like the ruin and fall of a broken House: Speed in King James p. 892.
Thus though the Design it self was understood by Few (for it was neither safe
nor necessary to impart it to many) yet the Papists generally knew, that there
was a Design in hand. And though there were but a Score, in the Treason, yet
there appeared Fourscore in the Rebellion: and it cannot be imagined, that so
small a Number could expect, without any other Assistance, to have made any
great advantage of surprising the Lady Elizabeth. And that great numbers of
Roman Catholics beyond Seas were acquainted with this horrid Treason, has
been abundantly proved by Many: nay, that it was carried on with the Privity
and Approbation of the Pope, is evident, both from Delrio disq. Mag. lib. 6.
cap. 1. Sect. 2. and from what our Bishop Andrews has asserted from the
voluntary Confession of a Jesuit viz. That his Holiness had ordered three Bulls
to be in readiness on the other side the Water, which were to be sent over, and
published in several parts of this Nation, so soon as the Blow was given. Tort.
Torti.

May we not then most justly charge their Church with this matchless Treason?
since such practices are agreeable to her Doctrines, and never any punishment
inflicted by her on these Traitors. Nay, so far have they been from censuring
these persons, that two Jesuits (principal Conspirators) were so kindly
received at Rome, that one was made the Popes Paenitentiary, and the othera
Confessor in S. Peter's at Rome. And Widdrington assures us, that Garnets Name
was inserted into the English Martyrology; that his Bones were kept for
Relics, and his Image set over Altars, as of a holy Martyr. Append. p. 150.
Such Honor have Traitors in the Roman Church: and yet this Gentleman has the
Impudence to affirm, That She abhors and punishes such Traitors, as severely as
any Protestant can wish. p. 67. When some in the late Times had proceeded to
such a height of wickedness, as to take away the life of our Gracious Sovereign
(which our Adversary is pleased to object against us, though it is more then
probable, that they were the Contrivers and Promoters of it, from what I urged
out of Dr. Du Moulin (which was never answered by any) and others have
attested) how did the Church and Nation groan, and were impatient till they
could vindicate the Honor of our Religion and Country, not only by an
execution of Justice on the immediate Actors, but by declaring in Parliament
against the Principles that led them to it. Let this Gentleman show us, that
the like has been done by the Court or Church of Rome against the Principles
or Actors of this Gun-powder-Treason, and with my consent, it shall never more
be objected against them. And thus, Sir, I have considered all that is material
in his first Chap. except his bitter Invectives against Protestants, which I
reserve for another place.

I will wholly wave his second Chap. in which there is not one true and
pertinent word, excepting Bellarmin's Assertion, That Jerusalem and not Rome,
shall be the Seat of Antichrist; for which several Fathers are cited by him:
But most of them are such, as he himself (de Scriptor. Eccles.) confesses to
be Spurious. Sir, if you please to compare this Chap. with the Second Chap. in
my Book, you I see the Honesty of the Man, and find, that he has not so much
as mentioned (so far is he from answering) what is most material in it. What
is there quoted out of the Fathers, and their own Authors, I avouch to be true,
and can give an Ocular demonstration of it, when he, or any other shall call
upon me.

Let us proceed to his third Chap. where (p. 101) he confidently affims, That
we cannot know, which are the true Copy's of Gods Word, without the testimony
of their Church; and consequently cannot charge them with any Corruptions of
Holy Scriptures. But the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet has sufficiently proved.
That without this Testimony, we may be assured, there are no material
Corruptions either in the Original Hebrew of the Old, or Greek of the New
Testament viz. By the diligent comparing the present Copy's with the most
*Ancient M S S. by the observation of what Citations of Scripture are produced
by those of The same Course we^ Sixtus 5. and Clement 8. pretended to take in
their Editions of the Vulgar Latin. Praef. ad Bibl. Sixth. and Clement
the Fathers, who lived when some of those Autographa were extant (as it is
apparent some were in Tertullians time, and some tell us, that the Authentic
Apocalypse was preserved in the Church of Ephesus in Honorius his time) by the
diligence of the Primitive Writers in taking notice of the least attempt for
falsification or corruption of the Text; For when Marcion began to clip and
falsify the Text, Irenaeus presently takes notice of it, and gives him a
sufficient rebuke for it: and so does Tertullian and Epiphanius. So that
whatever endeavors were made, they were presently discovered; as that of the
Arrians by S. Ambrose, that of Tatianus his Monotessaron by Theodoret. Besides,
it is observable, that among those multitudes of Various Lections in the New
Testament, of which R. Stephen made a Collection out of sixteen M S S. of 2384.
(which probably were occasioned by the general dispersion of Copies, and the
multitudes of transcriptions by such as were either ignorant or careless) yet
there are none which are material (as Bellarmin has confessed de Verb. dei.
lib. 2. cap. 2. 7.) so as to entrench upon the integrity and authority of the
Copies, as a rule of Faith and Manners; they are but Racings of the Skin, no
wounds of any vital Part. etc. Ration. Account p. 215 -- And Bellar. dares not
say more of the Vulgar Latin. de V. D. lib. 2. c. 11.

But the Hebrew Doctors (says this Gentleman p. 97. 98.) have corrupted the
Old Testament, and the Greeks the New. But the first is absolutely denied by
their great Bellarmin (to pass by others) and he urges five Arguments for it,
the weakest of which our Adversary is not able to answer. de Verb. dei. lib. 2.
cap. 2. And to the Tikkun Sopherim, produced by Porchetus, he answers, That the
truth of it may be justly questioned; since there is no mention of it, but in
the Thalmud, which is a most fabulous Book. And those Fathers, which were more
Ancient than the Thalmud, make no mention of it. ibid. And to that Place, Cited
out of Justin, he answers. That Justin does not say, that the Hebrew Text was
corrupted by the Jews, but that of the 70 Interpreters. ibid. And concerning
the Corruption of the New Testament, Bellarmin says. That though Heretics
have endeavored to deprave it (which is all that our Adversaries Testimonies
p. 98. do prove) yet Catholics were never wanting, who discovered and
prevented those Corruptions. That is, Irenaeus, Origin. Basil, Ambrose, and
Hierom.
de Verbo dei lib. 2. cap. 7. And so much is affirmed by the great S. Austin,
who writing against the Manichees, says. That with a deal of Impudence, or, to
speak mildly, with much weakness, they charged the the Scriptures to be
corrupted; and yet could not prove any corruption by any Copies that are
extant. de Vtilit. Credend. cap. 3. And this Father lived almost 3 Centuries
after Irenaeus, almost 2 Centuries after Orig^n, almost 1. Century after Basil
and Ambrose, and about 30 years after Hierom. And if the Hebrew and Greek
Copies are so corrupt, as this Gentleman pretends, why did their Infallible
Master, Clement 8. correct the Vulgar Latin according to the Original, in above
2000. places (as Dr. James has observed) when the contrary Reading was
established by Sixtus 5. Praef. ad Bibl. Clem. And he might have added several
thousands more, but consulto immutata relicta sunt ad offensionem p^pulorum
vitandam, they were purposely omitted, lest the People should take offense at
them. ibid.

Have not we then the greatest reason, to rely on the Originals, when the Pope
himself appeals to them, and reforms by them? for certainly the Hebrew and
Greek are as obvious to us as them.

Besides, we are advised by the Ancients to go unto the Hebrew and Greek
Fountains. As the purity of the Books of the Old Testament must be examined by
the Hebrew, so the purity of the Books of the New Testament must be examined by
the Rule of the Greek Text. S. Hierom Epist. ad Lucinium. Men whose natural
Language is Latin, have need of two other Tongues for the knowledge of the Holy
Scripture, the Hebrew and the Greek; that they may have recourse to the
precedent (Hebrew and Greek) Copies, when the infinite variety of the Latin
Interpreters brings some doubt. S. Austin lib. 2. de Doctrine. Christ. cap. 11.
To these Amandus Polanus has added several both of the Greek and Latin Fathers
Symphonia. Cathol. lib. 1. Nay we are obliged to this by their Pontifical Law:
Vt veterum librorum fides de Hebraeis voluminibus examinanda est, ita novorum
veritas Graeci sermonis normam desiderat. Decret. pars 1. did. 9. c. 6.

In the next place he endeavors to confute those petty Instances (as he calls
them) I urged against their Vulgar Latin. p. 105 --.

To the first viz. Genesis 3. 15. which the Vulgar Latin reads, Ipsa conteret. She
shall bruise thy head (contrary to the Hebrew Sept. Chald. Paraph. etc.) He
answers, that Victor, Alcimus, Avitus, S, Chrysostom. S. Ambrose, read it so. But
the first, though Ancient, was not a Writer of any Note; and Bellarmin gives
this Character of him, That he was more addicted to the study of Rhetoric,
than Divinity, and the Holy Scriptures. De Script. Eccles. p. 124. The second
and third viz. Alcimus and Avitus, I never heard of before, and Challenge this
Gentleman to produce them, or any Authentic Writer, that makes mention of
them. I suppose he means Avitus Alcimus, urged by Bellarmin De V. D. who is an
Author as obscure as the former.

That S. Chrysostom reads it so, is false. Indeed Philipus Montanus, who
translated Chrysostom, renders it, Ipsa, but he has placed a Note in the
Margin, that plainly shows the truer reading to be Ipse. And so much is
intimated in his Preface in Tom. 1. p. 8. and confessed by Pamelius, Annot. in
lib. 2. Cyprian Testim. adversus Judaeos n. 51. S. Austin Ambrose, Gregory, and
Beda have not only followed a corrupt Translation of this Verse, but also given
us an Exposition different, even from all both Popish and Protestant
Commentators, and contrary to the plain scope of the place.

I could add as a further Proof of this Corruption, the Testimony of Irenaeus
adversus Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 38. and lib. 4. cap. 78. S. Cyprian lib 2.
Testim. adv. Judaeos. S. Hierom Quaest. Hebr. in Genesis Pope Leo Sermon. 2. de
Nativ. dom. who lived in the 5 Century. Isidorus Pelusiota lib. 1. Epist. 426.
who lived in the same Century. And Lucas Brugensis assures us, that almost all
the Fathers read Ipse. Annot. 1. Nay, many Papists have acknowledged this
Corruption. Melchior Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 15. Andradius Defers.
Trident. lib. 4. c. 3. Cardinal Cajetan in Genesis c. 3. Brixianus --.

Obj. It Is false says (this Gentleman) the Vulgar Latin reads so absolutely;
for some Editions have (it) for (she.) p. 107.

Ans. If by Vulgar Latin, he means that of Sixtus 5. and Clement 8. which is
the only authorized Edition, it is most false, that any read (it.)

But it is time to consider what he answers to Genesis 4. 13. Heb. 13. 16. And
here he tells us. 1. That Primasius (S. Austins Scholar) used the word (merit)
in this very Text; as also Cyprian and others. 2. That the same Greek Word is
thus translated by us, Heb. 10. 29. 3. That if we confire this Word to the most
rigid sense viz. to obtain, procure -- the Church will require no other merit.
But. 1. This Gentleman does not inform us, where Primasius, Cyprian and others
use the word (merit) in this Text; and I am as backward to believe him, as that
Primasius was S. Austins Scholar, who lived about 100. years after Austin,
according to Bellarmin's computation. de Script. Eccles. p. 179. and 246. 2.
It Is most false, that the same Greek Word is thus translated by us Heb. 10. 29.
And 3. As false, that the Roman Church by (merit) understands no more than to
obtain, procure --. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. can. 32.

The other four Instances he passes over, affirming p. 108. that they are
confuted by Bellar. lib. 2. De V. D. whereas two of them are not so much as
mentioned by Bellarmin. May we not justly wonder, that a man who professes
Christianity, nay, to be a Member of so excellent a Church, should dare to
assert such notorious Falsities?

From the Scriptu^es he proceeds to the Fathers p. 109. where he tells us. 1.
That the Fathers have suffered infinite Corruptions by ignorant Transcribers,
and the avarice of Booksellers. 2. That diverse Fathers have writ erroneously,
even in things of importance. 3. That some of them have been corrupted by
Heretics, in those very things wherein they erred not. And then infers, That I
must acknowledge, that the Roman Church in correcting those Original or
Accidental Errors, executes her Office, acts a Careful part, and manifests her
self the true Mother of Gods Children p. 111. And a little after assures his
Reader, That the sum of my Accusation is, that the Roman Church took these
corrupt Fathers in hand, to make them speak suitably to her Doctrines.

Sir, you have already, seen what little reason we have to take this Gentleman's
Word, and here no more is offered by him to ground our belief upon. We have
charged their Church with the Alteration of several places in the Ancient
Fathers; let this Gentleman prove those places to have been corrupted either by
Heretics, or Transcribers, and we will beg her pardon, and call them from
henceforth Charitable Corrections. At present, we cannot but think it strange,
that the Fathers should be so often printed by the Roman Church, with so much
professed care and fai^hfulness (expressed in their Prefaces) and for so long
pass for Authentic without one Syllable of any Corruption; and yet in this
last Century, when Pro^estants began to read them, and urged from them so many
express Testimonies against their Novel Doctrines; they should be charged with
so many Corruptions by Heretics and Transcribers. Here we must either condemn
her former negligence, or suspect her present honesty: and whether of the two
is obvious to any man.

But we cannot (says he) suspect the Ancient Fathers to be corrupted by their
Church, to multiply Witnesses for Popery; for those very Fahers, whose Sayings
or Corruptions She corrects, afford plentiful Proofs of the Roman Church's
Faith from those sound parts, which are not called in Question either by the
Catholic or the Protestant Church: witness Perron, Bellar. etc. p. 116.

If all the Fathers be so express for Popery, why then have their most eminent
Doctors urged so many spurious Treatises (according to their own Confessions)
and falsely alleged others? Let any Person look into Coccius, Bellarmin,
Canisius etc. (who trade most with the Fathers) and examine how many of those
places are convicted of Forgery by Baronius, Bellar. Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis,
Possevin etc. and he must either deny what this Gentleman has so confidently
affirmed; or grant, that these great Champions and profound Scholars had been
little conversant in the Fathers. For take those spurious Treatises our, and
their large Folio's would dwindle into little Quarto's.

It Is time to leave this, and pass to his next Chap. where he lays down these
three Propositions, which contain (and he might have added confirm) the
contracted Venom and Quintessence of all my objected Cases. p. 137 --.

1. That the Church of Rome has universally degenerated from her wholesome and
Primitive use, and faithful dispensation of that most important Sacrament of
Penance, seeing that contrary to the express sense of Antiquity she daily and
every where allows her Priests to admits evidently impenitent, wilfully and
uncorrected, and daily relapsing sinners, and all sorts without exception, to
the Sacred benefit of Absolution, and Communion: Not one Confessarius in ten
Thousand daring once in twenty years to make use of the retaining part of his
power, for fear of incurring the shameful Censure of singularity.

2. That the Primitive Practice of large and severe Injunctions is
unwarrantably perverted into that fatal indulging of a five Paters, or a
Rosaries Penance. A Custom woefully experienced, to beget in sinners a damnable
presumption, that Gods mercy is at the beck of the Courteous Confessor.

3. That the universally established Doctrine and use of Indulgences do
expressly thwart the Primitive sense and Practice of that Juridical Part, lull
Gods People into a presumptuous security, and evacuate the Apostles Counsel, to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Now in vindication of his Holy
Mother, three things are urged by him.

1. That Pope Alexander 7. in the General Congregation at Rome, an. 1659.
declared, That the Doctrines held forth by those Casuists, I mentioned, are
false, erroneous, scandalous, dangerous -- p. 129.

I confess this is as plausably urged, as any thing I have met with in his
whole Book; yet there is little in it, when all things are well considered.
There had been for some years sharp Contests between the Jansenists and Jesuits
in France, and how Pope Alexander 7. stood affected toward the latter, is
clear from his severe Censures of several Books, that were written against
them. In the Year 1657. he condemned the Provincial Letters. Congreg. 66.
Sommaires des Declarations des Curez de Paris Congreg. 69. Jesuitarum Atheismus
detectus. Congreg. 84. Alphonsi de Vargas Toletani Relatio ad Principes
Christianos de Stratagem. and Sophismat. Politicis Societatis Jesu -- Congreg.
85. etc. But this would not do the work; for the devout sort of Catholics (to
use their own Words) were scandalized at those Doctrines of the Jesuits, and
Heretics made their advantages of them: Therefore the Pope an. 1665. (not
1659. as our Adversary affirms) censured certain Propositions, delivered by
those Casuists, which were most insisted on by their Adversaries, and offensive
to some devout Catholics. We see now what 'twas, that put the Pope upon this
Censure viz. the present State of Affairs in France, and not any dis-like of
the Doctrines; for had they been really displeasing to his Holiness. 1. He
would have condemned the Authors of them, and prohibited their Books; which was
not done. 2. He would not have been so severe upon those Doctors, that writ
against them.

2. He urges the severe Penances, imposed by the Primitive Church upon
notorious Offenders; of which he gives us (p. 146-) an Instructive Index (to
use his own expression) extracted out of Gratian etc. And then assures his
Reader, that these are enough to confront the Minister's pretended List, and
acquaint us with the careful and strict Proceedings of those best Ages of the
Catholic Church. p150.

But what is this to the present Church of Rome, which (as he told us before)
has universally degenerated from her wholesome and primitive use, and faithful
dispensation of that most important Sacrament of Penance. The Roman Church,
whilst a Virgin was as severe, as now she is become remiss: and what the Whore
obtains for twelve pence, the honest Virgin had scarce granted for a Penance of
twelve years. It was not then, as now at Rome, where Dispensations and Pardons
are presently got at a small rate, according to their Taxa Cancellariae
Apostolicae. This Gentleman seems to question, whether such a Book was ever
printed, and allowed by their Church. I thought this was sufficiently cleared
from the pregnant Testimonies of their own Writers, which he neither has, nor
can object against. And for his further satisfaction, I will produce the Book,
when he, or any other shall call upon me.

But suppose (says he p. 151.) the World had seen, or the Pope allowed a Book
of that Model, yet I am so just, as to clear the Church of that imputation; and
to acknowledge, that not only some Sorbonists, but even the Inquisitors of
Rome, have stigmatiz^d it. Certainly this Gentleman deserves to be stigmatized
for an impudent Liar. 1. I affirm (says he) that some Sorbonists have
condemned this Book. But where does he find any mentiond by me, except
Espencaeus, whose pious Censure the Roman Church is so far from approving, that
the Spanish Inquisitors have commanded it to be blotted out in their
Expurgatory Index p. 60. 2. I acknowledge (says he) that the Inquisitors of
Rome have stigmatized it, This is as true as the former; for my words are
these. And it is worthy of our Observation, that though the Inquisitors of Rome
have placed the Taxa Cancel. Apostol, in their Expurgatory Index, yet they
except nothing against the Book, printed by the Romanists, but that only, which
was lately put forth with Banks his Annotations, or which have been corrupted
by Heretics.

Obj. But why (says this Gentleman) should I quarrel with them for this, since
our Spiritual-Swordmen, or Lay-Absolvers do with approbation extract whole
Estates out of the Peoples sins?

Ans. What may be done in the dark by some needy and coveteous Persons, I know
not; but that such Practices are allowed by the Laws of England, is most false.
And let this Gentleman make good his Charge against these Spiritual Swordmen
(as he calls them) and I dare undertake, that our Reverend Judges will make
them Public Examples. Other Answers I could return to this Objection, which
for Brevity's sake I will pass over.

3. To the last his Answer is, That he does not apprehend, that their Church^s
Doctrine and Sense of Indulgences, truly understood, can offer any scandal to
the impartial Peruser. p. 155. Sir, if you please to cast an eye upon the
incomparable Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Learned Dr. Brevint, who have lately
discussed this Point, you will see what little truth there is in this Gentleman's
Assertion, concerning Papal Indulgences.

I now leave this, and pass on to his next Chap. where 1. He tells his Reader,
that I have picked up 3 or 4 of the least Authentic, or rather doubtful
Miracles, never as yet made use of by any Catholic Controvertist. p. 166. That
these Miracles are more then doubtful, I take to be a great Truth But that they
were never made use of by any Catholic Controvertist, is most false; for some
of them are urged by Bellarmin to confirm their Doctrines. De Imagine. lib. 2.
cap. 12. de Sacram. Euchar. lib. 3. c. 8. To pass by others. 2. He brings a
Gordion List of u^doubted Miracles in proof of several points of Catholic
Faith. p. 167. But alas! the Authors he mentions, are either confessedly
Spurious, as Bellar. de Script. Eccles. p. 116. Ludovicus Vives in August.
Athanasius de Passione Imag. Christi. S. Austin de Civit. dei lib. 22. c. 8.
etc. or notoriously fabulous, as Gregorius Turonensis, Paulus Diaconus,
Paschasius, S Gregory, Beda etc. or most falsely quoted, as I shall show anon,
Sir, if you desire further satisfaction in this Point, be pleased to read the
forementioned Authors viz. Dr. Brevint and Stillingfleet, where you will find the
Question truly stated, and enough to put any ^ober Man out of conceit with
Romish Miracles.

Nothing now remains, but that I give you a further account of this Gentleman's
unworthy dealing in these false and slanderous Assertions, which make up a
confiderable Part of his Book. As

That the Roman Church has taught Protestants all they know of Christianity,
Luther in Gal. p. 292. Wh^taker Controv. 2. Q. 5. c. 14. False. p. 2.


That all Christians are free from the Obligation of the Mo^al Law, Luth. in
Gal. p. 46. 42. 49. 144. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. c. 10. n. 5. lib. 3. p. 11.
c. 19. n. 2. and 4. All false.

That the Church took it very ill, that Pope Gregory dealt so with the Emperor.
Aquinas 22. Quaest. 12 Art. 2. False. p. 40.


That Vincentius in his Speculum Histor. lib. 15. c. 84. checked that Fac^ of
Pope Gregory. Most False.

That the Catholic Bishops in England with their Clergy declared to Q. Eliz.
that it is not warrantable either by the Laws of God or Man, p. 57.
to act against the allegiance, they owe to their Prince. Holinshead Vol. 3. p.
1358 --. That Parry's Fact was condemned by them. Holinshead Vol. 3. p. 1385.
and 1387. False.

That not above 13 Laymen and 4 Jesuits were either Actors in, or privy to the
Gunpowder Treason. Baker p. 593. False. p. 64.


That this Plot was the Treasurer's device, Osborn Mem of K. James. False.

That Popish Princes punished the Albigenses for their rebellious Doctrines
against Princes. Illyricus Catal. Test. Ver. p. 735. and 755. And p. 73.
for their actual Bebellions Osiander Epitom. Cent. 16. p. 715. For which
Bishop Jewel disowns them in the defense of his Apology. p. 48. All most False.

That Luther, Calvin, and other Principal Reformers are called the p. 76.
Flower of all precedent Doctors and Fathers; more knowing then all their
Predecessors, yea, then the Apostles themselves. Luther in Sermon. de evers.
Hierusal. p. 271. Beza Praef. in Nov. Test. The first Messengers of Truth.
Jewel Apol. part 4. c. 4. divis. 2. and Defense of Apol. p. 426. All false

That among Christians no Man ought to be Superior to another; that p. 77.
none but Christ is Ruler over them. Luth. de seculari potest. Tom. 9. That he
will disturb the Public Peace, and even confound and destroy the Prince
himself. Luth. Loc. Communes Class. 4. c. 30. That we are exempted from all
Human Laws by the Christian Liberty, given us in Baptism. cap. de baptismo.
All false.

That notorious Rebellions, and barbarous Cruelties immediately followed p. 78.
upon these Doctrines by Protestants. Sleidan H^st. lib. 22. p. 345. Osiand.
Cent. 16. p. 115. False.

That Earthly Princes divest themselves of their power, when they oppose
themselves against God; and therefore it is fitter a Man should spit in their
faces than obey them, when they grow so saucy. Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. and
Comment in Daniel cap. 2. v. 39 cap. 6. v. 2. 25. All false.

That Protestants advanced their wicked Principles in every Country p. 79.
to an execution of the most horrid practices of insolent Rebellion and
Bloodshed and Cruelty. In France for thirty years together. Osiand. Cent. 16.
p. 115 735. 599. Sutcliff Ans. to a Supplic. Libel. p. 194. Hist. of the Civil
Wars in France. In Germany Sleidan lib. 18. p. 263. In Swethland Chitraeus
Chron. p. 74. 75. In Holland Osiander Cent. 16. p. 801. 803. That they deposed
Ph^lip K. of Spain from his Dominions in the Low Countries. Osiarder Cent. 16.
p. 941. 805. That they violently excluded Sigismund K. of Sweden from his
Crown. Osiand. Cent. 16. p. 1115. and the Emperor from diverse of his Rights in
Germany. All false.

That Luther affi^ms, That neither Austin, nor Ambrose, nor any p. 90.
Doctor, Di^ine -- since the Apostles times, had so excellently instructed and
confirmed Men's Consciences, as he himself had done. Luth in lib. ad ducem
Georg. And that Calvin says, That all the Ancient Fathers for 1300 years had
been blindly led with Error. Instit. lib. 3. c. 5. All false.

That whether Antichrist has his seat at Rome or Jerusalem, yet even p. 92.
then, neither the Church, nor Pope of Rome shall be Antichrist, but both be
persecuted by him, and persevere still visible and eminent. S. Austin de Civit.
dei lib. 20 c. 8. and in Psalm. 70. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. c. 2. n. 12. All most
false.

That there was no visible Church, but the Popish Church for 1260 p. 95.
years before Luther. Napper upon the Revel. p. 145. Perkins upon the Creed. p.
400. and in his Reformed Catholic p. 307. All false.

That the Hebrew Doctors have corrupted the Scriptures. Calvin Instit. p. 97.
lib. 1. c. 13. n. 9 False. That S. Hierom thought it not safe to recur to
those Hebrew Copies, where the Septuagint differs from them. In Epist. ad Gal.
cap. 3. False.

That the first Reformers, and their Successors have entirely condemned p. 117.
and rejected the Fathers, both in general and particular, as blind, ignorant,
and full of Errors. Luther de servo Arbitrio. p. 434. Calvin in Heb. c. 7. v.
9. Instit. lib. 4. c. 12. n. 19. and 30. Humsred, de vita Jeweli p. 212. Fulkes
Retentive against Bristow. p. 55. Wotton defense of Perk us p. 491. Whitaker
contra duraeum lib. 6. p. 423. All false.

That the ten Commandments belong not to Christians. Luther Sermon. p. 124.
de Mose, and approved by Whitaker contra duraeum lib. 8. Sect. 91. Luther in
Gal. cap. p. 227. That it is Heresy to require good works to Salvation. Luth.
Sermon. de piscat. Petri p. 154 All false in this Gentleman's sense; for they
constantly affirm, that the ten Commandments belong to Christians as a Rule of
life, and that good works are necessary to salvation.

That the Church of England does acknowledge in her Marginal Notes p. 164.
upon Joh. 14. 12. That Believers in every Age have power to work Miracles.
False.

That infinite Miracles have been wrought by the Relics of Saints. p. 168.
Whitaker contra duraeum lib. 10 p. 866. False.

That the real Presence is confirmed by many Miracles, acknowledged p. 169.
by Dr. Humfrey in his Jesuitisme p. 2. rat. 5. p. 626. and Centurists. Cent.
4. col. 431. And that famous one in the Town of Knoblock an. 1510. is related
as a certain truth by Osiander ^ent. 16. cap. 14. p. 28. All most false.

That several Miracles are confessed by the C^n^urists, to prove the p. 170.
Mass to be a true Sacrifice, Purgatory and Prayer for the dead. Cent. 6. Col.
819. and Cent. 7. Col. 577. All most false.

That the Miracles wrought by S. Oswald, and others are approved by p. 179.
Holinshead in his Chron. Vol. 1. p. 115. 170. False.

That the formentioned Miracles, and many others of the seventh Age, p. 180.
are acknowledged by the Centurists Cent. 7. cap. 10. Col. 533. and Osiander
Epitom. Cent. 7. False.

That many undoubted Miracles were wrought in the 8. 9. 10. and 11. Ages in
confirmation of the use of Images, the Veneration of holy Relics, Invocation
of Saints, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, offered for the Living and the Dead.
Osiander Epit. Cent. 8. p. 47. and 92. Item p. 24. 25. The Centurists Cent. 8.
cap. 13. Cent. 9. cap. 13. Osiander Epit. Cent. 9. p. 63. All most false.

That the Miracles of S. Dunstan are recorded and approved by Holinshead Vol.
1. 165. and others in the same Age by the Conturists Cent. 10. cap. 13. and
Osiander Epit. Cent. 10. p. 125. All most false.

That the Miracles wrought in the Eleventh Age by S. Ansolm, O^^^o. p. 181.
and others, in confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Invocation of
Saints, are confessed by Osiander Epit. Cent. 9. 10. 11. p. 213. False.

That infinite Miracles were done by Malachias in the twelveth Age, whereof
some were seen and acknowledged by many hundreds of People. Holinshead Chron.
p. 55. False.

That many Miracles were done by S. Bernard, and acknowledged by the p. 182.
Centurists Cent. 12. col. 1634. 1635. 1649. and Osiander Cent. 12. lib. 4.
cap. 6. p. 310. And that these moved Whitaker to give him the just Character of
a true Saint. De Eccles. p. 369. All most false.

He further tells us, That signal Miracles were wrought in the thirteenth Age
by S. Dominick, and S. Francis, even while they were preaching against the
Albigensian Errors, whom Satan had seduced to deny those known Doctrines of
Gods Church viz. Purgatory, Prayers for the dead, Confession, Extreme Unction,
the Popes Authority, Images, Traditions -- And in the next page assures us,
That the Miracles wrought in the 15th. Age, are admired and reverenced by
Protestants themselves But for both these we must take his bare word; and how
can he in reason expect this from us, who stands convicted of above a hundred
notorious Lies?

Perhaps here you will say, That the Printer has mistaken many of the Quotations;
and therefore we cannot in justice charge them on the Author: Or that he has
taken them upon the Credit of other Writers.

But to the first I answer. 1. That the Printer cannot be charged with any
mistake in reference to many, nay most of the Quotations, I have mentioned. 2.
That about two Months ago I writ to this Gentleman (and have great assurance
that my Letter came to his Hands) and desired him, that, if there were any
Errata's in the Citations, he would be pleased to send me a corrected Book, and
it should be faithfully returned: But to this day I never heard from him.

And to the second Plea viz. That he has taken these Citations upon the Credit
of other Writers (which I believe to be a great truth) I answer, That to take
things upon trust in Controversial Points, argues much weakness and imprudence;
but to do this, and not give his Reader the least intimation of it, argues
great unfaithfulness and dishonesty, that will not admit of any Excuse. And to
evidence his great Proficiency in this Catholic Virtue, I could give you many
other Instances; but for Brevity's sake I Will mention but one, which you may
find p. 190. and will appear most notorious upon your comparing of it with p.
127. of my Book. Here he confidently tells the World, that all that the Bishops
of Bononia (as they are alleged in the last page but one of my Book) do affirm
i^, That private men's constructions of the Bible have raised great storms and
differences, and that the Doctrines preached by Christians (or the Romish
Church) se^m contrary to those contained in the Bible. But the advice of those
Bishops to the Pope was related by me in these words: Let that little suffice,
which is wont to be read in the Mass; and more then that let no Mortal, be
allowed to read, For so long as men were content with that little, your affairs
succeeded according to desire; but quite otherways since so much of the
Scriptures was publicly read. In short, this is the Book, which above all
others, has raised these storms and ten pests. And truly, if any one read that
Book (the Scriptures) and observe the Customs and Practices of our Church,
will see that there is no agreement betwixt them, and that the Doctrine, which
we preach, is altogether different from, and sometimes cont^^ry to that
contained in the Bible. Now can any Man pick out of these Words, or will any
one, but a frontless Romanist, affirm, that the sense of them is, That private
men's constructions of the Bible have raised great storms and differences, etc.
I grant, we are to put the most favorable construction upon another's Words
and Actions; Yet I take that Caution in their Canon Law to be extravagant, viz.
That if a P^p^st see one of their Priests k^ssing a Woman, he is bid to believe,
that the Priest is only giving her good Counsel: For though Charity be can did
and ingenuous, yet it is not blind and block^sh. And that their Charity must
have these debasing Qualifications, who endeavor to excuse this Gentleman, is
obvious to any. I have found him guilty of about an hundred and fifty false
Quotations, and observed near half that number, that are wholly impertinent,
besides many that I have not time to examine. Sir, if these Roman Factors dare
publish such notorious Falsities to the World, we may easily guess what pretty
Stories they tell their deluded Proselytes in secret. Let us commiserate their
Condition, who have committed their Souls to the Conduct of these Spiritual
Mountchancks, and admire Gods discriminating Mercy, who has delivered us from
their Fatal delusions.

Sir I am Your most Obliged and faithful Servant I. S.


