A Short DISCOVERY Of certain TRUTHS of GOD, According as they are revealed
through the manifestation of the eternal light of the Son of Righteousness;
Which are A Reply against two things, in an Epistle: And, An Answer to ce^tain
Queries contained in a Book, Entitled, Christian Queries, to Quaking
Christians, Subscribed by one J. B. Also Queries propounded, to be answered by
the Author of the same Book, or any other.

By JOHN STORY.

But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with
meekness and fear,

1 Pet. 3. 15. Printed in the year, 1664.

A Pamphlet, or little book being come to my hands, entitled, Christian
Queries to Quaking Christians, etc. By one who subscribes himself I. B. with an
Epistle to the Reader, from one who subscribes himself I. A. And I having duly
weighed, and seriously considered both the Epistle, and the Queries, I return
this following Reply against two things in the Epistle, with an Answer to the
Queries.

First, to the Epistle, in the Frontispiece of which I. A. says,

Go little book, improve thy Scripture skill,
Advance the truth, and throw down all self-will.
Reply. IT is not in the power of that little book, or any other writing, how
holy, or good soever they may be in themselves, either to advance the truth, or
beat down the self-will, and haughty pride of man; farther then they are
accompanied with the living word, Spirit, and power of the Lord God: therefore
may I say, much more it is not in the power of that little Book, either to
throw down self-will in any, in whom it is not yet subdued, or to exalt the
truth in general; because its only queries, gathered by the Author from the
Letter of the Scriptures without, and no message of heavenly prophesy,
doctrine, or exhortation, received by the Author from the Lord, through the
divine inspiration of his light, and Spirit within, whose light, Spirit, and
power operating in the hearts of men, is that only means, which becomes
effectual to accomplish the things before mentioned, viz. the laying low the
pride of all flesh, and the exaltation of the name, and truth of God, in the
world. Therefore may I say, it is a very vain, and idolatrous exhortation, which
I. A. has given to I. B. his little book.

And I. A. further says, Let light without be guide to light within.

Reply. If by this exhortation I. A. means, that light without should guide the
true light, which shines in the hearts of Saints, which I cannot but gather
from the forementioned words: then, I must needs say, it is a very absurd, and
foolish exhortation, and being spoken upon a divine account; it is very full of
idolatry, and evil, and greatly contrary to the Gospel, and exhortation of Gods
Ambassadors to the Saints upon earth; which was, that they should abide in the
light, or anointing that was in them, 1 John 2. 27. And the Apostle prefers
the light, that God has caused to shine into their hearts, so far beyond any
perishing thing, or light without, that he exalts it, as that excellent means,
by which he, and the Saints received the knowledge unto everlasting life, 2
Cor. 4. 6. Where he says, God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness,
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. Many more testimonies proving the same truth,
might be instanced. And though the holy Scriptures without, and the Saints
practices are as lights in the world: yet far be it from all true Christian
men, so to idolize them; as to set them in esteem above the light, which is
sufficient to guide, or to esteem them equal with the light, and Spirit of
Christ within, from which the Scriptures were given forth, which are but
branches of that holy ^oot, and as it were fruits of that heavenly tree, viz.
the appearance of God in the hearts of his people. If I. A. had bid people mind
the doctrines, and exhortations of the holy Scripture, which testifies of, and
exhorts to Christ, the true, and never erring light, in the hearts of his
followers, he had done better. But what I have already in love said, I shall
leave to his more serious, and better consideration.

1. Query. How, and by what means may salvation be attained, whether by
adhering to light within us, or by faith in Christ without us? (1) if the later
be not the best way, why is it, that the Scriptures do so often bid us to
believe in Jesus Christ, and that by so doing, we may be saved, 3 John 15, 16.
Acts 16. 30, 31. (2) or if the former be the better way? if so I would then ask
farther.

Answ. Salvation is to be obtained through believing, and walking in the
obedience unto Christ Jesus, who is that only true and saving light, which
lights every man that comes into the world, John. 1. 9. And all mankind, who
comes out of that night of darkness, which has overshadowed the whole world,
and from under the cloud of error, that has covered all the inhabitants of
the earth, must both believe, receive, and walk in the light of the Lamb, Rev.
21. 24. which is the best and most excellent way: though we must confess, as
Jesus, the true light of the world, is God blessed forever; our vessels are not
able to contain him, because his presence is infinite, and fills heaven and
earth; and as he is thus infinite in himself, we must confess, that he is as
real without us as within us: yet the true knowledge and faith, which we with
all the Saints have in Christ unto our salvation, is not of him at a distance
without us, but even in him, as he is near at hand, by his light, and spirit
revealed within us; according to what the Apostle says, Romans 1. 19. That,
which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them. And Col. 1. 27. the Apostle says To whom God would make known, what is
the riches of the glory of this mystery amongst the Gentiles, which is Christ
in you the hope of glory. Therefore I say, the hope, which we with all true
Christ^ans have, whereby we may attain heaven, where all felicity and
happiness is enjoyed for ever, is not by any knowledge of Christ at a distance
without us, but as he is inwardly revealed, by his light and Spirit in our
hearts; and they who thus know him, have and do experience the virtue of his
precious blood, which was shed for many, to wash away their sin, and to purge
them from all their transgressions. And this is that knowledge, which a man may
have, and not dye, for the soul that has it lives to God in this world, and
shall reign with Christ to all eternity, in the world to come. And because this
is the best and most excellent way for Christians both to believe in, and
receive Christ unto their everlasting salvation; therefore it is, that the holy
Scriptures testify of Christ being revealed unto the Saints, in this way: but
neither the Scriptures which thou have instanced, nor any other exhorts
Christians to believe in Christ, as he is at a distance without them; but the
contrary, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.

2. Query. Whether the light within us be a sufficient guide to direct us unto
true happiness? and what this light is? whether in every man? or how to be
attained? (1.) if this light be sufficient to salvation, of what use are the
Scriptures? And why are we at all exhorted unto faith, which implies something
at a distance, and not yet enjoyed? Heb. 11. 1. 3.

Answ. The light of Jesus within us is a sufficient guide to direct and lead
us, which all them that walk in it, out of darkness and misery, to the
inheritance of glory, and joy with the sanctified in Christ's spiritual
K^ngdome, according as our Savior, who is this light, testifies of himself,
John 8. 12. where he says, I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life; and Zechariah
prophesying of him, whose light is sufficient to guide men out of error and
darkness, says Luke, 1. 78, 79. through the tender mercy of our God, the day
spring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
By these two testimonies may this truth be confirmed, viz. that the light of
Jesus, which shines within us, is sufficient both to direct and lead us to true
happiness.

Secondly, this true light, (in which we walk, and give testimony to the world,
and say, it is that unto which all mankind must be turned, that come to receive
remission of sins, Act. 26. 18.) is no other, but even Jesus the everlasting
son of God, as the Scriptures testifies, John. 1. 9. and John 8. 12. Rev. 21,
24.

Thirdly, This true light lights every man, as it is before already proved,
John 1. 9. And he that desires to attain the knowledge of Jesus, the true
light, let him not say in his heart, who shall ascend, or descend, Romans 10. and
6. 7. for Christ the light is near, whose beams, in a small measure, shines in
the darkness of his heart, according to John 1. 4. 5. and may be known by its
operation of manifesting the secret evils there, which are reproved, and
through it, he comes to have a descerning between the inward thoughts, and
desires, which would incline his heart toward God; and those which would, or
does cause his heart to decline from God: therefore he that would attain to the
knowledge of Christ, (whose light gives him in some measure the knowledge of
himself, as is before said) must in love and obedience to Christ (whose light
convinces him of sin) confess and forsake his sin, in which obedience man
comes to receive that heavenly power of God, which begets him again out of sin
and death, and makes him partaker of the divine nature, and life of Christ, the
light, in which he comes to see light, and to have the excellent knowledge of
that everlasting son, through which, in some measure, he saw the filthiness of
sin, and the motions of it in his heart; while as yet he had not the knowledge
of the light, neither could it comprehend.

Fourthly, Because this light is sufficient, of great use are the Scriptures
which testifies of, and directs to this light, and exhorts, Christians to
the growing in faith, and belief in Jesus, who is the true light, and Savior
of the world, and able to save to the utmost, Heb. 7. 25. Heb. 5. 9.

3. Query. Whether is this light the conscience of every man? or (3.) is it
Christ in every man? if so, why then are not all men saved? for if he that has
not this light be out of Christ (as you say) then all, that have this light,
must of necessity be in Christ, and consequently saved, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2 Cor. 5.
17.

Answ. This light is not the conscience of every man, neither is it the
conscience of any man, but is that heavenly light, by which God lightens the
consciences of the sons of men, to distinguish between good and evil, as I have
already said. And all they that believe in, and obey the motions of Gods
Spirit, by the light of his Son, he will lead them out of all darkness, and
error, and guide them in the way everlasting, and he will give them richly to
possess, the evidence of his light and Spirit upon their consciences, that
they are his children. Herein they come to partake of that peace which never
shall have an end.

Secondly, though we do not say, that every man knows, or has received Christ
within; yet we say the beams of his light lights all men, in which his grace,
that brings salvation, has appeared to them, 1 Tit. 2. 11. And hereby his
good Spirit is tendered to instruct them, notwithstanding they rebel against
him, Neh. 9. 20, 26. And this is the cause, that all men are not saved, viz.
their not believing in, but rejecting the light of his salvation, and rebelling
against his Spirit, which should instruct them in the way thereof, through
which Spirit, all men that continue in sin shall be left without excuse, whose
destruction is of themselves.

4. Query. Whether that way which you teach, and the doctrines you maintain and
propagate, be consonant to, and may be defended by the word of God, contained
in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, whether it be not necessary to
have some rule of trial, by which we may try the spirits, whether they be of
God, or no? 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. And (2.) whether the Scriptures be not
sufficient thereunto, or is there any better way to be propounded for such a
trial? and (3.) if there be any better way, why are we directed by the Prophet
Esaiah to the Law, and to the testimony, and if any man speak otherwise, it is
because there is no light in him? as Esai. 8. 20. and (4.) why were the Bereans
commended for searching the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so?
Act. 17. 11. Lastly, if the Scriptures are not to be the rule for all
Doctrines, why is it that the Apostle does so severely, and that over and over
again, pronounce a curse against all such as should preach any other Gospel,
then what he had already preached? which is only to be found in the
Scriptures, as Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9.

Answ. The doctrines, which we maintain and propagate, are consonant to, and
may be defended by the forceable arguments of truth, and holy records thereof
contained in the Old and New Testament.

First, It is necessary to have a rule of trial, to try the spirits, whether
they be of God, as I. B. has already instanced, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. And he,
that in some measure has it not, is not yet settled, or grounded upon Gods
foundation; but is unstable, and may be tossed to and fro, by every wind of
doctrine, ready to be beguiled by every false motion, and device of the enemy
of the soul inwardly, and to be led afide with the cunning craftiness of evil
men outwardly; even like a ship without an anchor, left to the mercy of the
wind, and the seas, ready to suffer shipwreck every moment, therefore how
wholesome was the counsel of our Savior to his Disciples, to have salt in
themselves, Luke 9. 50. and he tells them that they are the salt of the earth,
Mat. 5. 15. he that wants this salt which seasons, gives to savor, and discern
between what is of God, and what is not of God, is, or may easily be deceived,
or misled by that spirit of error, through which men becomes vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction.

Secondly, The Scriptures are not the most sufficient rule of trial, (not in
any dispraise unto them be it spoken) because it is possible that men, by that
Spirit, which is not of God, may not only speak according to, but use the very
same words, as the Apostles and Ministers of Christ did, and do unto this day;
so that (whiles they speak not contrary words or doctrines) that Spirit at many
times cannot by the rule of Scriptures be detected: though it is true, many
Spirits there are, which may be proved not to be of God by the Scriptures, for
their speaking and acting contrary thereunto: but the forementioned Spirit,
(which is Satan transformed into an angel of light, or into a person, who has
sometimes prophesied ^n the name of Christ, and declared the joyful tidings of
the everlasting day cannot be discerned, but by the immortal light o^ Spirit,
from which the Scriptures were given forth, and though many have, and may be
zealous for the letter of the Scriptures; yet thereby they do not discern Satan
in this deceivable appearance, in which he steals the words of the true
prophets, and in declaration of words, and doctrine may seem to speak like an
angel, or messenger of God, even speaking the same words with a false spirit,
as has sometimes been spoken through the same person by the true Spirit: but
the inward knowledge of this is a great mystery, which is hid from all worldly,
and sinful men: but is opened by the Lord unto that spiritual man, which
judges all things, yea, Angels, who are made able to put a true difference
between the angels of God, that in truth serve him, and those, who in outward
appearance seem to be his angels, and yet serve him not: therefore spiritual
and heavenly men have a more sure rule to try spirits by, then the Scriptures,
which is the unction that they have received from the Holy One, (1 John 2. 20.)
that gives them to discern of spirits, and the matters that belong thereunto,
that differs in nature and quality. though not in profession, nor outward
appearance: and this is that infallible rule of trial, which may (and not with
any derogation from the authority which belongs to the holy Scriptures) truly
be said to be better then the Scriptures; insomuch as it is the same life and
Spirit of Christ, manifest in the hearts of Saints, from which the Scriptures
were given forth: and therefore must in all things have the pre-eminence. For
this holy unction in the hearts of true Christians, is that spiritual law in
Christ Jesus, through which they have the testimony, (as their father Abraham
had) of Christ's glorious day, in the sight of which their hearts are made
exceeding glad; and if any man want light to discern and try what spirits are
of God, and what spirits are not of God, let him look into the spiritual law of
Christ, which is a light that shines within, through which the heavenly
testimony is received; as it is written, If any man want light, let him look
upon the law, and the testimony, and see, if they speak not according to this
meaning, as the old translation renders it, Isa. 8.

Thirdly, though the Scriptures be not the most infallible sure rule to try all
doctrines by, (as is before showed) yet I say, cursed be that man that
preaches another Gospel, then that which the Scriptures testifies of, which is
the power of God unto salvation, as it is preached by the same divine authority
and power, as it was in the days of the Apostles: but that either the power,
or all the words of the Gospel (...) be found extant in the Scriptures, I do
deny; for as it is (...) the Evangelist, John 31. and the last. There are also
many other things. which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every
one, I suppose that even the world it self could not contain the books that
should be written, Amen. And doubtless many heavenly and saving doctrines were
preached by the Apostles, as they ran to and fro upon earth in that Gospel-day,
(in which knowledge was increased) which we have not extant at this day:
therefore all the wholesome doctrines and exhortations that they preached, are
not [only] to be sound in the Scriptures,

4. Query. Whether all men do or may attain perfection in this life? and
whether any that come short of this perfection may be saved; or (1.) Whether
those texts of Scripture that exhorts us to be perfect, may not imply certain
degrees of perfection, rather then perfection it self, as to the height of it?
And (2.) whether there be not a perfection of sincerity, as well as of degrees?
And (3.) whether believers may not be perfect by imputation of his
righteousness, who knowing no sin, yet was made sin for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him? 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Answ. All men do not attain perfection in this life, because many there are
that do reject the means ordained by our heavenly Father, through which
otherwise they might receive freedom from sin, and obtain perfect dominion
over it, to reign in victory with the Lamb for evermore.

All that die in the faith of Christ shall be saved, though they be even babes
in Christ, and far short of that attainment in life, wisdom, dominion, and
strength (as to the fullness of it) as it is manifest in the perfect man, who
is come even to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
13. In whom all rule, and authority, and power contrary to God, is put down,
and he crowned with perfect dominion over all his spiritual enemies, reigning
as a King in the triumphant victory over sin, death, and the grave, in the
image of the heavenly which he bears, in which the perfect life of the new man
is known, that walks with God in this world, and that shall live and reign with
him perpetually in the world to come; for spiritual men in this triumphant
state, have received the end for which the blessed ministry of the Gospel was
given, which was for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12.

But, as I have already said, the Saints which die in the faith shall be saved,
though they be far short of that excellent state of perfect men in Christ, who
are witnesses of his fullness and stature. For some of Gods people die, or put
off this earthly tabernacle soon after their conversion, while they are but
even young in the faith, and children, even babes in the truth of our Lord
Jesus Christ; yet through faith they are heirs of the promise, and by the birth
immortal they have a true title to the Kingdom of God, though such who are
weak in the faith may be so assaulted many times with doubts, false fears, and
temptations of the evil one, and in their departure even so strongly beset, as
the perfect man in Christ is not, because all his spiritual enemies are
conquered, and put in subjection: so that he is in rest, being perfectly
assured, when the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, he has
a house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

First, those Scriptures, which exhort to perfection, doubtless intends
perfection it self in the height of it, as well as in the degrees; though the
Saints (which attains it) attain it by degrees, as by growing from one degree
of grace and strength in Christ unto another, as the Psalmist says, They go
from strength to strength, until every one appears before God in Sion, Psalm.
84. 7. And the Apostle said, When he was a child, he spoke as a child,
understood as a child, and thought as a child, but when he became a man, he put
away childish things, 1 Cor. 13. 11.

Secondly, there is a perfection of sincerity, and he, that through the faith
and power of our Lord Jesus, attains this perfection of sincerity, cease from
all sin, and he that in this sincerity, or any degree of it believes and walks
in obedience to the Gospel, is justified through the righteousness of our Lord
Jesus, of which he is an heir through faith.

5. Query. Whether Jesus Christ did not institute, and appoint certain
ordinances under the Gospel for his Churches to observe and keep until his
coming? (1.) Did he not institute that ordinance of his Supper, and enjoin his
disciples to observe it in remembrance of him! Luke 22. 19, 20. And (2.) is it
not recorded of the Primitive Church how they continued this ordinance? Acts 2.
46. (3.) Why does the Apostle Paul commend the practice of it to the Church of
Corinth, and tells them whence he had it? for (says he) I have received of the
Lord that which I delivered unto you; and so repeats the manner how it was
first instituted, 1 Cor. 11. 23. 26. or, (4.) are these ordinances ce^sed, and
now out of date? if so, pray tell us when they first expired? has not himself
told us, that they should last until his coming? or is he already come, and we
knew it not? if he be, it must be only by his spiritual presence, and so he
was with the Primitive Church, and that in a greater measure then now adays,
yet did they continue in all the ordinances of the Gospel. Or (5.) may we not
rather understand his coming to be meant of his second coming, spoken of by the
Angel at his ascension, when he shall come in like manner, as he was seen to
go into heaven, Acts 1. 10, 11.

Answ. The matter in question is a thing about which there has been more
idolatry, and evil practiced by the false Christians, than any other thing
partaining to Christian Religion, since the dark and long night of Apostasy
that has overshadowed Christendom, which Apostasy was beginning to come in,
even in the Apostles days. Oh! when I consider the blood of Christians which
has been shed about this very thing, it does afflict my very heart, and cause
my soul to cry alas, alas, that ever Christians should be so far deluded, and
misled, as to shed the blood one of another about the outward practice of
Christianity, which are but (in comparison to the more weighty matters) as the
very outward Courts or Suburbs of Christian Religion.

Christ did institute the breaking of Bread,, as it is written, when our
Savior with his disciples was eating the Passover a Feast of the Jews,
pertaining to the ministration of the Law, in which was many shadows of good
things to come. And as they were eating this Passover according to the Law, he
said unto his Disciples, With desire have I desired to eat this Passover with
you, before I suffer, for I say unto you, I will no more eat thereof, till it
be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22. 15, 16. and as they were eating,
he took bread, and gave thanks, and break it, and gave it to them, saying, This
is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me: likewise he
took the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood
which is shed for you, Mark 14. 20. Luke 22. 19, 20. and by this sign, his
death, who is our Passover was signified, or showed, and not only by the
Bread, and the Cup, but by the Lamb without blemish, of which a bone was not to
be broken, Exodus 12. 46. in which practice, they continued unto his coming,
even so to remember him when they break the Bread, and drank the Cup, as that
thereby they showed forth his death till he came, not eating and drinking
damnation unto themselves, as those who did, and does break the Bread, and
drink the Cup unworthily, who eats to the lust, and drinks to the lust, even
feeding themselves without fear, whose table is not the table of the Lord, but
the table of Devils, at which they are so far from discerning the Lords body,
and fullness, (which fills all in all) that they neither break that Bread in
remembrance of him, nor to him, but even to the lust, by which he was crucified
and slain; but the Disciples (who practiced this outward sign by which his
death was shown) were witnesses of his resurrection, and coming again, not
only unto (but spiritually to dwell in) them according to his promise, where
he says, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you, John 14. 18.
in which he eat with them, and they with him, as he said, I will not henceforth
drink of the fruit of the Vine, until that day, I shall drink it new with you
in my fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26. 29. and I say unro you, I will no more eat
thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God; but the inward
enjoyment of the substance of this outward sign (by which was signified the
death or sacrifice of Christ, the immaculate Lamb of God, who is our spiritual
Passover that is sacrificed for us) is a mystery (which by the vulturous eye
was never seen) as it is fulfilled to the true Disciples in Christ spiritual
Kingdom, in which our Savior sups with them, and they with him, and is no
other then that spiritual Feast, which is kept amongst the children of God, for
whom Christ their Passover is sacrificed, and by his power they purge out the
old leaven, and keep this spiritual Feast not with the old leaven, neither with
the leaven of malice, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 2
Cor. 5. 7. 8. for the bread of God which comes down from Heaven, is that by
which they keep this spiritual feast, and the flesh and blood of Christ is this
bread which the holy people break, and spiritually feed upon, and the incomes
of his love is that spiritual wine, by which he does wonderfully refresh their
souls, through which they come to grow into the endless life, and in which
they more abundantly partake of the everlasting consolation that is in Christ
Jesus, in which they spiritually eat and drink with him, and he with them (who
are his lillies) in his heavenly Kingdom. And this is a small hint of that
spiritual Passover or feast which was and is kept by the Saints in this
glorious Gospel-day, through which the night is expelling, and the shadows
vanishing away. Glory, glory be unto the Lord our God for ever.

But to return, this practice of breaking of bread together, was continued by
the Apostles in the Churches, as I. B. has already instanced, Acts 2. 46. And
they brake bread from house to house, and ate their meat with singleness of
heart, as is the practice of true Christians at this day, and in which they
ought to continue to the end, that whether they eat, they may eat unto the
Lord, or whether they drink, they may do it unto him, not making an idol of the
creature, or any Christian practice be it never so good in it self; but may
both eye and discern the Lord in all their practices and duties, which was that
good end for which the Apostle delivered unto the Church of Corinth, the thing
in question practiced by Christ and his Apostles at the Passover, which many
did soon abuse if not idolize even in his time, for which he often reproved
them, 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 20. where he says, When ye come together, this
is not to eat the Lords Supper, for in eating every one takes before other his
own supper, and one is hungry, and another drunken; and tells them verse. 25,
26. As often as they break the bread, and drink the cup, they should do it in
remembrance, saying, they that eat, and drink unworthily, eat and drink
damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lords body, verse. 29. Oh that all
drunkards, and gluttoners, ignorant persons who make an idol of the creature,
in breaking the bread, and drinking the cup unworthily, Oh that they would
seriously consider, and lay these things to heart, that they may not henceforth
any more break the bread, and drink the cup unworthily, in the sinful lust of
the flesh, the doing of which brings them to be guilty of the body, and blood
of the Lord, in that they eat to (and feed the) same lusts of the world, as was
in them which slew him; and none can be partakers of the table of the Lord,
while they thus feed at the table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21. But it may be the
enemy will tell them, it is no such thing, for they neither are nor drank that
day, before they break that bread and drink that cup, and call to natural
memory with trembling and fear, before they practice the thing before
mentioned, that Christ's body was broken for them, and his blood shed for them,
the which, I say, all this thou may do, and yet be an idolatrous and unworthy
eater in an unholy fear, adoring the outward bread, and the cup beyond what is
meet, even as there are too many that look upon it to be more then a sign, and
worship it as the thing signified: and so in ignorance worship the bread, and
the cup as a God at sometime, and at other times using it without that holy
fear, and remembrance in which Christ's body is discerned, and the heavenly
virtues, and fullness thereof enjoyed, which fills all things, and is that
glorious and everlasting substance which lives and remains when all created
excellencies come to an end, and shadows are past away, and is that eternal
fountain which fills with spiritual grace and satisfaction all that in
sincerity love him for ever and for evermore.

6. Query. Whether Christians are not bound to the performance of such
religious duties as were practiced by the people of God under the law, and not
abrogated by the Gospel? (1.) Whether Christians ought not to pray morning and
evening, as David very frequently did, evening and morning, and at noon, will I
pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice, Psa. 55. 17. Or (2.) Is it not
lawful for Christians to appoint and set apart a convenient time and season
for the performance of religious exercises, as did Daniel, who not withstanding
the Kings command, thought himself obliged not to omit his duty once, but
prayed three times a day, Dan. 6. 10, 13. Or (3.) Are we only to pray when our
own spirits move us, and not at the motion of Gods Spirit which bids us to pray
continually, or te be always in a frame, and frequent in the duty of prayer, 1
These. 5. 17. Or (4.) Whether it be not a duty incumbent upon all Christians to
exercise family duties, as the people of God in former times did? whether
parents ought not to instruct their children, and masters their servants, for
which God so much commended Abraham, because he would command his children and
his household after him, Genesis 18. 17, 18, 19. (5.) Whether it be the duty of all
Christians frequently to read over and confer about the holy Scriptures both in
their families, and with others, as the Lord commanded the children of Israel,
thou shall teath them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Nay (6.) Whether is it not necessary for all Christians
to beg Gods blessing with, and return him thanks for every mercy they receive?
according to the practice of our blessee Savior, who when he fed so many
thousands, would first look up to heaven for a blessing upon what they enjoyed
on earth, Mat. 6. 41. And after his Resurrection, he practiced the same thing
amongst his disciples, Luke 24. 30. Whose blessed example the Apostle followed
taking bread, and giving thanks in the presence of them all, Acts 27. 35.
further recommending it to the practice of others, that in every thing they
would give thanks as the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning them, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 18.

Answ. Christians are bound to the practice of many religious duties which was
practiced by the people of God under the Law; for though the ceremonies, types,
and shadws of the Law, or first Covenant are abolished by the Gospel, yet the
weighty matters are not abolished, or made void through faith in Christ Jesus,
as it is written, Do we through faith make void the Law, God forbid, Romans 3.
31. Through faith we establish the Law: for it is by virtue of faith in the
Gospel, that Christians are fully enabled to practice those religious duties,
which were commanded under the Law, viz. to love God with all their heart, and
with all their mind; for our Savior calls this the first, and great
Commandment, saying, the second is like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self, and on these two commandments hang the whole Law, and the
Prophets, Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. these religious duties with many other
righteous practices of the people of God under the Law, are indeed binding to
Christians under the Gospel.

First Christians ought to live and continue in sincere desires after God at
all times, and to pray unto him not only at morning, evening, and at noon day,
but at all seasons and hours, wherein they shall find the immortal birth of
life inclining their hearts to seek after him, and his spirit to help their
infirmities, without the help of which, Christians cannot pray, ask, or seek
aright, as it is written, Romans 8. 26. 27. We know not what we should pray for
as we ought; but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings
which cannot be uttered, and the motions of this immortal life, and spirit of
our heavenly Father, is not limited to days, set times, places or hours of
days, but when, and what time it inclines and moves Christians are to follow,
and as they seek through, and by its assistance, they shall find, and as they
ask in the life, and nature thereof, they shall receive theirs hearts desire,
and obtain the thing which they pray for.

Secondly, It is lawful for Gods people to set apart a time for religious
exercise, as did Daniel, and the rest of the servants of the Lord, who,
notwithstanding the great afflictions, and persecutions which attended them for
righteousness sake, and for their practice in the worship of God, yet did they
continue not only to profess him openly, but to worship him after their
accustomed manner, as appears by the Scriptures which I. B. has instanced,
Dan. 6. 10, 13. with several other Scriptures which might be mentioned, whose
example herein I desire the Lord may instruct all Christians in sincerity to
follow, and continue in the practice of the doctrines and exhortations of the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who exhorted the Saints not to forsake the
assembling themselves together, as the manner of some was, Heb. 10. 25. but as
the day approaches, exhort one another, in which practice the true Christians
ever did walk and continue, notwithstanding the cruel persecution and grievous
afflictions that were inflicted upon them by ungodly men of this world for so
doing, viz. their continuing in the profession of Christianity, and practice of
meeting together, to wait upon, and worship the Lord in Spirit and truth, for
which holy practice, so great were the sufferings and afflictions by them
endured, (as may be read at large in Ecclesiastical Histories) that Fox says
in the book of Martyrs, what fires, what tortures, without respect either to
age or sex they were enforced to feel; then did the earth without doubt bewail
her children, and the round world which contains all things (being imbrued
with their blood) made a dolefullamentation for them, and the day it self
provoked to mourn, was amazed for them, when the very barbarous Nations rejoice
for their sakes, which received and harbored them when they were afraid, and
fled from us, keeping them as it were in a most loving, and amiable captivity,
to which I may say, Alas, alas that ever any that profess the same Christ, as
these persecuted Christians suffered for, should now Acts and Monuments, lib.
1. fol. 92.
become persecutors, and not only of such as in words deny him, but even of
such as confess and believe in him, to be the only Savior of the world.
Surely the true Christian soul that seriously considers, will be greatly
afflicted, and the heart that sees it cannot but mourn in the beholding of the
woeful apostasy, darkness, and delusions in which many thousand Christians are
fallen, who profess Christ in words, and yet walk so far contrary to the light
of Christ, and are so far out of his nature, which is to show kindness, mercy,
and love to all men, not only to them that believe, but to them that believe
not, even with long patience to instruct them, that they may believe, and
repent; but the heart that is possessed with the true knowledge of the woeful
backsliding from the ancient doctrine and truth of the Gospel (in which those
persecuted Christians walked both in, and after the Apostles days) beholding
this dismal night that is come upon multitudes of Christians, cannot but even
take up a lamentation, and cry, Alas, alas, that ever any who profess Christ
should be so far void of his bowels, and mercies, and should have so far lost
all tenderness of conscience, that they should even now persecute their
brethren, who profess and believe in the same God and Christ, as they in words
profess and believe, having no other reason for their so doing, but only
because they differ from them in some ceremonial and outward practices of
Christianity. Alas, alas, that ever the Devil, the enemy of mankind should so
far delude and deceive men, who agree in the outward profession of one God and
Christ, which is the main and weighty matter in the outward profession of
Christian Religion. Oh that ever they should be so far darkened, and misled to
afflict and persecute about the smaller matters or outward practices of
Religion, whenas it ought to be a duty incumbent upon all who profess the name
of Christ, to persuade one another in the power of the Gospel: and if the true
Christian cannot overcome the error of the mind in the false Christian, after
this manner he ought notwithstanding to walk in love toward him, and leave him
to the Lord who is that great Potter that has power over all men to change
from error to truth, and out of death into life, when, and what time soever he
pleases.

Thirdly, Christians are to mind in that serious and weighty duty of Prayer,
the motions and leadings of Gods Spirit, through which their infirmities are
helped, and they not praying in their own name or will, but in the name of
Christ, their prayers become effectual, and God answers them in the things they
pray for, as it is written, John 14. 13, 14.

Fourthly, It is a duty incumbent upon all true Christians to use family
duties, viz. to pray unto him as they are led thereunto by the heavenly birth
and Spirit which of him they have received. And parents ought to instruct their
Children by word, and godly example, as they may find the Spirit of Christ lead
them so to do, by the virtue and authority of which their exhortations will
become effectual to their children and servants, not only to turn them from
error unto truth, but to establish and build them up in the truth, that they
may serve the Lord in their day; and herein all Christian parents and masters
of families ought to follow the example of Abraham, in commanding their
households after them to walk in the holy commands of God, and to serve him in
their generation, etc.

Fishly, the Scriptures were written for our learning; therefore it is
necessary for Christians to read them, and to confer about the heavenly things
signified of in them all their life long, as they are inclined thereunto by the
life and Spirit that gave them forth; for though eternal life cannot be found
in the Scriptures, yet they testify of Christ, in whom it is to be found; and
the holy sayings contained therein (which were given by the divine inspiration
of God) are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 16. 17. Therefore all true Christians
prizeth the Scriptures, for unto such they are comfortable, and bear true
testimony of that living way and truth, in and by which we have eternal
redemption.

Sixthly, it is necessary for Gods people to pray unto him, and to beg his
blessing with and upon those creaturely benefits which they receive from the
hand of their heavenly Father, and to return him thanks for his unspeakable
mercies toward them, which was the moving cause of that heavenly visitation by
which the Lord God has visited his people with the day spring from on high,
through which many that have sat in darkness, are now both come to see and
walk in the light of life: blessed be the Lord our God for evermore.

7. Query. Whether it be not lawful for Christians to give a civil respect to
the several degrees and relations in which persons may stand? as (1.) Whether
the younger ought not to reverence the elder? as says the Scripture, Thou
shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, Lev.
19. 32. and (2.) Whether a Christian may not evidence his respect by some
outward action or gesture of his body, according to the custom of the Country
he lives in? as Abraham bowed to the sons of Heth, Genesis 23. 12. So did Nathan
a Prophet to King David, 1. King, 1. 23. and (3.) Is it not lawful for
Christians to express their respects by giving to every man the titles
belonging to him, in reference to the several dignities or places they may be
advanced to? as Luke does Theophilus, calling him most excellent, Luke 1. 3. So
Paul to Felix, calling him most noble Felix, Acts 26. 25. and John to the elect
Lady, 2 John 1.

Answ. It is lawful for people to give civil respect to the several relations
and degrees in which persons may stand. First, Christians ought to respect with
subjection and obedience, either actively, by doing the commands of their
magistrates; or passively, by suffering for not doing, in case any thing should
be imposed contrary to Gods law, and a good conscience, by the authority,
either set up, or permitted by the Lord to be set up over them, and in so doing
they give the respect that is due to men, thus related unto them as Superiors,
whose honor and respect consists not in putting off the hat, and bowing the
knee and body, but in obeying their just commands for the respect by adoring or
bowing to men's persons, who wear the gay clothing, is forbidden, and he that
gives it transgresses the law of God, James 2. 9.

Secondly, the younger ought to reverence the elder by an inward love and
respect. The true reverence from children to their parents has its being in
the heart, and is evidenced by outward obedience to their just and lawful
commands, and bodily actions, of not despising them when their strength
fails, but in lowliness and humility to help them in their old age, not
following the example of the Pharisees, whom our Savior reproved for making
the commands of God void by their traditions, which command was to honor
father and mother, for they said, whosoever should say to his father or mother,
it is a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honors not his
father or mother, he shall go free, and thus they broke the command by their
traditions, Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6, 7. Neither following the example of Ham, but the
good example of Shem and Iaphet, who covered their fathers nakedness, Genesis 9.
22, 23. and in so doing the love and respect of children is demonstrated
toward their parents, and not by putting off the hat, and bowing the knee
according to the custom of the country and people where they dwell; for both
vain and idolatrous may the custom of the people be herein, as in the days of
old, Ier. 10. 32. Though Abraham did bow to the sons of Heth, and Nathan to
King David in that ministration, in which the types and shadows were in force,
and the seed not come to full dominion, but he outwardly as a stranger in the
land, which God had promised to give to his seed after him for an inheritance,
I say Abraham's and Nathan's example herein is no more binding to Christians
under the Gospel ministration, then is their example of swearing, outward
circumcision, with diverse other things that they were commanded or permitted of
God to do in that ministration, etc.

Thirdly, it is lawful for Christians to give unto every man those titles
which of right belong unto him, according to the place or office to which he
may be advanced, as to call a King, King; and a noble man, noble man; and a
Judge, Judge; and a man that excells in reason and moderation may be called
excellent, etc. In this wise a Christian may express his love, and respect to
persons advanced to the aforementioned dignities, and not by worshipping and
adoring their persons: for that is a transgression of the law of God, James 2.
9.

8. Query. Whether Christians may not make use of, and take delight in those
creatures God affords us, either for food or clothing? And (1.) whether at
sometimes it be not lawful to feast and enjoy the creatures, afforded for our
use in a lawful mirth? provided it be done in its proper season and with
moderation, Eccl. 3. 12, 13. And (2.) whether it be lawful for Christians to
wear what apparel they shall think best in their own Christian prudence, to be
apparelled in, if without excess: did not God command the children of Israel
that they should borrow jewels of silver, and jewels of gold of ths Egyptians,
Ex. 11. 2. And Abraham 's servant gave unto Rebecca bracelets for her hands
which she also wore, Genesis 24. 22, 30.

Answ. Christians may make use of the creatures, for through faith, and the
birth immortal they only of all people upon earth have right to the creatures,
as it is written, Romans 4. 13. and 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. where the Apostle says,
All things are theirs, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, etc. Yet
in the creatures they must not so delight, as to love and worship them more
then their Creator, who is God blessed for ever. Therefore if any who
professes himself a Christian so love and delight in the creatures, as that
his love and delight in the Lord is made less thereby, such a one may profess
himself a Christian in words, but in works he denies Christ. Therefore all
Christian men had need to be watchful against the temptations of that lustful
spirit of the world, which would lead them to abuse the creatures.

First, its lawful to enjoy the creatures afforded for us in the joy and mirth
which comes of, or is allowed by the Holy Ghost, but not in the vain mirth and
foolish pleasures of sinful worldly men, who have their end in lamentation and
woe; for it is better (as the wise man says) to go to the house of mourning,
then to the house of such mirth and feasting, for that is the end of all men,
the living will lay it to heart, Eccles. 7. 2, 3. But if a man does eat, and
drink, and enjoy the good of his labor in the covenant of God that is to the
praise of God, and to his spiritual and creaturely comfort, in this fading
world, in which God fills his heart with content and satisfaction, whether he
has much or little of the perishing things of this life.

Secondly, its lawful for a true Christian, who is guided by the Spirit of
Christ, to wear what apparel he by the wisdom and instruction of the Spirit
shall see both to be lawful and expedient for him to wear, that he in that, as
in all other things, may give a good example, not only to them that are weak,
but that also he may be a pattern of righteousness unto those that are
without, and may shine as a light in the world, that they seeing his good works
and example, may be made to glorify his Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16.
Therefore the Apostle exhorted the Christian women to adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness, and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array, but which becomes women professing
godliness with good works, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.

9. Query. Whether when Christians are met together for the worship and service
of God, they may then be silent, and depart without any thing done for the
edification of one another? or (1.) Whether they ought not rather to stir up,
and exhort one another to continue in the faith and practice of the Gospel? as
the Apostles of old did, who when they met together spent the time in praying
with and exhorting one another, Acts 1. 13, 14. Acts 12. 12. (2.) Whether to
speak in a strange tongue, or to be wholly silent when the people of God are
met together, be not one and the same thing? the former of which the Apostle
forbids, as no way tending to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 4. to the 20.

Answ. When Christians are met together to worship God in Spirit, they may be
silent if nothing be given them from the Lord to say, for God who is a Spirit
may be as truly worshipped in Spirit, and adored in the hearts of his people
when there is no words, as when there is words of God given them to speak to
the edification one of another. But if any should meet together with a
resolution to be silent, and not to wait for, but to quench the motions of the
Spirit, if any thing should be given, this would be worse then to speak in an
unknown tongue.

First, for if any thing be freely given, Christians ought freely to speak what
from God they have received to the edification one of another, as the Saints of
old did when they were met together, 1 Cor. 14. 26: Whether by prophecy,
doctrine, or prayer.

Secondly, though people may sometimes meet in silence, in the name and truth
of Jesus; yet it is not one and the same thing, with speaking in an unknown
tongue, for the unknown tongue may be so far from edifying in the truth, that
people may rather be led from the truth thereby. But when Christians are met
together in Christ's name, though they be silent for a time, yet God has, and
will fulfill his promise by the manifestation of his presence amongst them, by
whose spirit they receive inward teaching both to comfort, build up, and
instruct them, so that many have gone away satisfied with the spiritual sense
of the Lords heavenly presence, which has been seen and enjoyed in silence
amonst them, by the incomes of whose love his children are refreshed in
preaching, and without outward preaching, glory unto his name for ever: whose
spirit cannot be limited that he shall not appear to the joy and comfort of his
people, either by, or without outward preaching; for it has been the manner
and practice of the Prophets, and people of God to sit together in silence,
when nothing was given them of the Lord to say, though it was day after day as
says the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3. 15, 16. then I came to them of the captivity at
Telabib that dwelt by the river Chebar, and sat where they sat, and remained
there astonished among them seven days, and it came to pass at the end of
seven days, the word of the Lord came unto me saying: so it seems they sat
together in silence, till the word of the Lord came to the Prophet, although he
was a Prophet, and the hand of the Lord upon him; yet must he not speak till it
was given him from the Lord what he should say: and all preachers, and people,
who are not in, but against this example in meetings together, are such as come
under the woe due to them which use their tongues, and say he says, howbeit the
Lord has not spoken to them, Jer. 23. 31. Therefore how much better were it
for them to wait upon, and worship God in silence, when nothing is given them,
or revealed unto any of them from the Lord to speak, then to use their tongues,
when he has not spoken to them: I shall leave to the sober minded to judge.

10. Query. Whether Christians that do not palpably contradict the practice of
Godliness, may not live with and have charity toward one another, though
different in judgments? And, (1.) whether this has not rendered the popish
religion more odious, because they have so little charity for any that differ
from them who style all to be heretics that are not of their way? Or, (2.)
whether any of the Apostles, or our Savior himself, did ever condemn others
upon this account only, but on the contrary, when the Apostles told our Savior
they had seen one casting out Devils in his name, yet followed not him, Christ
bids them not forbid him, alleging that he which is not against us is with us,
Luke 9. 49, 50. And so the Apostle would have every man persuaded in his own
mind, Romans 14. 5. and I know no reason why ye should condemn any man for being
in the dark because he sees not by your light?

Answ. Christians ought to have charity one toward another, and they who are
true Christians have (not only in name but in nature) Charity, and love which
reaches even to those who differ from them in judgment.

First by love they labor to instruct those Christians who are in error, that
if possible they might reclaim them from error, by the force of the love and
word of God; but the spiritual striving and war (on the true Christian's part)
is not against flesh and blood, but against that spirit of darkness which
misguides the mind. If the true Christian does not hereby gain the false
Christian to the way of life; yet he should walk in all love, and gentleness
toward him, not endeavoring by force, and violence to destroy his body for
the error of his mind, or to cut off his life from the earth, as the Papists
and false Christians ever have done against those true Christians, whose minds
and consciences they could never overcome, for which cruel persecution they
have no example amongst the Ministers of Christ, whose practice therein has
stained their Church with the guilt of blood, which has and will cause a curse
and infamy to come upon them, which never shall be forgotten.

Secondly, All men in the world are in the dark that in some measure sees not
by the light of the Lamb in which we and all Nations of them that are saved
must walk, Rev. 21. 24. But it is not the practice of Christians who are grown
in grace to condemn and judge others, because they are not fully come up to
their rule and degree of righteousness in every particular, though some who
are young in the truth (and yet disciples) may through weakness (if not
watchful and diligent to hearken unto their Lord and Master) even err in those
things as the disciples of old were apt to do, as I. B. has already instanced,
Luke 9. 49, 50. who forbid the man to cast out devils in the name of Christ,
because he followed them not, and would have had fire to come down from heaven
upon those Samaritans that did not presently receive him, Luke 9. 54.

11. Query. Whether it be not the duty of Christians to observe and set apart
one day in seven for the more solemn service of God? and (1.) Whether God
himself did not appoint, and the people of God in all ages keep such a day,
Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 20. 8. (2.) Whether the Sabbath was ever abrogated by Jesus
Christ, or only changed, and another kept in the room of the first; and (3.)
Whether the first day of the week be not the true Christian Sabbath? We read
that it was the custom of the Apostles chiefly to meet on this day, John 20.
19. Acts 20. 7. and that they made collections for the poor on this day, 1 Cor.
16. 2. and John was in the Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10.

Answ. Christians did set apart times to wait upon and worship the Lord in
Spirit and truth, and they did meet together to perform this solemn service and
duty to God upon the first day of the week, as the Scriptures testify which I.
B. has instanced, and that on that day they made collections for charitable
uses.

First, But that they were commanded in the same manner to observe that day, as
the Jews were to observe the seventh day, that I must deny; and I also do deny
that that day was set apart and brought in the room of the seventh day to
answer that end for which the seventh day Sabbath was given, which was a sign
of that happy restoration which should and is come to mankind by the glorious
Gospel of Christ, in whose day man's soul is redeemed from the bondage of
corruption, and recovered from under the fore travail and pain of the curse,
into the liberty of Gods children, where all weights and burdens are cast off,
and the soul comes to be perfectly freed from its long captivity and sore
bondage, through which it returns into that spiritual rest which the outward
day was but a shadow of, and all who are come into this endless Sabbath, or
holy day of God, their souls dwell at ease, and they are in perfect rest, so as
to bear no burden, neither to travail under the load of sin and the curse any
more; and this is a small hint of that felicity and happy state which God in
mercy figured out unto man, while he was yet under the burden by the outward
Sabbath day, or sign of rest, as it is written, I gave them my Sabbath for a
sign, between me and them, Ezekiel. 20. 12. Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in
meats, or in drinks in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbath day, which are shadows of things to come, but the body is of Christ.
Therefore I say the day of Christ being dawned, and he the substance being
come, the outward figure must needs be abrogated, and the shadow past away.

12. Query. Whether it be not lawful for Christians to swear, if called
thereunto for the attestation of some truth? and (1.) Whether Abraham did sin
in making his servant to swear unto him. Genesis 24. 3. Or (2.) Whether swearing
be not a ready way to put an end to all controversies, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 6. 16.

Answ. This is a point about which much has been very fully and clearly
written by several other hands, therefore I need not say much to it, only this
I say, it is not lawful for a Christian under the Gospel ministration to swear.

First, though Abraham did not sin in causing his servant to swear, and though
those holy men did not sin, who (under the first covenant) swore the Lord lived
in truth, righteous, and judgment (swearing and many other things being then
lawful for them to practice) yet, such things are not lawful, neither useful
for the Saints to practice under the Gospel, this particular practice of
swearing was not in the old Covenant forbidden. Therefore our Savior says,
Mat. 5. it has been said of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but
perform thine oaths unto the Lord. But he gives his Disciples a new command,
quite contrary to what was practiced herein by the people of God in the old
time, in that he says unto them, swear not at all, neither by Heaven for it is
Gods Throne, nor by the Earth for it is his Footstool, neither by Jerusalem for
it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by thine Head,
because thou can not make one hair white, or black, Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36. By
this absolute command he not only forbids vain swearing, which was fully
forbidden in the law of God before, but he positively excludes all manner of
swearing in the days of the Gospel, and likewise the Apostle says, James 5.
12. Above all things my brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth neither by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay,
least you fall into condemnation: which two testimonies are sufficient to
confirm the truth unto all true Christian men, that it is in no wise lawful
for them to swear in any case. Many more testimonies might be instanced out of
the Ecclesiastical histories of the ancient Christians; some of whom, holding
it in no wise lawful for Christian men to swear, suffered death for the
profession of Christ. Acts and Monuments Vol. 2. fol. 55.
Policarpus who, as it is said, was John's Disciple, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 4. page
98.
Basilides a Christian Martyr, and the Waldenses, whose names are so famous
among the reformed Churches, and are said immediately to succeed the Apostles,
being the most ancient, and true Protestants, professed it to be no way lawful
for a Christian man to swear; and the Acts and Monnuments. Vol. 1. fol. 527.
Plowman in his prayer, and Chrysostom who was Bishop of Constantinople
blames them greatly that brought forth a book to swear upon, charging Clarks
that in no wise they constrain any body to swear, whether they think a man
swear true or false, saying, Acts and Monuments. Vol. 2 70.
it is a sin to swear well. And these forementioned testimonies, with many
others which might be instanced out of Ecclesiastical histories, were given
against swearing, and though the Apostle says, Heb. 6. 16. That an oath for
confirmation amongst men is to them an end of strife; yet this does in no wise
justify, or prove swearing lawful amongst Christians; for he speaks that by
way of allusion, as being the strongest bond in the old time (in which the
promise was made) whereby men could bind themselves, to set forth unto
believers the certainty of Gods promise, being confirmed by such a strong bond
as an oath was among men in the old time, when the promise was made to Abraham,
and his seed after him; and as for the Apostles saying, an oath among men is to
them an end of strife, I say, that did rather allude, or relate to what was at
any time done for the ending of strife amongst those Hebrews, who had not
received the Gospel, then that any such thing was done or practiced, amongst
those believers to whom he writ his Epistle. For if he had instanced any such
practice amongst them he should not have said an oath amongst men, but an oath
amongst you, etc. Which he did not.

13. Query. Whether it be not the great duty and concernment of every Christian
to plead for and vindicate all such Gospel truths as he has formerly received,
and yet believes, and (1.) whether a Christian may not earnestly contend for
the truth once delivered? Jude 3. (2.) whether it be not the duty of all
Christians with readinss to render an account of his faith to him that asks
him? 1 Pet. 3. 15. And (3.) whether it be not your concernment to return some
satisfactory answer to the Author of these Queries.

Answ. It is a duty of concernment to every child of God both to plead for, and
vindicate the truth, (the knowledge of which he has received of our Lord Jesus
Christ) by the utmost force of those spiritual weapons, or arguments wherewith
he is furnished thereunto, by the word, and counsel of the Lord, against all
those that may gain say it, in doctrine, practice, or conversation, following
the example of the Apostles, and messengers of the great King. The weapons of
whose warfar were not carnal, neither was their war against the flesh and blood
of men in error: but the weapons wherewith they warred were spiritual, and
mighty through God to the destroying of that spirit of wickedness, which leads
into error, and also to the recovering many out of error, who have been
captivated in error. And they that are furnished with the spiritual wisdom,
word, and power of the Lord God, by which many are turned to righteousness,
they shall shine as the brightness of heaven, and as the stars for ever and
ever.

Lastly, it is the duty of the children of God, who in measure experience
redemption, and sanctification by Christ Jesus, to give a reason (according to
their ability with meekness and fear) of that precious hope, and faith, through
which they have, or may overcome in the day of trial, and hour of temptation,
which comes upon all the world to try them, that dwell upon the Earth; and
that excellent hope and faith (in which the Saints are preserved in this day,
and hour of trial, and through which they shall be purified, and made more
white, that their innocence may shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, and which keeps from fainting to the end) is of more worth then gold
that perishes, and is not to be valued with all created excellencies, or
compared with any glory of this fading world, therefore I may say of the faith
and hope, of which Christians ought to give a reason, as Job did of wisdom,
man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living.

Having in the love and fear of the Lord returned an answer to I. B. his
Queries, and therein given some reason and account of our faith and judgment
in the things queried, its desired that I. B. may answer these following
Queries, in the same love, that we may know a reason of his faith and judgment
concerning the things queried.

Query 1. WHether Christ by that one act of his death and suffering has so
done away or blotted out the sins of the children of men, that the divine
justice of his father is so answered, or satisfied thereby, that he looks upon
men to be in his Son, notwithstanding they are yet sinners, and accepts them,
as perfectly righteous in his sight, only in and through what Jesus has done
for them by his death upon the Cross?

Query 2. Whether God who is the righteous Judge of all the world, does so
impute his righteousness as to justify any man upon the earth thereby, in the
self same capacity as his righteous law in Christ condemns him?

Query 3. Whether any man upon earth is absolutely acqvitted and freed from
sin, by virtue of what Christ has done and suffered without, whiles as yet the
witness of Gods Spirit in his own heart and conscience condemns him?

Query 4. Whether there is any such thing, as that any man's sins are done away
past, present, and to come, whiles as yet he does not cease to commit sin?

Query 5. And if the eternal God does impute the righteousness of his Son, so
as to justify any, while they do not yet, cease to commit sin, why does he not
so unto all, seeing all his ways are equal, and there is no respect of persons
with him?

Query 6. What, and where is that law by which comes the knowledge of sin,
without which the Apostle said he was alive, but when it came sin revived, and
he died?

Query 7. Was it only the letter of the ten Commandments without him, which he
had and was zealous for, while he was yet alive in sin, or the light and Spirit
of Gods law inwardly manifested in his heart?

Query 8. And if so, whether it was not the very same law in nature and quality
as made him free from the law of sin and death?

Query 9. And what, and where is that law which the Apostle says has dominion
over a man, so long as he lives, through which he is bound as a woman by the
law of her husband, is it the law of God or the law of sin?

Qeery 10. If it be the law of sin, how and by what means may those persons
which are bound by it, come to know the heavenly virtue of the body of Christ,
through which they may die to it, and know the chain broken?

Query 11. Whether the example of all that the Apostles and Saints practiced in
the primitive times be absolute binding at this day to Christians?

Query 12. Whether many outward things, which rather pertained to the typical
or shadowy part of the Law that is vanished away, then to the glorious Gospel,
was not practiced by Christian believers under the ministration of the Gospel
in the Apostles days?

Query 13. And if so, what was the absolute reason thereof, was it because the
Apostles were commanded thereunto by God, or because of the weakness of the
people that he suffered his ministers to bear with them for a time, that could
not (while young in the truth, and their eyes much outward) easily be brought
off of many outward things pertaining to the Law?

Query 14. What was the Apostles end or Gods end by them in not only permitting
or suffering those persons that received their Gospel testimony, to practice
many ordinances and shadows pertaining to the law, but that also they did
sometime practice them themselves? was it because the Lord had a purpose to
establish them as his ordinances to be practiced by all ages, or were they
allowed to practice them in the peoples weakness for a time, that thereby they
might gain the more out of them into that everlast lasting truth which is the
substance of types and shadows where people come to see beyond all outward
things?

Query 15. And if they that were partakers of the everlasting substance did
make use and continue in the practice of any outward things which were but
outwardly shadows of what they inwardly enjoyed, was it because they had need
so to do, or because of the weakness of others?

Query 16. Whether John's Baptism with water was not of, and belonging to the
ministration of the Law, under which the carnal washings and outward ordinances
were enforce?

Query 17. And if so, why was water Baptism practiced by the Apostles under the
Gospel, was it done by absolute command from God, as necessary unto salvation,
or to answer the weakness of those believing Christians, who after they
believed, desired it, and being weak could not well he satisfied without it?

Query 18. And if it was done by absolute command from God, as necessary to
salvation, how is it that the Apostle Paul (who was made instrumental to
convert so many thousands) had not a command to baptize with water, as well as
to preach the Gospel?

Query 19. And if to answer the desire of Christians in weakness was not the
reason of the Apostles baptizing with water, but that they had an absolute
commission to do it from God; then I desire, that (in answer to this Query) the
Scripture or Scriptures (if there be any) may be showed, in which water is
expressed to be that means with whith they were to baptize Christians into the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

I. S.

THE END.

