SOME REMARKS Upon a late Pamphlet, Entitled, AN ANSWER TO THE Scots
Presbyterian Eloquence. WHEREIN The Innocence of the Episcopal Clergy is
Vindicated, and the Constitution and Government of out Church of Scotland
Defended, against the Lies and Calumnies of the Presbyterian Pamphleters.

Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 29. Thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their High Places. Psalm. V. 9. For there is no Faithfulness in their
Mouth, their Inward Part is very Wickedness. IMPRIMATUR,

Dec. 20. 1693.

Guil. Lancaster.

LONDON,

Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball overagainst the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1694.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Glasgow
May it please Your Grace,
HOW soon I entertained any thoughts Publishing a Discourse of this Nature in
Vindication of our Church and Cle gy, I was easily determined to send abroad
under Your Lordships Protection. You ha^ been such an Eminent Sufferer and
Confessor those woeful Calamities of our Church and Nation, have been Persecuted
to such a height, both in Person and Reputation; merely for the Defense of our
common Principles, that you may justly challenge the Patronage of such a
Treatise as your due.

Your Merit having justly Advanced you to such a Dignity in the Church, as to
be a Father of the Clergy; I therefore presume you will not decline to Espouse
any thing that is Writ in a just Defense of their Innocence. The most of those
Persons, whose Vindication I have here undertaken, have sometimes lived in Your
Graces Diocese, are personally known to you, and you have had frequent
occasions to search into the whole course of their Life and Conversation, so
that I dare the more boldly Appeal to your Lordships Impartial Judgment, if
what I have said here in their Vindication be any more than is Just and
Reasonable; and what the severest Judge will readily acknowledge to be their
due.

While the Enemies of the Church are at Work to Calumniate and Accuse the
Clergy; your Grace being placed in such an Eminent Station, could not well
expect to escape the Censure of their Malice. The Office you bear in the
Church, and the Sacred Character you have stamped upon you, expose you more
Remarkably to the Malice of such Vermin as despise Religion* and trample upon
all that is Sacred. But your Lordships Character and Merit is so Universally
known, that whatever Malicious Reports are Raised upon you by the Enemies of
our Church and Religion, deserve no^ a particular Confutation.

However, your Grace has been pleased to gr^tisie your Enemies so far, as to
take some Notice of their Calumnies and has Annexed to this Treatise such an
irre^ragable Assertion of your own Innocence, as cannot fail henceforward to
s^op the Mouths of your most inverterate Enemies.

My Lord, I don't question but you are alway^ ready under your Troubles, to
practice that Christian Doctrine of Patience, you have so often Recommended to
others, and I hope God, in his own good time, will pu^ an end to these Nationa^
Judgments, and recall your Lordship srom you^ Exile, to be again an Ornament to
our Church, and to assist in the Rebuilding of the Second Temple, and making it
more Glorious and Beautisul than the former; that to the Excellent Constitution
of our Church Discipline, we may have added a set Form of Prayer and Devotion,
and then our Church shall again Flourish as a Palm Tree, and forever after be
immovable as a Rock. So begging your Lordships Paternal Benediction, I am with
all Duty,

MY LORD, Your Graces most Obsequious and Faithful Servant. W. S.

TO THE READER.
THE most effectual way of Undermining Religion, is to bring those who
propagate it into disgrace and contempt* If once we Receive bad Impressions
concerning the Lives and Morals of our Teachers, we will not readily hearken to
their Exhortations of Piety and Morality.

The Authority of our Spiritual Guides is at an End, if we fancy them to be
addicted to those very Sins and Vices, which they so vehemently Preach and
Exclaim against, and denounce woeful Judgmen^s against all that practice them;
we easily believe that they are not in earnest with what they profess; and we
are Tempted from hence to conclude Religion to be a mere Cheat and Imposture.

This Method of subverting Religion has been always thought so successful, that
if we look back into the History of former Ages, we shall find, that since the
first Plantation of Christianity, it has been the constant practice of all its
Enemies to Slander and Revile those that did promulgate it, to accus^ them of
the grossest Immoralities they could imagine; thinking by this m^ans to give
such a fatal stroke to the Christian Religion, as to prevent its Conquest over
Judaism and the Pagan Worship.

Was not the Author of our Religion himself, the Holy and Blessed Jesus,
Reproached with the Title of a Glutton and a Wine-bibber? Were not all his
Followers, ev^n in the first and purest Ages of Christianity, charg^d with
Atheism, for contemning the Worship of the Heathen Idols; with incestuous
Mixtures, and with eating Childrens Flesh in their Holy and Sacred Mysteries?

This Heath^nish and Abominable Practice of calumniating our Adversaries, seems
to have been copied by most of the Sectaries of the Christian Religion; but I
think, by none more exactly than our Presbyterian Dissenters, who have never
failed to lay out all their Indust^y and Wit, in contriving Forgerie^ and
Calumnies against both Clergy and Laity of the Orthodox Communion.

In our late Civil Wars, when the Presbyterian Schism prevailed over this whole
Island, when the Churches both of Scotland and England were quite overturned,
and the Clergy Persecuted and Exposed to the greatest Hardships of Poverty and
Want; their Persecutors, to justify this their Cruel and Barbarous Usage of
them, did industriously represent them to the credulous* people, as ignorant of
their Profession, and highly scandalous in their Lives; loading them with the
most Villainous and Immoral Crim^s they could think of.

Thus were the whole Body of the English Clergy at that time maliciously
assaulted, and accused of all the Crimes their Enemies could invent against
them, as appears from the Centuries of S^andalous Ministers complained of to
the Parliament, Anno 1646.

So lik^wise in their present Persecution against the Church of Scotland, they
revived their Old practice of Slandering those whom they had most unjustly
Persecuted.

When they had Rabbl^d the Clergy from their Churches, and Acted such Villainies
and Indignities upon their Persons and Families, as the most Savage Barbarians
would have been ashamed of; the Noise of this Persecution spreading abroad,
they found it convenient to Publish and Divulg^ all the Lies and Calumnies they
could invent against our Clergy, lest they should seem to have (...) them
without any ground; and thinking likewise by this Stratagem, to exasperate and
rais^ the Indignation of all good Christians against them, upon account of
those heinous Villani^s with which they maliciously charged them.

Such Usage as this could not fail to Exercis^ the (...) of the Clergy, to see
themselves so ^njuriously P^rsecuted and Reviled. But they had thi^ for their
comfort, that they received no worse Usag^ than their Master had done before
them; It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant
as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his Household? But thanks be to God, the Lives and
Conversations of the far greatest ^art of our Clergy are so apparently Pious
and Exemplary, so exactly conform to the Character they bear of b^ing Spiritual
Guides, Bu^ning and Shining Lights, that as the Calumni^s of their Adversaries,
cannot much injure their Reputation in this World, so far less will they be
able to diminish that Eternal Reward laid up for them in the Life to come.

However, when the Clergy are thus maliciously and unjustly Slandered and
Reviled, Religion does often suffer thereby; and therefore in thi^ Case, I
think it is the Duty of every Christian, to Espouse the Interest of Religion,
and to Vindicate the Clergy from those Aspersions their Enemies load them
withal.

There is not a more certain forerunner of Atheism and Irreligion in a Nation,
than a contempt of the Clergy; and it may justly provoke God to remove his
Candlestick quite from us, if we suffer his Ministers and Ambassadors to be
Treated with such Reproach and Cont^mpt; it is a shrewd Sign we have no great
Respect for a Prince, if we affront his Ambassador.

Although I am not in Holy Orders my self, yet I have such a Veneration and
Esteem for that Sacred Function, that it raises my Indignation to a great
height, to see Ingenious and deserving Men Buffoon'd and Ridiculed, merely for
their having devoted themselves to the Holy Ministry, for having Received the
Title of being Christ's Ambassadors to his Saints here on Earth.

Were they of any other Profession, their Parts and Piety would make them to be
much Regarded by all Men; but because they have entered into the Office of the
Holy Ministry, that Office which our Savior did not disdain to take upon
himself, and his Holy Apostles Gloried in, they must therefore suffer all
Indigniti^s and Affronts, and be Treated with greater Contempt and Ig^ominy
than the meanest Artizan.

Is not this to Crucify afresh the Lord of Life and Glory, to put him again to
op^n shame, to Mock him, and to Spit upon him, as the Jews ^id before his
Crucifixion? For whatever Indig^ity we offer to his Ministers here on Earth, he
^akes it as done to his own Person; He that depiseth them, despises him that
sent them. It was t^is Respect alon^ which I have for the Ministe^al Function,
that moved me to Write these few Remarks upon a late Scurrilous Libel against
our Clergy, Publish^d by an obscure Anonymous Author, who se^ms to be more
influenced by the Spirit of Malice and Envy, than of the Christian Religion. I
was not a little concern^d ^o see so many Eminent and Deserving Men thus
injured in (...) Fame and Reputation, and tha^ among Strangers to whom they
were wholly unknown.

Were these Stories Published only in their own Country, where the whole course
of their Life is sufficiently known, they might bid defianc^ to ^he utmost
Malice of their Enemies; and to An^er any such malicious Libels against them
th^re, would be altog^ther superfluous. Bu^ when th^se R^ports are propagate
amongst Strang^rs, who have no personal knowledge of the M^n who ar^ thus
abused, it is n^cessary to Write som^thing in their Vindication, and to prevent
Peopl^'s being farther impos^d upon by such Li^s and Calumnies.

This Author has Writ a second Part of the Treatis^ which is her^ (...), but
that b^ing already taken to Task by another Hand, I take no Notice of it. My
busin^ss is only with his first Pamphlet, wherein I have suffici^ntly shown his
Gross Pr^varications and Falsehoods, and confuted all the Shadows of Reasoning
that ly^ scattered in his Book.

My present Circumstances would not allow me to make an exact inquiry
conc^rning all the particular Persons whom h^ h^re Accuses of Immoralities, I
being at too great a distance from the Places where they do resid^. But I have
picked out the most considerable instances; thos^ Persons whom he charg^s with
the most Atrocious Crimes, and in his Accusations against them, I have
evid^ntly proved him guilty of the highest Malice and Injustic^; which I think,
is sufficient to Ruin the Cr^dit of his Book in the r^st of the Instances among
all Sober and Judicious M^n.

THE CONTENTS.
Introduction.
THE Uncharitableness and Inhumanity of this Author's Design. Page 1 This
method of Writing inconsistent with the Principles of our Religion, and the
Laws of Humane Society. 3 The occasion of publishing the Scots Presbyterian
Eloquence. 5
Chap. I.
THis Author's Reflections upon the Church of England, and so^ of ^he Ministers
of State, considered. Page 9 Episcopacy established in Scotland, not by the
force and tyranny of our Rulers, but by the consent and approbation of the
whole Nation. 10 The Bishops in Scotland invest^d with full Authority belonging
to Bishops. 11 A short account of some of our Church Judicatories,
Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods. Ibid. These Judicatories shown to be
no Encroachment on the Episcopal Power. 12 Our Author's disingenuity in his
slanderous Reflections upon the Clergy. 13 Some few of the Episcopal Clergy
offering to join with the Presbyterians, can be no sufficient Vindication of
the Lives and Morals of the Presbyterian Party. 14 The Episcopal Cl^rgy have
charged the Presbyterians with nothing relating to their barbarous Persecution,
but what they have been ablc to prove from irrefragable Authorities. 15
Episcopacy the first Government of the Church of Scotland after the
Reformation, and never there by Law abolished, till the unhappy Civil Wars
under the R^ign of K. Charles the First broke out. 16 (...) occasion of
settling Superin^endents in the Church of Scotland upon the Reform^. 17 The
Superintendents inves^ed with the whole Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction
over the Clergy of their Diocesses. Page 18 The Mission of the Superintendent's
plainly different from that of other Ministers* Ibid. The Superintendents no
ways Temporary as to their Office, but only as to the Nam^. 19 The
Superintendents giving an account to a National Synod of their Diligence in
their Functions, no Argument against their being Bishops. 20 T^ Enacting of
these P^nal Laws against the Presbyterians, which this Author has scraped
together, occasioned merely by the frequen^ Rebellio^s of that Party. 21 T^
Nation had sufficient ground to Enact these Laws against the Presbyterians,
from their Treasonable Practices under the former R^igns of K. James the Sixth,
and K. Charles the First. 22 ^at this was the true occasion of Enacting these
Penal Laws, appears from our Author's o^n Concessions. 23 (...) ^s been the
constant practice of the Presbyterians to* shelter their Treasonable Designs
under the Name of Religion. 24 The Sufferings of the Presbyterians no ways
promoted by the Episcopal Clergy. 25 The Ministers of State under K. Charles's
Government sufficiently Vindicated from our Author's aspersions of C^uelty. 26
A short Narrati^ of the Proceedings of the Council against son^* Ministers
turned out in 1662. 27
Chap. II.
THE Presbyterians have justified the Murder of the Archbishop of S^. Andrews
in the face ^f Authority upon several occasions. Page 29 Mitchel's Execution
justified. 30 The making the Inclinations of the People the Standart of the
Church Government, is of very fatal consequence to the i^terest of Religion.
Ibid. T^ Presbyterians having made more Insurrections in the Kingdom, in be^alf
of their Church Government, than the Eiscopal Church have thought fi^ to do* is
no argument that Presbytery is more popular in Scotland than Episcopacy. 32
This last Convention having abolished Episcopacy, and established Presbytery*
is no good argument, that the Presbyterians ^ave the majority of the Nation on
their side. 33 The Methods used by the Episcopal ^lergy for reclaiming the
Diss^nters sh^wn to be very effectual, since at the time of K. James's
Indulgence there were f^w or no Presbyterians but what joined in Communion with
the Episcopal Church* 3^ The Pr^terian Practice in vilifying our Savior's
Prayer, altogether in* excusable. Page 35 The malicious Characters this Author
gives of the English and Scots Gentry, as well as Glergy. 36 The ^etling or
abrogating matters of Religion in complian^e with the humors of the Populace,
stands directly in opposition to the propagating of the Christian Religion. 37
The disingen^ity of this Author and his Party in calling the English
Common Prayer Book Popery. 39 The lawfulness of observing Anniversary Days of
Human^ Institution asserted. Ibid. The Murder of K. Charles ^he First justly
chargeable upon the Presbyterians in both Kingdoms, and not upon the Nation in
general. 42 The beh^viour of the Scots Presbyterians' toward K. Charles the
Second upon his advancement to the Throne. 46 That the English Convocation
acted upon far better Grounds in refusing an Union with the (...), than the
Scots Assembly in rejecting the Addresses of those few Episcopal Clergy who
addressed them, proved by several Reasons. 47 It is from the Civil Magistrate
the Church derives all her Temporal Privileges, b^t ^e is in no w^ys the
Fountain of Spiritual Power. 50 (...) account of the King's Supremacy in
Scotland, as it is there Established by t^ Laws of the Kingdom. 52 The Church
has the sole Power in Matters purely Spiritual, but the Clergy are equally
subject to the Civil Authority, and liable to the same Punishments with the
Laity. 53 The Papists* and Presbyterians extend the Church's Authority beyond
its true Bounds, in claiming an Exemption to the Clergy from Secular
Punishments till they be first condemned by the Church. 54 The Church of
England guilty of no breach of Promise, in ref^sing an Union with the
Dissenters upon the Terms proposed. 56 The Presbyteria^ Mi^isters ^ave often
assumed to th^selves a Power of making Peace and War. Ibid. The Presbyterians
not without some ground stigmatized with the Reproachful Term of New
Gospellers. 57
Chap. III*
IT is not strange to see Persons, after they have murdered, robbed, or any way
injured their Adversaries, to endeavor likewise to blacken them i^ their ^me
and Reputation, the better to palliate their own wicked Actions against them.
Page 58 The Innocence of our Clergy sufficiently Vindicated from this (...)
Aspersions, since in this present Persecution against them by the Presbyterians
they cannot instance in four of their Number, against whom they could find the
l^ast pr^tence to deprive them for Immoralities. Page 59 Many of our Cl^rgy
sufficiently Vindicated from this Libeller's accusations by the Author of an
Appendix to a late Treatise, Entitled, An Apology for the Clergy of Scotland.
60 Dr. Canaries fully Vindicated from the Calumnies brought against him by this
Accuser, and the Accuser's malice and disingenuity fully detected. Ib. An
account of Dean Hamilton's Process, and his being absolved t^from by the
Privy Council, and the Criminal-Court. 62 Our Author's great mistake concerning
Mr. Boyd. 63 A full Relation of the Process concerning Mr. Hugh Blair, and of
the indirect ways and means us^d by the Presbyterian Party to stain his
Reputation. Ibid. The Story of Mr. ^hisholm truly r^lated, and he cle^red from
this Calumny. 68 This Affair of Mr. Chisholm's, a singular Insta^e of the
Villainous Arts and Practices of the Presby^erians to bring Contempt on the
Episcopal Clergy 71 Mr. Waugh a Presbyterian Minister vindicated from the
aspersions of this Li^eller. Ibid. Another Mist^ke of our Author's, concerning
Mr. Gregory's being Minister at Torboulton. 72 The notorious Falsehood of the
R^lation about Mr. Pearson. Ibid. A Vindication of Mr. Lawson Minister at
Yrongray. 72 A Testimony of Archbishop Cairncross in favor of Mr. Lawson. 75
Another Testimony in his favor by the Presbytery of Dum^reis. 76 Archbishop
Paterson his Letter, Vindicating himself from the Asp^rsions of this Libeller.
(...)* 77, 78 A Vindication of Archbishop Cai^oss. 83 Declaration of Mr.
Richard Scot, and Mr. Henry Knox. 85 T^ Conclusion. 87
SOME REMARKS Upon the ANSWER TO THE Scots Presbyterian Eloquence.
In Vindication of the Clergy of Scotland, from the Calumnies thrown upon them
by the Author of that Pamphlet.

WHEN I first Read the Answer to the Scots Presbyterian The unch^ ritabl^ness
and inhuma nity of th Authors d^ sign.
Eloquence, I con^ess I was perfectly amazed to think, that any sort of Men
could be so Wicked as to shake off all ties of Humanity and Religion, and Write
in this Scurrilous and most unchristian manner. This is such a m^thod of
Answering Books, as I believe was never yet heard of. The very Heathens and
Infidels would blush at such Practices; and what an Age must this needs be in
which our Lot is cast, that Christians, who profess to own that Pure and Holy
Religion, should openly and avowedly Act such thing* as the most Barbarous
Nations would b^ ashamed to commit. To Ra^e together a parcel ofWicked and
Profane Stories, and to charge them upon Men, (most of whom are known to be of
an untainted Fame and Reputatlon) and this without so much as one Witness to
avouch for the Credit of what he says; this is such a piece of Impudence and
Villainy, as is not easily to be paralleled. Does our Author think, that his
bare Authority in aslerting these Lies and Aspersions without any other proof,
is sufficient to blemish the Reputation of any Man of Worth and Credit? Or can
he possibly imagine, that any Men of Sense and Reason are so easily imposed
upon, as to believe these Calumnies to be true, unless he had been more
particular in the circumstances of time and place when most of these matters of
Fact are said to be done, and had produced the Testimony of some Famous and
unexceptionable Witnesses to evince the Truth of what he says? In the very
beginning of his Pamphlet he declares himself an inveterate Enemy to the Church
of England, and to the whole Episcopal church of Scotland; and yet after he has
thus Proclaimed an open Hostility, can he be so inconsiderate as to think, that
any judicious or unbyassed Reader will give the least Credit to what he says
against the most obnoxious Member of their Society, unless he brings very clear
and undeniable Evidence for his Assertions? It cannot be denied but that ^ome
two or three of those Men whom our Author thus Libels in his (...), were
obnoxious to cen^re in their Lives and Conversations; but it is very
unreasonable that the Vices of these particular Members should be thrown upon
the whole Society, since the Church did take all imaginable care to purge her
self of these Vicious and Corrupt Members, and did actually (...) and depose
^or Scandals and Immoralities some of those Clergymen whom this Libeller here
accuses, but whether for those Crimes he (...) them with, I cannot positively
aver. This I am sure of, that the mo^ (...) of them, who were thu^ censured by
the Church, could never be g^ilty of some of those things alleged against them
in this Pamphlet. Our A^thor in several of his instances has quite outdone his
Malice, and has been so inconsiderate in the inventing of some of his (...),
tha^ the bare Relation of the circumstances of the Story is a su^icient
Con^utation of the whole matter of fact. ^or although a Man may be so Wicked,
as to be guilty of that unnatural Act of Sodomy, yet unless he be in a Fit of
madness to the highest Degree, it is hard to be imagined that he could either be
so public, or so indiscreet in his Commission of it, as to be convicted by 88
Witnesses, as this Libeller would have us believe, Page 64. So imprudent is he,
in contriving some of his Forgeries. For this is such an Act of Folly and
Imprudence, that I can hard^y think any reasonable Creature could be guilty of
it; since not only the ^hame of his Crime, but likewise the danger of being
capitally punished for it, would be sufficient Motives, if not to terrisie him
from the sin, ye^ at least to engage him to privacy in his Wickedness.

But as it is true, that some of the Clergy here Accused by our Author, have
been guilty of some immoralities that cannot be excused; yet his other
instances where he attempts to slander the Rep^tion of some innocent and worthy
persons are as notoriously false, as you shall see ^y and by when I come to
consider the several instances more pa^ticularly. However, I think these
innocent Gentlemen are not in great hazard of susfering much in their
Reputation by the malice of t^is Author; for his Pamphlet is all over stuffed
so with the spirit of Gall and Bitterness, that his Testimony cannot be of any
great weight among serious and sober Men. He is not satisfied to bel^ out all
his Vomit against the Clergy of both Nations; but he likewise (...) upon all
the Laity of the Episcopal persuasion both in England and Scotland, and
represents them as Men void of all manner of Religion, who instead of
frequenting the Religious Assemblies, do haunt Bawdy-Houses, and are Drunk in
(...) and Page 1^.
Ale- Houses. And here I cannot ^orbear taking Notice of this Barbarous and
Inhumane way of Writing, how destructive it is to all humane Society, This
Meth^d of Writing (...) with the (...) of (...) Religion, and the La^ of Humane
Soci^ty.
and how inconsistent with the principles of that innocent and harmless
Religion we all profess to maintain. It teaches us to be quite of another
spirit, ''To render no Man Evil for Evil, but to bless them that ^urse ''us,
and to pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute ^s. The Spirit of
the Gospel is so far from countenancing such Wicked practices of Slandering and
Reviling one another, that it requires us, when we know our Brother to be taken
in an Offense, to endeavor to reclaim him in the spirit of meekness, by
private and brotherly Admonitions. But alas! this New method of converting
Sinners, which our New Gospellers have taken up, is such, that instead of
reclaiming, it rather hardens and emboldens the Wicked in their Impieties.

I do seriously wish the Authors of such Libels would but consider a little the
general interest of Religion, and bethink themselves what advantage the^ affo^d
the Enemies thereof by such unch^ian practic^; f^r (...) a scandal must it
needs prove both to Jews and (...), against our mo^ Holy Religion, when they
see those who profess to (...) it, accusing one another of such gross
immoralities as could ha^dly be acted among any who firmly believe the
Existence of a D^y. They must n^ds be Tempted from such practices to conclude,
that all our (...) i^ a mere Cheat, and that we outwardly profess wh^t we do
not inwardly believe; since our behavior toward one another is such, as if we
did not really believe there is a God in ^eaven to reward the Good, or punish
the Wicked Doer. Our Primitive ^ors used this (...) in (...) of their Religion
against the Heathens, that it was Pure and Holy, harmless and innocent, and
that its Doctrine was more effectual in reclaiming Sinners from their Wicked
Courses, than the Principles and Dictates of all the Heathen Moralists. This
they insist much upon in their Apologies; and it was certainly one of the most
successful Argu^ents in making Converts to their Religion; for we find that by
this Argumen^ many Heathens were persuaded to leave their Superstitious Rites
and Customs, and to embrace the Ch^istian Religion as the most Pure and Holy,
and that which advanced the Princlples of Humane Nature to the highest pitch.
But can we ever expect at this rate to make any Converts to our Religion, when
its Enemies do see us daily accusing one another of such Crimes as the most
Barbarous Nations do abhor. Nay, so far are we from gaining any New Proselytes
thereby, that I Am confident this Practice of Libelling our brethren does tempt
such of our Religion as are not firmly persuaded of the Truth thereof, to
desert and ridicule it. We may easily foresee of what pernicious consequence
this Practice will at last prove, if we but consider how greatly Atheism and
Irr^igion does already prevail among us Is it not the general Humor of but too
many in these Nations to Laugh at all manner of Revelation as a mere Art of
Priests to captivate and delude silly people? They look upon Religion as a
thing mean and despicable, and far below the concern of such great Masters of
Reason, as they pretend to be. Nay, we are come to such an indifferency in
matters of Religion, that many of our Laity do look upon it as a piece of
Grandeur and Bravery, to trample upon all that is Sacred and stamped with a
Divine Character. Don't we see them daily endeavoring to expose the Clergy to
Ignominy and Reproach, to retrench and diminish their Revenues, to represent
them as Abject and Vile Persons, as the refuse of all the people, and even to
Rob them of those Spiritual Privileges with which our Savior has invested
them, and of which no Mortal can just^y deprive them? And it is no small
encouragement that our New Libellers afford these open Prophaners of Religion
to persist in their Wicked courses, of exposing the Clergy and consequently
Religion it self to Scorn and Derision; for unless the Clergy be had in that
Esteem and Respect by the Laity which their Sacred Function does r^quire, it is
imposs^ble that ever Religion can flourish among us; they will never hearken to
their Precepts, that have not a due Reverence for their persons. So that, if we
have any concern for Religion, we ought above all things to be tender in
blemishing the Reputation of Clergy men; since it tends so much to the
detriment of Religion, and renders their Ministry altogether ineffectual among
the people*

But this Method of Slandering and Reviling our Brethren is not only (...) to
Religion, but is likewise destructive of all Humane Society. For where such
practices are permitted, it must needs beget Rancour and Malice, Envy and
Revenge among the people, and this will at last end in Blood and Confusion. The
most innocent person can have no Fence for his Reputation against such Wicked
practices as these; for suppose any profane R^n should have the Malice to
Accuse any of us of being Guilty of gros^ Immoralities in private, and offer no
(...) to avo^ch for the Truth of his Accusations; what method can we propose in
this Case to purge our selves from these Aspe^sions? For my part, I know no
other way but to Appeal for our Innocence to the Testimony of those who are
most acquainted with the whole Course of our Life and Actions* I wish the
Author of this Pamphlet may Reflect a little upon the mischievous consequences
of such Practices, and consid^r what mischief he does to Religion meer^y to
grati^e a little Humor.

I know he endeavors to excuse hims^ by pretending that the Episcopal The
occ^sion of publis^ the S^ots Presby^an Eloquence.
Party were the Aggressors, and that they were (...) to use these Weapons only
in their own defense. As for the f^w Reflections on particular persons which are
contained in that (...) our Author pretends to Answer; I consess I never did
approve them; but when I consider the occasion of Publishing this Treatise, I
cannot deny but they had great provoc^tion to what they did. When the
Presbyterians were car^ying on their Persecution against the Clergy of (...),
it w^ their constant practice to summon them before their Courts of Judicature,
and there produce Libels against them, containing all the false Accusations
their Malice (...) possibly invent* of the being (...), Ignorant, and (...) in
their Pri^s, the O^d Cant that was used against our Clergy, by the
Presbyterians in their ^mer (...) in both these Nations These Libels were Read
pub^ickly in their Courts in the presence of a great many (...), and this on
purpose to expose the Clergy to the g^ter Contempt among the Vulgar. The P^
thus Accused very patiently h^d their Li^ls* and desired Witnesses might be
adduce^ ^o prove the least (...) of Fact the^e Libelled against them; and when
they complained of this Barbarous way of proc^ing, that a Court of Ju^ice
should suffer Libels to be Read (...) them without any Accuser to own, or any
Witnesses to prove them; and only begged of their Judges that they might be
allowed to (...) Reputation, and to purge themselves from these Calumnies, by
the Te^timony of a few of their Neighbors of the best Fame and (...); that so
these (...) Lies might not be kept (...) Record as an Eternal Reproach to their
Memory. This small (...) was denied them, and the Judges very civilly told
them, they were not concerned to inquire into the Libels produced against them,
(notwithstanding of which they caused them to be Read publicly in their
Courts, that the Vulgar might have thereby Oppo^tunity to mock and ridicule the
Clergy; a most horrid Act of iniquity!) but only whether they had complied with
the Civil Government, and given Obedience to the Acts of the Conventi^n (...)
Lstates. And yet after they had declined to search into these Libels, they
Ordered them to be inserted into the Registers of their Cou^ts, as being one of
the Grounds of the Deprivation of the Clergy, though not so much as ever
Attempted to be proved; where they are still ^pt on Record, as a Public
Monument of Infamy and Disgrace to our Clergy; and the Author of this Pamphlet
has the impudence to qu^te these Records as an Evidence against them. Now this
is such a horrid and ba^barous Act of Injustice, as I am confident, was never
heard of among the most Ba^barous Nations; and yet it is so certain^ True, that
I my self was Eye Witness to several instances of it, and dare Challenge the
most impudent of their Party to disprove this matter of I'act as here Related.

The (...) did not rest satisfied with th^r Attempts to render the Episcopal
Clergy odious in Scotland, by their Unchristian Pra^s of inventing malicious
Libels against them; but likewise at the same time they were Persecuting them
at home, they industriously Printed and Dispersed Papers here in England,
representing them as Men vicio^s in their Lives, and ignorant in their
Profession. So that after all this Barbarous and Cruel Treatment which our
Clergy suffered from the (...), it was no wonder that some of their Friends
should be Tempted to (...) their Quarrel, and to expose their Adversaries in
their (...) and Natural Colors. But these kind of Practices where they are
(...) with Spite and evil Designs, I must needs own, ought to be (...) of in
neither P^ty: since the only Essect they have* is to propagate our Animosities
and Divisions, and to enlarge our (...) so as to make it altogether incurable.
However this may su^ ^o let you see the Presbyterians were the first
Aggressors, and if they still p^st to Write at this Scurrilous and Obscene
Rate, it is to be feared they may provoke some Writers for the Episcopal Party
to ^ight them at their own Weapons, and then perchance they may have g^od
Reason to be weary of such Practic^s.

The Design of this Treatise, which our Author pretends to have given him just
occasion for writing in this obscene and calumniating manner, was not to
blemish the Reputation of any particular Person, by reflecting on (...) Morals,
or ripping up the Sores and ^ailings which any one may have chanced to be
guilty of through the Infirmity of Humane Nature. No, this had been a most
Unjustifiable and Unchristian Thing, since the Precepts of our Religion teach
us to cover and conceal the (...) of our Brethren. And it were very unjust to
Upbraid one that i^ a good Man now, with the Escapes to which the Frailty and
Weakness of his Youth did expose him: We ought rather to rejoice and glory in
his Conversion, that through the Assistance of the Divine Grace he has been
enabled at last to ov^rcome all the Temptations of the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, and to rescue himself from the Paws of that Roaring Lion, which
goes about seeking whom he may devour. We are all of us, alas! but too much
exposed to the Frailties and Infirmities of our Nature, and so have no great
cause to Insult too much over the Fallings of our Brethren; especially when
they are so far from persisting in their wicked Courses, that they heartily
repent of the Wickedness they have committed, and endeavor now to do that
which is lawful and right, that they may save their Souls alive. And all the
Instances in this Book, containing Personal Reflections upon the Life or Morals
of any, do not amount to above two or three, which I have ground to believe
were slipped into the Book without the consent or privity of the Author. But the
true design of this Discourse was, to inform the World what great Damage did
accrue to Religion, by the ridiculous manner in which our Presbyterians are
wont to handle all Matters that are Sacred; how they infuse into the Minds of
the People sordid and mean Notions of the Great and Eternal God; how they often
fright many into an unreasonable Despair of God's Mercy, by the horrid and
extravagant Notions which they entertain of the great Mystery of our
Redemption, and how by their ridiculous and nauseous Stuff which they vent in
their Prayers and Sermons, they expose the Sacred M^ies of our Religion to
Scorn and Derision. And I think the doing of this is so far from being a Crime,
that it is rather a Duty incumbent on us, to forewarn People of the fatal
Consequences that such Methods must needs have among us; that all good Men, who
have any real concern for Religion, being informed of these things, may
contribute their Endeavors for preventing that Deluge of Atheism and Impiety,
which has already begun to overflow these Nations, and may justly be imputed to
the Principles and Practices which these kind of pretending Gospellers have
propagated among us; and that being made sensible of the great Danger to which
Religion by such Practices is exposed, may for the future discountenance all
such Men as without any Commission from God do usurp the Authority of his
Ambassadors, and by their Drollery and Ridicule profane all that is Sacred.
Yea, I doubt not but Charity, even to the Pres^yterian Preachers themselves,
partly moved ^he Author to expose those extravagant Expressions in their
Sermons and Books; acco^ding to that of St. Augustine, Haec (...) misericorditer
irride, ut iis r^denda ac fugienda commendes; Do thou mercifully deride these
Errors in Men, that thou may move themselves to de^ide and shun them.

This, methinks, is a pious and commendable Design enough; and if the Author of
this pretended Answer had but followed this method, and offered to prove
against the Episcopal Clergy, what some of their Writers have done to a
Demonstration against the Presbyterian Sect, that in stead of Preaching the
pure and sincere Wo^d of God, they filled-their Sermons and Instructions with
nothing but nauseous Stusf and Nonsense; I say, could he have proved these
Things against them, and had he abstained from his Calumniating Aspe^sions, his
Vindication of his own Party would not have been so generally condemned. But
being sensible of his Weakness on that side, and that any Assertions of that
nature in Prejudice of our Clergy could be easily con^uted, he was ^esolved to
attack them in a more Revengeful manner, and to allege Things against them,
which* though most of them are as notoriously false as the other, yet he knew
could not be so easily disproved. For in this case, as I said before, when a
Man is accused of being guilty of some Scandals and Immoralities in his ^ife,
and not the least Evidence brought to prove these Accusations; the only way
left him to purge himself, is to appeal for his Innocence to the Testimony of
those that have been most acquainted with the whole series and course of his
Life. But had he offered to urge any thing against them relating to the Matter
of their Doctrine and Sermons, he very well knew that was a thing too Public
and too Notorious to Falsify in, and that they could bring a Cloud of
Witnesses against him to declare, that they Prea^h nothing but the Pure and
Sincere Gospel of Christ, and Administer hi^ Sacraments with that Gravity and
Sincerity that becomes the Infinite and Eternal Being, whom they represent here
on Earth as his Ambassadors, and whose Covenants they seal in his Name, that
they never approach the Throne of God but with the greatest Reverence and
Devotion, d^claring by the outward Prostration of their Body, what great and
noble Thoughts they entertain of their Almighty Creator, and of ^he Sacred
Offices they are about.

CHAP. I.
HAving thus given you my Thoughts very freely of the General Design of this
Pamphlet, I shall in the next place trouble you with a few Remarks on the
Particulars contained therein. As for our Author's Dedication, which, I
suppose, he designs for a piece of Wit, I can discern nothing in it but what is
mean and silly. His malicious Reflections upon that Prelate, whom he so
scurrilously Treats in his Dedication, and elsewhere, are nothing but a mere
Brutum fulmen, and cannot in the least wound the Reputation of so great a Man,
he being a Person endued with such excellent Parts, and his Merit having
advanced him to such a Character in the Church, that it puts him far beyond the
reach of the greatest Malice of any such Scribler. In his Preface, he very
civilly Compliments This Author Reflections upon the Church of England, and some
of the Minist^ of State, co^^ sidered.
those Members of the Church of England, who promoted the Design of the
Comprehension with the Dissenters, and tells them, that in his many Reflections
on the Church of England, he does not intend them, but understands only that
Faction which opposed His Majesty's desire of Uniting his Subjects, and goes
under the Title of Ceremony-Mongers. It were to no purpose to relate here the
many venomous and ill-natured Reflections on the Church of England, which are
scattered in all the Pages of this Pamphlet. But by what he says in his
Preface, we may plainly see, that he declares War against the most considerable
part of the Church, as being Enemies to all Religion, and betrayers both of our
Religious and Civil Rights. And although he is pleased to call them a Faction
only of the Church, yet he must own them to be such a Faction as are the
greatest part, and consequently the fullest Representative of the Society,
since by their Interest in the House of Convocation they opposed the
Alterations that were then designed to be made in our Offices.

In the same Paragraph he inveighs bitterly against the Chief Ministers of
State here in England, who, upon the Application of some of the Episcopal
Clergy to this Government, were pleased, out of a Compassionate sense of their
Miseries and Oppression, to espouse their Interest, and endeavor to procure
them a Redress of their Grievances. These Men he represents, as having been
formerly Instruments to bring us under Popery and Slavery; and whether this be
not such a Reflection on the present Government, as does concern it to Punish
severely, I leave my Reader to judge, since to accuse the Chief Ministers of
State under any Government of such odious Crimes as Enslaving their Country, is
a direct Insinuation against the Government it self, as if it, by employing
such kind of Instruments, did really design those Mischiefs against the Nation,
with which they upbraid their Chief Ministers of State. And here I cannot
enough admire the Impudence of this Author, to quarrel with the English Peers
for meddling in the Affairs* of the Church of Scotland, when he very well knows,
that the greatest Encouragement and Support the Presbyterian Party in that
Kingdom have, is from the in^luence of some foreign Presbyterians. And I would
gladly know why an English Nobleman has not as good Right to concern himself in
the Affairs of our Church as any Dutch Presbyterian.

But to take off all Church of England men from having any Pity or (...) in
^otland, ^t by (...) ^rce and ^ranny of (...) Rulers, ^t by the (...) and
^robation the whole (...)
Compassion upon the Distressed State of our Church, he endeavors to persuade
them, that the Constitution of Episcopacy in Scotland is so very sar disferent
from that of England, that although our Clergy are Sufferers sor the Primitive
and Apostolical Government of Episcopacy by Law established in that Nation, yet
they cannot be said ^o suffer for the Government and Discipline of the Church
of England, and so not deserve that Fellow-feeling and Countenance which some
worthy Members of her Communion are pleased to show them. His first Instance,
to show the d^erence betwixt the two Const^tutions, is this, That ours in
Scotland was (...) upon us by the Tyr^nny of our (...). Now suppose his
Asse^tion were true, yet, methinks, it is a very odd consequence, that two
Constitutions must needs be disferent in their Nature, because disferent means
were used to set^le them in a Nation. Could not the Tyranny of our Rulers have
forced upon us the same Constitution with that of England, as easily as one
that is disferent. But his Assertion is as notoriously false, as the
Consequence he endeavors to draw from it; for in the Insancy of the
Reformation our Church was governed by Bishops and Sup^rintendents, and that
form of Government was app^oved of by the Un^nimous Consent of the whole
Nation, both Clergy and Lai^y*. And as to these later Times, our Anno 1572.
^rl. 3 Jac. 6. (...). 45, 46, ^c. (...) Perth ^ss* in Aug (...).
public Records of Parliament can yet testify, that the Episcopal Government
was so far from being sorced upon the Nation against their Will and Consent,
that it has been established and confirmed by Twenty seven successive Legal
Pa^liaments. It Is known that at the Restoration of the Royal Family, the whole
Nation having long groaned und^ the Yoke of (...), they were very desirous to
have their Primitive and Ancient Government of Episcopacy restored, that they
might be rescued from the Tyranny and Confusion of the Presbyterian Anarchy,
under which t^y had so severely smarted during their Usurpation; and a great
many of the Clergy, I am sure the whole Diocese of Aberdeen almost to a Man,
add^essed Hi^ Majesty upon this account.

His next Instance is, That Presbytery being* Engraf^ed with our Reformation,
The (...) in Scotland (...) the s^l Authori^y (...) ^o Bishops.
Prelacy could never attain to a kindly nor plenary Possession: And to prove
this, he instances in our retaining of Kirk-Sessi^ns, Presbyteries, and Synods,
even under Bishops. That the Presbyterian Government had no Settlement in our
Church for many Years after the Reformation, I shall hereafter prove, to the
conviction of the most Obstinate. But that Presbyters had a great Hand in
Reforming us from the Errors and Superstitions of the Romish Church, both in
Scotland and other Nations where the Reformation happily prevailed, is what we
do not deny. But does it hence follow, that because Presbyters were more
instrumental than Bishops in Promoting that great Work of the Re^ormation, that
therefore the Presbyterian Government ought to be Established wherever the
Reformation obtains, and that of Episcopacy overturned? Or because Presbyters
had the Happiness to be concerned in so good a Work, does that therefore
Authorize them to Usurp the Sacred O^fice of a Bi^hop, without b^ing duly
Called and Ordained thereto, by those whom our Savior has appointed to convey
that Authority? Although some Bishops may chance to be backward and negligent
in doing their Duty, as those Popish Bishops ^ho opposed the Reformation, yet
it is altogether unreasonable that the whole Order should suffer for the Crimes
of some particular Members of their Fra^ernity. What our Author means, by
saying, Episcopacy never attained to a Plenary Possession among us, I do not
well apprehend; ^or '^is plain the Constitution of our Episcopacy is such, that
the Bi^hop is ^nvested with the sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction
within his own particular District; the whole Presbyters of his Diocese are
subject to his Authority, and own him for their Chief Governor in Matters
purely Spiritual; there is no Act of Discipline put in execution by the
Inferior Clergy, but by the Allowance and Approbation of their Dioc^san; and I
think this is such a full and plena^y Possession as may justly entitle them
even to a through Set^lement.

As ^or his Instances of our Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteri^, Synods Pr^vincial ^
and National, because this is a part of our Constitution not so very well
known here in England, I shall trouble my Reader wi^ this short account of
them. That which he calls the Kirk-(...), i^ a Court of Judicature established
in every Parish, consisting of the Minis^er and some few Laics of good
Reputation that a^e his Parishioners, whom he associates to himself for giving
him in^ormation of the Manners and Conversation of his People, that so he
^eceiving from these Men exact Information of the state of ^is Parish, all
scandalou^ and vicious Persons may be brought to condign Punishm^nt. The
Presbyteries are a sort of Judicatory under the Episcopal Constitution,
consisting merely of the Clergy; ^or every Diocese is divided into several
Presbyteries, each of which consist of about 12 Ministers or thereby, some of
them being more numerous than others. This Judicatory meets at least once a
Month, and their chief business is, to consult and advise about Affairs
relating to their several Churches, and to examine the Qualifications of those
that design to enter upon the Holy Ministry, the Bishop never admiting any to
Holy Orders, but such as have their Approbation after several Exercises done
before them. If there happen any Matter of great Consequence and Importance in
any Parish, which the Minister is not willing to meddle in without the Advice
of his Brethren, he b^ings it before this Judicatory, and laying open the whole
matter to them, desires their Counsel and Direction how to proceed in such a
weighty Affair, of Punishing an obstinate Offiender who refuses to submit to
the Censures of the Church. This kind of Judicatory was not indeed known in our
Church till near 26 Years after the Reformation. The Synod is a Convocation of
the whole Clergy of a Diocese, with their Bishop, who meet twice every Year to
consult about Matters relating to their own particular Province. National
Synods, commonly called General Ass^mblies, (consisting of all the Bishops and
their Deans, together with the Moderators of the several Presbyteries in their
respective Dioceses, and one Commissioner from each Presbytery joined with the
Moderator,) are called by the King Pro re nata, to Deliberate concerning the
Affairs of the whole National Church* In the Provincial Synods, the Bishop
takes care to examine, i^ the several Presbyteries be diligent in their Duty of
Punishing Offenders; and if any of the Clergy be obnoxious to Censure, h^e they
are Prosecuted ^or their Misdemeanors.

Now ^ese Judicatories are so far from being prejudicial to the The^e (...)
sh^wn to b^ n^ (...) ^n the (...) Power.
Bi^hops Power, that they are rather a great Assistance to them for promoting
^he Discipline of the Church, and upon that account we^e first Erected with the
Consent and Allowance of the Bishops themselves, they judging it very proper
and convenient not to do any thing of great consequence to Religion, without
asking the Advice of their Clergy how they should behave themselves in a Matter
of so great Importance. And these Courts could not be looked upon as any
Encroachment upon the Episcopal Power, since they so entirely depended on the
Bishops Authority, that without his Consent no Act of theirs could be valid.
But I think truly the Discipline of our Church is none of the things most to be
blamed; for we have some remains of the Primitive Discipline as yet among us,
which are to be found but in few National Churches at this day, as appears from
the Vestige we have of that Ancient custom of Communicatory Letters among the
Bishops of the Primitive Church. And as there is some Resemblance of it amongst
our Bishops, by dimissory Letters; so it was still in force among the Inferior
Clergy, who were obliged to receive none into their Congregations, till they
first brought ^ertificates from the Minister in whose Parish they formerly
Lived, testifying, that during their residence among his Flock, they had
behaved themselves Christianly and Soberly, and that ^e knew nothing against
them, why they might not be admitted into any Christian Congregation; without
this they were never allowed to have the benefit of the Sacraments. Had not ^he
Presbyterians by their Tumults and Commotions envied us the happiness of having
the English Liturgy settled among us, the Con^titution and Discipline of our
Church was such, as made us inferior to few National Churches* And here I
cannot but wonder at the Impudence of that Party, that although they refused to
join in Communion upon any Terms with the Episcopal Church, as by Law
Established; yet they would take upon them to hinder them from settling among
the Members of their own Comm^nion, such a Form of Worship* as they thought
most agreeable to the Word of God, and consonant to the practice of the
Primitive Church.

Our Authors transient Reflections upon the Clergy are dressed up O^r Aut^ors
disingenuity in his (...)* ^ous* R^lexions upon the Clergy*
in such Scurrilous and Obscene Language, as must needs make any Man of a
Vir^uous Education blush to Read them; and therefore lest I should offend the
Ears of the modest Reader by Repeating them, I shall pass them over in*
silence, till* I* come to consider his Third Part, and a^ present only take
Notice of those things in the Book which relate either to matter of Argument or
matter of Fact. And here I cannot omit his great protestations of his Ingenu^us
and fair D^aling in this Work, whereby he thinks the more easily to captivate
unthinking Readers into a belief of his Li^s and Calumnies. He pretends ^o have
inserted nothing but what he has Received from Credible Hands, but he thinks it
not fit to gratify his Reader with an Account of the Names of those C^edible
Persons whose Authority he avouches for the Truth of his Aspersions. Had he
given us the Names of the persons, with attested Declarations under their
hands, asserting the Truth of these things alleged against some of our Clergy,
we could have then known of what Credit and Authority the Testimony of those
Persons ought to be had, and it had been an easy matter to convince the World
of the Falsehood and Forgery of his Calumnies, and to purge those innocent
persons from the Slanders cast upon them, out of mere Malice and Envy. But as
^or our Authors Ingenuity in his Collection, he has scraped together a great
many Sto^ies, many of which are most notoriously False, and have not the least
shadow of Truth in them, as I shall a^terwards make appear; and for the proof
of some of them, he Appeals to Records, where no such thing is extant or to be
seen, as I have had particular occasion to enquire. Some of his Accusations ^re
against such of the Clergy, as were either Suspended, or Deposed by the Church
for their Immoralities, and yet this Author imputes the Faults of these Men to
the whole Society, and is so disingenuous as not to acquaint his Reader with
the Censures passed upon them by the Church. Others again are Passages related
of some Clergymen, who ^ived under the Presbyterian Government, du^ing the
times of its last Usurpation in that Kingdom, which this Author is pleased to
charge upon the present Episcopal Church, and whether this be Fair and
Ingenuous* Dealing, I appeal to any unbyassed Reader.

This Author insists much upon the Address presented to their General ^ome few
of ^he Episcopal (...) off^ring (...) with (...), can (...) no (...)
Vindication of (...) Lives an^ (...) ^e (...) Par^y.
Assembly, by some of the Episcopal Clergy, desiring to be admitted into a
share of their Church Government. This he urges as a sufficient Vindication of
the Lives and Morals of the Presbyterians, or at least as an Argument that
these Episcopal Addressers were no Honest Men themselves, who desired to be
associated with such Knaves as they (...) the Presbyt^rians out for. This
Address was op^osed by a great part of the Church of Scotland, most of them
looking upon it as unlawful and altogether inconsistent with the Prinples of
Christian Communion, to join any ways in Communion with thos^ whom they owned
to be notorious Schismatics, as long as they persisted in their Schism; so
that it was but a few of the Clergy that were concerned therein, and this they
urge in their own Defense. That notwithstanding the Nation was in a distracted
^tate and Condition, yet it concerned every individual Christian, especially
Clergymen, to lend their Assistance for the punishing of ^candalous and
Vicious Persons, and therefore, that although the Presbyterians had Usurped the
Government of the Church; yet the Episcopal Clergy, who still retained
possession of their Churches, might, consistently enough with their Principles,
join ^ith them in ^he pu^ishing of contumacious Offenders; ^specially, since
they were not obliged by this Act of Union, to concur with them in their
Presbyterian Ordinations, or to own their Authority in matters purely
Spiritual; but only to Unite with them as a Company of Laics empowered by the
State to Inflict censures upon obstinate Sinners. These were the Terms proposed
to them by the Civil Government for carrying on this Union, and this they think
they might have law^ully done, without owning so much as the validity of their
Ministry; and I am sure, much more without being obliged either to approve of,
or to enquire into their Lives and Conversations; since in matters of Religion
the bad ^ives of Christians is never a sufficient Ground for separating from
their Communion, if it be in all other Respects lawful.

The design of the first part of this Pamphlet is to show, That the The
Ep^scopal Cl^rgy have charge^ the Presbyterians with n^thing r^lating to (...),
but what (...) have be^n (...) A^ko* (...).
Episcopal Party bear an invetera^e M^lice against the Presbyterians, and
therefor their Testimony ought not to be of any Authority in these Accusations
which they bring against them. But our Author, if his Spirit of Revenge had not
been too predominant, might have saved himself all this trouble, since the
Episcopal Party do not over to urge any thing against them upon their own bare
Authority, but what they can evidently prove from Authentic Reco^ds, and from
the A^testations of Men of ^nspotted Fame and Credit, who were EyeWitnesses to
many of the Villainies and Injuries done to our (...) And this I am certain,
they have already done beyond the possibility of a Con^utation in the Case ^f
^he Afflic^ed Clergy, and some other Discourses which they have Published
relating to their lat^ Barbarous Persecution. Late I ought not to call it,
since it Rages almost as much now as ever. It Is tru^, the Clergy are not so
much exposed to the Rage and ^ury of the Rabble, as they were (by whose
instigation is very well know^) not very long ago. But their Miseries are far
f^m b^ing at an end* they sti^l rem^in in Exile from their Churches and Houses,
are exposed to all the Miseries of Poverty and Want, have not the least (...)
of (...) wher^by they may gain Bread to (...) their crying (...); (...)
Mis^rie* do daily increase upon them, and which is most discouraging, they have
no prospect of Deliverance. ^ pray ^od may enable them p^tiently to undergo
this Fiery Try^l, to withstand all the Temptations of Interest and World^y
Po^iticks, and to remain firm and steadfast in asserting those Prin^iples of our
Re^igion, for which they at present suffer; that so having no other aim before
their Eyes, but to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and Man,
they may have a well grounded hop^ of Receiving at la^, as a Reward of their
Sufferings, that Eternal Crown of Glory which Christ has purchased to all
those that suffer for well doing.

But let us pursue our Authors Thread of Discourse, and see what (...) first
Government of the Church of Scotland after ^he (...), and (...) Abolis^ed (...)
^nhappy Civ^l W^rs under the R^ign of K. Cha^les brok^ (...).
the Grounds are whereon he Accuses the Episcopal Party, with inveterate Malice
against the Presbyterians. And the first instance we meet with of this kind,
is, That they were the First Aggressors, and impugned the Government of the
Church of Scotland by Presbytery, which was the first it had after the
Reformation. It is not a little surprising to see what pains the Presbyterians
take to delude the ignorant people into a belief, That our sirst Reformers
Condemned and Exploded the Ancient Government of the Church; and that it was no
less Odious to them than the Romish Superstitions. When there is nothing more
plain from History, than that at the beginning of the Reformation, there was
not the least Controversy about the Church Government, and the Bishops who did
not oppose the Reformation, were lest in full possession, not only of all their
Temporal Dignities, but likewise of their Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction.
Suc^ of the Bishops as persisted in the Romish Errors and Corrupti^ns, were not
allowed to Exercise their Spiritual Authority over the Clergy, but some of the
Reformed Communion, under the Name of Superintendants, were placed over their
Dioceses, and invested with the whole Episcopal Jurisdiction and Authority over
the Clergy of these Provinces, who were obliged (as appears from the Acts of
our National Synods Spotsw. Refut. Libel. de Reg. Eccl. Sco^. p. 21.
) to pay to their Superintendents, all the Canonical Obedience that is due to
other Bishops. And by a Commission of the Assembly met at Leith in January
1572, the Government of the Church was declared to be in the Archbishops and
Bishops, and their Elections to be made by the Dean and Chapter; which
Declaration was ratified by Act of Parliament the Ibi^. p. 26.
some year, and likewise by a General Assembly held at Perth in ^gust
thereafter. Till the year 1575, about fifteen years after the ^gal settlement
of our Reformation, there was not the least disturbance in the Kingdom about
the Government of the Church, that Mr. And. M^lvil returning ifrom G^eva, where
he had been bred up with the Presbyterian Parity, began to raise Commotions in
the Church, by attempting to have the Geneva Model Established in (...). But a
fu^ler Account of the Government of our Church after the Reformation, you may
see in a Treatise Published by Archbishop Spo^swood upon this Subject, and
Entitled Refutatio Libelli de Regimine Eccl^siae Sco^icanae; and likewise in a
late Discourse, ^*
where the same Argument is at Large considered, and in which it is undeniably
proved from the Records of Parliament, that Episcopacy was not only the first
Government Established in our Church, immediately upon the Reformation, but
wha^ is more, that although the Episcopal Authority was frequently Weakened and
Interrupted by the popular Insurrections of the Presbyterian Party; yet it was
never by Law Abolished in that Kingdom, till the unhappy Civil Wars broke out
under the Reign of King Charles I.

In the year 1592, when they pretend their great Idol of Parity was Erected,
there was indeed a greater Jurisdiction and Authority allowed by Act of
Parliament to Presbyteries and Synods, than what was Granted them before, which
the King was forced to yield to, to put a stop to the many Seditions and
Commotions raised by Melvil and his Accomplices. But yet notwithstanding this,
the Bishops did still continue to exist by Law, and in all Parliaments they did
Sit and Vote as the first of the three Estates, as appears from the Records of
these Parliaments. And in the year 1596. L^slie Bishop (...) Ross dying at
Brussels. Mr. David Lindsay was presented by the King to the Bishopric the
very next year; which is a plain demonstration that at that time Episcopacy was
looked upon as existent by Law; all which is made out very plainly and
evidently in this Apology,

But our Author will by no means allow the Superintendency Established The
occasion of settling S^perintendants in the Church of Scotland upon the
R^formation.
in the Church by our first Reformers, to be a Species of Prelacy. And his
Reasons are; first, That those Superintendents had the very same Form of
Ordination with other Minister^. Before I proceed to consider the force of this
Objection, it will be needful to premise something concerning the occasion of
this Institution. At the beginning of the Reformation it was not thought safe,
that the Popish Bishops, who still adhered to their Errors and Superstitions,
should be allowed to exercise their Spiritual Jurisdiction in the Church, and
therefore they were excluded therefrom, and others of the Reformed Communion,
being Vested with Episcopal Authority, were surrogated in their stead, and
called by the Name of Superintendents; the Sees of the Popish Bishops not being
Esteemed void, but supplied by Protestant Superintendents, who did not enjoy
any of the Temporal Privileges and Honors annexed to the Bishoprics. For
although the Popish Bishops were restrained from the exercise of their
Spiritual Power, yet such respect was had to them; that they were allowed
during their Lives to possess all the Revenues of their Bishopri^ks, and to Sit
and Vote in Parliament as Peers of the Realm. But such of the Bishops as went
along with the Reformation, were allowed, not only to enjoy all their Temporal
Privileges, but likewise to exercise their Spiritual Authority in the Church,
and no Superintendants Named for their Diocefes, as was for those of the Popish
Bishops.

Now, although we should grant our Author, that their Form o^ The (...) with
the whole Ep^copal Auth^rity and Jurisdict^on (...) the Cl^rgy of their D^ceses.
Ordination was not di^ferent; yet it cannot be denied, that they were invested
with the whole Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction over the Clergy of their
several Dioceses, which is the only Bugbear in Episcopacy, with which the
Presbyterians pretend to Quarrel, because they Usurp Lordship and D^minion over
their Brethren, They were clothed with full Power of Ordaining Presbyters, of
Suspending and Deposing them from their Sacred Function, of censuring and
punishing the Clergy, according to their several Crimes; and all this they were
Authorized to do Spotsw. Resut. p. ^. 21.
without asking the* Advice, or Consent of the rest of the Clergy, which is
more than our Bishops at present do. All Appeals from Presbyters and the
Inferior Clergy, were to be made to the Sup^rintendents; they were Ass. at St.
Johnsto^n Sess. 2. July 26. 1563.
to decide all Controversies in the Discipline of the Church, to preside in
Synods, and to direct the Church Censures inslicted by the rest of the Clergy.
All the Presbyters within their Dioceses were required, under the pain of
Deposition to be subject to their Government and Authority; and were not
allowed without the consent and approbation of the Superintendents, to transact
any thing of moment in the Church. So that they were invested with the whole
Power and Jurisdiction that belongs to Bishops; and this, methinks, should be
enough to stop the Mouths of the Presbyterian Party, who (as I have already
said) exclaim against nothing in this Sacred Order, but the Authority which
Bishops are allowed to have over the rest of the Cle^gy.

And as for their Ordina^ion, it seems at lest, that it was different ^.
from that of other Minist^rs, since those who were Nominated to be
Superintendants; were chose out of the Number of such, as had already received
the Orders of a Presbyter, and yet upon their Election to a Superin^endency,
they were again solemnly set apart by Prayer for that O^ice. Now it cannot be
imagined, that they should again receive the same Orders of a Presbyter, which
had been already conferred upon them; and therefore this second Mission,
mentioned upon their being chose Superintendents, can be meant of nothing else
but Episcopal Consecration, or something in the sense of the Church at that
time, equivalent to it. They ^ad long before received the Ordination of
Presbyters; and now when they were Elected Superintendents, they were set apart
for Hi, in Ministrorum ordinem ante coapta^i, ad hoc (...) munus solennibus
auspiciis de stinabantur, destina^i eligebantur, electi su^ctionem inibant.
Spotsw. Res. Libel. p. 3.
that Office, by certain solemn Rites and Ceremonies, which is a plain
Demonstration, that they were in a manner Consecrated anew to that Sacred
Function. Besides, it is not to be conceived, how they above other Presbyters,
could be invested with this Power of conferring Orders, and* exercising other
Acts of Jurisdiction which belong only to Bishops, unless it* were by having
this Episcopal Authority conferred upon them, by the hands of other Bishops,
and this they could without any difficulty obtain, from the hands of those
Bishops in Scotland, who had embraced the Reformed Communion. However, it is
not peremptorily said here; that the Ordination of Superintendents to the
Episcopal Of^ice, was altogether ^anonical: It is enough for our purpose, that
they being of new, solemnly set apart for a more eminent O^ice in the Church,
The Clergy and Lai^y had such a regard for the ^piscopal Order, That they
considered the Superintendents as such; and paid the same deference to them,
that formerly was due to the Bishops* so that, tho their distinct Ordinations
would not b^ mad^ evident from Hi^tory to be Canonical; yet their Power was
undoubtedly Episcopal.

There is nothing more notoriously false, than what this Author urges in the
second place against the Superintendents, That their (...) ways temporary as to
their Offic^, but only as to the Name. Spotsw. ^ist. ^. 150* 160.
Office was Temporary during the Exigence* of the Church. For in the Form of
Church Policy, which the Protestant Clergy offered to the Parliament in the
year* 1561, one of its Heads is concerning Superin^endents, and it is there
appointed, that the Election of Superintendants in after times, should be
stricter than the present circumstances would allow; and the last Head of that
Policy prescribes some conditions to be kept in future Elections of (...);
which is an evident proof, that our first Reformers did not look upon the
Office of Superintendents only as a Temporary thing. The Name I grant indeed to
have been temporary, and to have la^ted no longer in the Church, than during
the Natural Lives of the Popish Bishops. For while they were alive, their
Bishoprics with respect to their Temporalities, were not esteemed vacant; and
the Protestants who were set over their Dioceses, were called by the Name of
Superintendents; they not being invested with the Temporal Privileges of a
Bishop, but only with the spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction belonging to
that Office; but upon the Death of the Popish Bishops, we find, that whosoever
was presented to any of these Dioceses now falling void* by their Death, they
were not presented under the Name of Superintendents, as they had been
formerly, while the Popish Bishops were alive; but had now the Title of Bishops
given them, and were invested with all the temporalties, annexed to the
Bishoprics. Thus it is we sind in the Infancy of the Reformation, both Bishops
and Superintendants contemporary in the Church; but in a few years after, we
have no mention of Superintendents, and all the Governors of the Church go
under the Name of Bishops. And this, I should think, were enough to convince
any unbyassed Reader, that in those days the Office of Episcopacy and
Superintendency were both the same.

The Third Argument which he brings against the Superintendents, The
Super^ntendants giving an Account to a National Sy^od of their diligence in
their Functions, no Argument against their being Bishops.
is, That they were accountable to the Presbyters, which is altogether
inconsistent with Episcopacy. Although Bishops at their first Institution, were
invested with an Absolute Power over their Flocks, independent of any
Authority, but that of Jesus Christ their Head, and were accountable to none
for their right Administration of their Office but to him alone. Yet in after
Ages, by a mutual compact among themselves, they did agree, that for the better
preserving the Unity and Discipline of the Church; each Bishop should be
accountable for his Administration to the whole College of Bishops. And
therefore although the Bishops should yield up some of their Right, and for the
entertaining the better correspondence with the Clergy of their Dioceses,
condescend to give them an Account of their diligence in the Offices of their
Function, yet this could not be supposed to degrade them of their Office, or
make them to be no Bishops. We grant, that the Superintendents did yearly give
an Account of their Diligence in their Functions to a National Synod; but this
Synod consisted of none but the Superintendents, and Bishops of the other
Dioce^es, and of the most Eminent of the Presbyters, who were allowed by the
Superintendants, to sit in that Meeting. There was no Minister permitted to be
a Member of that Synod, till he was first approved of, by the Superintendants,
Spotsw. Refut. p. 22.
as a person sitly qualified to judge of such matters as were brought before
that Assembly. And I would willingly know of this Author, whether the
Superintendants were any more a^countable to this National Synod, than the
Bishops who went along with the Reformation, and notwithstanding of this their
being accountable, were still looked upon as Bishops, and left in full
possession of all their Temporal and Spiritual Rights, which they enjoyed
before the Reformation? And if those Men, who were acknowledged on all hands to
be Bishops, were as much accountable as the Superintend^nts; then it is no
Argument that the latter were no Bishops.

The next instance which this Author brings of the Episcopal Party, The
Enacting of these Penal Laws against the Presbyterians which this Author has
scraped together, occasioned merely b^ the frequent Rebellions of that Party.
their bearing an inveterate Malice against the Presbyterians, is a long
Enumeration of the Laws and Statutes made by King Charles II. and his
Parliaments, for suppressing the many Seditions and Rebellions raised against
his Government by the Presbyterian Faction. He sums up all the Acts of
Parliament made against that Rebellious Crew; and these he highly aggravates,
as the greatest instances of Cruelty in any Government. But as to this point,
the Learned and Worthy Sir George Mackenzie has quite stopped the Mouths of this
clamouring Party, by his excellent Treatise, wrote in defense of the
proceedings of the Government of K. Charles II. against the * Vindication of
the Government in Scotland, during the Reign of K. Charles II.
Presbyterian Dissenters. He has there given us a summary account of the mild
and calm Methods used by the Government to reclaim this obstinate Party, who
were even hardened in their Rebellious Principles. He shows, that the enacting
of these Penal ^aws against them (which this Author has scraped together) was
nothing but what the Governors of any Nation would have been, out of absolute
necessity, forced to do for its safety and security. He has collected the most
considerable of the pretended instances of Cruelty against particular persons,
which the Presbyterians do now most grievously complain of, and do mostly
insist upon in their Railings and Belchings against the Government. To all
these instances he has given such a full and satisfactory Answer; that every
impartial Reader must needs own and acknowledge, that these persons met with no
severity, but what their Rebellious and Treasonable Actings against the
Government did justly deserve; that the punishments inslicted upon them, for
their op^n and avowed designs of subverting the Monarchy, were conform to the
Laws of the Nation, and the proceedings in their Trials very fair and legal;
and that the Methods of proceeding in our Criminal Courts of Scotland, (which
this Author so grossly belies page 30. 31.) are the fairest and justest, and the
Panna^s indulged the greatest advantages for their own defense, of any Nation
in Europe. All which he has clearly demonstrated to the conviction of every
disi^teressed person; who upon Reading the History of these times will be apt
to say, that the mildness and clemency of that Government toward the
Rebellious Sectaries was its greatest Cruelty. So that it is but Labor in
vain, for this Author to be so sull and copious, in relating these sufferings
of his Party, unless he can disprove what Sir George Mackenzie, and others have
demonstrated against them, of their being guilty of such srequent Seditions and
Rebellions against the State, as would have provoked the mildest Government on
Earth, to have quite extirpated them. But all the Attempts which either this
Author, or another, who pretends to Answer the Vindication of K. Charles II.
Government, makes that way, are only some weak esforts upon Sir George's
personal ^ame and Reputation, which are sounded upon such a Rock, as the
greatest Malice of this party is not able to undermine. His admirable qualities
of Learning, Loyalty and Religion, have so justly recommended him to the Favor
and Esteem of all Virtuou^ and Ingenious Men, that for these Scriblers to
Attempt the blemishing of his ^ame; is to as little purpose, as the Dogs
barking at the Moon.

What this Author alleges against Sir George's ingenuous dealing The Nation
had sufficient ground to ena^t (...) Laws against the Presbyterians, from their
tr^asonable (...) the (...) R^gns of K Ja. 6. (...) ^. Chapter I.
in his Vindication, of Printing some Fanatical Covenants and Declarations,
published by the Presbyterians, and the urging these as ^ ground ^or enac^ing
those severe Laws against them; although the Laws were made long before the
publishing of th^se Declarations; I say, what he alleges on this score is most
notoriously false. For these Covenants and Declarations, were only annexed to
Sir G^orge's Vindication of the Government by the Publisher, and that with
design to let the World see, with what impudence this Party did accuse the
Government of severity, when it appears from their own Authentic Declarations,
that they were still pe^sisting obstinately in their Wicked and Rebellious
Practices against the State. There was no necessity of recurring to these
Posteriour Declarations of Rebellion, to justify the making of these Laws
against the Presbyterians; since their former Trea^onable Actings, under the
Reigns of K. James VI. and K. Charles I. were sufficient grounds to direct the
Wisdom of the Nation, to enact such Laws as might tend most ^o suppress the
sedition of Rebels, and secure the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom* Their
srequent Insurrections against K. Jam^s VI. in laying violent hands on his
person, at the Castle of Ruthven in the year 1582, and keeping him Prisoner
th^re, for several Months together; in raising an Army against him in the year
1585, in the South parts of the Kingdom, and advancing therewith straight
toward St^rlin where the King then was; and in tumultuously getting to Arms at
Edinburgh, and there Besieging the Session-House, where the King and his
Counselors were met together; and by that Insurrection had like to have done
considerable mischief, had not their Rage been stopped by the Loyalty of some
Citizens, who instantly Assembled together in Defense of the King's Person; and
the many other Commotions they raised against his Government by their Seditious
Libels and Sermons; besides that the whole Reign of King Charles the First,
that most just and clement Prince, was nothing else but a perpetual Succession
of Rebellions raised against him by these Presbyterian Votaries. I say, all
these Instances of their Treasonable and Rebellious Practices in former Times
are su^ficient Grounds to justify the Nation, in Enacting such ^aws as might
best prevent these Disturbances for the future, without having any recourse to
these After-Monuments of their R^bellion to justi^ie the Proceedings of the
Government against them. However the Reader may easily judge from these
Covenants and Declarations, whether any Government or Society can possibly
subsist where such pernicious Principles and Practices are tolerated.

But that it was merely the frequent Rebellions of this Party against That this
was the tr^e occasion of Enacting these P^nal Law^, appears from our A^thors
own Concessions.
the State, which occasioned the Enacting of these Laws against them, does
partly appear from this Author's own Concessions. For, Page 1^. he owns, That
their Field meetings, which they had under pretense of Religion, were called by
the Parliament, Rendevouzes of Rebellion: And Page 14. he grants, That after
the Deseat they received at their Insurrection of Bo^hwel-bridge, the Prisoners
were all set at Liberty upon this only Condition, of giving Bond never to rise
in Arms against the King on any pretense whatsoev^r; and yet a great many of
them were still so hardened in their Rebellion, as to refuse their Liberty upon
such easy Terms. And yet, methinks* these were no very hard Conditions s^om
such a persecutiug Government as they are pleased to represent it; but from
hence we may easily perceive, that the whole Design of the Government and its
Ministers in Enacting these Laws, was only to secure the Peace and Quiet of the
Nation, and by all the calm Methods imaginable to reclaim these deluded
Creatures from their Seditious and Treasonable Practices against the State. And
after Argil^'s Rebellion in the Year 1685, which threatened nothing less than
the utter ruin of the Monarchy, and in which the whole Presbyterian Party were
engaged, when Argile himself was made Captive, his whole Forces dispersed, and
many of them taken Prisoners, and so lying at the Mercy of the Government; yet
such was its Clemency toward them, that besides those who were killed in the
Skirmishes betwixt the two Armies, I Am confident there were not four in the
whole Nation that suffered Death upon that account. So mercifully were they
then dealt with, although now they complain of the greatest Oppression! Again,
Page 15. our Author confesses, That a Party of the Presbyterians did declare
King Charles the Second to have forfeited his Right to the Crown, and to be no
more King, and at the same time, because of his Vicious Life, they
Excommunicated him; which this Author expressly justifies them in, by saying,
They had more Honesty than Policy in d^ing so. And whether the Tolerating such
kind of Practices as these be not altogether inconsistent with the safety of
any Government, I leave my Reader to judge. Can the mildest Government on Earth
wink at such open and avowed Designs of subverting the Monarchy? Can it suffer
a number of deluded People to range up and down the Country like as many wild
Bears, threatening Destruction to the State and all its Ministers, declaring it
Lawful to Murder all such as had any Hand in the Government of the Nation, and
putting these Threatenings in Execution against some of the ^oyal Subjects? Can
it be imagined, that any Government should Tolerate such pernicious Courses,
and so destructiv^ of its own Security, without endeavoring to bring the
Ringleaders and Incendiaries of this Rebellion to condign Punishment? And after
this account of the occasion of the Presbyterians Sufferings, I ^hink I may
very confidently appeal to any disinteressed Person, whether the Episcopal
Party had not very good reason to complain of their present Persecution in
Scotland, as being more Grievous than any Treatment the Presbyterians ever met
with; since what they susfered, (and are pleased to call by the Name of
Persecution,) was always for their Rebellion and Treasonable Conspiracies
against the Government. But what the Episcopal Party do now suffer, or have
suffered since this Revolution at the Presbyterians hands, is merely for
Maintaining and Asserting the Principles of our Religion, and Adhering to the
Communion of the Catholic Church, without which they can pretend no just Title
to the Privileges of the Gospel.

Although there is nothing more clear and evident than that what It (...) ^he
con^ant practic^ of the (...) to (...) their (...) un^r the name of Religion.
the Presbyterians suffered under the late Reigns was merely for their
Rebellion; yet this Author has the confidence to persuade us, Page 13. That all
their Sufferings were upon the account of Religion, and at the Instigation of
the Episcopal Cl^rgy. If the Presbyterians will needs cover their Treasonable
Designs against the State always with the Name of Religion, and when they are
punished for Rebellion, pretend that they suffer for Conscience Sake, who can
help it? But it is evident from the Laws enacted against them, and the
Punishments inflicted upon some of their Party, that whatever Pretenses they
might make to Religion, yet the State took notice only of their Rebellion. If
they, under a pretense of judging it unlawful to hear the Episcopal Ministers
preach, shall abstain from Church, and meet together (sometimes all of them in
Arms) in their House and Field-Conventicles, the better to carry on their
Designs against the State, and there Preach nothing but Treason and Rebellion;
and if the Government upon this account shall strictly prohibit all such
seditious Meetings, and punish those who frequent them; can this, I beseech
you, be called Susfering for Religion? And yet this is the very case of our
Presbyterians; for their Meetings were Prohibited by Act of Parliament, chiefly
upon account of the Sedition and Rebellion vented in them. But this is no new
thing in our Presbyterians; it has been not only their constant Practice, but
likewise of all other Seditious and Ambitious Persons, in subverting the
Government of a Kingdom, in overturning States and Nations always to cover
their wicked Designs of Rebellion with the specious pretext of Religion. To
amuse and delude the vulgar sort of People, they publi^h in their Declarations,
That they design nothing by their Attempts, but the good and safety of
Religion, when in the mean time any thinking or considering Man may clearly
perceive, that they have no other Design or Aim before their Eyes, but to
promote their own wicked and ambitious Ends. Now to deal with Religion in this
dissembling and hypocritical manner, to shelter their villainous Designs under
the Patronage of the Just and Holy GOD, is such a contempt of Religion and all
that is Sacred, such an Act of Wickedness and Villainy, as the Divine Justice
cannot easily Pardon.

Upon what Ground our Author alleges, That their Sufferings T^ Suff^rings of
the Pr^sbyterians no ways pr^moted by the Episcopa^ Cl^rgy.
were at the Instigation of the Episcopal Clergy, I cannot r^adily conjecture.
I am sure many Instances may be brought to prove the contrary, where the Clergy
have interceeded with the Government in behalf of many of these Rebels who were
most obnoxious to Punishment, and by their importunate Intercessions have saved
their Lives, thinking by these calm and mild Methods to rec^aim them from their
Errors and strong Delusions. Indeed the Event proved far otherwise, for in our
late Distractions, these Men, who had been so mercifully dealt with, were the
most furious and violent in carrying on the Commotions against the State, and
the Persecution against the Clergy. Nay, their Ingratitude was such, that they
alone occasioned the rabbling of those very Clergymen, who had formerly been
so instrumental in rescuing them from the Gallows* But I would willingly ask
our A^thor here, Whether he can charg^ any of our Clergy with Petitioning the
Government for the Execution of any of these Rebels, as the custom was in
former times when Presbytery had Usurped the Government both of Church and
State. Many Instances of this kind might be here produced to show the Cruelty
of the Presbyterian Party, how their Teachers during the late Civil Wars did
often Petition the Committee of Estates for a speedy Execution of the
Pris^ners, when they were all of them Men of extraordinary Wo^th and Integrity,
and had no Crime alleged against them but Loyalty to their Prince, as was done
by the Commission of the Kirk (...) a^ P^rth in the Year 1645; and how they
have persuaded the Generals of their Armies to put those Prisoners to the (...)
of the Sword, who had surrendered themselves upon Quarters asked and given, as
they did after the Defeat of Mon^rose by David L^sly at Philiphaugh in the same
Year 1645. For the Foot Vid. Spirit of Calumny.
in Montrose's Army surrendered themselves upon Quarters, which the General
readily granted; but the Presbyterian Ministers, who were then in the Army,
were highly enraged that Quarters should be given to such Wretches as they, and
declared it to be an act of most sinful Impiety to spare them, and so by their
Importunity they prevailed with D. L^sly to suffer the Army to be let loose
upon them, and cut them all in pieces. Many such Instances of their Cruelty
might be here produced from the History of these Times, but I purposely forbear
to mention any more of them.

This, I think, is all that is needful to be said here in Answer to The
Min^sters ^f State under King Charles's Government, sufficiently vindicated
from our Author's Asp^rsions of Cru^lty.
our Author's First Part, since Sir George Mackenzie in the abovenamed Treatise
has already demonstrated to the satisfaction of all disinteressed Persons, that
what the Presbyterians suffered under the former Reigns was occasioned merely
by their own Rebellion, and could not in any justice be imputed to the severity
of the Government. And the same Reasons that justify the Government in
Enacting these Laws against the Presbyterians, will likewise Vindicate those
Noble Persons who were employed either in the State or Army under that
Government, from the Aspersions of Cruelty thrown upon them by thi^ Scribler.
If the Government be endangered by the Tumults and Insurrections of a Party,
must the Ministers thereof overlook such dangerous Practices, and not put the
Laws in execution against the Incendiaries of these Commotions? Though I am
certain it was done with the greatest Tenderness and Lenity imaginable by those
Gentlemen whom this Author in his Pamphlet accuses of the greatest Cruelty.
Most of the Persons concerned in the Administration of Affair^ under that
Government, especially those whom he chiefly vents his Malice against, Page 26.
are known to be Men of such Worth and Merit, that our Author does his Party no
small prejudice, by letting the World know, that their Practices have been
such, as to provoke Men of that Honor and Quality to be their Enemies.

But before I put an end to this Chapter, I must consider one Particular A
short Narrative of the (...) of the Counc^l against some (...) ^rned ou^ in
166^.
more which this Author urges as an Instance of the severity of that
Government, and where the Parties that did Susfer cannot be so (...) said to
have susfered for Rebellion, though they may justly enough be charged with an
obstinate and peevish Cont^pt of the lawful Commands of their Superiors. It is
Page 6. w^ere he says, That by the Instigation of the Prelates, the Council by
their Act, October. 1662. turned out 300 Ministers out of their Churches, without
^ither Accusation, Citation, Conviction or Sentence, or a Heaving allowed them.
To answer this Objection, there needs no more but a true Narrative of the
Matter of Fact, which I shall here set down as briefly as I can, and then leave
it to the Judgment of my Reader, whether this Matter, when truly represented,
can be with any reason urged as an Instance of the Severity of that Government.
In the Year 1649. when there was no King in our (...), and the Presbyterians at
liberty to act as they liste^, the Right of Patronages was abolished by Act of
Parliament; and after the Restoration of the Royal Family, there was an Act of
Parli^ment in the Year 1662, restoring this Right to the Patrons, and requiring
all the ^lergy to take Presentations from them, under the^ pain of ^orfeiting
their Churches. But that the present Incumbents, who had entered to their
Churches without a P^esentation from the Patron, might not sustain any Damage
by this Act, it was th^reby provided, That the Patrons should give
Presentations to none but to those Persons who were in actual possession of the
Churches, and had entered thereto by the Call of the People. There were sever^l
P^esbyterian Ministers who refused to give any Compli^nce with this Act of
(...), and would take no Presentation from the Patron; and therefore the Vid.
(...)
Privy Council issued out a Proclamation, requiring all the Clergy comply with
this Act of Parliament, and declaring the Plac^s of those void who refused to
yield Obedience thereto. Upon which the Non-Compliers of their own accord (so
that there was no need (...) of Accusation or Sentence against them) abstained,
after the Time limited by the Act, from the Exercise of their Ministry, and the
Patrons took care to present others to the vacant Churches. But I cannot see
the least shadow of reason, why this Act should b^ urged a^ an Inst^uce of so
great severity in the Government, since there was not the least harm thereby
intended to the Clergy; the design of the Act was only to secure the Rights of
particular Persons which had been i^croached upon in the Presbyterian
Usurpations; for the Ministers that had been in possession of their Churches
before the Year 1649, and had received Presentations from the right Patrons,
were not included in this Act, but remained in their Settlements as before; and
such as were now willing to own the Right of their Pat^ons, by taking
Presentations from them, were allowed to keep their Churches, and the Patrons
obliged to give Presentations to them, and to none else if they were willing to
accept of them. So that whatever may be objected against the Uncanonicalness of
the Proceedings against them, (though even that may be justified, since all the
Bishops concurred with what was done by the Council in that matter,) that their
Sentence of Deprivation ought to have been pronounced by a Spiritual rather
than a Lay-Court, and that the Bishops were more competent Judges to deprive
them of the Exercise of their Mi^istry than the Privy Council; yet I am sure
there is not the least ground to urge it as an act of Severity in the
Government, since these Ministers were permitted to keep their Churches upon
such easy Terms, and the mildness of the Government toward them was such,
that many of them, notwithstanding they absolutely refused to comply with this
Act of Parliament, or own the Authority of their Bishops, were indulged by the
favor of the Bishops to keep peaceable Possession of their Churches, although
this Author maliciously insinuates, that all their Sufferings were occasioned
by the Instig^ion of ^he Pr^lates. But a ^uller Account of this you have in a
late Discourse* Entitled, An Account of the late Establishment of (...)
Government by the Parliament of Scotland, Anno 1690. Page 14.

CHAP. II.
OUR Author in his Second Part con^ines himself to a particular Consutation of
the Treatise, Entitled, The Scots Presbyterian El^quence; but before he b^gins
to take it to task, he is very high in his Pan^gyricks upon the Lord, (...) and
M^lvil. I don't incline to make any particular Re^lexions either upon the Parts
or Integ^ity of these two Lords, the Tree may be easily known by its Fruits:
but this I must beg our Author's leave to say, That as for their share in this
ba^barous Pe^secution of our Clergy, let them use all the means imaginable to
conceal it from the Eyes of Strangers, let them deny it never so impudently,
yet their own Consciences, and the starving O^phans of many of our poor Cle^gy,
will appear as dreadful Witnesses against them, in that Great an^ Te^rible Day,
when they are called to give an Account of all their Actions, whether good or
bad. And all the harm I wish them is, that they may at last seriously reflect
upon the great Injustice and Barbarity of their Proceedings toward our Clergy,
that so by their unfeigned Repentance they may Atone for these Crimes, and save
their Souls in the Day of the Lo^d.

In the next place, he accuses the Author of the Presbyterian Eloqu^nce, The
(...) have justisied the Murder of the Archbishop of S. Andrews in the face of
(...) upon (...) o^cusions.
for asserting a great many Untruths in his Book; and* p. 36. he instances in
that, of charging the Presbyterians with the Murder of the A.BP. of St. (...);
^or (says he) the Presbyterians were so far from approving it, that they
refused the (...) to those con^erned in it, particularly at the Sco^s (...) in
(...). What Abhorrence the Presbyterians in Holland had of this barba^ous
Murder, I cannot well say; but this I Am sure of, that our Presbyterians in
Scotland were so far from detesting it, that they generally approved of it as a
most Noble and Glorious Action; and I dare boldly affirm, that never one of the
Party there refused to admit the Murderers to their Sacraments, or ever offered
to inflict any other Censure upon them for this heinous Villainy. On the
contrary, it is notorious how most of the Presbyterians that suffered for their
Rebellion in Scotland did justify this Murder in the face of Authority, and
commended it as an act of good Service done to God and his Church in delivering
them from such an Oppressor. This our Author's impudence ca^ hardly serve him
to deny boldly enough, and therefore he is satisfied rather to recriminate the
Matter upon the Episcopal Party, by charging the Privy Council of Sc^tland with
Hanging five Men in Magus-Moor as the (...) Murderers, though never one of them
^ad seen a Bishop. These Men were punished by a lawful Authority, and conform
to the Laws of the Land; for though they were not the Murderers of the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, yet they were notoriously guilty of Treason and
Rebellion against the Government; and these Crimes being sufficiently proved
against them, and they justifying and approving of the Archbishop's murder, I
think it was no breach, either of the Laws of God or Man, to make them a
public ^xample for the ter^ifying other wicked Offenders, and securing the
Peace of the Society for the future.

He says likewise, That the Council hanged Mr. Mitchel for shooting at Page 37.
the said Archbishop, though he missed ^im. But although this Villain Mitchel's
Execution justified.
happened to miss of his Design against the Archbishop of St. Andrews, yet the
Bishop of Orkney being then in Coach with the Archbishop, was unfortunately
wounded with the same Shot, which occasioned his Death, tho not very shortly
after. Now I can hardly think, that any good Man would ever offer to condemn
the punishing of such a Villainy; and r^ally I very much wonder, that this
Author regards so little the Credit and Reputation of his own Party, as to over
so publicly to countenance or excuse such Villainous Practices, as have justly
rendered that Party odious to the whole World. What he alleges about the Earl
of Rothes and the Council their promising Mitchel his Life upon Confession, is
nothing but a mere Fiction: For I am credibly informe^, that they solemnly
declared before the Justice Court, That they never made him any such Promise;
and certainly if they had, they were all of them Men of more Honor and
Integrity than to have retracted it.

This Author is at a great deal of pains to prove, that Presbytery Page 39.
is mo^e popular in Scotland than Episcopa^y, which has ever been much The
making the Inclinations of the People the Standard of Church Government, is of
very fatal consquences to the (...) of Relig^on.
insisted upon by the Presbyterians as a great Argument for the Lawfulness of
their Government, as if any Principle or Doctrine were the True^, because
agreeable to the Inclinations of the People. If this be the Standard of Truth,
why was not Christianity exploded, and Heathenism still continued, as being
more suitable to the Humors of the People? This is such a Foundation for the
Truths of our Religion, as will go near to subvert all its Doctrines; since
many of them are so far from being popular, that they are downright Enemies to
Fle^h and Blood, and oblige us to abstain from all those Worldly Pleasures
which we so greedily pursue. It Is but a bad sign of the weakness of a Cause,
when they flee for shelter to the fickle and unconstant Humors of the Vulgar;
when they betake themselves to such weak and frivolous Arguments in defense of
their Government, it is a shrewd indication they are at a loss for better to
produce. This new Method we have taken up to promote Religion, by establishing
nothing that is contrary to the Inclinations of a People, may chance to have
more fatal Consequences than we at present seem to be aware of. The settling
the Government of the Church upon such a slippery Foundation, disposes People
to look upon it as a thing altogether indifferent and ambulatory, so that each
Nation may set up what form of Church Government they please. But if we
consider a little the Nature and Constitution of the Christian Religion, we'll
soon find that the Government of the Church is not of such an ambulatory
Nature, and that it is a very essential part of the Constitution, yea so
essential, that it is not in the power of Man to alter it. For God having
established his Church as a Society, and invested it with peculiar Privileges
belonging thereto; he must be allowed to have settled and established a
distinct Order of Persons for the governing it, and for admitting Members to a
right to all those Privileges which he has appropriated to the Members of the
Society. And if he has separated a certain Order of Persons for this Office,
and empowered them, and them alone, to seal his Covenants in his Name, it must
needs be Sacrilege in the highest degree for any to usurp that Office, without
a due and legal Call from those whom God has appointed to conveigh his
Authority. And God can never be obliged by the acts of those Persons whom he
never authorized to represent him, no more than a King can be said to be under
any obligation to rati^ie the acts of any one that usurps his Authority, and
falsely pretends to be his Ambassador. So that to alter the Government of the
Church from what it was at first constituted by our Savior, is nothing less
than to undermin^ the whole ground of our Salvation, since we can have no Title
to the Benefits of the Gospel, but as we are Members of Christ's Church here on
Earth; and we cannot pretend to be Members, unless we b^ admitted into the
Society by those Persons whom God has delegated to that Office, and entrusted
with that Power. But notwithstanding the impertinence and weakness of this
Argument in Vindication of the Church Government, yet since our Author insults
so mightily upon it, I shall comply with him so f^r as to consider the grounds
of his Assertion; only I would caution the Reader never to lay stress on such
kind of Arguments, as are altogether incompetent, and of no force to prove the
Truth of any Principle of Religion. For there is no Doctrine which is in it
self false, that can be justified by never so general a reception of it; and
therefore, it can be no Argument of the lawfulness of any form of Church
Government, that it is the most agreeable to the Inclinations of the People.

All his Evidences to prove, that Presbytery is more popular in The
^Presbyterians having made more Insurrections in the Kingdom, in behalf of
their Church Government, than the Episcopal Church have thought fit to do, is
no Argum^t that (...) is more (...) in Scotland, (...)
Scotland than Episcopacy, amount to no more than this, that the Presbyterians
have made more Insurrections in behalf of their Government, than the Episcopal
Church ever thought fit to do. And that this is not sufficient evidence enough
to prove their point, will easily appear from hence. The Principles of our
Presbyterians with respect to Monarchy, are of a very large extent; they make
the Supreme Power of the Nation accountable to his Subjects, and allow he may
be resisted and Dethroned for his Maladministration. So that, if the
Sovereign shall at any time think sit to m^ke such Alterations, either in
Church or State, as do not exactly quadrate with the Wild Humors and Fancies
of that Party; then they instantly betake themselves to Arms, and resolve to
involve the Nation into Blood and Confusion, rather than fail of having their
unaccountable Humors gratified. But the Episcopal Church of that Kingdom have
greater restraints upon them; they own, in Consormity to the Laws of the Rea^,
and to the Laws of God in his first Institution of Government; that the Supreme
Power is irresistible, and cannot for any Male Administration be Dethroned by
his Subjects; that if he be guilty of any Illegal or Unjustifiable Actions in
his Government, he is accountable to none for them, but to God alone. And
therefore, although the Sovereign should chance to ^stablish such
Constitutions, either in Church or State, as are contrary both to the Laws of
God, and the particular Laws of the Realm; yet by reason of their strict
Obligations to absolute submission, they are not at Liberty to Rise in Arms,
and assert their Rights that are thus encroached upon. They may indeed very
lawfully refuse their actual concurrence and compliance with these sinful
Constitutions; but to resist or Dethrone their Sovereign upon that Account, is
what they are not able to Justify, either by the Laws of God, or the Laws of
the Nation. This is, and has been the constant Principle and Doctrine of our
Church; and if any of its Members have Acted contrary thereto, they have in so
far deserted the Principles of their Church, and slighted their Sacred Vows and
Obligations, and therefore ought in Conscience speedily to return to their
Duty. The Reason why the Episcopal Church Act more submissively to the Lawful
Powers than the Presbyterians, is not, that there lie stricter Obligations to
Obedience upon the one Party than the other; no, they are both subject to the
same Laws, are obliged to own the same Prince; and are under the same
Obligations and Ties of Conscience to submit and adhere to him. But the
difference lies here, that the Episcopal Church make some Conscience of
performing their Duty, and of Walking answerably ^o their Vows and Obligations;
and resolve, in Conformity to their ^imitive Ancestors; rather to suffer
Pe^secution than be guilty of Rebellion. On the contrary, the Presbyterians
sacrific^ a^l Duties to the Interest of their Party; and where that is
concerned, make light of all Obligations: So that, whoever considers the
different Principles of both these Parties, will never conclude from hence,
that Presbytery is more popular in Scotland than Episcopacy, merely, because
there have been more popular Insurrections for it, than for the other; since
the Presbyterians think it lawful to Rebel upon that account, and the Episcopal
Church look upon it as altogether unjusti^iable to resist the lawful Powers
upon any account, even of Religion it self.

As for what our Author urges concerning the great Party that This l^st
Conv^ntion having abolis^ d Episcopacy, and establish^d Presbyt^ry, is no good
Argum^nt, that the Presbyterians have the majority of the Nation on their side.
appeared for the Presbyterian Government in this last Convention, which
Abolished Episcopacy, and Established Presbytery; I shall plainly make it
appear, that this can be no Argument, that they have the Majority of the Nation
on their side. At the time when this Convention was called in Scotland, the
Affairs of our Nation were in such a distracted condition, as made the Event
altogether uncertain; and upon this account many of the Episcopal Gentlemen who
were wont formerly to be Members of Parliament, thought it safer to keep out of
public business, and therefore refused to be Elected by those Shires and
Buroughs whom they used always to represent in Parliament. Nay, some of them
were so averse from being Elected themselves, that they would not so much as be
present to Vote at the Election of others, thinking it to be a direct breach of
their Ties and Oaths to the Government, and particularly that of the Test, to
meet or consult about the A^airs of the Nation without the consent of the King.
So that at many of the Elections one third part of the Members concerned
therein refused to be present, and the Episcopal Gentlemen declining to be
Elected, there was no opposition made to any that would stand; and this was
certainly the Reason why more Presbyterian Members ^rept into this Convention,
than ever durst appear in the like Assembly before. But notwithstanding this
great advantage the Presbyterians had in these Elections; yet even in the
Convention, had not the Episcopal party been divided among themselves about the
Civil Government, their Adversaries could never have gained any ground upon
them, in altering the State of our Church. For many of the Episcopal Nobility
and Gentry being dissatisfied about the lawfulness of the State Revolution,
withdrew from the Convention of Estates before the Affairs of the Church were
considered; and this you must needs suppose, was no small diminution of the
interest of the Episcopal Church in that Convention, and enabled the
Presbyterians to do there as they pleased. And so I think this short Account of
the State of our Nation at that time is sufficient to convince the Reader; that
although Presbytery was Established by that Convention; yet it by no means
follows, that the Majority of ou^ Nation inclines to that Government. It Is
known to any who are the least conversant in the Affairs of our Country, that
the persons who are mostly drawn away with the strong delusions of that party,
are but of the meaner and vulgar sort, and those only in the Western parts of
the Kingdom; but the greatest part of our Nobility and Gentry* are Men of more
Judgment and Reason, of a freer and more Noble Education, than to be so
infatuated, or deluded by vain and imaginary Dreams. And therefore to clear
them from this imputation of Meanness thrown upon them by this Author, and in
his own Phrase, to cut the Throat of this Objection once for all, that we may
not be hereafter any more stunned with the Noise hereof; I could have subjoyned
hereunto a LIST of all our Nobility that are not Popish, and have Ranked them
according as they are affected, either to the Episcopal, or Presbyterian
Government; but being at such a distance, cannot have it exact. And if it were
not a thing of unsufferable Toil, and of little or no moment, to make an exact
List of the Gentry of the Nation, I could show a far greater Disparity among
them, with Respect to this Affair, than could even here appear in the List of
the Nobility, and yet it might be evident from it, how vastly considerable the
Episcopal Interest is among them, beyond that of the Presbyterian.

Another of the untruths with which this Author charges his Adversary, Page 42.
is, for asserting, That the Episcopal Rulers and Ministers used all Christian
and discreet Me^hods to gain Dissenters. And why our Author should have so much
Malice as to deny this known Truth, I cannot well imagine, for it is certain,
that the behavior of the The Methods (...) by the Ep^scopal (...) for (...)
^he (...) s^ewn to be v^ry (...) sin^ ^t the (...) of K. (...) were ^w or (...)
b^t what ^yned in Communion with the (...) Church.
Episcopal Clergy toward the Presbyterian Dissenters, was truly Christian and
Brotherly; they used all fair and discreet Methods to reclaim them from their
Errors and Delusions, and their endeavors that way were, by the blessing of
God so successful, that at the time when K. James Granted his Indulgence to his
Subjects, there were scarcely any Presbyterians in the whole Nation (^xcept a
few Wild Camer^ans, who betook themselves to the Hills) that did not actually
join in Communion with the Episcopal Church* their very Teachers came
punctually to Church, and attended upon the Ministry of the Episcopal Clergy;
they were constant Hearers of their Sermons, and frequently Received the
Sacraments from their Hands. Now I would gladly know of our Adversaries, what
plausible Reason they can give for deserting our Communion, after the
Promulgation of this Indu^gence, when they thought it lawful to join with us
before. What excuse can they pretend for ^o groundless a Separation, to
separate from a Communion, which they themselves owned to be lawful, by their
joining therein? Our Constitution still remained the same; there was no
Alteration in it, that could afford them the least pretext for leaving our
Communion; and Episcopacy can never be urged in their Defense, since by their
former practice, they declared it lawful to Communicate with Bishops. Methinks,
that if they had any true Notio^s of Schism, they might soon perceive how (...)
of it lies against them upon this score, and it concerns them highly to
Vindicate themselves in this point, and to show that, by separating from a
lawful Established Communion, which they themselves by ^oyning with it, owned
to be lawful, (...) in which there were no (...) Terms required, they were no
ways guilty of Schism.

Page 43. He accuses his Adversary of downright Lying, because T^ (...)
practice in ^Wird^ o^r (...) P^yer alto^ther (...).
he asserts, That the Presbyterians ^ve justled out, and (...) the Lord'^
Prayer, and Abolished the Reading ^f the Scriptur^s in Church^s; and yet with
the same Breath, he confesses the Assertion to be true, and endeavors to
Vindicate their practice therein. He alleges the frequent Use of the Lord's
Prayer, is a mere profaning of it, and upon this Account, he thinks the
Presbyterians may totally abstain from the use thereof; which is such an
instance of Veneration to Sacred things, as is not often to be met with; that
because a Sacred thing may sometimes chance to be abused to Superstition,
therefore we must altogether slight and contemn it. May not we upon the same
ground likewise abstain from Worshipping God, since the Divine Worship has been
prophan^d by the Heathenish Superstitions, in paying that Adoration to
inanimate Creatures, which is due only to the Eternal and Infinite Being? But
the Presbyterian practice in this contempt of our Saviors Prayer, is so very
ridiculous, and many of their party have uttered such Blasphemous Expressions
concerning it, that they deserve no small Rebuke. And I don't see how they can
well Vindicate themselves from what is charged upon them by the Author of the
Presbyterian Eloquence, that when a Presbyterian Minister was Staged before one
of their own Judicatories for this Blasphemous Expression, That if ever our
Savior was Drunk, it was when he composed his Prayer, they would not so much
as enquire into the Truth of this Accusation, notwithstanding it was brought
before them, by a person of known Honor and Integrity, who had been one of the
Judges of the Nation, and offered to prove the Truth of his Accusation, by the
Testimony of such Witnesses as could not be well rejected. Now methinks, that
although their concern for punishing such Blasphemous Expressions had not
influenced them, yet at least the deference they owed to a Man of his Character
and Quality, ought to have engaged them to take this matter into their
cognizance, and make some enquiry into it; and what excuse they can pretend for
this Neglect I cannot apprehend, the matter of Fact being so Notorious, that
there was no denying it? Their Abolishing the Reading of the Scriptures in
Churches is likewise so generally known, that our Author does not offer to deny
it. It is customary in the Church of Sc^tland, that always at the beginning of
Divine Service, the Clerk is appointed to Read two or three Chapters, in the
Old or New Testament, for the Instruction of those who come sooner to Church
than others; that their thoughts being taken up with hearing the Holy
Scriptures Read, they may have no occasion to spend that time in gazing about
them in the Church, or entertaining one another with trivial Discourses; and
this the Clerk continues to do, till the usual time that the Congregation be
fully met. This practice the Presbyterians have quite Abolished, and instead of
the Scriptures, have set up their more Sacred Oracles, the confused Farce of
some of their Sermons, which they Order to be Read, for the Edification of
their Auditors, till the usual time that their Sermon begins.

The Malicious Charactersthis Author gives of the English and Scots Gentry as
well as Cler^y.
Our Author Page 47. Quarrels his Adversary, for saying, That the Author of the
Brief and True Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland; bestows the
Characters of Godless Miscreants, infamous Parricides, Sorcerers, and
incestuous Apostates upon the Scots Gentry, as well as Clergy. And although he
will not allow the truth of this in that Author whom he endeavors to
vindicate, yet he himself is so very civil as to Treat them at the same
scurrilous rate in many places of his Book. As for the Clergy, he spares none
of their Rank or Order, but represents them all as the worst of Men, and
belches out his Vomit against them in such obscene and scurrilous Language, as
any modest Man would have been ashamed to utter. The Episcopal Gentry both of
England and Scotland he represents as Robbers and Murderers; as generally
Profane Page 23.
and Debauched; as Men void of all manner of Religion, Page 38.
who, in stead of freq^enting the Religious Assemblies, do haunt Bawdy-houses,
and are drunk in Taverns and Alehouses. But it is Page 13.
no wonder he should Tre^t our Clergy and Gentry at this rate, when he has not
the least respect to the Sacred Persons of our Princes; them he repres^nts as
wa^owing in their Sins and Uncleanness, and avowing their Adulteries as Sodom.
And what Treatment the Author of such Villainous Re^lexions does deserve, I
leave the Reader to judge. To Treat the Sacred Persons of Princes and Prelates,
the Anointed of the Lord, in such a scurrilous manner, to wound the Reputation
of Men of known Honor and Integrity at this rate, is such a piece of ^illany
as can hardly receive a sufficient Punishment. Can any Man that is not totally
void of Religion write in this Inhumane and Unchristian manner? To represent
all that differ in Principles from them as worse than Infidels; this is such an
act of Malice as I believe was never practiced among Heathens or Barbarians,
and it is no small (...) to our Religion, that any who call themselves by the
name of Christ should be guilty of such barbarous Practices.

This Scribler endeavors, Page 52. to answer an Objection which The settling
or (...) Matters of Religion in com^liance with the Hum^urs of the (...), (...)
in (...) to (...) ^he (...).
his Adversary brings against their new and unheard of Practice, of settling
and abrogating Matters of Religion, even those that are most essential,
according as they are either agreeable or contrary to the inconstant Humors of
the Vulgar. His Argument runs thus; That upon the same Grounds our
Presbyterians in Scotland declared Episcopacy to be Anti-humane, Christianity
must be Anti-humane in Turkey, and Protestantism in France and Spain; and
therefore ought in all Equity to be rejected by them, they being contrary to
this new Standard, the Inclinations of the People. This Argument a ^ri is so
very conclusive, and presses our Author so hard, that in stead of Confuting,
he is forced to yield to it; and he very fairly gran^s, that if Christianity or
Protestantism be contrary to the Inclinations of the People in these Parts,
they may reje^t it as Anti-humane, and it ought no ways to be imposed upon
them. I wish this Author would but consider a little, whither this Principle of
his carries him, what absurd and pernicious Consequences he is forced to grant,
and what great disservice he does to the Interest of Religion merely through a
blind and mistaken Zeal for his own Cause. It seems strange to see Men so
hurri^d away with the Spirit of Contradiction, as not to discern such plain and
obvious Consequences. Is it possible at this rate ev^r to mak^ any Conv^rts to
the Christian or Reformed Religion, except where it alr^ady g^nerally prevails?
And how the Christian Religion could at first be propagated through the World
according to this new Principle, is a thing impossible to conceive. I would
gladly know of this A^or, what Arguments he can pos^bly bring to convert these
Heathen Nations to the Christian, or to p^rswade the Popish Countri^s to
^mbrace the Reformed Religion? They can (...) retort upon him his own Argument,
That the Christian Religion being contrary to the Inclinations of the People in
these Parts, they ought to declare it to be (...), and no ways to (...) it, and
how our Author can well ev^de the forc^ of this Argum^nt I do not appr^hend. If
the Inclinations of the People must needs be the Standard of Truth, I Am sure we
can have no hopes of their Conversion, since they a^ by this Principle obliged
to persist in their Idolatri^s and Corruptions, and the Popish Countries must
still adhere to their Errors and Superstitions. If any of them desert their
Errors, and ^mbrace the true Religion, then, according to our Author's
Hypothesis, they embrace what is Antihumane, and what they ought to r^ject as
being contrary to the Inclinations of the People. The only thing our Author
comforts himself with in this matter, is, that he is con^ident the People of
these Countri^s can never declare the Christian or Protestant Religion to be
contrary to their Inclinations. But upon what Evidence he grounds his
Confidence, I cannot easily imagine. Does he fancy, that the generality of the
People in Turkey, and these other barbarous Nations, are more inclinable to the
Christian Religion than to their own Idolatrous Corruptions? Do they not
declare against our Religion as a downright Cheat and Imposture? And do not
those of the Romish Communion look upon our Reformation as a mere Innovation?
And what Encouragement this Author affords these Enemi^s of our Religion to
continue in their Errors and Superstitions, I leave a^y serious Reader to
consider; he has taught them a new Principle, by which they may easily evade
the force of all the Arguments we can bring for their Conversion.

I find our Author her^ tak^s notic^ of on^ of his Adversaries Observations,
The disingenuity of this Author and his Party in calling the English
Common-Pray^r Book Popery.
where he says, That the new Gospellers call the Common Prayer Boo^ Popery; and
this he is so far from denying, that he endeavors to justify the Charge. Now
to s^e Men pretend to the Spirit of Moderation toward Adversaries, and yet in
the m^n ti^ be guilty of such an Overt Act of Malice and Disingenuity is not a
little amazing. I dare appeal to this Author's own Conscience, that he knows a
sensible and a vast difference betwixt the English Liturgy and the Romish
Mass Book, and yet he is so disingenuous as to persuade the silly and ignorant
People, that they are both the same. I Am confident he knows our Liturgy
contains no Prayers either to Saint or Angel, and that all our Prayers ^re
directed to the true and sole Object of Divine Worship, the (...) and Et^rnal
God. We have no Prayers of Intercession or Mediation but which ar^ addressed to
the Lamb of God, who sits at the right hand of the Father to ^ake Intercession
for us; all our Forms of Prayer are composed of such emphatical and
comprehensive Sentences, are framed with such a tendency to raise and el^vate
the D^votions of the People, that it is beyond the Art of Man to bett^r them.
But this has been the constant practice of the Presbyterian Party, to represent
every thing as Popery that is not in all Points agreeable to their
Enthusiastical Dreams; they endeavor to infuse into the Minds of the People
dismal and frightning Notions of Popery, and then the better to expose their
Adversaries that di^er from them to the rage and fury of the Rabble, they brand
them with the odious Name of Papists; which is such a piece of Malice and
Di^ngenuity as I believe is peculiar to the Party.

In the same Page we have a Vindication of the Presbyterians for (...) of
(...)-day of (...).
not observing the Anniversary of King Ch^rles I. his Murder. And the reason of
their so doing, our Author says, proceeds from a Principle, that no Human^
Power can oblige them to violate the Fourth Commandment, which says positively,
Six days shall the work. This is indeed a new Comment upon the Fourth
Commandment, and such as few of our Expositors have been so happy as to light
upon. GOD out of his Et^rnal Wisdom thought ^it indeed to separate a seventh
part of our Time for his own Worship and Service, and to establish the
Sabbatical ^estivity in Comm^oration of that Great and Omnipotent Work of the
Creation, when he rested from framing the Glorious Fabric of this Universe;
and out of his great Bounty toward the Work of his own Hands, he allowed us
the other Six days of the Week for carrying on our Worldly and Temporal
Concerns. But was it ever before dreamed, that this Indulgence of Time for our
private Labors was such a strict and positive Precept, requiring us to spend
these Six days so entirely in working, as if we were not at liberty to set
apart any portion thereof to worship God either for public or private Mercies
upon any occasion vouchsafed unto us. We ought not indeed to spend this Time in
idleness and vanity, and when we ar^ not taken up about the Service of God, we
ought to be diligent in following our private Labors and Callings. But if we
employ any portion of this Time either in public or private Exercis^s of
Devotion, in glorifying God for some Personal or Nation^l Blessings conferred
upon us, or in deprecating his Wrath for our crying Sins and Abominations; this
is so far from being a breach of God's Commands, that it is what he repuires
and expects at our hands* and has been the constant practice almost of all
Nations in the World. Do we not find that the Jews, besides the Festivals
Godwyn' s Moses and Aaron, Page 138.
appointed them by their Lawgiver, observed a great many uncommanded Feasts and
Fasts, which ^hey themselves had instituted as Anniversary Commemorations of
some signal Deliverances? The ^east of Purim was instituted by Mordecai in
remembrance of the Esther, ^. 9.
delivery of the Jews from ^aman, who maliciously sought the Destruction of
them. And the Feast of Dedication was instituted in remembrance of that great
Mercy which God showed unto his People, in delivering them from the Tyranny of
Antiochus, and the Idolatry which he had forced upon them, setting up the Idol
of Jupiter in the Temple of God, and abolishing the true Worship of God. It was
appointed by Judas Maccabaeus as a Yearly Festival, to be observed from Year to
Year for the space of eight days. Besides these, they had several other Feasts
of Humane Institution, of which we ^ind frequent mention in Scripture. We see
likewise, that the Romans had their Feriae, and their Festi Dies; the Feriae,
which were instituted to the Honor of their Gods, they observed so Sacredly,
that it was a heinous Crime to do any manner of Work on them; on these Days it
was unlawful for them Terram ferro tangere, as Servius Serve. in Virg. p. 86.
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16.
tells us. These Feriae were either Stativae, unmovable Feasts, and appointed
always to be kept on a certain Day; or Imperativae, which were Arbitrary, and
solemnized upon such Days and on such Occasions as the Magistrates and Priests
thought most expedient. And the Practi^e of the Christian Church in this matter
is so notorious, that, besides their frequent occasional Festivities, the
greatest Mysteries of our Religion have been Celebrated in (...) Anniversary
Solemnities through all the Ages of the Church; which is a most effectual way
to prevent these Articles of our Faith from being subverted by Heretics. And
thus we see, that this practic^ of observing Anniversary Days has been
constant^y received not only in the Christian and Jewish Churches, but likewise
among the H^athens; it being as it were a Principle engrafted in ^umane Natu^*
to return a suitable Tribute of Praise and Thanks to the Supreme Governor of
the World, for disposing and ordering the Events ther^of in such a manner as
tends most to his own Glory, and the Welfare of his peculiar People. So unhappy
are o^r Pr^sbyterians in their Schism from the Catholic Church, that in many
Doctrin^s and Customs wherein they di^fer from us, they run in a di^ect
opposition to the Practice and Judgment, not only of the Catholic Church, but
likewise of all Mankind; so fond are they (...) own singular Opinions.

What this Author urges in contradiction to this Universal Prac^ of observing
Anniversary Days, is of no consequence* for although there may be none of the
Six on which some remarka^le (...) not happened, as he alleges; yet it does by
no means follow, (...) should have no time left at all for Work. It Is not to be
suppo^d, that God requires such constant Exercises of Devotion from u^, as to
impede the necessary Works of Humane Life; it is true indeed, there is no
Dispensation of the Divine Providence, but what is accompanied with such Wisdom
and Prudence as deserves to be admired and adored by all Rational Creatures,
but yet there are some Acts thereof so signal and so remarkable in their
Events, that they require a more solemn acknowledgment at our hands, and
deserve to be more frequently Commemorated by us. And the appointing of s^t
Times for Commemorating these more signal Dispensations of Divine (...) must be
left to the prudence and discretion of the Governo^ of the Church, who are the
most proper Judges of what concerns the public Worship; and we are not to
suppose them so (...) in the conduct of Affairs, as to separate such an unequal
share of (...) Time for the public Worship, as would render Devotion bu^som to
the People, and altogether inconsistent with the (...)* of Humane Life. And if
any private Person can, by entailing (...) Charity upon us, engage us to
observe an Anniversary Day for the commemorating of his Charity, as this Author
grants he may, I (...) no reason why our Superiors either in Church or State
may not with far greater Authority oblige us Yearly to Commemorate some signal
dispensations of the Divine Providence, that have been designed by God, either
as a punishment or a Blessing to us.

But our Author being somewhat jealous, lest this negl^ct of the Presbyterians
to observe the Anniversary of K* Charl^s I. his Murder, The Murder of K. Chapter I.
(...) upon the (...) in both Kingdoms, and not upon the Nation in (...).
should prompt the World to believe, that they app^ove and (...) the same; he
therefore endeavors to persuade us, that neither the Scots n^r English
Presbyterians had any h^nd in bringing him to his Death. But their Rebellious
and Inhumane practices toward that most clement Prince, are too Notorious for
the Party now to think to conceal them; how many Insurrections they Raised,
both against him and his Father is but too well known; and when they forced him
to Grant Concessions, which were no small encroachments upon his Prerogative
and Honor, yet nothing would satisfy their capricious Humors, but the
overturning both of Church and State. If we but look back a little into the
History of these Tragical times, we shall find, that the Presbyterians in both
Nations were the chief Instruments of obstructing the peaceable and quiet Reign
of that Religious Monarch, and of bringing at last, that fatal stroke upon him.
Was it not they, who sowed the first Seeds of all these Wars and Confusions,
and having Treasonably associated themselves together, Rose in Arms against his
Majesty, under a Wicked pretense of Reformation? And having reduced ^im to such
Extremities, that he was forced to throw himself at their Me^cy; ^ow basely did
they Treat him? For when the King escaping from the Siege of O^ford, committed
himself to their Army at Newark; the first thing they for^d him to do, was to
command his Governor of N^wark to deliver up the City, and M^itrose, Huntly
and Mackdon^ld, and all others that were in Arms for him in Scotland, to
dis^and. ^ad not the King been advised to these Courses, he might have happily
prevented all these fatal consequences that followed thereupon; but His Majesty
was now redu^d to such circ^mstances, that it behoved him to Grant whatever
they pleased to demand. And afterward, in the Parliament of Scotland, which
met at Edinburgh in (...) 1646- when the Question came to be debated, whether
they should own the King, or recall their Army ^r. Burnets M^moirs of the D^kes
of Ham^lton Page 284.
from England, and leave him to the English; the Presbyterians opposed the
King's Affairs with no little Fervor and Zeal. The King's party in Parliament
was at first so considerable, that had the que^ion been proposed at the
downsitting thereof, the business had been carried for the King, by at l^ast
Thirty Voices, as some of the ^ing's Friends did then compute, by trying the
Pulse of the Commissioners. but for f^ar matters should go for the King, the
Presbyterians were very busy and industrious, in drawing away many that
adhered still to the King's Interest; and for this end Pub^ished a Declaration,
tending to keep in with the English Parliament, and not to own the King. And by
their Interest in this Parliament they got it Enacted, that their Army should
withdraw out of England, and leave the King to the English, without any
Conditions for his Interest. Now the Guilt of this Act cannot in Reason be
imputed to any but the Presbyterian Party, and no ways to the generality of the
Nation; because, as to the Nobility, the Third Bishop G^thries History of the
Civil Wars i^ Scotland, MS.
part of them was not present at that Sederunt; many having been excluded for
their known Affection to the King, and others upon other pretexts* And some
withdrew from the Parliament of their own accord, being on the one part
resolved not to comply, and on the other loath by their dissent to offend the
prevailing Faction, lest they should in^roach upon their Fortunes. And as for
the Gentry and Commonalty throughout the Nation ( F^fe and the W^stern shires
being ex^pted) there were a hundred to one that abhorred it, and would never
have instructed their Commissioners that way, but were so overawed, that they
durst not challenge them.

But the opposition of this Party to the King's Affairs will further appear, if
we consider their Behavior, with Relation to the ^n gagement in Scotland, for
Rescuing the King's Person. In Apr^ 1648, the Parliament of Scotland being
informed of the Rude and Barbarous Treatment which the King received from the
English (...) (...) (...).
Parliament and Army; and hearing that they had made him Prisoner in the Isle
of Wight; they Voted, That they should demand the King to be brought from his
Prison to London, or thereabout in Honor, Freedom and Safety. And having for
this ^ffect dispatch^d Lieutenant Colonel Marsh^l to the Parliament of
Engl^nd, with a Remonstrance of their Breaches; they concluded and ^oted a Levy
of 30^0 Foot and 60^0 Horse, of which D^e (...) was made General. But the
Presbyte^ians expressed very gr^t dislike of, and solemn^y protested against
all that was resolved* and sent strict Orders to all their Disciples, that they
should on ^he last Sabbath of May keep a Publi^k Fast* (...) i^st that Co^rse*
(...) ^
them withal, not to comply in any so^t ^or (...) this ^evy, under pain of the
Highest Censure; and their Ministers did in the mean time, Thunder* Curses*
against all who should join in this ^ngagement. And when the Noblemen and
others in Command over the Army, were hasting to bring ^orth (...) R^giments,
that they might Mar^ into England; a great Number of Western people Assembled
in Arms against them at Mauchlin, under the Command of some Presbyterian
Ministers, Viz. Mr. Will. Adair, Mr. Will* Guthry, Mr. Gabri^l M^wel, and Mr.
John Nevoy. Middleton Dr. Burne^ ^bid. p. 353.
being sent against them with some Troops of Horse, these Ministers parlied
with him, but were so violent, that they would needs Fight it; but the ^ight
lasted not long, for Middleton in an instant put them all to the Rout; and yet
dealt so mercifully with them, that such as he took Prisoners, he dimitted
without any suffering. The Army under the Command of Duke Hamil^on being
Marched into England, the Genesis Ass. met at Edinburgh Jnly 12* and Published a
Declaration against the Army, proving the sinfulness and unlawfulness of the
Eng^gement. And upon Notice, that this Army (...) Guthries Hist.
was Defeated by Cromwell at Preston in Lancashire; the West Country upon the
first Notice of this Defeat, got instantly to Arms, with a design to cut off
the remainder of this Army, and upon the Head of this Rebellious Multitude,
were Mr. David Dick, and the rest of the Presbyterian Ministers in those parts.
Thus did they Treat that ^oyal Army which had Assembled themselves together, to
Rescue his Majesty's Sacred Person from the hands of his Cruel and
Blood-thirsty Murderers. Here we have a clear view of the Behavior of the
Presbyterian Party toward the Royal Martyr K. (...) I. how they acted against
his Majesty's Interest, in a direct op^sition to the wh^le ^ody of the Nation.
When the whole ^ingdom* (...) t^ose who had formerly been deluded by the rest
of the (...), with the ^alse and Hypocritical pretenses of Reformation, did
unanimously embrace the King's* Interest; the Presbyte^ians were so far from
being s^nsible of their Sin and Folly, that they ^ted against him with the
utmost Rigor of Malice and En^. And ye^ t^ese Men ^ave now the Considence to
protest, They (...) no hand (...) ^inging him to his Death, as if the History
of these ^es were qui^ (...), and no public Monuments of their Trea^nable and
Reb^llious Actings against that Prince remaining to (...) ^ternal (...) and
Reproach.

But this is not all the countenance and encouragement these Barbarous
Par^icides Received from our Presbyterians. For when the ^ws came to Scotland
of a Treaty, begun betwixt the King and Parliament of England; Mr. Rob. Blair
and Sir John Cheesly were (...) (...) (...).
^sently dispatched away, by Order of the Presbyterian Ministers to join with
Cromwell, in obstructing the Treaty. And upon their Arrival there wi^h two other
Commissioners, Viz. The Earl of Lothian, and Will. Glendinning, from the
Committee of Estates, Cromwell began to show himself for crushing the Treaty; he
drew up his Army toward London, and sent in a Remonstrance to the Parliament,
showing his disallowance of the Treaty, and craved Justice (as he called it) to
be done on the King. Now these Presbyterian Commissioners not only concurred
with Cromwell in this Remonstrance against the King, but likewise remained at
London, during the whole time of the King's Trial and Execution, and never
offered to Remonstrate against the Unjust and Unnatural proceedings against his
Majesty. They did indeed send down to Scotlan^, for Instructions relating to
the King's Trial; and they were Ordered to endeavor the procuring a delay; but
in the m^an tim^ to be cautious not to offend the prevailing Party in ^gland. I
know the Presbyterians will here pretend, that the Guilt of this Act cannot be
charged upon them solely, since their (...) from the Kirk Acted nothing in
reference hereto, but in conjunction with the Commissioners from the Committee
of Estates. But here we must consider, that the Committee of Estates did now
wholly consist of the Presbyterian Party; the rest of the Members not daring to
appear, by Reason of their known Affection and Loyal^y to their Prince. For
when the Scots Army was Defeated by Cro^ at Preston* many of our Noblemen and
Gentlemen were (...) killed in the Action; others to a great Number taken
Prisoners, and such as had the Fortune to make their escape, were ^orced either
to abscond or (...) the Country, to avoid the severities with which the
Presbyterian Pa^ty, who now had Usurped the Government of the Nation, did
persecute all such as were concer^d in this Engagem^nt for the Defense of the
King's Person. And by this means the Presbyterians got the whole management of
the affairs of the Kingdom into t^eir (...)* and acted there as they Listed; so
that, although the Committ^ of ^states as well as Commission of the Kirk, sent
Commissione^ to concur with the Kings Murderers in England, yet the Guilt and
shame of this Act, cannot in any Reason be imputed to the generality of the
Nation, but only to the Presbyterian Crew, whose actings have always tended to
bring their Country into Disgrace and Contempt.

From hence, I think it clearly appears, that the Horrid Murder of this Royal
Martyr, is justly chargeable upon none of our Nation but the Presbyterian
Sectaries; and the like may be made evident, in Relation to the Kingdom of
England, that the Presbyterians and other Sectaries of that Nation, were the
only Actors of that dismal Tragedy, and did most cruelly Persecute the Church
of England and its M^mbers, for persevering in their Allegiance and Duty to
their Sovereign.

But let us in the next place see what the behavior of this Party The (...) ^f
(...) Scot^ (...) tow^rd: K. Charles II. ^pen hi^ (...).
was toward K* Charles II. upon his advancement to the Throne; for our Author
tells us, That what they suffered on his Account every body almost know^. That
our Presbyterians did consent to the pro ^laiming of Charles II. King upon the
News of his Fathers Murder is true, but their Loyalty in this point, was
clogged with such Rest^ictions and Limitations, as was not ^asie for the King
to comply with They for^'d him, before his Admission to the Crown, to Sign a
D^laration, signifying his Penitency for the Sins of his Forefat^rs, in
opposing the Work of God, and his own in so long foll^wing their ^ootsteps,
with a Resolution to accomplish and (...) the Covenant, in all its ends and
purposes, which also for the more (...), they caused him to take and Swear. And
because his Majesty did at (...) refuse to Sign this Declaration; the (...) of
the Kirk did on the 1^ of August 1650 Publish a (...) commonly called the Act
of the Westkirk, wherein they (...) they will not Espouse any Malignant Party
or Quarrel, and that they will not own the King nor his Interests, otherwise
than ^ith ^ Subordination to God, and so far as he owns and prosecutes the
^ause of ^od, and disclaims his and his Fathers opposition to the Work of God,
and to the Covenant, and likewise disowns all the ^nemies thereof. And in
prosecution of this Declaration, when the Kingdom had resolved to call home K.
Charles II. and for that End had admitted to favor, those who formerly were
banished the Court and Nation as Malignants; this gave the Zealous and bigoted
Covenanters so great Offense, that they protested against all the present
proceedings, and declared that they had, (...) to the solemn ^eague and its
ends, admitted to the Throne (...), who was an Enemy and Opposer of the quiet
of (...) and ^irk. And this Rigid Party having drawn to a (...) in the West, in
the year 1650, Oct. 17. they Penned and (...) a Paper, which they called a
Remonstrance of the Gentlemen, (...) and Ministers att^ending the Forces in the
West, which they delivered into the Committee of Estates, and from which
afterward they got the Name of Remonstrants. Hence we see how this Merciful
Prince was Treated by them in the very infancy of his Reign; and what further
disquiet and disturbance they afterward* occasioned him, is but too Notorious,
from the many Insurrections they raised against his Government, and which
occasioned the Enacting of those Laws, the severity of which they now so
grievously complain of. What these Su^ferings were which this Author alleges
the Presbyterians met with for adhering to K. Charles II. I must confess I am
altogether ignorant of, unless he means, that some of the more moderate of
their Party were willing to own the King after he had taken the Covenant, and
therefore upon that account suffered in the common Calamity with the rest of
the Nation, when Cromwell with the English Army invaded our Kingdom, defeated
our Forces, and oppressed all that stood in any sort suspected of the Crime of
Loyalty. But it is evident from the History of these Times, that the generality
of the Presbyterians were so far from being forward in owning the King's
Interest, that at the same time when Cromwell was so successful in the South of
Sc^tland, as to have all besouth Forth under his Dominion, great numb^rs of
them were assembled in Arms in the West, and remonstrated against the Nation
for owning the King's Interest. And this much of the Loyalty of our
Presbyterians.

This Author, Page 53. to justify the Proc^dings of their late That the
English C^vocation ac^ed upon f^r b^tter Grounds in r^susing an Union with the
(...), than (...) Scots Ass^mbly in rejecting (...) Addresses of those fe^
Episcop. (...) them, prove^ by (...) R^sons*
General Assembly, in refusing to admit some of the Episcopal Clergy into a
share of their Government upon the Terms desired by K. William, urges, That
they did nothing but what the Church of England Convoc^tion had done (...)
them, who (...) to admit the (...) on the same King's desire. It were no small
presumption in me to offer any Vindication of the Proceedings of those learned
and worthy Meembers of the Convocation in England, who at that time opposed the
designed Comprehension of the Dissenters; but I think I may be allow^d to say,
that they w^nt upon far better Grounds than our pretended General Assembly, who
refused to receive such of the Episcopal Clergy as condescended to address them
upon that account. I am not concerned here to enquire into the ^awfulness of
what these ^piscopal Addressers did, in desiring to be united with the
Pr^sbyterians in the Government of the Church, I shall not here so much as
enter upon that Question. My business at present is, only to show, that the
(...) of Scotland are ^ar more inexcusable in denying the Request of these
Episcopal Ministers that addressed them, than those of the English Convocation
who obstructed the Union with the Dissenters upon the Terms that were then
proposed; and my Reasons are these.

First, The Dissenters in England never offered any Address to the Convocotion,
declaring their Willingness to return to the Churches Communion, upon her
laying aside the use of these innocent Ceremonies which they pretend they
cannot in Conscience comply with. Had the Presbyterians given but the least
intimation of their readiness to abandon their Schism upon the making of these
Alterations, the Clergy perhaps, to further so desirable a Work, might have
easily been induced to grant them some Ease as to their unreasonable Scruples
about those harmless Rites used in our Worship, which though indisferent in their
Nature, yet are very signi^icant in their Use. But it is to no purpose ever to
expect to reclaim the Presbyterians from their Schism upon such Terms, since
they declare against the whole Body of the Common Prayer, and the Order of
Episcopacy, as unlawful; and therefore to make Alterations in the manner of our
Wo^hip, which could have no other esfect but to create more Enemies to our
Communion, was no ways consistent with the Prudence that is required in
Ecclesiastical Governors. Now this is what the Sc^ts Assembly cannot urge in
their Defense, since those of the Lpiscopal Clergy, who had the freedom to join
with them in the Government of the Church, Petitioned them upon that account,
and declared their readiness to concur with them in maintaining the Discipline
of the Church, and punishing scandalous and contumacious Offenders, which were
all the Acts of Government they de^ired to share with them in. As for their
Presbyterian Ordinations, they did indeed declare positively against them, and
refused to join with them in any such Acts as they thought to be direct
Encroachments upon the Episcopal Power.

But, Secondly, There is another Reason which may have influenced the ^nglish
Convocation to oppose the Alterations in the form of our Worship, which K.
William did then desire them to make, and that is, The Preservation and Saf^ty
of the whole Liturgy. They were ^t that time sensible of the fatal overthrow of
their Neighboring Church of Sc^tland, how the Order and Constitution of its
Government was ^uite overturned by the Presbyterians, and not only the Bi^hops
turned out both of their Spiritual and Temporal Rights, but (...) the greatest
part of the Clergy most barbarously Treated, and driven from their Houses and
Churches. This cruel Treatment which their Brethren in (...) received from that
Dissenting Party, might ju^tly a^arm the English Clergy to expect the same
Usage from the P^esbyterians here, as soon as they could thrust themselves into
(...) power of doing them any mischief. And therefore considering the great
Interest the Presbyterians had in that first Parliament after the Revolution,
it was no ways safe for the Convocation to consent to the Dissolving of the
present Act of Uniformity, lest they should meet with such Obstacles in
establishing another, as they were hardly able at that time to grapple with.
The Presbyterian Members of that Parliament were so numerous, that had the
present Act of Uniformity been once dissolved, they would have th^own in so
many Stops and Hindrances against a new Establishment of the ^urgy by Act of
Parliament, they would have started so many new Scruples of Conscience to be
solved about it, and by this means occasioned such infinite de^ys therein, as
would have made the Re-settlement of our Liturgy, a t^ing almost impossible. If
the Parliament had offered to ratisie the Service Book with the Alterations the
Convocation should think fit to make therein, before they Dissolved this
present Act of Uniformity, I cannot tell but many Members of that Convocation
might have been prevailed with to Consent to some Alterations in those
indisferent Ceremonies the Presbyterians so groundlesly exclaim against; that
for the future they might not have the least pretense for continuing in their
notorious and wretched Schism. But for the Convocation to consent to the
Dissolving the present Establishment, without having any security for another,
is what none could expect from any prudent or reasonable Society.

Thirdly, The Convocation in England might perhaps be the more remiss in
promoting an Union with the Di^senters upon the Terms proposed, because they
saw no probability of preserving thereby the Unity of the Church, as long as
the Presbyterians profess to own no common Principles of Unity with us, that
may still oblige them to remain in the Communion of the Church. Unless they
acknowledge our Bi^hops to be the Principles of Unity, and that it is necessary
for every one that intends to continue a Member of the Catholic Church to be
united in their Communion; I say, unless they own these Catholic Painciples of
Unity in common with us, we can have no security that they will remain ours any
longer than their Interest, shows them their Duty. And therefore an Union with
them upon any other Terms, in stead of preserving the Unity of the Church,
would be a ready way to enable them to make a greater rent and breach in our
Communion, whenever they should see it their Interest again to erect Altar
against Altar. But our Scots Assembly could have no such Pretense against those
few Episcopal Clergy that ^esired to be United to them in a share of the
Government. They were willing, I suppose, to own the same common Principles of
Unity with the Presbyterians, in reference to the Discipline of the Church,
that is, to be governed by the major part of all their Assemblies, and to
submit always to what is carried by a Plurality of Voices in their Meetings;
though sometimes they themselves, when they see it for their Interest, destroy
this Principle of Unity, so fundamentally nece^ary to all Democratical
Societies, and allow the lesser Number to preponderate the greater, as in the
Case which happened in the Synod of St. Andrews, an. 1591, about settling a
Minister at Leuchars. And this methinks is enough to show, that the Church of
England had far more reasonable Grounds to oppose the Comprehension with the
Dissenters, than the Scots Presbyterians had to reject the desire of the
Episcopal Addressers. But this Author will needs have the Disadvantage appear
wholly on the Church of England's ^ide, and therefore we must consider a little
the Reasons he brings for his Assertion.

His first Reason is, Because the King is really the Fountain of all their ^.
Church Power, as ^aving the making of the Bishops, and does still remain Head
of their Church; whereas he has actually renounced Name and Thing in Scotland,
where the whole Ecolesiastical Jurisdiction is by Law settled in the Church.
The King is indeed owned by the Church of England to be in his own Dominions
Supreme over all Persons, and in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastical; but that
he is the Fountain of all their Church Power, is what I believe the most
Erastian Principled among them never dreamed. Their 37th Article asserts the
contrary in as plain words as can be desired, where it is said, ''That they
give not to their Princes the Ministering either of God's Word, or of the
Sacraments, but that only Prerogative which they see to have been always given
to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself; that is, That they
should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the
stubborn and evil Doers. From whence it is plain, that the Church of England in
her Articles allows the Civil Magistrate no Power or Jurisdiction in Matters
purely Spiritual; he cannot Administer the Sacraments, nor Consecrate either
Bishops or Priests, neither can he inflict any Spiritual Censures upon
obstinate Offenders. The Civil Power may for strengthening the Hands of the
Church, and making her Discipline the more dreaded and regarded, enforce her
Spiritual Censures with Secular Punishments, but can lay no claim to the Power
of the Keys as his own Right. It is from him the Church derives that Power of
having Civil Penalties inflicted on such as contemn and despise the
Ecclesiastical Censures; as in the case of Excommunication, which renders the
Party excommunicated obnoxious to Temporal Imprisonment, and incapacitates him
from carrying on any Suit or Action in the Civil Courts. The Church cannot by
her own Authority use the Civil Sword to punish the stubborn and evil Doers;
and therefore in so far as the Civil Magistrate extends the Churches
Jurisdiction to some Secular Matters, and impowers her to inflict Civil
Penalties for the better preserving of her Ecclesiastical Discipline, the
Clergy must own the King to be the Fountain from whence they derive this Power.
But as for their Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction, which only can be called
properly the Church Power, they derive it from a higher Original, from God
himself, who is the true ^ead of our Church, and it cannot be conveyed to us by
the Hands of any Lay-Person. God has instituted a distinct Order of Men in our
Church, whom he has authorized to transmit this Spiritual Power down through
all the Ages of Posterity, that there might still be a constant Succession of
Pastors and Governors in the Church to administer his Wor^ and Sacraments to
his People. And it is from this Sacred Order of the Divine Appointment that our
Clergy derive their Spiritual Power; it is from their hands they receive Holy
Orders, and a Power of Ministering in Holy Things, and none but they alone can
Divest them of this Authority.

Our Author's Expression, of the King's having the making of the Bishops, is
somewhat ambiguous. If he means, that the King is allowed by the Church of
England a Power to Consecrate and Separate the Bishops for their Sacred
Function, it is such a notorious Falsehood as needs no Confutation, the practice
of the Church to the contrary being so visible. But if his meaning is, That the
King has Power to Nominate any Clergyman to a vacant Bishopric, it is no more
than what they themselves allow to the Laity in their popular Elections. And if
the Laity in these Elections may be allowed to Nominate their own Pastor and
Spiritual Guide, I see no reason why the Church should be blamed for allowing
the King to Nominate and Recommend to them a Person ^itly Quali^ied for the
Sacred Office of a Bishop, especially since it is to his Bounty they owe all the
Temporal Privileges and Honors which are annexed to the Episcopal Sees.

The same Power in the external ordering of Spiritual Matters, An acco^ of the
King'^ (...) in Scotland, as it is (...) b^ (...)
with which the ^ing is Invested by the Constitutions of this Church and
Nation, does likewise belong to him by the Laws of Scotland. ^e has the Power
of Nominating the Bishops, and it is by his Authority the Clergy of that Kingdom
are allowed to meddle in Secular Matters, and to in^lict any Civil Penalties
upon such as d^spise their Spiritual (...). What this Author alleges about the
Res^inding of the whole Supremacy in Sc^tland by Act of Parliament since this
Revolution, is a gross mistake* as may easily appear from this short Narrative
thereos. By the 129th Act, Parl. 8. ^. Jam^s VI. the King's Royal Prerogative
of Supremacy over all Estates, as well Spiritual as Temporal* is acknowledged
and rati^ied; and it i^ d^clared, That none shall d^cline the ^ing's Power in
(...) Premises under the pain of Treason. Thereafter by the ^. A^, 2. Parl. K*
Charl^s II. there is an Exp^ication of this Act and Prerogative, whereby it is
declared, That whatever Constitution the King s^all make concerning the ord^ing
and disposing of the external Government of the Church shall be obeyed as Law.
This last Act was thought to give ^he King too much Power, since he might
thereby have aboli^hed the Government of the Church by his own immediate
Authority, and so there was some pretext for Rescinding this last Act, and it
is Rescind^d by the first Act of the second Session of Parliament of ^.
W^lliam; but the first Act is not Rescinded, and there was an (...) Order to
the Commissioner not to consent to any Act in prej^dice the^eof. So that the
King then, by virtue of the first Act, continues to have a Supremacy over all
Es^ates Ecclesiastical as well Civil, and over all Persons and Causes thereto
relating, and the Clergy of S^otland ar^ as much bound to own this Supremacy as
those of (...). ^ere I cannot but observe how visibly the Disloyalty and (...)
of this Pa^ty to all Civil Government does appear. They endeavor, under
pretense of lodging all Ecclesiastical (...) in t^ Church, to divest the King
of that Power in the extern^l ord^ing of Church Matters, which does duly belong
to him as being the supreme Governor within his o^n Dominions; and yet they a^e
so sar from settling the whole Ecclesias^ical Jurisdiction in the hands of
Spiritual Persons, as they pretend, that they have not so much as one
Judicatory but what does consist of at least (...) as many Laics as those who
pretend to be Ecclesiastics. They (...) not allow the King so much Power as to
Convocate the Clergy so^ the (...) of Matters about Religion when he thinks
fit, or to ^ommand them faithfully to discharge their Duties and Functions,
which he may lawfully do by virtue of his Civil Power over their Persons as his
Subjects, and yet they allow the Lay Elders in their General Assemblies to
share with them in the Authority of in^licting Spiritual Censures, which
properly belongs to none but Spiritual Persons; and their indulging the Laity
this Power in spiritual matters, is more than what they can well account ^or,
according to the first Institution of the Ministry. In their General Assemblies
there is no Minister d^prived of hi^ function, no Sentence of ^xcommunication
passed, no ^eretick condemned, nor any thing of moment transacted, but what
their Lay Elders share in as much as their Teachers; and yet is the King should
(...) any such Power in their Meeti^gs, they would be apt to ^ly in his Face as
an Oppressor and Persecutor of the Cause of God; but methinks they might at
least indulge him the (...) of being one of their Ruling Elders.

That the Church has Power of calling her Assemblies, and exercising The Church
(...) the sole Power in (...) purely Spiritual, but the Clergy ar^ ^qually
subject t^ the Civil Au* (...), an^ liable to the same (...) with the (...).
^er Discipline in some extraordinary Cases, even contrary to the Command of
the Civil Magistrate, is what we do not deny, as this Author is pleas^d to
allege. The Apostles and Primitive Christians did in a direct opposition to
the Roman Emperors and Jewish Sanhedrim, frequently meet together to perform
the Religious Exercises of Devotion, and determine such Controversies as then
happened to arise among their Brethren, and this they did without thinking,
that they encroached in the least upon the just Rights of the lawful Powers
then in being. And what was lawful for them to do, is still lawful for the
pr^sent Church in the same Circumstances; for the Magistrates being now
Christian, can Entitle him to no gr^ter Power in Church (...), by Virtue of his
Civil Authority, than what did b^ong to the Heathen Magistrates. The Church may
indeed upon prudent Mo^ives, indulge the Christian Magi^trate a greater Power
of (...) in Ecclesiastical matters, than wh^t had been (...) or ^afe* to
entrust the Heathen Emperors wi^h; but this Power which the Church Grants to
the Magistrate, does no ways belong to him by (...) of ^is Civil Authority; it
is only Indulged ^im by the Church, in prospect of his Temporal Protection; and
therefor, (...) he instead of a Nursing Father to her, shall turn an
oppressing (...), or when the Church shall see it any way necessary sor the
well being and safety of Religion, she may recall it again at her pleasure. But
as we allow the Church to have the sole Power and Authority in matters purely
Spiritual; so we deny, that any such (...) Jurisdiction belongs to her, as to
ex^mpt the Bodies of the Cl^gy, from Subjection to the Civil Powers. They owe
their Sovereign the same Duty and Obedience with the rest of his Subjects, are
as much under the Jurisdiction of his Civil Courts, as liable to the Temporal
punishments which he inflicts, as the persons of the Lai^y; sor otherwise the
Civil Magistrate could have no security for hi^ Government.

We do not allow the Clergy to be Judges of every thing done ^.
by themselves in the first instance, which is the height of the Popish
Usurpation and Supremacy, and makes Churchmen no Subjects. And herein it is,
that we differ from the Presbyterians in asserting the Jurisdiction of the
Church; they together with the Papists carry it to such a height, as to claim
an exemption for the Clergy of their not being answerable to the Civil Courts
of the Nation, but only cognizable by themselves; they deny the secular
Magistrate any Power to punish the persons of the Clergy, for Rebellion and
Treason preached openly from their Pulpits, or any other Crime, till they once
be Convicted of the Crime and Condemned therefore, by a sentence of an
Ecclesiastic Judicatory. That this is, or at least was always wont to be, the
constant Principle of the Presbyterian Party is so Notorious, that I admire
this Author should ever attempt to conceal it. Was it not their proceeding to
practice upon these principles, which gave the first Rise to that Act of
Parliament in K. James VI's Reign, ratifying the King's Supremacy? For one Mr.
And. Melvil a Presbyterian Minister, having declaimed ^requently against the
King, for which being called before the Council, he boldly declined the King
and Council as Judges in prima instantia of what is Preached in the Pulpit,
even though it were High Treason, and so he fled into England. Whereupon the
Nation Assembled in Parliament in the year 1584, in a just Resentment of th^se
Seditious Doctrines and Practices, did pass the abovementioned Act of
Supremacy; and it was by Virtue of that very Act that Mr, Ja. Guthrie a
Presbyterian Minister, was anno 1661 hanged for declining the King's Authority.
The Presbyterian Ministers declaimed against and reproached this Act of
Parliament, and in opposition thereto, one of their Number Mr. Dav. Black,
having Railed against K. James and Queen Elizabeth from the Pulpit as Enemies
to God, being called before the King's Council, he not ^nly declined the King's
Power of judging him, until he was first Condemned by his Brethren, but United
most of the Ministers of S^tland most tumultuously in his Defense; and some of
them who were then residing at Edinburgh, stirred up the multitude to such a
Rage and Fury upon this occasion, that they presently leap^ to Arms, and came
to the Street in great Numbers crying, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, it
shall either be theirs or ours. And taking their March straight to the
Session-House, where the King and Spotsw. Ref. lib. p. 65.
his Counselors were then met, would in all probability have forced the Doors
(which upon the Noise of the Tumult were shut) and done no small mischief, were
it not that, by the Providence of God, a Loyal party drawn together by the
Deacon Conveener of the Bishop ^uthries H^st*
Trades kept them back for a while, till their Fury cooled a little; and in the
mean time the Earl of Mar called from the Castle, a Company of Musketeers to
Guard the King's Person; upon the Notice whereof the multitude chose to
disband, and went away as confusedly as they met. And whether such practices as
these be not directly to invade the Temporal Sword, and Usurp the Power of the
Civil Magistrate, I shall leave the Reader to Judge. And if the Popish Bishops
be guilty of the like practices with the Presbyterians, in encroaching upon the
Rights of the secular Magistrate, it ought not in Reason to reflect upon the
Bishops of the Reformed Communion, since it is what we can be no more
accountable for, than for the Barbarous and inhumane practices of the
Presbyterian party, because they pretend to be our fellow Christians. It is to
these unjustifiable principles and practices of the Papists and Presbyterians,
that we owe all the encroachments that have been made upon the spiritual Power
in these later days; for the Popish Clergy together with the Presbyterians, not
being satisfied to assert only the independent Authority of the Church in
matters purely Spiritual, have endeavored to extend its Jurisdiction so far,
as plainly to encroach upon the Rights of the secular Magistrate, and to
subject the State to the Church, not only in Spi^ituals, but likewise in
Temporals. And this on the other Hand has Tempted many of the Lai^y in these
later Ages, (when Men are degenerated into such an indifferency and
lukewarmness about matters of Religion, that they look upon the Temporal
concerns of this World, to be of fa^ greater Value and Concern, than the
Eternal Interest of our Souls) upon all occasions to grasp at the Rights of the
Church, and to Rob her of that Spiritual Power and Au^hority ^ith which our
Savior has invested her independently of any humane Authority, and which to
Usurp from her is Sacrilege to the highest degree.

The second Reason our Author bring^ to prove the Church of England to be in
the blame, for refusing an Union with the Dissenters, is, That they believe
most of the things in Controversy to be indiff^rent, whereas the Presbyterians
look upon them as unlawful; and that The Church of England the guilty of no
breach of promis^, in r^susing an Union with the (...) upon (...) ^rms propo^i.
the Church of England were under promise to King James to have done it. That
the Church of Engl^nd had reasonable grounds to oppose an Union with the
Dissenters upon the Terms then proposed, I think I have sufficiently evinced
already. And that they are guilty of any breach of promise which they made
concerning it, while King James was here, is what cannot well be alleged,
since they were always willing to receive them into the bosom of their Church,
and to Grant them all imaginable ease, as to their unreasonable Scruples which
might be consistent with the safety of their Church and Communion. But to
abolish the use of those Innocent and instructing Rites in our Worship, merely
to satisfy the groundless scruples of the Presbyterians, when they do not so
much as offer to return to our Communion upon these Terms, is what no
reasonable man can well expect. Our Author in this Paragraph seems to T^x the
Episcopal Clergy with being addicted to Arminianism and Socinianism. As for the
latter, I Am confident there are few of them ^ainted with these sort of
principles; they entertain the true Notions of the Son of God, of his Divinity,
his Incarnation and Passion, according as they are revealed unto us in the Holy
Scriptures. And as to the controverted Doctrines about Election, Reprobation,
etc. They are careful to observe St. Paul's Rule, not to be followers of
Arminius in these things, any further than he is a follower of the Doctrine of
our Savior and his Apostles.

That the Presbyterian Ministers have often assumed to themselves The (...)
Min^sters have (...) to (...) a Power of making (...) and War.
a power of making Peace and War, and have declared Engagements to defend the
King's Person, Honor and Prerogative, which were made by the Parliament
without their consent, to be unlawful, is so well known, that I think there
needs no great Rhetoric to convince us of the Truth thereof, although this
Author very confidently avers the contrary, Page 56. If we but Read the History
of the late Civil Wars under King Charles I. we shall find, that in all these
proceedings, the Parliament or Committee of Estates appointed thereby to Govern
the Nation, never acted any thing in Relation either to Peace or War, but in
conjunction with the General A^sembly or Commission of the Kirk; or if they
chanced to pass any A^ts without their consent, they were instantly declared ^o
be unl^wful and of no Obligation. And to prove the Truth of this we need no
more but consult their proceedings, in opposing ^he King's Affairs in the year
1648. for when the Parliament of Sco^l^nd had resolved on an Engagement for
delivering the King's person from his Imprisonment in England, did not the
Presbyterian Burnets M^moirs of the Dukes of Hamilt. p. 337, 339*
Ministers prescribe some Articles to the Parliament, for carrying on this War
against England, and because the Parliament did not comply with their desires
herein, they solemnly protested against all they had resolved on, and thundered
Cur^es and Damnation against all who did not oppose this Engagement.

Page 59. This Author is highly displeased with his Antagonist, The P^esbyteria
s not with u some ground stigmatized wi^h the r^p oachful Term of New
Gosp^llers.
for throwing upon the Presbyterian party the reproachful Term of New
Gospellers; and he cannot apprehend what can be found in the Presbyterian
Writings to ground this Accusation upon. But I think ^ruly, when we con^der the
Nature of most of their Difcourses upon Religion, the whole Tenor of their
Sermons and Preachings, it is not without some ground, that they are Reproached
with this distinguishing Character. I do not say, that they main^ain wholly a
New and a Singular Gospel, but I am sure they have so disguised the Gospel of
our Savior, from its Ancient Purity and Simplicity, that what they Preach, is
vastly different from the Doctrine of the Purer and Primitive Ages of
Christianity. They have corrupted most of its Doctrines, with their Rude and
Indigested Notions; they have transformed the Meek and Calm Spirit of the
Gospel, into a Spirit of Bitterness and Revenge, instead of converting their
Swords into pruning Hooks and plow shares; they, to propagate their excentrick
Notions of Religion, maintain it lawful to res^st the Supreme Powers, and
rather than fail of their designs, to imbroil Nations into perpetual War and
Bloodshed. And this me^hinks is quite another Gospel from what our Savior has
taught us in his Holy Scriptures, where we have not the least encouragement to
propagate Religion by force of Arms, or any such indirect means. There we find
nothing more frequently inculcated to the Christian Converts, than a Spirit of
Meekness and Humility, of Brotherly Love and Charity, and to live peaceably
with all Men as much as in us lies. We are not taught from thence, to
prosecute with the utmost Rigor of Malice and Revenge, all such as differ from
us in the l^ast matters about Religion, but we are rather exhorted to reclaim
them from their Errors, in the Spirit of Meekness and Charity.

CHAP. III.
I Come now to our Author's Third and Last Part, where he has (...) is not
strange to see Persons, after they have murdered, robbed, or any way injur^d
their (...), (...) endeavo^r (...) to black^n them in their (...) and (...),
(...) b^tter to (...) own wick^d Actions (...) them.
heaped together a parcel of such Villainous and Profane Stories, of such
manifest Lies and Forgeries, as do plainly show the Author to have abandoned
all sense of Morality and Religion, and ^o have prostituted his Conscience
merely to gratisie his Malice and Revenge. After he has in ^he ^ormer parts of
his Book, almost in every Page, reviled the whole Body of the Episcopal Clergy
and Gentry both in E^gland and Scotland at a most ignominious rate,
representing them all as Drunkards and Whoremongers, as wallowing in all Sins
of Uncleanness and Impurity, he now (...) the Persons of some particular
Clergymen in Scotland, whom he endeavors now to wound in their Reputation and
Honor, as his Party have already done in their ^ives and ^ortunes. It is no
ways strange to see Persons when they have either murdered, robbed, or any way
injured a Man, to endeavor to blacken him in his Fame and Reputation, to
represent him as the vilest Monster, that so they may the better palliate and
excuse their own wicked and hellish Practices against him. Could we ever expect
that the Pre^byterians, after they had once attempted, frequently threatened,
and at last accompli^hed in a most barbarous manner, the murder of tha^ great
Primate Bishop Sharp, that they should, after this unparalled Villainy of
theirs, allow him the Character he dese^vedly bears of a Religious, Prudent,
and Godly Prelate? Could we imagine they would deal more tenderly with his
Reputation than they had done with his Life? On the contrary, we had good
reason to expect that they would charge him with all the notorious Villainies
their Malice could invent, as this Libeller very civilly Treats him, Page 64.
So that we have no great reason ^o wonder at this insatiable Malice of our
Presby^erians, that after ^hey had raised a most furious Persecution against
our Clergy, thrust them from their Spiritual Cures and Preferments, robbed them
of their Temporal Fortunes and Estates, and cruelly treated their Persons, by
murdering of some, and wounding of others; that their Malice should not stop
here, but likewise extend it self to their Fame and Reputation, the most
precious Jewel we possess; I say, we need not much wonde^ a^ ^his, since i^ is
no more ^han what was necessary to crown their glorious Work of Reformation,
that they might not only the^eby the more expose the Persons of our Clergy to
further Igno^niny and Contempt, but likewise might have some show or pretense
to color their own barbarous Practices against them.

It is a sufficient Vindication of the Clergy, whose Lives and Conversa^ions
The (...) of o^r Clergy sufficien^ly vindic^ed srom this Libll^r's aspersions,
since in the present (...) against them by the (...), t^y cannot Instance in
(...) of their number, against whom they could find the (...) pret^nce to
deprive them for Immoralities.
this Author so maliciously attacks, at least of all those who are yet alive,
that in this present Persecution against them, raised and carried on by the
Presbyterians with all the fury and malice that was possible, there were few or
none of them deprived for their Immoral Lives and Actions. Their Adversaries
not only persecuted them in their Persons, but likewise endeavored to blacken
them in their Reputation by all the hellish Arts they could contrive; they
framed Libels against them, stuffed with all the groundless ^tories they could
possibly scrape together, and with all the Lies and Forgeries their Malice
could invent; and yet after all these indirect m^ans used by them to stain the
Reputation of our Clergy, I verily believe, they cannot instance in four
Persons against whom they could ^ind the least pretense to deprive them ^or
their Immoralities. And this methinks, were enough to detect the falsehood of
this Villain's Forgeries, and to vindicate those of the Clergy whom he here
assaults from the foul Aspersions he so invidiously throws upon them. I^ these
of the Clergy had been in the least obnoxious in their Lives, could they have
possibly escaped so critical a Censure of their Enemies, when they sifted all
their Acquaintances for Stories against them, and ripped up their Lives to
their very infancy, and when nothing else could be found blameable in the whole
course of their Lives, they charged some of them with their Juvenilia, and even
those they represented under a great number of aggravating Circumstances which
never had the least shadow of Truth. Had I the good fortune of being acquainted
with all the Clergy, who are here libelled by our Author, or a convenient
opportunity of corresponding with these places where they resided, I could
fairly undertake to disprove this Accuser in most of the particulars of his
Forgeries. But since I am at present deprived of the Advantages of such a
general Correspondence as this requires, I must in this Vindication con^ine my
self to such of the Clergy as I have either the happiness of knowing, or have
had occasion more particularly to enquire into the History of their Lives. And
from what I shall discover as touching this Libeller's disingenuous and unfair
Dealing with respect to these Clergy, the Reader may easily guess how fairly
and heartily he treats their Brethren, and what credit is to be given to his
Calumni^s and Aspersions upon them.

What I designed upon this Subject, is in a great part anticipated*by Many of
our Clergy suf^iciently vindicated from this Libeller's accusations, by the
Author of an Appendix to a late Treatise, entitled, An Apology for the Clergy
of Sco^laud.
a late Treatise concerning our Scots Asfairs, entitled, An Apology for the
Clergy of Scotland, where the worthy Author in an Appendix to his Book has
vindicated many of our Clergy from the Libels brought against them by this
petty Scribler, and has given such true and just Characters of them as all that
know them will readily acknowledge to be their due. To this Appendix therefore
I shall refer my Reader for an Answer to a great deal of what concerns the
third Part of this scurrilous Libel, not being willing to repeat here what is
so excellently said by that Author in vindication of our Clergy. I shall only
here subjoyn such further Matter for their Vindication from this Libeller's
Aspersions, as the Author of the Appendix had not then the opportunity of
knowing* and has since come to my hands.

And first, As for Dr. Canaries, against whom the bent of this Dr. Canaries
fully vindicated from the Calumny brought against him by this Accuser, and the
Accuser's Malice and (...) fully (...).
Accuser's ma^ice seems to be chiefly levelled, although I never gave the least
cr^dit to this abominable Story charged upon him in this Pamphlet, as knowing
him to be a Man of a vi^tuous and exemplary Life; yet because the Libeller so
confidently appeals for the truth of his Story to the Registers of (...), I had
the curiosity to send ^hither to a wo^thy Friend of mine for an Extract out of
the Regist^rs conce^ning this matter, not doubting but our Author had consulted
the R^cords himself before he made so public an Appeal to them. The Answer I
received was to this purpose: That as for Dr. (...)'s Affair, after all the
Researches could be made into the Records of the Kirk-Sessions and Presbytery
of Dundee, there was no mention of it to be ^ound there, and the Ministers
assured him never any thing of it was Recorded, so that he could not send me
any Extract of it as I desired. And he says, That it is great Impudence in the
Author of this Pamph^et to appeal to these to gain credit to that abominable
Story; as it is likewise most notoriously false what this Author alleges, That
the Doctor was constrained to flee; for he averrs it as a certain truth, That
there never was any Sentence pronounced against him, and this (he says) all the
Ministers of the Presbytery can attest. He likewise says, That his very
Accusers there do utterly deny that there was any such thing as a Form of
Baptism used, which is so considently asserted by this Villain. He tells me, he
was credibly informed, That the Fanatics in that place had been at pains to
sift these Accusers of the Doctor, and that Mr. Spalding the
Presbyterian-Intruder there had sent some of his Followers to examine them
concerning this matter, and after all they were brought to Mr. S^alding
himself, but never would acknowledge any such thing as the Pamphleter records.
He concludes his Letter thus; That he must do Dr. Canaries the justice to
testify, that he was as ^ittle tainted with Intemperance as any he knew of his
age. And this Testimony ought to be of the greater weight with us, that it
comes from one who was intimately acquainted with the Doctor, and had all the
advantages of knowing exactly the whole Series and History of his younger Years

When that Passage of the Doctor was Examined before the Presbytery of Dundee,
the Doctor received an Acquittance from the Presbytery, clearing him from
having any accession to that Scandal given by these two young Gentlemen who
were in his company, and accosted the Women in the Fields. And notwithstanding
the malice of the Presbyterians has aggravated that Story into a heinous
Villainy, yet the true and real Ground of it was no more than this, That these
two young Gentlemen being in company with the Doctor, run from him to some
Women in the Fields, and undecently thrust their Hands under their Clothes.
When this Answer to the Presbyterian (...) was published, Mr. Castairs a
Presbyterian Minister to^d Dr. (...), that he was in^ormed by Mr. Spalding the
Presbyterian Preacher at Dundee, (the place where this Story had its rise,)
That there was no ground for this malicious Calumny against the Do^tor; and
that if the Doctor pleased, he would write to Mr. Spalding for an account of
it, which he thought would be such a Vindication of the Docto^s Innocence, as
the most malicious of his Enemies could not well withstand. Mr. Castairs having
wrote to Mr. Spal^ing, who s^nt him up some account of it to London; he sent a
Letter to the Do^tor, acquain^ing him, That such an account was come from Mr.
Spalding to London, (though not as yet to his hands) wherein the Doctor's
Innocence was sufficiently cleared from this malicious Slander. This Letter
from Mr. Castairs I suppose the Doctor has in his possession; but Mr. Castairs
sent not afterward to the Doctor Mr. Spalding's Letter, for what reason I
shall not here enquire.

Hence we may see how fairly and heartily the Docto^ has been treated by this
malicious Scribler, and for no other reason that I can conceive, but his being
employed by a part of the Clergy of Scotland to Negotiate their Affairs with
the present Government, and the vigorous opposition he always made to the
Designs carried on by the Presbyterian Party for overturning and subverting our
Church* I shall not here resume what the Author of the Appendix above cited
brings in further Vindication of the Doctor's Innocence, as that he underwent
two fiery Trials before the Presbyterian Judicatories in Scotland, one before
the Privy* Council at Edinburgh, which consisted then wholly of Presbyterians,
who are still by far the majority at the Council Board; the other before a
Meeting of Presbyterian Teachers at Selkirk; by both which he was acquitted,
and not one instance of Immorality laid to his charge. On the contrary, the
Presbyterian Ministers offered cordially to receive him into their Society, if
he would but renounce his Principles of Episcopacy. I think there needs no more
be said in the Doctor's Vindication; if he but appeal for his Innocence to the
Testimony of those who have known the whole course of his Life and
Conversation, he may fairly bid a defiance to the most inveterate malice of his
Enemies.

Page 64. He charges Dean Hamilton with Sodomy, and says, He An ^ccount of D^an
Hamilton's Process, and his being absolved therefrom by the Privy Council an^
(...) Criminal ^ourt.
was convicted of it by 88 Witnesses; and again, Page 73. he accuses him of
buggering a Mare, lying wi^h several Men's Wives in Hamilton, and several other
Immoralities, among which is his profering Bestiality (I suppose our Author
would have said Sodomy) to a young Man in London of this Author's own
Acquaintance. These Crimes, he says, were proved against him before the
Criminal Court at Edinburgh, but he having bribed the Judges, the Trial was put
off. As for these last Crimes, Buggery, Adultery, etc. the Dean was never so
much as accused of them, so far were they from being proved against him, as
this Libeller falsely alleges; and it is the height of Impudence in him to
arraign the whole Justice of the Nation at this rate, for conniving at such
gross and scandalous Immoralities as the most barbarous Nations detest and
abhor. Is it possible for any man of sense to believe, that the whole Judges of
a Nation can be so degenerated in their Morals, as to be bribed or corrupted by
such a vile Wretch as this Dean Hamilton must needs have been, had our Author's
Calumnies against him been tr^e? The Dean was indeed accused of the Crime of
Sodomy, and upon that account was cited first before the Privy-C^uncil, and
afterward before the Justice-Court at Edinburgh; and all Witnesses that could
be had were examined against him, but they not proving any thing of the Crime
upon him, he was fully absolved from it by both those honorable Courts. And my
Informer assures me, that he has seen the Sentences of Absolution passed upon
this Affair by both those Courts; the one signed by Duke Hamilton as President
of the Council, and the Clerk to the PrivyCoun^il; the other signed by the
Justice General, and the Clerk to the Justice-Court; and these Sentences of
Absolution are to be seen at this day in the several Registers of those Courts.
Now, after the Dean was so publicly absolved from the Guilt of this Crime, it
must needs argue a great stock of Impudence, and nothing less of Malice in this
Author, to averr so confidently, That he was convicted of it by ^ighty eight
Wi^nesses. Whether he was really guilty or not of such a Villainy, God and his
own Conscience can best tell; it has been the misfortune of several pious and
innocent Persons to be ^alsely accused; but however, since he did so openly
Vindicate himself from the Guilt of this Crime, the Laws of Christian Charity
oblige us to look upon him as Innocent, till we have better Evidence to the
contrary, than the Aspersions and Calumny of a malicious and virulent Scribler,
who has declared himself an Enemy to all those that have ever been vested with
the Authority of Christ's Ambassadors.

In the following Page Page 6^. Our Author's great mistake concerning Mr. Boyd.
he mentions one Mr. B^yd a West-Country Parson, whom he affirms to have got
his M^id with Child, and, to have been taken in the Act by some of his
Parishioners, and thereupon to have deserted his Wife, and run with the Wh^re
^o England. In this our Author is so f^r mistaken, that I am credibly informed,
there never was an Episcopal Minister of that Name in the West of Scotland
since* the Year 1662, except one Mr. Robert Boyd Minister at Carmunoch, who
although upon some other accounts he was once Libelled in Bishop Leighton's
time and absolved, nothing of the Libel being proved, yet never any thing like
Adultery was laid to his charge, and at present he lives in (...) with his Wife
under a virtuous and commendable Character.

In the same Page our Libeller assaults the Reputation of Mr. Hugh A full
Rel^tion of the Proc^ss conc^rning Mr. Hugh Blair, and of the indirect ways and
means used by the Prosbyterian Party to stain his Reputation*
Blair Minister at Rutherglen, concerning whom he has these Words; That he was
a c^mmon Drunkard and Swearer, and at last got his Maid with child, ^or which
he was suspended about a month by the Bishop; but having bribed one Macfarland
to marry the Whore, and say the Child was his, he was restored again to his
Office, though the thing was proved before the Bishop by many Witnesses who had
seen them lying together; and it was also proved, that the Woman owned it in
her Labor, and that her Husband had confessed it. I have chose the rather to
set down our Author's Words at large, because they contain a complication of as
many Lies as Words. That Mr. Blair is either a Drunkard or Swearer, was not so
much as alleged against him in all his Process, which notwithstanding was
ca^ried on with the height of Malice and Envy. That he got his Maid with child,
is a most notorious Lie, as I shall convince you by and by, as it is likewise
false that the Bishop ever suspended him on that or any other account. That Mr.
Blair bri^ed one Macfarl^nd to marry the Whore, contains no less than two
ma^ifest Falsehoods; for First, There was never one M^cfarland mentioned in the
whole Process; and Secondly, The Whore lives still unmarried to this day. That
the thing was proved before the Bishop by many Witnesses that were examined
about it, is likewise a noto^ious ^ntruth, ^or of above an hundred Witnesses
that were examined about it, not one of them deposed that they saw him as much
as speak to her after he put her out of his Service, far less to have the least
scand^lous carriage towa^ds her. That ^he W^man ^ned it ^n her childbed, and
that her H^sband conf^ssed it, are of the same strain with the rest of these
Calumnies, and have no greater shadow of Truth; for when the Hussie was in
Childbed, she declared one Don^ld Ferg^n to be the Father of the Child, who
owned ^t as his, and maintained it as long as the Child lived. As to the
Husband's confessing that he was bribed to own the Child, I have already told
you, that the Woman was never known to have a Husband, and that she lives
unmarried at this day.

But that you may be the better able to understand the whole of this A^fair
concerning Mr. Blair, take the History of it as ^ollows* Mr. Hugh Bl^ir being
indebted for some money to one James Macfarland of Ki^k-town, his own
Cousin-German, and Mr. (...) having occasion to wri^e to him frequently about
it* s^t a Se^vant of his called Donald F^rguson with the Letters; and thi^
(...) stay^ng some times all night at Mr. Blair's House, had occasion to
^ebauch M^rgaret Drew one of his Maidservants, and got her with Child, which
so soon as Mr. Blair was informed of, he put the Hussi^ out of his ^ervice.
Then Commissary Fleeming his Lady living in Mr. Blai^'s Parish, and having had
a former Grudge against him, laid hold on this occasion, and dealt with the
Whore to father the Child on Mr. Blair. And for that end, she and the Fanatic
Party in Glasgow gave her a sum of money to own it; (which can yet be proved by
the Hussie's own confession, and by other Witnesses that were privy to it;)
upon which she goes to a Minister in the Presbytery of Glasgow, and affirmed
Mr. Blair to be the Father of her Child. The rumor of this coming to the
Archbishop of Glasgow his ears, he forthwith appointed a Visitation of the
Church of Rut^eglen, where Mr. Blair was Minister, to be in April 1663, and
caused the Woman (...) Dr^w to be summoned thereto. She appearing before ^he
Pre^bytery* declared, That Donald Ferguso^ was the Father o^ her Child.
Where^pon Mr. George Milne Minister at Campsie, in whose Pari^h this Ferguson
lived, was ordered to summon him to the next Presbytery Meeting; who compearing
freely, owned himself to be the Father of the Child, and did satisfy the
Discipline of the Church at Gavan for the said Scandal, where both of them
confessed the Child was begotten. When the Child was presented to Baptism, this
Ferguson did the duty of the Father, and did likewis^ maintain it as long as
the Child lived*

Commissary Fleeming's ^ady being disappointed of this her design against Mr.
Blair, set another on foot of Libelling him; and p^ocured from the Archbishop a
second Visitation to be kept at his Church of Ruthe^glen by the Presbytery;
where all hi^ Pa^hioners that had any thing to say against his Life and
Conversation, were invited to come freel^ and declare it: Yet even then his
whole (...) cleared him of all Imputations both of Doctrine and Conversation.
^ut our Presbyterian Lady's malice rest^d not so, for she procured a third
(...), against which time she had provided one William Robison, a Smith to his
Trade, and a prosligate vicious Fellow in his Morals, to give in a Libel
against Mr. Bl^ir, and accuse him of several Immoralities. This Fellow had been
a Sergeant at the Insurrection of (...)-bridge; before which time Mr. (...) and
his Kirk-S^ssion had frequently censured him for (...), Swearing, Breach of the
Sabbath, (...), and Whoredom; so that the Archbishop and Presbytery could not
admit him as an Accus^. And this necessitated the Lady to set up one John
Widderspon^ a Tailor to subscribe the Libel against hi^, who was a
Bastard-relation of her own, at that time her servant, a young man not one and
twenty Years of Age, having no Family, and not worth a Groat; yet
notwithstanding all these just Exceptions against him, to give the Lady
satisfaction, he was sustained. But after more than two years Process before
Synods, Sub-Synods, Presbyteries, and the Examination of above an hundred
Witnesses, there was not one Titl^ of the Libel proved against him; even
although no Witnesses were rejected, but all admitted, even Informers
themselves, and one John Stev^n, whom Mr. Blair proved to be a Madman, was
^dmitted Cum Not^, as the whole Synod and Presbytery of Glasgow and their
Registers can t^stifie. But all this failing them, the Lady again set on the
Whore, and gave her more money to retract her former judicial Confession, and
to ^her the Child on Mr. Blair De novo. Many Witnesses were procured* by her,
to prove that Mr. Blair bribed the Hussie with money. But all Proof failing,
and she having thereby m^de her self In^amous, the Archbishop, together with
the whole Diocese, after three years Process, finding nothing of the Libel
proved, nor any ground to trouble him further, did absolve him from the whole
Libel and P^ocess; all which the Registers to this day do bear, and all the
M^nisters of the Diocese yet living can attest. In this Process Co^sary
Fleeming and his Lady, their Oaths being taken, did confess that they had set
out both William Robison and John Widderspone to accuse Mr. Blair, and given
them money for that end; and this is contained in their Original Depositions
upon Oath, subscribed with their own Hands. The Commissary's own Original
Deposition signed by himself, owns that he was instrumental in persuading
William Robison to accuse Mr. Blair to the Presbytery, but denies that he knew
any thing of Widderspone's doing it till after he had begun it.

I have thought ^it to trouble the Reader with an exact Copy of Commissary
Fl^eming's Deposition upon Oath (...) this matter, because it contains a
further confirmation of what I have already said in Vindication of Mr. Blair's
I^ocence, and is a full discovery of the malicious and indirect means that were
used by the Presbyterian Party to stain his Reputation. Here follows the
Deposition.

Glasgow, May 1. 1684.
SIR William Fleeming Commissary of Glasgow being called, compeared, and his
Oath being taken, did acknowledge he (...) William Robison to go in and inform
the Presbytery against Mr. Hugh Blair, but that by the Oath he had made he knew
nothing of Widderspone's doing any thing of that kind until he had entered on
it. For Provest Bowman, he never called ^r him ^nt Mr. Hugh Blairs business so
far as he remembers. He called ^r Prov^st ^arvey, and ^nquired at him what he
kn^w anent Mr. ^ugh Blair, and he having told me what he knew, I answered, Why
t^n you must be ready to depo^e according to your knowledge when (...). And in
the very like fashion he sent for Baily Fleeming, according (...) his m^mory he
thinks: he called for James Cuming, and took Inquisition of wh^ he know anent
Mr. Hugh Blair, and asked, Whether he would be a Witness ^r I^former, or
^ither, and that ^e found satisfaction in neither, and that according to his
memory all this was after the Visitation, but cannot be (...). He remembers
nothing anent William Scot Weaver positively, and that by the Oath he had made
he said, That William Robison should be at no loss by any Expenses he should be
at, but that he never off^ money to Wi^nesses that he can remember, and that he
never threatened any Witnesses to come in against Mr. Hugh Blair. He sent for
Thomas Wilkie, and asked him what he could say? And when he told him, he had
him be ready, as he should answer to GOD* to tell the Presbytery. And d^clares
as to the Insor^tive part, and as to the getting of an A^cuser, he does not
judge himself bound (...) Law to give an account of his private Methods and
Transactions (...), especially seeing the Presbytery required all the Her^tors
and others to inform what they could against Mr. Hugh Blair, but Ex
superabundanti, for the Committee's satisfaction he had declared Ut supra sic
subscribitur.

W. Flyming.

The Commissary in the end of his Deposition says, That having interrogated
Thomas Wilkie what he could say against Mr. Blair, persuaded him to be a
Witness against him, implying as if this Wilkie could have discovered some
material thing concerning Mr. Blair* whereas Thomas Wilkie's Deposition upon
Oath is rather a Vindication than an Accusation of Mr. Blair's Innocence. He
not only denies that he ever knew Mr. Blair guilty of any undecent thing with
this Huss^e; but swears positively that he heard Mr. Blair affirm, That if this
Woman were with Child, he should take all imaginable care that she might appear
and satisfy the Discipline of the Church for the Scandal. His Examination upon
Oath signed by himself take as follows.

Glasgow, Dec. 26. 1683.
THE whilk day Thomas Wilkie being admitted Witness and Interrogate, if he did
see Mr. Hugh Blair riding before Margaret Drew on an Horse toward Edinburgh?
Deponed thereto Negatively. 2. Being Interrogate, if he did see them sup
together in James Borland's at Blackburn? Deponed thereto Negatively. 3. Being
Interrogate, if he heard Mr. Hugh Blair say, if Margaret Drew were with Child,
he should secure her Fees (...) his hand for her Compeirance? To which he
deponed Affirmative. Sic subscribitur

Thomas Wilkie.

I think I need say nothing further in Mr. Blairs Vindication; whoever cosiders
what is already said on that point, will be fully convinced of his Innocence as
to all these Calumnies brought against him by this Libeller, he is not the
first whose Fate it has been to be maliciously and innocently slandered. I
have not the happiness of being of Mr. Blairs acquaintance, but the Character
under which I have heard him always represented by his Brethren and Neighbors,
s^ews him to be a Man of a Virtuous Life, and of such Learning and Parts, as no
Cause needs be ashamed to own him for one of their Confessors.

The next instance of which I shall take Notice, is Mr. John The ^tory of Mr.
Chis^olm truly related, and ^e cleared from this Calum^y.
Chisholm Parson of Lisly in Teviotdale, whom this Libeller Accuses in these
Words; That he having got his Maid with Child^, bribed a Mason to Marry her,
and own it, but the Woman afterward going to a Field Meeting in the
Neighborhood out of Curiosity, was so stung in C^nscience, on hearing the
Famous Mr. John Welsh Preach against such Immoralities, that she cried out to
the disturbance of the Worship, that she was undone Eternally, and voluntarily
confessed her Crime; for which she was pursued by the Episcopal Clergy, and
imprisoned a long time, th^' she still owned the Guilt; and the same was also
Attested by her Brother, who had been privy to his Villainy. This instance does
furnish us with such a Notable Discovery of this Author's sincerity, and the
Spirit of his party, that I very much wonder he had not the sense to pass it
over, it re^ecting such Scandal and Disgrace upon the whole Faction; and really
it is hard to determine, whether the Impudence, Malice, or Folly of this Author
be most discernible in it. For this whole Affair having Ministered matter of so
much Talk to the whole adjacent Neighborhood where it happened, upon the
singular discovery of this calumnious Cheat of the Presbyterians, it could not
possibly escape the knowledge, either of this Author, or his Informer; and yet
so blind is the Spirit of Rage and Malice, that ou^ Author would needs publish
this instance, as one of the Scandals of the Episcopal Clergy, when he very
well knows, that all the Scandal of it returned with a Witness upon their own
Heads. But it ^ems the contriving this sham had cost them so great pains, that
they were unwilling to lose the Fruit of so much Labor, even though the Mystery
was now unfolded; hoping by such aspersions at least to impose upon Strangers,
as before they had done for some time on the Neighborhood, till that
overruling Providence, which most ^requently exerts it self in the Vindication
of oppressed Innocence, brought to light that hidden Work of Darkness. The
Story in (...) ^s thus.

Mr. Chisholm had a Servant Maid in his House who happened to be with Child;
she being conveened before the Kirk-Session declared who was the Father of her
Child, the person on whom she Fathered the Child owned it to be his, and both
she and the said Father did Penance for this Scandal, according to the usual
Custom as was enjoy^ed, and thereupon Received the Churches Absolution. Mr.
Chisholm upon his Maids falling into this Scand^l removed her from his Service,
and afterward the Lady Cherrietr^es (a Zealous Presbyte^ian, and who would not
let slip any occasion, of bringing Reproach on the Clergy, and rendering that
Sacred Profession odious to the World) being, as appears from the sequel of the
History, put upon it by the pa^ty, hires this Woman to be her Servant; and by
some Arts or other prevails with her to say, that Mr. Chisholm her late Master
was the Father of her Child. And to make the thing more clamorous, they
persuade her to go to a Conventicle where Mr. John Welsh P^eached, and there by
all the hypocritical sorrow she could counterseit, to pretend her self to be
under an intolerable Remorse of Conscience for concealing the Sin of her
Master. The Noise of this no soone^r went abroad, than the Neighboring Clergy
took notice of it, and appointed the Woman to be Summoned to the Meeting of
their Presbytery, whom, when she appeared, they interrogated, whether she owned
what was commonly Reported she had said concerning Mr. Chisholm's being the
Father of her Child? She answered she had said so, and that she now adhered to
it, and that it was a Truth, that Mr. Chisholm had committed Fornication with
her. This her bold Accu^ation did not a little amaze all those who had any
familiar acquaintance with Mr. Chisholm, whom they had always Esteemed a Man of
an inoffensive Life, having been of an unblameable and exemplary Conversation.
His Brethren however in the mean time, because of the Scandal, did suspend him
from the exercise of his Ministry* and used their utmost endeavors with him,
to bring him to a Confession of his Guilt, and to persuade him to dimit his
Office, his Ministry being, upon the Account of the Scandal he had fallen
under, rendered altogether useless. But after the Process had been long
depending, and he still continuing under the Suspension of the Exercise of his
Ministry, did notwithstanding unalterably persist in his Pleading not Guilty,
and did by such serious Protestations Remonstrate his Innocence to his
Brethren, that they firmly believed him to be very much injured in this Affair.
He told them, i^ was not to save his pre^erment that he stood so much to the
Vindication of his Innocence, but that his personal Reputation being highly
wronged in this matter, and especially, there being so much Scandal and
Reproach cast upon the Sacred Office of the Ministry upon his Account, he
thought himself bound in Conscience to endeavou^ all he could, to have this
Affair thoroughly Canvassed, that ^e might clear not only his own Reputation,
but likewise the Ministerial Function of this great Scandal so maliciously
thrown upon them.

After this, some of Mr. (...)'s Friends being thoroughly persuaded of his
Innocence, thought sit to make Application to the Civil Power to take the
matter under their cognizance; and spoke to the Sheriff of the place, that he
might take some effectual course for having the Mystery of this whole Affair
unfolded. The Sheriff sends for the Woman, and tells her, he had very good
ground to suspect that what ^he Reported of Mr. Chisholms, being the Father of
her ^hild was a ^eer Calumny and Forgery, she having at first declared another
Man to be the Father of the Child, and this Man having owned the Child to be
his, and they both having done Penance for the Scandal accordingly. She still
persisting to say Mr. Chisholm was the Father of her Child, the Sheriff told
her, there was no other way to clear this matter, but by her Oath, and
therefore required her to hold up her Hand, (the way of Administering an Oath in
Scotland) and solemnly to declare, whether Mr. Chish^lm was the Father of that
Child or not? The Hussie holds up her Hand, but finding that the Sheriff seemed
to be in earnest to tender her the Oath, she presently pulls back her Hand, and
resuses to Depose. The Sheriff, having from this her behoviour good ground to
believe there was some Cheat in the business; proceeds to threaten her with the
Torture, if she did not instantly disclose to him the whole Mystery of t^is
Affair. Upon this the Hussie presently conse^es, that Mr. Chisholm was not the
Father of the Child, but that the Lady (...) (a Zealous Bigot for Presbytery)
having taken her into her Service, prevailed with her to Father it upon Mr.
Chish^lm, and that the thing might b^ the more public, to do Penance for it
in a ^ield Conventi^le. The Sheriff sends forthwith ^or the Lady (...) and
(...) ^er, and after having thoroughly Examined the matter, an^ (...) her
Guilty, he Fines her in the sum of above an hundred and (...) pounds Sterling*

In this we have an excellent proof of our Authors Fair and Candid D^ling, of
which he so faithfully (...) his Reader in the close of his Preface; and it
likewise affords us a singular instance of the disingenuou^ Arts and Villainous
practices of that Party, who never This Affair of Mr. Chisholm's, a singula^
instance of the Villainous Arts and Practices of the Presbyterians to bring
cont^mpt on the Episcopal Clergy.
stick at any thing, nay, not the most Hellish and indirect means they can
conceive, to stain the Reputation of their Adversaries, and to bring them into
Contempt. As for the Truth of the story as I have here related it; I had it
from a very Grave and Worthy person, who then lived near to the place where it
happened, and was Eyewitness to a great part of the Trial, and so had all the
advantages of knowing the Truth of this Affair. But this whole Story is so
notorious and so very well known in that place of the Country, that I Am
confident, our Adversaries can never have the Face to deny it. Besides, there
was a very remarkable accident; some may perchance call it a Judgment from God,
that happened in a short time after the discovery of this noto^ious Cheat,
which made the whole story the more taken Notice of. It was concerning the Lady
Cherrietrees, who had been the Author and occasion of all this trouble to Mr.
Chisholm, and had pe^swaded his Maid to Father her Child upon him. For one of
her own Confessors, a Presbyterian Minister, (his Name is but too well known)
coming upon some occasion to lodge at her House, during the short time he
stayed there, he committed Uncleanness with one of her nearest Relations and
got her with Child; and both he and the young Gentlewoman did Penance for this
their Sin of Fornication in a Field Conventicle, held upon the same Hill, where
the Lady Cherrietrees had obliged Mr. Chisholms Serv^nt Maid to publish him as
Father of her Child in their Presbyterian Congregation, and that it might b^ing
the greater Scandal upon the Episcopal Clergy, to do public Penance for it
there. You may be sure such a remarkable (...), as this would not (...) without
a critical Censure from all the Country ^ound a^out.

Page 79. Our Libeller mi^s a little of his Aim, for instead of Mr. Waugh a
(...) Minist^r, Vindicated from the Aspersions of this Li^ller.
an ^piscopal Clergyman, ^e fails soul upon one of his own party, a (...)
Minister; however I think I Am in justice bound to s^t down what Information I
have of that Assair; and to Vindicate the injured Memory, even of a
Pre^byterian Minister, from the Calumnies and Aspersions of those of his own
Faction. His Name is Mr. Waugh Curate of Borrost (...), whom thi^ Author a^irms
to have Rav^shed his Wifes Ne^e. ^m told indeed, that he was slandered with
Adulte^y, and that a Woman Fathered a Child upon him, but she was neither a
Married Woman, nor his Wives Niece; however, of this Accusation he purged
himself by Oath, before the Presbytery of (...), as is to be seen in the
Registers of that place.

In the next P^ragraph he mentions one Mr. Gregory Curate o^ Another mistake of
our Authors conc^rning Mr. Gregory's b^ing (...) at Torbolton.
Torboltoun, who, he says, was taken in the Act of Uncleanness on a Dunghill.
Whereas I Am informed, there was none of the Name of Gr^gory, Minister at that
place. Mr. James Gill^spie was Minister at Torb^ltoun, and Mr. Alexander
Gregory Parson of Air. But they are both Men of an untainted Reputation, and
were never so much as slandered with such a Crime, and far less convicted of it.

The next whom he Attacks, is Mr. Pearson, Curate of Pasley, who The notorious
(...) of the R^lation a^out Mr. Pearson.
he says, was seen in his own Garden committing Indecencies with his Wife.
Whereas Mr. Pearson was three years Minister at Pasley, during all which time
his Wife was never in Pasley, nor nearer to it than Burn^island in Fyfe, which
is about fifty miles distance; and this all the Presbytery and Parish of Pasley
can attest.

The next I shall take Notice of, is Mr. Lawson Minister at Yrongray* whom this
Libeller Accuses for procuring Souldi^rs to be Quar^ered A ^indication of Mr.
Lawson Mi^ster of Yrongray.
on his Parishioners, till they were quite eaten-up, and f^r informing against
his Par^shioners, and causing sev^ral of them to be Hanged. The Falsehood of
this Accusation is so manifest, that Mr. Lawson challenges his Accusers to Name
any one of his Parish* that were hanged, during the twenty years of his
Ministry at Yrongray, except one Gordon, who suffered for his Notorious
Rebellion. And he was so far from procuring Soldiers to be Quartered on his
Parishioners, that by his Intercessions with the Government in their behalf; he
actually saved many of them from Fines, Imprisonments, and other Legal
punishments to which they were obnoxious, for their frequent Rebellions against
the State. For the Truth of this he Appeals to the Testimony of James Jewine of
Crockmare, Tho. Smith of Drumclaye, James Grier in Dalwhaine, and others in the
Parish of Yrongray, whom he protected from being Fined, and of John Welsh of
Cornlee, for whom, when he was Condemned to die for his Rebellion, Mr. Lawson,
by his Interest with the then Archbishop of Glasgow, obtained first a Reprieve,
and afterward a Pardon.

In the ^ext place he Accuses the said Mr. Lawson of b^ing Drunk at Dumfreis,
and in ^is return ^omewards quarrelling with some Drunken Country people* who
beat him and made him Bleed, and that upon this Account, he caused five young
Men to be Hanged, as being the Persons that did assassina^e him. Now, the
Villainy as well as Falsehood of this Calumny, will clearly appear from the short
Narrative I shall give you of this Transaction. Some of Mr. Lawsons
Parishioners being cited to appear before the Commissioner of that County to
take the Test, (^o which they had a great Aversion) the said Mr. Lawson, at
their entreaty, went to the Church of Traquair, the place where they were
appointed to meet, to request the said Commissioner to Grant them a delay. Here
he stayed, from Ten a Clock in the Morning till about five at Night, and
prevailed with him to show all possible kindness to his Parishoners, and to set
the Imprisoned at Liberty. After which Mr. Guthry Minister at Keir, and Mr.
Lawson went to Yrongray together, not fearing any hurt. They met with none to
quarrel with by the way, (as this Scribler impudently avers) but came peaceably
to Mr. Lawson's Stable Door. Mr. Guthry did sit on Horseback till Mr. Lawson
should send forth his Servant to take in their Horses; but he being about to
enter his own Gate, was ^ncountred by two Men, one of which Wounded him in the
Head twice, calling him Papist Dog. Mr. Lawson entreated them to Reason the
matter with him, rather than to shed innocent Blood; to which they at last
yielded, and entering his House with him, seemed to be grieved for what they
had done, and after a short stay, they went away peaceably. Six of Mr. Lawson's
Neighbors hearing of the Cruelty done him, came instantly to see him; and
about half an hour after, these blood thirsty Villains returned, (after some
converse had with Rob. Currer in Dalwharne and Agnes Ferguson) and entering Mr,
Lawson's House, dragged him sorth without his Gate, and shut the Doors after
them, keeping his Wife and Children, with his Servants and Six Neig^hbours
within. They Guarded the Doors with charged Carabines, threatening Death to any
that should offer to come forth; while in the mean time, they were Murdering
him without Doors. Peter Stranger, (alias Hutcheson) the principal Actor in
this Tragedy, hearing Mr. Lawson call upon God to be merciful to his Soul,
Rebuked him, saying, O Blasphem^us Dog! What have you, or any of your Godless
Party to d^ with God? In fine, having broken one Sword upon his Skull, he
borrowed another from his Neighbor; with which two Swords, he gave him twenty
eight strokes; and supposing him to be Dead, lest him weltering in his Blood
with seventeen Wounds, the Marks whereof are to be seen in his Body at this
day. The Names of those who were Witnesses to this Tragical Action, are Tho.
Ferguson of Hallbil, John Rabson of Newark, John Grier in Brae, Robert Findlay
in Undy-hill, Jam^s Edgar in Gateside, James Grier in Burns. And
notwithstanding these Witnesses did see Mr. Lawson dragged out of his ^ouse,
and a^terwards wallowing in his Blood; yet this Author does most impudently
aver, that no Man came near to Mr. Lawson's ^ouse, and that neither his Wise
nor Servants saw any Man come thither that Night* This is a proo^ of our
Author's Ingenuity, of which he so often boasts throughout his Pamphlet,
pretending to abhor the Method of inventing Lies, and to have inserted nothing
but what he received from cred^ble hands!

It is likewise a most Notorious Falsehood, That five young Men were brought to
Mr. Lawson, and that he Swore these were the Men that Wounded him, and did
thereupon demand Justice. The ground of ^his story is thus. After the Murder
of the Archbishop of St. (...), and feveral Violences done to the rest of the
Clergy and other ^oyal Subjects; the King with Advice of his Privy Co^ncil,
com^anded his Forces to apprehend the Rebels wherever they could (...) them,
or to kill them if they made any Resistance. Next day ^ter the Wounding of Mr.
Lawson, there was a narrow search made ^hroughout the Country for such Rogues,
and the Soldiers falling ^on a Party of them that made Resistance, four of
them were ^illed upon the spot, and two apprehended and Hanged near the Church
of Yrongray. But those were none of them that were a^ Mr. Lawson's Wounding,
and therefore it is the height of inju^ice, as well as impudence, to impute any
thing of this to Mr. Law^on, he having no hand in it, and they suffering justly
for dist^rbing the Peace of the Kingdom. Mr. Lawson was so far from ^hirsting
after the Blood of his Persecutors; that when Peter Stran^er the principal
Actor of this Tragedy was apprehended in Dum^reis, and Mr. Lawson being called
for by my Lord Dunmore, to ^eclare whether that was the Man that Wounded him or
not; he ^urning to the said Peter Stranger; said, if you be the Person that
W^unded me, the Lord sorgive you, and I forgive you. Whereupon, although he was
Imprisoned for his Rebellion, yet he was never pursu^d by Mr. Lawson; and is
yet alive, and in some place of publi^k Trust in that Kingdom.

Again Mr. Lawson is accused of Covetousness, and of having exa^ted 500 l. of
his Parishioners; which is an equal Falsehood to the (...). ^or upon account of
the Cruelties done by the Presbyterian Party, to the Clergy in the West
Country; there was an Act made in K. Charles the II. his Reign; that if any
Clergyman was injure^ in his Body or Goods, the Parishioners should be obliged
to ^ay 5^0 Marks Scots. This was Enacted for preventing the Cruelti^s and
Outrages of the Presbyterian party. The King's Advocate h^aring of the
Barbarous Usage of Mr. Lawson; caused the Freeholders of the said Parish, to be
cited before the Privy (...), for (...) of the said Fine* Mr. Lawson was so
concerned hereat, that not being able to Write himself, because of his Wounds*
he caused a Letter to be Writ to his Grace the then Archbishop of Glasgow,
requesting for the mitigation of the ordinary Fine in such Cases. And this his
desire was Granted, and the Parish only Fined in a 100 l. the fifth part only
of the Sum alleged by the Libeller. For the Truth of this Mr. Lawson Appeals
to all the Freeholders* i^ Yrongray, being near thirty in Number. Now I would
ask our Author, if in all this carriage of Mr. Lawson's, there be any thing
that savours the least of Blood Thirstiness or Cruelty, wherewith he so
maliciously charges him? But I don't much Wonder to see Mr. Lawson thus
Calumniated by them; for they had committed such Acts of Cruelty upon his
person, as they could not but be ashamed of; so that the better to slur over
their Cruelties against him, they found it necessary to represent him to the
World, as the greatest Monster of Cruelty and Immorality, and therefore, they
not only accuse him of Thirsting after the Blood of some of his Parishioners;
but likewise of being Drunk and Kissing his Wives Maid. Mr. Lawson now Aged
about 55 years was ^ever charged; Nay, not in his younger days, with any thing
of that Nature. But sor his ^urther Vindication from all th^se and other such
Aspersions, as this Libeller has maliciously slandered him with; I shall
subjoyn two Testimonies in his Favors sent me, with this Information. The
first is of Archbishop Cairncross, who was for the space of 17 years his Fellow
Presbyter, and afterward his Diocesan. It is as follows*

London, August 28. 1692.
I Alex. Archbishop of Glasgow do hereby Testisie, that Mr. James Lawson
Minister of Yrongrey in the County of Galloway, and Diocese of Glasgow in
Scotland, is ^ very Orthodox and Zealous Prot^stant, and of good Esteem in the
Church for his Pastoral Gifts, and Pious and Exemplary Life in his Ministry.
And as he was forced away from his Church and Family, by the Bar^arous Cruelty
of a set of Presbyterians in that Nation; so I do heartily recommend him to the
tender Favor of all good and well affected Persons; especially to the Reverend
and Pious Clergy of the Church of England, as a Person qualified to do Service
in that Caurch, as God in his Providence shall afford him occasion. Given under
our Hand and Seal the time and place aforesaid.

Alex. Glasguen*

The other Testimony is that of his Neighboring Clergymen, the Reverend
Brethren of that Presbytery, whereof he was a Member.

At Dumfreis June 17. 1690.
WE Undersubscribers Ministers within the Presbytery of Dumfreis iu Scotland,,
do Testify and Declare, that the Bearer hereof Mr. James Lawson Minister at
Yrongray within the said Presbytery, has lived within the Precinct thereof,
twenty five years and an half, and his behavior has been such as became the
Gospel, and his Doctrine such as became a Godly Minister, decrying Romish
Doctrines and Practices, when in greatest Vigor in this Place; and that for
his Zealous, Faithful and plain Dealing, in the Service of his Master; he was
Wounded and left for Dead, by some Ruffians, at his own House, upon the
Eighteenth of February 1685. Wherefore we earnestly desire, that he may have
just Encouragement in such places as he shall happen to com^ to, and be
permitted to Pass and Repass about his lawful Affairs, without Molestation;
since nothing moves him to Travel abroad, but the Confusions Raised by an
insolent Rabble in this place. That the Premises are of certain Truth is
Attested, Day and Place above Written by.

James Glendinning Minister at Traquair. Ja. Little Minister at Tinwald. Jo.
Malcolm Minister at Holywood. A. Kincaid Minister at Terregles. Mr. Alex.
Meldrum Minister at Dunscore. Mr. Rob. Gardner Minister at Rerick.


Since this malicious Libeller has, in this his Scurrilous Pamphlet, Published
so many Base Calumnies, and Diabolical Lies, against that most Reverend and
Worthy Prelate, Dr. Patterson Archbishop of Glasgow, I have taken occasion here
to insert his Grace's Letter, (containing a Full and Pathetick Vindication of
himself,) which was sent to me by a Reverend and Worthy Friend of mine,
enclosed in this following Line.

London, October 17. 1693.
SIR,
I Hear that you are to Publish the Animadversions that you made upon one of
the Libels printed against the Scots Clergy. The Methods lately taken to ruin
that Order of Men in Scotland, are as Unjust as they are Diabolical. It is a
good while ago since I knew who was the Author of that Scurrilous Book, and
this made me think that the Archbishop of Glasgow needed no Apology against the
Attempts of such a despicable Wretch; yet it is possible, that what is once made
Public may fall into the hands of several Persons who are very apt to be
abused, and therefore I have sent here enclofed the Letter that the Archbishop
wrote to me upon occasion of that In^amous Pamphlet. I let it go abroad the
rather, that I am so seriously appealed to in the Letter it self. I give you my
hearty Thanks for your solid Confutatio^ of several malicious and obscene Lies
propagated by that Calumniator. I continue in all Sincerity and Affection,

Your Real Friend and Servant.
For my worthy Friend Mr. --
Edinburgh-Castle, Jan. 21. 1693.
Reverend Brother,
WE may say with Hezekiah, This is a Day of Trouble, and of Rebuke, and of
Blasphemy. Just now (when I am ordered to remove out of these Three Kingdoms,
and so to part from my numerous Family, and ten Motherless Children, when they
most need my Care,) I am surprised to find in an obscene and virulent Pamphlet;
(written undoubtedly by one of the Firstborn of the Father of Lies, who dares
not own his Villainy, Entitled, An Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence:)
Some Paragraphs and Passages impudently painting me, as one of the most impure
and (...) Wretches that ever was clothed in Human Flesh; which, if true,
should justly expose my Name to Infamy, and my Life to Justice, as the most
vi^e, profane, and sacrilegious Monster, that ever bore a sacred Character:
Which I no sooner read than I fell on my Knees, and, as the same good King
^ezekiah did with Senacherib's blasphemous Letter, I spread it before the Lord
in Prayer, and in the innocence of my Heart, and integrity of my Life, I
appealed to him ^or a just Vindication; not that I needed it amongst them to
whom my Life and Manners are known, but only amongst such as are Strangers to
me, and to this Kingdom; upon whom this impud^nt Son of (...) designs to impose.

Not only the sense of Religion and Purity, but even my Native Modesty, (sor
attesting of which, I do appeal to all the Men and Women in the World with whom
I ever conversed, whom I earnestly obtest ingenuously to declare, if ever they
heard one single obscene Word drop from my Tongue, or ever perceived any
immodest Insinuation either directly or indirectly in my Actings or Practice*)
made me read these obscene Passages with great aversion and horror; most of
which, I declare in the Presence of GOD, I never heard, nor read to be said, or
done by, or charged upon any Mortal, till I found them there asserted as things
notoriously known of my self, by this infamous Monster of Profaneness, as well
as of villainous and impudent Lying. Modesty will not allow me to repeat them,
since they de^ile the Air, and needs must pollute the Eyes of Readers, and Ears
of Hearers, and therefore to convel and (...) them, I shall only say this; That
if the wicked Author will be so just to himself, and to his Party, as to come
out from behind the Curtain, pull off his Mask, and prove any of these infamous
Articles or Passages he asserts against me by two, nay by any one single
Witness or Person of known Virtue and Probity, and of irreproachable Fame, I
shall not only offer my Name to Infamy, but my Life to Justice; and to
encourage him so to do, I hereby promise him as a Reward; and shall find him
good Surety for it, (tho my Circumstances are now very low) of Two hundred
Pounds Sterling, (and perhaps the silly Author needs such a charming Bait) if
he shall prove any single Article or Instance of those infamous and diabolical
Aspersions and Calumnies. Now, if after this open Appeal and Challenge, and
offer of this Reward, he shall not appear and avow himself the Author, nor make
at least any one Article of his many Instances against me appear to be true, I
shall then leave it to all mankind, to judge if he is not the most wicked,
impudent, lying Villain, that ever put Pen to Paper, or if I need any further
Vindication; especially considering, that he asserts so many Persons to be
privy to those impure and obscene Passages, so that he cannot be straightened for
want of Evidence and Witnesses, and is very sure that the present Judges (for I
shall decline none) will not prov^ Partial upon my side.

I render devoutly Thanks to GOD, who has continued my Life thus long, and
granted me this opportunity thus to appeal and charge this wicked Author, that
so I may satisfy the World of my Innocence, and that this may remain as a
solid Witness sor me and my good Name after my Death against a Spirit of Lying
and Calumny, which (as formerly against our pious and worthy Predecessors) is
now like to go sorth, enraged and rampant, against those of my Persuasion,
Order and Character, from such who have long made Lies their Refuge.

Dear Brother,
You know I have lived long in this Church and Kingdom, and have born a greater
and more eminent Character, both in Church and State, than my weakness and
imperfection did deserve; you know also I did not want many, and some of great
^uality and Power, who sometimes have been Enemies to me, so that had ^ been
such an abominable, wicked, and notour Monster, as this infamous Scribler
endeavors to paint me, I had been as certainly as justly thrust out from the
Counci^ Table, and the Sacred Episcopal Office, with disgrace and infamy; for
nothing could have supported such a villainous Wretch from feeling the Justice
of this Church and Nation. You have long conversed with me, and I appeal to
you, and to all my Reverend Brethren, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, to whom
I am known, nay to all mankind with whom I ever conversed, and I conjure you
and all them to declare to all men, when occasion offers, as in the fight of
our great and omniscient Judge, if ever you or they heard or perceived any
manner of impure, or so much as an immodest Word or Insinuation to flow from
me, and I am ready to stand or fall at that Bar accordingly.

There is a Party of Men in the World who Treat us, as some Persecuting
Heathens did the pure Primitive Christians, whom they sowed up in Skins of
Wolves, Bears, and other Savage Beasts, and then hounded out their bloody Dogs
to devour and tear them in pieces; is it not enough that our Sacred Order is
abolished, our selves turned out of our Livings and Benefices, (so that many of
us (alas) are reduced, with our numerous Families, to a state of starving,)
that our Persons are assaulted, and beaten in the open Streets of our Capital
City; our Houses rifled, our Families ^abled out? Nay, after all this the
Malice of some is not satiated, till Hell and Calumny are called up against us;
and our Reputation must be blackened, and our good Names torn, by the most
impudent Falsehoods and Calumnies which Satan can invent, and his true Offspring
publish and propagate,; but, Thanks to our GOD, there will be a Resurrection of
blackened and murdered Names, as well as of martyred Bodies.

You know I have drawn much of the Odium and Spite of a Party upon me, by
opposing their Errors, their Schisms, their Rebellious and Treasonable
Principles and Practices, with all the Reason and Interest I was Master of;
though in stead of endeavoring to take away any of their Lives, (which this
Libeller also lays to my Charge) I have been at pains to save many of them, and
have actually prevailed for saving of the Lives of several deluded Creatures of
that Party, which can still be attested by themselves.

I grudge not my Lot, in having my Name thus assaulted and torn by such little
ridiculous Scriblers and Calumniators; it were an intolerable Pride in me to
look for better Treatment than our dearest Savior, the Holy Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, and noble Army of Martyrs had before me; or than the
Primitive holy Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops encountered, of whom the
World was not worthy; such as St. Athanasius, St. Chrysostom, Narcissus Bishop
of Jerusalem, and others, great and blessed Souls; whose sacred Names, and
innocent Lives, have been attacked and blackened by the foul Mouths and lying
Tongues of Heretics, Schismatics, and impudent Calumniators; and some of them
after the same manner, and with the same fulsom Lies as I am; the Disciple is
too proud, who looks to be better Treated than his Master; and that Servant is
too saw^y, who would needs be better used than his Lord; who by the then
Scribes (...) Pharisees, was said to be in Covenant with (...): I can
com^ortably say with the holy calumniated Ancient, Quisquis (...), ^ddit
m^rcedi (...).

I doubt not the sober Presbyterians will be as angry at, and dissatissied
with, this infamous and anonymus Sc^ibler and Calumniator, as we are; as
knowing there can be no more ready nor effectual Method advanced to promote
Atheism, and to ruin all Religion, than by Lies and Calumnies to invade and
black^n the Honor and Reputation of the Clergy and Pastors of the Church; and
whoever, and of whatsoever Persuasion he is that dares follow it, can have
nothing of Veracity, nor of the meek Spirit of the blessed JESUS, nor regard to
the Honor of our (...) Religion in him.

As for me, I shall bring no railing Accusation against thi^ impi^us and
obscene Calumniator, nor against any of his Party; but shall only say, as
Micha^l the Archangel did to this Scrible^'s Master, that Father of Lies, when
he contended and disputed with him about the Body of Moses -- The Lord r^buke
thee. I thank GOD I have learned to Pray with the Church, That G^d ^ay forgive
all my Enemies, (...), and Slanderers; and particularly to grant Repentance and
Mercy to this sad pitiful Wretch, who is so palpably abandoned of GOD, and
given up to a (...) course of Lying. When he reads and pond^rs Psalm 52. v. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and Psalm 120. throughout, he may by a serious and recollected
Meditation, through the Divine Grace and Blessing* be brought to Repent; as he
would avoid the heavy Wrath and Judgments there threatened against him, and his
way.

Dear Brother,
I writ this in haste, being crowded with many Thoughts and Affairs here in
Prison ere I part for Holland; and can have leisure to say no more at present,
but to beseech you to cause Print and insert this Letter (which (I being to go
to Sea) may prove the last I shall write to you,) in the Answer that is to come
abroad, for the Vindication of those concerned in that infamous Defamatory
Libel.

GOD ever keep you in his Truth and Fear, and under his most holy Care. I am,

Reverend Brother, Your most Affectionate Brother, and Servant, Sic
Subscribitur* Jo. Glasgow.

As for what this Author Libels against Bishop Cairncross late Archbishop
Vindication of Archbishop Cairncross.
of Glasgow, I need say nothing further in answer to it, but insert the
Vindication which he himself wrote of his Innocence, and caused to be printed
at Edinburgh, for it contains such a full and satisfactory Answer to all the
Particulars Libelled against him in this Pamphlet, as plainly discovers the
malice and wickedness of the Author. It is as follows.

A Vindication of Dr. Alexander Cairncross, late Archbishop of Glasgow: Written
by himself.
WHen at first I found my self Reproached, (in a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An
Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence,) I neglected and contemned it, not
only because I was conscious to my self of mine own Innocence, and that it is
no small pain to any man of an ingenuous mind to be raking among Calumnies, and
penning Apologies or Vindications of himself: But likewise because the Author
of these infamous Aspersions on the Episcopal Clergy has discovered all along
such a strain of embittered Malice, that I presumed they would obtain little
credit or belief in the World. For it is notour to all, that because the Author
of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Scots Presbyterian Eloquence, alleged some
Presbyterian Ministers guilty of undecent Sayings or Expressions from their
Pulpits; therefore this Auth^r in his Answers resolving both to recriminate and
surpass him, has both studied and acted his utmost Revenge, in representing
some of the Episcopal Clergy as not only guilty of undecent Sayings and
Expresfions, but also guilty of vicious Lives and Practices; and whether true
or false he values not, if his Malice be but satisfied, and they so reported of
in this World. But now considering that a good Name is a tender and choice
Blessing which every man in justice to himself should defend and preserve, and
that there is too great an aptitude in most People's minds to entertain and
believe evil Reports of others, I have thought ^it by these few Lines to make
my just Apology, as in the sight of GOD, against the Calumnies cast upon me in
that Pamphlet. Now the whole Paragraph relating to me in that Pamphlet is this:

[Mr. Alexander Cairncross Curate in Dumfreis had a lusty Maidservant named
Grier, who was got with Child in his service, and in her Travail refused to
tell who was the Father of it, but sent to her Master to tell her what she
should say; who thereupon sent his Servant, a young Boy called Tait, that owned
the Child, and has kept him in his Service ^ver since; and that he b^ing
Moderator of the Presbytery, received a Letter from Mr. Menzies th^n Curate of
Carlaverock, renouncing his Conformity to Episcopacy, and among other Reasons
mentioned, that it was so much adap^d ^o bring in Popery, of which ^he
Familiari^y be^wixt Curat^s and Papists was a demonstration: At which (...)
s^id Mr. Cairncross was so much surpris^d, tha^ in a Fury he started up, and
said, Wh^. ^he Devil, will we all (...), (...) Mr. Menzies is (...)! sor his
(...), (...) upon the matter. What is that, said the rest? Are ye stupi^d
(...), answered he, that (...) this very ^ck of time that the (...) are our
necessary (...); bu^ sinc^ it is so, let him be gone (...) r^st in the
M^untains, which h^ must do when ^he Bond com^s, or (...); and seeing he is
such a Fool, I had r^ther (...) were ^nged (...) I should ^nger any P^pist
anent (...) ^f Controversy ab^ut our Opini^s. ^e was (...) made Archbishop of
Glasgow, and ^urned out by King James, being esteemed the best of Scots (...),
and it seems could not go the full length his necessary Friends would have had
him.]

^ere are two plain matters of Fact, and both base Lies and Calumnies; sor as
to the sirst, That I having a lusty maid named Grier (...) S^vice, wh^ (...) ^o
tell ^he Father of her Child (...)* etc. I answer, First, Immediately after I
heard that Woman (...) was suspected of being with Child, I discharged her both
from my ^ouse and Service; and from my just Resentment against her, I p^ocured
from the Magistrates her Imprisonment for some weeks, in the which P^ison, and
when s^e was brought before ^he (...)-(...). (...) pu^ickly con^essed, That
(...) Sharp, Commissar-(...) in the Town, ^ad committed (...) with her, and wa^
(...) of (...) C^ild; and the said (...) Sh^rp being summoned, compear^d (...)
the S^ssion, and confessed himself guilty wi^h her, and own^d (...) Child; and
both of them m^de public Sati^ction on the public Place of Repentanc^ ^hree
(...) Days in (...), and (...) of (...): All which is Record^d in (...)
Regis^er of ^he said Session. And, Secondly, For the Boy Tait, [(...) i^ is
all^dged I sent ^o her in ^er Travailing,] he come not to my S^rvice till eight
Years thereaster; she having satissied and brought ^orth her Child in the Year
1671, and he entering to ^y S^vice in 1679, before which time I did never see
him in the (...) to my knowledge.

As to the second, That he being Moderator of the Presbytery of Dumfreis,
received a Letter from Mr. Menzies then Curate of Carlaverock, r^nouncing his
Conformi^y to Episcopacy; at which he was so surprised, that in a fury he
started up, (...) the Devil, will we all go mad, etc. This is likewise a b^se
and horrid Unt^uth: For first, Mr. M^nzies sent me no Letter, but being pre^ent
in the Presbytery, exhibited to the public Meeting that hi^ Paper of
Renunciation; and after Reading and closs Re^soning upon it, he pressed to have
it insert in the Presbytery Register, which all the Brethren out of a
Tenderness to him refused, p^esuming that he had been imposed upon by others,
and that in a litt^e time he might alter both his Course and Opinion; which
accordingly thereafter ^ell out, ^or in an. 16^6, he pubickly acknowledged his
Failzior for his sormer Renunciation, and returned to the Exercise of his
Ministry under Episcopal Government, I being then his Bishop. Secondly, In that
Paper which he then exhibit^ and is yet to be seen, Mr. Menzies al^dged, That
he had heard that Exp^ession before ( of Papis^s being ^ur n^ssary Fri^nds)
from one of the ^piscopal Clergy, but where, or by whom, or whether true or
fa^se, God know^. But as for the Oath and Expressions here alleged uttered by
me* I appeal to the Consciences and Declarations of Mr. Menzi^s himself, and of
all the Brethren then present, Whether they heard me utter that Oath, and these
Expre^ions here Libelled and Alleged? And though many of the said Ministers be
yet alive, viz. Mr. Ri^rd Sc^ then Minis^er of Kirkbe^m, Mr. (...) Minister of
(...). Mr. ^ohn (...) Mini* s^er of (...), Mr H^nry Knox Minister of (...), Mr.
(...) Ly^ M^nister of (...), Mr. (...) Minister of Kilp^rick* Mr. William (...)
Minister of N^w (...), and several others, whom I may presume were present at
that time, to whose Testimony I do appea^; yet they being all absent at this
time from this place of (...), except Mr. Riqhard Scot and Mr. Henry Knox here
present* these two have given in the following Declaration subscribed under
their Hands.

WE Mr. Richard Scot late Minister of Kirkbean, and Mr. Henry ^
Knox late Minister of Terreagles, being formerly Members of the Presbytery of
Dumfreis, and being personally present at that Meeting of Presbytery, wherein
Mr. John Menzies then Minister of Carlaverock did publicly exhibit to that
Meeting his Paper of Renunciation of his Conformity with Episcopacy; Do hereby
Testify and Declare, That we did not hear Dr. Alexander Cairncross late
Arc^bishop of Glasgow, and then Moderator of the said Presbytery, utter the
Oath or Expressions here Libelled and Alleged. Sic Subscribitur,

Mr. Richard Scot late Minister of Kirkbean. Mr. Henry Knox late Minister of
Terreagles.



And if any thing more were requisite, I am ready to Depone upon my solemn
Oath, That I am altogether free and innocent of all these former Calumnies and
Reproaches.

How much then the Author of this Pamphlet has kept his Promise and Faith
given to the Public in its Preface, (that he would in^t nothing relating to
the Lives of the Episcopal Clergy but what he had from credible Hands, and his
abhorring the method of inventing of ^ies,) let the World judge: Only I wish
the Author seriously to consider, how Inhumane and Unchristian it is to
Perse^ute some of the Episcopal Cle^gy with new Cruelties, seeing their present
and past Sufferings might sufficiently satisfy, yea satiate the Malice of
their bitterest Enemies. And because ye cannot Extirpate them from off the
Earth, ye labor to make them Unsavory upon it: Remembe^ there is an infinitely
Wise and Just GOD above, who will exactly and impartially Judge all our Words
and Actions; and I heartily pray, That GOD may never be provoked to turn back
your Reproaches upon you, as Neh. c. 4. v. 4.

As also, I would have you to consider how much Re^igion it self is exposed,
and Prophanity and Atheism encouraged, by representing Men of Sacred Offices as
Vicious and Scandalous in their Lives: For thus J^lian the Apostate resolving
to extirpate Christianity, ^ighted the methods of Persecutions and Cruelties
used by some form^ ^then Emperors against the Christians, but caused Reproach,
and accuse the Ministers and Profes^ors of that Holy Religion as g^ty of all
the Vices and Lewdnesses that might render them and t^ir S^cred (...) odious to
the World. And therefore it was a P^ous Saying of King Ch^rles I. to one asking
Liberty from him to Write and P^blish the Weakness and Failziors of some
Ministers th^n in opposition to His Majesty's Inter^st; No, said the King, for
in s^ doing, Religion it self ^ill suffer.

And however your Calumnies and De^amations may be credited among the Credulous
or Prejudicate Vulgar, yet I presume by this way you will not gain many
Proselytes among those that are Good and Wise: ^or who, that are endued with
the common Principles of Justice and Charity, will believe men guilty of gro^s
Crimes upon your bare and naked Narration, without adducing the Attestation of
any Witnesses, or yet a^y seeming or just Proof? Or who, that is endued with
the sense of Re^igion and Godliness, can approve of the methods of ^itter
Malice, Revenge, and Unchristian Calumnies, so contrair to all the Ru^es of
Humanity and Christ^anity, for ^upporting and promoting of any Party or
Inter^st whatsoever? And as equal Tenderness is to be had to a man's Reputation
as to his Life, I allow you to search and examine my Conversation and Life
hitherto, and Treat me but by the Rules of common Justice, and I am Proof
against your Malice.

What we have already observed concerning our Author's malice The Conclusion.
and disingenuity in these Inst^nces we have taken notice of, may s^rve, I
think, as a sufficient Caution to all ingenuous and imp^ial Readers, not to lay
too great stress upon the Calumnies and Aspersions of this Author, nor to
entertain any the harder Thoughts of our Clergy for being bespattered by the
Pen of this virulent Scribler. For the candid Treatm^nt which these Persons I
have mentioned have met with in this P^mphlet, may in a great me^sure enable us
to judge what Credit and Authority the re^t of this Author's Aspersions on our
Clergy ought to have, since he deals so basely and difing^nuously in all these
Instances. He invents Stories which he cannot sind the least shadow of Truth to
justisi^, for the Truth of some of his matters of (...) he appeals to Records,
where there is not the le^st mention of them to be found; n^y, he sticks at
nothing so he but can serv^ hi^ main End and Design, which is to b^acken the
Fame and Reputation of our Clergy, and to render their Sacred Function odious
to all Mankind. I pray GOD to give this Author a d^ep sense of the Villainy of
this his Design, that h^ may Repent in time, and s^ve his Soul before it is too
late. It is a Scandal and a Reproach to our Religion, that such Hellish and
Diabolical Practices, as this Author uses, should be so much as heard of in any
of those places where the Name of Christ is invocated; such kind of Practices
are so Inhumane, and so contrary to the Spirit of Christianity, that they must
needs make the Authors and Abe^tors of them stink in the Nostrils of all Good
and Religious Men.

All that I have ^urther to add now, is only to beg my Reader's Pardon, for
detaining him so long in searching into the Rubbish of a parcel of Profane and
Lewd Stories. I must needs own it is no very pleasing Task to me, to be raking
into such a Dunghill; but finding the Reputation of some of our Clergy very much
injured among Strangers, by reason of the Calumnies and Aspersions of this
obscure Writer; I thought my self ob^iged, from the Duty I owe to my Country,
and from the Respect we all ought to have for the Sacred Charact^r of Christ's
Ambassadors and Ministers, to contribute my small Endeavors for asserting and
vindicating the Oppressed Innocence of our ^lergy, and for detecting the Malice
and Falsehood of this Libeller's Asper^ions. In which I hope I have been so
successful with this small ^say, that after perusal thereof, every
Disinteressed Person will readily acknowledge, That the Author of this Virulent
Libel against our ^lergy has been totally acted by the Spirit of Malice and
Envy, and has dealt so basely and disingenuously in all his Relations which I
have had occasion to search into, that his bare Accusation can be of no
Authority against the most obnoxious Member of any Nation or Society.

FINIS.

