A COLLECTION OR NARATIVE Sent to his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR of the
COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, etc. CONCERNING The Bloody and
Barbarous Massacres, Murders, and other Cruelties, committed on many thousands
of Reformed, or Protestants dwelling in the Valleys of Piedmont, by the Duke of
Savoy's Forces, joined therein with the French Army, and several Irish
Regiments.

Published by Command of his Highness.

Printed for H. Robinson, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and the
Dominions thereto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
YOUR Highness having thought it convenient that I should put in print the
writings I have received concerning the horrible massacre committed upon the
poor Protestants of Piedmont, I humbly dedicate them to your Highness, as to
whom they do of right belong, not only because they were sent me to present to
your Highness, or that your Highness has received them from other hands, but
chiefly for that every one knowing the Piety of your Highness, and the fervent
Charity you have testified to the poor Protestants, the strait Communion you
hold with them, and the care you have of their preservation, it seems as if
your Highness were particularly interess'd herein. And so much the more,
because this cruel action was chiefly executed by the Irish, as in revenge to
those who have driven them out of their own Country for the cruel Massacres
they there committed. So that every one believes your Highness will express a
deep resentment hereof, and will endeavor the consolation and reestablishment
of many thousands of persons escaped from this Butchery, who have chosen rather
to quit their Houses and Goods, than to make shipwreck of their Faith. This
also is an occasion, which God by his providence has set before your Highness,
to show the incomparable zeal which you have for his service and Glory, and to
give to the Protestants an evident prof of the affection your Highness bears
them, and to confirm them in the confidence they have conceived of your Highness
Protection. This all the Israel of God expects from your Highness upon this
occasion, looking upon your Highness as a Zerubbabel, whom God has sent for
the repairing of his Jerusalem. I beseech the Lord, who by the marveilous
dispensations of his Providence, has raised your Highness to this great
dignity, that he would grant you to be the Protector of the people of God in
all Nations, as he has in this, and that he would long preserve your Highness,
to the end you may employ the power he has given your Highness for the
accomplishment of his great Works, for the defense of his whole Church, the
preservation of them which remain, and the reestablishment of the desolate and
afflicted for the propagation of his Gospel, the advancement of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and the Glory of his great name.

Which is the Prayer, My Lord, of Your Highness's most humble, faithful, and
obedient, servant, J. B. Stouppe.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AMongst all the Churches of Christ, that do profess the pure and holy Religion
which he has taught in his Word, that of the Waldenses is the most
considerable, as well for her Antiquity, as for the sharp and continual
persecutions it has suffered. Her Antiquity is such, that no man can truly find
out her beginning: so that even her Adversaries say, that the Heresy of the
Waldenses (thus they call their Doctrine) began in the Apostles days, and
allwaies has been in the Valley of Angrogna. But of all the Certificates which
many Papists have given of the antiquity of the Waldenses, and of their
Doctrine, that of Reynerius, a Roman Inquisitor, whose VVritings have been
procured to us by Gretserus the Jesuit; is most remarkable: for thus he
speaks of them. Amongst all the Sects that are in the World, there is none
that has been, or is still more perncious than that of the Waldensis or
Leonistes, for three Reasons; First, because it has lasted longer than all
others, some saying it began in Sylvester his time, others deriving them from
the Apostles. Secondly, because it is so Universal, that there is no Country
where it is not. Thirdly, because the Professors of it live more uprightly
before men, and hold all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, blaspheaming only
against the Church of Rome and hating it.

But however this Reynerius, living about the end of the Eleventh age of the
Church and the beginning of the twelfth, and so there being above 400. years
since he did call the Waldenses an old Sect, he shows clearly they had then
been a time in the Church. * Bishop Usher, de Successione, etc. Page 151. and
210.
Besides it is certain* as we find in many credible Historians, that 1160. a
great number of faithful souls, called then the poor of Lions, or Waldenses,
because they had been taught by Peter Waldus, a man of great Erudition and
singular piety, being persecuted at Lions, by the Roman Clergy, by reason of
the Reformation, which he procured unto the Church, they retired into those
Valleys, where finding the Natives to be of their own opinions, they composed
together those reformed Churches of the Waldenses, which have ever since
subsisted: Which proves, that the reformed Religion professed in those Valleys
did not begin within an age or two of this, as some ignorant adversaries say;
but that it has been either from the very Apostles, or from the first ages,
and that the Waldenses found there th seed of the true Religion, having nothing
to do on either side, but to encourage each other to do better and better, and
to set up the Banner of truth, in the view of the world. Since that time, those
poor Churches have always been the mark for worldlings to shoot at, and spend
against them all the arrows of their malice. Satan has done all he could
against them, and Antichrist has spared nothing to destroy them, fires have
been kindled, and flames blown up, to reduce them into ashes: they have had
experiments of the barbarous cruelty of men. And as there is no war so
bloody, as that which is undertaken in hatred of Religion; so to suffer
proscriptions and exiles, confiscations of goods, and imprisoning, torturing,
and killing of bodies have been the ordinary excercises of the faithful in
those Countries. Yet notwithstanding the great Massacres acted therein from Age
to Age, God by his providence has allwaies preserved a considerable number of
them, which made up many fine and flourishing Churches, although they were
always under the Cross.

I will not enlarge my discourse, to make a description of the persecutions
they have suffered, since a large Volume would not suffice for that I will only
say something of those evils they have been exposed to these two last years.
There was great probabillity they should of late, in the time of their Princes
Coronation, enjoy some quietness and tranbuillity* since they had obtained the
confirmation of their Possessions and old Privileges; but they were soon
frustrate of their hope; For the Court of Rome, and the Popes servants and
Agents did work so cunningly, that they were deprived of the benefit of those
Privileges; Commerce was forbidden them, many men driven out of their
Habitations, and finally after the publication of a Croisade, they were 1653.
assaulted by a great Army, which had wholly extirpated them, if God had not
assisted them by an extraordinary Rain, which did oppose the endeavors of
their Adversaries, and made them vain. And because this bloody Design did not
succeed them well, they endeavored afterward to ruin wholly those faithful
persons by extraordinary Impositions and Burdens much above their own
strength, and which were not set upon the Papists in those parts. Thus they did
engage them unto great expenses to obtain again the Confirmation of their
Privileges, and being obtained, their Enemies exacted from them prodigious
sums of money to have it sealed. Yea, the matter was brought to that height of
injustice, to make them bear the charges of those, who were come to fight and
ruin them. Besides all that, there being a French Army in those parts, it was
sent to take its winte quarters in the midst of those Churches, which thus were
wholly deprived of what remained for their subsistence.

But all that was but a beginning of greater sorrow: for if they had then cause
to groan and sigh, they have had since occasions to shed whole streame^ of
tears; since they have tried, how far the cruelty of the persecutors of truth
may go, and found that th^re is neither fidelity nor law in the behalf of
those, who profess true Christianity in those Valleys. They thought, they had
in some sort stilled the Sea, and that a blessed Calm had succeeded the
furious Storm, when after a long Negotiation, in which they had consumed great
sums, they had obtained of their Prince the confirmation of their ancient
Privileges. But they were soon deceived of their hopes; for instead of keeping
promises to them, Orders came, as from their Prince, against all those of the
Reformed Religion dwelling in Luserne, Lusernette, Bubiane, Fenil, Bricheret,
St. John, St. Second, La Tour, and Campiglion, which is the best and most
fruitful ground in the Valley of Luserne, as being in the plain, with a strict
Injunction to quit their habitations within thre^ days, or go to Mass upon
pain of Life and Confiscation of their Goods; Proceedings directly contrary to
the Concessions or Grants of their Prince, twice confirmed by the present Duke,
with his express Declaration not to change any thing therein. The Minister
designed and sent for the execution of that cruel Order has bee^ one Andrew
Guastaldo, who has the Title of the Keeper of the Catholic Faith against the
Heretics of the Valleys; and who is likewise one of the Council de propaganda
fide, lately erected at Turin. He caused these Orders to be published in the
places already named, the 25th. of January last past, and notwithstanding the
extraordinary Snow and Rain, which then caused great Inundations or
overflowings of water he (with the greatest Inhumanity that can be imagined)
expelled all sorts of persons without distinction of quality, or sex, or age,
and without commiseration of women with child, and lying in, nor of the sick
and weak, nor of old persons and sucking Infants. Many thousands of all sorts
were expelled and forced to retire into the Rocks, there to be frozen or
famished. They did often address themselves unto their Prince, and sent many
Deputies to beseech him to revoke that Order, producing their most just
complaints, and showing their Reasons in all humility; But all without effect,
because their Judges were their Adversaries, and that those, before whom their
Cause was h^ard, were members of the said Council de propaganda fide, and
Slaves unto the Pope.

In the mean time, these poor Fugitives complaining but in vain, that their
Goods were plundered, their Grounds laid waste, their Houses burnt and
demolisht, some of them went down to keep them, then presently they were
declared Rebels, and all Ears were stopped to their cries, and no hand would
receive their humble Petitions; Yet some, to deceive them, put them in hope to
be reestablished, while by the means of the general confession of Papists to
their Priests before Easter; all the men of Predmont, able to bear Arms, were
enjoined to be ready at a day appointed, that so they might set on those
Protestants; all being sworn to keep that Plot secret. Every one was ready the
27th. of last April, and with many the Roman Clergy met at the Rendezvous,
where printed Bills of full pardon of sins were distributed to every man,
besides the spoil of the pretended Heretics given to them who should destroy
them. To this Militia of P^edmont, the French Army, and some Irish Regiments,
joined themselves, who together plundered, and wholly burnt all the houses of
the Plain, interdicted to Protestants, by the Order already spoken of.

After that first furious exploit and ignoble action, the Marquess of Pianess,
who did command that Army, would assault the passages and places of the
mountains, where all those did retire who had escaped the fury of their
enemies: but seeing he could not do it openly by force, he resolved to use a
damnable policy, and detestable treachery to ruin them. He sent therefore for
the Deputies of Angrogne, Villar, and Boby, of the Vale of Lusern, and promised
them, yea with an Oath, that if they would receive a Regiment of Horse in those
places, and one of Foot in each, and lodge them for three days, no injury
should be done them. Those poor souls, who believed him not capable of so black
a treachery, to testify their submission to his Highness Orders, received
those wicked Regiments, which were no sooner in, but the whole Army did follow,
and presently began their work, and put all to fire and sword, making an
horrible slaughter of all they found, without distinction of quality, age or
sex, young and old, men, women and children, rich and poor, were all
indifferently killed, although by very different torments, and with such
cruelties, as can hardly be imagined. Many were burnt alive, some hanged by the
feet to a tree; Others torn in pieces, diverse were strangely slasht and cut,
then Salt ane Pepper being laid on their wounds, and their Shirts put on again,
they were burnt in that sort, and so made Martyrs in an unknown way to all
preceding Tyrants and Monsters. Some being stripped naked, and tied head and legs
together, were tumbled down the Mountains. Others were nailed unto the ground
through the belly with stakes, and others were spit through the fundament,
after the manner of the Turks, and others through the middle. Many women having
first been ravished, and endured diverse outrages and ignominies, had afterward
their heads chopped off. A great number of little children have been barbarously
butchered, some being cast down headlong from high places, others pulled
asunder by two Soldiers, who held them by the feet, and a third sort had their
brains dashed out. Finally, such strange cruel^ies have been used against them,
as were unknown to the very Heathen^, far from being exercised by Christians.

This butchery being ended there, they went to the Vale of Perouse and St.
Martins, where upon pain of death they commanded all Protestants to go to Mass,
or to quit the Country within 24 hours. They left their goods and possessions,
and did all quietly depart, except some few who turned Papists. But
notwithstanding their quiet retreat, all their houses were burnt, that so they
might never return, even as it had been acted in the Valley of Lucerna. Thus
the Reformed Religion has been wholly rooted out of the Valleys of Piedmont by
slaughters and banishments, and nothing has been left there, but for the Roman
Catholics.

Yet though there be about 6000 of them barbarously murdered, or that dyed
since by cold, famine or other accidents, there are above sixteen thousand of
those, who saved their lives from the Massacre acted on their brethren in the
Vale of Lucerne, and who have been expelled out of Perouse and St. Martin, who
all retired into the Vales of Cluson and Queeras, deprived of all goods, and
all equally reduced unto an extreme want, subsisting even by the charitable
helps of the Churches, who did receive them, or of few others, who have sent
them their alms. In the mean time, as we ought not to doubt, but that God will
revenge the blood of those, who have been so barbarously butchered: so is it
the duty of all the faithful, to have a true compassion of the calamities of
those who remain, and are banished for the cause of Christ, to implore God's
assistance by supplications and prayers, for their preservation and
deliverance; and finally to communicate their Goods to them for their relief.
Indeed as we are all members of one and the same Body, and obliged to be
sensible of the Evils of one another, we ought above all to be lively touched
by the afflictions of those faithful witnesses of Jesus, who have suffered for
his sake to maintain his truth, and the profession of his Gospel. It had been
easy for them all to preserve their Goods, and acquire new possessions, if they
had been willing to make a Shipwreck of their Faith: If the spirit of Christ
dwell in us, that same spirit, who quickens us all, and has fortified those
faithful souls in their sufferring disgraces and losses for God, ought also to
move us to succor them with all our power.

What they humbly desire of us, is neither to enrich themselves, nor to make us
beggars. They beg only a small part of our abundance; not to employ it in
excess or riot, but in the preservation of their lives, which they are in
danger to lose through want. If we have a true horror of the cruelty of their
bloody enemies, how can we refuse them what Christ does ask of us for their
consolation? Who fails in so just a duty, instead of showing himself a friend
to Christ, and to his Saints persecu^ed for him, declares himself half their
enemy, and seems to embrace the party of their Persecutors in their detestable
cruelty. For if those inhumane Papists have unjustly spoiled them of all their
goods, we should approve what they have done in not affording them what is
necessary for their subsistence. If (as it is very true) they have sinned
against our Brethren, through malice and rage, let us beware to make our selves
guilty toward them, through our hardness and want of compassion. If they have
stripped them, and almost starved them, shall we, who (by Gods grace) are well
clothed and fed, leave them both naked and hungry? If their Enemies have
wounded them, may we not pass for their false Friends, if we give them no
salve, but see and suffer them bleeding, without binding their wounds, and
applying some remedies? If th^se cruel Murderers have taken away the lives of
many, shall we refuse to preserve theirs, who remain after that great
slaughter? Yea, in refusing to help the living, are we minded to make their
condition worse than that of their dead friends? for it is certain, that it is
a greater cruelty to make a man languish in misery, and to starve him, than to
kill him outright.

I hope that all faithful Christians and Saints of this Country, being lively
touched by the sad and lamentable condition of those poor fugitives, who are
persecuted for righteousness sake, will open them their bowels of mercy, and
will give them liberally such portion of their goods, as may satisfy their
hunger, and help them to subsist. So they shall have in their conscience the
joy and comfort to have contributed to the restoration of those poor Churches,
which God has raised and preserved miraculously so many Ages together. Those
Sanctuaries they shall re-edisie, will without intermission offer their prayers
to God for their Benefactors prosperity and salvation. Those members of Christ
will bless them for their sense of their misery, Gods Angels will rejoice for
their effectual compassion, and God himself having (as it were) smelt the
sweet odor or savor of the sacrifice of their Alms, will now recompense them
with all his temporal and spiritual blessings, and hereafter will crown them
in Heaven with Glory and immortality.

A Brief Apology in the behalf of the Reformed Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont; With a Narrative of what has happened in the execution of the Arrest
issued against them the 25th. of January, 1655.
WHereas we are forewarned by the word of God in the Apocalypse, that the rage
and cruelty of the infernal Dragon toward the latter end of the world, would
be in no wise abated; but seeing his time of persecuting the Saints to be but
short, be the more vehemently incensed against them, the Reformed Churches in
several parts, especially those next unto us in Piedmont, have very often
heretofore, as well as now, had sad experience of the truth of this particular.
For, notwithstanding that the Duke of Savoy, who is Sovereign Prince of the
Valleys of Piedmont, after a most tedious and chargeable Application made unto
him, did by an edict expressly promise, that he would confirm unto them an
enjoyment of the liberty of Religion, and of those Privileges granted to them
by his predecessors Dukes of Savoy; yet through the powerful persuasion of the
Congregation (as it is called) for propagation of the Faith, and extirpating of
Heretics erected at Turin, or rather by virtue of that Authority which they
usurp over Princes, he soon forgot his promise, and beyonnd all men's
expectatations one Gastald was sent with a Commission, who calls himself
Conservator General of the Catholic Faith against the Reformed Professors,
affirming that he has received instructions from the Prince, whereby Command is
given touching all of the Reformed Profession within the several Towns and
Precincts of Lucerne, Lusernette, St. John, La Tour, Campiglion, Fenil,
Bobiane, Bricheras, and St. Second, both inhabitants and strangers, that in
case they will not, within three days embrace the Popish Religion, they must
for ever bid farewell to their Native Country, their Houses, their Lands, and
Possessions: adding moreover, that it should be death without mercy, if after
that space of time any of them were taken in those places.

Hereupon, no sooner was the time limited over-past, but immediately the
Missionary Monks and Popish Priests sent in upon them a world of Cutthroats
and Villains, who not only gape after the prey like hounds, and hunt for ihe
precious life of these miserable Exiles, but also discharge their rage and fury
against their houses, and Lands by cutting down and rooting up the very Trees.

In the mean time, these our poor brethren knew not where to complain of these
injuries, and lay open their Cases, nor to whom, being deprived of all
possibility of making any address to the Prince; and if any offer to present
Petitions in their behalfes, they are presently snap't, and sent away to the
Congregation for propagating the Faith, and extirpation of Heretics; that is,
to their Adversaries the Archbishop of Turin, the Prince's Confessor, the
Abbot de la Monta, the Prior of Rorene, and some others, who are politic
Pensioners to the Pope. Now, as touching this Persecution against the
Protestants, whereby they are made to depart within three days upon pain of
death, into such desolate places, as are hardly sufficient to receive and
sustain the Native inhabitants, the iniquity and injustice of the proceeding
appears even in this, that the poor Protestants, through the influence of their
Adversaries and accusers upon the Magistrate, were without hearing, or the
least Summons sentenced to banishment, upon pain of death, without giving them
any respite, or admitting them to make any Protestation or Appeal, unless
their Petitions were drawn in such form as might please the Commissioner, who
is the great Protector of this persecution, and according to the mind of their
Adversaries, in such terms as they should prescribe, whereby they must
necessarily betray themselves and their Cause; and then, after execution of the
foresaid penalty, they have been pleased to give some of the poor Exiles a
hearing, and permitted them to plead their Cause, and that only by a Popish
Advocate or Proctor, who had been so charmed and terrified by the Clergy, that
before he entered upon the Cause, he was faign to crave pardon upon his knees
for undertaking to plead it.

And as for the pleading, it was not managed before competent and lawful
Judges, but the Protestants chiefest adversaries sat in judgment, the
Archbishop of Turin, the Dukes Confessor, the Abbot de la Monta, the Prior of
Rorene, and some others, devoted to the Court of Rome; yea, and in the Arch
Bishops own house. Moreover, whereas according to certain Grants made by the
Prince, leave was given to the Protestants to dwell in their wonted
habitations, where they had a Toleration, and it remains on their part to be
proved, that those were the accustomed places of their habitation, the matter
was so handled by the Romish Clergy, that they endeavored as much as in them
lay, to hinder the Papists from giving any testimony on the behalf of their
Neighbors of the Reformed Religion, concerning this their habitation, which at
length our brethren made a hard shift to wrest out of them, to the exceeding
regret and indignation of the Clergy, and so proved at last by those authentic
testimonials under the hands of their Popish Neighbors, that all those places,
out of which they were driven, have been places inhabited by Protestants time
out of mind.

But to the end that it may more fully and clearly appear, upon what account of
right or wrong the Popish adversaries do incite their Sovereign, the Duke of
Savoy, who is yet but young, to the driving of the poor Protestants out of
their ancient patrimonies and places of abode, in the midst of a sharp and
terrible winter, and this upon pain of death, unless within three days after
publication of that decree of perpetual banishment, they immediately quit
their native Country, or else abjure the true, and devote themselves and their
families to the Romish Religion. It is to be observed (omitting the mention of
their more ancient rights and privileges, and the long possession which they
have held beyond the memory of man) that in the They are to be seen in the
History of the Martyrs, set forth in French to the year 1561.
Edicts set forth by the Dukes of Savoy, and the agreements, made for the
Protestants enjoying a liberty of Religion, the limits appointed for the
public preaching of the Reformed Religion, do not extend so far as the
dwellings of those men that profess it, nor are the limits of their dwelling
to be contracted into so narrow a compass as the places limited for preaching.
But that the reformed professors have a right of habitation in those places out
of which they are now expelled, is evident, not only by an ancient prescription
of many ages, seeing their Fathers, Grandfathers, Great-Grandfathers, and other
their Ancestors, have inhabited there before them, but also by those very
Grants and Concessions confirmed by Duke Charles Emanuel, wherein it was
acknowledged by public Edict, that this habitation was derived to them from
their fathers. For when he, through the instigation of the Court of Rome, had
by a surreptitious d^cree commanded them to depart thence toward the latter
end of the year one thousand six hundred and two: afterward, being well
informed of their right, he by an authentic Charter gave them leave to dwell
there again; for the confirmation of which Charter, they paid six thousand
Ducatoons into the Duke's Exchequer, upon the 17th. day of August, Anno, 1620.
and it was confirmed again by the Prince now reigning, upon the 29th of
Decemberr, Anno, 1655. And yet now, contrary to faith given, upon the 25th. of
January last, in the depth of winter, not sparing even women with child near
delivery, nor those that had Infants hanging on their breasts, they were all
without distinction, both men, women, and children, driven out to wander
through frost and snow in a most bitter season, without the least warning or
delay: And no sooner had these old inhabitants quitted their ancient
inheritances for the saving of their lives, but those savage Thieves that gaped
after the prey, presently fell to plundering and spoiling their houses, driving
away their Cattle, felling and cutting down trees, or else rooting them up. In
a word, they destroy all, and by this means attempt to drive these poor
wretches to the utmost point of desperation; and if any man endeavor to
withstand or oppose them, they immediately cry out he is a Traitor. So I
commend these miserable exiles to the mercy of God, and the compassion of their
brethren of the reformed Churches.

Andreas Galstaldus, Doctor in Law, Conservator and ordinary Auditor, sitting
in the Honorable Chamber of accounts of his Royal Highness, and General
Conservator of the holy Faith, appointed to put in execution all orders which
are published against the pretended Reformed Religion, in the Valleys of
Lucerne, Perouse, and St. Martin, and particularly appointed by his said
Highness for this special business.
ACcording to the power given us by his Highness, by his Letters dispatched to
us in due form, signed Violetta, and sealed, bearing date of the thirteenth of
this Month; and in performance of the instructions given us, as also at the
instance made to us by Master Barth^lomew Gastaldus, intervening in the behalf
of the Royal Exchequer; we ordain and command the first Sergeant or Bailiffe
sworn to make command and injunction to all the heads of Families, and to each
particular of the pretended Reformed Religion, of whatsoever estate, condition
and degree, no inhabitant excepted, possessing any goods in the territories of
Lucerne, Lucernette, Saint John, la Tour, Bobiane, Fenill, Campiglion,
Bricheras, and St. Second, within three days next after the publication
hereof, to relinquish and abandon with their Families the said places, and to
transport themselves into those places and limits which by the good pleasure of
his Royal Highness are prescribed unto them, viz. Bobiane, the valley of
Angrogne, Rorata, and Country of Bonetti, under pain of life, and confiscation
of their houses, possessions, and goods which are extant without the said
limits, in case they cannot within twenty days make proof before us that
they are Catholics, or that they have sold their estates unto some
Catholics: His Royal Highness declaring, that it was never his design, not
of his Royal Predecessors, by any act done or to be done, nor his intention,
much less his will, to enlarge their bounds; and that if any thing has been
done or published to the contrary, it was both against his own orders, or those
of his Magistrates, but a mere usurpation against the disposition of those
Acts, as it is manifest; and therefore the transgressors have undergone the
penalties mentioned in his Declarations: Besides that, his Highness does
intend, that in all those places, and each of them, where they are lovingly
tolerated, the sacrifice of the holy Mass be celebrated; Prohibiting all
subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, to give any molestation in deeds
or words, to the Fathers Missionaries, and those that officiate under them,
much less to disturb or divertany of the pretended Reformed Religion from
turning Catholics, under pain of death; Charging, and particularly commanding
each particular Minister of the pretended Reformed Religion, to see the
forementioned injunctions inviolably observed, as they will answer it at their
utmost perils; Declaring his intention to be, that the execution hereof be
done by posting or fixing Copies of these presents, which shall be at the like
value, as if they had been made and intimated to each in particular.

Given at Lucerne, the 25th. of January, 1655. Andrew Galstaldus Commissioner.

A second Apology in the behalf of the Reformed inhabiting the Valleys of
Piedmont.
THe History of the Reformed Churches, whom God has preserved in a corner of
Italy, in the valleys of Piedmont, as miraculously as he did Moses his Bush in
Horeb, not only since the year 1100. when the poor Vaudois and Albigeois
retired themselves thither, well knowing that the traditions of the Romish
Church, namely, the modern, had no access there, but also time out of mind,
that is always, and from all time, as says the Monk Belvedere in his book
entitled a Relation to the Congregation de propaganda fide, and as it is
gathered out of Thuanus his History and many others, is at large described in
several books written to that purpose by Mr. du Perrin, and lately by Master
Giles Pastor in those quarters; and shall yet further be seen, God willing, by
a second Edition which will come forth, with an exact addition of what has
happened since; and very suddenly by as ample a Manifest as the case does
require it, that will be more particularly made manifest, which now in these
few lines is but slightly touched, concerning their number, their extent, their
fights, their deliverances, the Edicts, Privileges and Concessions, by virtue
whereof they have enjoyed the peaceable habitation, and the exercise of their
Religion, the disturbances, which from time to time the Romish Clergy has
raised unto them, and the deliverances the Lord has vouchsafed them, until
these latter days, wherein he has broken down their hedges, and the Boars of
the wood have utterly wasted that Vineyard, and the Hawks have chased and torn
to pieces that Dove even in the very clefts of the Rocks.

In the years 1560. and 1561. Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoy, and Prince of
Piedmont, at the instigation of the Romish Clergy sent a mighty army to destroy
the poor Reformed of the Valleys of Lucerne, Perouse and Saint Martin in the
said Piedmont, hard by the Dauphine, under the command of the Count de la
Trinite. That War was long and bloody. After they grew weary of it, both
parties came to an agreement, bearing, among several other heads, the
permission unto all of the Reformed Religion to inhabit all places and lands of
the aforesaid three Valleys, wherein were any before the War begun. In
consequence of which agreement and Concession they were restored into Lucerne,
Lucernette, Saint John, la Tour, Fenil, Bobiane, and Saint Second, which places
are lower toward the plain about Turin and Pinerol, as well as into the more
remote places toward the neighboring Mountains of Dauphine, and they have
been preserved there and protected by their Princes until the year 1602. Then
Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy and Prince of Piedmont of glorious memory, after
the banishment of the reformed out of the Marquisate of Salluces, gave leave to
his Delegates to pubblish several Orders against the inhabitants of the Valley
of Lucerne, who dwelt toward the South of it, beyond the river called Pelice,
viz. the Reformed of the Borroughs of Lucerne, Bobiane, and Fenil, which are
but small dependences of the Church of Saint John, but would not suffer them to
touch the rest. And indeed it shall not be found, that during the former
persecutions, any Duke of Savoy has ever pretended that all the other places,
nor any of them, of those marked in the Order, be out of the limits of the
habitation granted to the Reformed.

It is very remarkable, that soon after, viz. in April 1603. he made a Decree,
whereby he ordered to those of Lucerne, Bobiane and Fenil, who alone had been
turned out, to inhabit again their houses, and enjoy their estates, recalling
all orders to the contrary. He confirmed the same by a Decree of the 29th of
September in the same year, in the first Article. And he kept them in the
possession until the year 1620, at which time yet they offered to stir
against those of the same Lands of Lucerne, Bobiane and Fenil; but the clemency
and Justice of his said Royal Highness was yet such, that he no sooner had
granted the order for their banishment, but presently he recalled it, and
granted them again a fine Decree, whereby he declared That he was willing, and
intended that all the pretended Reformed (for such are his words) should
peaceably enjoy their habitation, in all the places formerly granted and
accustomed, such as the aforesaid were: Ordered that they should be no more
molested therein, and even granted them the enjoyment of some Temples pretended
to be lower toward the plain; then the limits of the preaching extended unto;
and that he granted for a Sum of 6000 Ducatoons he exacted from them. All these
have been confirmed by the Ducal Chamber and the Senate, and were observed
during all the rest of the life of the same Charles Emanuel. After him,
Victorio Amedeo his successor of glorious memory, left them also in the full
enjoyment of whatsoever his Predecessors had granted unto them, and specially
the free commerce in his Dominions, and the peaceable habitation in all the
places which are questioned in the order which shall follow, having only
deprived them, contrary to their ancient Concessions, of bearing any public
Office, saying, that if his Father and Granfather had granted them that
privilege, for his part he was not willing to continue it; or as now the
Marquis of Pianess does speak, that graces of Princes are not unalterable.

Afterward, Madam Royal during the time of her whole Regency, has yet
preserved them in the same state without disturbing them for their habitation,
and even in 1638. issued out a fine Decree, bearing an express promise of a
confirmation and observation of their ancient Edicts.

Charles Emanuel now reigning, by the grace of God, being come to his Majority,
the Reformed presently after demanded of him in all humility the confirmation
of their ancient privileges. He granted them the same in 1649. with some small
restriction; yet the Reformed not having hoped any thing better, were willing
and desired to have the same confirmed by the Ducal Chamber, They had promise
that so it should be done, having received the Decree, and agreed about the
money, and kept the whole business in suspense, until his Royal Highness
(because the valleys had refused him some houses to have the Mass said in
them, in such Commonalties, where there were no Romish Catholics) should have
seized on such as he pleased, ex Officio, as says his order of 1650, as Master
of the Lands. This being done, the said Chamber granted them in June and
September, 1653 and in May, 1654 not only the confirmation of their ancient
Concessions, to be as they were in use, as speak the Decrees aforesaid formerly
passed, but as they had been in use under his Predecessors, and as they were
found in their Decrees, without adding or diminishing. And there by he restored
them to the ability of bearing public charges, and the right of habitation of
the Commonalty of Campiglion, and of the Borrough of Bobiane, from whence they
had been expelled: But when the confirmation of these new Decrees has likewise
been granted, and the money disbursed, at the time appointed, when they should
have received it, a Patrimonial Advocate was raised up, who alleged, that the
Congregation de propaganda side ought to be aquainted with it. The said
Congregation then opposed the foresaid confirmation. The Reformed applied
themselves again to his Royal Highness, who referred them to the said
Congregation, but they refused the same, as being their adversary parties:
They were referred to the Marquisse de Piannesse, the head of the said
Congregation; they appeared before him, as being chief Ministers of State to
his Royal Highness; but he declared unto them, that they should never expect
audience, unless they should first pass a procuration, promising to accept
and yield to whatsoever should be ordained. They answered, that ever they had
dealt with their Princes by humble requests and Petitions, and never by
Procurations: He replied, that without such Procuration no Petition would be
received; therefore they dressed such a Procuration unto two Deputies, whereby
they grant them full power to accept of, and to promise whatsoever should be
ordained, saving only their Consciences and their Concessions. He refused to
see the same, or to receive it with that restriction; and on the 13. of January
of this present year 1655. he drew, or caused to be drawn an order by the
Delegat Gastaldo, who published the same on the 25. of that Month, bearing that
those of Lucerne, Bobiane, and Fenil (who formerly had been molested) and S.
John, la Tour, and S. Second, should within three days forsake their houses,
under pain of death, unless within twenty days they would go to the Mass.

That rigorous order much surprised them; yet those of the plain to avoid the
violence of their bad neighbors, presently obeyed the same, and altogether
made their protestations before the Delegat, and demanded again, that they
might apply themselves to his Royal Highness, and to have an act how they had
appeared: It was denied them and all the proofs they offered of their just
title of habitation in those places, rejected, without being examined. In the
mean while their neighbors pillaged, plundered, and ruined their houses,
plucked up the young Trees, and cut off the tallest; They complained of it, and
had this answer returned unto them, that if these exiled persons would watch,
and give notice of those that were guilty, they would be brought to punishment;
thereupon some of them went down to keep their houses. Presently they were
declared Rebels, and therefore not a word more of addresses, petitions, or
supplications must be heard of; they were left to sleep for a while. In the
mean time, by means of the Auricular Confession before Easter, all the Piedmont
is disposed to fall on them upon a day appointed. The Father knows nothing of
the Son, nor the Brother of his Brother, and yet the twelfth of April, without
any gathering of Soldiers, or any foregoing preparation, all is found ready;
All men able to bear Arms in Piedmont, with all the Clergy, came to the
Rendezvous: Printed Bills were distributed among them, bearing a pleniary
Indulgence all pardon, besides the booty to all those that would go and fight
against the pretended Heretics. To the Army of Piedmont that of the French was
presently joined, which before quartered in Dauphine, and was made to come over
the Alps. All these Troops and Souldies did wholly waste and burn the Plain,
where the interdicted places, mentioned in the aforesaid order, were situated.

That done, the Marquess de Pianess quartered in the Monastery of the
Franciscan Friars at la Tour, (who, as well as the rest of their Brothers in
Piedmont, are all Spaniards.) There he called the Deputies of Angrogn, Villar,
and Boby, of the Vale de Lucerne; he much flattered them, and told, that as to
them, they were in the limits which his Royal Highness was resolved to
tolerate; that no harm would be done unto them, if only they would receive a
Regiment of Foot, and a Troop of Horse in each Commonalty, engaging his word,
and with oath promising the word of his Royal Highness; But threatening them in
case of refusal, that they should be declared Rebels. The Deputies not having
leave to confer about it, and seeing the French Forces, with all the Piedmont
ready to fall on them, and hoping that the word engaged to them would be
performed, and that his Highness would not wholly destroy those places, they
consented thereunto, came up with those Forces, and forbad the Reformed to
shoot at them; But they were no sooner in those strong places, but the rest of
the Army fell on on all sides, seized on the tops of the Mountains, put to the
sword and fire whatsoever they met in their way, and did practice there the
cruelties, whereof the Pattern may be seen in the here annexed papers.

Thus was Vale Lucerne destroyed. From thence they came to Vale Perouse and St.
Martin, an Order was sent them either to go to Mass, or to be gone out of the
Country within twenty four hours, under pain of death, and forfeiture of their
estates. They thereupon forsook their houses, and fled into the King of
France's Country, and thereby all gave obedience, except a very little number
of small people, who turned Papists; but notwithstanding their retreat, their
houses were burned to ashes, and all the Country made waste, as the Vale
Lucerne; having thereby wholly rooted out the Reformed Religion in the valley
of Piedmont, not one Temple, nor one house, neither man nor beast having been
left there, only for the Romish Catholics.

A third Apology for the said Churches against the Calumnies falsely imputed to
them.
REceiving Information from a friend touching the Answer made at Turin, I
perceive those enemies of the truth, the Vassals of the Court of Rome, who
contrived it with no less Art then malice, do follow their old course, and
after the example of him, who is both a murderer and a liar, yea the Father of
lies, cover, and so increase their cruelty by false Calumniations. For, whereas
they would not seem to be unjust in this banishment forced upon the Reformed
Waldenses, they endeavor to asperse them with fictious and Imaginary Crimes,
and yet dare not charge them expressly with any one Particular in writing, for
fear lest the Parties accused should disprove it, which they know might easily
be done. For, when the Protestants had made Answer to such Accusations as were
brought against them by Gastald before the Duke's Deputy, he ingenuously
confessed those Crimes were objected against them without cause, to wit, those
pious frauds or officious lies spread abroad by the Monks and Priests, to draw
an Odium upon the Protestants. Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens? If
it be sufficient to accuse, who then can be innocent? If an accuser only in
general terms say a man is wicked, what Answer can be made in order to a
Purgation?

The Protestants for their parts, call God, Angels, and men to witness, that
they are most injuriously charged with those things. Yea, they humbly pray,
entreat, and beseech they may be brought to a Trial, that if any be found
guilty he may be severely punished. But here the Romish Clergy interpose,
endeavoring with their Scarecrow of Excommunication, and threats of
everlasting damnation, so to terrify their seduced people, that no Papist dare
give any Testimony, though in things most evidently known, to clear the
innocence of Protestants, for fear lest he should be thought a favourer of
Heretics; And hereupon, those Monks and Priests, the Contrivers of those
Officious lies, presuming upon their own power, through the terror of
Excommunication, and knowing very well, that no Papist will dare to give in any
evidence for the refelling of their Impostures, do with a brow of brass most
audaciously devise and object whatever they please against the Reformed
Professors: But if the difference in Religion and consideration of parties were
set aside, and the whole cause brought to a hearing before impartial Judges,
without respect of persons, and if witnesses might have liberty to give in
their Testimony according to truth, without fear of Excommunication, all the
Calumnies of the Adversaries against the Protestants would soon come to
nothing. They made no scruple to render them odious to the Prince, by accusing
them of Rebellion, but the thing it self is clear enough to the contrary: For,
those Protestants that were suddenly driven out of their ancient Inheritances,
lived some of them quiet and secure in their Cottages; others wandering about in
diverse Countries, being scattered far distant from each other, dwelt in many
places but a few of them among great numbers of Papists, minding nothing else
but their Plough and tillage of the ground. At that time they had no Meetings
nor Commerce with one another. Every one of them with his poor family rested in
peace under his own Vine and his own fig tree, until they were driven out by
Gastald the Dukes Commissioner, without allowing them the benefit of any legal
Protestation and Appeal. What universal conspiracy then can be fastened upon
all those men, who were dispersed up and down in Towns, Villages, and Fields?
That they lived in the seats of their Fathers, and their ancient Possessions,
and that they had not attempted any alteration of affairs, nor in any wise
exceeded the Bounds and limits set and prefixed to their habitation, they are
able to prove by undoubted Arguments and infallible Witnesses from the very
place it self. We understand indeed by Letters, only of two Crimes objected
against certain Protestants; of which the one was a foolish childish exploit of
certain Boys, both Protestant and Popish, at la Tour, who upon occasion of a
marriage between two persons of unequal years, brought out an Ass belonging to
the Bridegroom, to mock the Bride and make mockery of the Wedding; Whereupon
the Monks took occasion to wrest the matter against the Protestants, as
intended by them to the disgrace and reproach of their Mass; but upon a
hearing of the business by the Prince's Commissioner, before whom the
Protestants made their defense, he acquitted them as innocent in this
Particular, and promised that in time to come no further mention should be made
of it; Nevertheless, the Monks are up with it ever and anon in other Places,
where the falsehood of their Calumnies is not known. The parents of those wanton
Boys ought not to suffer for their childish doings, much less ought that
whole Church, and the Protestants of other Churches; and if they deserve
Banishment for this, the same punishment ought also with as much reason to be
inflicted upon those Papists, whose children were in the same transgression.
The other crime objected is indeed more grievous, but very wrongfully put upon
the Protestants, and that is the Murder of a certain Priest of Fenil, whereas
it is generally known to the meanest persons there, that not a drop of that
blood can be aspersed upon the Reformed Churches. And if the Magistrate had
thought any of the Protestants of Fenil in the least wise guilty of that
bloodshed, he would not, I suppose, have banished them with the rest, but
rather have cast them into prison, that they might have been punished according
to the heynousnesse of the fact: And therefore when all the Protestants of
Fenil were promiscuously commanded by Gastald to depart, and let go without
taking notice of any man for so horrible a Crime, he thereby gave sufficient
testimony to the innocence of the Protestants in this matter. And truly, in the
Decree of banishment he makes not the least mention of that horrid business;
but by declaring, those persons should be exempted from banishment, that would
abjure the Reformed Religion, he sufficiently shows, that the turning them
out of all in the midst of winter, at three days warning, upon pain of death,
was resolved and executed to this end and purpose, that the men being reduced
to harship and misery, might by this means be compelled to a renouncing of
their Religion. But put case that any man among the Protestants of Fenil had
committed that wickedness, it cannot be concluded therefore that the rest of
them in Fenill, much less that those of the same Religion in Lucerne,
Lusernette, Bobiane, St. John, la Tour, Bricheras, and St. Second, ought in
justice to be thrust out of their ancient possessions; For, the guilt of this
murder, though it had been committed by a Protestant, it could by no means be
imputed to these, or to any of the inhabitants of other Towns and Corporations
that are far distant from them. As by the Law of God and common Justice, so
also by several Decrees of the Dukes of Savoy made in favor of the
Protestants, September 29. 1603. and June, 4. 1653. it is prohibited, that the
innocent should not suffer for the guilty; so the Professors of the Reformed
Religion do not desire to hinder, but make it their humble and earnest Request,
that such as are guilty may be brought to punishment.

From hence then, it is obvious enough to any man, upon what account it is that
the enemies of the Refor^^^ ^hurches have not only driven very many of them
(...) their native Country and ancient dwellings into banishment, but go on
still to persecute them by a most cruel and bloody war; which they have cause to
believe is not carried on against them by the proper inclination and direction
of the Prince himself, but through the persuasion and instigation of the
Congregation for propogating the Faith and extirpation of Heretics, who have
usurped the cognizance of this Controversy; being the only persons that have
hindered the Protestants from being heard by the Prince, when they have
presented their Petitions, or made any Addresses to his Royal Highness: But
yet they so ordered the matter, that they directed diverse Courtiers (their
creatures) to feed the poor Protestants with hope that the ears of the Prince
being wearied out with continued Petitions, they might at length obtain the
favor to have their business brought to a trial before competent Judges;
while in the mean time they prepared Forces underhand, with which they make it
their business to fall upon them unawares and oppress and destroy them. It is
against this unjust violence that the Protestants endeavor to defend
themselves. They struggle not against their Prince, but with the said
Congregation for extirpating Heretics, who as in the hearing and judging of
this Cause, so also in the bloody execution of their sentence by the sword,
have for the covering of their injustice, made use of the name and Authority of
the most illustrious Prince.

Moreover, they with the like injury blame those Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont, about those Letters of intercession written on their behalf to the
Duke of Savoy, by foreign Magistrates of the Reformed Religion, as if they
applied themselves to States and Princes abroad for protection, whereas those
Letters are no more but friendly offices, writtten without the privity of those
Churches, much less upon their entreaty, and sent by those Magistrates of
their own accord, induced thereto by a Pious and Zealous affection, and out of
a brotherly commiseration of that most grievous calamity, which might have
moved even stocks and stones, and whereof they had sufficient notice from other
Parts, seeing the turning of so many men, women, children, Infants, and sick
persons, out of doors to the wide world in the midst of winter, at three days
warning upon pain of death, was become a most notorious business, which cried
out aloud of it self, and by reason of the wandering of those miserable Exiles,
who were forced to rove up and down like vagabonds to beg their bread. Nor
could they be ignorant how unjustly those their Protastant brethren of the
Valleys of Piedmont were oppressed by their Adversaries in the Congregation for
propagating the Faith, who had openly arrogated to themselves the judging of
the Cause of those our brethren, in the Archbishop of Turin's house, contrary
to all the Rules of judicial proceeding, and abused the Authority of the Duke
of Savoy to oppress and destroy them,

An Appendix to the foregoing Apology.
AS we are informed by several Letters, the ruin long intended by the enemies
of the truth of the Churches of Piedmont, by the permission of God, being angry
because of our sins, is now executed. Indeed they had put off the execution
by fained shows and hopes of reconciliation, that they might the while provide
all necessaries to compass their ends; But against our expectation upon the
16. of April 1655. the Army, made up of the Forces of the Duke of Savoy, and of
the King of France, amongst which were some Irish Regiments, fell upon the
Churches of the Valley of Lucerna, and with them the Militia of Piedmont, and a
crew of banished thieves, felons, and other malefactors, let on purpose out of
prison, and from all parts flocking together in hope of prey; whose incursions
in an hostile manner the Reformed mistrusting at first, and fearing to be
crushed ere they could be heard, when all means of approach by supplication to
his Highness the Duke of Savoy was taken from them, they withdrew themselves
into the mountains. But the Commander of that Army, the Marquess of Pianesse,
sewing the Fox skin to that of the Lions, feigned he had no other intention
then to entreat the Reformed that they would approve to the Prince their faith
and obedience, not by bare words, but by real facts, viz. by quartering only
for three days three Regiments of the Army, viz. one at Angrogne, another at
Villars, and a third at Boby; which if they did, he faithfully promised that no
harm to them or theirs should be done; which when it was granted by the
Reformed, and they had received the three Regiments, presently the whole Army
rushed upon them, no difference made of men, women, children, or sucking babes,
dashing them against stones, some laying hold on them by the legs, and either
dismembring them, or hurling them headlong into precipices, with such fury,
that the very rocks were wet and bloody with their brains, and that in sight of
the mothers, who after the murder committed upon their children, were
themselves likewise murdered, as it was done in the Borrough of Villars and
Boby, with such horrible butchery, that some appeared to be indeed partakers of
the cross of Christ, by being nailed to trees and put to lingering deaths:
amongst whom one Paul Clement, a man of a dvery upright life, who being nailed
the head ^ownward did undergo with great constancy the butchery and continued
in holy prayers to God to the very last; others, especially of the weaker age
and sex, striving to fly from the ^^ry of the soldiers, being driven through
Preof pices into the mountains full of snow, died of cold, and of other
accidents; as the numerous family of the L. Scipion Bastia. In the Countries of
St. John and la Tour, they fell with fire and Sword upon Churches and private
houses; this holy fire being kindled by a Priest and a Franciscan Friar,
thereby to prove himself a Seraphin with his St. Francis, to whom his
Disciples give the seat of Lucifer. This disaster being made in the Churches of
Lucerne, the Commander of the neighbor Valleys under the Duke of Savoy, namely
in that of Perouse, St. Martine and Rupelate, as glorying at the thing done,
commanded the Inhabitants of those places, in case they did not turn Papists,
to leave the Country: Whereupon those who perferred the richesses of Christ
and Heaven to the earthy Country, cheerfully went out, carrying his shame, and
followed him in huge numbers. The names of the banished, who persevered in the
faith, and how many they be, are not yet known to us; for those of Lucerne
having been overwhelmed unawares, they made an escape and fled where they
could. Of many thousands, a very few have carried any thing with them, whereby
they might for some days preserve life. Those that remain do by the bowels
of Christ beseech all godly men to open their hearts unto them, that they may
receive of him a greater reward, and may reap so much the greater harvest, that
the field of God to receive seed, is the greater.

An Abstract of a Letter written from the Vale of Perouse the 17 of April 1655.
Describing the beginning of the murders and cruelties committed on the said
Reformed.
OUr tears which are no longer of water but of blood, and do not only
offuscate our sight, but do also suffocate our poor hearts, and cause us to
hold our pens with a trembling hand, as they are led by brains, not only
dulled by the blows, they just now received, but also extremely troubled by
the new alarms and assaults made on us, do hinder us from framing such Letters
as we could wish, and such as the strangeness of our desolations should
require. But we do entreat you to excuse us and to gather from among our
sobbings the sense of what we should be willing to express unto you.
Notwithstanding the reports spread abroad that we would not stoop to make our
addresses to his Royal Highness, about the molestations raised against us,
whereof you have had notice, Yet we never ceased from writing, petitioning, and
sending of Deputies; But all the while, as formerly, we have been referred,
sometimes to the Counsel de propaganda fide, sometimes to the Marquis de
Planness. The three last times they were flatly refused audience, under
pretense they had not Letters of attorney sufficiently authorizing them to
promise and accept of whatsoever his Royal Highness should be pleased to
offer. And especially at the instigation, and by means of the Romish Clergy an
Army of five or six thousand men was secretly raised, who unexpectedly fell
upon St. John and la Tour, being encouraged by the presence of the said Marquis
de Piannesse, who having seized on the said places, was presently reinforced,
not only by all such among our neighbors, as were able to bear arms, but by
the whole Piedmont, where it having been spread abroad, that our goods were
given to be plundered, they came all upon us with such an impetuous fury, and
chiefly a crew of banished rogues, prisoners and guilty persons, upon hope of
saving their own souls and filling their pockets. It was not all, that they
might the better oppress us, five or six regiments of the French Army were
sent against us, besides the Irish, to whom, they say our country is given to
possess it, and other forces that are coming up daily toward us, under
pretense of taking quarters and refreshing themselves in the Valleys. That
innumerable number of men, together with the licentiousness of the Marquis de
Piannesse, being stirred up by the Monks, and led and set on by our bad
neighbors, has so surprised us on all sides and with such violence, yea and
with such a dreadful treason, specially in Engrogne, Villar and Boby, to whom
the said Marquis had engaged his word, that if they would but quarter for three
days a regiment in each place or Commonalty, they would have no harm, that in
a moment all has been brought to confusion, and the Inhabitants having done
somewhat toward the saving of their Temples a little lower from the fury of
the Boutefeux, were forced to fly for saving their Wives and children, not
only those of the plain, who were retired into the Mountains, but also the
Inhabitants of the said Mountains themselves, seeing they were betrayed and
surprised at the back door. Yet they could not use such diligence, but that
many of them were overtaken in several places, as among the rest at Villar and
Boby, where they were kept in without any possibility of saving their lives,
the enemies having possessed themselves of the Fort of Mirebouc* to hinder them
from saving of themselves, and an horrid massacre was done on them. In a
certain place or corner they villanously tormented one hundred and fifthty
women and small children, and having cut off their heads, they dashed others
against the Rocks; and the prisoners they took, who were fifthteen years of age
and upwards, who would not yield to go to Mass, were hanged by them, or nailed
to some trees the feet upwards, which torments they constantly and resolutely
endured. We hear that those of quality have been carried to Turin, as among the
rest one of our poor Brethren Mr. Gros Minister and part of his family.

In the vale of Luserne there is neither booty nor cattle left: What has been
saved from the plunder is very little; the rest has furnished several Towns of
the enemies in Piedmont: As to the movables they have all been lost also.
There are some whole Commonalties, as those of St. John and la Tour, where not
one house has escaped the fire, nor their Temples neither; the firing of them
all has been managed by a Franciscan Friar and a Priest. Among those
desolations the mother has lost her child, the husband his wife, the richest
are brought to beggary, and in great sorrow; and are so much the farther from
being comforted that some Churches being yet left untouched in the vale of
Perouse and St. Martin which was a refuge to those that were perfecuted, this
day they have received a command to be gone out of hand, under pain of death,
namely those that are within the dominions of his Royal Highness, having no
longer time but to be gone immediately.

However, these our fine flourishing and ancient Churches are lost without
ressource, except God be pleased to work wonders for them: Our time is come,
our measure was full. But take pity of the ruins of Jerusalem and lament for
the wound of the poor Joseph; but above all have a real compassion, opening
your bowels to many thousands of persons brought to poverty and beggary, for
having been desirous to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Sirs and most
dear Fathers and Brothers, you have ever been as a sacred anchor, to whom
after God our poor Churches have had recourse in their afflictions; take pity
on them for Gods sake, at this time, when they have not felt the rod, but the
Iron bar, in doing and procuring some good, both to the Pastors and to the
sheep, who are scattered; working for them according to your wisdom, and that
as speedily as you can or think fit. We expect that grace from your goodness,
commending our selves and our poor scattered flocks to your holy prayers,
praying to God that he might be pleased to preserve you, and to prosper your
holy Labors:

Lion, the 8th of May 1655.
THe persecutors at the first assault having lost most of their men by the
courageous resistance of our men, they were out of hopes to compass their
design by open force. Their Head dissembled his evil will, and made a show as
if he had received order from the Prince to spare these poor people, and to
promise them, from his part a pardon for what was past; provided for the time
to come they should prove wiser and better subjects, and on condition that they
should presently quarter in the Valleys some Forces that were about Pinerol,
both of the French Army, and of that of his Royal Highness. Whereupon the
Valleys having consulted, they were advised to accept of that unlucky
condition, which they did; and as soon as the said forces were come into the
place assigned unto them for their quarters, they were commanded to seize on
all the passages and avenues, and to make an end of our people, which they were
ready to execute, because of the booty they hoped to have; so that they killed
and plundered whatsoever they met with, without distinction of women or
children. Four Elders and among them Mr. Paul de Rossane, as Pious and
Religious a man as ever I knew, were hanged at la Tour; eighteen men, and among
them Mr. Gros, a Minister, were carried prisoners to Turin; and those who could
escape that desolation, are fled toward the Dauphine.

A Continuation of the description of the murders, and cruelties committed on
the Reformed, in the Valleys of Piedmont, on the 6. and 7. of April 1655.
MY Lord Marquess of Pianess, having many times reiterated to the Deputies of
the Churches of the Valleys with asseveration (as they do affirm) that upon the
Paroll of his Royal Highness and his own (they giving testimony of their
confidence and obedience, by the Reception of such Regiments) they should not
receive any injury, They did thereupon suffer them to enter without any
resistance whatsoever, hoping the rather that it should have been so, seeing
those places were reserved, even in the order lately published, and never
questioned, as to their habitation, But those of St. John, who had all their
goods and families in Angrogne, and for whom there was no Quarter, hasted
thither to save their Wives and Children, which also did those of Angrogne, who
soon perceived the Treachery, and how the Papists keep Faith to the pretended
Heretics. The said Marquess also kept Prisoners the Deputies of St. John and
Angrogne, who went thither to treat upon his Parole; and as the Troops agreed
on, were going up by the way appointed, three or four thousand men got before
them by a backway, near La Tour, climbing up with an incomparable swiftness,
putting all to the Sword they met with, and firing the Houses of Angrogne, near
the Meadow of La Tour, being one of the strongest places, and at the furthest
distance; and that they executed even before the others were come into the
middle of Angrogne which they had chosen for their Quarter. The other Troops
did the like near St. John toward Bricheras, and in many other places near la
Tour, so long as Day light permitted.

Amongst so many furious assaults, so many violent attempts, and so black
deceits and treasons, the air being all on fire by reason of the flames, or all
duskish by the smoke of burnt Houses and Churches, did resound nothing else but
the Cries, Lamentations and fearful scriechings, made yet more pitiful by the
multitude of those Eccho's, which are in those Mountains and Rocks.

The Mother has lost her sucking Child, the Husband his Wife, the Brother his
Brother, some have been barbarously massacred, whilst they were busy in saving
some of their goods, others having fled to escape to the tops of the Mountains,
were forced to cast themselves into the hollows of Rocks, and amongst the Snow,
without fire, without nourishment, without covering, sick, old, wounded, Women
with Child, of whom many miscarried, and lay dead near their Children, after
they had sustained themselves with a little Snow, which was put and melted in
their mouths instead of Sugar. Amongst many, who were forced to run away
barefoot and bare-legg'd, several persons of great quality had their legs and
feet so long frozen by Snow and Ice, that they have altogether lost them.

On the morrow after, being the 21. the Boutefeus and murderers were not idle:
A Monk of the Order of St. Francis and a Priest, who were desirous to have the
honor to be the chief Incendiaries, with their fire works (which they easily
could do) did not fail to set on fire the Church of St. John, and almost all
the remaining houses, part in Angrogne, and part in La Tour. And where they
found any Corner free from the first fires, the Priest did but discharge his
Carbine to make an end of in; And the Soldiers being fleshed with blood, did
run to the very tops of the Rocks and places, which seemed to be inaccessible,
to cut the throats of all such as they should find there. It was not a
difficult thing to them so to do, since they were not in a posture to make any
other resistance, but by their tears, which might have caused the most
barbarous Tartarians and Canniballs, to let fall their Arms out of their hands.
At Taillareta very small Village scitua^^d upon one of the highest hills of La
Tour, they offered a thousand injuries to an hundred and fifty Women and little
Children, and then cut off their heads; whereof they did boil many, and eat
their Brains, but left off, saying, they were too unsavory, and that it went
against their Stomach; they cut many others in pieces and bits, which they
threw the one at the other. From a poor woman that escaped them, and is yet
living, although she was cruelly treated by them, they took her little Child in
swaddling Bands, and threw him from a precipice with many others. And there have
been many others, who have been torn and split in the middle by two Soldiers,
who took those innocent Creatures, one by one leg, and the other by the other,
and after they had torn each one his half, they beat one another with it. They
stripped naked many people, without distinction either of age or sex, and cut
their Bodies after such a manner, as would make one tremble to hear it recited,
and then threw upon them Salt and Gunpowder, and then putting on them their
Shirts again, they set them on fire, making them burn upon these poor
martyrized Bodies. Others being naked were tied Neck and Heels together, and
rolled down some Precipices. They were so barbarous as not to exempt one Peter
Symond of Angrogne, being 100 years old, nor his wife, who was 95 years; They
burnt a great many in their houses, refusing to kill them before, though they
requested it: To others they opened their Breasts; to others they pulled out
their Guts, and cut off their privy parts; After they had abused several
women, they thrust many stones in their privy parts, and walked them in this
posture till they dyed. They hanged others upon trees by the feet, and left
them in that estate till they dyed. They gaunched many both by the fundament
after the Turkish manner, and a Cross. They staked others through the Belly to
the ground, and drove the Stakes into the earth as far as they could. Of those
whom they brought alive before the Marquess, and who would not abjure their
Religion, they carried many to Turin, and amongst others Master Gross, and Mr.
Aghit, Ministers of Villars and Boby, and that after they had seen the
admirable constancy of John Paillas, and Master Paul Clement, that a poor
Peasant, this an Elder and Deacon of the Church of La Tour, the former having
chosen the Gibbet rather than the Mass, the other was carried near him to
appale him; but as he was on the top of the Ladder, and the Missionaries
redoubling their exhortations, saying, it was yet time enough if he would turn
Catholic, he spoke to the Executioner to do his duty, desiring him to
dispatch, and prayed God to pardon those Murderers, although (said he) he saw,
as present, the Vengeance that God wou'ld take for so much innocent blood spilt.

My pen falls from my hand in describing these things; yea, the very thoughts
of them makes my whole Body to tremble, my Hair to stand up; A Heart of
Adamant, a hand of steel, and a pen of Iron, could not express half the horrid
Prodigies of cruelty and lamentable spectacles which were seen, unheard of
amongst the most barbarous in former ages, far from ever being exercised in
Christendom. You might have seen here the leg of a Woman, there the head of a
Child, sometimes the privy Members of a man, the Intrails of another, and
sometimes the pieces of another, whom the Beasts had not yet made an end of
eating. Tears obscure my sight, and the violence of my sobbings hinders me from
proceeding further.

Having paused here a little and taken breath, I shall say farther, that a poor
old man, being ninety five years old, called Mr. Thomas Margher, having been
taken among the rest, a French Officer, who was present at his Martyrdom,
relates of him, that at the first time he refused to go to Mass, his Nose was
cut off; then being asked again whether he would go to Mass, and having
answered he would rather choose to dye, one of his Ears was cut off, and then
the other; and so every time he said he would not go to the Mass, one or other
of his Limbs was cut off; at length they hanged him as they did the other two
above named: and then this good old man with a smiling countenance would say to
his Executioners, Do ye tie and torment my Body as much as you please, yet you
cannot touch my Soul, nor have ye any Prisons or Chains that can keep it from
going to Heaven; but to the contrary according to the course of Nature, having
so little time yet to live in this World, ye do but hasten my Deliverance and
my Happiness. Then having given thanks to God for the honor he did him to
suffer for his name, he prayed the Hangman to perform his duty.

Of the spoil of Provisions, of Wine spilt in abundance by those who pulled off
the iron hoops from the vessels, of the Cattle, or of their plunder, say we
any thing; The very Women came from the furthest part of Piedmont and carried
away all to the very Broomes.

A very few of them, who made shift to get away with some of their Cattle,
upon the neighboring Mountains of Val Perouse, saved some of them there, all
the rest were plundered. The French, Irish, Piemontois, banished persons and
released Criminalls, divided the Spoil amongst themselves, and many of them
killed one another in the division of it; That which they could not carry away
they set on fire, and those poor people that escaped as Brands rescued from the
fire, the one almost as rich as the other, being of Val Perouse, Val Cluson and
Queiras, some of them drawing lamentably after them their miserable families
with Cries and Tears, others weeping and bewailing the loss of theirs.

Val Luserne was destroyed, which did contain 7 Churches, each containing about
three or four thousand persons, except Roche-platt and Roras, which had
something less. Before the Troops assaulted the rest, the Deputies of the
Valleys desired the protection and intercession of Monsieur de la Bertoniere.
Lieutenant and Governor for his Majesty at Pineroll, and of Monsieur de
Corselles, Captain in the Regiment of Navarr, who said he had found in their
Royal Highnesses a great inclination to pity, desired them to intercede for
them, which they did with a great deal of Diligence, and presented their
Petition to his Royal Highness, and at the same time gave their Letters to the
Marquess of Pyanessa, to whom (as they were informed) however things went, all
would be referred.

The Contents of the Letter shows that of the Petition to wit.

Most Excellent Lords.
PResuming that near the infinite clemency of his Royal Higness, there may be
yet some Grace and Mercy for us, his poor and disconsolate Subjects upon our
due humility and submission to him, we have sent to him our Petition in the
best form the present disturbances will permit us, referring our selves wholly
to his good pleasure, and promising to conform our selves to whatever he shall
prescribe, if he will only give us leave to enjoy the liberty of our
Consciences, so that we may serve God according to his Word; in the mean time
we supplicate his Highness that it would please him to cause these strange
Hostilities to cease, which are committed against his intention, and also your
Excellencies; Of which we thought it our duty, not only to give advice to your
Excellency, but also as to one that has full Power and Authority, and to whom
we are informed all shall be referred: We make to you the same Supplications
and Promises, imploring your Grace and Protection.

Given at Val Cluson the third. of May 1655. Your Excellencies most humble,
most obedient and devoted servants, the Deputies of the Valleys of Lusern,
Perouse, and St. Martin.

It was signed by a great number.

Let the Reader take notice that these poor people, for to endeavor to
preserve yet this small part of Val Perouse, which belongs to his Royal
Highness, with the small and poor Valley of St. Martin (notwithstanding their
entire and irreproveable sidelity and innocence) did humble themselves, but all
to no purpose as yet, except God be pleased to touch the Hearts of the
Superiors, or deliver them by other means

Every one does ask, But what may be the reason these poor folk have been so
dealt with? Far from hence reasons enough and causes of it are alleged;
whereof they do not so much as speak of upon the place.

First, Some say that the Reformed have killed a Priest at Fenill in the lower
Vale of Luserne; But that Priest has been killed but sixteen days after
publication of the aforesaid Edict, and was murdered by the Secretary of the
Prefect of that Province, who is a Romish Catholic, and had already slain
another Priest in the same place. A young man of the Reformed Religion, having
been accused to have been partaker with him therein, has been delivered by the
said, Reformed into the hands of Justice and of the Delegate of his Royal
Highness; who having deposed there, that the said Secretary called Pagot had
persuaded him to go along with him in that horrid execution, promised to give
him three hundred Pistolls, but that he had refused to do it, and took only
two, to bind him not to say a word of it, has been released and declared not
guilty. After this, considering the scruples of some yet, the same man has
several times presented himself to Madame Royal and the chiefest of her
Ministers, and the Reformed have still represented him upon all occasions to be
examined and brought face to face before the parties, but they still refused
it, holding him as fully justified, and the other convicted. Besides, though
among the Reformed there should have been found a Thief, neither their
Concessions nor their Laws do suffer the innocent to be punished for the
guilty. Such Assassinations were never committed by order of the Reformed, and
could have no advantage by the death of an inconsiderable Country Priest, who
could never do them neither good or evil.

Secondly, Some say that at La Tour an Ass has been dressed like a Monk. It
is a Diabolical invention. In a word it was thus. The Youth of the place,
partly Papists, partly Reformed, to jeere and mock at a very Heterocliticall
Marriage, made a Charivary, as they call it, and took the Ass of the
Bridegroom, whom they did set on the topp of the Oven in a public place,
where it was seen of all, all the day long; and nothing therein touched the
Monks, nor the Mass, nor the Host. The Roman Catholics in such occasions have
often set up Asses upon the top of their Pinacles in those places.

Thirdly, Therefore the published Order alleges no such reasons, only the
Marquess de Piannesa, as appears in the answer he got M. Gibeline (the Roman
Catholic Attorney of the the Reformed at Turin) to make, said, that his Royal
Highness was willing to abase their pride, for having craved the Protection of
the Foreign Princes, because the Lords of Zurick and Berne, after the Order
published against them (though not required, but out of their own inclinations)
had sent to his Royal Highness some Letters in their behalf. Let the Reader
judge of the validity of this Reason.

This Fourth is most cried up in Piedmont. viz. That the Reformed have cruelly
murdered the Catholics in Ireland, and have wholly expelled them; and that
they ought to murder the Reformed in Piedmont, and clear the State of them, to
lodge the Irish in their place. Let yet the Reader judge of this reason.
Besides it is false the Reformed have murdered the Catholics in Ireland, but
to the contrary.

Therefore it remains that there has been no other true cause of this, but the
haued they bear to the Religion; it being known to all the world, that no
Subjects have ever been true or more obedient to their Prince than they, who
never stirred, when all the rest of the State was up in Arms; who still paid
their Taxes, though ever burdened, have borne extraordinary Winter Quarters,
aflorded their men for the war, as often as demanded, and even some few days
before their desolation, sent their Militias for the service of his Royal
Highness, upon the receipt of his very first command.

I have hastily given you a Copy, of this tract, of the horrible furies of the
Adversaries, desiring you to see if his Highness, the Serenissime Lord
Protector, could take occasion to insert in the Treaty with France, the
re-establishment of our Brethren escaped from the Massacres, which they have
caused the Irish to do, as in revenge of their being banished out of their
Country, for Massacring the Protestants there. Your Brother has assured us, he
will give us the Charity ordained by your Church, A general Collection in your
Quarters will be necessary, there being so many thousands despoild of all, that
are seeking for refuge. There are two Ministers viz. Master Gross and Master
Aghi^ Prisoners at Turin, God strengthen and deliver them, and conserve you and
your Colleagues, whom I salute,

remaining May 8. 1655. Most honored Brother, wholly yours.

A Letter written to his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. about the said Murders Massacres and
cruelties, sent together with the said descriptions.
To his Highness My Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland.
ALthough his Highnese the Lord Protector be well informed of whatsoever comes
to pass in most places of the world, yet we have thought he would not be sorry
to see, as in a contracted picture, the horrid cruelties practiced by the Duke
of Savoy's men, upon the Faithful in the Valleys of Piedmont; That is to say,
upon such people, that, if any in the world, did live in the greatest purity,
and the greatest innocence; whose only crime is, that neither they, nor their
Fathers, nor their Ancestors, 500 years since, would ever pollute themselves
with the Roman Superstitions and Idolatries.

The whole Christendom have their eyes fixed on his Highness, and all good men
hope that he will avenge, or rather God will avenge, by his hand, such a
hellish barbarousness. If we should have a less knowledge of his Zeal, and of
his Heroical courage, we would tell him what once Mordecai said to the Queen
Esther c. 4. v. 14.
Esther, If thou hold thy peace at this time, then shall their enlargement
and deliverance arise from another place; But thou and thy Father's house shall
be destroyed: And who knows whether thou art come to such a high dignity for
such a time as this?

But at his Highness possesses lights altogether extraordinary, he will of
himself consider that God has given him a great power, to employ it to his
glory; and that he has put a victorious sword in his hand, to be a revenger to
execute wrath upon those that do evil. Romans c. 13. v. 4.
So that, as since the Greation of the World, nothing has been seen so
dreadful, so nothing shall be punished in such an exemplary manner.

It is hoped that with him several Protestant Princes will embrace so just a
cause. But if there be any that be not sensibly moved by so deep and so sharp a
wound, and that having power, yet be not willing to prosecute and pursue those
Martherers, and those Incendi^ries, that saying will be applied unto them of
the Prophetess Deborah, Curse ye Meroz curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
with the mighty. Judges c. 5 v. 2 3.


In the mean while, your Highness will spread through the whole earth the sweet
savor of his name, and as it has been said, The sword of the Lord and of
Gideon, so hereafter they will say, the sword of the Lord and of OLIVER. His
praises will be celebrated to the world's end, and they will say that the
Protector of Great Britain, is become the Protector of all those that are
persecuted for righteousness sake.

All those that do sincerely love God, and that are sick because of the bruise
of Joseph, will heartily pray unto God, that he might be pleased to prolong the
days of his, Highness, to settle his Government, and to pour upon his posterity
his most holy and most precious blessings.

Let his Highness be assured that this draught has been made by a faithful
hand, and let him have the goodness not to enquire who he is that sends it. It
is not so much the voice of men, or the blood of the Martyrs, as the voice of
God himself, who cries for vengeance for the injury done to his great name, and
who commands him to work the deliverance of those that are Prisoners for the
Lord Jesus, and to restore to their Native Country the poor banish^d men, who
like the faithful of old, are wandering in the wildern^sses, in the Dens, in
the Mountains and in the clefts of the earth: That they might sing as those
that returned from the Babylonian Captivity, When the Lord turned again the
Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream: Then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with singing, etc. Psalm. 126. v. 1. 2.


FINIS

