Strange and wonderful News FROM CHIPPING NORTON IN THE County of Oxon. Of
certain dreadful APARITIONS, WHICH Were seen in the Air, on the 28th of July,
which began about half an hour after nine of the Clock at Night, and continued
till near eleven, in which time was seen the appearances of several Flaming
Swords, strange Motions of of the superior Orbs, with the unusual sparkling of
the Stars, with their dreadful Continuations.
With the Account of the opening of the Heavens, and strange Appearances
therein disclosing themselves, with several other prodigious circumstances, not
heard of in any Age, to the great amazement of the Beholders, as it was
communicated in a Letter, to one Mr. Tho Colley living in West-Smithfield. and
Attested by Tho. Brown, Eliz. Greenaway and Ann Gutheridge, who were spectators
of the dreadful Apparitions.
And if any Person would be further satisfied of the Truth of this Relation,
let them repair to Mr. Nightingals at the Bear-Inn in West Smithfield, and they
may be satisfied
WHat shall we say, when Prodegies still attend the rising Sun and the falling
Sun, Heavens hand must sure be in the Jenuine product of such monstrous Births,
when leaking Fires surround the dazzling Orbs, and Natures self begins to Groan,
when swife winged Lightnings and impetuous Thunders role, to rend the watery
Fleeces of the Skies, where Factions Meteors Muster all their Forces, and
contend with warring Elements, as if they would unhinge the Globe, or reduce
the Universe into its primal Chaos, and in an undigested Heap of all Confusion,
lay the mighty Mass, so powerful and so dreadful have their lare effects been
known, so that some have felt their irresisted Forces, and confirmed the
Testimony of their Rapid Violence to after Ages, with Tragical Scene of their
expired Breath, being stricken dead with unexpected Flames and many Towns and
Villages have suffered much in those tempestuous Storms and furious gusts,
beside, whole Fields of standing Corn, by violent and unexpected Showers of
falling Rain and Hail, have been destroyed, to the almost undoing of many rural
Intendants, but not to dwell on this too long. I shall here give my Reader an
impartial Account of so strange and wonderful a Prodegy the like has not been
heard in many Ages for sure it is, that Heaven seldom does austend such
dreadful Sights to the admiring Sons of men, but it thereby forewarns them of
some notable Event, that by such Heralds often are ushered in, and certainly, a
dawning Fate sits blushing on their dismal Fronts, the Prodegy of which I here
intend to Treat, the Truth of which is credibly Attested be many seriou.
Persons, who beheld the same to their Amazement; it is as follows.

At a place called Chipping-Norton, in Oxford shire, on the 28th of July,
between the hours of nine and eleven at Night, the Skies being scerene, (yet
notwithstanding, by reason of the Heat attracted in the superior Regions, by
the Beams of the Sun that precedent Day) there issued great Sheets of Flame or
Glances of Lightning, without Thunder, by reason it met with no Opposition nor
Massy Clouds in their descending to their proper Centers, they continued for
some time without intermission, so that those Sulphurous Fumes dispersing
themselves from every Quarter of the Globe that by reason of their Heat they
corrupted the Atr, and caused a strange and unusual smell so that many adjudged
it to proceed from those still continuing Sulphurous Flames and Exhallations,
this continuing till about the the hour before mentioned, at which time, some
people gazing in the Streets, and some out of their Windows, could discern
strange Alteration in the course and motions of the Stars, those Nocturnal
Tapers that bespangle the Blew Arch of Heaven upon which, they tasking a more
serious Observation, could from the West part of Heaven, diserne the Skies to
open, and from thence to proceed, a perfect Flaming Sword, which pointed so
directly to the East, its Shape was perfect, and of a prodigeous size, twirling
found, as if it was managed with some active Hand, at which Motion, the Golden
Stars seemed all in Clusters, joined as if commanded to impose themselves in
Battle Array: moving with such celerity, as if each one had took his Station,
all fiery red they twinkel round, and seemed to manage with their sparkling
Nods, no sooner did this disappear, but straight another did disclose its
dreadful self, for not far distant from the Equater, the Skies unfolding as
before, another Flaming Sword more large and perfect than the first, from which
the sparkling Fire dispersed themselves abroad, still mounting upwards, and all
the burning Orbs that did surround, continued their like motion as the other;
this appearing a considerable time, gave opportunity to the Spectators to take
a more perfect View, but it also disappeared, and another in the same Form and
posture, appeared at North, North West; and after many Cirklings, and often
sparkling of Fire, it passed onwards toward the South-East; and after some
time, disappeared to the Great amazement of the Beholders, who thought now that
all was overpast, but they were quickly convinced of their Errors, for in the
East, Flashes of Lightning began to play most Furiously so that many took their
Houses, to avoid the hot Flashes that descended and ran along the Ground; so
that it was exceeding Light, although the Moon did not shine; whereupon the
Skies unfolding, another Sword appeared like unto the former but larger, and of
a more bloody color being judged to be five yards in length; but by reason of
the disproportionable height, it was impossible to be exact in this point, but
dreadful was its appearance; the Stars swiftly shooting round about it after an
unwonted manner; It coming on apace toward the South West, tho the Wine was
contrary it no sooner being arrived in the midst of our Horizon but another
Appeared in the South, the which also moving forwards, that from the East
meeting it, seemed to divide it as it were in two parts, whereupon the Skies
seemed to open several times to great astonishment of all that observed it, and
still as the Skies opened, the which was about ten or eleven times, some
strange shapes or other appeared.

Thus it continued for the space of an hour and a half, all this while there
being an exceeding strong and Sulpherous smell. this dreadful Scene lasted near
the space of two hours, and is faithfully Attested by several of the
Inhabitants of the place aforesaid.

FINIS.

