STRANGE NEWS FROM VIRGINIA; Being a full and true ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE and
DEATH OF Nathanael Bacon Esquire, Who was the only Cause and Original of all
the late Troubles in that COUNTRY.

With a full Relation of all the Accidents which have happened in the late War
there between the Christians and Indians.

LONDON, Printed for William Harris, next door to the Turn-Stile without
Moor-gate. 1677.

Strange News from Virginia, being a full and true account of the Life and
Death of Nathanael Bacon Esqiure, who was the only Cause and Original of all
the late Troubles in that Country.
THERE is no Nation this day under the copes of Heaven can so experimentally
speak the sad Effects of men of great Parts being reduced to necessity, as
England; but not to rake up the notorious misdemeanors of the dead, I shall
endeavor to prevent the sad effects of so deplorable a Cause, by giving you an
account of the remarkable Life and Death of this Gentleman of whom I am about
to discourse. And because when a man has once engaged himself in an ill action,
all men are ready to heap an innumerable aspersions upon him, of which he is no
ways guilty, I shall be so just in the History of his Life as not to rob him of
those Commendations which his Birth and Acquisitions claim as due, and so kind
both to Loyalty and the wholesome constituted Laws of our Kingdom, as not to
smother any thing which would render him to blame.

This Gentleman who has of late becconed the attention of all men of
understanding who are any ways desirous of Novelty, or care what becomes of any
part of the World besides that themselves live in, had the honor to be
descended of an Ancient and Honorable Family, his Name Nathanael Bacon, to
which to the long known Title of Gentleman, by his long study in the Inns of
Court he has since added that of Esquire. He was the Son of Mr. Thomas Bacon of
an ancient Seat known by the denomination of Freestone-Hall in the County of
Suffolk, a Gentleman of known loyalty and ability. His Father as he was able so
he was willing to allow this his Son a very Gentile Competency to subsist upon,
but he as it proved having a Soul too large for that allowance, could not
contain himself within bounds; which his careful Father perceiving, and also
that he had a mind to Travel (having seen diverse parts of the World before)
consented to his inclination of going to Virginia, and accommodated him with a
Stock for that purpose, to the value of 1800 l. Starling, as I am credibly
informed by a Merchant of very good worth, who is now in this City, and had the
fortune to carry him thither.

He began his Voyage thitherwards about Three years since, and lived for about
a years space in that Continent in very good repute, his extraordinary parts
like a Letter of recommendation rendering him acceptable in all men's company,
whilst his considerable Concerns in that place were able to bear him out in the
best of Society. These Accomplishments of mind and fortune rendered him so
remarkable, that the worthy Governor of that Continent thought it requisite to
take him into his Privy Council.

That Plantation which he chose to settle in is generally known by the name of
Curles, situate in the upper part of James River, and the time of his Revolt
was not till the beginning of March 1675/6. At which time the Susquo-hannan
Indians (a known Enemy to that Country) having made an Insurrection, and killed
diverse of the English, amongst whom it was his fortune to have a Servant slain;
in revenge of whose death, and other damages he received from those turbulent
Susquohanians, without the Governor's consent he furiously took up Arms
against them, and was so fortunate as to put them to flight, but not content
therewith; the aforesaid Governor hearing of his eager pursuit after the
vanquished Indians, sent out a select Company of Soldiers to command him to
desist; but he instead of listening thereunto, persisted in his Revenge, and
sent to the Governor to entreat his Commission, that he might more cheerfully
prosecute his design; which being denied him by the Messenger he sent for that
purpose, he notwithstanding continued to make head with his own Servants, and
other English then resident in Curles against them. In this interim the People
of Henrica had returned him Burgess of their County; and he in order thereunto
took his own Sloop and came down toward James Town, conducted by thirty odd
Soldiers, with part of which he came ashore to Mr. Laurences House, to
understand whether he might come in with safety or not, but being discovered by
one Parson Clough, and also it being perceived that he had lined the Bushes of
the said Town with Soldiers, the Governor thereupon ordered an allarm to be
beaten through the whole Town, which took so hot, that Bacon thinking himself
not secure whilst he remained there within reach of their Fort, immediately
commanded his men aboard, and towed his Sloop up the River; which the Governor
perceiving, ordered the Ships which lay at Sandy-point to pursue and take him;
and they by the industry of their Commanders succeeded so well in the attempt,
that they presently stopped his passage; so that Mr. Bacon finding himself
pursued both before and behind, after some capitulations, quietly surrendered
himself Prisoner to the Governors Commissioners, to the great satisfaction of
all his Friends; which action of his was so obliging to the Governor, that he
granted him his liberty immediately upon Paroll, without confining him either
to Prison or Chamber, and the next day, after some private discourse passed
betwixt the Governor, the Privy Council, and himself, he was amply restored to
all his former Honors and Dignities, and a Commission partly promised him to
be General against the Indian Army; but upon farther enquiry into his Affairs
it was not thought fit to be granted him; whereat his ambitious mind seemed
mightily to be displeased; insomuch that he gave out, that it was his intention
to sell his whole concerns in Virginia, and to go with his whole Family to live
either in Merry-land or the South, because he would avoid (as he said) the
scandal of being accounted a factious person there. But this resolution it
seems was but a pretense, for afterward he headed the same-Runnagado English
that he formerly found ready to undertake and go sharers with him in any of his
Rebellions, and adding to them the assistance of his own Slaves and Servants,
headed them so far till they touched at the Occonegies Town, where he was
treated very civilly, and by the Inhabitants informed where some of the
Susquohanno's were inforted, whom presently he assails, and after he had
vanquished them, slew about seventy of them in their Fort: But as he returned
back to the Occoneges, he found they had fortified themselves with diverse more
Indians than they had at his first arrival; wherefore he desired Hostages of
them for their good behavior, whilst he and his followers lay within command
of their Fort. But those treacherous Indians grown confident by reason of their
late recruit, returned him this Answer, That their Guns were the only Hostages
he was like to have of them, and if he would have them he must fetch them.
Which was no sooner spoke, but the Indians sallied out of the Fort and shot one
of his Sentinels, whereupon he charged them so fiercely, that the Fight
continued not only all that day, but the next also, till the approach of the
Evening, at which time finding his men grow faint for want of Provision, he
laid hold of the opportunity, being befriended by a gloomy night, and so made
an honorable retreat homewards.

Howbeit we may judge what respect he had gained in James-Town by this
subsequent transaction. When he was first brought hither it was frequently
reported among the Commonalty that he was kept close Prisoner, which report
caused the people of that Town, those of Charles-City, Henrico, and New-Kent
Countries, being in all about the Number of eight hundred, or a thousand, to
rise and march thitherwards in order to his rescue; whereupon the Governor was
forced to desire Mr. Bacon to go himself in Person, and by his open appearance
quiet the people.

This being past, Mr. Bacon, about the 25th. of June last, dissatisfied that he
could not have a Commission granted him to go against the Indians, in the night
time departed the Town unknown to any body, and about a week after got together
between four and five hundred men of New-Kent County, with whom he marched to
James-Town, and drew up in order before the House of State; and there
peremptorily demanded of the Governor, Council and Burgesses (there then
collected) a Commission to go against the Indians, which if they should refuse
to grant him, he told them that neither he nor never a man in his Company would
depart from their Doors till he had obtained his request; whereupon to prevent
farther danger in so great an exigence, the Council and Burgesses by much
entreaty obtained him a Commission Signed by the Governor, an Act for one
thousand men to be Listed under his command to go against the Indians, to whom
the same pay was to be granted as was allowed to them who went against the
Fort. But Bacon was not satisfied with this, but afterward earnestly
importuned, and at length obtained of the House, to pass an Act of Indemnity to
all Persons who had sided with him, and also Letters of recommendations from
the Governor to his Majesty in his behalf; and moreover caused Colonel
Claybourn and his Son Captain Claybourn, Lieutenant Colonel West, and
Lieutenant Colonel Hill, and many others, to be degraded for ever bearing any
Office, whether it were Military or Civil.

Having obtained these large Civilities of the Governor, etc. one would have
thought that if the Principles of honesty would not have obliged him to peace
and loyalty, those of gratitude should. But, alas, when men have been once
flusht or entered with Vice, how hard is it for them to leave it, especially if
it tends toward ambition or greatness, which is the general lust of a large
Soul, and the common error of vast parts, which fix their Eyes so upon the lure
of greatness, that they have no time left them to consider by what indirect and
unlawful means they must (if ever) attain it.

This certainly was Mr. Bacon's Crime, who after he had once lanched into
Rebellion, nay, and upon submission had been pardoned for it, and also
restored, as if he had committed no such heinous offense, to his former honor
and dignities (which were considerable enough to content any reasonable mind)
yet for all this he could not forbear wading into his former misdemeanors, and
continued his opposition against that prudent and established Government,
ordered by his Majesty of Great Britain to be duly observed in that Continent.

In fine, he continued (I cannot say properly in the Fields, but) in the Woods
with a considerable Army all last Summer, and maintained several Brushes with
the Governors Party: sometime routing them, and burning all before him, to the
great damage of many of his Majesty's loyal Subjects there resident; sometimes
he and his Rebels were beaten by the Governor, etc. and forced to run for
shelter amongst the Woods and Swomps. In which lamentable condition that
unhappy Continent has remained for the space of almost a Twelvemonth, every
one therein that were able being forced to take up Arms for security of their
own lives, and no one reckoning their Goods, Wives, or Children to be their
own, since they were so dangerously exposed to the doubtful Accidents of an
uncertain War.

But the indulgent Heavens, who are alone able to compute what measure of
punishments are adequate or fit for the sins or transgressions of a Nation, has
in its great mercy thought fit to put a stop, at least, if not a total period
and conclusion to these Virginian troubles, by the death of this Not. Bacon,
the great Molestor of the quiet of that miserable Nation; so that now we who
are here in England, and have any Relations or Correspondence with any of the
Inhabitants of that Continent, may by the arrival of the next Ships from that
Coast expect to hear that they are freed from all their dangers, quitted of all
their fears, and in great hopes and expectation to live quietly under their own
Vines, and enjoy the benefit of their commendable labors.

I know it is by some reported that this Mr. Bacon was a very hard drinker, and
that he dyed by inbibing, or taking in two much Brandy. But I am informed by
those who are Persons of undoubted Reputation, and had the happiness to see the
same Letter which gave his Majesty an account of his death, that there was no
such thing therein mentioned: he was certainly a Person endued with great
natural parts, which notwitststanding his juvenile extravagances he had adorned
with many elaborate acquisitions, and by the help of learning and study knew
how to manage them to a Miracle, it being the general vogue of all that knew
him, that he usually spoke as much sense in as few words, and delivered that
sense as opportunely as any they ever kept company withal: Wherefore as I am my
self a Lover of Ingenuity, though an abhorrer of disturbance or Rebellion, I
think fit since Providence was pleased to let him dye a Natural death in his
Bed, not to asperse him with saying he killed himself with drinking.

FINIS.

