Strange and Wonderful NEWS FROM BRISTOL BEING A True Relation, how several
Sheep were found Killed near that City; their Bellies being Ripped Open, and
their Fat only taken out of them; all the rest of the Carcass being lest
entire, in order (as it is to be Feared) to the Kindling more Dreadful Fires,
for carrying on the Horrid and Damnable Popish Plot and Conspiracy for the
Destruction of His Majesty, and the Protestant Religion and Government now
Established by Law.
Together, With the Examinations taken thereupon, before Sir John Lloyd Mayor,
Sir Robert Cann, Mr. Alderman Yates, Capt. William Bedloe, and Sheriff Jackson,
and many other of the most Eminent Citizens of Bristol.
THose Damnable and Hellish Popish Conspirators, who have Designed the
Destruction of His Majesty and Government, and the Religion of this Nation now
by Law Established, have found no way more Effectual for carrying on this their
Horrid Plot, than Fireing; and thereby Impoverishing the Famous City of London,
and also the most Considerable Cities and Market To^^^ (...) Kingdom; against
some of which they have to Effectually succeeded in their Villainy, and have
Designed it against all the rest; and this they have performed by several Ways
and Methods; of which Captain William Bedloe has given a very large and
satisfactory Account, in the late Impartial Narrative of the Fires of London,
Westminster, Southwark, and the parts Adjacent, published by him.

And among the several Ways whereby they perpetrated their Mischiefs; One
usual Method was, By Throwing Fireballs into Houses, Windows, or any other
place where there was Combustible matter fit for their purpose: which
Fireballs were compounded of several Ingredients; and among the rest, we hear
that they generally used a great quantity of Sheeps-Fat taken from the Cawl and
Kidneys; and upon this Account we may well suppose the Reason why we have heard
of so many Sheep that have been found Killed in the Fields, having nothing
taken from them but only their Fat: And this has been done several Times, and
in many Places of this Kingdom, diverse having been found Dead in the same
manner in and about London, awhile before the Dreadful Burning thereof; as also
about Northampton before the Fire thereof: Yea, some Sheep (not many Months
since) have been found in the same Posture in the County of Surrey, not above
Seven or Eight Miles from London.

And for the further Confirmation of these their Wicked Practices, we shall now
give you this Brief, but True Account, That upon Thursday the Twenty Fourth of
this instant July, near the City of Bristol, there were Five Sheep found Dead
in the Fields, with their Bellies ripped open, and all their Kidney-Fat taken out
of them, and the Carcass and Skin, with all the Quarters, was left entire upon
the Ground.

Upon the Report of this Mischief, there was Complaint made to the Magistrates
of the City of Bristol, since it was to be Feared it might prove Dangerous,
because there were Three St^^p ^^ides (...) Killed in the same manner but the
Thursday before this that is, upon the Seventeenth of this Month: Whereupon the
Mayor of Bristol, with several Aldermen of the same City, and also Captain
William Bedloe, took the same into their serious Consideration, and made a
strict Enquiry into the Business; and finding the thing to be True, that so
many Sheep had been really destroyed, and found Dead in the manner
aforementioned; they immediately issued out Orders, That the Common Watch
usually belonging to the City, should be Double the Number as formerly; and
that Six of the most Considerable and Substantial Housekeepers in each Parish,
should Watch every Night in their Own Persons, till further Order to the
Contrary: And that all possible Care should be taken by all means, to endeavor
to Seize upon these Wretched Incendiaries, that so they might be brought to
Condign Punishment for these their Cursed Attempts.

And the Reason of this Order was, Because, as we mentioned before, the like
Wicked Practices were used before the Fires of London, Southwark, and other
Places; For we are told, That this Sheeps Fat, with other Compounds made up
into Fireballs, are of an Extraordinary furious Burning Quality; so that when
they are once Kindled, they cannot be Quenched, till they go out of themselves:
And where they are Thrown, they Stick so fast, as not to be Removed, till they
have wrought their Cursed Effect.

This Relation is most certainly True; and we hope, may Warn us to have a Care
of the Cursed Doctrines and Practices of the Romish Church, who allow of
Firings, Murtherings, Poisoning, and all other Villainies whatsoever, if it may
any way promote their Damnable Cause and Interest.

And now Dear Countrymen, since your Lives, Liberties, and Estates, are once
more put into your own Hands, Let it be your greatest care in the Choice of
your Representatives, for the ensuing Parliament, since a Miscarriage herein,
may never be Retrieved: Choose men of Honesty, Sobriety and Courage; those that
may Stand by His Majesty for the Defense of his Sacred Person, and the
Protestant Religion and Government Established; Those that may not be Afraid to
Search into the Bottom of this Damnable Hellish Plot and Conspiracy, to Destroy
His Majesty, and the Laws; Such as may make Provision, that we may not leave a
Religion of Blood, Villainy, and Slavery to our Posterity: Let not him be
counted the Fittest man for your Choice, who gives you the most Drink, and
spends the most Money; lest like Cursed Esau, you sell your Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage, and Establish Slavery by a Law: Which God in his great Mercy
prevent. Amen.

FINIS.

