A Strange and True RELATION Of the Prodigious Multitude of MICE, That have
Destroyed the PLANTS, HERBS, and GRASS, between ROTTERDAM and SCHEDAM; As it
was Communicated to a Person of Quality, by a Letter from a Merchant living in
ROTTERDAM. Likewise, Infesting their Houses and Chambers, Insomuch that the
Inhabitants thereof are in despair of their Security. Wherein you will find a
Philosophical and Historical Relation concerning the Generation of those
Vermin, and some Prognostics raised therefrom. As also, An Account how Dengy
Hundred in Essex has been formerly Infested with an incredible number of MICE;
And how it was freed after a Miraculous manner.

Printed, Anno Domini, 1670.

A Letter to a Friend.
Worthy Sir,
TO satisfy your curiosity, knowing you to be delighted with all News; but
more especially with that of Prodigies: witness your kind acceptance of my
Letters to you upon the apparition of the Comets. I shall now give you an
account of a Prodigious Army of Mice, that have lately invaded us, and have
possessed themselves of Rotterdam, Schedam, and many other places; their manner
of Invasion was as follows. About the beginning of this November, there was
observed by the Inhabitants near to the Maes, whole sholes of living Creatures
swimming toward the Shore; at first they were supposed to be small Fish flying
to the shore for their security, being pursued by some ravenous Fish that
sought to devour them; but it proved quite otherwise: for these supposed Water
animals proved to be Water-Mice, creatures of the nature of Crocodiles, that
can live in both the Elements. They were no sooner Landed, but they, without
asking leave, fell to tearing and rooting up Grass, Plants, and what ever came
in their way, saving the Plough-men a labor by turning up the Grass, and
making that which was before Pasture, good arrable Ground, well cleansed and
freed from Weeds; whether the Contrymen do account these courtesies, I
cannot tell: but their number makes them so undaunted, that they neither fear
the States threatenings of sending an Army of Cats against them, nor care for
being Sued at Law for Trespassers* They declare nothing but Free Quarter, and
are of that generous and good Nature, that they never quarrel with their
Landlords, but ar^ well contented with what they find in the House. At their
first coming they took up their Quarters in the Fields but now they have left
off their Field-Quarters, and are com into our Towns, observing the common
custom of Armies to Summer in the Fields, and Winter in the Cities. The reason
of this Prodigy has been controverted by all persons, whose Ingenuity leads
them to a Scrutiny of things of this nature, as well Divines, Physicians,
Lawyers and Astrologers.

The Divines conclude it to be a severe Judgment of God upon that Country,
for the States tolerating all sorts of wickedness, under pretense of tolerating
all sorts of Religions.

The Mathematicians are of the opinion that it is a Judgment of God, but they
will have the Cause of it, to be, not the tolerating of Religion, but their too
much encroaching upon Neptune's Bounds; and it is feared by many, that these
Creatures being so numerous, they may in time eat down the Banks, and give
liberty to the Sea, to reassume that which is its undoubted right.

The Opinion of the Physicians, is, that appearance of these strange Bodies in
the Body-Politick, are certain Diagnosticks of some strange Malignant Distemper
to happen; But coming to consider what particular Distemper it might be that
should afflict the Country; One of the Company desired to have a sight of the
States water, But that would not be granted at that time; But it was thus
concluded concerning the particular Distemper; that in regard of those
dangerous Symptoms that do now appear, as the Generation of strange Bodies,
denotes a great Putrefaction of the Humors, the Ulceration and Corrosion of
the interior parts, and the increase of the Animals, do argue some foul
Disease, It is much to be feared that the Country this year will sub Morbo
Gallico laborare, as a nimble witted fellow amongst them, supposing that it
might be meant, that the French would invade the Land; answered, there was no
fear of the French coming amongst them, since the Mice had so devoured the
Plants, that they could not pick one Sallet in the Country.

The Lawyers coming to consider what might be the events of this Prodigy: Some
determined; saying, that they were Prodigious Trespassers; and in regard they
lie skulking in holes and corners, and will not be taken by the lawful Process
of a Trap, they ought to be sued to an Outlawry,

The Astrologers have been a great while Calculating the Nativity of this
Prodigy rectifying it by the Trutine of Hermes, Animodar, of Ptolomy, and by
accidents, which they say is the surest way of Rectification; But as yet they
cannot find the Aphaeta, Alcocoden, or Anareta of this Prodigy; so that it may
be supposed that these Mice may prove a greater Flagellum Astrologorum; then
ever Picus of Mirandula was, or Lillies Gold Chain. They have put out a Book,
which they call Nuncius Astralis, or an account of the reasons of the
Generation of Mice, according to the Rules of Astrology, of their Progress and
Declination of several Prognostications raised therefrom, Predicting the
present and future condition of Holland, and the several Accidents, whether
good or bad, that shall happen to that State for Twenty years to come; By the
next Packet you may expect the Book, which you may think worth your Reading.
In the mean time take this short account.

First, they tell us, that the estimate time of this Prodigious Birth, was when
the Sun entered Scorpio, a venomous watery Sign; and from this they conclude,
that they were bred in the water, and have venomous teeth, because Grass, nor
any thing else grows where they have once been. And about the same time Jupiter
did oppose Mars, and squared Sol, and the Moon was in opposition to Saturn,
they do Predict from hence, that in regard that Jupiter is Significator of
Lawyers and Divines: And Mars the general Significator of Soldiers, that there
may be many Controversies, Quarrels, Fightings, Duels between those of the Long
Robe, and the Buff-Coats; Then Jupiter squaring Sol, does show that the Soldier
will have the better on it at the Sword, and the Lawyer at his Tongue; the Moon
in oppsition to Saturn, does plainly show; that old Men will have the worst of
it, if they deal with young Women, Saturn being the significator of old Men,
and the Moon crescent of young Women. From all these aforesaid Aspects, with
other Transits; Revolution, Profectional Figures, Speculums, Radices, with many
more hard words, which you will find in their Book; They do conclude, that
malum principium, malus finis sequitur, the Consequencies will be very Bad and
Ominous, a Grand Catastrophe will happen either to the States, or some other
Persons; But what these Consequencies are, they tell you, it is not safe to
discover the Politic Secrets of the Nation; They intend therefore to see the
Event, and then they will explain their Prognostications, and tell you, They
did Predict all those things that have happened, as Lilly Predicted the Kings
Restoration by these words in his Merlin's Prophesies; A Grand Catastrophe
shall happen in England between the Years 1655, and 1665, in 10 Years over or
under; Though in the same Book and Place, he says positively the contrary.

Thus having tired your Patience with Men's Opinions; I will come now to the
Matter, and give you an account how great a trouble these inconsiderable
Animals, whose number being considerable, makes them formidable.

They destroy all our Provision, knawing holes through VVood, Cloth, etc. so
that nothing can preserve our Bread, or other Provision from them, but Iron;
And therefore many of our Inhabitants are fain to provide Cupboards made of
Iron Plate; They do so increase, that we begin to fear they will devour us, as
well as our Food; they being already so bold, as to come upon our Beds, and
sometimes bite us by the Toes, or Fingers. Great Care is taken for their
Destruction, but all in vain, by Traps, Cats, Dogs, all signify* nothing.

There came a V^rtuoso from Paris the other day, that undertakes to free the
Town by a Talisman; which startled the Burgo Masters of Rotterdam, supposing it
to be the name of some Infernal Spirit, till such time as he explained himself,
and told them, that it was only the Effigies of a Mouse Engraven upon Iron;
(being demanded why upon Iron, rather than any other Metal? He answered.)
Because the Sun entered Scorpio (which is Mars's winter House) when the Mice
entered the Land; it must be Engraved in the hour of Mars: afterward it must be
heated nine times upon a Tuesday in the hour of Mars, and quenched with the
juice of Martial Plants, impregnated with Sal Martis, then there must be a
stone gathered under the Dominion of Venus, when Venus is well fortifyed in her
own Dignities; (Be sure she be not in Conjunction with Mars, for then she will
part with no Influencies to the Stone) Upon this must be Engraved a She-Mouse
in the hour and day of Venus, and this Stone must be made red hot nine times,
and quenched as often in the juice of Venerial Plants, impregnated with Ens
Veneris. These being prepared* this Virtuoso intends to hang this Talismanical
stone about the neck of this Talismanical Mouse, and throw them both into the
Maes, which will by an occult quality, and sympathetical virtue draw all the
other Mice to the bottom of the River to them. The Burgo-Masters at length
approve of the Art, and desired him to hasten the experiment.

But since this, there has been another Project thought on for freeing the
Town.

A German, who it seems, was born in the Town where the Pide Piper whistled the
Rats and Mice out of the Town, and drew them into the River, does affirm, That
not long since, the Pipers Tomb was discovered by digging for some Mine, and in
it was found the very Pipe, which has been proved since by the same
Experiment, making all the Rats and Mice in the Town to follow him that played
upon it. This German untertakes to procure this Pipe for a sum of Money, and so
to free us from these Vermin. The Papists are very importunate with their
Priests to Excommunicate them; and it is discoursed amongst them, that they
have sent to the Pope for a Bull to scarr them all away,

We have no other News or Discourse here, but concerning the Mice. I remember a
Story that I have read in England of the like Prodigy in Essex, which put us in
some comfort of being freed after some such miraculous manner; The Story was
thus,

About November in the year 1581, in the Marshes of Dengie Hundred, in a place
called Southminster, in the County of Essex, there suddenly appeared an
Infinite and Prodigious number of Mice, which almost covered the whole
Superficies of the said Marshes, treading and knawing the Grass by the Roots,
spoiling and tainting the same with their venomous teeth, in such sort, that
the Cattle that graized thereon, were struck with a Murrain, and many dyed
thereof; which Vermin by all the Policy of Man could not be destroyed, till at
last, it came to pass, that there flocked together all about the same Marshes a
great number of Owls, whereby they were shortly after de livered from the
vexation of the Mice. The like of this was about that time in Kent, as
Chronicles relate. What further News shall happen, you may expect an account.
In the mean time,

I rest Yours, Eugenius Anonymus.

FINIS.

