Strange and Wonderful Prophecies and Predictions Taken from the APPARITION Of
the late Dreadful COMET The last Wonderful ECCLIPS, And the great and signal
Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the Fiery Trigon, That will happen on the
twenty-third of October next, signifying the utter downfall of the Hierarchy of
Rome, and other most wonderful and unheard of Mutations, which shall happen in
Europe within few years.
Taken from the joint consent of the most learned Astrologers and other famous
Men, skilled in the Astral Sciences.

As likewise a Prophesy of Mr. Lillies, and one of Bishop- Vshers found some
time after their Death.

HEaven is God's Book which he lays open before Mortals, but wise men can only
read it; Fools admire it, and Fops deride it. But it is most certain, that God
shows not his Signs in the Heavens in vain, and that Comets, Eclipses and
remarkable Conjunctions of the Luminaries and other Stars signify something to
Mankind, since experience, the Mistress, even of Fools, teaches us that our
Bodies, and the Bodies of all Animals and Vegitables, are subject both to the
benign and malevolent influences of the Heavens; we shall therefore let the
ignorant and incredulous alone, and speak only to those, who with more judgment
inquire into these Prodigies, which we may so call, though they are natural,
because portentous, and are remarkable Signs of things to come.

We shall not in this narrow compass go about to declare our judgment of the
matter of Comets, or how produced: the opinions of the Ancients about this
matter are exploded, and some later have ingeniously enough judged them to be
caused by the Actions of Spirits, and some other learned Vertuosi have thought
them (and perhaps not amiss) by reason of the great height of most of them,
that they are the Conflagrations of so many several Worlds. But as to this, we
shall not discourse any farther, but procceed to let you understand, what the
learned have predicted from those signal Apparitions, and that great
Conjunction which will be celebrated in October next.

As to the first, the Comet seen in England, as well as in most parts of
Europe, and also in America, in December 1680. According to our most learned
English Merlin, it signifies great and unusual Tempests by Sea and Land, blasts
of wind, strange Treacheries, Death of Cattle, Dearth of Grain, Plague, and
Famine, with great Inundations of waters. Which has been verified in the great
Deluge in Flanders and Holland, and all the Low Countries, to their unspeakable
Damage, and the perishing of many thousand Souls, besides the loss of Cattle,
and Land hardly ever to be regained. As this great and unusual Flood might be
the effects of this Comet, so also it may have its signification and may
predict Troubles, Wars, and great Devastations and Depredations to come shortly
on those Countries, as it has been observed in the like Cases. Therefore let
Flanders this year and the next, look to it self, and Holland also, lest they
become a Prey to the French Monarch; it is much to be feared. Besides this
Comet, we have from very faithful hands, that three Suns have been seen at once
several times, the last of which was in April 1681. As also several other
strange Apparitions in the Air, of Armies Fighting; Ships combating and firing
one at another, all which are not sent in vain, and do predict something more
than we are free to speak of at this time, but proceed in our discourse of the
Comet. Fromundus says, Cometa non est Physica causa calamitatum sed signum
potius ad placitum Dei. That a Comet is not a Physical cause of Calamities but
rather a sign thereof, at the pleasure of God. So we may well believe that this
remarkable Comet is a sign of many Changes to come, and we may thence predict
or foretell great changes in many places, as Scarcity, Plague, Famine, Wars,
and Cruelties exercised by some potent Prince.

Lilly in his Anglicus 1655. has these prophetical expressions.

In the year eighty three,
Great Changes there will be.
And I have heard of another Prophesy, concerning that year, found in the
Papers of a learned Man.

Who e're shall live to ninety three,
Three Armies shall in England see,
Three Princes shall for Empire strive;
Two shall be slain the third survive.
And when the Crown's placed on his Head,
Religion shall be established.
The South then to the North shall say,
This is Englands happy day.
Time will reveal all things, but it behooves all men not to slight such
warnings from God, nor laugh at impending Judgments, but to amend their Lives.
Hear what another learned man in the Science of Astrology tells you, in his
Astrological Observations for this year, That the motion of a Comet from one
place to another, manifests an hostile motion of an Enemy, from one Region to
another. God preserve us from an Invasion. We may Justly fear that this Comet
portends more wars in Europe. I wish the Turk breaks not the League with the
Emperor, or invades not some other part of Christendom within these few years.
He goes on and says further, the dreadful effects of this Comet will be the
slight of many good people from their Habitations, the Banishment of several
persons into other Countries, unusual Tempests, dark weather, piracies, and
Shipwracks with many other Calamities, destruction of Fruits, overflowing of
waters, uncomfortable Harvests, Scarcity of all sort of Grain, many infirmities
happening to Cattle, as Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, etc. with many Melancholy Diseases
frequent among the People.

But as this Comet was not in all respects as other Comets have appeared, being
more remarkable in its progress, and bushy Tail or Stream measuring to many
Degrees in the Heavens; Some learned Philosophers have predicted from it, some
unusual mutation to be made in Religion, to the great detriment of proud
Persecutors, but whether Italy or some other part of Europe be poynted at, time
only will reveal. We shall now proceed to the Lunar Ecclips

This Ecclips of the Moon happened on the 11th of February last, and was plainly
seen of us. Tho Ecclipses of either Luminar, are Natural, the one being caused
by the interposition of the Moon betwixt us, and the Sun, which Shadows its
light by its opacous body, the other, being caused by the interposition of the
Earth between the Moon and the Sun, whose shadow causes the Lunar Ecclips; yet
I say these Ecclipses by all the Ancients have been observed to have produced
their very great Influences and Effects upon the people of the World. This
Diliquium or total defect of the Moon, is celebrated in the Mid-heaven in three
Degees, fifty three minutes of the Celestial Virgin, and portends some
alteration in Religion, and that many careless Christians run into strange and
unheard of principles destructive to our Faith. It also predicts great
sicknesses arising from cold and dryness, especially unto Princes, and great
persons. We may expect to hear this Summer of the Death of some great and
remarkable Prince or Potentate. This Ecclips, happening also in a Northern
Asterism, portends sudden Earthquakes, according to Ptolemy. Mercury is Ruler
of this Ecclips, which signifies great Change and Mutability in the minds of
Men. Treachery, Shamplots, Subtle Contrivances, Craft and Cuning among
Magistrates: promotes Innovations in Religion, and in Laws and Customs, Causes
high winds and a troubled Air. The effects of this Ecclips will appear among
all people, and those Countries subject to Virgo, Pisces, Sagitary, and Gemini,
and that when the Sun and Mars come into those points, then will the effects be
most powerful. We may expect a dry and unwholsom Spring, full of noxious and
malignant fumes, which may give great detrement to the Fruits of the Earth.
Thus much for this remarkable Lunar Ecclips, we will now proceed to the great
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter which is indeed very signal.

This notable Conjunction of which we are now about to speak, is between Saturn
and Jupiter, in the Regal Sign Leo, which predicts very notable things, being
also seconded with a Conjunction of Mars, both with Saturn and Jupiter in the
same Kingly Sign; the effects of which will last many years, and, as a knowing
Astrologer says, will much alter the Affairs of Europe, and give the form of
things another Face, from what it had before. Things that have long been a
hatching will now be brought to Light. God preserve England from another new
contrived Popish Plot, and private Enemies under the mask of Friendship. Mars
junctus Saturno struet frauds multas and deceptiones. Mars being joined with
Saturn, brings forth many frauds and Sham-plots, Robbing by Land, Piracies by
Sea, great unfaithfulness of great ones one to another; and Teeacheries and
Villainies of all kinds. God preserve this Nation from Pestilence, which seems
to be threatened by the Malevolent influences of Mars and Saturn: also great
Feavors and other Epidemical Diseases, toward the latter end of this year, and
next Summer. Multa cadunt inter labia and Calicam: many men's expectations shall
be frustrated; there is a Square of Jupiter and Mars that will make a great
noise and will very shrewdly shake if not break to pieces the Image of
Nebuchadnezar, Verbum Sapienti.

This Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter and Mars in Leo, and all of them in
Square to Venus in Scorpio, and the Moon also disposed of by Mercury- and yet
in Square to him, is one of the worst revolutional Figures that may be seen.
These Conjunctions happening in Leo, near the Tropic of Cancer, will pour their
effects on those Northern Regions to purpose, because their diarnal Ark or time
above the Earth is near 15 hours, so that during that time, the power of their
rays have great influence, to alter the Principles of the Air, and so by
Consequence of all other things living in it: we say, that this will be a cause
of many perturbations; men's minds will be stirred up to fiery and furious
Actions, to War, Battle, Murder, Treachery, Rebellion, and the like. In some
of the Northern parts of Europe, because they have all North latitude in Leo.
Saturn in a fixed sign Signifies Mortality, and Scarcity of Fruits of the
Earth: and indeed a great Mortality is to be feared, for Saturn and Mars are in
the 4th and both Dignities in the 8th House, which is the House of Death. But
God may hear the prayers of the Faithful, these things invite men to
Repentance, and to Supplicate Almighty God to divert his impending Judgments.

By it England, Ireland, part of France, all Scotland, and Holland, Polonia,
Sweeden and Denmark, seem to be much Concerned: many inundations, tempests,
Shipwracks, Pestilence, Famine, and unusual diseases will ('it is very likely) be
manifested in those Countries. This famous Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
falls in about 20 degrees of the Regal sign Leo, on the 23d of October. 5 H.
Post M. The fiery Trigon, or the Conjunctional returns into this Trigon, have
always been attended with very notable and Memorable Changes both of Church and
state, and very great Actions and Alterations in Kingdoms and Countries. This
being the 7th Revolution since the beginning of the world.

The famous Merlinus Anglicus tells you that the first Revolution of this
Trigon after the Worlds Creation, fell in the days of Enoch, the second in
Noah's time, when the universal Flood drowned the World, the third in the time
of Moses when the Children of Israel were delivered from the Egyptian Yoke, the
fourth was about the setting up of the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians, the
fifth fell about the time that our blessed Savior lived here upon Earth, the
sixth was when Charles the Great translated the Western Empire to the Germans.
And now this is the seventh which has a singular Mystery of Sabbatism, and
promises great things more than ordinary to the World. Its effects will last
several years, and will be about the year 1801 e're this triplicity has its
full period: about which time we may expect the utter overthrow of the Hirarchy
of Rome, if not before; and that about that time we may expect a Total
Catastrophy of the world, and in the mean time we may look fot great and
Mavelous alterations and Changes in the Constitutions of Empires, and strange
Revolutions of Monarchies and states. But Leo being a Regalsigne, and in trine
to Aries, England's ascendent, what ever Changes we may expect at home,
Monarchy will be advanced and we need fear no danger of a Commonwealth, for no
such thing is threatened from its Influence, but rather that some petty states,
should choose them some warlike prince, and become Monarchical. Who ever lives
to 88 shall see such Revolutions as few expect but we shall at this time
Conclude with this Prophetical Enigma. When the Eagle builds his Nest on the
top of a Fir Tree, let the white Raven leave Croaking, for his end is near: the
Frog and Reremouse shal^^^ter into a League, but shall be both destroyed by the
Sparow-hawke. Then shall a man arise with the Sun on his head, whose rays shall
Illuminate the Northern parts of Europe, then Peace and Plenty shall flow
through all his Dominions, which shall Extend from the North to the South
having diverse Princes his Tributaries.

These things shall all fulfilled be
Before Seven hundred Eighty three.
LONDON Printed for J. Smith. 1682.


