Strange and Dreadful NEWS From the TOWN of DEPTFORD, IN THE County of Kent.
Being the Full, True, and Sad RELATION OF ONE Anne Arthur, WHO According to
her own Report, had diverse Discourses with the Devil, on the Third of this
Instant March 1684/5. who offered her Gold and Silver; telling her many Strange
and Wonderful things; And, in the end, carried her in the Air a Quarter of a
Furlong, etc. Together, with the Life and Conversation of the said Party; and
Directions to the Place of her Abode. And a Particular Relation of the sad
Distractions she fell into, upon that Occasion; And diverse other Circumstances
relating thereto.

CErtain it is, that the Devil who is Prince of the Air, and much conversant in
the Earth, as himself testifies in the 1st. of Holy Job ver. the 7th would
wreck his Malice and Vengeance to the destruction of Mankind, did not an
Almighty Power restrain and limit his fierce Wrath, yet sometimes we see he
being as it were let loose for a while, attempts the bodily destruction of
such, as he cannot otherways ruin; nay, and on the contrary it has been
observed in diverse sad Examples, that God has permitted him to execute his
Indignation, on several Profligate, Wicked and vain Persons, whilst they were
yet alive, thereby to terrify and scare others, from a fatal perseverance in
their evil ways, of which I might instance many, but the subject story of these
pages, being fresh and memorable, I shall pass over former Relations, and
proceed to what is Material.

In Deptford near a place called Flaggon-Row, dwells one Anne Arthur, that had
a long time gotten her Living by selling things about the Streets; and in that
Occupation appeared to her Neighbors very Industrious and Laborious; but
chiefly her Trade was in those Cheese-Cakes, which are known by the Name of the
Town aforesaid, the which she frequently brought to London, and disposed to
diverse Customers, but so it happened on the Third of March that having been in
the City and Suburbs somewhat late, as she was going home, according to what
her self with many asseverations, has related to diverse persons of known
Integrity, who came to see her in that sad and deplorable condition, where she
is; that a little beyond the Half-way-House, a House so called, standing
between- Rederiffe and Deptford a Human Shape, in a dark Habit approached her
which she says she supposed at first to be a Man, but narrowly and with a
fuller aspect by Moonlight, observing his countenance to be stern and
dreadful, she began to be in much Fear and Consternation, as doubting it was
the common Enemy of Mankind; who in that solitude, was roving about, etc.
Whereupon she would have gone back, when immediately so fierce a Wind did rise,
that it in a manner constrained her to proceed on her way, or as she further
says, she had no Power to do otherways, being still followed by the Gloomy
Apparition, she passed on till coming out of the Fields she came into the Lane
or division of Grounds, that leads to Deptford, though in an extreme sweat
occasioned by the Fear and Amazement conceived, when being there the Form or
Spectrum, as she supposed it to be, demanded whither she was going, and where
she had been, who in abrupt stammerings made reply, that she had been at London
selling her Ware, and her Habitation was at Deptford, and that she was a poor
Woman, and obliged to undertake that Employment for Her Maintenance; Whereupon,
after some horrid Mutterings, a Hand was held forth full of Silver, but she
being fearful for the Reasons aforesaid, shunned it (praying to her self that
God would deliver her from the Power of all Evil Spirits, and from Temptations)
which refusal much displeased her new Associate; Yet after often urging her to
take it, by alleging her Poverty, and telling many things that had happened to
her through Want and Penury; saying that hereby she might be enabled to Live
better for the future; he drew out a handful of Gold, which seemed to her to be
a vast Heap, more than any Hand could grasp; and would have had her permitted
him to put it into her Basket, But she refused. Then, as she says, he told her
of her Straw-Bed, and named her Utensils, which are but poor and mean,
upbraiding her for refusing his Offer. Yet still, as she declares, she prayed
for Deliverance; ever wishing some Man or Woman would come by; but none came.
So that, in much Terror she kept her way, with trembling Joints; till she came
in sight of the Houses that stand in she Bend or Turning to the Fields, the
Lights whereof a little comforted her, but ere she could reach them, whether by
the Force of a Whirlwind, the Wind then blowing hard, or by him that associated
with her, she directly knows not, she was taken up, fitogether with her Basket,
a considerable Height, and carried, pitiously crying out for Help for the
space of a Quarter of a Furlong; and there; with great Violence, thrown amongst
the Bushes, where her Cries and mournful Laments reaching the ears of some
People that were then abroad, they supposed it might be some Person robbed, and
bound; and therefore went to see. When being directed to her by the Noise she
made, they conveyed her thence to a Neighboring House, and afterward to her
own Lodgings. She at that time, through Fear and Amazement, being in a manner
bereaved of her Senses; But coming, in the end, to her self, she made this
strange Relation to many that came about her; continuing in much Disturbance of
Mind, often starting, and appearing fearful, as if she saw some dreadful Shape
before her Eyes.

And thus she continues to persevere in the Relation beforementioned, though
in a distracted and disorderly manner. She confesses further, She has been a
notorious Liver, often given to Swearing, and calling upon the Devil; breaking
the Sabbath, and the like. Insomuch, that she being often Reproved, instead of
Relentment, proved Incorrigible; saying, to those that gave her sacred
admonitions, That she knew the worst on it; and could but go to the Civil Old
Gentleman in the Black at last. So vain and ridiculous were her Expressions;
though it plainly appears, that when he drew near, if her own Asseverations may
be credited, she was no ways desirous of his Company. But not to ridicule on
this solemn and tremendious Occasion, I shall Conclude with a hearty desire,
that all People would have such Regard to their Ways, that the Tempter may
have no advantage over them; but that by resisting him, they may put him to
Flight, and become Victorious, fighting under the Banner of the Lord JESUS.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for D. W. 1684/5.


