THE RELIGION OF THE DUTCH. Represented in Several LETTERS FROM A Protestant
Officer IN The FRENCH ARMY, to A Pastor and Pr^^^^^^ of Divinity, at BERNE in
Swis^erland. Out of the French.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Heyrick at Grayes-Inn Gate in Holbourn, 1680.

The Contents of the LETTERS.
THE First Letter discovers by what means, and upon what motives, the Reformed
Religion, according to the Calvinistical way, was established in the United
Provinces. The Second and Third give an account of all the different Religions,
that are in those Provinces, and their principal Opinions. The Fourth and Fifth
prove, That the United Provinces cannot be said, to be an Estate of the
Reformed Religion. The Sixth makes it appear, That, though the Dutch were the
most Reformed Christians in the World, yet were it an act of temerarious
Imprudence in those of the Reformed Religion, to Confederate together, for
their Relief, in the War between Them and the most Christian King. And that, of
the Protestant-Cantons, of Swisserland, those were highly to be blamed, which
refused to raise Forces for his most Christian Majesty; as was also that of
Berne, which having granted his most Christian Majesty a Regiment, kept so much
stir, to hinder its Serving against the Dutch.
THE RELIGION OF THE DUTCH.
The First LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
THough I have always known, and looked upon you, as a most zealous man in the
Calvinistical persuasion, yet I should never have imagined, that your zeal
would have transported you so far, as to induce you, to pronounce an Anathema
against all those of the Reformed Religion, who now serve the most Christian
King in the War, wherein he is engaged against the Dutch. Mean time, you know,
that you have run into this strange Extremity, in the Letter you were pleased
to write from Borne, of the 15 th. of the last Month, which yet came not to my
hands till within these two days. You, at the first dash, tell me, it is a
matter you cannot be sufficiently astonished at, That any Officer, who makes
Profession of our Religion, whether he be Swisse, or French, or of what other
Country soever, should presume to fight against our dear Brethren in Christ,
the Dutch, and make it their Business to destroy that Sanctified Republic,
which has always been the Refuge and Sanctuary of those of the Reformed
Religion, and to which all Protestants are in the highest manner obliged. You,
afterward, make it your most earnest entreaty to us, That, out of the
tenderness we ought to have of our Salvation, we should quit our Employments,
and enter our Selves into the Service of the Dutch, so to expiate the Sin we
have committed in serving against them. You solemnly declare to us, in Fine,
That, if we do not, upon sight, follow this advice of yours, we are a sort of
damned Wretches, never to be retrieved out of the deplorabl^ Condition we are
in, and that we ought not to expect any Forgiv^ness for our Crime, either in
this World, or that to come, no more, or less, than if we had sinned against
the Holy Ghost. As for your Protestant-Cantons you highly celebrate the
Prudence of those among'st them, who have denied his Majesty of France any
Forces, in his unjust War, as you are pleased to call that, wherein he is now
involved, against the Dutch. Besides, you highly condemn those, who, having
supplied him with such Forces, have not been importunate in the recalling of
them, and have not been dissatisfied, to see them employed, in attacking and
maintaining the Cities which have been taken from the States General.

I should not have been much startled, if I had received such a Letter from the
Minister of some Country Village, or from some person whose abilities raised
him not above the ordinary Rate of men. But I must acknowledge my self
surpised, as much as man can be so, to see that you, Reverend Sir, who are a
Professor of Divinity, and have the reputation of being one of the most
experiensed men of Swisserland, especially upon the score of Politics, should
write me a Letter fraught with things very strange and extravagant, and Maxim^s
absolutely inconsistent with sound Sense, and Reason, and contrary even to the
end you have proposed to your self, which is, doubtless, the preservation and
propagation of our Reformed Religion, and of the Churches which profess it. I
undertake to make a clear justification of the truth of the things which I
advance, and to let you see the Mistake you lie under, and with what injustice
you have so slightly pronounced the Sentence of Condemnation, against all those
of the Reformed Religion, who serve the most Christian King, in the War which
he is now concerned in against the, Dutch.

To that end, it is my design, to show you, somewhat at large, of what nature
the Religion of the Dutch is, and what sanctity is to be attributed to their
Republic; and thence it will appear, how highly the Protestants are concerned
to wish the preservation of it. And when that is done, I shall afterward
prove, That though the Hollanders were the most reformed of all People, in
their Religion, as well as in their morality; yet you would not have any
reason, to condemn either those private Persons of their Persuasion, who serve
against them; or yet those of your Cantons, who have supplied the most
Christian King with Forces, upon this occasion.

I must acknowledge, That if we consider the Dutch Confession of Faith, and the
Cathechism they use; it cannot be denied, but that they profess the same
Religion, with that which is received at Geneva, and in your
Protestant-Cantons. But in the mean time, this is to be noted, That though they
make an external Profession of the same Religion with yours, yet their Conduct
and Deportment do evidently demonstrate, that they make not any account of it,
or that they believe it not at all. To that end, it is requisite, that I make a
higher enquiry into things, and go to the very source, and give you a
discovery, by what Degrees, and by what Means, this Religion was established in
the State, and the different Conduct which the States General have observed, in
reference thereto.

I am of opinion, in the first place, That there is not any necessity of my
telling you, that Religion was neither the cause, nor the pretense, of the
disturbances, revolutions, and seditions of the Low Countries; and that it was
not upon that score, that the People of several Provinces, after they had
carried on the War against their Prince, for many years, resolved at last to
degrade him, and to shake off the yoke of his Dominion over them.

The great Lords of the Country, as the Prince of Orange, the Count of Egmont,
and Count Horn, were extremely exasperated, to see, that Cardinal de
Granvelle, a Forreigner, and a person of very obscure Parentage, had the
management of all things, and was the supreme Arbitrator of all Affairs; and to
think, that they themselves had not any authority in the Government. They
maintained in the mean time, That the said authority belonged to them, of
Right, upon the score of their merit, that of their birth, that of the great
Estates they were possessed of, and that of the Services they had done the
State.

The Ecclesiastical party were most highly disgusted, upon this account, That
their Abbeys, their Priories and their Benefices were to be abolished, for the
Raising of a Revenue for the new Bishoprics, which had been erected; as also
for that they had set over them certain Persons, who devoured their annual
profits, and who censured their Conduct, and their Manners. To which they added
another grievance, That, according to the decisions of the most learned Lawyers
of the Country, it was an impi^ty, to convert the Goods of Ecclesiastical
Persons to any other Use, than that whereto they had been designed, by the
Wills of those, who had made the donations of them.

The Magistrates of Cities and Corporations made their Complaint, That they had
denied audience to the States, who had desired a free Assembly, that there
might be a common consultation, about the remedy, most likely to promote the
remedying of their grievances; and that there had been new and insupportable
impositions laid upon them, not only without the Consent of the Estates, but
also in spite of their opposition.

The ordinary People loudly declared, That the King of Spain would have
abolished the ancient form of their Government, to the subversion of their
Laws and Customs, that he might thereby introduce a Tyrannical dominion, like
that which he made Use of, for the Government of some Kingdoms of Spain, that
of Naples, and the Indies. In a word, the Grandees, the Ecclesiastics, the
Magistracy, and the common sort of People, had all a particular occasion of
discontent; but they had also one which was common to them all. Above all
things they had an extreme horror for the Inquisition, which had been
established amongst them; out of a Fear, that under pretense of Religion, some
design might be carried on, against the Liberties and Estates of all. It was
for the same reason, that the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Naples, and of the
Duchy of Milan, would not endure the establishment of the Inquisition amongst
them, though neither of those two Countries ever had any design, to desert the
doctrine and Worship of the Roman Catholic Religion.

Most part of the Inhabitants of the Low Countries were, at the beginning,
strongly inclined to the profession of the ancient Religion; and yet they could
not endure, that any man should be put to death, upon the score of any Religion
whatsoever. And though that cruelty gave them not any occasion of Fear for
themselves, yet did it however raise in them a compassion for their
fellow-Citizens. However it were, whether out of pity to others, or by way of
precaution for themselves, those People, who were extremely jealous of their
liberty, and for the conservation of their Laws and Customs, which, at best,
are but Temporal things, contributory to the conveniences of the present life,
could yet much less endure to be deprived of the Spiritual things, which rela^e
to the service of God, and eternal Salvation.

In the year 1566. The greatest Lords of the Country, and several Gentlemen,
considerable upon the score of their extraction, of whom most were Catholics,
entered into an Alliance, for the preservation of their municipal Laws, and for
the abrogation of the sanguinary Edicts which had been made for the
Establishment of the Inquisition. In pursuance of this first Treaty of union,
was it, that they presented to Margaret, then Governess of the Law-Countries,
that famous Petition, which occasioned the first insurrections, and which
procured them the denomination of Beggars, which was then given them, and which
they could not get off for a long time: After the Treaty of Gaunt, all the
Catholic Provinces, save only that of Luxemburg, entered into an Alliance with
those which were already confederated, for the security of their Laws, their
Privileges, and their Liberty. The Alliance of Union, and Arms, which they had
contracted, against the Spaniards, was immediately published in Brussels, and
confirmed by the solemn Oaths of the Clergy, the Nobility, the Gentry, the
People, and of the Senate it self.

In the year 1578. The Estates, as well of the Roman Catholic Religion, as of
the Reformed Persuasion, being assembled at the Hague, did unanimously declare,
That King Philip was divested of the Principality of the Low Countries.

In the year 1579. The Estates being assembled at Vtrecht, made a new Union,
from which they took the name of the United Provinces. And in the 13 th Article
of that Treaty, it is expressly ordered, That every man shall be allowed the
liberty of Religion, without any trouble of persecution to any one, upon that
occasion.

All these Treaties of Alliance, which the Provinces, as well Catholic, as
Protestant, had made together, for their mutual defense against the Spaniards,
make it evidently appear, That the design of Establishing a new Religion was
neither the ground nor motive thereof. Prince William himself, in his
Declarations and Apologies, did always openly protest, as did also the States
in theirs, That they had not taken up arms for Religion, and that the
Provinces had not united, in order to the profession of any one particular
Religion. So far was it from this, that it is certain, all the Treaties, as
that of Gaunt, and the Union of Vtrecht, all the Declarations of the Archduke
Matthias, and of the Duke of Anjou, do loudly establish the free Exercise of
all Religions, and in express terms, forbid the Disturbing and Persecuting of
any man upon that occasion.

In the mean time, though they had not, at the beginning, any reflection by way
of conscientious motive, for the having of any one public Religion, yet could
they not forbear establishing it afterward, out of a pure interest of State.
The Inhabitants of the Low-Countri^^ having then* in a manner quite shaken off
the yoke of Obedience to the Magistrates, that juncture of time seemed
wonderfully fit for the Establishment of new Religions. About thirty or forty
years before, men had seen budding out afresh, in Germany* the opinions of John
Hus; in England, those of Wickliff, and in France, those of the Waldenses. All
these different doctrines were much about the same time spread up and down
amongst the Belgians. The Prince of Orange having got out of Germany and
France, some of the Disciples of Luther, and Calvin, where their Religions were
already established, ordered them to Preach in the Low Countries, by the means
of those new Doctors. But he himself persisted in a public profession of the
Roman Religion, and was unwilling, in the Principality of Oran^e, to permit the
Exercise of our Reformed Religion, which was otherwise well established in
France. But as he had his Prospects at a great distance, he either underhand,
or openly, when he thought it most convenient, countenanc^d, or connived at all
the Assemblies which the People made, for the Exercise of all the New
Religions, which were of no long Standing in the World. By this m^ans did he
make account to gain the Affections of the People, and, at one time or other,
to make his advantage of those different R^ligions, for the execution of his
great Designs. He knew that all those new Christians, whom he protected in the
Exercise of Religions, were so many Creatures, whom he made sure to his Party,
by an inviolable Bond; and as many irreconcilable Enemies to Philip, who was
the cruel Persecutor of all those upstart Professors of Religion.

In the mean time, Prince William, who had all this while conconceal'd his
Sentiments for Religion, took a very convenient opportunity, to lay by the
Roman Catholic persuasion, which he had till then professed, and to embrace
that of the Protestants. He was in Germany, at his Brothers, the Count of
Nassaw, and had been forced by the Entreaties of many of his Relations, and
some Friends, banish^d out of the Low Countries, to try an expedition, to
endeavor the deliverance of their Country from the oppression wherein it was,
and to set it at liberty. When therefore he saw, that he stood in need of the
assistance of the Protestants, for the getting of an Army together, he thought
it a fit time to cast off the Mask, and to publish, by his M^nifesto, That he
had deserted the Roman Church, to follow a better Religion. He had also in his
Eye this considerable advantage, That by the Settlement of a Religion different
from the Roman, he rendered the reconciliation between the Provinces and the
King of Spain, more difficult, or indeed impossible. He had observed, that some
of the Catholic Provinces had devia^ed from the Alliance of Gaunt, and put
themselves under the obedience of Philip; and he saw, that the Catholics of
the Confed^rated Provinces would rather have inclined him to reassume the yoke
of their ancient domination. It was his Fear, and with reason, That when the
dispute should be only about the Privileges, the Laws, and the Customs, and in
a word, things of a temporal Concern, King Philip coming to satisfy his
Subjects, or the Subjects to recede from their Rights for the obtaining of a
Peace, it would be no hard matter to see those people reconciled to their
Prince. Whereas, on the other side, having disposed the confederated Provinces,
to embrace a new Religion, he thereby put an insurmountable obstruction to
their reunion with Philip. He knew that That Prince, who with an implacable
fury persecuted all those who had renounced the ancient Religion, would resolve
rather to lose the Low Countries, than to grant his Subjects the free Exercise
of a new Religion. There had been a Report spread about, that presently upon
his Return into Spain, after he had ordered the Condemnation of some men
eminent for their Learn^ng, and women illustrious for their birth, to be burnt;
he would himself be present at so cruel an execution; and was a spectator of
it, as if it had been a delightful Show.

Many persons therefore, amongst the Inhabitants of the Low Countries, having
embraced the new Religions, the Prince of Orange engaged them by the Bond of
Conscience, and by the Despair or Pardon, to maintain the Change he had made,
that so they might not relapse under the power of their ancient Master. Happy
was it, for the prosecution of his design, that he had made this advantage of
that Liberty of Conscience, which he had given to all sorts of persons; but
perceiving withal, that that unbounded Liberty, without the establishment, and
preference, of some one Religion, occasioned a great confusion in the
Government, he thought it necessary to make choice of one, which should be the
pub^ick, and predominant Religion, and the Religion of State. Yet had he not as
yet absolutely pitched upon what he intended, nor determined which Religion he
ought to embrace; whether that of the Lutherans, that of the Calvinists, or
that of the Anabaptists; all those three Religions not making any
acknowledgment of the Popes Authority, or the jurisdiction of the Roman Church.
But he had afterward some reasons, which obliged him to determine upon the
choice of one, as well for his own private Concern, as for that of the State.
The Sect of the Anabaptists was the least considerable upon all accounts, and
was not much to be feared, as well by reason of the divisions wherewith it was
shaken, as by reason of its Sectators, who, for the most part, were persons of
a very obscure condition, and of their Sentiments, by which they are not
admitted to Magistracy, or the Use of Arms. For which reason, the Prince of
Orange could not make any Use of them, as being not proper for his Design. He
aspired to the principal charge of the State; and that Religion permitted not
its Disciples to exercise any kind of Magistracy. He needed the assistance of
Arms, to maintain and make good the Change he had made in the State, and the
new form of Government which he had established; and the Anabaptists would not
have Arms used upon any occasion.

The Lutheran Religion was very considerable, by reason of the affection and
Support of several Princes of Germany, who had embraced it, and highly
protected those who made profession thereof. Prince William had more
inclination for that Religion, in which he ha^ been instructed from his
Infancy, and he might very well hope for assistance and protection from the
Electoral House of Saxony, of which he had Married a Daughter, to his Second
Wife. But on the other side, he hoped for more considerable assistances from
the Princes who made profession of our Reformed way of Religion. That which
Queen Elizabeth had Established in England, was wholly conformable to ours, as
to the Doctrine, and differed from it, only as to the Form of Government, and
the Use of Ceremonies. The Elector-Palatine, who was then the most powerful
Prince of the Empire, did absolutely profess the same Religion. The King of
Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral Castillon, and a considerable
number of the Lords and Gentlemen, and a numerous people of France, made a
public profession of it. The Prince of Orange therefore, hoping to engage all
those Princes, by the interest of one and the same Religion, to give him
powerful assistances, for the corroboration of the new Republic, thought fit
to make choice of that Religion for himself, and the State. Besides, as that
Religion was more contrary to that of the Romish Church, than the Lutheran, so
he thought it more fit for the Commonwealth, which he had founded, out of an
aversion to the Tyrannical Domination of Spain. The Inhabitants of the
Low Countries having a strong aversion for the Spaniards, the Prince of Orange
endeavored to persuade them, That there was no likelihood, that a people so
corrupted, should have received directions from God, to serve him purely, by
the Worship of the true Religion. He afterward endeavored to insinuate to
them, That our Reformed Religion, which was more different from theirs, was,
doubtless the best, and most acceptable to God.

There comes into my mind, upon this occasion, what I have Read in the History
of the Indies, That they could not by any means dispose a great number of
persons of that Country, to be converted to the Christian Religion, because the
Spaniards made a profession of it. For, as those poor people had seen them
commit such Cruelties, as they had never seen any example of before, so they
had a horror for their Religion, upon a supposition that it inspired them with
such barbarous Sentiments. They could not be moved with the hope of Celestial
Felicity, after they had been told, that the Spaniards, together with all good
Christians, would have their abode in that happy place. They saw no charms in
the Glories of Paradise, since they were to be partakers of them with a Nation
so barbarous; and they could not believe, that the Felicity, which they put
them in hopes of, could secure them from the persecution of so inhumane a
people. In a word, they could not be induced to embrace a Religion, which was
to conduct them, after their death, to live eternally in the company of a
people, which, according to their Sentiment, was the most wicked of any upon
Earth.

The Duke of Alva having exercised, in the Low Countries, as strange Cruelties,
as those of his Country had done in the Indies, the Inhabitants of Flanders and
no less an aversion for the Spaniards, then the Indians. And as all the
rigorous punishments, which had been inflicted upon the people of the
Low Countries, were imputed to the Roman Catholic Religion; so the Prince of
Orange did cunningly make use of that prejudgment, to induce them to embrace a
Religion, contrary to that of the Spaniards, which had made them endure so many
Calamities.

It was in the Year 1572. that that Religion, which was received in your
Protestant-Cantons, at Geneva, in the Palatinate of Germany, and in the
Churches of France, was established in the Confederated Provinces, for the only
public Religion. And yet they put a difference in it, which you will think
very considerable, if you consult the Sentiments of your first Reformers, those
of the Doctors who were their Successors, and the constant practice of your
Protestant-Cantons, and of all the Estates of the Reformed Religion. For you
know, that in all the Countries, where those of our Religion are the Masters,
they do not suffer the exercise of any other Religion, nor allow, in all their
Territories, a place of habitation, to those who profess a different one;
whereas the United Provinces did not only permit the exercise of all sorts of
Religions, but did also reject as Tyrannical, all the Laws, whereby there was
any prescription made for Uniformity of Sentiments, upon that occasion,
attributing to them the name of Inquisition, so odious amongst them.

And this Liberty of Conscience, was, as I have already observed, Established,
not only by the Writings of the Prince of Orange, by the Peace of Gaunt, by the
public and particular agreement, which was made for Religion, under the
Regency of the Archduke Matthias; by the Union of Vtretcht; and by several
Treaties which have been made with the Cities of the Country. If I mistake not,
methinks it may be affirmed, that the Confederated Provinces were of our
Reformed Religion in particular, while the, Liberty of Conscience was
Established for all sorts of Persons, and the exercise of all Religions was
publicly permitted; and it was so till the Year 1583. All the Regulations
which the States General have made afterward for Religion, and the Conduct
they have been guided by, in reference to that, are so far from proving them to
be of our Religion, that they make it evidently appear, that they never were,
nor are not at all of it. And this, Sir, is what I design to justify to you in
the first Letter, which I shall write to you upon this Subject. This is long
enough; and if I am weary of Writing, you possibly may be more weary of Reading
what I have Written. Let us then repose a while. It will not be long e're you
hear from me again; mean time, be assured, that I am,

Reverend Sir, Your most humble, etc.
Vtretcht, May 4 th. 1673.
The Second LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
IF you have seriously reflected on what I have written in my first Letter, I
conceive you will readily make this acknowledgment, That the United Provinces
were not of the Reformed Religion, as long as there was not any such
Established by any public Decree; and that all the Sectaries had as much
liberty there, as those of the Reformed Persuasion. I know well enough, that
that Liberty of Conscience, which had been Established by so many Treaties, and
by so many public Acts, was absolutely forbidden, by the Regulation which the
States General made in the Year 1583. Take here, in express terms, what it
contains.

Since there has been a permission granted, by the Union of Utrecht, to
amplify, to abridge, and change, some Articles, when ever the welfare and
security of the Provinces should seem to require it, the States, attentively
considering the XIII. Article, have unanimously ordained, and appointed, That
the exercise of any Religion shall not be henceforward received, other then
that which is publicly taught in the United Provinces, which is the Reformed
Religion. With this proviso however, That if any Provinces, Members, or Cities
of the Popish Religion shall be willing to enter into this Alliance, they shall
be continued in the freedom of their Religion, conditionally, that they sign
and subscribe the other Articles of this Alliance.

To render this Ordinance of no effect, I might tell you, what was alleged, as
soon as ever it was past, by the Catholics, and all those who were not of our
Reformed Religion. Their complaint was, That it had been made, contrary to all
manner of Justice and Reason, contrary to the Stipulated Faith of all the
Treaties, which the Inhabitants of the same Provinces had made, and of those
which the Provinces had made mutually one with an other. They maintained, That,
having united themselves together, for the preservation of the Laws and
Privileges of the Country, it was a great injustice, to make an Establishment
of one single Religion, to be the public Religion, and to deprive the others
of the exercise of theirs, and not to allow them any part in the Government of
the State.

But, above all others, the Catholics thought it very strange, that they,
having taken up Arms against the Spaniards, only for the defense of their
Liberty, should not be allowed the free exercise of their ancient Religion, as
if they had spent all their labor, only to deprive themselves thereof, and to
acquire Liberty of Conscience for others, and to make the Reformed Religion the
most predominant, and to raise that only into the Throne. Nor did the followers
of the other Religions, think they had less cause, then the Catholics, to be
dissatisfied and disgusted, at that Ordinance, which took away the exercise and
absolute freedom of their Religion. They urged, That from the time of their
first intertexture of the interest of Religion, with that of the State, in the
contest which they had with the Spaniards, Liberty of Conscience had been
Established by so many public Decrees, that they could not be violated,
without extremity of injustice.

The Prince of Orange, without concerning himself much at the complaints of the
one or the other of the aggrieved Parties, did, for his own private interest,
and for that of the Republic, prosecute his design of making an Establishment
of our Reformed Religion, to be the only Public Religion, of which all those,
who should pretend to any concern in the Administration of the Government, were
obliged to make their profession. He had a jealousy of the Catholics, upon
the score of his being afraid, that they might employ their credit, to dispose
the people to resettle themselves under the domination of the Spaniards. Nor
had he any greater liking to the adherents of the other Religions, by reason of
their being odious to all the rest of the Protestants. As therefore those who
professed our Reformed Religion were the best-affected to him, so he thought it
convenient, to entrust them with all the Authority, for the management of
public Affairs.

Now, Reverend Sir, be your self pleased to judge, whether these Provinces
deserve to be called of the Reformed Religion, for this reason, that, out of
pure interest of State, and without any Justice, they have made an Ordinance
for the Establishment of one single Religion, exclusively to all the rest?

But supposing I should grant, that whatever is alleged by the Catholics, and
the Sectaries, against that Ordinance, is groundless, and irrational, and that
they had the justest Reasons in the World to make it; yet I maintain, that the
bare making of it is not a sufficient inducement, for any one to affirm, that
this State is of the Reformed Religion. I cannot forbear acknowledging, that
this Ordinance does so expressly comprehend the sentiment of all our Doctors,
that if the United Provinces had been as careful in the execution of it, as the
Elector-Palatine, your Protestant-Cantons, and the City of Geneva are, it could
not be denied, but that their State really and truly is of our Reformed
Religion. But I think, Sir, that you do know, and if you do not know it, I
shall make it so clearly appear to you, that you shall not in the least doubt
of it, That this Ordinance has been so far from being put into execution, that
they have always practiced, and still do practice, what is directly contrary to
the Contents thereof.

By this Ordinance, there is an express prohibition of allowing any other
Religion then the Reformed, in the Provinces; and yet we there find the public
exercise of many other Religions, besides the Reformed, not to say of all those
who were desirous to have it. And that you may not doubt of it, I shall here
give you a short Catalogue of the Religions in that Country, which have an
uncontrollable liberty of celebrating their Mysteries, and serving God, as they
themselves think fit.

Be pleased then to know, that besides those of the Reformed Religion, there
are Roman Catholics, Lutherans, Brownists, Independents, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Socinians, Arrians, Enthusiasts, Quakers, Borrelists, Armenians,
Muscovites, Libertines, and others. And there are in fine some whom we may call
Seekers, because they are still seeking out for a Religion, and do not profess
any of those which are already Established. I give you no account of the Jews,
the Turks, and the Persians, in regard that, as they are not Sects o
Christians, so what I might say of them would signify nothing to the subject I
have in hand. And since I am well satisfied, that there are not any Turks and
Persians, but what are in Amsterdam, or happily in some other Sea-Port-Towns,
there is no consequence deducible thence, for the Residence of any such in the
other Cities of that Country. Nor shall I say any thing of the Armenians and
Muscovites, who are all of the Greek Religion. And as I conceive, that there
are only some Merchants of the one, and of the other of those Nations, and that
none of the Natives of the Country do profess their Religion; so I do not think
there is any person, that will condemn the liberty which is given them, to
serve God, according to the Ceremonies and Precepts of their Religion. And
whereas, of all the other Religions, and Sects, we find a great number of
persons, born in that Country, who make an open and public profession thereof,
I conceive you will not take it amiss, that I should here in few words, give
you an account of the Opinions, of all the Religions, which are in this Country.

As to the Doctors and Professors of our Religion, I question not but you know,
that they also differ amongst themselves, in many things. Voetius, and des
Marets have, by their disputes, distracted and dishumour'd all the Province of
Holland, where they have been so violent, one against the other, that if men
would believe either the one, or the other, they must, upon pain of Damnation,
stick to the sentiment of the one, and reject that of his Adversary. Voetius
did, and still does maintain, That it is Sacrilege, to leave the
Ecclesiastical Revenues at the disposal of Slothful Paunches, which are not any
way serviceable to Church or State; That those who are known by the name of
Lombards, are not to be called, or admitted to the Lord's Supper, inasmuch as,
lending out Money at Interest, they exercise a profession forbidden by the word
of God; That the Sabbath Day is to be very carefully and Religiously observed;
That we ought not to Celebrate any Festival-Day, no not Easter, Whitsuntide, or
Christmas; That when we speak of the Apostles, Evangelists, or Disciples of
Jesus Christ, we are not to give any one the name of Saint, and that we are not
to say, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint John, Saint Thomas, but to say
downright, Peter, Paul, John, and Thomas; and that all the Faithful ought to
follow a severe kind of life, to retrench themselves from the greatest part
even of the most innocent enjoyments of life, that they may the better work out
their Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

On the other side, des Marets is opposite to Voetius, almost in all these
things, and has argued against his Sentiments, with so much Animosity, as if
their Dispute had been about those points of Religion which are most important,
and most necessary to Salvation. And I think they had not yet ended their
Dispute, if Cocceius had not published some Opinions, which were displeasing to
both; upon which they thought fit to agree together, in order to the opposing
of them.

This Cocceius was a Professor of the University of Leiden, very well skilled
in the Hebrew Tongue, who read the Scripture with a continual attention, and
has therein discovered many things, which were not before known to any one, and
has penetrated into the mystical and profound Sense of it. In all the
Prophecies of the Old and New Testament, he almost every where finds the Reign
of Christ, and that of Antichrist, which is opposite thereto. He has disposed
the economy of the Old and New Testament after a way not known before, and
such as had not yet been Established by any Doctor. He is the first that has
discovered, and taught, the difference there is, between the Government of the
Church before the Law, and that under the Law, and that after the Law. He
affirms, That before the Law, the Promise took place; during which time of the
Promise, the Church was free. That to the Promise, God had added the Law,
which, having been at first represented in the Decalogue, contains only an
abridgment of the Covenant of Grace, and the Commandments of Faith, Repentance,
and the Gratitude we owe to God; as it appears by the sense of the Preface, and
of all the Commandments in particular. He adds, That after the worshipping of
the Golden Calf, God, to Chastize his people for the Idolatry, which they had
committed, had given them a Law, consisting of Ceremonial and Carnal
Commandments, which were not good; having imposed upon them a Yoke, by the
Establishment of his Ordinances and Ceremonies. Whence it comes, that the Law
had been made, in appearance, a Covenant of Works, promising life to those, who
should obey his Commandments, and denouncing malediction and death against
those, who should transgress them.

It is also another persuasion of his, That the Commandment concerning the
observation of the Sabbath Day, was one of those Ceremonial and Carnal
Commandments, which have been abrogated by Jesus Christ. During all the time
before Jesus Christ had paid the Father the price of our Redemption, he
affirms, That all the Faithful were saved, by the Security which Jesus Christ
had given for us; That the forgiving of Sins did not take place, otherwise than
by a connivance of Grace, in as much as They were only under the Promise; the
payment, or satisfaction, having not been yet made by Jesus Christ. That the
Law being added, as an obligation, did reproach the People with their sins, and
put them into a mindfulness thereof by the Sacrifices; and that it is upon that
score that the Ancient people were under servitude, and in fear of death, till
such time as Jesus Christ, having, by his Blood, paid the Ransom of our Sins,
the Obligation, which was in force against them, being cancelled, we have fully
and perfectly obtained the pardon of our sins. He is of Opinion, in fine, That
there is to spring up in the World a Reign of Jesus Christ, which will abolish
the reign of Antichrist; and that, when they who shall have corrupted the Earth
shall be destroyed, the Church shall be in a happy condition in the World; And
when there shall be a restoration of the Reign of Jesus Christ, before the End
of the World; and that after the Conversion of the Jews, and of all Nations,
the Catholic Church shall scatter the rays of its meridian light and glory,
into all Parts of the World. He believes Her to be the Celestial Jerusalem,
which is described in the Revelation, the Emblem whereof represents to us the
condition of the Church, such as she ought to be in her greatest Splendor upon
Earth, and not that which is to triumph in Heaven.

I thought my self obliged to give you an account of the particular Sentiments
of this Divine, because he has a great number of followers; as also for this
Reason, That Voetius and des Marets condemn his Opinions as Heretical; nay
indeed represent him as a Socinian, in many things. They affirm, That he is an
Innovator, and give him the title of Scripturarius; as if it were a great
crime, to be closely addicted to the Scripture, and to make it the most
important of our Studies. There are many other Divines, especially such as have
studied under the Professors, whom I have before named, who obstinately oppose
his Sentiments, and endeavor to persecute, and to procure the condemnation of
all his Disciples.

It is not requisite that I should give you any account of the Roman
Catholics, it being notorious to all the World, what their Sentiments are.

You know also, what the Opinions of the Lutherans are. The famous Confession
which they made at Ausbourg, in the Year 1530, has made a sufficient discovery
of them to all the World. True it is, that most of their Doctors have Opinions
very different from their first Confession. They are divided amongst
themselves, upon the score of very disconsonant Sentiments. But as that
diversity is found only in those of them who are in Germany, I shall say
nothing of it. They who are in this Country, keep closely enough to the
Sentiment of their first Doctor. Only observe here, in what they differ from
those who are in Germany, Denmark, and Sweden. They do not use Auricular
Confession; They have neither Images, nor Altars, in their Churches; Their
Ministers wear no Sacerdotal habits; They have not the several Orders of
Priests, Deacons, Archdeacons, and Superintendents, or Bishops, as they have
in most other Parts.

The Arminians took their denomination from Arminius, their first Doctor, who
was a famous Professor in the University of Leyden. They would rather be called
Remonstrants, by reason of the Book, which they presented to the
States General, in the Year 1611. to which they had given the Title of
Remonstrance, and which comprehended the principal Articles of their Belief.
You know the Five remarkable Points, upon which they were condemned by the
Synod of Dort, held in the Year 1618, in which were present some Divines of
your Cantons, as also out of several Countries professing the Reformed
Religion, as England, Germany, and other plac^s. After the death of Arminius,
and in the time of Vorstius, and of Episcopius, a most Eminent Doctor amongst
them, they adopted many Errors of the Socinians. Nay most of them have
deserted the Opinion of their first Master, upon the Point of Predestination,
and Eternal Election. Arminius had taught, That God had Elected the Faithful,
by the prevision of their Faith. And Episcopius is of Opinion, That God has not
Elected any one from all Eternity, but that he does Elect the Faithful, in
time, when they actually Believe. He speaks only in very doubtful and ambiguous
terms of the Prescience of God, which was the great Fortress, in which Arminius
secured himself. These same Arminians of the present time believe, That the
Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons, in One only Essence, is not necessary to
Salvation; That there is not any Precept in the Scripture, by which we are
commanded to adore the Holy Ghost; nor any Example, or Indication, by which it
appears, that the Holy Ghost has been adored; That Jesus Christ is not a God
equal to the Father; That Faith in Jesus Christ, by which we are saved, has
not been commanded, nor took any place under the Old Covenant. Most of them do
make it their study to avoid that Expression of the Satisfaction of Jesus
Christ. Episcopius, in the mean time affirms, That Jesus Christ has, by his
Passion and Death, so far satisfied God, as to render him Propitious to all
Mankind, and ready, henceforwards, to receive all men into his Communion;
provided they, by Faith, embrace that Propitiation of Jesus Christ; So that God
being no longer displeased, there is no Enmity remaining, but what proceeds
from Men, refusing to entertain the grace of Jesus Christ. They very earnestly
press the Toleration of all the Opinions of those who profess Christian
Religion; maintaining, That all Christians agree in the most Important, and,
such as they call, the most Essential and Fundamental Points of Religion; That
it has not been hitherto decided, by an Infallible Judgment, who they are
amongst the Christians, who have embraced the Truest and Purest Religion, and
such as is most conformable to the Word of God; That to the effect all may be
mutually united, to make up one and the same Body or Church, and that they
ought to love one another as Brethren, and not to have any enmity or animosity
one against another, upon the score of their dissenting in some Points of
Religion, especially such as are not of the most considerable. That men ought
not to force any one to condemn, and renounce his own Sentiments, or to approve
and follow those of another. They say, That heretofore amongst the Jews, the
Pharisees, the Sadduces, and the Esseni, of whom the Sects were very different,
and had most dangerous Opinions, were however tolerated by the Jews, and all
received into the Temple, to present their Sacrifices and Prayers to God, and
to perform all the other Functions of Religion. If Arminius were to come into
the World again, certainly, he would not own most of those who bear his Name,
to be his Disciples. And yet there are some amongst them, who have not added
any thing to his Sentiments. But they all agree in this point, That all
Christians ought to be Tolerated; either that all-together they might make up
but one and the same Church, or that every one may be allowed the liberty of
his Religion.

The Brownists have many great Assemblies in the Low Countries. They are a sort
of people separated from the English Church, and from all the other Reformed
Churches, which they think to be corrupted, not as to the Doctrinal Points of
Faith, concurring in that respect, with those of the Reformed Religion of
Holland, Germany, and other places, but as to the Form of Government. They
equally condemn Episcopal Government, and that of the Presbyterians, by
Consistories, Classes, and Synods. They will not join with our Churches, for
this reason, as they say, that they are not assured of the Conversion, and
Probity of the Members, whereof they consist, because they therein suffer
Sinners, with whom men ought not to communicate; and that in the participation
of the Sacraments, the good contract impurity in the Communion of the wicked.
They condemn the benediction of the Marriages, which are celebrated in Churches
by the Ministers, maintaining, That, being a Political Contract, the
confirmation of it depends on the Civil Magistrate. They would not have their
Children to be baptized, who are not Members of the Church, or are not as
careful, as they ought to be, of the Children that have been baptized. They
reject all Forms of Prayers; nay they affirm, That the Prayer, which our Lord
has taught us, ought not to be recited as a Prayer, but that it was given us to
be the Rule and Model, by which we ought to frame all those, which we present
to God. They reject the Use of Bells, and Churches, especially such as they say
had been Consecrated to Idolatry.

The Independents are a brood of the Brownists. John Robinson, an English man,
is the Father of all those who are in this Country. They believe, That every
Church, or, as they call it, every particular Congregation, has in it self,
radically, and essentially, whatever is for its conduct and government, and all
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction. That such a Church, or Congregation, is
not subject either to one, or more Churches, or to their Deputies, or
Assemblies, or Synods, or to any Bishop; Or that any one Church, or Assembly
has any power over any other Church whatsoever. That every particular Church
ought to manage its own affairs, without any dependence on any other; and hence
it comes, that such as follow these S^ntiments, have the denomination of
Independents. And though they do not think there is any necessity of assembling
Synods, yet they affirm, That if any be assembled, there ought to be a
consideration of their resolutions, as of the counsels of wise and prudent men,
whereto a certain submission is due; and not as definitions, and
establishments, requiring conformity and obedience. They are willing to
acknowledge, that one or more Churches may be assistant to another Church, as
to advice, and admonition; nay that they may reprove it, if there be any
offense; yet not upon the account of any superior authority, which has any
power of Excommunication, but as a Sister-Church, declaring, That she cannot
have any communion with such a Church as has offended, and does not demean her
self, according to the Rules and Commandments of Jesus Christ.

And these are the Particular Sentiments of the Independents, in reference to
the Government of the Church. Their very Name had rendered them very odious
even to the Protestants; but the Confession of Faith, which their Brethren of
England published, when they assembled at London, in the Year 1651. has made it
appear, That they have not otherwise any particular sentiment, as to matter of
Doctrine, but that in reference to that, they concur in all things with those
of the Reformed Religion. I have hitherto given you an account of but Three or
Four different Religions, or rather Persuasions; but this Letter being come to
a considerable Length, I will adjourn what I have to say of the other Sects of
this Country, to the next opportunity I shall have to write to you, remaining,
in the mean time,

Reverend S^r, Your most humble, etc.

The Third LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
I Am now, according to my promise, to give you an account of all the different
Sects, or Religions, which are in this Country. They, who, in other places are
called Anabaptists, are known, in these Provinces, by the denomination of
Mennonites, and have derived that Name from Menno, a Man born at a Village of
Friezland, in the Year 1496. Not that the said Menno was the first Father of
the Anabaptists in this Country; but that he, having rejected the Enthusiasmes
and Revelations of the Primitive Anabaptists, and their Opinions concerning the
new Reign of Jesus Christ, which they pretended to establish upon Earth by
force of Arms, has broached certain new doctrines, which his Followers have
embraced, and persisted in to this day.

Their Tenets are these; That the New Testament only, and not the Old, ought to
be the Rule of our Faith.

That in speaking of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, there is no
necessity of using the terms of Persons, or the Trinity.

That the first Productions of the Creation, as to Mankind, were not created in
a state of Justice and Holiness.

That there is no such thing as Original Sin.

That Jesus Christ did not take Flesh of the substance of his Mother, Mary, but
of the Essence of the Father; or that the Word was changed into Man, or that he
brought it from Heaven, or that it is not known whence he took it.

That the Union of the Divine Nature with the Humane, in Jesus Christ, was so
made, that the Divine Nature was rendered visible, subject to Suffering, and
death.

That it is not lawful for Christians to swear, to exercise any charge of Civil
Magistracy, or to make Use of the Sword, not even to punish the wicked, or to
oppose force with force, or to engage in a War, upon any account, or occasion.

That a man may, in this life, come to that pitch of Perfection, as to have an
accomplished Purity, and to be without any defilement of Sin.

That it is not lawful for the Ministers of the Word to receive any Salary of
their Churches, for the Pains they take.

That little Children ought not to be baptized.

That the Souls of men, after their death, rest in an unknown place, till the
day of Judgment.

These Mennonites are divided into several Sects, upon very slight occasions.
Of these Sects, there are two of a considerable standing, whereof one is that
of the ancient Mennonites of Flanders; The other, that of the Mennonites of
Friezland. Those of Flanders exercise Ecclesiastical discipline, with
extraordinary severity, and excommunicate those of their Sects, for very
trivial miscarriages. They are of a persuasion, That it is not lawful to eat,
or drink, or to have any communication, no, not as to the Concerns of a Civil
Life, with those who are Excommunicated. They, by that means, make a division
between Husbands, and their Wives; Children, and their Parents; maintaining,
That all the Obligations of Friendship and Society are to be cancelled with
those, whom the Church has anathematized.

Those of Friezland receive into their Communion such as have been rejected by
the other Sects of the Mennonites; and they exercise so great a relaxation in
their discipline, that they entertain all sorts of polluted persons into their
society; and for that reason are they called Borboritae, or Stereorarii. But as
there are, even amongst them, some more scrupulous than others, so they also
are parcell'd into diverse S^cts, upon very slight, and trivial occasions. I
shall only give an account of one, by which a judgment may be made of the rest.
There is one Sect of them called Mamillarii, upon this score, That a Young Man
had taken the freedom to put his hand into a Young Maids Bosom, whom he was
then courting, and, within a few days, to marry. Some amongst them maintained,
That he ought to be Excommunicated; and others condemning that severity, there
happ^n'd a Schism. They, who would not have the Young Man to be
Excommunicated, were called Mamillarii. There are daily divisions, and
separations amongst them; and as soon as they chance to be ejected out of one
Society, they find a reception in some other.

Many amongst the Mennonites have embraced most of the Opinions of the
Socinians, or rather those of the Arrians, concerning the Divinity of Jesus
Christ. They generally press that Toleration of all Sects, which is so
earnestly recommended by the Arminians. It is their persuasion, That they ought
not to expel* out of their assemblies, any man who leads a devout life, and
acknowledges, That the Holy Scripture is the Word of God, though the same Man
does not agree with the others, in many things which are accounted Articles of
Faith. These last are, by the others, called Galenists, taking their name form
one Galenus, a Physician of Amsterdam, a very Eloquent, Learned, and
well-Experienc'd Man and one who is charged to be an absolute Socinian.

The Socinians deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ, the Existence of the Holy
Ghost, Origina Sin, the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, the Resurrection of the
Reprobate, and the Reassumption of the same Bodies which the Faithful had,
during their abode in this World. Their publi^k Ass^mbli^s are forbidden, but
they lurk under the names of Arminians and Anabaptists. They have also their
secret Assemblies, in which they are very fervent in Prayer to God, with
groaning and weeping. They make it their Comp^a^nt, That they are odious to,
and abominated by most Christians, upon the score of the doctrine which they
profess. They affirm, That they have not Interest in the maintaining of it,
save only the P^rsuasion they have of its truth, and the zeal of appropriating
to its only individual, and Sovereign God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the glory of his Divinity. They are further of opinion, that having been
confirmed in their Faith by the reading of the Word of God, and by the Books
which have been written against them, they make it their earnest and humble
Suit to that great God, That, if they are in any error, he would discover it to
them, that they may renounce it, and give his Truth the glory. Their
conversation is holy and without reproach, as far as men can judge by what they
see; and that conversation is absolutely modeled according to the Precepts of
Jesus Christ; and it externally appears, that since they are not much concerned
for the things of this World, their care is the greater, to perform the works
of Devotion and Charity, and to promote the Salvation of their Souls. They
wholly employ themselves in the reading of the Word of God, in which they are
so well versed, that most of them seem to have it by heart. In the Assemblies
they make for their exercises of Piety, all that are present have the liberty
of speaking. One amongst them begins to read a Chapter of the Scripture; and
when he has read several Verses of it, till he has come to a full Paragraph, he
who reads, and they who hear, do respectively give their Sentiments, concerning
the sense of the words, which have been read to them. But what is most
surprising, is, that though the greatest part of them be illiterate, and men of
no study at all, as being Merchants, or Tradesmen, yet they all seem to have a
particular Talent, for the understanding, and exposition of the Holy Scripture.
Nay it is reported, that the Learned amongst them, who have written
Commentaries, or Annotations, upon the Holy Scripture, have every where done
very well, save only in those places, where their own prejudgments have engaged
them to accommodate the Scripture to their own Erroneous Sense. So that it may
be said of them, as I think I have heard it heretofore said, of Origin, Vbi
been, nemo melius, ubi male, nemo pejus; Where he had done well, no man could
have done better; and where he had done ill, no man could do worse.

Having given you this Summary account of the Socinians, my next work is to
give you that of the Arrians. Those last are very numerous in this Country, and
many amongst the Socinians have embraced their Opinions. You know what were the
Sentiments of the Arrians, concerning the Birth of Jesus Christ. They believed,
That the Word, the Intellect, and the Word of God, had had been created before
all the Creatures; That God had made Use of it, in the old Testament, as of an
Interpreter of a Mediator, when he had something to declare, to the Patriaerchs
and Prophets. That that word, had, by a voluntary annihilation, animated the
Body of Jesus Christ, as the Spirit of Man animates his Body, the Word having
taken Flesh only, without Soul, and without Spirit. Nay they were also of a
persuasion, That all the Souls of other men were Spirits, subsisting before the
Bodies, and that they assumed not the name of Souls, till such time as they
actually animated their Bodies. Christopher Sandius, a Gentleman of Poland, Son
to a Councellor of the Elector of Brandeburgh, was the Restaurator of the
Arrian Sect in this Country. His habitation, for some Years past, has been at
Amsterdam. Among other works, he has written two Books which I have seen,
whereof one is entitled, The Paradoxall Interpretations of the Four
Evangelists. The other is, An Ecclesiastical History, in which he proves, or
pretends to prove; That all the Doctors, commonly called the Fathers of the
Church, who flourished from the time of the Apostles, to that of Arrius, had
the same Sentiments as he had, concerning the Mystery of the Trinity.

The Borrellists had their name from one Borrell, the Ringleader of their Sect,
a man very Learned, especially in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues. He was
Brother to Monsieur Borrell, Ambassador from the States General, to his most
Christian Majesty. These Borrelists do, for the most part, maintain the
Opinions of the Mennonites, though they come not to their Assemblies. They have
made choice of a most austere kind of Life, spending a considerable part of
their Estates, in Almsgiving, and a careful discharge of all the Duties
incumbent upon a Christian. They have an aversion for all Churches, as also for
the Use of the Sacrament, public Prayers, and all other external Functions of
God's Service. They maintain, That all the Churches which are in the World, and
have been ever since the death of the Apostles, and their first subsequent
Successors, have degenerated from the pure Doctrine which they had Preached to
the World; for this reason, That they have suffered the infallible word of God,
contained in the Old and New Testament, to be expounded and corrupted, by
Doctors, who are not infallible, and would have their own Confessions, their
Catechisms, and their Liturgies, and their Sermons, which are the works of m^n,
to pass for what they really are not, to wit, for the pure word of God. They
hold also, That men are not to read any thing but the word of God alone,
without any additional explication of men. Another persuasion they have, is,
That if there should be any Assembly, wherein men would content themselves with
the bare reading of the word of God (however the persons who might be desirous
to be received into it, may demean themselves) provided they acknowledge the
Holy Scripture to be the Word of God, they ought to be received into its
Communion.

The Enthusiasts, or Quakers, who affirm, That what they say, or do, is by
Divine Inspiration, maintain, That the Holy Scripture ought to be explicated,
according to the light of that Divine Inspiration, without which it is but a
dead Letter, written to Children, and not to perfect and spiritual men; and
that it is not the true, only, and perfect Word of God, or the Complete and
Necessary Rule of Faith. They maintain, That their own private Spirit is the
true, internal, and spiritual Word of God, the Rule and the Judge of the
Scriptures: That men ought to hearken to, and follow that Spirit, and not the
words of the Scripture. That a man has, within himself, and in his own Spirit,
an infallible Teacher, who, if he hearkens to him, will inform him of all he is
to believe, or do, in orer to his Salvation. That they who hearken to that
Spirit are united to God, and that such union makes them Gods. When they are in
their Assemblies, they continue a long time in a sitting posture, without
speaking, and many times without so much as stirring, for the space of one or
two hours; and there is nothing heard of them, unless it be some sighs and
groans, till such time as some one among them, feeling the agitation and
stirring of the Spirit, rises up, and speaks the things which the Spirit
commands him to speak. Nay many times, the Women are sensible of those motions
of the Spirit, which occasion their speaking, or holding forth, in the
Congregation of their Brethren. In their ordinary discourses, they speak of
their Ecstasies, and Revelations, and will be always sure, to add very severe
censures of all other Christians. They very vehemently declaim against Vices,
and with great earnestness press the mortification of the Flesh. They challenge
all those who are in the Assembly, and conjure them to speak, if there be any
one that has ought to object against what the Spirit has inspired them to
deliver. And this occasions the frequent disputes and quarrels, which happen
amongst them. Nay it comes to pass sometimes, that after they have for a good
while expected the coming, and inspiration of the Spirit, not any one amongst
them being sensible of its heat and motion in himself, they depart from the
place where they were Assembled, without any one's having held forth.

As to the Libertines, they seem to have each of them his particular Sentiment
to himself. But most of them are of this persuasion, that there is only one
Spirit of God, which is universally diffused, and lives in all Creatures. That
the Substance and Immortality of our Souls, is not any thing but that Spirit of
God. That God himself is not any thing but that Spirit. That men's Souls die
with their Bodies. That Sin is not any thing. That it is but a simple opinion,
which immediately vanishes, provided there be no account made of it. That
Paradise is but an illusion, a pleasant Chimera, which the Divines have
invented, to engage men, to embrace that which they call Virtue. That Hell also
is but a vain Fancy, which the same Divines have framed, to divert men from
that which they call Sin; that is to say, to hinder them from being happy in
doing what they please. They affirm, in fine, That Religion is only an
invention of Politicians, to keep the people, by the fear of a Divinity, in a
subjection to their Laws, in order to the better Regulation and Government of
the Commonwealth.

In short, there are in this Country a vast number of persons, as I know there
were heretofore in England, who go under the denomination of Seekers. It is the
acknowledgment of these people, That there is one true Religion, which Jesus
Christ has brought us from Heaven, and which he has revealed to us in his Word;
but they maintain withal, That that true Religion of Jesus Christ, which we
ought to profess, in order to the attainment of Salvation, is not any one of
those Religions, which are Established amongst Christians. They have some
particular exception to make against every one of those Religions, and they
condemn them all in general. In a word, They have not pitched upon any one
determinate Religion, as being still concerned upon the Seeking account. They
read and meditate the Holy Scriptures with great attention. They pray to God
with a fervent Zeal, That he would illuminate them in the knowledge of that
Religion, which they ought to embrace, in order to the serving of him according
to his Will, and for the acquest of that everlasting Felicity, which he has
promised his Children.

I should not think, that I have given you an account of all the Religions and
Persuasions of this Country, if I should omit the saying of a word, or two, of
an Illustrious and Learned man, who, as I have be^n assured, has a great number
of Followers, and those, such as keep closely to his Sentiments. He is a man,
by birth a Jew, whose name is Spinosa, one that has not abjured the Religion of
the Jews* nor embraced the Christian Religion: So that he continues still a
most wicked Jew, and has not the least tincture of Christianity. Some Years
since he put forth a Book, entitled, Tractatus Theologo-Politicus, wherein his
principal design is, to destroy all Religions, and particularly the Jewish and
the Christian, and to introduce Atheism, Libertinisme, and the free Toleration
of all Religions. He maintains, That they were all invented, for the advantage
and conveniences, which the Public receives thereby, to the end that all
persons subject to Government may live honestly, and obey their Magistrates,
and that they may addict themselves to Virtue, not out of the hope or
expectation of any reward after death, but for the intrinsic excellency of
Virtue in it self, and for the advantages which accrue to those who follow it,
in this life. He do^s not, in that Book, make an open discovery of the opinion
which he has of the Divinity, but he does however so far insinuate it, as that
we may guess at his meaning, whereas in his Discourses, he boldly affirms, That
God is not a Being endowed with Intelligence, Infinitely-Perfect, and Blissful,
as we imagine him to be; but that he is not any thing else, but that Virtue of
Nature, which is diffused into all the Creatures.

This Spinosa is now living in this Country. His Residence was, for some time,
at the Hague, where he was visited by the Virtuosi, and all others who
pretended to more then ordinary Curiosity; nay by some young Ladies of Quality,
who pride themselves in being more ingenious* then is requisite for their Sex.
His followers are somewhat cautious in discovering themselves, because his
Book, beforementioned, does absolutely subvert the very Foundations of all
Religions, and has been condemned by a public Edict of the States General, and
a prohibition put upon the Sale of it; and yet it is publicly Sold. Amongst
all the Divines, of whom there is a great number in this Country, there has not
stood up any one, that has presumed to write against the opinions which this
Author advances in the aforesaid Treatise. And I am the more surpised
thereat, for this reason, that the Author, making a discovery of his great
knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, as also of all the Ceremonies of the Jewish
Religion, of all the Customs of the Jews, and of the Heathenish Philosophy; the
Divines of the Reformation cannot say, but that the Book does well deserve,
that they should take the pains to refute it. For if they still continue
silent, men cannot forbear affirming, that either they are defective in point
of Charity, in suffering so pernicious a Book to be scattered up and down
without any Answer thereto, or that they approve the Sentiments of that Author;
or that they have not the courage and abilities to oppose them.

And thus, Reverend Sir, have I given you an acccount of the different Sects of
Christians which are in this Country, and which have all, in a manner, the
freedom of Exercising the Religions which they profess. I leave you to make
thereupon what reflections you shall think fit. It will be no hard matter for
me, to deduce, from this diversity of Sects, such convincing Reasons, as shall
prove what I have before advanced, to wit, That the States General are not of
our Reformed Religion. In the first place, it cannot be affirmed, that this
State is of the Reformed Religion, upon the score of the number of those who
make profession of it. For, though it cannot be precisely known, what number
there are of persons professing the Calvinistical way of Reformation, which is
commonly called the Reformed Religion, in these Provinces, yet this is still
out of all question, That the number of those who are not of it, is
incomparably greater than that of those who do profess it. Having thereupon
consulted some of the Inhabitants, they have assured me, That there may be a
Tripartite Division made of the people of these Provinces, and that the three
parts may be something toward an equality. The one is of the Reformed
Religion; another, of the Roman Catholics; and the third, of the Sectaries. I
should never have thought, that the number of the Roman Catholics had been so
great. It is certain, that a considerable part of the Inhabitants of Great
Cities, and the greatest part of those of the Campaigne, and of the Boors of
that Country, are Roman Catholics; and there are assuredly at least as many of
those of the Reformed Religion. And if we put together all the Sectaries, they
also, doubtless, make up a third part of the Inhabitants of these Provinces. If
therefore the Domination, and the Denomination, ought to be deduced from the
greatest part, those of the Reformed Religion being, at most, but a third part
of the people of this Country, cannot give the whole State the Denomination of
being of the Reformed Religion. It cannot therefore be such, upon any other
account than this, that our Reformed Religion has been Established, and the
others forbidden, by the public Edict beforementioned. It might indeed be
granted, that it deserved that name, if that Ordinance had been put in
execution; but that having not been executed, the name cannot be justly given
it. But that being a matter requiring much discussion, I shall wave it at this
time, and make it the subject of my next to you; and so I shall make no
addition to this, save only that of assuring you of my being,

Reverend Sir, Your most humble, etc.
Vtrecht, May 7 th. 1673.
The Fourth LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
YOu have observed in my first Letter, That the States-Generall have always
given Liberty of Conscience to all sorts of persons, and allowed the public
exercise, in a manner, of all Religions. You thereby find, that they never
executed the Ordinance which they made in the Year 1583. to wit, That no any
Religion should be thenceforwards received, nor the exercise of any other be
permitted, then that which was publicly taught in the Seven Provinces, and
which is the Reformed Religion. It will be no hard matter for me to prove to
you thereby, That what external profession soever the United Provinces have
hitherto made of the Reformed Religion, if we search the business to the
bottom, it will appear, that they neither are, nor ever were of it.

While the free exercise of all Religions was permitted by all the public
Decrees, you will certainly acknowledge, That then the States were not yet of
our Reformed way of Religion. For if you make this conclusion, That these
Provinces were at that time of our Religion, because there was a public
profession of our Religion made in them, I shall, with the same reason, make
this, That they were Catholics, Lutherans, and Anabaptists, because, at that
time, there was a public Profession made in them of all those Religions. Let
us therefore examine, what Ordinances these Provinces made afterward, which
might give them the name, which they are so desirous to have, of our Reformed
Religion. I have told you heretofore, That it was in the Year 1572. that our
Reformed way of Religion, such as it was taught at Geneva, in your Cantons, and
in the Palatinate of the Rhine, was received in these Provinces, for the only
public Religion. But the very Ordinance, which established our Religion to be
the public Religion, Did also openly confirm the Liberty of Conscience of all
sorts of Religions, with an express prohibition, for the Disturbing or
Molesting of any Person whatsoever upon that account.

The difference there upon this Score, between the States General, and all the
other Estates of our Reformed Religion, was so great, that I cannot imagine you
should think the one and the others to be of the same Religion. The United
Provinces had ordained it by a public Decree, That the free Exercise of all
Rel^gions should be permitted. The Elector Palatine, the City of Geneva, and
your Cantons did not, in any part of their Territories, permit the Exercise of
any Religion, ever so little different from ours. I question not but that you
know, the Elector-Palatine did, at the beginning, follow the Confession of
Auxbourg, which was received in all his Dominions; and that, since that time,
having embraced our Reformed way of Religion, and having est^blish'd it in his
Country, he ordered all the Lutherans, who would not make profession thereof,
to depart out of it. It is doubtless, no small trouble to the Elector of
Brandenbourg, to see that most of his Subjects are Lutherans, that there are
many of them Catholics, and but very few of the Calvinistical reformed way of
Religion. But, as you know, it is not above sixty years since that Electoral
House began to make profession of our Reformed Religion, yet so, that he could
not oblige his Subjects, either his embrace the same, or to quit that which
they had professed for a long time before. John Sigismond, who died in the Year
1619. and was Grandfather to the Elector now reigning, was the first Renouncer
of the Lutherane Religion, which he and some of the Ancestors had till then
prof^ss'd, and first the Profession of our Reformed way. He published a
Confession of Faith, in the Year 1614. In the Preface of it, he says, That it
was about eighty Years, since Joakim, he Second, had renounced the Ceremonies
of the Roman Church; But that having retained a Doctr^ne upon the Point of the
Eucharist, which was not conformable to the Truth, and some other things in the
Temples, which were not allowable, he had applied, himself to the correcting of
all Abuses, in order to a full and perfect Reformation. And yet the greatest
part of his Subjects, having, near fourscore years before, embraced the
Lutherane Religion, he was so far from obliging them to quit it, and to embrace
the Profession of ours, that, in many parts of his Territories, nay even at
Berlin it self, which is the principal City of his Residence, he has not the
Liberty of having the particular Exercise of our Religion, for any but himself
and those of his Household. No doubt but he wishes that he could follow the
example of other Estates, who do profess it, in not permitting the Exercise of
any other in all his Dominions.

There is not any necessity of my telling you, That there never was, either at
Geneva, or in your Cantons, any permission, I do not say of the Exercise of our
Religion, but even of Habitation, for those whose profess a Religion different
from ours. That being so, I assure my self, of your being persuaded, that one
and the same Religion cannot inspire those who profess it, with sentiments that
are contradictory, and with an absolutely opposite Conduct and deportment.

There may be some in the World, who would say, That interest of State obliged
the Palatinate, the City of Geneva, and your Cantons, to proceed one way, and
that the same interest of State obliges the United Prvinces to take a quite
different Course, in the same case, and upon the same Oceasion. But I do not
imagine, that you approve that strange Maxim of some Politicians, who
accommodate Religion to the Interest of State; and I hope, you will
acknowledge, that they, who do so, have not any at all. At the very time that
our Religion was established by a public Decree, Liberty of Conscience was
also solemnly confirmed, by the Union of Vtrecht. Nay it is expressly granted,
That, as to matter of Religion, Every Seignory or Province, should make such
regulation as it thought fit, according to its own customs. It is therefore
manifest, That the united Provinces cannot be said to be of the Reformed
Religion, according to the Calvinistical way, but only from that time, and by
Reason of the Regulation which they made in the Year 1583. But if, as I think I
have evidently made it appear, the States have no other ground than that, from
which they may have the demonination of being of the Reformed Religion,
methinks I shall without much ado, make it further appear to you, that they
have not any at all.

If then the Decree they made, by which it was expressly ordained, That there
should not be the permission of any Religion amongst them, but of ours only,
does justly give them the Name of a State of that Reformed Religion, the
continual Conduct which they have hitherto observed, in a constant Practice of
what is quite contrary to the Ordinance, does, if I mistake not, deprive them
of the Name, which they pretended to, by its Establishment. I do not think,
Sir, that you will undertake to maintain, That for a State to be of our
Reformed Religion, it needs do no more, than make a Decree, by which it
declares a Resolution to profess it, and not to permit in its Territories the
Exercise of any other Religion; when, instead of a sincere Accomplishment of
what had been resolved by its Decree, it is so far from performing of any thing
of it, that it acts d^rectly to contrary thereto. I do not imagine you will
pretend, That State to be of our Religion, by Virtue of a Decree, which it
makes, and never did put in Execution. You will tell me, That the
States General are of our Religion, because they affirm it, and make a public
Profession thereof. And I, on the other side, maintain, that That is not
sufficient, for their assuming a name which they do not deserve, since they
destroy the external Profession they make of it, by a Practice quite opposite,
and very odious to all those of the Religion. If they permitted in their
Country but one or two Religions, whose Sentiments were not much different from
ours, and that in some of the less principal, and lesser important Points,
there would be no great Cause for men to wonder at it. It might be urged, That
Prudence and Charity obliged them, to have some Compliance for Christians, who,
as to the principal Part, retain the groundwork of Faith, though they have not
received such Illuminations from God, as might create a Belief of all our
Mysteries. But is there any thing in the World so surprising, as our finding,
That the States give an unlimited liberty to all Sorts of Religions, insomuch,
That in the very Province of Holland*, there are more discovered and
acknowledged Sects, than there are in all the other Parts of Europe, and that
there is not any Master-Heretick, who has a mind to frame a n^w Sect, but is
there kindly received, to teach and propagate his Religion, and to make a
public Profession thereof?

Some Years since, John Labadie, the Apostate, having been deposed and
excommunicated by the Walloon-Churches of this Country, addressed himself to
the Here Van Beuninghen, desiring to be taken into his Protection, Van
Beuninghen makes him this Answer, That as long as he was willing to continue in
the Communion of the Walloon-Churches, he was obliged to submit to their
Ordinances and Discipline; but that if he would frame a new Sect, he should
participate of the Protection which the States granted to all sorts of
Religions. I do not question but you know the said person, and are, doubtless,
able to judge, That it was not out of any Scruple of Conscience, that he
thought it not convenient, to establish his Sect in this Country. He had
amongst his Devotes, the Illustrious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Mary de Schurmans, and
other young Ladies, of more than ordinary quality; but being in some Fear, That
their Relations might get them out of his Society, which began to be cried
down, and to appear very scandalous; he thought it his better way, to settle
himself elsewhere, with his sanctified Company of both Sexes, whom he took
along with him. Had he thought it convenient, to make his Abode in this
Country, he would have augmented the Number of Sects, which have their
Establishment here, and made some Additions to the Religions, which have a
public Liberty in these parts.

But though this Liberty of Conscience, is of so great a Latitude as I have
told you, yet I am in some suspense, whether you know it to be so
comprehensive, as to extend to the countenancing and protecting of those
Heretics, whom you would sentence to death, if they were amongst you. This I
am satified you know, That, above a hundred years ago, your Canton, and the
Republic of Geneva, condemned Michael Servetus, and Scipio Gentilis, to be
bu^nt alive, for the erroneous Opinions they held, concerning the Trinity. The
principal Errors, upon which they were Indicted, are much the same, or, at
least, are not more dangerous, than those which the Socinians maintain, upon
the same Mystery of Christian Religion. Do you not then wonder at the
extraordinary difference there is, between the Conduct observed by your Canton,
and the Republic of Geneva, toward those two ancient Heretics, and that
which the States observe, in reference to the Socinians, who propagate the same
Heresies, or others that are equally pernicious? Geneva, and your Canton could
not endure the one, Servetus, and the other, Gentilis; and passed their
judgment, that they both deserved death. The States General do, without any
Scruple, suffer a great number of Socinians, most of whom are born and brought
up amongst them, and never had the least thought of doing them any harm, upon
the score of their Religion.

Your Canton, and the City of Geneva would have thought themselves guilty of a
great Crime against God, if they had not, by death, taken off these two
Heretics, who h^ld such strange Errors, against the Divinity of Jesus Christ.
But the States General would think they had committed a great Sin against God,
if they should put any of the Socinians to death, whatever their Errors may
be. Your Cantons, and the City of Geneva, thought themselves ob^ig'd in
Conscience, out of their zeal for the Glory of God, and Christian Religion, to
take all the Courses imaginable, for the smothering of those Heresies, which
are so destructive to our Principal Mysteries. The States General have, on the
contrary, done all that lay in their Power, to countenance and to improve them.

Not many years ago, the Books of the Socinians were very scarce. Amongst those
which had come forth into the World, as they had been printed in very remote
places, and but very few Copies had been taken off, so were there not any to be
had, but at very dear Rates; nay most of them were not to be had at all. The
States General have out of their special Favor and Indulgence, and out of an
unparalled tenderness of Conscience, found out a Remedy for that
inconvenience. To satisfy the Socinians, and those who were desirous to become
their Proselytes, they have permitted the works of Four of their principal
Doctors to be printed, at Amsterdam; to wit, those of Socinus, Crellius,
Slichtingius, and Wolfogenius.

At this very time, there is publicly sold at Amsterdam, that Library of the
Socinians, in Eight Volumes, in folio, which costs but a hundred Guilders. Not
many years since, two hundred Pistols would not have purchased one part of
those Works, which at present may be had altogether for less than ten. True it
is, That not long since, there was burnt at Amsterdam, a certain book of the
Socinians; but it was done, no doubt, upon the very Entreaty of William Bleau,
for whom it had been printed. Not many days after that public Execution, he
publicly exposed the very same Book to sale, and the more to recommend the
sale of it, and to enhaunce the Price of it, he had got an Advertisement put
into the Title Page, that it was the very same Book, which had been, by Order
of the States, condemned to be publicly burnt, by the hand of the common
Executioner.

I question not, but you have had the relation, or happily you your self remember
it very well, how that not much above Forty years ago, the Magistrate of Geneva
caused Nicholas Anthony a Minister at Divonne, in the Balliage of Gex, to be
burnt alive, upon a discovery made, of his being a Jew. The Twelve Articles,
which he signed, and upon which an Indictment was drawn up against him, make it
evidently app^ar, that he did not beli^ve any one of our Mysteries of the
Incarnation, and Death of Jesus Christ, for the Salvation of men, and that he
expected the coming of Jesus Christ, as the Jews do expect him, for their
Deliverance, and the Establishment of a Temporal Kingdom upon Earth. No doubt
but you know, that the Jews are very numerous in this Country; that they have
an absolute Liberty, and their Synagogue, in which they make their Assemblies
for the Service of God, and that there never was the least Thought of driving
them hence, or putting any one of them to death.

You know also, better than I do my self, what you did at Berne, in reference
to some Mennonites, who were found in your Territories. They gave them the
dreadful name of Anabaptists, purposely to render them odious, and abominable
to all your people. You cast them into Prison, and you there kept them a long
time, out of the Zeal you had for your own Religion, and the aversion you had
to theirs; nay, for a certain time, you would not set them at liberty, in order
to their departure, with what they had, into some other Parts. But at last, you
granted them that Favor, and it is not unlikely, that you did it upon the
Entreaty of the Magistrate of Roterdam, who writ to you a very pressing Letter
on their Behalf. Some years before, the Canton of Schasfhouse, had also
banished out of their T^rritories, certain* Mennonites, and thought they had
done them a kindness, in permitting them to take along with them what effects
they had, into some other parts. Nay, I have been also assured, that not many
Years since, a certain Number of Mennonites being, to their Misfortune, found
in the Canton of Zeurich, they were taken into custody, and had indictments
drawn up against them, on these two Capital Crimes.

There were at that time some Comapnies raising, upon some extraordinary
occasion which the Magistrates had, for the safety of the Country. The
Mennonites would have excused themselves, from being listed in those Companies,
alleging, That they did not believe a Christian could, with a good Conscience,
bear arms, upon any occasion whatsoever. They preferred however, voluntarily to
lay down what money should be required of them, for the payment of such Person,
as might be put in to serve in their stead. They would moreover engage them to
oblige themselves by Oath, to be faithful to the State, and to obey their
Magistrates. They acknowledged, That they were in Conscience, obliged to that
Duty, and that they should be very careful in the discharging of it; They
promised to do so, and declared, that they conceived themselves as deeply
engaged, by their bare word, as if they had confirmed it with a solemn Oath;
But that they could not be induced to take any, for this Reason, that they
believed, that Jesus Christ had commanded such as professed Christianity,
simply to say, Yea, for the affirming of a thing* and Nay, for the denying of
it, expressly forbidding them to swear, upon any occasion whatsoever.

The Magistrate of Zurich, judging that those two Errors were pernicious to
the State, passed this Order against the Authors thereof, That within Fiftee^^^
days, they were to depart out of Switzerland, and to remove th^^ce all their
Effects, and Concerns, or abjure their Doctrine, be ready to take their Oaths,
and to take up Arms, if the Magistrate commanded any such thing; And if any one
did not obey this Order, that he should be taken, and banished, after he had
received a severe Chastisment by Whipping; If he were taken a second time, That
he should be whipped again, and that after he had been burnt with an hot Iron
on the Shoulder, he should be again sentenced to Banishment; but if he were
taken the third time, he was to be brought to the Magistrate as a Rebel, and so
to be put to death. But all the Cities of this Netherlandish Country are full
of these Mennonites, who have their public Assemblies, and an absolute Liberty
of Exercising their Religion. Nay, there is at Amsterdam, That Christopher
Sandius, of whom I have heretofore spoken to you, who makes an open and public
Profession of being an Arrian, and he has many Disciples.

If therefore you will seriously examine the thing, I think you will meet with
but little Encouragement, to maintain, That those Governments, which follow so
contrary a Practice, one to the other, upon a matter of Fact so important,
Reference to Religion, can, in the mean time, be of the same Religion. I do not
Imagine, that you will approve or what some affirm, upon this occasion, That in
things which are indifferent, two States may demean themselves, the one, this
way, and the other, that way, and be both in the mean time of the same Religion.

Things indifferent, as to practicability, are, if I am not mistaken, such as
may, or may not be done, or be done after one manner, or after another quite
different manner, yet, all without offending God. But I am not easily to be
persuaded, that the things we now speak of can be called Indifferent. For I
pray, tell me, Was it not well done by your Magistrate, and by that of Geneva,
when they burnt these two ancient Heretics, and this last Jew? If it was well
done, it was not therefore a thing Indifferent, and they could not have omitted
the doing of it, without offending God. If they did well in their procedure,
methinks you cannot deny but that the Dutch do very ill, in tolerating and
protecting the Socinians, who, as to the main, hold the same Errors, as those
ancient Heretics; unless you would happily affirm, That there are some things in
reference to Religion, which may be done after one way in Switzerland, and at
Geneva, and after another way in the Low Countries. For, I cannot comprehend,
how one and the same Religion, can incline some of those, who profess it, to do
things directly contrary to those which the others do.

Moreover, I do not think, that you will be so confident, as to affirm, that it
was a thing indifferent, for your Magistrate, and for him of Geneva, to put
those two unforunate Heretics to death. You have too great a respect for your
Lords, and Superiors, to charge them with the Odium of so rigorous an
Execution, if they had not been thereto obliged by the Precepts of their
Religion. If the Magistrates of the Low Countries are of the same Religion, as
yours, why does it not induce them, to follow the same Practice, in reference
to the same Heretics, or others, who are yet more dangerous?

In short, I would make this Interrogatory to you, Reverend Sir, What S^nt^ment
you have, of those Magistrates, who are of Opinion, That no Man ought to be
troubled, or molested upon the score of Religion and, That all Christians ought
to be tolerated, whatever disagreeing Sentiments they may have, upon that
Account? If ^here were some of them amongst you, I do not beli^ve you would
receive them into your Communion; at least, thus far I am assured, That,
according to your own Principles, you ought not to receive them. H^w then can
you be of a Persuasion, That the Magistrates of the United Netherlands are of
the Reformed Religion, properly so called; when as, if they were at Geneva, or
in Cantons, you cannot admit them to communicate with you? You know, that
Monsieur d' Huissea^, Pastor of the Church of Saumar, was some years since,
deposed, and excommunicated, by the Synod of the Province, for the Book, which
he had publ^sh'd, for the Toleration and Reunion of Christians. Though I have
read it, yet cannot I call to mind, all the Maxims, which he advances and
maintains. Mean time this I ^m assured of, That he does not advise a greater
Toleration of Christians, than what the States General do effectually grant.
Which is as much as to say, That the Magistrates of these Countries, have time
out of mind, practiced that which that Minister has taught, by the Book, which
he writ some years since. If it be so, I cannot imagine the Minister should be
more in Fault, than they are; since he has offended only by his Writings, and
the Magistrates are effectual Offenders. They have been the Doers of the
Mischief, and he has been but the Teacher of it, and, possibly induced thereto,
by their Example. If you are of Opinion, That the said Minister was justly, and
legally excommunicated* you must certainly be guilty of a strange Partiality,
if you allow the Name of your good Brethren in Jesus Christ, to the Magistrates
of the Low Countries, who* ^or those hundred years past, have committed the
Evil f^r which that Minister has been excommunicated, though he had not done
it, and but* only approved the Doing of it. If therefore, you cannot own them
for Brethren, nor admit them to the participation of the Communion with you,
according to the Maxi^s of your own Religion and Discip^ines, can it enter into
your Bel^^f, That the external Profession which they make of your Religion, is
sufficient to give him the denomination of being of it, as well as you.

But if the Magistrates did acquit themselves of the Devoir, whereto the
Reformed Religion does particularly oblige Magistrates, I should make no
difficulty to grant them the Privilege of Attributing to the State which they
govern, the Name of the Religion which they profess. I believe, you will grant
me, That the Reformed Magistrates, are, after the Example of your Cantons,
obliged to obstruct the Establishment, and public Exercise of false Religions;
and the Magistrates themselves of the Low Countries cannot be ignorant, of what
their own Confession of Faith, reviewed, and approved by the Synod of Dort,
prescribes to them, upon this occasion. The xxxvi. Article, in which mention is
made of Magistrates, says expressly, That it is their Duty, to remove
Idolatry, and the false service of God, to endeavor the destruction of
Antichrist, and to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

I cannot imagine therefore, that you should endeavor to maintain, That the
States General do conscientiously acquit themselves of what they are olig'd to
by their charge of Magistracy, after what I have said to you, of the Liberty,
and Indulgence they grant, to so many different Sects, which, by their
erroneous opinions, subvert the principal Mystery of our own Religion.

If you consult your own Sentiments, and those of your Colleagues, and of all
your Ministers, and if you follow the Practice of all your own Churches, you
are obliged to exclude out of your Communion all those Magistrates, who give
that Liberty to all sorts of Sects and Persuasions. How then can you think,
that those Magistrates, whom the Ordinances of your own Churches permit not to
communicate with you, can give the Name of your Religion, to the State which
they govern? Nay there are some Magistrates at Amsterdam, and Rotterdam; two of
the principal, and most wealthy Cities of Holland, who make a public and open
Profession, of their being Arminians.

The Sieur Adrian Patius, who is one of the Magistracy of Rotterdam, is also an
Arminian, and his Religion hinders not his exercising the Charge of Ambassador
from the States General, at the Spanish Court, where he at present is. I know
not whether he be of those of the Sect, who do absolutely follow the Sentiments
of the Socinians. But if that person be a Socinian, and, in his Return from
Spain, should be in Humor to take his way through your Cantons; I know not
whether the worst that might happen to him, would be, a Denial of Reception
into your Communion.

Upon the Summing up therefore of all I have said to you, I am apt to think,
that you cannot still have the same Opinion of the States General, and continue
your calling them a Holy and sanctified Republic. Could you represent to your
self that strange party-colored, Chequer-work of Religion, which is to be seen
in those Countries, I should hardly believe, that you could persist any longer,
in the good Sentiments you have for this State. I am ready to acknowledge, That
the Protestants are obliged to it, for the liberty they have, to live there,
without any fear, in the exercise of Religion. But are not all sorts of
Heretics equally obliged to it, for the liberty they have, to live there
quietly, in the exercise of their Religions? If this State has been a Sanctuary
to those of the Reformation, all Heretics have also found refuge there, as
well as the others.

In the General Diet held in Poland, in the Year 1658. it was Ordered, by a
Public Decree, That all the Socinians (who were very numerous in that Country,
and had their Principal Seat there) should be sent away thence, and that, after
some time allowed them for the disposal of their Estates, they were to be for
ever banished thence. The States General did charitably receive all those
amongst them, who took refuge in this Country; and it is particularly since
that time, that they have notoriously increased, and multiplied. If this State
be the School of the Reformed Party, it is in like manner the School, the
Damme, and the Nursery of all Heretics. Nay, I am in some suspense, whether it
may not be justly maintained, That Christian Religion has received more
detriment, than advantage, by the establishment of this State? And possibly,
for the same interest of Christian Religion, there will be a greater obligation
to wish its ruin, then its welfare. It will be a very hard matter, to
persuade you to this, since you are of Opinion, That the Republic of the
United Provinces is a most-Christian State, and one of the most Reformed, even
amongst Christians. I know not whether you will always persist in this
Sentiment; but though you do, I shall not forbear remaining,

Reverend Sir, Your most, etc.
Vtrecht, May 13 th. 1673
The Fifth LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
IF I am not mistaken, I have, by irrefragable reasons proved, That the
States General cannot be said to be of the Reformed Religion. But you will say,
If they are not of our Religion, what Religion may they be said to be of? I
must confess they are of the Reformed Religion, if, to be so, there needs no
more, than an external profession of it, no more, than to have ordained, by a
public Decree, That our Religion should be the Religion of State, and that all
those, w^o would have any concern in the Government, should make public
profession thereof, and that there should be public Schools for the Teaching
of it. If these things make a sufficient Title to the Reformed Religion, this
State is doubtless of that Relig^on. But if, as I think, I have made it
sufficiently appear, This State follows a practice quite contrary to all
Governments of that Religion; and does, by its Conduct, and its own Confession
of Faith, and the publict Decree, whereby it established our Religion to be the
Reli^ion of State, destroy that very Religion; let what will be said, I
maintain, That this State is not of our Religion, but only as to the
denomination, and not in effect.

If you are pleased to remember, Reverend Sir, what I have hitherto told you
all-along, you will find it manifest, That as Liberty of Conscience was
established by the first Ordinances which they made in this Country; so it may
be said, with reason, That this State consonantly to its own Principles, is,
and ought to be, of all Religions. And if it be of all Religions, it may well
be said, That it has not any particular Religion, nor indeed that it has not
any at all. True it is, That there is one of them, which is very common to most
of the Inhabitants of the Country, to wit, that of A^arice, which the Scripture
calls Idolatry. Mammon has a vast number of Votaries, in these parts, and,
there is no question to be made, of his being better* served here, than the
true God is by most Christians. If we consider the whole course of Life,
amongst the Dutch, as also the earnestness, and application, wherewith they are
addicted to Commerce, we cannot forbear acknowledging, That the only design
they seem to have, is to grow rich, and heap up Money. There comes into my
mind, upon this occasion, what I read in an Italian Relation, of a certain
Voyage of the Dutch; That being come into the Cities of Japan, out of which
there had been an expulsion of all the Christians, and the Inhabitants of the
Country having asked them, whether* they were Christians; they confidently
answered, Siamo Holandesi, non Siamo Christiani. We are Hollanders, we are not
Christians. And indeed their deportment since, as well in the Indies, as in
some other remoto places, makes it evidently appear, that they are extremely
concerned for the advancement of their Commerce, and not any thing at all, for
that of Religion.

All other sorts of Christians, as well Roman Catholics, as Protestants (the
Dutch only excepted, if they may be admitted among the latter) make the
Colonies they have, in those remote parts of the World, promotive to the
advancement of Christian Religion, by causing it to be Preached to the
Infidels. This we see practiced by the Catholics, with so great Zeal, by the
great number of Missionaries, whom they send into the East and West Indies, and
into the Turkish Empire, to Preach the Gospel, and to Convert those People, to
the Faith of Jesus Christ. Nay this is also done by the English, who send
Ministers of the Gospel, into all parts where they have Colonies, and order all
the Directors of their Companies, not to spare any thing, for the advancement
of Christian Religion, and the conversion of Infidels. And so indeed, as well
the Catholics as the Protestants, make Use of Commerce, as of a means, to
adv^nce the Religion of Jesus Christ, and to bring those Idolatrous People to
his Faith.

But the Dutch, on the contrary, out of a detestable impiety, are absolutely
neglectful of all the Interests of Religion, in the Indies, in the Levant, and
other Places, where they have great Colonies, that they may do nothing
prejudicial to the Interests of their Commerce. They give express and
peremptory Orders to the Directors of their Companies, and the Commanders of
great Places, to hinder the Unbelieving Inhabitants of those parts, from coming
to the knowledge of the Mysteries of Christian Religion, and being Converted to
the Faith of Jesus Christ. It is their persuasion, That if some amongst those
People, were once become Christians, they might, by the Conversation they
should have with other Christians, come to the knowledge of that grand Mystery
of Commerce, and deprive them of some part of their Trade. They would rather
see all those People Perish eternally in their Igno^^^ce, than to see their
Eyes opened, by the illuminations of Heaven, and that they should share with
them in the advantages of their Commerce. Is it not a horrid thing, that the
consideration of a Temporal Interest and Concern, should stifle all Sentiments
of Piety, Charity, and the Zeal they ought to have, for the advancement of
Christian Religion, in a sort of people, who would pass for Christians, nay,
pretend to be of that division of Christians who assume the Title of Reformed?

We need only take an Observation of their Conduct, in those Countries, to make
a discovery, that they take not the least care in the World for the settlement
of Religion there, and that the only Concern they have to mind there, is to see
their Commerce in a stourishing condition. You will be fully satisfied of the
truth of what I tell you, when you shall have understood some of the remarkable
Actions, which the Dutch have done in the Cities of Japan, and in some other
Cities of the East Indies.

There were in the Territories of the Emperor of Japan, many
Portugueze-Merchants, and a very great number of persons born in the Country,
who were Christians, and had been converted by the Jesuits, and other
Catholick-Emissaries. The Dutch, who do all they can, to be alone in those
remote places, and to get all other European Natives out of them, that all the
Trade may be at their sole disposal, found a means to make all the
Roman Catholics odious to the Emperor, that so he might have an occasion to
Banish them out of his Dominions. To that end, they informed him, that those
Catholics had the Pope for their Head, to whom they rendered an implicit
obedience, so far, as that he did dispense with, and discharge them of that
subjection which they ought to their lawful Sovereigns. Consequently to this,
they represented to that Prince, that it was dangerous for him, to have in his
Country so great a number of Subjects, who acknowledging elsewhere a Sovereign
Power, superior to his, might, upon the reception of such a Command from it,
rebel against him. That Prince, having, by this malicious information,
conceived a very great Distrust of all the Christians in general, resolved upon
an absolute extermination of them, and that not any one should ever be suffered
to live in his Territories. All the Cruelties, which the ancient Tyrants ever
inflicted upon Christians, are no great mattter, in comp^rison of wh^t that
Prince exercis^^ upon the Catholics, who were found in his Dominions. He put
all to death with grievous, yet long-lasting Torments* nay there were many cut
off who were not Christians, upon a suspicion of their lying concealed amongst
them, that so not one might escape his fury. After so Bloody and Cru^l an
Execution, he put f^^^h most severe Ed^cts, by which he Ordered, That there
should never any Christian b^ permitted to enter into his Territories. The
Dutch having crept in there, as I told you before, by a flat denial of their
being Christians, acknowledged afterward, that they were indeed some of those
people, to whom that name was given; but that, for their parts, they minded
only their Trade, and never troubled themselves with any thoughts of their
Religion. They voluntarily made this Profer, that they would never speak to the
Inhabitants of the Country, either of God, or of Jesus Christ, or his Religion,
nor perform any Ex^rcise of it themselves; and that they would so live, as that
it should not be known, that they ever were Christians.

The Emperor of Japan finding the Dutch so well inclined, was of Opinion, That
he had no cause to be afraid of them, though they were Chris\tians, since they
promised to live at such a Rate, as if, in effect, they were not such. He
thereupon permitted them to live i^ his Territories, upon the conditions, which
they had proposed themselves. The Dutch, who never executed any Treaty, when it
was more for their advantage to violate it, did very Sincerely and Religiously
observe this with the Emperor of Japan, because it is destructive to the
Interests of Religion, and highly beneficial to them upon the sc^re of Trade.
They have ever since Lived, and still do Live, in the Dominions of that Prince,
without the performance of any Function of God's Service, without having the
Bible, or any other Godly Book, or Treatise of Piety, for the doing of their
Devotions in private.

But I am withal to ^^ll you, Reverend Sir* That what you read of these
Transactions of the Dutch, in those remote parts of the World, you are not so
to look upon, as if that so detestable an Agreement made with the Emperor, was
the private determination of a certain number of Dutch Merchants, resident in
those Parts: but you are to consider what they did, as done by the express
Order of the Directors of the Company established in that Country, who have
ratified it, and promoted the execution of it. All the Dutch, who are returned
into this Country since that Treaty was made, having published it, all that
have any concern for Virtue and Christianity in these Provinces have expressed
themselves much astonished thereat. The Ministry made some stir about it, and
there have been several Acts made, in their Synods, in order to the making of
Remonstrances and Complaints thereof to the States General. I cannot precisely
tell, what Resolution tha States General have yet taken thereupon; but I know,
that they have not taken any, for the breaking off of so Impious and so
Scandalous a Treaty. Their deportment, in this very case, may justly create a
belief, That they are of the Sentiment of that Renegado Jew, Spinosa, of whom I
have already given you an account, though he has not any thing of Christianity.

It is that Author's design, in his Treatise, called Tractatus
Theologo-Politicus, page 62. of the Latin Edition, to prove, That Baptism,
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Prayers, and all the external Functions of Gods
Service, which are, and ever have been common to all Christians, in case they
were appointed by Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, of which he says that he is
not assured, were appointed, as he maintains, but only as external signs of the
Universal Church, and not as things any way conducive to Beatitude, or having
any sanctity in themselves, and that they who live in Solitude are not obliged
to the performance of them; And that they who have their Habitations in remote
Countries, where the Exercise of the Christian Religion is prohibited, are
obliged to abstain from those Ceremonies, and may yet do well enough, in order
to a happy life. To prove the Proposition, which he advances, he alleges the
example of what the Dut^h do in Japan. In which Country, the Christian Religion
being prohibited, he affirms That the Dutch are obliged, by the command of the
Directors of the East India Company, to forbear performing the exercise
thereof. From whence it may be deduced, That that Action, of the Dutch, in
Japan done, and maintained by a public Authority must needs be impious and
detestable, since this Author, who makes an open profession of Atheism, makes,
Use of it, as an irrefragable Reason, to prove, That all the external Services
of the Christian Religion, are not at all contributory to, or advancive of
satisfaction, and that men may be never the less happy, though they never mind
them. But if, without any regard to the Sentiment of that Atheist, you consider
that Action in it self* what could you imagine in the World of greater horror,
than that some Christians, who would pass for such as are of the Calvinistical
way of Reformation, could ever be induced, to make an express prohibition, and
^n absolute retrenchment of all exercise of Religion, to their people, in a
^ountry, that they may there have a quiet exercise of their Trade. And
therefore I hope, Reverend Sir, that, however you may have an over passionate
kindness for the Dutch, yet you will not have the confidence, to deny their
being guilty of the highest impiety, in Sacrificing the interests of Christian
Religion, to their Commerce and Trade, and making no Conscience, or being any
way concer^'d, to see so many Persons live and Die, without the exercise of
any* Religion, as if they were without God, and without hope, only to make an
unhappy profit by the loss of their Souls.

If you have had any account of the dreadful Execution which was committed by
the same Dutch, in the Island of Amboyna, in the Year 1622: it is impossible,
but you must acknowledge, that there is not any consideration of Religion able
to divert them from the exercising of all sorts of Cruelties, when the Dispute
is about their interest, and profit. There were not Twenty Englishmen in that
place, and the Dutch had there a very gr^a^ Colony, and a well fortified
Castle, with a good Garrison in it* They accused the English of having a design
to take that C^stle, though they had neither Arms, nor Forces. They are taken
into custody, upon that pretended Conspiracy; they are interrogated, not one
amongst them confesses any thing, and there could be no Discoveries made of
their being guilty of it. But it was for the interest of the Dutch-Company,
that they should be so. That they might be ^ender'd such in appearance, they
are put to the Torture. All ^he several Tortures of Fire and Water were used,
to make them acknowledge, what the Dutch would have them to say. After some
resistance of such Cruel Torments, they were at last or'e-press'd by their
violence, and confessed whatever they desired them. But after they had
recovered themselves again, they disowned all they had said in the midst of
their Torments; nay when they were just at the point of Execution, they called
God to attest their Innocence, and besought him to make it appear, after the
death they were then going to suffer. He who was the Commander of that place,
and the unjust Judge who had condemned them, were nothing moved at, though fully
convin'd of the Innocence of those Prisoners. But there being a necessity of
their Dying, for the interest of the Dutch-Company, Nine of the pretended
Conspirators were Executed, and some of them were set at Liberty, who,
returning into England, brought thither the News of that Cruel Massacre.

Now, Sir, I would fain know, what you would say of so inhumane and so
barbarous an Action? Will you still allow those to be good Reformed Christians,
who make no scruple to cut the Throats of their Brethren, professing the same
Religion as they do, for a little Worldly Goods, and for their own private
Interests? This Tragical Story, is so well known all over the World, that there
is not any Dutch man dares deny it. Nay an Author of their own Nation, one
Aitzema, in his Book, entitled, The Lyon-Combatant, page 211, 212, 213, 214,
215. Printed in the Year 1661. gives a very large and particular description of
it. And he makes out withal, how false, and unlikely the Accusation brought in
against the English, was, and confidently affirms, that it was framed, upon no
other score, than that they might have a pretense to put them to death, seize
into their own hands all the effects of the English Company, and, by that
detestable imposture, render themselves Masters of all the Trade of the
Moluccoes, Amboyna, and Banda.

The same last-mention'd Author, does, in the same Book, page 113. Relate
another Story of a greater Cruelty, which the Dutch exercised upon the English,
in the Island of Banda. He says, That the Dutch, in order to their becoming
Masters of that Island, Massacred above Forty Englishmen, and that, after they
had bound living Persons to dead Carcasses, they cast them into the Sea, and
afterward possessed themselves of what they had, which amounted to above Five
and Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling.

True it is, that they are somewhat to blame, who still reproach the Dutch with
those two Actions, and particularly with that of Amboyna, since they have made
a considerable satisfaction for it, in the Treaty which was concluded between
them and the Protectordome of England, in the Year 1654. For, the Parliament
having entered into a War against them, which, amongst other p^etences, had
that of the Execution at Amboyna, the Dutch gave the English several Millions
of Guilders, not simply to satisfy them for the damages, they had caused them
to suffer, which could not have amounted to near so great a Sum, though they
had taken away all the effects which they had in that Island, and deprived them
of the advantages they might have made by the Commerce of Thirty Years; but
also by way of Reparation, for the Blood which they had Unjustly spilt. and to
blot out the remembrance of so barbarous an Action.

There would be a necessity of compiling a great Volume* if it were my design,
to make a collection, of all the Cruel Actions, which the Dutch have committed
in the Indies, and elsewhere, upon the pure interest of Commerce. But I am apt
to think, that you will gladly spare me that Trouble, and will think, no doubt,
that I have said enough, and happily too much, upon a subject which is not
divertive to you. If then, after a serious reflection upon what I have
entertained you withal, you find no abatement of the affection, which you had
for the Dutch* I must acknowledge, That your friendship does, in steadiness, and
strength, exceed that of any other person in the World. And this gives some
hopes, that you will continue that part of it, which you have promised me, as I
assure you of my ever remaining,

Reverend Sir, Your, etc,

The Sixth LETTER.
Reverend Sir,
IT is no small affliction to me, that I have given you an account of some
things, concerning the Dutch, which certainly must have raised in you some
disgust against me. I am therefore, out of a pure fear of feeding or augmenting
it, resolved to be very careful, in waving to tell you any thing henceforward,
which may give you any perplexity in reference to them. Nay, I am willing to
make you satisfaction for all I have already said to you. I acknowledge
therefore, to humor you* that the Dutch are as good Christians, and as much of
the true way of Reformation, as you imagine them to be, that is to say, the
best in the World. Though it were so, yet I do not think you have any reason to
cry out, Arms, Arms, as you do, to excite and encourage all that are of the
Reformed Persuasion, in Europe, to come in to their relief. You know we^l
enough, that his most Christian Majesty is not engaged in a War against them,
upon the matter of Religion but that the reason of his engaging in it, was, to
chastize their ingratitutde, to mortify their violence, and to teach them a
new Lesson, of paying him the respects they owe him, and to keep within the
bounds of modesty, and reason. Were it a War upon the score of Religion, do you
think, that the one or the other Branch of the House of Austria, that of
Germany, and that of Spain, which are the natural Enemies of our Religion, and
which ever have been the cruel Persecutors of those who profess it, would have
openly undertaken the defense of the Dutch, in this cause, against the
interests of the Catholic Religion, of which, they make it their oftentation,
That they are the Pro^^ctors, and especially the King of Spain, whom, for that
reason, the Pope has honored with the Title of Catholic King.

But to show you again, how desirous I am to please you, I will acknowledge
also, That this is a War of Religion. Let us see whether it will turn to our
advantage, to raise an Army, consisting only* of men professing the true
Reformed Religion, and to bring it into the Serv^ce of the Dutch. Let us make a
computation of all those who may be for us; and of all those, who, in this
case, might be against us. But I think, it were better, we never meddled with
that troublesome discrimination, which would only convince us, of the weakness
of our little Flock, and discover the great number of Enemies, whom we should
have to do withal. I am satisfied, That a great number of good Soldiers might
be got out of your Canton, and the other Protestant Cantons. But I humbly
conceive, you will not be offended, if I tell you, That if Jesus Christ himself
were upon Earth, and had occasion for the assistance of your Forces, you would
not let him have any, unless he would be sure to see you well paid for them;
and that he should not prevail so far with* you, as that, for his sake, you
would abolish the Proverb, which you have br^ught into Vogue, Point d^argent,
point de Suisse, Mo Money, no Swisse; or as the English Saying has it, It Is
Money makes the Mare to go.

And that it thus* happened, is well known, when the Chimerical Ambassador of
the Dutch had underhand solicited your Cantons, and had afterward been
admitted into your Assembly, Conjuring and beseeching you, by the love you
ought to have for your dear Brethren, not to abandon them in their Necessities,
and to maintain their Cause, which was, that of Jesus Christ. You know very
well, that all he could get of you, in your Diet, was, That you had resolved
one should be assembled, for their sakes, that you would spare some few
rep^sts, observe a Fast, and pray for their Preservation and Prosperity. That
if it were a War upon the score of Religion, whatever Zeal you might have for
ours, the Catholic Cantons, having no less ^or theirs, we should find more
Soldiers running out of the Catholic Cantons, to maintain the Party of their
Religion, than there would be Protestants ready, to defend the Interests of
ours. And as to the quality of the Soldiers of Swisserland, if a computation
may b^ made of it, by the Success of two Wars, one wher^o^ you had about 140
years ago; and the other, about 18 y^^rs since, I am con^ident, you cannot
deny, but that the Catholic Soldiers are much better, than all those of your
Protestant Cantons. Nay, the Catholics would have this advantage, that their
Pay would easily come out of the Exchequers of Kings and Princes, if the
Dispute were about the defense of their Religion. Whereas yours, not finding
any Protestant-Prince, who were able to bear the charge of them, should be
forced to keep in your own Country, and content themselves with the making of
Vows, for the preservation of our Religion. Nay, I do not think, that all the
Princes or States of the Reformed Religion, in Europe, would be able, all
together, and do their utmost, to keep up an Army of Ten Thousand men, when the
safety of our Religion lay at stake. I do not speak of the Lutherans, because
the greatest part amongst them, have such an animosity against us, as loudly to
affirm, That they would rather enter into the Communion of the Catholics, than
into Ours.

If again, on the other side, you consider, how many Kings, Sovereign Princes,
Republics, and States, there are in Europe, who all profess the Romish
Religion, you may all imagine, That as we are but a small handful, in
comparison of them, so there is not any likelihood, that we should be able to
resist them, if they were once engaged in a War against us. Nay, if it were an
open and declared War, upon the account of Religion, you would soon find the
Emperor and the King of Spain deserting the party of the Dutch, and siding
with that of their own Religion. The Catholics have yet another most
considerable advantage, which would extremely corroborat^ their Party against
ours. They have the Pope, whom they all acknowledge to be the visible Head of
the Church upon Earth, who reunites them all for their Common Interest, and
would, with much more Zeal, publish a Croisado against us, then ever he did any
against the Turks. And indeed, he has reason to have a greater animosity
against us, than against all the unbelieving people in the World. As he
pretends to be the Spiritual Head of all Christians, so he considers those who
do not acknowledge him, as revolted Subjects, and Rebels to his Empire; whereas
he looks on the Turks and Heathens, as Strangers, who are out of his
Jurisdiction, and not within the extent of his Superintendency.

And as a King is more incensed against his Subjects who have revolted from the
obedience they owe him, then against foreign Enemies, who are not within the
Verge of his Dominions; So the Pope suffers the Jews in his Territories; and
would never permit any of the Reformed Persuasion, to harbor in them. His
Pontifical Dignity will not suffer him, ever to be reconciled to those, who
directly shock the authority, which he pretends to have over all Christians.

You may see by this, the great danger, into which those of our Religion would
be reduced, if your Zeal could inflame them so far, as to make a Party, in
favor of the Dutch. Nay, I leave it to your own Judgment, whether it is any
fault of yours, if your inconsiderate Zeal has not excited the Catholics, to
fall upon those of our Reformed Religion, in those places, where they lie
exposed to their mercy, and that they have not made it their business to
exterminate them?

But if your Zeal, without Knowledge, be injurious to all those of the Reformed
Religion in general, it is also very prejudicial to all your own
Protestant-Cantons, and to your Allies in particular* As Soon as ever you saw
the first breaking out of this War. You your self, Reverend Sir, in the City of
Berne, and all your Ministers, within the Extent of your Government, were
continually cajoling the people by their Seditious Sermons, to make an
Insurrection against those of your Magistrates, who had given their judgment,
That there should be a Regiment of men granted to the most Christian King out
of your Canton. If men would have believed you, and all the Ministers of your
Country-Villages, it must have been accounted a very horrid Crime in you, to
suffer your Soldiers to be employed in a War against your beloved Brethren in
Jesus Christ, the Dutch. 'Twas this gave occasion to your Magistrate,
distracted by your Pulpit-bawling and by the clamours of the multitude, whom
you had inflamed into an Insurrection, to write unseasonable Letters upon
Letters, to the Officers of your Regiment, fraught with terrible menaces, if
they s^rv'd in this War against the United Provinces. Nay, you thought it not
enough to put in a Charge against your own Canton, upon the account of its
having granted Forces to his most Christian Majesty, and his not preventing
their being employed against the Dutch, but you must also Panegyrically
celebrate the Cantons of Zurick, and Schaffouse, for their refusal to give him
any. I cannot comprehend any reason you should have to name Schaffouse, which
being a poor little Canton, has but one half-Company in the Service, but a
hands-breadth of ground within its Jurisdiction, and can raise but Two
Companies at the most. And you speak of it, as if that refusal of their Forces
had been very detrimental to the Kings Affairs, and much retarded the Progress
of his Conquests. And yet it is certain, in the mean time, That all the best
qualified Persons in the Council of that Canton had promised to grant the
Companies which the most Christian King required of it. But One Factious person
amongst them occasioned the breaking of that Resolution, upon this score, that
besides his being a man absolutely devoted to the Dutch, ever since his
reception of a Present from them, when he sojourned in this Country, he was out
of hopes of getting the Command of a Company for one of his own Relations, that
he might make some advantage thereby.

But, as to the Canton of Zurick, I must acknowledge it to be powerful, and that
it might have raised several Companies of good Soldiers. I know also, That its
Council consists of Persons of very good worth, such as have Wit, and Honor,
Vigor, and Constancy, if the thing had depended upon them; and they knew their
own Interest much better, than to have denied his Most Christian Majesty the
Forces he had required of them. But the mischief of it, as you know, is, That
they are not the absolute Masters. The Sovereign Authority lies in the hands of
the Council of Two Hundred, consisting, for the most part, of much Heat, and
little Prospect, of much Obstinacy, and little Reason. It is no wonder then,
that, the Ministers, having enflamed that multitude with the zealous Concern of
Religion, they could not be disposed, to grant Forces to his most Christian
Majesty, though he should have no Design to employ them against the Dutch.

I must confess further, Sir, That I am very much astonished, at your
Undertaking, to make a confident justification of those Two Cantons, for their
having denied Forces to the most Christian King; as also, that after you had
blamed your own, for their having granted a Regiment, you should undertake to
vindicate all it did afterward; either to have it recalled, or to prevent its
being employed against the Dutch. It will be no hard matter, for me, to make it
appear to you, That this Conduct of yours* besides its being most unjust, may
also be very prejudicial, even as to what relates to the interests of Religion.
You cannot forbear granting your selves to be absolutely unjust, if you deny
the demeaning of your selves toward his most Christian Majesty, as you would
have him demean himself toward you.

For instance, If it should happen, that you were attacked by the King of
Spain, or the Emperor, by the Duke of Savoy, by the Catholick-Cantons, or by
some other Prince, of the same Religion, you would desire, That his most
Christian Majesty would assist you against them, by virtue of the Alliance
there is between you and him. If the King should deny you the Forces you
desired, and allege, That he could not assist you, being of the Reformed
Religion, against Catholic Princes, you would complain of it, and affirm, That
the Most Christian King does not observe the Al^iance he has made with you. How
then do you not see, that the most Christian King has just cause of
complaining, That you are unwilling to supply him with Forces, against the
Dutch, because they are of the Reformed Religion? Do you not further observe,
That, by your indiscreet Zeal, you deprive your selves of all the Advantages,
which you might expect from the Alliance there is between You and the most
Christian King, by giving him just cause to deny you assistance, if you should
come to desire it of him? If the Duke of Savoy should enter into a War against
you, upon the Pretensions he has to the Country of Vaud, tell me, Whether you
would be so presumptuous as to desire assistance from the Most Christian King?
You would not have your Forces to serve his most Christian Majesty against the
Dutch, because they are of our Reformed way of Religion, though they are not
your Allies. By what Right can you pretend, That the most Christian King should
give you Forces, to serve you, who are not of his Religion, against a Catholic
Prince, who, besides his being in alliance with him, has also the honor of
being nearly related to him? Besides, you make but an ill acknowl^dgment, of
the Favor which the most Christian King, did you, not Two Years since, when he
openly undertook your protection, against the Bishop of Basil, who was going to
give you some disturbance. He had established a Catholic Church, upon some
part of your Territories, as he pretended that he had a right to do. The Pope,
the Emperor, and the King of Spain, had openly taken his part, by reason of
the Concern of the Catholic Religion. The most Christian King having been
informed, That he had not any Right to establish that Church, upon your
Territories, sent a Message to him, That if he did not restore things, to the
condition they were in before, and forbear making any alteration, he would
openly grant you assistance against him.

You know, Sir, That the said Prelate, standing more in awe of the most
Christian King's Indignation, than relying on the Succors of the Pope, the
Emperor, and the King of Spain, thought in his best course, to renounce his
Pretensions, and to give over disturbing you. If the most Christian King had
done then, what you have done at the present, he would have been far enough
from entertaining so much as a thought of protecting you, being of the Reformed
Religion, against a Bishop, especially in a Cause, wherein the Interest of the
Catholic Religion was concerned.

You know also, That the Emperor, and the King of Spain, who have a particular
Alliance with the Catholic Cantons, are obliged to assist them, in case they
should enter into a War against you, or against the other Protestant Cantons.
Now it is manifest, That, upon such occasions, you cannot hope for any
assistance, but from the most Christian King. If therefore you would not have
your Forces to serve his most Christian Majesty, against the Dutch, who are not
your Allies, merely upon the score of their professing the same Religion, as
you do, I do not see, how you can desire the most Christian King, to grant you
Forces, to serve you, who are of the Reformed Religion, against the Catholic
Cantons, who are of his Allies, as well as you.

You know further, That the City of Geneva is under the protection of France,
ever since the time of Henry the Third, who granted it thereto against
Philibert-Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. All the Successors of that King have
continued their protection to the same City, against the Successors of that
ancient Duke, who are the troublesome Neighbors, and in a manner the only
Enemies, whom that Republic has any cause to fear.

You see then, by this proceduce of Henry the Third, of France, and the Kings
who succeeded him, That though they were very zealous for their Religion, yet
they made no scruple, of giving their Protection to a Protestant-State, against
a Catholic Prince. Had your Politics been known in the World, those Princes
would not have become guilty, of what you think a great crime, That a King
should defend a State, professing a Religion different from his own, against a
Prince, who is of the same Religion with him. If this Maxim comes, once to
established, you may very well fear, that the most Christian King, having his
Eves opened by your illuminations, and following your example, may withdraw his
Protection from Geneva, that so he may avoid the Reproach, which may be made to
him, of having succored a City of the Hugu^not-Persuasion, against a Prince of
his own Religion.

From this you may also take this further measure, That the implicit affection
which you have for the Dutch, does expose you, as also the Protestant-Cantons,
and your Allies, to an evident danger, of not receiving any more assistance
from his most Christian Majesty, against a Catholic Prince, or State. If it
should ever happen, that you were concerned in such a War, the plausible
pretense of Zeal for Religion, would prove very prejudicial to you, in
depriving you of the Assistance of the most Christian King, who, certainly, is
the greatest, or, to say better, the only Support and Refuge that you can have.
Your Injustice therefore, and your Ingratitude, are so much the greater, in as
much as you cannot deny, but that France has many times openly given its
Protection to the Protestants, in opposition to the Catholics.

You know, That, for a long time, it assisted the Dutch, against the King of
Spain, even before there was any open War between the Two Crowns.

You know also, That France gave an Overt Protection to the Protestant-Princes
of Germany, against the Emperor, who had already divested several of them of
their Dominions, and would, under the pretense of Religion, become Master of
all Germany. The late King, Lewis XIII. made an Alliance with the King of
Swed^n, against the House of Austria, and got that Prince to come out of the
remoter Parts of the North, to oppose the Ambitious Designs of that House, to
raise up the oppressed Princes, and to defend the Liberty of the Empire.

After the Death of Gustavus Adolphus, France did again join its Arms, with
those of his Successors, and the Generals of that Great King, in a continuance
of its Protection to the Protestants, and for the re establishing of those
Princ^s in their Territories, who had been dispossessed of them. But, on the
contrary, the House of Austria had the greatest part of its Allianc^s with the
Catholics, against the Protestants. 'Twas upon this, that the Adherents of the
Emperor, and the King of Spain, took occasion to publish Libels against the
most Christian King, whom they accused of being a Protector of Heretics, and
fighting for them, against the Interests of the Catholic Religion. And yet all
those Accusations which were put up against France, upon that score, obstructed
not its persisting in the stipulations, it had made to its Allies, and
continuing its Protection to the Protestants, against the Violence of the
Emperor, who endeavored to oppress them. Nay, the King of France is in a
manner the only Catholic Prince, who allows the Protestants the Exercise of
their Religion in his Dominions; whereas the King of Spain would never
Tolerate, in his, the Exercise of any other Religion than the Catholic. And
the Emperor has forced all the Protestants out of his Hereditary Countries.
And, both the Emperor, and the King of Spain, think it highly meritorious, in
the sight of God, to be the irreconcilable Enemies, and implacable Persecutors
of those whom they call Heretics.

In the mean, Reverend Sir, it appears by your deportment, That, let the
Protestants be never so transcedently obliged to his most Christian Majesty,
they should so little mind it, as that the only resentment they have, should
have no other object, than the Calamities, which the Dutch endure by the War,
wherein he is now engaged against them. Your Compassion is so great for their
Misery, that you think you have a dispensation, to forget all the Kindnesses,
which the most Christian King has done to those of the Reformed Religion, and
not so much as to reflect on those he may yet do you, in giving you assistance
against your Enemies. In a word, your Bowels do so yearn for those poor
Brethren of yours, the Dutch, that, provided their preservation be secured, you
do not much concern your self, what may become of you, and all those of the
Reformed Religion. You are so blindly infatuated, upon this subject, that,
provided you demonstrate your good Inclinations for the Dutch, you seem to be
indifferent, that you are thought a bad Huguenot, and most wretched Politician.
The Dutch, certainly, are the best Politicians in the World, for things
relating to Religion, which they never made any other Use of, then that of
accommodating it to the Interests of State. Nay they have always been so
little concerned, at the danger of those who professed the same Reformed
Religion, that they made no scruple at all, of entering into a War for their
destruction, upon the pure score of Money.

Of which take this instance. I think you need not be informed, Reverend Sir,
how that the Dutch sent a certain number of Ships, to the most Christian King,
for the reinforcing of his Fleet, by which Rochell was then blocked up. That
was, indeed, a War, upon the pure score of Religion, in which the most
Christian King was engaged against his Subjects, to get out of their hands the
fortified places, which they were possessed of, and would keep, to secure the
observance of the Edicts, and the Exercise of their Religion. All the whole
party of the Reformed-Religion, in France, were afraid, That as soon as the
King should have taken Rochell, he would abrogate the Edict of Nantes, and
absolutely take away the Exercise of the Calvinisticall Religion All the other
Reformed Princes, and States had the same apprehension, insomuch, that public
prayers were made in all parts for the preservation of Rochell, as a City, on
which depended the safety of all those of the Reformed Religion, in France.
They had the same thoughts in the United Provinces, and prayers were made to
God, in all Churches, that he would be graciously plea^d, to preserve Rochell,
as the impregnable Fort of those of the Reformed Religion. And yet the Dutch
made no scruple of hiring out Ships, for money, to the then most Christian
King, to promote the Destruction of a City, which, according to the
apprehensions of all the World, was certainly to have consequent thereto, that
of our Reformed Religion, and of all those who professed it in the Dominions of
France. Was there ever seen any example of so detestable an impiety. That a
State, which makes a boast of being of the Reformation, should have made no
Conscience, for money, of contributing to the Ruin of a great People, who make
profession of the same Religion; and that at the very time, when, for the
completing of the Impiety, it ordered Prayers to be made to God, in the
Churches, for their Preservation? This puts me in mind of the Emperor, Charles
the Fifth, who caused public Prayers to be made, all over Spain, for the
Liberty of Pope Clement the Second, whom he himself kept a Prisoner at Rome, in
the Castle of Saint Angelo.

But there are yet some particular circumstances in this action of the Dutch,
which do very much aggravate the horror, and perfidiousness of it. In the
first place then, before the doing of any act of hostility against those of
Rochell, and before they had made any declaration of being enemies, they
endeavored, by Surprise, to become Masters of the Port. Though what I say
seems strange, and at some distance from credibility, yet is there not any
thing in the world more true. An illustrious person amongst the Dutch, and the
Author before by me cited, when I gave you an account of the affair of Amboyna,
I mean Aitzema, in the Book entitled The Lion Combatant, page 241. sets down
at large this History, of the design which the Dutch had, to surprise Rochell.
Take here in express terms what he says of it.

On the fourth of July, in the Year 1625. Hautyn, Admiral of Holland, appeared
before Rochell, with nineteen men of War. The Inhabitants of Rochell writ to
him, as did also the Count Dela Val, to let him know, what astonishment they
were in, to see him in the posture of an enemy, as being not able to imagine,
that either the States, or the Prince of Orange, would have entered into a war
against the Reformed Religion. Hantyn told those who had brought him the
Letters, that he could not return them any answer, still he had had some
conference with those of the King's Council. The next day he sent them back to
Rochell, with two of his own people, and told them, That he knew not whether
they were come by the order of all the Inhabitants, or of some part of them
only, and that he was going to send to them, to be assured of it; and that in
case they continued in their subjection to the King, they were not to fear any
harm. In the mean time, those Deputies having left him, in order to their going
to Rochell, he came up, with part of his Fleet, very near the City, which gave
occasion to two men of Rochell, whom he had kept aboard, to tell him, That he
did not deal fairly. Monsieur de Soubize, having perceived, that he was
advanced with a good number of Ships, made him stand off, and one or two days
after, he absolutely defeated him, burnt his Vice Admiral, and four or five
Ships, and killed him five hundred men; so that the whole Fleet, being in great
disorder, got away as far as Nantes. And this was the unhappy success, which
that perfidious man had, who, under pretense of friendship, would have
surpised the City, and so betrayed it to the King.

After Hauntyn had refitted his Fleet, he joins that of the most Christian
King, commanded by Monsieur de Montmorency, who would fight that of the
Rochellers, as soon as he came in sight of it. But news was brought him, That
the Dutch Admiral would not be concerned in the action; for this reason, no
doubt, that he was afraid to be beaten once moro. Montmorency presses him, and
conjures him, not to desert him in so important an occasion. He alleges for
his Excuse, as we find in Gramond, Hist, Gall. page 635, and 636. That without
an express Command from the States, he durst not employ their Ships, to give a
decisive battle to the Protestants of France, who were of the same Religion
with his Masters. Mons. de Montmorency, being extremely troubled, that the
Dutch did, by their refusal to fight, defeat him of the Fame, which he expected
infallibly to acquire, by the Victory, was forced, after a fruitless
application of entreaties, and promises, to make Use of an expedient, which
ever prevails with the Dutch. He, with good palpable money, corrputed their
whole Fleet, and engaged the Admiral, the Commanders, and the Soldiers, by
oath, to fight against those of Rochell. So the most Christian King's Fleet,
being reinforced with that of the Dutch, de Montmorency gave an absolute
defeat, to that of the Rochellers, commanded by Mons. de Soubixe: So that the
Inhabitants of that City could not equip another, and from that very day lost
the Sovereignty of that Sea, which they had kept for some time. Whereupon, they
having no Fleet, and that of the most Christian King having the absolute
command of the Sea, his Land-Army undertook that memorable work of the Digue.
The City finding it self deprived of all hopes of relief, surrendered to the
King, after the endurance of incredible inconveniences, by famine, during so
long a Siege. If the Dutch had sent in this assistance to his most Christian
Majesty, by virtue of any Treaties of Alliance, which they had had with him,
there would not have been any thing to quarrel at in the said Action. But is it
not an infamous thing, that, after they had plainly alleged their not being
empowered to fight against those of the Reformed Religion, without an express
command from the States, they should nevertheless be lured in, by money, to do
a thing, which they knew to be contrary to their duty, and might have
contributed to the ruin of all those who professed the Reformed Religion in
France, if the most Christian King had had any such design, as some imputed to
him? And by this, you may judge of the Friendship which the Dutch have for
those of the Reformed Religion, since they make no scruple, to hire out
themselves, and their Ships, to be assistant in their extermination.

If you can, without passion, examine all I have written to you, concerning the
Dutch, I am confident, you will not persist any longer, in the good opinion you
have hitherto had of them. But I think you will hardly be induced to lose it,
because you are extremely propossess'd in their favor. Mean time, since I look
upon you, as a very just and rational Person, I hope you will not think it
much, to aquaint me with the Reasons, which you may have had, for your not
being moved with those which you have reciev'd from me. Show me, that there is
not any ground in all those, by which I have pretended to prove, That the
United Provinces are not of the Reformed Religion, according to the
Calvinisticall way of Reformation. Make it appear to me, that you have done
well, in endeavoring to make an insurrection in your Canton, about the
Regiment, which you had raised for his most Christian Majesty, and that all
those of the Reformed Religion ought to unite together, for the relief of the
Dutch, in the present War, between them and the most Christian King. If you can
prove all these things to me, I assure you, I shall submit to your Reasons. And
I shall moreover give my thanks, for your deliverance of me, out of the error,
in which I have hitherto continued, and for the illuminations I shall receive
from your documents. This I do sincerely promise you, as also, that, howe'ere
it may happen, I shall ever be,

Reverend Sir, Your most humble, etc.
Vtrecht, May 19 th. 1673.
FINIS.

