Georgius Stradling S.T.P. Decanus Cicestrensis Prebendarius Westmon:


SERMONS AND DISCOURSES UPON Several Occasions.

By G. STRADLING, D. D. Late Dean of CHICHESTER.

Never Before Printed.

TOGETHER With an Account of the AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

The PREFACE.
'TWAS the ancient Modesty of those Ages, and Nations, who had a due Sense of
Decency, to introduce great Works with the Lives, rather than the Elogium's of
the Authors; and to distinguish a Preface from a Panegyric. Afterward,
especially in the declining Age of the Roman Empire, Sophistry began its Reign;
The Prologue, that anciently opened the Play, was now spent in commendation of
the Poet; and Men were drawn into an high esteem of the Writer by the Proem,
till they were undeceived by the Book.

It Is the unhappiness of those general Prefaces, that, if ever they avoid the
guilt of falsity, they are necessarily liable to the charge of impertinence; as
being unluckily joined to those Books, that either do not deserve their praise,
or do not need it. For which of those two Reasons, I give no commendation of
these following Discourses, I leave the Reader to judge; it seeming at present
more material to give a short, plain, and naked Account of the Author.

Dr. Geo. Stradling then was born about the Year M DC XXI. at St. Donat's
Castle in Glamorgan-shire, the ancient Seat of his Family. His Father was Sir
John Stradling the fifth of those 200 Original Baronets, that were created by
K. James upon the first Institution of that Order. His Father's propensity to
Learning and his Progress in it, is easily discernable from those his Works
that are yet extant; and whether it proceeded from the greatness of his parts,
the agreeableness of his Temper, or the generality of his Studies, we shall
hardly find any Gentleman whatsoever, that, among all the eminent Scholars of
that Age, men of different Professions and very disagreeable Studies, appears
by their Writings to have gained so Universal a respect and esteem.

Dr. George Stradling the Youngest of his Sons, followed the genius of his
Family; and, though not then designed for the Clergy, pursued however the best
and most agreeable Studies of humane and polite Learning with great vigor and
diligence, at first beyond Sea, and afterward at home: For so it happened,
that being very early sent to Travel, about the rise and first appearance of
the Troubles in England, he grew acquainted with the modern Languages abroad,
before he had obtained a familiarity with the Latin here. And therefore I have
often wondered upon the Sight of many of his solemn Exercises in the University
afterward, that a Man that came so late to the Study of the Roman Tongue,
should not only obtain so great an insight into the best Authors thereof, but
should have made himself an entire Master of their Eloquence. Which strange
improvement (which is not now common to many of those of his Profession, who
are esteemed Learned) can be attributed to nothing more, than the deep
Impressions which the true Sense of the Authors of the best Age of the World,
I mean that of the Augustean Century, first made upon his mind; so that
afterward, by frequent perusal of their Works, he, without the usual Art or
Method, occasionally understood, rather than industriously learned, not only
the true and genuine Phrase, but the best Cadence, Turn, and natural Beauties
of the Roman Language.

It is observable, that when he came to the University of Oxford, after his
Return from France and Italy, about the 18th. Year of his Age, he much addicted
himself to the Study of Music, and made so great Improvements in that Art, the
grounds of which he had learned in his Travels, that no man in England was more
valued for his Skill therein by the greatest Professors of it in his Youth,
especially Dr. Wilson the Music Professor of Oxford, in his Time, nor made
better use of it in his declining Age to the diversion of his Leisure, or to
the raising and heightning of his Devotion.

When he had for some Years resided in Jesus College, he, being descended from
one of the Brothers of the Noble and Generous Founder of All Souls College,
Henry Chicheley, once Archbishop of Canterbury, was in the Year M DC XLII,
deservedly and gratefully elected Fellow of that College; a Society exactly
fitted to his humor and disposition; as that which according to its original
Institution, had always preserved an equal Mixture of the Gentleman and the
Scholar.

He was a Gentleman of that easy and affable Temper; and withal, of so
considerable a Character then in the University, that, it is no wonder if he was
much loved and regarded by most of his Cotemporaries in the College, and in a
particular manner by Dr. Sheldon then Warden thereof. I have seen several
Letters from him, when afterward Bishop of London, which expressed a nearer
Intimacy with our Author, than the Distance of Age and Place that was then
between them, generally seemed to allow. And indeed as they were both of them
Men of good Birth, and no mean Fortune, as their dispositions to the King's
Cause were the same, the Evenness and Generosity of their Temper alike, their
Breeding, Education, and the Tendency of their Studies, not different; it is
hardly to be imagined, but that such an Agreement and Conformity of Mind,
Fortune, Manners, and Studies, confirmed by their long* Enjoyment of each
others Conversation, should improve their Acquaintance into a lasting
Friendship. To that worthy and generous Prelate, at last Archbishop of
Canterbury, Dr. Stradling, who after the Restoration of the King, became his
Chaplain, did in a great measure owe those Dignities and Preferments which he
afterward enjoyed in the Church.

The Wars coming on, and most of the best Gentry in England appearing on the
King's side, our Author, according to the Inclination of himself and his
Family, went into the Army, and was made Cornet in a Troop of Horse, raised by
his Nephew Sir Edw. Stradling, for the Service of His Majesty; in which Station
he behaved himself with Courage and Resolution, till, after the loss of his
Brethren, and other his Relations in the Field, the Army was disbanded by the
King; and the common Despair of the Royal Party throughout the Nation, gave him
opportunity of an honorable retreat to his Studies. At that time there was a
Cessation of Arms, rather than a Peace; The Fury of the Conquerours was turned
into deliberate Revenge, and those that were conquered had lost their strength
rather, than forgot their hatred. The Visitors of the Parliament, that were not
often inclinable to Forgiveness, did frequently take occasion to disturb our
Author in the Enjoyment of his Fellowship, and once had utterly ejected him,
if his Alliance to two great Men of different Principles, had not happily
secured him. Mr. Oldisworth, a Man of no small Learning, once Secretary to the
E. of Pembroke, who had married his Sister, and Coll. Ludlow, a Gentleman now
of late well known to the World, who had married his Neice, interposed so
violently in his behalf, that even his Merits, and known Loyalty could not
procure his Expulsion. This kindness of his Relations, who were engaged on the
other side, was so well resented by him, that afterward in the Reign of K.
James II. he was extremely pleased, when, upon the Alteration of Affairs in
England, he had an opportunity offered to him of requiting the Obligation to
one of the Parties, and indeed almost of paying the Debt in kind. And here you
must excuse a very short Digression, if I acquaint you, that this was not the
single Instance of his Life, wherein herdiscover'd his fixed Principle, That no
difference of judgment or opinion ought to hinder the mutual Offices of
Friendship, Charity, and Benevolence; much less, the Exercise of the most
indispensable Duty in the World, that of Gratitude. For it is well known to many
now living, that in the time of the most exalted Loyalty, when men's outward
Profession of Fidelity, was not so much the Test of their Zeal, as the Earnest
of their Preferment, he engaged so far for his Friend, not in espousing his
Tenet, which perhaps was erroneous, but in procuring his safety, that he, upon
that Account, lost a Bishopric, which had been often promised to him, and
which seemed in reality to have been otherwise designed for him.

But to return to our Author's Life -- After the Restoration of K. Charles II.
he had so great a Reliance on his Friend Dr. Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury,
that though he was unanimously named, if not actually chosen Principal of Jesus
College in Oxford, he declined the offer of that creditable Post, out of a
Prospect, I believe, of greater Advantage by his Stay at London. His
Preferments at last were the Deanery of Chichester, and the Precentorship of
that Church, a Prebend of Westminster, a Rectory, a Sine-Cure, with another
additional Dignity.

It is easy to be perceived therefore, that he never made himself liable to
the Censures of those that blame Pluralities, but it ought further to be known,
for the prevention of other objections, that he was not willing to have
accepted two Dignities seemingly incompatible in one Church, if he had not
obtained a Promise from K. Chapter II. of annexing the Precentorship perpetually to
the Deanery of Chichester. The small Revenues that belong to the Deanery of that
ancient Cathedral, recommended this Design to his Care; and the meeting of the
two separate Interests in one Person was the most probable Method of
accomplishing it. The Advances made in this Affair; the License under the Privy
Seal; the Consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Opinion of very
Eminent Council therein, are now in my hands: And though indeed the Design was
always pursued with Earnestness, and Vigor by our Author, yet so it happened,
that through others negligence, it not only, as Church-work usually, proceeded
slowly; but by reason of some Difficulties arising between a warm Bishop of
that See, and Dr. Stradling then Dean thereof, was then wholly discontinued,
and is now rather to be desired than expected.

I am well assured, That during his Life, the Rights of that Church were well
defended; the Revenues of it improved: And the Fabric beautified, and
repaired; and this is the rather probable, because, when his great Adversary
had brought up to Court a Charge against him, it fixed no other Crime upon him
in that Station, than his too great Negligence and Remissness in promoting the
Interest of the Crown in the Choice of Parliament men for Chichester.

The good Prelate Dr. Carleton, a man possibly of no ill Principles, but much
heat, was angry that men that agreed with him in opinion, were not likewise of
the same Frame and Temper, and equally violent in executing their Designs.

The Pulse of our Author, it seems, did not beat so high, nor did his Blood
circulate so quick, nor was he by the bent of his Nature so much fitted, for a
popular and tumultuary Canvass; and therefore the want of Passions was by the
zealous Bishop easily misinterpreted Lukewarmness, and the Observance of
Decency in his Applications to the Electors, seemed to infer an indifference
in the Choice.

I shall not be much concerned to refute this Accusation, because, after our
Author's ingenuous and manly answer to it, a great Minister of State was
pleased to assure him in a Letter, that His Majesty was satisfied, that he was
both able and willing to promote the King's Service, with as much Zeal as his
Accuser, and with much more Sincerity, Discretion and Success.

In the Year MDCLXVI. he was married to Margaret, Daughter of Sir William
Salter, in the Chapel of Richking House in Buckingham-shire, the Seat of her
Father.

He behaved himself always to his Wife, who brought him a very large Fortune,
not only with Kindness, but with all imaginable Indulgence, and was happy, as
in the Enjoyment of her for XV. Years, so in his numerous Issue by her, some of
which are yet living; but I shall not enlarge on this Head, as thinking the
World not much concerned in the particular and exact Knowledge of the small
Occurrences of a private Family. What I have farther to add, is, That our
Author, after a long Disease, at last died at Westminster, on the XVIII Day of
April in the Year MDCLXXXVIII, and in the Year of his Age LXVII, and was buried
in the Abbey there, much desired and lamented by many; but especially by those
few that had the happiness of his near and intimate Conversation.

Having thus given you the Memoirs of Dr. Stradling's Life, his Birth, Fortune,
Manners, and Death; I shall proceed to draw from thence, and from the other
Accidents of his Life, which would hardly bear a distinct Relation apart, the
true and full Idea and Character of our Author.

He was a Man then of a free, sweet, and condescending Temper, and withal of a
deep and piercing Wit; so that his Conversation not only procured him the Love,
but raised the Admiration of his Acquaintance. He was not open to many
Visitants, but had the unusual happiness of being respected by Men of a
different Humor, Party, and Temper, from each other, and who hardly agreed in
any one thing, but the Esteem of him. And indeed, as he was a Man of strict
Morals, and yet of an easy and agreeable Disposition, he gained a respect of
the more rigid and moroso part of Mankind, and gave in the meanwhile a liberty
of access to those that allowed themselves a greater latitude in Conversation.
His Learning was by no means superficial, and yet his general Correspondence
with Gentlemen of all sorts, had made it easy to him, and to his Company; and
though it was not always in sight, yet was it ever ready, not so much to amuse
Ignorance, as to refute Impertinence. It will appear by the use he made of
Foreign Authors in his Works, that he traveled not with the same Design as
young Gentlemen of his Station and Quality were used to do, but as Pythagoras,
Solon, and Lycurgus; he saw not only old Walls, ruined Amphitheatres, and
antiquated Coins, but brought home with him the Histories, Polities, and
Learning of each Nation; And indeed upon Comparison of his Discourses, with
some of the same Subject written beyond Sea, you will find, that whenever he
borrows any Foreign Thought, he so refines upon it, that you can hardly descry
the Plagiary, but where you must apparently own the Conqueror; and not so
properly discover his Thefts, as his Triumphs. As to his Preferments in the
Church, it is easy to see in his Answer to Bishop Carleton's Charge, that he
was neither forward, nor ambitious in attaining them, nor proudly sullen in
slighting or refusing them; but carried himself so even between Contempt and
Compliance, that he was equally raised above the meanness of flattering his
Superiors, and above the Vanity of despising them.

By never writing or publishing any thing, but what the Duty of his Place
required, or public Authority commanded, he showed himself not desirous of
applause; and by his Care and Accuracy in the Excellency of those necessary
performances, he appeared not insensible of Reputation.

He was moderate in his Diet and Pleasures, and yet unhappily exposed to the
Gout and Stone, which for many Years allayed the Enjoyments of Life, and at
last occasioned his Death. However, he had no reason to complain of Providence,
who lived long, and well; beloved by his many Friends, and rather envied than
hated by his few Enemies; Noble in his Descent, and not uneasy in his Fortune;
Whose Reputation in his Life was unquestionable, and whose Fame after Death
will be lasting: Who was happy in his Marriage, Issue, Preferment, and Estate,
and not wholly unfortunate in any thing, but what died with him, his Diseases.

The further Character of our Author, the Reader may easily learn from his
Works; in which his Temper and Disposition is as well discovered, as his Sense
displayed; and which are not only the Test of his Wit, but the best Image,
Representation, and History of his Mind.

A SERMON Preached on the Annunciation.
St. LUKE XI. v. 27, 28. And it came to pass as he spoke these things, a
certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. But he said, Yea,
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
AND it came to pass as he spoke these things, a certain woman lift up her
voice; And had she not done so, had all the Auditory been silent, the Stones
would have immediately ery'd out and applauded the Speaker. Joh. 7. 46.
And yet, though never Man spoke as He did, the harder Jews were of full proof
here against his Eloquence; A generation of Vipers, not to be charmed by the
wisest Charmer, who could as easily resist his Words as they had done his
Miracles. Each of these might convince, but both together could not change
them; so that their Infidelity over-mastering his Omnipotency, it proved a
harder task for him to dispossess them, than the dumb man, v. 14. the occasion
of our Savior's discourse here, and of the Jews envy.

Yet could not their untoward disposition make void the word of God, especially
when proceeding from the mouth of the Word Incarnate: Here, to be sure, it
should not altogether miss of its effect; nor did the Seed sown by him wholly
fall on such rocky ground, some part thereof met with a fitter soil to receive
and cherish it. One there was, among the rest, of a more tender complexion,
whom God's hand had chaft into a suppleness capable of his impressions. In the
midst of all opposition from the Jewish Doctors, he raises up a certain Woman
to check and frustrate it; His Truth opens her Mouth, as his Grace her Heart,
to bless him whom they cursed, and to proclaim him a* Prophet whom they gave
out for a Devil. Thus can the Almighty out of the mouth of Infants, or
suchlike weak Instruments, those that bring them forth, perfect his own
Praises, and give them that courage to maintain his Cause which Nature had
denied them. For let the learned Scribes and Pharisees revile him never so
much, this single weak Woman here shall dare to defend his Truth against their
Slanders, and magnify his Person in spite of their malicious Contempt. And
now her Tongue, moved by that Holy Spirit whom these Revilers blasphemed and
resisted, pronounces not only Christ himself Blessed, but the very womb that
bare him, and the paps that gave him suck; reflecting a Glory from the Son on
the Mother, which our Lord was not unwilling she should share in; allowing her
Blessed, though not most Blessed in that respect; granting it her as her
privilege, not as the sole, much less the best reason of her Blessedness: A
Blessedness others might not despair of, Men no more than Women, who by a
diligent attendance to God's Word conceiving, and by a conscionable practice of
its Precepts bringing Christ forth, might each of them become his Mother too;
As if our Lord should have said, Thou, O woman, pronouncest the womb blessed
that bare me, and the paps that I have sucked: And herein thou say true, for
she is indeed even thus Blessed, and all generations shall call her so: but I
will tell thee who are rather Blessed, They that hear the Word of God, and keep
it.

I shall not pretend to tell you, as some here do, who this Woman was, nor
what her name; but it is not strange those persons should be able to find out
unknown names, who can at their pleasure Saint folks, as they have done this
Woman in the Text; it being as easy for them to Christen, as to Canonize. But
of this the Text is silent, and it is not of such consequence to know who she
was, as what she says; her Testimony being much more material than her Person.
Which Testimony here directly points to Christ, and but glances at the Holy
Virgin; it being usual with the Jews to magnify the Parents of those they
chiefly intend to commend, and not to be wondered at, if a Woman were so
willing to extol her own Sex; or a Jewish Woman the Paps and Womb of a Mother,
who could fancy nothing beyond the Milk and Honey of her Canaan.

I shall not consider the words as they point to our Lord himself, ( who is
above our praises, over all, God blessed for ever) Romans 9. 5.
but as they occasionally reflect on his Mother; A subject proper to this day's
Festival, and wherein there are two things considerable.

1. The Testimony given in by this Woman, and allowed by Christ, that she that
bare and nursed him up was Blessed. 2. A Way or Means proposed by our Lord,
whereby others as well as she, might be not only Blessed, but more Blessed than
the very Mother of God, considered barely under that Relation; and that is, By
hearing the Word of God, and keeping it.
Which two things, when I shall have briefly spoken to, I shall then in the
close endeavor, 1. To show you how the Holy Virgin was in this latter respect
Blessed above all her Sex, anointed, like her Son, with the Oil of Gladness
above her fellows, in being as much the Mother of God, and as properly in a
Spiritual as ever she was in a Carnal sense. 2. And, secondly, to stir you up
to an imitation of those her Virtues and Perfections, which, as they entitled
her to this more divine and blessed Relation, will us too, proportionably as
they shall be found in every one of us.

The first thing that offers its self here is the Woman's Testimony allowed by
Christ, That she that bare him was Blessed; and for that very reason too. In
the time of the Law 'twas accounted a great Blessing to be a Mother in Israel;
Barrenness being then as infamous, as Fruitfulness was honorable. To have
still preserved their Virginity, was in most people's conceit as bad as to have
betrayed it; insomuch that some have more bitterly lamented that, than their
untimely death, or which is more, their sins. The reason which the Jewish
Doctors give us of this strange passion, was, Because the Messiah being to
come, every one that was not barren might hope to be that person that should
have the honor to bring him into the World. And as all the Daughters of Israel
were most ambitious of it, so about the time Christ came in the flesh, the
expectation of the Messiah's Revelation was very high and pregnant.

Whether this Woman in the Text took our Lord for the true Messiah, that great
Prophet that should come into the World (which yet it is not improbable she
might guess him to be by the visible power of his Miracles, and, which was as
admirable, the force of his persuasions) is altogether uncertain; But this is
certain, that she looked upon him as an extraordinary person sent from God, and,
as such, one that might justly ennoble his Parents and Relations. This, as it
was a great Truth, so 'twas not all; and our Savior did not only here allow
this Woman's Testimony for good, but farther improve it, by expressly revealing
Himself to be the Messiah, which is called Christ, Joh. 4. 25 the Holy One of
Israel, and the glory of its People; a Monarch, but a spiritual one, to whose
Scepter all Nations and Souls should bow; such a King as had Heaven for his
Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool; That the Desire of Nations was now
come, so long before promised by God, foretold by the Prophets, expected by the
Patriarchs, infinitely wished by all just Men, with a desire equal to their
necessities; And to be the Mother of such a Prince as this, to enclose Him in
her bowels whom the Heaven of Heavens could not encircle, to be the Mother of
God, Deipara: (A Title bestowed Romans 1. 4.
on the Blessed Virgin by a General Council, and which we may safely allow
her:) This was more than to have descended from the Loins of the Kings of
Judah, or the most glorious Monarchs of the Earth; An honor which the greatest
Queens thereof would willingly have purchased even with the loss of their
temporal Diadems; A thing which never happened but once, and can never any
more, unless a Savior could again be born; so that there can never any more be
such a Mother, because never again such a Son. We read, Genesis 5. 2. that the
Sons of God joined themselves to the Daughters of Men, but that God himself
should vouchsafe a poor Virgin that honor he is pleased to bestow upon his
Church, to call her his Spouse, the great Creator, ( He by whom all things
Coloss. 1. 16, 17. Joh. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 2.
were made, and do consist,) not disdain to be made the Son of his own
Creature, and own himself as it were beholding to that Creature for something,
which he that has all things had not, a garment of flesh (such a garment, as he
can no more put off now than He can his Godhead, for, quod semel assampsit,
nunquam dimisit.) This, I say, was a strange Condescension in the Almighty, and
a peculiar honor done to the Holy Virgin, who was culled out for this purpose
from the rest of Women, and may therefore very well be styled Blessed among,
yea and above them, the top and glory of her Sex, as in whom the whole Trinity
now met to consult, not as at the Creation to make Man, but Deum-Hominem, to
unite God and Man in one Person of the Word; so that as the Father bespeaks the
Son, Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: The Blessed
Virgin might to her immortal honor say too, This day have I conceived thee.

Nor was this all; To be such a Mother, was indeed a high Privilege; but Esaias
9. 6.
to be a Mother, and yet still a Virgin, wonderful as that Son she brings
forth. This had the Prophet Esaias long before Mat. 1. 23.
foretold, chapter 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive: But the Prophet Jeremy,
not content with that, gives it out for a strange and unheard of thing, (and so
indeed it was) more strange than Christ's coming into the house, the doors
being shut, Joh. 20. 26. The Lord (says he, chapter 31. 22.) has created a new
thing in the Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man; i. e. A Virgin (still
continuing such, otherwise sure it were no new thing) shall in her Womb enclose
a Man child, and such a Man as the same Prophet styles Immanuel, God with us,
chap. 8. 8. V. Scultet. Evangel. Exercit. lib. 1. c. 46.
and chap. 9. 6. The mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace,
(enough to silence the incredulous blaspheming Jew;) so that these two Glories,
like the two Luminaries of Heaven, met in the Mother of our Lord, (which never
happened to any before, nor shall ever hereafter,) that of a Mother and of a
Virgin; the Fruitfulness of the one, and the Purity of the other.

But these things, as they were the Holy Virgin's Privileges, and in some sort
her Happiness too; so there was something that rendered her yet more blessed,
by being a Blessing to us, in conveying to us the greatest good that ever could
happen to Men. For as her Son is the Fountain of those living streams which
refresh the Sons of Men; so was this Mother the golden Pipe to derive them to
them. It Is of his fullness we all receive, but by her; The promise of our
Redemption, as it was as old as our Fall; Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpent's head; so was it literally fulfilled in this Woman,
of whom St. Paul says Christ was made, Gal. 4. 4. i. e. from whom He took the
matter of that Body, wherein He wrought out our Redemption; the full import of
St. Paul's (...) and St. John's too, Joh. 1. 14. For however the Anabaptist
dream of a Body framed in Heaven, which passed through the Holy Virgin as water
through a Conduit-pipe; yet cannot this fancy possibly consist with the work of
Man's Redemption, which could not have been performed but in such a Body as his
own; nor could the Seed of the Woman be said to bruise the Serpent's head, had
not Christ been conceived of that Seed; nor the Promise renewed to Abraham,
Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, have
been made good, had not the Mother of our Lord descended from his loins too.
And surely well may she be called Blessed, without whom we could never have
been so, since 'twas she that furnished those Materials that repaired our
ruins, from whose Blood also flowed that most precious One, which alone can
cleanse and redeem us. Our Mother Eve could brag when she had brought forth her
first-begotten, (and he but an untoward Child, for St. John tells us he was of
that wicked one the Devil, 1 John 3. 12. as all other Reprobates are there said
to be, verse. 10.) I have gotten a Man from the Lord, Genesis 4. 1. i. e. (as some
interpret the words) That famous Man the Lord, fancying Cain to be that Seed of
the Woman that should bruise the Serpent's head: But how truly may each of us
now say, Possedi Deum per Virginem, I have gotten the Lord my Redeemer by the
means of a pure Virgin, of whom my Savior was made Man, that I might be made
the Son of God. How much better may the Virgin Mary deserve the name of the
Mother of all the Living than Eve did, Genesis 3. 20. who at best conveyed unto us
but a Natural, whereas the former a Spiritual life, in giving us Him who is the
Life: so far was Eve from being Matter Viventium in this sense, that she brought
forth all her Posterity still-born into the World, dead in Ephesians. 2. 2.
trespasses and sins. She indeed hearkened to the Suggestions of an evil Spirit,
but the Holy Virgin to the Message of a good one; If she were the Mother of the
Living, then this, of the Predestinate; and if by the former Satan bruised our
heel, by this Anti-Eve we crush his head, being instated in a better condition
than we had forfeited. Now if they who were the first (...) Benefactors to
Mankind were thought worthy of divine Honors, (the first occasion of Idolatry,
there being nothing that renders a person more like God than to do good,
especially to oblige all Manking, nothing that could raise such Persons so high
in the Esteem of Mortals as such a large and comprehensive Goodness,) surely
none came so near the Almighty in this so divine a quality as the Holy Virgin
did; by whose means not only the Inhabitants of the Earth, but, in some sort
too, those of Heaven became certainly and immutably Col. 1. 20.
Blessed, confirmed in such a state of happiness by her Son as they are
incapable of losing; And therefore well might the Angel pronounce her Blessed,
who, with the rest of his Order, were so much obliged by her; And surely all
generations of Men much more, who in part owe unto her their recovery, and
those hopes they have of being one day (...) alike Blessed with them; and if
St. Paul was Blessed in being a chosen Vessel to bear Christ's name, then the
Holy Virgin much more, by conveying a humane Nature to him, who alone makes us
partakers of the divine one. All these advantages had the Mother of God;
glorious indeed, but not the chiefest part of her happiness; nor was she to
value her self for her relation, purely considered in its self; Yea, rather,
Blessed are they, says our Lord, who hear the Word of God and keep it.

Whereby it appears how little he set by any carnal propinquity, and how much
nearer and dearer to him the Righteous are than his own blood; not that he did
in the least despise his Parents, (for his own Example preaches Subjection to
them, Luke 2. 51.) but only prefer Spiritual kindred to Carnal, as he often
does, letting us know, That Mar. 3. 32, 35. Luke 8. 19, 21.
to do the will of his Father which is in Heaven, is, to be his Brother,
Sister and Mother, Matthew. 12. 50. That true Christian Heraldry is founded in
Grace, and not in Blood; That to be joined unto him in one Spirit is a closer
Union than to be united to him in the flesh, and to be obedient to his Commands
far more advantageous than to relate to his Person. Nay so little would our
Lord have us too to prize such outward things as these, that unless in some
cases we hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and our selves
too, he plainly tells us, we cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14. 26. And for this
reason Moses blessed Levi, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Who said unto his Father, and to his
Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew
his own Children; but observed God's Word, and kept his Covenant. This is
certain, that all outward favors and privileges, how pompous soever in
themselves, are wholly insignificant and ineffectual without the grace of
Obedience, being at best but gratioe gratis datoe, non gratum facientes, rather
ornaments than benefits; which as we are not thanklesly to over-slip, so
neither presumptuously to over-ween. See how little account St. Paul makes of
them, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Though we have known Christ after the flesh, have
familiarly conversed with him, been eyewitnesses of all those glorious things
he did, as his Apostles; yet now henceforth know we him no more, we disclaim
all such carnal acquaintance; and if we should know Christ no better, he would
not know us, nor own us for his; we might be nearly related to him, and yet be
far enough from him, and without him; for so it is expressly recorded of some of
his Brethren, that they did not believe in him; Joh. 7. 5. So far were they
from looking upon him as their Savior, that they took him for no better than a
madman, one besides himself, Mark 3. 21. (though in process of time some of
them indeed became his disciples) and no doubt of Christ's Genealogy not a few
were eternally lost. The Jews much prided themselves in being Abraham's sons,
and yet one of them that calls himself so, fryes in Hell. What did it avail
Saul to be a Prophet, or Judas an Apostle, when such privileges served them for
no other purpose but to enhanse their damnation? We read not of any dignified
with more glorious Prerogatives than these two, the Blessed Virgin and St. John
the Evangelist; the one for bearing our Savior in her Womb, and the other for
leaning on his Breast; yet how little had these things benefited them, had not
Faith and Piety seasoned such outward privileges, and made them as gracious as
they were glorious. Happier Mary for bearing Christ's Sayings in her Heart,
than Himself in her Womb; in that she partook of the Merit, than imparted the
Matter and Substance of his blood; 'Twas not so much the loveliness of her
Motherhood, as the lowliness of her Handmaidship that He regarded; And how much
happier St. John too, in carrying his Savior in his own bosom, than in leaning
on his. The far greater happiness of the two, but common to every one of us;
The more excellent way being our spiritual relation, without which Christ will
1 Cor. 12. 31. Heb. 2. 11.
be ashamed to call us his Disciples, Brethren or Mothers. Bring then but a
good Ear, but especially a good Heart; Let thy Savior in by that, and get him
formed in this most sanctified Womb of thy Soul; i. e. conceive him by thy
Faith in the hearing of his holy Word, and bring him forth by thy Obedience in
the practice of its divine Precepts, and then shall thou be a much happier
Mother of thy Lord, than if he had been a part of thine own bowels; Thou have
his own Word for it; Yea, rather, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God
and keep it; The proper way or means whereby every Christian is to be happy,
and more happy than the Mother of God, merely according to the flesh, and my
next part.

Blessed are they, 1. That hear. And no doubt, a Blessing belongs to that in
the first place. It Is a fundamental and original Duty, the Nurse of all other
Duties we owe to God; Hearing and Receiving the Word being the inlet to Faith
and Piety. 1. To Faith, for that comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. the sense of
divine as of humane Discipline. 2. To Piety; so our Savior, Job. 17. 17.
Sanctify them by they word, thy word is truth. For as the first Insinuations
of Sin were conveyed by the Ear; so are the first Inspirations of Grace let in
by the same door: with this, God began his Law, Deuteronomy. 4. 1. and with this,
Christ his Gospel too, Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. And his
voice alone we must hear, not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10. 4, 5. The proper
object to which our great Shepherd here limits our Hearing; being the Word of
God, not the uncertain Traditions or pretended Revelations of Fanatical Men,
vainly pufft up by their fleshly mind.

I shall not press the necessity of a Duty so frequently and clearly required
by the Scriptures, nor indeed need I, Men being generally so fully persuaded of
it: Jam. 1. 19.
and 'twere to be wished they were as swift to practice as they are to hear. All
their devotion now is placed in hearing; (as if like Athenians, their whole
time were to be spent in nothing else but either to tell or hear some new
thing;) All their serving God is an Ear-service, as their profession little
else but an Eye-service. We see many flock to Sermons and Lectures, just as
they use to do to Plays and Shows, only to feed their Eyes and Ears. Man's
whole Body is become 1 Cor. 12. 16, 17. Eccles. 1. 8.
one great Ear, and that such an itching one as is never to be satisfied with
hearing, no more than their Eye with seeing. Such a (...) there is in this
part, such a canine appetite and craving for spiritual food without any
digestion, Omnia te adversum spectantia, a continual taking in there is without
bringing forth any thing. This is certainly a common, and it is an evil disease
under the Sun, which Satan labors all he can to nurse up; nor is it a small
delusion of his to shrink us all into an Ear; for when he cannot draw us wholly
from the service of God, he makes us single out one part from all the rest, to
magnify that, and cry it up alone, with neglect, and even with some disgrace
to all besides it. Wherein how successful his policy has been in these our
days, appears by this, That the Church is generally so thronged at Sermons, and
so empty at God's service. It must needs appear strange to our reason, why
hearing of the Word should so much get the start of, and eat out all the rest
of the more substantial parts of God's service; whereas it is its self,
although the first, yet but one part of it, and subservient to practice, and
consequently as inferior to it as the means is to the end. And that the
Primitive Church had this opinion of it, its practice evidently declares, which
was to finish the Sermon before they began the Service, and by promiscuously
admitting all sorts of people, Heathens and Infidels, Jews, Schismatics and
Heretics, Catechumeni and Poenitentes, to the former; but totally excluding
such persons from their Assemblies when the Liturgy began, as that part of
divine Worship which none but holy and sanctified Men were in a due capacity,
in their esteem, to partake of. I urge not this to decry Preaching or Hearing,
but only to prefer doing to it as the more important Duty of the two, and to
which the Blessing is chiefly appropriated, Joh. 13. 17. as it is Jam. 1. 25.
and implied in the Text, which styles them Blessed that hear the Word of God,
but much more them who keep it.

But then what is it you will say to keep it? Is it to be a little moved with
it? To rejoice in it for a little season, or to tremble at it? Why this is no
more than what an Agrippa, a Herod, or a Felix might do. A few sudden qualms
of Conscience, and pangs of a superficial sorrow for sin; some faint desires
vanishing like flashes of Lightning as soon as they appear; some insignificant
resolutions of amendment and newness of life may be found in a Balaam, nay in
the most profligate wretches; Or, lastly, is it to applaud the Preacher and his
fine-spun Discourse, and to be ravished with his Eloquence? Some indeed there
were in the Prophet Ezekiel's Ezekiel. 33. 31.
time of that humor, that reckoned of Sermons no otherwise than of Songs; the
Music of a Song and the Rhetoric of a Sermon, all was one with them; they
could give a Prophet the hearing, commend his sweet air and delicate strains,
and that was all; Their devotion expired with the harmony: They hear thy words
(says God there speaking of them) but they will not do them. And of such
Auditors there are store enough at all times, who will afford the Preacher
nothing but their Ears; and no sooner is the Sand run out of his Glass, but his
Words are out of their Memories. Let us not mistake our selves; that word that
must save the Soul, must be an engrafted Jam. 1. 21.
word; not a superficial seed floating on the surface of the Heart, but taking
deep root there, and springing up in the visible actions of a good life. It Is
not the Conception, but the Birth of the new Man that makes us Christians; and
better were it for us that this divine Issue should never come to the birth,
than we want strength to bring it forth; and that Christ should never be formed
in us, than we prove abortive. But if by hearing we receive the immortal Seed
of his Word; if by a firm purpose of doing we conceive, by a longing desire
quicken, and by an earnest endeavor travel with it, then indeed God's Word,
yea God himself, the eternal Word is incarnated in us, and we become as much
his Mothers in the Spirit, as the Blessed Virgin was in the Flesh.

And herein was it that the Mother of God was in the best and most advantageous
sense Blessed, as one in whom the Word was twice Incarnated, her Lord and his
Gospel; much more Blessed in sucking the sincere Milk of the Word from her Sons
Paps (those golden ones, Revel. 1. 13.) than in affording him her own. 'Twas
her glory and her chiefest happiness that she kept all her Sons sayings, and
pondered them in her heart; an Eulogy given her no less than twice in one
Chapter of St. Luke, chapter 2. v. 19, 51. This sacred Ark had the two Tables of
the Law and the better Manna laid up in it, which she continually treasured up
in her heart, feeding upon it in her private thoughts, and digesting it in her
practice; being as well a Daughter as a Mother of God, and her Soul more
fruitful than her Womb. So that this Mary too chose the better part: It was, I
say, her Choice this; whereas to be the Mother of God but her Privilege. In
this latter capacity she only furnished her Son with a humane Nature, but in the
former she procured her self a participation of his divine one. There Christ
was made her Son, and here, her Savior; and it is upon the account of her Faith
Elizabeth blesses her, Luke 1. 45. and so does St. Augustine pronounce her
more happy, Percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi; nay he
plainly tells us, that this latter Conception had done her no good at all
without the former, Nihil Mariae profuisset (says he) Lib. de S. Virginit. c. 3.
nisi felicius Christum cord quam corpore gestasset. To bear Christ in her
Womb was little to the having the Holy Ghost in her Soul; and to conceive of
him little to the bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit, Faith, Humility,
Patience, Love and the like Graces, whereof she was a sacred Repository; like
the Ark, overlaid and in-laid with Gold, adorned with outward Privileges and
inward Graces, nay like that King's daughter, Psalm. 45. 14. more glorious
within than without. This Spouse of God shining out radiis Mariti, clothed
with that Woman, Revel. 12. 1. with the Son of Righteousness, who decked her
with his light as with a garment. And how could it be otherwise? How was it
possible that He on whom the Spirit rested and abode, should not Esaias 11.
impart of it to her in whom he so long Joh. 1. 31. chapter 3. v. 34.
dwelt, and in greater measures than to any mortal, He who himself received not
Coloss. 2. 3.
the Spirit by measure? If in him were hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, surely the Blessed Virgin must needs have been highly enricht by
them; and while he sanctified the Baptist in his Mother's womb, did he not
think we much more sanctify that Womb wherein, with himself, the fullness
Coloss. 2. 9.
of the Godhead dwelt bodily? where the whole Blessed Trinity met, the Father
being with her, the Son in her, and the Holy Ghost over-shaddowing her? Surely
being so near the Fountain of Grace and Glory, nay having it in her Soul, those
single Perfections which singly meet in others, all concentered in this great
Saint.

Among which give me leave to propose some of the more eminent ones to your
imitation; as, 1. Her Faith, in crediting the Message of the Angel. 2. Her
entire Resignation of her self to the Will Luke 2. 29.
of God, Ecce Ancilla Domini. 3. Her Modesty, in being troubled at the presence
of a Man, and those Praises he bestowed on her, being, it seems, unacquainted
with such guests or addresses, a thing which nowadays would perhaps be
construed ill breeding. 4. Her Prudence in examining a Message, which at first
blush seemed to look like a Temptation, casting in her mind what manner Luke 2.
34.
of Salutation that should be; so jealous was she of her honor, that she durst
not trust the divine Messenger with so choice a Jewel, till she saw it should
be safe; till he could find out a way to reconcile her, being a Mother, with
her Purity, otherwise to her even an Angel of light had been but an Angel of
darkness. This was not Unbelief in her (as 'twas in Zachary) but Caution; He
indeed required a Sign for that which was within the ordinary course of nature;
She none at all, though in a business far above nature; not in the least
questioning the thing its self, but desirous only to be informed of the manner
Luke 2, 34.
of it, since she knew not a man. 5. Add we to this her Devotion, in constantly
visiting God's Temple, where, after our Lord's Ascension, we find her assembled
with the Apostles and other Saints of God, Acts 1. 14. as in the frequent
exercise of the Acts thereof, Meditation and Prayer; It being a general
Tradition, that when the Angel delivered her his message, he found her on her
knees; and, if we may credit St. Bernard, V. Tail. Gr. Ex. r^. p. 17.
(but how warrantably I know not) at that very instant begging earnestly for
the Salvation of the World, and the Revelation of the Messiah. 6. Lastly, To
crown all, her profound Humility, (that heavenly Ladder whereby God descended
to her, and she mounted up to him) and that even in the midst of far higher
Ecstasies and Revelations than the great Apostle was afraid of; And yet no
pretense of Merit, no assuming to her self any portion of that glory which
belonged unto God; and she wholly ascribes to him in these words, He that is
Mighty has magnified me, and Holy is his Name.

Which clearly shows how inconsistent with, nay how diametrically opposite to
her Modesty and Humility those praises are which Popish flatterers so
frequently bestow upon the Blessed Virgin, and how impossible it is to excuse
their (...) that is, (as they are pleased to explain it) not so high a kind of
worship as belongs unto God, and yet higher than what is due to any other
Creature besides her self. A strange middle sort of Adoration, that has no
ground or foot-step in Scripture, and no better than flat Idolatry. Prayer and
Invocation are the Almighty's Prerogative; This Incense must not smoke but on
his Altar; and the calves of the lips are a sacrifice which must be offered to
none but to a God that hears prayer, Psalm. 65. 2. and can alone grant our
requests. This he challenges as his peculiar right, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me
in the time of trouble; so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise me. And to
him the Saints of God have always addressed their Petitions, David for one,
who, Psalm. 5. 2, 3. professes that unto him he would direct his Prayer. And
therefore it is observable that the Angel here salutes the Holy Virgin, but does
not pray to her; and her self says, that all generations shall call her
Blessed, not invocate her for Blessings, as the Papists do; and not only so,
but in other respects too equal her to God, as by freeing her from all sin,
both original and actual, (whereas her self, by calling Christ her Savior,
Luke 1. 47.
professes her need of him,) so especially by making her a vast and
inexhaustible Ocean of all perfection, the property of him alone in whom all
fullness dwells, and of whose fullness we all (the Virgin Col. 1. 19.
Mary not excepted) have received: and all this upon a plain mistake of the
word (...) which implies not any infused qualities, or inherent gifts, but
God's mere gracious acceptance of her. And yet as great an affront as this is
to the divine Majesty, there is yet one thing more intolerable, that these Men
not content to allow the Virgin equal to her Son, will needs give her a kind of
Command and Authority over him; as if now in Heaven he were to be subject to
her as once on Earth, and she were a Queen - Regent to govern and comptroll him
as it were in his Minority: Witness those expressions, Monstra te esse Matrem,
and, Jussu Matris impera salvatori, words which I dare not English, and which
their Rosaries and Litanies are stufft with. Nor does their Practice belly their
Expressions; their Addresses being more to the Mother, than to the Son; and her
Temples having almost swallowed up his, which are now become Shops of lying
Miracles; one of them especially, that of Loretto, all Wainscoted within with
them; and its self the greatest of all, as having been carried, if we will
believe them, from Bethlehem by Angels, and by them placed where now it stands.
I shall not trouble you with a description of all their fopperies, their
superstitious bowings, cringings, and lighting of Candles to our Ladies Images,
their ridiculous dressing and undressing them, their vows, offerings and
presents to these dumb Idols, so like the Cakes offered up to the Queen of
Heaven, Jer. 7. and the like; which if they do not out-doe, at least they bid
fair for Heathenish Idolatry; if this be not to worship the Creature more than
the Creator, it is at least Romans 1. 25. Gal. 4. 8.
to do service to her who by Nature is no God, and who can no more endure it
than St. Paul could a sacrifice, Act. 14. or the Angel in the Revelations,
chap. 19. 10. divine Worship; or, to come a little more home, than St. Peter,
to be styled Universal Bishop of God's Church; a Title they will needs force
upon him, though himself expressly disclaims it, 1 Pet. 5. 3. No; let us honor
the Blessed Virgin as becomes the Mother of God, not as a Goddess; she is but a
Creature how glorious soever, and we are not to make her an Idol, neither to
invoke her Name nor adore her Person; we allow her God's Mother, but not his
Rival; place her we may as near his Throne as Religion will suffer us, not in
it (in the Throne God will be Genesis 41. 40
greater than any) style her Queen of Saints, while Christ remains the
Sovereign King of them, and it is honor enough for this Queen to be solo Deo
minor, to be blessed even above the Angel that proclaimed her so; yea, if they
will have it, above all Saints and Angels too; but still below her Son, who is
over all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5.

In a word, Our endeavor should be to copy out those Perfections which were so
eminent in this Blessed Mother of our Lord; Her Faith, by our ready assent to
God's Word; Her Devotion, by frequently meditating on it (a book which, like
Ezekiel's roll, must be eaten Ezekiel. 3.
and well digested;) Her Purity, by Jam. 1. 27.
keeping our selves unspotted from the Jud. v. 23
World, and hating even the garment Rev. 14. 4.
spotted by the flesh, always remembering that they who follow the Lamb are
Virgins; Her Prudence, by trying the Spirits, by proving all things, but
holding fast that which is good, suspecting even an Angel from Heaven, could he
propose any thing to us that should seem to cross a Precept of Christ, and
dreading not only every little stain, but the very suspicion of it; Her
Obedience, by an entire submission to God's revealed Will, and, which is the
crown and perfection of all grace, her Humility. These are the Copies we are to
transcribe, the best Gifts to be coveted, such as will adorn and perfect us,
make us holy and glorious; other may have more pomp and luster in themselves,
these most use and benefit to us; and therefore let our aim be to be pure as
the Mother of God, we who are commanded to strive to be perfect, even as our
Father which is in Heaven is perfect. And if we hear the Word of God and keep
it as she did, the Lord will as certainly be with us as He was with her, and we
at last be with him where she now is, eternally Blessed in the fruition of the
most Blessed Trinity, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; To whom let us ascribe,
as is most due, everlasting glory, etc.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached on Christmas Day.
TITUS II. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
THE greatest blessing God could bestow upon us, or we receive, took its rise
from Man's sin. The sin of the first Adam was the cause, or at least the
occasion, of the Incarnation of the second. Had the former still continued in
Paradise, the latter had not come down from Heaven: Innocence was to be lost
before it could be recovered; nor was the Physician but for the sick, nor the
Redeemer but for the captive.

But as the first Man did not therefore sin, or was ordained to sin, that the
Son of God might be incarnated; so his Goodness, who can fetch light out of
darkness, took advantage by that sin to manifest its self in its expiation, and
his Wisdom contrived a way to make that very sin instrumental to a greater
good than Man had forfeited; which gave occasion to a Father to style Adam's
first Transgression Foelicem culpam, a happy crime, that procured him such a
Redeemer as could do him more good than 'twas in his own or Satan's power to
do him hurt, and so well repair his Ruin as to make it more advantageous to
him than his Innocence. He is now a gainer by his loss, his falling so low has
but raised him up the higher, being made more happy by his very unhappiness; so
that where Man's sin did abound, God's grace has much more abounded.

And never sure did it more abound than at this time, when the Son of God took
our humane nature upon him that he might unite it to his divine one; Visited us
from on high, to this end, that he might redeem us; was born only to dye for
us, clothed with our flesh to be in a capacity to suffer in it, and by his own
suffering to advance us to glory in Heaven.

And next to that his transcendent Mercy of giving us Heaven, is this; That He
prepares us for it; That He is pleased to refine as well as to exalt us. We may
now behold him as gracious in his Commands, as in his Returns; as kind in what
He exacts from, as what He bestows upon us; His reforming our Nature being the
greatest honor it ever received, next to his own wearing it. Had our Lord only
pardoned our sins, and not removed them, the guilt indeed might have been gone,
but not the shame; whereas now both are done away by Him, by his not only
imputing Righteousness, but requiring it. So that his Incarnation, besides the
primary end of redeeming us, has another too, which is to make us worth the
redeeming, nay capable of being truly redeemed, that is, of being made
Partakers of the fruit and benefit of his Redemption: For as Christ gives us
his Righteousness, so he expects we should return him ours; We receive indeed
all our Merit from Him, but upon condition that we afford him our Obedience. He
will save us from our sins, provided we forsake them. Nor is it enough for us
here to be innocent, if we be not holy; nor holy too, if not exemplary.
Holiness is the Badge and Livery of our Profession, and Perfection the Crown of
it. By that, we are his People; by this, his peculiar and chosen People indeed.
A Title due to none but those who are not content to do great things, if they
be not ambitious still of doing greater; if they have not a Zeal in some
measure answerable to their Obligation, and wholly give up themselves to Him,
Who gave Himself for us, that He might not only redeem us from all iniquity;
but withal, purify us to Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

In which Words we have,

1. The Person, in the Relative, Who. 2. His Bounty and Goodness, in the
clearest, the highest, and most endearing Expressions thereof, His giving
Himself for us. 3. The Design or End of this his Gift; and that twofold: 1.
Redemption, That He might redeem us from iniquity, and from all iniquity. 2.
Sanctification, That he might purify us to Himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works.

Of these in their order.

I. Who this is that gave Himself for I. Person, Who.
us, we read in the verse before, That it is our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. But if you would fully know who He was, you must go to the beginning of
St. John's Gospel, no one word being able to speak him out but that which
Himself is there styled by, and which He always was. If we should say, That is
God, we should not say enough, for He is also a Man: But how poor a thing is it
to say He is a Man, when He is also a God?

St. Paul prefaceth this Article thus, Great is the mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the flesh: Great sure, when it is the vast Complexum of the
Creator; and more, even a Creature too, where God is not all, and Infinity but
a part. He who is in all things else, All in all, is here not the whole: He who
did send, and who was sent; He who was given, and who gave Himself, shall make
but one part, being indeed both but one. St. Paul in opposition to one Heresy,
affirms Him to be really a Man; and in opposition to another, to be as really
over All, God blessed for ever. This Infant was the Ancient of days, born at
this time and before Eternity. Here you may behold Eternity beginning, and
Immensity confined; a Virgin Mother, and an Infant God. This is that which St.
Peter tells us the Angels desire to look into, but cannot see; Those
Intelligences understand not this; They have with us the Benefit, not the
Knowledge of it; And when themselves are saved by it, they can never understand
how we came to be so. They are indeed naturally above us, (for God has made us
lower than the Angels,) but now is Psalm. 8. 5.
our Nature set above them. The Scripture is very sparing in discovering those
glorious Beings; yet this we read, that they worship God and tend us, are
ministering Spirits to his honor and our preservation. How did it surprise
them, think we, after so many Ages to see Immutability change, and God become
what He once was not? He turned the chiefest of their Order out of Heaven for
endeavoring to be like Him; and Himself became like us to bring us thither.
Their Maker made Himself a Man, and perhaps received some addition by this
diminution. Before, He could indeed Command; but now He cannot only do that,
but, what is often more, He can also Obey. Besides, that He can prescribe Laws,
He can now observe them; Give the Rule, and be the Example. Thus does
Almightiness, if not increase, yet exert new vigor in the strength of its very
Infirmities; and the Humanity becomes a qualification superadded to the
Divinity; the Veil not only to cover, but adorn it.

The Stoics have an impudent brag, That Men who live according to the rules of
Virtue and their Sect, are to be preferred before God Himself; because, say
they, He is good by the Necessity of his Nature; They, by the Wisdom of their
Choice. Temptations never assault Him, but these have conquered them; that is,
He is indeed without Temptations, but themselves above them. To complete their
happiness, there is nothing wanting but Immortality, which although they cannot
attain; they do more than so, for they deserve it. See here now a supposition,
which no Philosophy nor Impudence it self could ever fancy; God himself
submitted to the duties, to the infirmities of a Man, to every thing of him
besides the sin; nay, that He might be like us in every thing, He came as near
sin as He could possibly, without the guilt of it; for He was made sin for us,
though 2 Cor. 5. 21.
he would not commit any; He would be a Criminal, though without a Crime; or a
Criminal with our Crimes, though not his own.

In this low condition of his see the Son of God's Love, bearing his wrath;
submitting to, as if He were not One with Him; and besides forsaken by Him, as
though He had not been his very Self. But that our Lord may not lose the
Glories of his Humility, the Honor of his Manhood, the Exaltation which was
due to his being humbled; so that the Man has gotten a name and a place above
Angels, and only lower than the God Himself always was: He who was Heir of all
things, is not ashamed of an Inheritance He has obtained. This Title of his
own procuring was thought not unworthy to be joined to that He was born with,
and the Man has got a Name the God disdains not to be called by. See now Him,
who made the Heavens, for more than Thirty years together, behaving Himself as
a Candidate for them; meriting what He was born to, as if his own Actions had
been to instate upon him his Nature; his Obedience to qualify him for his
Supremacy; his Submission to God to assert his Equality with him; and from his
very Humanity have a kind of Title to his Divinity. He has a Throne in Heaven
due to his very leaving it; and that which He has purchased so very glorious,
that some have mistaken it for his Eternal one.

To all this which He has obtained for Himself, let us add what He has
merited for us in that flesh He this day took upon Him, and wherein He wrought
out our Redemption, offering up Himself to God, and giving Himself for us, the
greatest gift He could give or we receive; whereof in the next place.

II. Who gave Himself for us. Every II. Part, Christ's Bounty.
word here has its weight. 1. He gave. 2. Gave Himself; and 3. For us.

1. He gave. A Gift this as much above Man's Desert, as 'twas above his
Comprehension. 'Twas a free gift too; no Attractive here but misery; no Motive
but his own goodness. The Romanists indeed, to establish their rotten Doctrine
of Merit, will needs persuade us that some Ancient Fathers, before and under
the Law, did ex congruo, if not ex condigno, merit Christ's Incarnation, or at
least the hastening of its accomplishment. This conceit of theirs they mainly
ground on Genesis 22. 18. where it is said to Abraham, In thy seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed, Because thou have obeyed my voice; As if that,
Because, denoted the meritorious Cause of Christ's Incarnation to have been
Abraham's Obedience; whereas Zachary ascribes it not to the Merits of any the
most holy persons of old, but to God's mercy and free promise to the
Forefathers, Luke 1. 72. St. Paul to the riches of God's mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. To
his benignity and loving kindness to mankind here, Tit. 3. 4. As our Lord
Himself does also, John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that He gave his only
begotten Son; and so well did that his Son love it too, that He gave Himself
for us, says the Text.

2. Himself. And surely more He could not give. For as the Apostle speaks in
another case, Because God could Heb. 6. 13.
swear by no greater, He swear by Himself: So may we here, because He had no
greater thing to give us, He gave us Himself. The Almighty could go no higher
than this; Infinite goodness was here at its non ultra. He who is All in All,
could bestow no more than that All. More then He could not give; but could He
not have given less, and that less have been enough? Or might not the party
offended have freely remitted the Offense without any farther satisfaction? or
have obliged some other to make it? Sent some glorious Creature, some blessed
Spirit of the noblest Order of created Beings to be a sufficient expiatory
Sacrifice for Mankind, and so have saved Himself the trouble of an Incarnation?
It Is not for us here to be too inquisitive, what God might have done; let us
rather admire and extol his Goodness for not contenting Himself with less than
what He did, and withal dread the severity of his Justice not to be atton'd by
any other Sacrifice than that of his own Son. And indeed the most glorious, the
most innocent and perfect Creature God could make being but Finite; it cannot
possibly be conceived how it could satisfy an infinite Justice; much less was
it in the power of Man to satisfy for himself, of the party guilty to expiate
its own guilt: This knot was too hard for any but a God to untie; Nay the
Godhead its self, it seems, could not do it without the assistance of the
Manhood: For as the divine Nature could not suffer, so the humane one could not
merit; This furnished the blood, but that made it passable and valuable; None
then but He who united both Natures in the Person of the word Incarnate; He who
was (...) God and Man, could be a perfect Reconciler of both Parties. This, as
his Justice and our Necessities required; so his alone Goodness prompted him
unto, and his as infinite Wisdom found out the only way to do it, by taking
our Nature upon Him, and so giving Himself for us.

3. For Us. This circumstance does yet very much heighten the Blessing, and set
off God's infinite Love to Mankind, That He should give Himself for us, us
Sinners and Rebels, and for us alone. Were there no other Objects for his Mercy
besides us? Were there not Angels to be redeemed as well as Men? Or were they
not worth the Redeeming, who were by Nature so much above them? That God should
pass by them, and only vouchsafe to look upon us, This is the great Mystery of
his Love; And that He did so, is clear from Heb. 2. 16. Verily He took not on
Him the Nature of Angels, but He took on Him the Seed of Abraham; whereupon He
is called the Savior of all Men, but not of Angels, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Whether it
was because the sin of Angels had more of V. Davenant. Colos. P. 92.
Wilfulness in it, and less of Temptation; or because they did not All fall, as
we did, some of them still preserving their Station, let the Schools dispute.
These may serve for plausible Conjectures; but to find the true cause hereof,
we must go out of the World, and seek it in the bosom of the Father, and in the
bowels of his own Son, whose Love did even transform him into us this day;
whereon He was born for no other purpose, but to dye for us, and by his
meritorious Death rescue us from the slavery of Sin, the primary end of his
Incarnation, and the third Thing to be spoken to.

III. That He might redeem us. For III. Part, 1. End. Redemption.
the better comprehending the benefit we reap from the Incarnation of our
blessed Lord; We must consider the main end and design of it, which, the Text
says, was to redeem us. Now Redemption being a Relative, supposes Bondage. (For
we cannot say his Irons are struck off, who never had them on; or pronounce him
released, who never was a prisoner.) Now such was all Mankind till Christ
delivered it, by taking upon Him the form of a servant, and being made in the
likeness of men. For as Aristotle has made some men born slaves, and, as
others tell us of a Law whereby all the Posterity of Captives were Bondmen; So
in Divinity it is a certain truth, that not some, but all Mankind are born under
the Fork, and that the Womb of our first Parent was like that in Tacitus,
Subjectus servitio Uterus, a Womb from which issues a race of Slaves. Christ
then found us in Captivity, and that, according to the Divinity of the Schools,
a threefold one. 1. To Sin, as the Merit obliging. 2. To Death, as the Reward
or Punishment. 3. To the Devil, as to the Executioner. And to each of these the
Scripture has assigned a Dominion over us, and that in terms of the greatest
subjection, and which in the conveyance of Power give the strongest Empire. For
the first, St. Paul has told us, That we are the servants of Sin, Romans 6. 20.
so far it is our Master; And in another place it is said to reign in our mortal
Bodies, That makes it our Prince. And ver. 12.
indeed as some have found out a platform of Government among the fallen
Angels, who, though their Principles be crooked, yet being obeyed by Wills as
crooked, observe an irregular Rule and a perverse Order even in Hell; so Sin
rules in us too by Principles: For there is, says St. Paul, a Law of Sin. Rom
7. 23.
But then it is such a Law, as if it should be Treason for any Subject not to
Murder his Natural Prince, or Adultery not to Ravish, or Blasphemy not to take
God's Name in vain. It Is such a Law, as if two Anti-Tables should be written,
which should make it Sin, not to break the Commandments. Lastly, Let the
Apostle tell you what Law it is, It Is a Law Romans 7. 23.
of the Members warring against the Law of the Mind; and not only warring, but
bringing it into Captivity, Romans 7. 23. Sin herein far exceeding the Author of
it; For he only aspired to be like the Highest, but Sin has made an inversion
in the Soul; advancing Sense into the Chair of Reason, and placing the Beast
above the Man. And though it may leave us to a natural liberty in moral
actions, (for it is harsh to think that Justice and Temperance are but gilded
Sins,) yet for actions of Grace it has so glewed and settered the Soul, that it
cannot possibly mount up to Heaven. 2. Next, for Death, Men have made a
Covenant with that, says the Scripture; Esaias 28. 15.
and, if Contract be not enough, we read, Wisd. 1. v. 14. of a Kingdom of
Death; so that Christ did not only find us Captives, but Captives slain. Teneo
a primordio homicidam culpam, says Tertullian: Adam's Throat was our open
Sepulcher; who, in that fatal Apple, did not only murder his Children like
Saturn, but, like Thyestes in the Tragedy, did eat them. After that
Transgression, there passed an Act upon us, It is appointed for Heb. 9. 27.
all Men once to dye; Nay it were a degree of happiness to dye but once, if
nothing remained for punishment (for nothing can suffer nothing.) But we were
to be raised to another Death, and, like drowsy Malefactors, that had lain
down with their Sentence, were to be awakened out of sleep, to be put upon the
Rack.

3. The Scripture almost everywhere styles the Devil the Prince of this World;
His Kingdom had enlarged its self from that place, about which the Schools
dispute, to every rebellion and disorder of the Soul; where as in a conquered
Province, per cupiditates regnavit, says St. Augustine, He reigned by his
Proconsul Sins; There also making himself the Prince of Darkness, by our
ignorance; and the Prince of the Air, by raising Tempests through all the
Regions of Man, and exercising an universal and absolute Power over him. For
such was his power in the World, when the Savior of it came into it. There was
then a general defection from God; Satan's Synagogue had in a manner swallowed
up God's Church, who had but one corner of the World left him, and therein for
a long time but a moving Tabernacle; and when a fixed habitation, but one
house, wherein a very few to serve him; while the Devil's Temples were
everywhere crowded with Priests and Sacrifices, and his Altars smoked in all
places with Incense: so that the Earth, and the fullness thereof, seemed now
his; and he, though cast out of Heaven, to have revenged himself, in some sort,
of God by thus dispossessing him, as it were, of the Earth. Nor was the Devil's
power more Universal than 'twas Absolute, over men's Bodies and over their
Souls too. Their Bodies he possessed and tormented at pleasure, insomuch that his
very Priests might have received Death with as much ease as they did his
Oracles, entering into Men as he did into the Hoggs; hurrying them violently
into perdition; commanding Parents to make their Sons and Daughters pass
through the fire to him; tearing and Luke 9. 39. Mat. 17. 15
bruising those he had got into, and casting them sometimes into the water and
sometimes into the fire: Nor did he tyrannize less over Men's souls than
bodies, blinding their understanding, putting out the light of natural reason
in them; first corrupting their Judgments, and then their Manners; from Error
in judgment, the passage being natural and easy, to Error in practice; and
accordingly St. Paul tells us how vain men became in their imaginations, even
to worship the Creature instead of the Creator; to change the glory of the
uncorruptible God into Images made like to corruptible Men, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things; which made God give them up to all
manner of uncleanness, as you may read at large, Romans 1. 21, etc. In such
slavery had the Devil not only Heathens, (his own people, as I may call them,)
but even the Jews themselves, God's chosen people; who after so many Miracles
of Power and Mercies, so many excellent Statutes and Ordinances to direct them
in the true manner of his Worship, as had not been delivered to any Nation
besides, did not for all this fall short of the worst of Heathens either in
matter of erroneous judgment or vicious practices: The profane Sadducee had
corrupted all good Manners, and the hypocritical Pharisee perverted the Law by
his false Glosses and Comments on it; so that when our Savior appeared on
Earth, an universal deluge of Wickedness had overspread the face of it: And
thus all Mankind being the Devil's by right of Conquest 2 Timothy 2. 26.
(...) taken by him as it were in War, (the true import of that word) and bound
fast to him with his Chains of darkness of gross error and vitiousness; 'twas
high time for the Son of God to come down, to rescue miserable Men from these
several Captivities; which he did three manner of ways: 1. By Commutation. 2.
By Conquest: and 3. By way of Ransom, or Purchase.

1. By Commutation. For when we were prisoners to Death by sin, God made an
exchange, delivered his Son over to it for us, became our Scapegoat, like the
Ram substituted in the place of Isaac; and, as the Apostle speaks, tasted death
for every man, that we might not be devoured Heb. 2. 9.
and swallowed up by it.

2. By Conquest, as it referrs to Power; and thus our Lord offered violence to
Hell; snatched us as brands out of its fire, and rescued us as so many preys out
of the teeth of the roaring Lion; delivering Col. 1. 13. Heb. 2. 14.
us from the power of darkness, and translating us into his kingdom;
vanquishing Romans 16. 20.
death, and him that had the power of death, the Devil, and treading him under
our feet: And not content with that, he spoiled principalities and powers,
making Col. 2. 15.
a show, or as the word (...) imports, an example of them openly, and triumphed
over them in himself, or in his Cross.

3. By way of Purchase or Ransom, as it referrs to Justice. Thus Christ made a
perfect satisfaction to God by laying down a price for us, and paying the very
utmost farthing of our debt; and so came not only to give us an Example, as
Socinians fondly dream, (which the Prophets of old might, nay every good and
virtuous Man may still do, and in this sense become our Savior as well as
He;) And therefore St. Peter plainly distinguishes these things, between
Christ's suffering for us, and his leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. And the
Scripture everywhere is express to this purpose, That Christ came to give
himself a ransom for all, so says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Nay so says Christ
Himself, Mat. 20. 28. He came to satisfy for us, the Joh. 16. 11.
clear import of the (...) and the like words so frequently occurring in
Scripture; and of those expressions of St. Paul, of Christ's being made sin and
a curse for us; his 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. Gal. 3. 13. Col. 2. 14.
blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and the like.
These were the several ways whereby Christ freed us, and this was the main
design and end of his coming in the flesh this day; and we can never truly
value the Blessing of it, but by reflecting on the Misery of our former
slavery, whereby we became Servants to Corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
and so beneath and viler than Corruption its self, as the Servant is below his
Master, (the Condition of every one Joh. 8. 34.
that commits sin, and is at the mercy and under the power thereof, its
eternal drudge, forced to go and come as it bids him,) and consequently lay
under the guilt of Sin, and so obnoxious to God's Judgment, and under the
sentence and condemnation of Death; all our lifetime Heb. 2. 14.
subject to this bondage too, and at the mercy of our most cruel and implacable
enemy the Devil; who could have no power over us but what our Sin gave him.

And now that we are restored to this glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, let
us stand fast in this our Liberty. The Son of God has done his part, He has
made us free indeed, if we will be Joh. 8. 36.
so, (for nothing can re-enslave us but our own wills,) and it is strange we
should desire to be slaves when we may be free; nay, a strange choice this,
rather to be Sin and Satan's slaves than God's freemen; To be not so much
conquered by Hell, as willingly subject to it; not so much Pressed men, as
Volunteers in its Service; To be led by Satan at his will, and with our own
too; in love with his chains of darkness, 2 Timothy 2. 28.
and desirous to have our Ears bored through with his Awl in token of our
Eternal vassalage. Doubtless Christ, by coming down from Heaven, never designed
Redemption for such willing Slaves; never intended to buy them who sell him,
and that for naught, (as every Sinner does;) nay, who sell themselves* with
Ahab, to do wickedly: He did not put such a price into fools hands that will
not sue out their freedom with it; nor give men this liberty only to be
licentious, and so no otherwise free than, as St. Paul Romans 6. 20.
expresses it, from righteousness. Did He therefore break off Sin and Satan's
yoke from our necks, that we should cast off his; or make us the Sons of God,
that we should make our selves the Sons of Belial; impatient of any yoke,
though it be of his own most easy and light one? Did He therefore cancel our
old debts, that we should study to make new ones; as if the end of his coming
in the flesh had not been to redeem us from our old Conversation, but to it? No
sure: He came to buy us; Ye are bought with a price, says our Apostle; 1 Cor.
6. 20.
and therefore ought we to glorify God in our bodies, and in our spirits,
which are Gods: God's, as well by right of Redemption as of Creation. If we be
delivered by Him from the hand of our Ghostly Enemies, it is that we should
serve Him without fear indeed, but not cast off his fear. And surely the
obligation is very strong and binding, and the Consequence unavoidable; He has
saved us, and therefore we must serve Him; promote the honor of our Deliverer,
and advance the interest of this our great Lord and Master. Servants, says the
Philosopher, are but (...) living Tools or Instruments to be used or employed
at the discretion of their Masters. They are not sui juris, not their own Men,
and all that they acquire is for him they serve: Nay, by the Civil Law,
ingratitude to their deliverer did make Men forfeit the benefit of their
freedom. And surely, if we abuse Ours, and Him that bestows it, Our Lord may
justly return us to our former slavery; make us Satan's slaves once more, who
refuse to be God's freemen; and his slaves we are, while bound unto him by any
one of his Chains; and since the least of them will be strong enough to tie us
fast to him, let us break all his bonds asunder, and cast away all his cords
from us.

An Obligation which lies upon us as at all times, so now especially when we
are to partake of the benefit of that Redemption Christ has wrought out for us:
His Blood was the price of it, ( In whom we have Redemption through his blood,
the Remission of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7.) and the Cross the Altar where that price
was paid, or else there could have been no perfect reconciliation for us. So
the same Apostle, Col. 1. 20. Having made peace through the blood of his Cross,
by him to reconcile all things. So that remission of sins, peace with God and
with our selves, freedom from the slavery of Sin, Death and Satan; all this is
the purchase of Christ's blood shed upon his Cross, and applied to us in his
blessed Sacrament, to which we are now invited. Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, says Christ, Mat. 11. 28. In like
manner does he bespeak us here too; Come unto me all ye that are in bondage to
Sin and Satan, and I will release you; Subdue the power of them by my grace,
and restore you at last to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; Let the
door-posts of your Hearts be sprinkled with my blood, and the destroying Angel
shall pass, and not hurt you. O let us then hearken to His most gracious
invitation; and having such encouragement, draw near, to his Holy Table, with a
true heart in full assurance of faith; and Heb. 10. 22
for the time to come wholly give up our selves to Him, who gave Himself for
us, this day of his Birth, by taking our Flesh, and now offers up Himself again
for us at his Passion, whereof this Sacrament is so lively a representation,
and seal of our Redemption. In a word, as Christ has redeemed us, so let us for
the time to come walk as the redeemed of the Lord, and his peculiar people,
that so we may obtain those Blessings which belong to such, both here and
hereafter. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED The Sunday after Christmas.
TITUS II. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
I Need not be very exact in repeating what I so lately delivered hence to you
on these words, it being so fresh in your Memories: Only give me leave, for the
better carrying on of this Second Part of my Discourse, to name the Heads I
then proposed; which were these.

1. The Person, Who gave himself, Christ Jesus, God and Man.

2. His infinite Bounty and Goodness, in the clearest, highest and more
endearing Expresses thereof, His giving himself for us. A free Gift, a great
one too; for surely a greater thing God could not give than Himself; and an
undeserved Gift; the parties on whom it was bestowed being Sinners and Enemies
to God, and so in no manner of capacity to receive or deserve it.

3. The Design or End of that Gift; and that twofold:

1. Redemption, from the slavery of Sin, Death and Satan. And thus far I then
proceeded. That which now remains to be spoken to, is,

First, What Christ chiefly designed to redeem us from, and that is said to be
Iniquity; and withal, the extent of that Redemption, All iniquity.

2. The other great End of Christ's giving himself for us, namely
Sanctification; To purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Of these in their Order.

Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from iniquity; From our
slavery and bondage to Sin, not from our subjection to Men. This was no part of
that liberty Christ came to purchase for us. The Servant is still obliged to
perform Obedience to his Master; nor does Christianity give Him here any
Manumission. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters Ephesians. 6. 5.
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart,
as unto Christ; that is* with all diligence and sincerity, as unto Christ, who
sees your hearts, and lays this Command on you. Nor, 2dly, does the Law of
Christ exempt Subjects from that subjection they owe to their natural and
lawful Princes: A Jewish conceit, which many primitive Christians were too
ready to entertain, especially such as having newly shaken hands with Moses;
thought that at the same time they cast off his Yoke, they might lawfully
renounce all Obedience to Heathen Governors. We know the Jews expected such a
glorious conquering Messiah, as should give them the Necks of their Enemies,
and the Empire of the whole World; and accordingly, to strengthen this fancy,
they wrested all those obscure passages of the Prophets to a literal, which
were only meant in a spiritual Sense. A conceit more excusable in a people so
long enured to a Carnal Economy; which made their Thoughts so low, that they
could rise no higher than the Milk and Honey of a Temporal Canaan. But our
Savior has expressly confuted this their gross error, Joh. 18. 36. by telling
Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this World; no more than it was his
business to cancel any natural or civil Obligations between Men, or break those
bonds wherein they stood related and engaged one to another. He came to save
his people indeed, but, as the Angel expresses it, from their sins, and no
otherwise; Mat. 1. 21. That is, not only from the guilt of them, and the
punishment due to that guilt; but also to rescue and free them from the power
and dominion of their sins, from that course of vicious living, wherein
themselves, with the rest of Mankind, had before been engaged: A slavery which
of all others being the saddest, (it being a kind of liberty to be given up to
the lusts of Men, in comparison of being delivered up to those of our own
hearts,) nothing but the Son of God could deliver us from it; and we find all
his Attributes engaged in that task; his infinite Wisdom to find out a way to
glory between God's Justice and Man's Sin; his infinite Power employed in
accomplishing that way; his infinite Mercy discovered in pardoning, and his
infinite Grace in subduing and conquering Sin. And that this was the great
design of God's sending his Son into the World, and of his giving Himself for
us, we learn from the 11 and 12 Verses of this very Chapter: The grace of God,
says our Apostle there, that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men,
teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. So Acts 3. 26. St. Peter
tells the Jews, that God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
them; how? not in saving them from their Temporal enemies, but in turning every
one of them from his iniquities. St. John says the very same thing too, though
in different words, 1 John 3. 8. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil; the word there is
(...), that he might dissolve, or loosen those chains of Satan, wherewith he
had fast bound and kept all men in captivity to Himself. And ver. 5. of that
chapter, Christ is said to be manifested to take away our sins, i. e. as to
free us from the guilt of them, by his 1 John 1. 7. Revel. 1. 5.
Blood; so from the 1 Cor. 6. 11.
filth and stain of them, by his Spirit. Thus you see 'twas iniquity Christ
came to redeem us from, and, how, as much as in us lies, we frustrate the very
end of his coming, and of his redeeming us, if we enslave our selves to those
sins, from which he came to free us. If our own interest, even that of our
eternal Salvation, be not enough, let the kindness and infinite love of God in
stooping so low as to become one of us, to redeem us from those sins, which
make us worse than the beasts that perish, oblige us to quit them. By
undertaking* the Faith of Christ, every Christian ties himself to a strict
life; Let every one, says the Apostle, that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and not only from some, but all kinds of it; from
All iniquity, even as Christ redeemed us from All.

2. Without which addition our Redemption had been but lame and imperfect, but
our Slavery had not been so; since any one unmortified Sin is enough to render
us its Vassal. There are indeed too many Rimmonists among us, that would be
content to allow Christ something, but not all; to part with many, but not
every sin; to defy grosser ones, and utterly inconsistent with their Christian
profession, but not such as they are pleased to call their failings of
Infirmity and the spots of Children. These Men consider not what the Text says,
That Christ having redeemed us from all iniquity; to retain any one known sin,
is to despise and make void his Redemption, at least to themselves; and that to
allow themselves in that one, be it never so small to their apprehension, is
still to remain in the bond of iniquity, any part of Sin's wages entitling them
to its service: For this, at best, is but partial Obedience to God; and every
partial Obedience does as well imply our partial Disobedience to Him also. And
where is that Man, who if he may have but one darling Sin, and be suffered to
enjoy that, would not willingly bate you all the rest? That would not be exact
in some duties, if he might commute for others? One Man will be as sober as you
would have him, if he may be allowed to be proud; and another as chaste, so he
may have leave to be revengefull. But these middle sort of people are like to
get little benefit by Christ's Redemption; They have the fate of Neuters to be
hated by both Parties; like Borderers, to be equally spoiled by both Nations.
And surely if this state be not the worst, it is certainly the most troublesome,
where the Man's Practices thwart his Principles; such a one is not less divided
from himself than from his God; His single self is at least two parties; His
Heart's the seat of a perpetual Civil War; He is often led Captive into both
quarters; and while he renews his strength, it is only for a fresh defeat; and
he lays in treasure to no other end, but to be worth another pillage. And there
is one thing highly considerable in the case of this middle person, That he
has neither the comforts of Virtue, nor the pleasure of Sin; the satisfaction
of doing his duty being sowred by his thoughts of the frequent omissions of it.
When a Man loves God, and hates his Brother, is a severe and a proud person;
such a one is just so excellent as to deserve our pity, because he has
undergone the trouble of doing some good, and missed the reward of it: In whom
so much Virtue was in vain; so many good things to no purpose; and who
possessed such rare advantages, that it might be the more remarkable how he
lost them too. These have the sad honor of being instances how near Men may
come to Happiness, and yet fail of it; They shall have the miserable Comfort,
that in them it shall be noted how much choice treasure may be cast away. Thus
what the Historian Tacitus.
says of a Nation, may be affirmed of Mankind in a Moral sense, Nec totam
libertatem pati possunt nec totam servitutem; That they would be neither
absolute slaves to sin, nor wholly free from it; be neither under the law of
Righteousness, nor altogether under that of Iniquity; that is, not wholly
Christ's enemies, nor yet well his friends. But as it was his design to free us
wholly from the slavery, so likewise to cleanse us from the stain and pollution
of every sin; As to be our Redemption, so our Sanctification; He came to
rescue, and withal, to refine us; To purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works; The second great End of his coming in the flesh, and the
last thing observable.

To purify, etc. Of all the Religions which ever were yet in the World, there
is not any that has so provided for the regulating of humane actions as
Christianity has done. All others have rather been employed in Expiations for
sin, than Deleteries of it; in performing such rights for which God should
pardon them, rather than in doing such actions for which he should love them;
the utmost of all their hopes being but for a Remission, whereas ours aim at a
Reward. This bewails our infirmities, so as to draw us from them, and fit us
for that happiness which it designs to procure us. And therefore He, who was
the Author thereof, did never intend to justify us by his Righteousness,
unless he might also sanctify us by his Spirit; or procure us pardon for past
sins, without securing us, as far as we were capable, from future ones. That
was indeed the proper task of his Priestly; This, of his Prophetic Office;
There he did expiate, Here he continually teaches us, not only to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, but withal, to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world; and that both by his Precepts and his Example;
which how effectual they are, if duly observed and followed, to the cleansing
of us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, beyond whatever the World saw
till He came into it, will easily appear to any that shall confront Christ's
Precepts (particularly those delivered in his Sermon on the Mount) and his
Practice with those of Heathens or Jews either. From the former of these two,
what Purity could be expected, whose very Religion its self was Impurity? whose
Divinity taught Men to violate Humanity, and whose ceremonious Worship was
nothing else but a Solemnity of the foulest Vices. Their Practices and
Principles, their Lives and Judgments, having been alike corrupt, as St. Paul
describes them, Romans 1. Nor was it possible how it should be otherwise, where
Men's Sins and their Religion were the same thing; where their Gods and their
Inclinations did equally contribute to Wickedness. The most abominable Sins we
know among them had their Temples, where Theft, Drunkenness and Adultery were
adored; and to prostitute their Bodies, was most sacred; and their very
Altar-fires did kindle those foul heats, from whence it is that Uncleanness is
so often in Scripture styled Idolatry. And this was the condition of the
Heathenish World before our Lord's Incarnation. It Is true indeed, that the more
intelligent part of Mankind was not so debauched in its Understanding, nor
altogether so loose in its Practice. Some few possibly there were who did a
little resist the common stream, and still retain so much of natural reason as
served them to discover the follies and impurities of others, but very little
to reform either others or themselves. Something perhaps it did toward that
too, and in all likelihood make way for the more easy admission of
Christianity; which gave occasion to that unwary expression of one who styled
Aristotle Christ's Forerunner in Naturals, as St. John Baptist was in
Spirituals: And upon the like ground it is that others affirm Christ's
Incarnation to be clearly deducible from Plato's Writings. How warrantably, I
know not; but this I know, That some of the Heathen Philosopher's Virtues are
little better than Christian men's Vices; and many of those Rules they give us
to walk by very crooked; nor did the exactest of them strictly observe them, or
follow their own Prescriptions. And to say the best of the Rules themselves,
they were such as were fitted to the outward Man, and did not at all require
that inward Purity of the Heart which Christ has severely enjoined his
Disciples; and is indeed the most effectual and only proper instrument to beget
true Holiness in Men. Wherein the Christian Religion has as well exceeded the
Jewish, as the Heathenish one; which entertained and amused its self rather
with external performances affecting the Sense, than divine and spiritual,
which alone could purify the Soul. The reason the Apostle gives why the legal
Sacrifices could not make him, who did the service, perfect, as pertaining to
the Conscience, because they stood in meats, and drinks, and carnal Ordinances,
Heb. 9. 9, 10. Nor could all their other Purifications do much neither toward
the cleansing of the Mind, which might be still in the Mire, while the Body was
in the Laver, and remain as bestial as those Creatures to which it was
beholding for its cleansing. Besides, that the Jewish Promises being so remote
and obscure, so low and mean, and relating so much to this life, that it is
questioned by some whether they pointed at all to any other; they could have
but little influence on the more spiritual part of Man, which can never rest
satisfied with what is so unproportioned to, and so much less than its self.
All which defects are abundantly supplied by Christ, who has not only given us
better Precepts, but, as the Apostle says, established them on Heb. 8. 6.
better and clearer Promises; such as in their nature are most apt to engage
us, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of 2 Cor. 7. 1.
flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

To all which we may add the powerful assistances of God's grace, and the
force and efficacy of Christ's example; whereby He has not only pointed out the
way to us, but traced it Himself, being both the way and the truth. All such
pressing Motives to Purity of life, that it is Morally impossible for any to
name the name of Christ, and not to depart from 2 Timothy 2. 19. (...)
all Iniquity. And therefore Athenagoras in his Apology for Christianity,
plainly tells us, (and it is a great truth,) That no Christian can be a bad man,
unless he be a Hypocrite; or pretend to so holy a Master, and be so unlike Him:
To behold the Lamb of God without spot or 1 Pet. 1. 19.
blemish, and be himself a Leopard. And surely He that shall consider how that
the whole Discipline of the Jewish Religion was but Purity in Type, and all the
Ceremonies of their Worship but so many Figures, or rather Doctrines of
Cleanness, must needs grant that Purity which the Christian Religion advanced,
and which the Mosaical one did but adumbrate, to have been of a far higher
strain; and cannot but in reason confess there lies now upon him a much
stronger obligation to Purity, he being not only washed in Christ's own blood,
(that blood which alone can purge his conscience from dead Heb. 9. 14.
works to serve the ever-living God,) but baptized with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire. And now tell me whether any can well pretend to be redeemed by that blood
wherein he finds no power to sanctify him? Without doubt, whatsoever Christ
works for us, He works in us too. If he clear us from the guilt of sin, he
does likewise cleanse us from the pollution of it; If he free us from the
obligation and the punishment, he does withal from the power and dominion of
it; and while he quenches Hellfire without, does at the same time quench that
of Lust within us. These things are not to be separated; and when we find them
so, or find our selves the same men Christ found us, still in our sins, though
he has used all possible means to draw us out of them, we certainly frustrate
all the ends of his Incarnation; He is not born for us, but against us: This
Child is not set for our rise, but for our fall. His taking our Flesh will do
us no good, if we do not walk by his Spirit; and that we shall not do, if we
be not Holy as well as Innocent; and not only perform* those excellent things
He requires from us, but love and become zealous of them, that so we may be
indeed his Peculiar People.

A Title which some in our days are pleased to appropriate to themselves, who
yet show little of that which must secure it; renouncing good works in their
own practice, and decrying them in* others as the mark of Antichrist's, rather
than of Christ's People. These are they who talk so much of Faith, and set it
up in opposition to good Works, (an error worse than theirs, who make them
joint Causes with Christ's Merits in our Justification;) such there were in our
Apostle's time, who, because He did so much magnify Faith to beat down the
Jews conceit of being justified by the Works of the Law; did so far Idolize it,
as to think all good works useless, when once they had taken upon them the
profession of Christianity. And there are, and too many among us, who bury all
thoughts of good works in a pleasing, but deceitful Contemplation of Faith, as
exclusive of those good works whereof it is so naturally productive; and which
can no more be separated from it, than heat from light. It Is Faith indeed which
alone Act. 15. 9.
purifies the heart; that is the very foundation and root of all other Graces;
without which our Profession is but an empty Name, and our most glorious
performances but so many glittering Sins; But then it is such a Faith as
supposes good works, or else it is but a dead, Jam. 2.
an invisible Faith; good works being the only evidences of its reality,
whereby we approve our selves unto Men as Mat. 5. 16. Heb. 13. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
well as glorify God; stop the mouths of the Enemies of the Gospel, make our
calling and election sure to our selves; and 2 Pet. 1. 10. Tit. 2. 10.
our profession good in the sight of others, by adorning the Doctrine of God
our Savior in all things, and by the practice thereof resembling Him, who went
about doing good. And upon these Act. 10. 38.
and the like accounts we find our Apostle highly magnifying, and earnestly
calling upon Titus to press the necessity of them, chap. 3. 8. This is a
faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that
they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works: these
things are good and profitable unto men; so profitable, that without them the
Text expressly affirms they cannot be God's peculiar People.

And here we may see how strict an Exactor of them our Lord is, who is not
content with our performance of, without our affection to them; nay, requires
the very heat and fervor of that Vid. Leigh L. Com. p. 715, 716.
affection; will have us do, and withal be zealous of them, which is more
than barely to do them, and cannot possibly consist with any coldness or
indifferency to them. Such a temper He requires, whose Zeal did even eat him
up, that we should follow after righteousness, (...) 1 Timothy 6. 11.
as the word is, eagerly pursue and even persecute it, be active and violent in
quest thereof, never leaving off our pursuit till we have obtained it. He who,
like Gallio, cares for none of these things, but is indifferent to them* shall
be as little cared for by God, and such as are neither hot nor cold in his
service, he will spew out of his mouth. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti
gratia; God's Spirit fires that Soul it does inspire, making it active and
industrious to improve his Graces, to add one link or other still to the Chain
of them, To faith, 2 Pet. 1. ^.
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and so 1 Timothy 6. 18.
on: To strive not only to be rich in good works, but richer than others; and
to be ambitious (...) still to excel and surpass all others in Goodness. It
being their Lord's will that his people should not only be holy, but eminent;
not barely innocent, but perfect too, as far as they are capable of perfection
in this life, or, at least, to endeavor to be so.

And surely there cannot be a stronger Motive to persuade them to be so, than
the honor and advantage such a Relation will procure them, as to be God's
peculiar People, chosen by Him out of the rest of the World, admitted into his
special favor and protection; a People Mal. 3. 17. Hos. 1. 10.
whom He shall love and value as his chiefest Treasure and choicest Jewels.
These alone He thinks worth the purchasing, even with his own dearest blood;
These alone have indeed the Benefit, Act. 20. 28.
others but the Tender of it; For these was He born, and for these did He
effectually 1 John 3. 8.
dye. Not for them who build up those works of the Devil which the Son of God
came on purpose to destroy: who in works deny him, and (as the Apostle
characterizeth them, Tit. 1. 16.) are to every good work reprobate: Nay more
than that, even zealous of bad ones, laying hold on Damnation; and are not only
Candidates of, but Factors for Hell. Nor 2. for them who revel it upon the
score of Christ's Righteousness; and while they turn his Grace into wantonness,
and so deny the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, (being upon that
account no less Antichrist's, 1 John 4. 3.
than they who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh;) yet take
sanctuary in his Name, as if that Name were a charm against the Almighty's
threats, or served only for a gourd to sit securely under the shadow thereof.
Is this to be God's peculiar People? Or did He in so much mercy choose us out of
the Heathen World, that we should be more wicked than Heathens for that very
reason, because we are Christians, and therefore ought to be much better? And
who is there, since the appearance of God's grace, whom so excellent a Religion
as he professes, a Religion that came down from Heaven, renders more just and
sober, more chaste and temperate, or any way more virtuous than some of those
very Heathens, whose Religion came from Hell? And yet stands high upon his
profession, and thinks that shall bear him out. It Is true indeed, the Devil is
not worshipped now, as then he was, with a Religion of Impieties; and yet the
same, if not viler things, are made to consist with Christ's Religion, as well
as with that of the Devil; and Men have found a way to yoke Christ with Belial,
to reconcile his Doctrines of Purity and their own Sins together; nay to make
this Holy time also nothing else but a more solemn opportunity of sinning, and
themselves more Beasts, because God now became Man for them. But I forbear, and
shall not dwell any longer upon so harsh a subject, as unfit for such a time of
Jubilee as this is, for so it is, if we may believe an Angel; Behold I bring
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, Luke 2. 10. Let us
then rejoice, but still in the Lord, as it becomes the Just and Righteous; and
give thanks unto him for a remembrance of his Goodness to us; Let us walk
honestly as Romans 13. 13, 14.
in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness,
but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provisions for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof: Put him on by an application of his Merits, and an
imitation of his Virtues; by our Faith in, and by our Obedience to Him, that we
may celebrate this time with the Duties of it, make it a Festival of our
services to Him for the everlasting benefit we still reap by it. God has not
called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness: He has 1 These. 4. 7.
called us as to glory, so to virtue, the pathway to it, 2 Pet. 1. 3. It Is a
great mistake to think, that because Christ came to redeem us from Sin and
Hell, therefore the liberty he has purchased for us extends so far as to free
us from Holiness too. No sure: As we are God's workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus to good works, so were we redeemed, you see, by Christ to perform them,
and in a more exact and higher way than ever the World before was acquainted
with. God did, no doubt, pardon many things, not only in Heathens, but even in
his own peculiar People the Jews, which he will not in us; our obligation to a
stricter Holiness now being so much the stronger, by how much our light is
clearer. The times of this Act. 17. 30.
ignorance God winked at, (says our Apostle, speaking indeed of Heathens, but
applicably to Jews too, in comparison of us, Christians;) He passed by many
things in them, who had not such clear Revelations of his Will as aftertimes
had; but now he commands all Men everywhere to repent. For since God has
vouchsafed to come down Himself from Heaven to show us the way to it; since
Himself has gone before us in that way, and left such manifest prints of his
divine Footsteps, as we may trace him all along by: If after all this we will
not follow him, but tread on still in those pernicious ways that lead to Hell,
we are to blame our selves for putting a bar to our Redemption. Christ has
done enough for us, and yet something he has left us to do for our selves, to
redeem our selves from our vain Conversation; be zealous and fervent in the
practice of those good works he commands and requires of us, that we may reap
the benefit of that Redemption he has purchased for us, while we give him the
glory of it; the glory of his infinite Humility and Condescension in stooping
so low as to take our vile Nature upon him; the glory of his Goodness in being
so willing to succor and relieve us; and, lastly, the glory of his Wisdom and
Power, who alone was able to contrive a way to do it, and could bring it to
pass. A Power this, beyond that of the Creation, (if any one Work of the
Almighty may be said to be greater than another,) and more glorious too; That
being called but the work of his fingers, Psalm. 8. 3. This, of his whole Arm,
Psalm. 98. 2. There he only made us Men; Here, new Men.

To conclude; Let us beg of Him, who by taking our Flesh became our Brother, to
make us such whom He may not be ashamed to call his Brethren; 1 Cor. 15. 49.
That as He now bare the Image of the Earthly, by being made after our Image,
so may we bear the Image of the Heavenly, by being made conformable to his. And
let us bless Him who sent his Son to bless us, in turning every one Romans 8. 28.
of us from his Iniquities, as well as in satisfying for them. And since his
Beloved Son has so lately washed our Rev. 7. 14.
Robes, and made them white in his blood; let us not defile them again, but
keep them unspotted from the World, and hate even the garment spotted by the
Flesh; purifying our selves as He is 1 John 3. 3. v. 13.
pure, that we may with comfort look for that blessed hope mentioned in the
verse immediately preceding, even the glorious appearing of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ; And when He shall appear, follow that immaculate and
unspotted Lamb into those Regions of Bliss where now He is, and whither he has
already exalted our nature; To which place God in his good time bring us all
for the Merits of his only beloved Son and our blessed Redeemer; To whom with
the Father, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
A SERMON Preached on Candlemas-day.
St. LUKE II. 22. And when the days of her purification according to the law of
Moses, were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the
Lord.
THere are not any Writings so harmonious, and everywhere consonant to
themselves, as the Holy Scriptures. The Old and New Testament, like Glasses set
one against another, reflect a mutual light; so that as Moses and the Prophets
testify of Christ, Christ bears witness to them* and all the Types of the Law
have their Anti-Types in the Gospel which directly answer them.

Thus the Gospel for this day is but the Echo to the Epistle. There the
Prophet Malachi fore-tells, That the Lord the Messiah, whom the Jewish Nation
sought, should suddenly come to his Temple; and here we find Him, with his
Blessed Mother, in that Temple, each of them appearing there in obedience to
the Mosaical Law; the one to be purified, the other to be presented.

And as this day's Festival takes its denomination from these two legal Rites,
so the Text expressly mentions each of them.

1. The Purification of the Mother, with the circumstance of its proper time,
in the former part of it, When the days of her Purification were accomplished.
2. The Presentation of her Child, together with the several circumstances of
the place where, and the Persons that presented him, in the latter, They
brought him to Jerusalem; that is, as it is explained, ver. 27. His parents
brought him into the Temple at Jerusalem to do for him after the custom of the
Law, which was to present him to the Lord.
Of these distinctly; and first of the Purification of the Mother. This we find
expressly required by the Law of Moses, Levit. 12. 2. where it is said, If a
woman have conceived seed and born a man-child, then she shall be unclean seven
days; according to the days of her separation for her infirmity shall she be
unclean. And it is added, ver. 4. She shall then, i. e. after the circumcision
of her Male-child, continue in the blood of her purifying thirtythree days, she
shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary until the days of
her purifying be fulfilled. Which legal Rite, as it did, no doubt, point to
that spiritual Purification, which was to be made by the blood of Christ, the
immaculate Lamb, to be shed for all Joh. 1. 29. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Mankind on the Altar of the Cross; so did it insinuate to the Jews their
Original corruption, that they, as well as other descendants of Adam, were
conceived Psalm. 51. 7.
in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. For to what purpose should there be
such care taken for the cleansing of the Vessel, had it not before been
tainted? Or why should a Sin-offering be required, where there was no sin to
expiate? The Law of Purification then evidently proclaims our uncleanness, and
tells us that our very Birth infects the Mother that bare us. She might not, we
see, till the seventh day converse with Men, nor till the fortieth day appear
before the Lord in the Sanctuary, nor then without a burnt-offering for
thanksgiving, and a sin-offering for expiation; and that of a double sin, viz.
of the Mother that conceived, and, as St. Paul tells us, was first in the
Transgression, and of the Son 1 Timothy 2. 14.
that was conceived. And this Rite, without question, the Holy Mother of God
observed in conscience of that natural Corruption which was common to her with
all other Men and Women, propagated to her as a branch of the first stock, and
which, by the Oblation made by her, she publicly confessed to God and the
Congregation. From whence it will follow, that as they are gross Conc. Trid.
Sess. 5.
flatterers of Nature, who tell us she is clean; so they are no less Idolaters
of the Virgin Mary, who exempt her from all stain, Original or Actual. For
besides, that our Lord's sharp rebuke, Joh. 2. 3. implies some such fault as
was inconsistent with a spotless impeccable condition; her willing submission
to the Mosaical Rite here, and her professing her own need of a Savior, Luke
1. 47. are sufficient Arguments to stop their mouths, who will needs force
those Eulogies upon her, which her self utterly disclaimed both by word and
practice.

But whatever stain there might be in her own Conception, it is certain, she was
most free from any particular sin as to that of our Lord's, and rather
sanctified than polluted by bearing Him, who could draw no infection from the
loins of Adam, as not conceived in the ordinary way of Mankind, but by the
virtue of the Holy Ghost over-shaddowing Luke 1. 3^
her. Happy Mother! Whatever impurity then there might be in others, there
could be none at all in the Son of God; and if the best Substance of a pure
Virgin had in it any spot, it was sufficiently scowred off by that Holy thing
which was conceived in her by the Holy Spirit; and did in a far more
extraordinary way sanctify that Womb wherein Himself lay* than that wherein
the Baptist.

Upon all which accounts the Holy Mother of God might well have challenged an
Immunity from all Ceremonies of Purification; she needed no purging, since she
had no stain. This was for those Mothers whose Births were unclean; hers was
from God, who is Purity its self; The Law of Moses reached only to those Women
which had conceived in sin; she conceived not that Seed but by the Holy Ghost;
That extended to the Mothers of those Sons which were under the Law, whereas
hers was above it; yet does she not wrangle with the Law upon any of these
scores, but cheerfully submits to a twofold Rite of Purification and Oblation;
waves all her Privileges, and chooses Duty; subscribes to the Law of that God
whom she carried in her Womb and in her Heart, the true Mother of Him who came
to fulfill all Righteousness, Legal as well as Moral; and though he knew the
Children of the Kingdom free, would yet pay Tribute to Caesar. These Rites then
she observed, not for her self, but for us, to give us a fourfold Example, of
Charity, Obedience, Humility and Gratitude.

1. Of Charity. Among other Acts, whereof this is not the least, not to
scandalize our Neighbors: For as no man Romans 14. 7. See v. 13.
(according to St. Paul's rule) lives to himself; We are obliged in all our
actions to consider others as well as our selves; and many times to abridge our
selves of our own freedom, to comply with their infirmities; and part with our
dearest liberty, for their satisfaction. It was this, no doubt, which made the
Blessed Virgin to do so, where the dispensing with her self for the observation
of this Ceremony, must needs have given the Jews no small occasion of scandal.
For when she brought her Son into the Temple, they who were wholly strangers to
the great Mystery of the Incarnation, who neither knew Her to be the Mother,
nor Christ to be the Son of God, but looked upon them with an indifferent eye,
as persons within the verge and compass of the Mosaical Law, and equally tied
up to a strict observance of all its Ordinances, must needs have taken great
offense at the omission of any the least of them: All such neglect would have
been construed a breach of the divine Institution, which no Man's innocence or
dignity could in their judgment have warranted. But as it is the property of
true Charity not to seek her own; so did this Blessed 1 Cor. 13. 5.
Mother of God choose to depart from her private right, rather than prejudice
the common good, or violate the peace of the Church; and rather draw an
inconvenience on her self, than yield the least occasion of offense to God's
People. Thus did she abstain from all appearance of Evil; not from that only
which was really so, but which had the face of, and looked like it; avoiding as
all crime, so all suspicion thereof; and having an eye as well to her
Reputation as her Innocence: A Temper scarce to be met with in this vicious and
offensive Age; where Men are not content to be wicked, if they may not withal
be scandalous; corrupt others as well as themselves, by putting
stumbling blocks in the way of their weak and blind Brethren. So far are they
from yielding Obedience to those Laws they may have some colorable pretense to
avoid, that they make it their great care and study wilfully to break those
they are necessarily obliged to. All things are lawful for such persons, and
all things expedient too; Law and Honor, Reason and Conscience they can as
easily shake off, as Sampson his withen Bands; defy the Magistrate and the
Church; cry up Christian Liberty, to the ruin of Christian Obedience, without
any regard either to other Men or themselves. Let them learn another lesson
from the Mother of God; who would rather lose her own right, than give others a
seeming offense; and let her Example teach us Obedience, though to the
prejudice of our just Liberty: And let us not on the other side rashly censure
them as Lawbreakers, who sometimes, perhaps, may omit a few little Punctilio's
of the Law, not out of any Contumacy or Spirit of Opposition, but to gratify
the humor of a tender, though erroneous, Conscience.

2. A second Example we have here of Obedience. A Virtue few have, who yet
pretend much to all others; but a Virtue, without which all the rest signify
little, and which is the best of Sacrifices. Had the Blessed Virgin presented
her Son to God, and not her self too, even That very Offering would have little
availed her. There she indeed offered up his Person, Here her own Will; which
we can, for the most part, more hardly part with, than with our dearest and
most beloved Children. But this Blessed Mother most willingly parts with both
to God; as freely resigns up her self to Him here, as when she first received
the happy news from the Angel, that God had designed her to be that Person of
whom he should take flesh, with an Ecce Ancilla, Behold the Handmaid of the
Lord: She quarrels not with the Law, but observes every Iota and Tittle of it;
The due time, when the days of her Purification were accomplished; the due
place, the Temple; the due Oblation too, a pair of Turtle Doves; so officious
was she in the Ceremony, as to admit of no excuse in any the least circumstance
of her Obedience; and so defective are most of us, even in the main Duties of
Morality. Surely that Soul is not fit for the Spiritual conception of Christ,
that is not conscionably scrupulous in observing all God's Laws. It Is not in
our own power to make choice of some part, where God requires an entire
submission to the whole. His Commands exact our strict Obedience, even to to
those things which seem to us of little importance: Our Measures here are not
to be taken from the Nature of the things themselves, but from the Authority of
that God which imposes them, whose Will, not our Reason, is to determine us;
and there may be as great contempt of his Will in neglecting or refusing to
obey it in lesser as in greater instances; nay, many times much greater, where
the things are of a more easy observation; as the greatest Sin that ever Man
committed was but the eating of an Apple. The instance of the Blessed Virgin's
Obedience here, was in that which many nowadays would think very trivial;
'twas but in a ceremonial part; the Mint and Cummin, not the weightier matters
of the Law; yet since God required so punctual an observance of that, and the
Blessed Virgin so exactly paid it, there will be little excuse left for
Schismatics, who despise the decent Ceremonies of the Church out of Piety and
Devotion, thinking thereby to do God good service; and less for them who
wilfully disobey the more substantial important Precepts of the Gospel. If the
Holy Virgin had such respect to the Law of Bondage and Severity, then surely
ought we to pay a far greater to the Law of Liberty and Grace; and if she so
religiously observed a Ceremony, which to her was but indifferent, with what
care ought we to keep those Moral duties of the Gospel which require our
Obedience, not out of Love only, but Necessity.

3. A third Lesson we may learn here from the Example of the Mother of God, and
that is Humility, which was as signal here as her Obedience, and the cause of
that Obedience: For all Obedience proceeds from Humility; which is as ready to
take Laws from others, as Pride can be to give them. 'Twas this which submitted
Christ to the Rite of Presentation, as it did the Blessed Virgin to that of her
Purification; though his Innocence might well have exempted him from appearing
in the crowd of Sinners, and her Purity from being rankt amongst the Unclean.
It was no small derogation to her Honor to submit to such a Rite, whose very
designment was to upbraid their guilt who observed it. They who are truly
humble, are even ambitious of Contempt; catch at all opportunities which may
debase them, and boast of that dishonor which turns to God's glory; as David
danced on before the Ark, notwithstanding Michal's taunts: And his Language
there is, that of every 2 Samuel 6. 22
humble spirit, I will yet be viler. Thus would the Mother of God own her self
legally unclean, who morally was not so; and bring her Doves to the Altar, who
was more innocent and harmless than those Doves she brought; too faint an
Emblem of her own spotless Purity, as the Lamb was of his, who knew no sin,
though he was content to be made sin for us.

4. There is one Lesson more behind, and that is of Gratitude; which, though in
the general, may concern all persons to pay their solemn Thanks to God in the
Congregation, especially after any signal and notable Deliverance, which is one
great Reason of this day's Festival among the Jews; yet in the particular
instance of legal Purification, it may seem only to point to Mothers, and
oblige them publicly to express their grateful acknowledgment of God's mercy
to them, in preserving them from the great peril of Childbirth. We see the
first appearance of the Mother of our Lord was in the Temple to present the
Lord with a burnt-offering as well as a sin-offering; That, as a Sacrifice of
Praise; This, as a Confession of her natural Impurity. Which Jewish custom, no
doubt as it gave just ground, so good warrant for that Office our Church
prescribes for the Churching of Women; and though there had been reason enough
to justify the Equity of her Commands in the very Nature of the thing its
self, yet sure the Authority of the ancient Church of God is here of great
force and a leading president: For although the Political and Ceremonial Laws
of the Jews are in the Particulars abrogated, yet not in the General; it is
indeed so in the Circumstance, but not in the Substance. The Moral of that Rite
will still remain a debt, as long as such a Deliverance continues a Blessing;
which none can deny it to be, but they perhaps who never were acquainted with
the danger from which Women in that case are rescued; or think there is no such
thing as Gratitude due for any deliverance, though to an Almighty Deliverer.
Let the Example of the Blessed Virgin teach them to be more thankful for
Blessings; who was no sooner either able or allowed to walk abroad, but she
travels to Jerusalem; she goes not to her own House at Nazareth, but to God's
House, there to offer up her Thanks and Praises. If Purifyng were a Shadow, yet
Thanksgiving is a Substance. Those whom God has blessed with fruit of Body and
safety of Deliverance; if they make not their first Journey to the Temple of
God, have little reason to expect a second Preservation, since they can as soon
forget the first as they usually do their Pains: such Women partake more of
the Unthankfulness of Eve, than of Mary's Devotion.

But then as that Devotion appears in the early Tribute of her Thankfulness, so
that Thankfulness by more than verbal Expressions. She would not appear before
the Lord empty; and although her Appearance was in forma pauperis, yet
something she would bring to the Altar. We are all willing enough to serve God
of that which costs us nothing: such cheap Votaries are as frequent nowadays,
as to pray for fashion, or fast for frugality. Here is a present mean indeed in
its self, but suitable to the Offerer's ability, and far more acceptable to God
than the Widows two Mites, Mark 12. Her Poverty could not furnish her with any
other Present but two Doves; she was not rich enough to provide such a Lamb as
the Law required, but she could bring that Lamb which that legal one did
typifie, and without which that other would not purify; a Lamb which gave
Virtue and Merit to her Offering, as it did to all precedent Sacrifices of the
Law; an Offering greater than the Temple its self, and which sanctified that
and the Altar too, even the Lord of the Temple, whom she presents to the Lord;
the next thing to be considered.

The Blessed Virgin had more business Part II. The Presentation.
in the Temple than her own; she came thither as to purify her self, so to
present her Son, having nothing so precious as himself to make Oblation of to
God. And this also the Law of Moses required, Exodus 12. and 13. 2. And the
reason of that Rite God himself is pleased to give, Numb. 8. 17. why the
Israelites should consecrate their firstborn to him, to mind them of their
great Deliverance, when he smote the firstborn in Egypt to be a Memorial or
standing Record of God's particular favor and mercy to that People, in that
their miraculous Preservation from the destroying Angel, and withal a Type of
Christ the true Paschal Lamb, whose Blood should save all Mankind from a worse
Destroyer, and free us from the Bondage, not of Egypt, but of Hell. And indeed
the Antitype here does in all points answer its Type; for Christ was both the
Lamb and the firstborn too; the only Joh. 3. 16.
begotten Son of God, as well as the firstborn Son Matthew. 1. 25.
of the Blessed Virgin, who bare none before or after him, whatever Heliadians
dreamt: And therefore St. Paul calls him the firstborn among many Brethren,
Romans 8. 29. A style justly belonging to him, both upon the account of Grace, as
by whom we are born anew, and made 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 5. 17.
new Creatures, Ephesians. 5. 2. So of Power too, as being the first fruits of them
that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20. and the firstborn of the dead, Coloss. 1. 18. Upon
all which accounts he belonged unto God, not only as the Son of God by eternal
Generation before time, and by miraculous Conception in time, but also by the
common course of nature. But though he might have pleaded an Exemption from
that Law, whereof he was the Author; yet, as good Princes use to observe those
Laws themselves make, he was most willingly subject to this Rite of
Presentation upon the same grounds his Holy Mother was to that of her
Purification, to teach us the same Lessons of a most exemplary Obedience,
Humility and Charity; when we see that he who was free from the common
condition of our Birth, would not yet, since the Mosaical Law required it,
deliver himself from those ordinary Rites, which implied the weakness and
blemishes of Humanity. And indeed, as it became him to countenance his own
Institution, so did our Necessities, and his own Justice, require his Obedience
to it. 1. Our Necessity did so, that by submitting himself to this Mosaical
Rite as to that of Circumcision; and so making himself a debtor to the Law, he
might redeem us who were under Gal. 4. 5.
the obligation and curse of it. 2dly, His Justice, to make that full
satisfaction to that Law which we had broken, and himself had obliged himself
for our sakes to fulfill. For although He was the Most Dan. 9. 24. Luke 1. 35.
Holy, and Act. 2. 14.
the Just One; and as such, out of the reach of any Law, which, as St. Paul
tells us, is not made for the righteous Man, and much less for him who 1 Timothy
1. 9.
was Righteousness its self; yet was He, in some sense, the greatest of
Sinners, namely, by Imputation, being charged with the Sins of the whole World,
and consequently obnoxious to the Law as our Surety and Undertaker. Thus was He
presented this day in the Substance, or as St. Paul, Romans 8. 3. phrases it, in
the likeness of our sinful flesh, and in the same sense must be said to have
been purified too; and therefore whereas some Copies with our Translation read
in the beginning of this Text, (...) Her purification; others, as Erasmus, have
it (...) and some (...) His or Their Purification, including the Child as well
as the Mother, both appearing this day in the habit and guise of Sinners,
though each of them spotless; She by Grace, and He by Nature too.

2. For these and the like Reasons would our Lord be this day presented, and
the place wherein was the Temple at Jerusalem, which received a second and
better Consecration by his Presence, than it had done by Solomon's Dedication.
This was God's House, and whither should the Son of God, who had no other, be
brought, but to his Father's House? There God had a long time dwelt, At Salem
was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling at Sion, Psalm. 76. 2. And in that place
'twas fit our Lord should first appear. And this his first Offering in the
Temple, which some have styled his Morning Sacrifice, was but a Preface to that
his Evening one, which was to be made on the Cross. In the former, he was
redeemed; in the latter, he did redeem us; giving himself for us an offering
and a sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. And as the Jewish
Holy Priest was in several respects a Type of Christ; so his entering into the
Holy of Holies was but a Figure of this Heb. 9.
his Presentation in the Temple, as well as of his Sacrifice on the Cross. Nor
was that his Presentation any thing else but his solemn Consecration to his
Priestly Office; and no place sure so proper for that as the Temple. But
besides, that the Law required he should be presented here as the firstborn;
an obligation common to him with others, who in that consideration were God's
peculiar Portion, and consecrated to him as soon as born: He was himself the
Lord of the Temple; and as such, was concerned to make his first appearance
there, upon these several accounts: 1. To give Authority to his own Ordinance,
to set his Seal to what himself had commanded. The same God was the Author as
of the Gospel, so of the Law, of the Jewish Synagogue, as well as the Christian
Church. Moses was but the Overseer of the Work, God the Contriver of the
Building and the Architect; and there was not one Pin in the whole Structure,
either of the Tabernacle or Temple, which himself did not precisely order, even
to the meanest Utensils thereof he appointed all; every Ordinance, every little
Rite and Ceremony was from him: Moses did all according to the Pattern shown
him in the Mount; a Servant he was, and as such, faithful in the House of God;
but Christ was the Lord of it, and therefore in honor obliged to maintain
whatsoever his Servant Moses had done by his order and direction. 2. He
appeared in the Temple to visit and repair it. It was now grown ancient and
much decayed, quite fallen from its primitive beauty and luster; All the glory
thereof was without, only in the external Pomp and Magnificence of its
Structure; nothing within it but dust and filth: the abomination of hypocrisy,
and profaneness of desolation; and the worst thing there was the Priest
himself: All was now very much out of order: God had long and often complained
by his Prophets of the Profanation of his Sanctuary; and our Lord was
constrained at last to cleanse it Himself, by whipping the buyers and sellers
Matt. 21. 13.
therein, who had made his House a House of Merchandise, and a Den of Thieves;
wherein he expressed an extraordinary zeal, transporting him beyond the bounds
of his natural meekness: Nor do we find that ever he discovered so much holy
Passion as in this instance: Thus, as himself tells us, for Judgment came he
into the World; and this Judgment was to begin at the House of God; and as he
came with his Fan in his hand to purge this his Floor, so the Prophet Malachi
makes this the great reason of his coming to the Temple, Chap. 3. v. 3. That he
might sit there as a refiner and purifier of Silver, to purify the Sons of
Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they might offer unto the Lord an
offering of Righteousness. Thirdly, He came to the Temple to put an end to it,
i. e. to the Mosaical Economy, whose very designment was at first but
Temporary: Heb. 9. 10. Col. 2. 17.
For the Temple, as the Tabernacle, was never intended for God's fixed and
settled Psalm. 40. 6.
Habitation; and though the former was the more lasting of the two, yet neither
of them was to be Eternal. The Prophet Daniel (as other Prophets before him)
had expressly foretold, that when the Messiah came, he should cause the
Sacrifice Dan. 9. 27.
and the Oblation to cease; break down all Jewish Altars, and make the whole
World his Temple: God had indeed long dwelt in the Temple at Jerusalem in his
Spiritual and Typical Presence. There was nothing either placed or done within
those Walls whereby he was not resembled; but now the body of those Shadows is
come, and presents himself where he had ever been represented; and when that
which was perfect was come, 'twas fit that which was imperfect should be done
away: That Moses should veil to Christ; the Servant give up the keys of the
House to his Lord, who was to erect his Church on the ruins of the Temple;
choose and order to himself a new Family, and govern it by better and more
spiritual Laws. The true and full meaning of that of St. Paul, Romans 10. 4.
Christ is the end, i. e. the perfection of the Law; which he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill; No more than the Temple, but in order to the erecting
of a more glorious Fabric; and when he pulled down that once stately Building,
he did it not in an instant, but by degrees; rent not the Veil thereof till at
his Death, nor quite demolished it till a good while after; such respect had he
for that place which himself had chosen, and so long honored with his
Presence, that he would not have it fall, but with a State answerable to its
first rising; and when the legal Rites and Ordinances were dead, provided them
a pompous Funeral and a solemn Interment.

4. To this I may add a fourth Reason, which is this; That he might at once
represent and consecrate us all to God as the first fruits of the whole lump:
For as he was our Head, so did he appear as the Representative of all Mankind;
the second Adam was as public a Person as the first; and whatever Mischiefs
were derived from him to us in that common capacity, as great Advantages flowed
to us from Christ as an universal restorer: If we run away from God in Adam,
and his shame has ever since made us hide our heads; Our Lord, by wiping off
that disgrace, and regaining our lost innocence and honor, has, by his
appearing in the sight of God for us, given us boldness now to come into and
stand in his Presence.

These were the reasons of Christ's Presentation in the Temple; and surely it
was never more glorious than when the Owner thereof was within the Walls of it:
For now was the hour and guest Ezekiel. 36.
come, in regard whereof the second Temple should surpass the first. Now that
Prophecy of Haggai received its chapter 2. 9.
full accomplishment, when our Lord first appeared in it. For that it could not
be otherwise understood, it is evident; because if we consider the Wealth, the
Majesty, the external Pomp and Structure of the first Temple, the second was
not in these respects any wise comparable to it. But 'twas the Presence of
Christ in the flesh that made the latter so far outshine the former; the
Prophet so interpreting himself, v. 7. The desire of Nations shall come, and I
will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts: and then it follows,
ver. 9. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than that of the
former. So that that prediction could not be applicable to any other glory but
that wherewith our Lord filled the Temple this day; and the rather, for that
this Prophecy was not made till after the destruction of Solomon's Temple: an
Argument sufficient to silence the most contradicting Jew, and force him to
acknowledge whether he he will or no, that this Prophecy was never fulfilled
till Christ was presented in the Temple. But our Lord, who foresaw that that
gainsaying People would not be satisfied; for their farther Conviction,
provided two such Witnesses as were beyond all exception, and such as might
bear down all opposition to the truth of this prediction; Simeon and Anna, both
of a reverend Age, and disciples of Moses; of a holy and unblameable Life, that
waited for the consolation of Israel, and were led by the Spirit into the
Temple on purpose to meet the Lord of the Temple, whom at this time they there
expected and found. In all which respects, these two persons were most proper
credible Witnesses of this truth, though there was something more to recommend
Simeon's testimony, if the conjecture of many learned Men may here be of any
force and credit, who make him the Son of Rabbi Hillel, the Master of Gamalael,
St. Paul's Instructor in the Law, and withal a Priest, as in all probability he
was, and it is not obscurely intimated by some Priestly Offices done by him in
the Temple; as the taking of Christ in his Arms, and the blessing of the
People in the behalf of God, acts peculiar to the Priest. And thus much may
serve concerning the place, where our Savior was presented; it remains now
that I speak something of the Persons that presented him, the third and last
Thing.

3. They brought him to Jerusalem; They, i. e. his Parents. The Law required
this too; and they were as willing to perform this good Office, as the Law to
exact it. That which God gives us, we should return to him, our Children
especially. Children, and the fruit of the Womb, are an heritage and gift that
comes of the Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 127. 4. and we are to present them
to him whose portion they are, and from whom we received them. And as they are
not so much ours that beget, as his that bestows them; so should it be our
endeavor to make them more his; than our own. Nor is it enough that we suffer
our little ones to come to God, but we must bring them, when of themselves they
cannot come, and as soon as we receive them. The care of Parents ought to
supply the natural defects of their Children, by a timely Consecration of them
to him, not only in their Baptism, (which yet some scarce baptized persons will
not allow, though Christ's Circumcision, which was in effect our Baptism and
his early Presentation in the Temple, directly confute their Opinion and
Practice,) but in their future Education too, by bringing them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Ephesians. 6. 4.
Lord, and teaching them to bear his yoke Lam. 3. 27.
in their youth; which is Solomon's counsel too, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child
in the way he should go, and when he is old he will never depart from it. Those
characters of Piety, which are imprinted in these smooth unfullied Tables, will
not easily be razed out: They will be both fairer and more lasting; and these
unstained Vessels will constantly retain a smack and tincture of that devotion
which first seasons them. 'Twas St. Jerome's delight Epist. ad Eustoch.
to hear Children balbutire Christum, smatter of Christ before they could well
speak of him: and Basil bragged of Macrina his Nurse, a disciple of Gregorius
Epist. ad Neocaes.
Neocaesariensis, who by often repeating to him what she had learnt from her
Master, made him suck Virtue from her with her Milk. They who first give up
their Children to the World, and then to God, are as bad as those Israelites
who *devoted them to Moloch. This Law, we see, required the first fruits of
Persons as well as of Things; then surely there is reason we should give him
the Flower of our. Childrens age, not the Bran. Such Morality we may learn from
this Constitution of God, that the best of all kinds is fittest to be
Consecrated to the Lord of all; and that every thing we have is too good for
us, if we think any thing we have too good for him. Happy are those Children
who derive a spiritual as well as a natural Life from their Parents; and as
happy those Parents who beget them more to God than to themselves, and, with
those of Christ, bring them to the Temple before they can walk to it; God will
make those obedient to such Parents, who have been so careful to make them so
soon subject to himself; bless them mutually for each others sake, both here
and hereafter.

But while I speak of the Mystery, let me not forget to mind you of the Duty it
exacts from us. Every Circumstance here is Symbolical. If the Blessed Mother
presented the Child to God, then must we present him too as our Savior and
Mediator, and with him our selves, to be a living Sacrifice, holy Romans 12. 1.
and acceptable to him. For unless we first present him, it is to no purpose to
present our selves to God. If he go not first to the Temple, we had as good
stay at home. God seems to speak to us here, as the Prophet did of Jehoshaphat
to the King of Israel, 2 Kings 3. 24. Surely were it not that I regard the
presence of Jehoshaphat, King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see
thee. If it were not for Christ, God would not regard either our Persons or our
Gifts: All our Offerings and Devotions then must be united to this Holy
Present, that by the Merit and Excellency of this Oblation we may exhibit to
God an Offertory, in which he cannot but delight for the Combinations sake and
Society of that his Holy Son, in whom alone Mat. 3. 17.
he is well pleased. Appear *then we must before him in this our Elder Brothers
habit, or we shall never steal away our Heavenly Father's blessing: For all we
have is by and through him, and it is with him God gives us all things. Our
Birthright descends to us from this firstborn of all the Creatures; All the
Privileges of it; Our Kingdom and our Priesthood are derived from him, who Rev.
1. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 9.
alone makes us Kings and Priests unto God. But then, 2dly, if we do not
present our selves and all our Offerings with Christ in that manner whereby
himself was presented, we shall gain little by his own Presentation this day.
And here three things offer themselves to our direction, how we may present our
selves to God, and all we have, so as that our Presents may be acceptable to
him.

This they will be, 1. If they be pure. 2. If early and of the best. 3. If
offered up in the Temple: All coucht in the Mystery of this day.

First, Our Presents must be pure, and to this end we must purify our selves
before we presume to address our selves to God in his Holy Temple: For if our
Persons be not pure, our Offerings will never be so; since God looks not to the
Hand, but the Heart of the offerer. And as his Eye is upon the Righteous, and
his Ear open to Their prayer; so the best Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to him. Cain's Present, no doubt, was as rich as Abel's, but not so
acceptable for the Donor's sake. Come we then into the Temple of God, but not
till our selves be also his Temples; and those Temples so well swept and
garnisht, that they may be a fit habitation for his Spirit. I will wash Eccles.
5. 1.
mine hands in innocence, aad so will I go to thine Altar, says David, Psalm.
26. 6. There is none of us that can pretend to be as pure as the Mother, much
less as the Son of God; yet each of them would be legally cleansed before they
would appear in the Temple. Nor was our blessed Lord brought thither till he
had been circumcised, to teach us, that the spiritual Circumcision of our
hearts is a most necessary qualification to make us fit presents for God: And
as his Example preaches Purity* so do his and the Blessed Virgin's Offerings
here proclaim the Necessity of it; a Lamb and a pair of Turtle-Doves being the
proper* Emblems of Cleanness.

Secondly, As our Presents must be pure and spotless, so early ones. And this
not only the legal Offerings, a Lamb of a year old and two young Pigeons, did
imply; but our Savior's Example declares, who was no sooner born, but
presented to God. Our young Services are most grateful to the Almighty: His
Soul delights in the first ripe fruits, Micah 7. 1. in the first fruits of our
Age, not the remains of our Harvest, Cain's Sacrifice. He cares not for such
Trees as St. Jude speaks of, whose fruit withers, and which bud not till the
Autumn, verse 13. He who, Jer. 1. 11. made choice of the Almond-tree, because
it blossomed first. It Is true indeed that a late Sacrifice is not always
refused, but an early one sure is most pleasing to him; and though the last
Comers into the Vineyard had their penny, yet doubtless the first were the most
welcome; and therefore Christ is said to have loved that young Man in the
Gospel, who had kept all God's Commandments Mat. 19. 20 Psalm. 71. 15.
from his youth up: Besides, a late conversion is seldom true; for setting
aside Abraham in the Old Testament, and Nicodemus in the New, we have not many
instances of Men converted in their Old Age. And surely when we see how soon
the Child Jesus was brought to the Temple, we ought not to think it reasonable
for us to stay so long from it, till we must be fain to be carried thither like
so many Carcasses to our Graves. This is not that fat of the Sacrifice God
requires of us; The blind, Numb. 18. 12.
the lame and the decrepid are not fit Presents for him.

Thirdly and Lastly, Our Presents will then be most acceptable when they are
offered up in the Temple. As Christ's first public appearance was there, so
was his last too, a little before his Passion. Nor was it only in compliance to
the Law that he first visited this place, but withal, to let us know where we
are likeliest to find him. The Temple at Jerusalem was then God's only House,
Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 7. Dan. 6. 10. Psalm. 138. 2. 68. 29.
out of which no Sacrifice was acceptable, and toward which Holy Persons
addressed themselves; wherever they were, their Faces and their Hearts too
were still toward this place. But our Devotion is not so limited, Jerusalem is
now everywhere, and every Christian Church as sacred as ever the Jewish Temple
was, where, with Holy Simeon, we may meet our Lord and embrace him; admit him
into our Heart, as he took him up in his Arms. In this place does God more
particularly exhibit Himself, and Blessing to be sure will go along with him
wherever he goes. In such Holy places as this, as he has put his most Holy
Name, so does he usually manifest his choicest Mysteries to us; and there is no
doubt but he will do so, provided we come thither, not with designs of Vanity
and Curiosity, Sensuality and Profaneness, but as Simeon and Anna did by the
impulse and motion of his blessed Spirit. Thus then let us come to the Temple,
and, with Holy David, wait for his loving kindness in the Psalm. 48. 9.
midst of it; not forsaking the assembling of our selves together in this House
of God, if we expect that Christ should make one of our number. If we fly from
his Presence here, we shall withal run away from his Blessing. St. Thomas we
know was not with the other Apostles, Joh. 20. 24.
when Christ first appeard to them; and to that his Absence, some have imputed
his Incredulity. If Peter be out of the Ship, he may sink; and if Shimei out of
Jerusalem, he may dye for it. The Church is our best Sanctuary and securest
place of Refuge. In this Ark we shall be safe. Here let Christ find us, and we
shall find him, especially if he finds us in such a way and equipage as he
expects to find us in; with that Evangelical Purity, Obedience, Humility,
Devotion and Gratitude he challenges from us; He will then, no doubt, present
us to his Father with himself; give Merit and Value to our Persons and
Offerings by virtue of his this day's Presentation: Our Eyes shall then see his
Salvation, and we at last, with Holy Simeon, depart in peace to meet him in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, that Holy of Holies, whereinto this our High Priest is now
entered, and where he ever lives to present himself and his Merits, and make
continual intercession to God for us, even the Church of the firstborn which
is written in Heaven, whither he bring us who is our Forerunner and Heb. 6. 20.
Harbinger to provide us Eternal Mansions there, through Jesus Christ, etc.

A SERMON Preached on Good Friday.
JOHN XIX. 37. And again another Scripture says, They shall look on him whom
they have pierced.
THE Text points directly to Christ's Passion; The piercing therein mentioned
clearly shows it; which being the last Act, takes in the whole Series of that
Tragedy. Our Evangelist, in the Verse before, observes two things: 1. That the
Soldiers brake the legs of two Malefactors, but not of Christ. 2. That one of
them with a Spear pierced his side, and thereout came water and blood. Both
which were literally fulfilled, according to the Scriptures, at our Lord's
Crucifixion. But besides the literal, there is a spiritual Sense, which was
also to be fulfilled, not only at the Conversion of some of Christ's
Crucifiers, but of every Penitent Sinner, who should pierce Him with his Sins,
as the Soldier did with the Spear; and should therefore be concerned so to
look upon him, as to be Himself too pierced with that sight. So that although
the Prophecy here may seem, at first blush, to be confined to the Jews, it must
be extended to all Christ's Piercers, whether Jews or Gentiles; To those, as to
the Instruments; and to these, as the Occasion of Christ's Death and Passion:
And accordingly, I shall, in the handling of the Words, have an eye all along
to both; And therein observe unto you these four Particulars.

1. The Spectacle it self, or Object here presented to our view, couched in the
Pronoun Him, i. e. Christ. 2. The Qualification of that Object, implied in the
word Pierced; Christ, not as glorified, but as crucified; Not in his state of
Exaltation, but Exinanition; Not as he is now sitting on his Throne, but as he
was in the days of his Flesh, in a mortal condition, hanging on the Cross; a
spectacle of infirmity to Men and Angels. 3. The Act it self here required; and
that is Looking on. 4. And lastly, The Spectators, who are called to this
sight, viz. As many as either did or should pierce Him, whether in a literal,
or in a spiritual and mystical Sense, which will bring us All within the
compass and into the number of his Piercers, as those who, upon a strict
inquiry, will be found equally guilty of spilling the blood of the Son of God,
and to have pierced Him as much, perhaps, some of us more, than the very Jews
themselves did, who were the immediate Actors in this Tragedy.
1. The first thing that offers it self here to our consideration is the
spectacle or object of our sight, which in its natural order claims the
precedence: For something must be looked on, else our looking will be to no
purpose. And that which is here proposed to us is worth our beholding, The Son
of God, or rather more properly the Son of Man, who alone was liable to
Vulneration, and could be pierced. That it is He, whom the Prophet Zachary,
chap. 12. 10. from whom the words of the Text are borrowed, points to, our
Evangelist's application here renders unquestionable; besides, that the Prophet
David had long before applied them to Christ, Psalm. 22. 17. They pierced my
hands and my feet, clearly fore-signifying our Lord's Crucifixion. Which two
plain Predictions of David and Zachary, because they pinch the Jews, they have
therefore used more than ordinary industry and artifice to elude them; and
their main shift is, to appropriate this latter Prophecy to King Josiah, but
without the least show and color of truth. For although the piercing might
collaterally and allusively suit with the manner of his Death, who is said to
have been shot to death with an arrow in the fields; yet principally and
directly it aims at Christ, who was God as well as Man, (which could not be
affirmed of Josiah;) for such the Prophet Zachary says He was, making Him the
same with Him who immediately before promises to pour upon Man the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication, which can agree to none but God Himself. And so our
Evangelist, Revel. 1. 7. plainly tells us, That the Person here pierced is such
a one, as shall hereafter come in the Clouds; Nay, Christ himself says so too,
that He shall one day come with power and great glory; and that All the Tribes
of the Earth shall mourn when they shall then behold him; Matthew. 24. 30. which
is in effect what Zachary had foretold and St. John repeats.

2. Him then we are to look on, but how? not now as coming in the Clouds; That
sight is reserved for another time, that of his second coming to judge the
World; We are here directed to view him in another gate and posture, as one
that was Himself judged and condemned by the World: For although to view him
sometimes in the former manner may be very useful, yet is it not so pertinent
to our present occasion. The Text presents Him to us as pierced, in a
suffering, not in a triumphant condition; nay, suffering all the outrages and
indignities which the witty rage and malice of Men could expose him to. A
prospect, I confess, very unpleasing to a Jew, nor indeed very grateful to
most Christians. No marvel if the Jew turns away his Eyes from such a sight as
must needs upbraid him with his guilt. This were to bring his blood upon him.
And what Murderer can take delight in viewing the Carcass of that person he
has murdered? May he not justly fear that his Wounds should bleed afresh in
his sight? Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling block, says St. Paul, 1
Cor. 1. 23. and I wish he were not to the Greeks, i. e. to all Heathenish
unconverted Christians, foolishness too. To the greatest part of them it is and
ever was indeed a spectacle of horror, but not to all of them. For we see the
Text speaks of some, that should look on Him whom they had pierced; And some of
them we find, Acts 2. did look upon Him with weeping Eyes and bleeding Hearts;
with more joy, comfort and satisfaction than ever they had before looked upon
him with anger, rage and despite. And when that whole Nation shall see their
error, when God shall remove that thick veil that is yet over their eyes, how
clearly shall they then behold and cordially embrace Him as their only Savior
and Redeemer, whom once they rejected and crucified as the vilest of
Malefactors? But to us, who own him, or at least pretend to own him as such,
what sight can be more glorious, what more comfortable than of a crucified
Savior? And yet, alas! how few of us can endure such a sight? How soon are we
cloyed with it? How ready to say with St. Peter, when the least mention is made
of his Sufferings, This be far from thee, O Lord. We distaste what Christ
embraced, and cannot endure so much as to think of what he refused not to
undergo. How would his Miracles attract our Eyes, were they wrought before us!
How should we be ravished at a second Transfiguration, and say with the
Apostles who beheld it, It is good for us to be here! Should Christ ascend up
again into Heaven in our sight, as he did in that of his disciples and
followers; Act. 1. 11.
should we not need an Angel, as they did, to check us for our too much gazing?
And yet let me tell you, that such a prospect as that would not be more
glorious than of a Christ nailed to his Cross, nor yet perhaps so useful. It
would rather raise our curiosity, than inflame our affections; rather amaze and
astonish, than benefit us. The Text therefore gives us a more advantageous one
of Him; It bids us look on him as pierced, and pierced even for us, who pierced
him; It bids us view this Sun of Righteousness, more glorious in himself, more
benign to us, in his Setting, than in his Rising; More beautiful in his
Eclipse, than in his full Luster; To Heb. 12. 2, 3.
look unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame; and to consider
him who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself. This was the aim
of all St. Paul's preaching, We preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23. This,
the top of his Knowledge; I determined not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. This, his only Glory; God forbid
that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14.
And here to our joy and comfort may we view him, Redeeming us from the curse of
the Law, Gal. 3. 10. Abolishing in his flesh the Enmity, the Law of
Commandments, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances
that was against us, and nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2. 14. Reconciling the
World to Himself, making our peace, expiating our offenses, satisfying the
Justice of an offended God, repairing our loss, and restoring us to a better
condition than we had forfeited by our Transgression; In a word, vanquishing
Hell, and opening Heaven for us. And ought not this to be matter of glorying to
us? Can any sight be more worthy our beholding? Any object more deserve to be
looked on than such a one as this? At this time especially, when the Church
solemnly invites us to this Spectacle? When, as St. Paul speaks Gal. 3. 1.
Jesus Christ is evidently set forth crucified among us? This the Text
prophetically tells us, Christ's crucifiers should do; and indeed All that
expect to have their part in the Merit of his Death and Passion must do, that
is, by a serious and oftenrepeated Meditation have Christ crucified always
before their eyes. For we are not to look upon the words of my Text only as a
Prophecy, but as a necessary Duty, obliging us to fix our eyes constantly on
this object, Christ pierced for us; and that we may the better do it, let us
take a more particular and exact view of Him, and consider Him as pierced both
in his Body and in his Soul; In every Member of That, in every Faculty of This,
the better to estimate his Sufferings and raise our Devotion and Admiration.

Consider we then Christ as pierced, 1. In his Body; Let us behold the Man, as
Pilate exposed him to the eyes of the Jews, all in Blood, all as it were one
Wound, pierced in every part of his Body. His Head torn with thorns; his Face
bruised with buffetings; his Shoulders crushed with the weight of that Cross
which he first bare, before it bare Him; His Back plowed up with Whips, his
Feet and Hands bored with Nails, and his very Heart pierced with the point of
the Spear. I am not able to paint out those dire Sufferings Christ endured in
his Body, but must draw a Veil over them and leave them to your own
Meditations. And yet this is but the least part of what our Lord suffered for
us, that which our bodily eye can discern; All this is but the outward
piercing, and but, as it were, skin-deep, in comparison of the piercing of his

2. Soul. For what is the pain of the Body to that of the Soul? And this had
its piercing too. What Simeon said of the Mother by way of Prophecy, That a
Sword should go through her Soul, Luke 2. 35. was more signally verified of the
Son of God. The Arrows of the Almighty did not only stick in his Flesh, but
pierced his very Soul through. That Blood, which streamed from him in his
Agony, was not so much the Blood of his Body as of his very Soul. And 'twas
this piercing which drew that sad and lamentable complaint from Him, Matthew. 26.
38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. Surely it was the
apprehension of somewhat more horrible than either Pain or Death that made him
so heavy and sorrowful of Soul. Evils are wont to crucify the Mind in the
expectation, rather than in the suffering. It is a double misery both to fear
and undergo it. God has mercifully provided this ease for our Souls in the
often ignorance of things that happen, that they streighten not our Thoughts
ere they load our Backs. Who of us embraces not Pain before Perplexity? How
often do we groan and cry for a ready dispatch in our lingerings? Defiring
rather to dye, than to feel or fear death and live? Yet was our Savior both
terrified and crucified; Terrified in the apprehension of Wrath, and in the
perpession of Death, crucified; Not only the sorrows of Death, but the very
pains of Hell came about him; and God's dereliction was that which made up the
greatest part of those pains, Mat. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? was That which most tortured Him. Christ's Enemies had now mocked,
scourged, pierced Him, so that from head to foot every Member was deformed and
dislocated, yet He opened not his mouth. He is silent and patient at all the
violence Man offered him; He only complains of the absence of his God; He
bewails not what He feels, but what He misses; and could have endured any
misery, that could not abide to want his V. Ga. pas p. 309.
God. And what a loss, think we, was this to want the presence and favor of
God, though but for a moment? which where it is perpetual does, in the judgment
of Divines, make up the greatest part of Hell? But, you will say, How could God
forsake Christ, unless Christ forsook Himself? Certainly God and Man were so
unchangeably, so inseperably combined in Him, that so strict an Union could not
possibly suffer the least Divulsion or Desertion. True indeed; And therefore
the Godhead, at this time, denied the Manhood, not his Person, but his
Patronage; not his Presence, but his Protection. Divinity here winks and
withdraws it self from Humanity, that our Lord might now be bereft of all
comfort and favor, who took upon Him to sustain the wrath of all. Well then
might his Soul be heavy unto death, which had such a load as the sins of
Mankind and God's wrath, due to those sins, hanging upon it. These were the
Arrows of the Almighty that went through his Soul; This, The poison thereof
that drank up his Spirit; These, The Terrors of God that did set themselves in
Array against Him, to use Job 6. 4.
Job's expression. The spirit of a Man may well bear his infirmities; but a
wounded spirit, a spirit so wounded as his was, by the hand and stroke of an
omnipotent God, who could bear but He that was God's equal; and yet even He
complains, who yet did bear it. How easily could He have vanquished the malice
of Hell, who stoops at the power and anger of God? If any thing could add to
this affliction, to this piercing of his Soul, on Man's part, it must have been
those bitter taunts, those cutting reproaches he suffered from the ungrateful
Jews, or rather those despights He foresaw Sinners should do Him, who should
make a mock of Him, and of those Sins which pierced Him; or, at least, so
slender a reckoning of all his piercings, as to have no sense at all of them,
and, as if they were a matter not worth looking on, should never bestow so much
as one Thought upon them; nay, by their constant sinning, and that without any
remorse, should crucify afresh the Son of Heb. 6. 6.
God, and put him to an open shame; treading 10. 29.
him under foot, and counting the blood of the Covenant, whereby they were
sanctified, an unholy thing. All this, and more than our faint apprehensions
can reach to, our Lord had in his prospect, and which pierced his very Heart by
that foresight He had of it; and so brings us Christians within the compass of
those that pierced Him.

Indeed the Text literally points to the Jews and their Assistants, the Roman
Soldiers, as the Authors of Christ's crucifixion, and the immediate
Executioners thereof. And it cannot be denied but that All of them had a hand
or head in this Act. They brought him to, they stretched Him on his Cross; They
pierced his hands and his feet; they stood staring and looking upon Him, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 22. 17. All of them, in their several degrees, were guilty
of the Fact; some, as procuring his Death, as the whole Nation of the Jews;
some, as commanding the Execution, as Pilate; others, as doing it, as the
Gentile Soldiers: And we are ready, and not without good cause too, to condemn
their cruelty. But this is only to mind the Evil they did, not what Evil Christ
suffered: This is to be angry with them, but not to justify our selves, who
pierced him as well as they, and some of us more deeply than many of them did.
Let us not mistake our selves. It was their Sin that did practice, but it was
ours that procured our Lord's Death. We would fain shift our Sin on the Jews
and Heathens, who were but the Instrumental causes here, whereas we are the
Principals. It Is not the Executioner that properly kills the Man, nor yet the
Judge; Solum peccatum homicida est; Sin only is the Murderer, and every Sinner
the Executioner of a Savior. All Men are the Meritorious causes, for whose
Transgressions He was pierced. The Lord has laid on Him the Iniquity of us
All, says the Prophet, Esaias 53. 6. It was the Hypocrisy of our Hearts that
mocked Him; It was the Bribery of our Hands that buffeted Him; The Oaths of our
Mouths that spat in his Face; We betrayed Him with our wanton kisses; We whipped
Him with the cords of our Oppression; We gave Him Gall and Vinegar to drink by
our luxurious Intemperance; Our Pride in vain Apparel and Ornaments platted a
Crown of Thorns upon his head, and stripped him of his garments; In a word, our
mighty Sins were the Nails which pierced his hands and his feet, and the Spear
that was thrust into his side. The glory of the Lord was brought to shame for
our shameful lives; The Lord of life was put to death for our deadly sins, and
the word became speechless for our crying Ones. So that I may justly bring this
home to every Man in this Congregation, with the Prophet Nathan's, Tu es homo,
2 Samuel 12. 5, 7.
Thou art the Man that piercedst Christ; and every one of us, were that
question put to us seriously, which was once to him scoffingly; Matthew. 26. 8.
Prophecy who smote thee, may, without the gift of Prophesying, return the
answer, It is We that smote Him.

We have now found out the Piercers here; And who but They ought to be the
Spectators of that Tragedy which themselves have occasioned. Indeed all Mankind
are the They in the Text, that have pierced, and therefore must look upon him.
But what is it to look upon him? Is it only to gaze upon a Crucifix with the
superstitious Papist, and have our Minds look one way, while our Eyes look
another? Is it to look upon Him with dry Eyes and unrelenting Hearts? Or only
to look, and no more? To afford him a passing glance of our Eye, and then fix
it perhaps on some vain and sinful Object? Surely the looking here implies
more than so; it requires the Exercise of all our Senses and Faculties, in the
judgment of the Hebrew Doctors, as Grotius on this place observes, out of Exodus
20. 18. and Jer. 2. 31. It requires our Memory to recall, our Understanding
often to reflect and ruminate on Christ's Passion, and engages all our
Affections about it. It exacts our most serious Attention, and our
often-repeated Meditations. We must so look upon, as to look into Christ
pierced for us; so look on, as never to look off Him; That by frequent viewing
the dimensions of his Cross, we may be Ephesians. 3. 18.
able to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height
thereof, and to know the love of Christ, there dying for us, which passes
knowledge. St. Peter speaking of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that
should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 12. tells us, ver. 13. that the Angels desire to look,
or as the word (...) there imports, curiously to pry into them; and the more we
do so, the greater benefit shall we reap by it. For at every our looking here,
some new sight will offer it self to us, to raise our admiration and exercise
our affections: It will make us love Him who was pierced for us; and it will
pierce us through with sorrow for having pierced Him: It will move our Pity,
raise our Faith, and exalt our Hopes to their highest pitch. That we may then
look upon Christ pierced to our benefit and comfort, let us do it these five
ways: With an eye of Pity and Compassion, of Sorrow and Regret, of Love, Faith
and Joy.

1. With an eye of Pity and Compassion. And this is no more than what we
commonly do to all afflicted persons. The misery of Sufferers, be they who
they will, naturally attracts our Eyes, and turns our Bowels toward them. At
least we are apt to pity, if not so charitable as to relieve them. The poor
wounded Man in the Gospel, who fell among Thieves, though he found no help from
the Priest and Levite that passed by, but only from the good Samaritan, yet
even they went near and looked upon him, Luke 10. 32. We need no other Motive to
pity any Lazar that lies in the streets, than his wounds and sores exposed to
our view. These sensible Arguments usually work upon and soften the hardest
Hearts. Nay, the vilest Malefactors, when led to the Scaffold or the Gallows,
draw Tears from our Eyes, though we know they suffer but what they deserve.
Common humanity inclines us to compassionate them; and we consider not then so
much who they are, as what they are to endure. Thus Pilate, to move the Jews
pity, thought it enough to expose Christ to them all bruised and besmeared with
Blood; as conceiving that such a fight would stifle their Malice and raise
their Compassion toward him. This, in his opinion, was enough to make a Jew
relent. And can we consider our blessed Lord, all bruised as he was for us, and
not so much as pity him? There are three things which usually dispose us to
pity suffering persons; The greatness of their Misery, and the dignity and
innocence of their Persons. Extraordinary Misery calls for extraordinary Pity
toward any; but who can behold an innocent, and withal a great Person in
distress, and yet be insensible of it, especially when himself is the cause of
it? Even Herod and Pilate, and one of the Thieves too, proclaimed our Lord's
innocence; they took him for an innocent Man; and we who know him to be no less
than the Son of God, who took upon him the form of a servant, and yet humbled
Luke 23. 14, 15.
himself even to the death of the Cross, and that merely for our sakes; ought
to melt into Compassion as often as we reflect on his direful Sufferings, and,
with St. Paul, be crucified with him, at least by a most sensible
fellow-feeling of what he endured by our procurement, that he may not complain
of us as he does of those hard-hearted Passengers, Lament. 1. 12. Have ye no
regard all ye that pass by the way? Nay, since there never was any sorrow like
his sorrow, nor any Person like Him that endured it; our Compassion ought in
some measure to bear proportion to that his Sorrow, especially since we our
selves were the Authors of it. And so,

2. Ought our Sorrow also to be answerable to his; They shall look on him whom
they have pierced; so look on Him, as to be themselves pierced too with sorrow
and grief for having pierced Him. This, in the Original Text, Zach. 12. 10. was
a Prophecy of what Christ's crucifiers should do: and in the following verse
it is said, In that day there shall be a mourning in Jerusalem; which some
construe of the day of God's vengeance upon the Jews for their Sins, especially
for that of piercing Christ, by reason of the Calamities it should bring upon
them. This is Theodoret and St. Hierom's Interpretation on this place, followed
by our Dr. Hammond on Revel. 1. 7. That when the Jews should see Christ coming
with Majesty to execute Vengeance upon his Crucifiers, in the day of his
visiting Jerusalem, they should then, though too late, bemoan their own folly
and madness. Which Prophecy so taken, is the same with that of our Savior,
Matthew. 24. 34. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in the Heavens, and
all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn: and with that of St. John, Revel. 1.
7. Behold, he comes with Clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also
that pierced him: and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him.
Which last prediction began to be accomplished in that day, when Christ came in
power to execute Vengeance on Jerusalem by the Roman Army; at which time, no
doubt, they experienced that fatal ruin which they had imprecated upon
themselves, His blood be upon us and upon our Children, Matthew. 27. 25. Though
the final accomplishment shall not be till the last and great Day of Judgment,
when He shall come in Person to inflict that heavy Doom of Condemnation, not
only upon those who actually crucified, but upon All that reject Him: At which
time it is impossible to imagine, what weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth;
what howling and wringing of hands, what despair, horror, and astonishment,
what a bitter mourning and lamentation there shall be.

I could wish this were seriously, speedily and sadly thought on by all sorts
of impenitent Sinners, that as they have their day of sinning, God will, sooner
or later, have his day of punishing: And as the day of a Sinner's Impenitency
is a day of carnal rejoicing; so the day of God's vengeance shall be a day of
bitter mourning. Woe unto you, says our blessed Savior, who now laugh, for you
shall mourn and weep, Luke 6. 25.

But although this be an useful Meditation, I conceive that other
interpretation to be more genuine and pertinent here, which construes this
Mourning mentioned in the parallel Text of Zachary, not to be penal, but
penitential. Indeed some Expositors glance at the Mourning Luke 23. 27, 48.
of the Women, which was in the day of our Savior's Passion, when beholding
his sorrows, their Bowels yearned, and their Eyes melted with Tears; At which
time also others of the Spectators smote their Breasts, and were astonished.
But this Mourning here relates not so much to the Spectators, as to the Actors
in the Tragedy; to those not who saw, but who pierced him. And since in the
forecited place of Zach. 12. 10. it is set down as an effect of the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication, or, as some read it, Lamentation, which was to be
poured out upon them; and is mentioned there rather as a Promise, than as a
Threat: It cannot rationally be expounded any otherwise, than to intend that
godly sorrow, which shall in that day, in the day of the Jews conversion, be
expressed by them for so heinous a crime. And do we not find this Prophecy in
part accomplished in St. Peter's Auditors, when they felt the very Nails and
Lance wherewith they had pierced Christ, sticking fast in their own hearts, and
piercing them with horror? For so we read, Acts 2. 37. that at his Sermon,
they were pricked at their hearts, and said unto Peter and unto the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? The Spirit of Grace was then
poured upon them, and so at once their Ears, Eyes and Hearts were opened to
hear reproof, to see and bewail their wickedness: Nor was it a slight and
superficial Sorrow, but a great and deep Mourning; so deep, that it went to
their heart; and so great, that, according to the Emphasis of the Greek word,
(...) there used, it was as if the sharpest points of many poisoned Daggers and
Scorpion's stings had been all at once fastened in their hearts. Thus they who
had shed the blood of Christ by the instigation of the Devil, shed tears by the
effusion of the Holy Ghost; and as they had cruelly wounded him to the death,
they were penitently, and mercifully by his Word and Spirit themselves wounded
with Repentance unto life. Which piercing, as it was in part accomplished in
those few Converts forementioned; so shall it have its fuller and more perfect
fulfilling on the whole Nation of the Jews, when they shall see their error and
be all turned unto Christ, as St. Paul tells us, Romans 11. 11, 32. I heartily
wish it may, as no doubt it was intended, be fulfilled in us too, and that my
Sermon may have the same effect on you that it had on Peter's Auditors, That
looking on Him whom we also have pierced, we may, with them, be pierced at the
heart too. We find that at our Lord's crucifixion all Nature mourned, all the
Creation groaned, Romans 8. 22. The Sun put on blacks, the Earth trembled, the
Rocks cleft asunder, and it were strange if we, of all God's creatures, should
remain insensible, and express no sorrow when we behold the Lord of Nature
suffering, and for us too. What a shame were it for us that the dumb, inanimate
Creatures, should upbraid us as the Children their fellows in the Marketplace,
Matthew. 11. 17. We have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. Let us then bear
our part in this Quire of Mourners; but with this difference, that our Mourning
be not so much outward as inward; not so much in the face as in the heart, a
heart pricked with sorrow for having pierced Christ; and not so much for the
smart, as out of the sense of our Sin; not so much for our selves, as for him,
for his sake whom we have crucified; for no Tears prevail with God, but such as
are wept over Jesus Christ: If he be not the flame in our Breasts that melts
our Hearts; if he be not the Object that draws forth our Tears, though we
should weep Blood, our Blood shall be but as Water spilt upon the ground: If we
grieve, and not in and for Christ, our grief will be but Hypocrisy, at least
but Formality. This is the Sorrow, this the Mourning which our piercing of
Christ calls for as a proper effect of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication;
and it must come in at the Eye; For the way to be pierced with Christ, is to
look upon him. Iisdem quibus videmus oculis, flemus; The Eye is the instrument
both of Sight and Sorrow: That must affect the Heart. What the Eye never sees,
the Heart, as we say, never rues. If the Understanding be not convinced of Sin,
our Hearts will never be moved at it. Sight of Sin must precede Sorrow for it.
The Prodigal first came to himself, ere he returned to his Father. Look we then
to Christ, but let us reflect upon our selves too, that our Eyes may dissolve
into Tears, without which Christ's Blood shall not wash away our guilt of
having spilled it. Let us sorrow, but with a sorrow according 2 Cor. 7. 10
to God, such as may work in us repentance unto Salvation for having crucified
the Author of it, and then we may look upon Him, to our comfort,

3. With an Eye of Faith; which is another prospect here mainly intended. For
the looking on in the Text is an Allusion to the beholding of the brazen
Serpent, Number. 21. 9
a Type of Christ crucified on the Cross, as himself tells us, Joh. 3. 16. It
was not the brazen Serpent it self, but their looking upon it that cured the
bitten Israelites. It was their Faith that did it, which came in at their Eye,
though it usually does at the Ear, and gave it a healing quality; As it was not
the Woman's touch, but her Faith that drew out Virtue from Christ to stanch her
issue of blood. It is the generally received opinion, that the Soldier who
pierced Christ, one Longinus, was, when he did that act, blind; but by virtue
of that precious Blood, which sprang on his Eyes from our Savior's side, he
had his Sight restored, and was hereupon converted, and after became a Bishop
of Cappadocia, and in the end died a Martyr. What truth there is in the
History, I know not; but very much surely there is in the Application: If by
Faith we will look upon him whom we have pierced, that Sight shall not only
clear our Eyes to discern, but touch our Hearts, and dispose them to embrace a
Savior. No spiritual Cure to be wrought on us without our Faith. We find that
Christ in all his miraculous Cures of diseased Persons still required their
Faith as a necessary preparative to their healing, as if Omnipotency it self
could do nothing without the Patient's belief; nor will the diseases of our
Souls be ever remedied without the concurrence of ours too. The Prophet Elijah,
by applying the Members of his Body to those of the dead Child, fetched it again
to life: Let us stretch every part of Christ pierced to our Souls, and they
will soon be revived, be they never so dead in trespasses and sins.

4. We are to look upon Christ pierced with an Eye of Love. This, we know,
naturally comes in at the Eye too; Oculi sunt in amore duces. Now as there is
no such Attractive of Love as Love; so never was there any such Love as that of
Christ in dying for us. It was our Sin that gave Him his Wounds, but it was his
Love that made him receive them. And we may read that Love, Esaias 49. 16.
to use the Prophet Esay's expression, in the Palms of his hands, that were
stretched out for us upon his Cross; In the Prints of the nails, which could
never have entered Him, had not his Love made them a passage; And in the point
of the Spear, which lets our Eyes into the very Bowels of his tender Love and
Compassion toward us. Well may each of us say with the Holy Martyr Ignatius,
My Love was crucified for me. If the Jews that stood by Him, when he was about
to raise Lazarus, said truly, Behold how he Joh. 11. 36.
loved him, when he shed but a few Tears out of his Eyes; much more truly may
we say of Him, Behold how he loved us! for whom He shed his very Heart-bloud;
the utmost Expression of Love, as Himself tells us, Joh. 15. 13. Greater Love
than this has no Man, to bestow his life for his friends; and yet greater love
than this did he show forth by laying down his life for us who were his
Enemies; I say, by laying it down; for no man had power to take it from him,
Joh. 10. 18. It was his own pure Love, not any force, that compelled him to dye
for us. And therefore our Obligation to love him ought to be so much the
stronger, by how much his suffering for us was more free and voluntary.

5. Lastly, Let us look on Him whom we have pierced, with infinite Joy and
Exultation; not for that we have pierced Him, which ought to produce a quite
contrary Passion in us, but that he would suffer himself to be pierced for us,
who only deserved to be so. What should have become of us, had he not undergone
the punishment due to us? Where had we been, but for his Passion? It is by his
stripes that we are healed; It is his meritorious Death that has procured us
Life; It is his precious Blood shed on the Altar of his Cross that has
reconciled us to God, that has vanquished Death and Hell, and opened unto us
the gates of Heaven, having thereby obtained eternal Redemption for us; which
we shall Heb. 9. 12, 26.
certainly partake of, if we will but look on him whom we have pierced, in such
a manner as we ought to do, with an Eye of Pity and Compassion, of hearty
sorrow and contrition of Faith and of Love. If we will do so, we may then lift
up our heads, for our Redemption draws nigh; We may then rejoice too with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, looking for that blessed hope, the glorious
appearing of our Lord and Savior at his second coming, to deliver us from this
present evil World, and to restore us to the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God. But, on the contrary, if either we will not look at all on Christ pierced
for us, or so slightly as not to be in the least affected with that sight; nay,
even despise his Sufferings; make a mock of Him, and of those Sins which
pierced Him; persecute Him in his Members; rend his mystical Body by Discord,
and his seamless Coat by Schism; corrupt the Purity of his Doctrine by Heresy,
and shame Him and his Gospel by our vile and wicked Lives; We shall then have
another, but a very dismal and uncomfortable sight of Him; not only the
merciless Jew, who actually shed his Blood, but the loose profane Christian,
who has trampled it under foot, shall see him then to his eternal horror and
confusion. I say shall see him; see him whether he will or no. It shall not be
in his choice whether he will see him or no. Every Eye, says St. John, shall
then see him, even they also who pierced him, and all kindreds of the Earth
shall wail because of him. The whole World then shall be the Theater on which
this sight shall be shown, and every Man thereon a several Spectator. And what
a dreadful sight shall that be to all unconverted Sinners, whether Jews or
Gentiles, when Christ their Judge shall appear in a visible shape with those
Wounds in his Body which they gave him! How successlesly shall they then cry
unto the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and cover them from the
presence of this Lamb, once dumb before the Shearers; but then with his very
voice, glorious and mighty in operation, breaking the loftiest Cedars in
pieces! In vain do we now put off this evil day from us, and, with St. Peter's
mockers, question the promise of his 2 Pet. 3. 4.
Coming. Behold he comes, says St. John, Revel. 1. 7. He is even now on his
way, and will as certainly come, as if he were already present. Nay, is already
come, if we may believe St. James, Behold the Judge stands before the door,
Jam. 5. 9. And who may abide his second Coming? when he shall come in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel, which his Son preached? 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. His first Coming was in Humility
and in Weakness, but his second shall be in Majesty and Power. How shall the
Scene then be changed? And with what face shall the enemies of this Cross be
able to look on him then whom they had here so often pierced? Consider we these
things, and let us prevent one sight by another; and let every one of us
prepare to meet our Lord in such a garb and posture, as that we may be able to
look upon him then with comfort. And that we may so do, let us beg of Him to
look upon us as once he did upon his Apostle that denied him; that with him we
may weep bitterly for having pierced him, and so fulfill the Prophecy of the
Text in the best sense of it; in that of the Prophet Zachary, and not of our
Evangelist, in the forecited Revel 1. 7. That we may here by Faith see him,
with St. Stephen, sitting at the right hand, and there making intercession for
us by those Wounds which we have given Him, that we may hereafter for ever
behold him in Glory.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached on Easter Day.
ACTS II. 24. Whom God has - raised up, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
THE precedent Verse, and this of the Text, represent Christ unto us in a very
different condition; That, in the low ebb of his Exinanition; (...) Irenaeus.
This, in a high pitch of his Exaltation. In the former we find him under the
power of death; In the latter raised up to life; There a Worm, and no Man;
Psalm. 22. 6.
Here more than Man, Declared to be the Son of God with power by the
Resurrection Romans 1. 4.
from the dead.

Christ had given sufficient evidence of his Manhood in his natural Infirmities
and Necessities; but, above all, in his Passion: But the main proof of his
Divinity was to be taken from his Resurrection. A proof at this time most
necessary, in relation to his greatest Enemies the Jews, who were so apt to
triumph in his ruin, to fancy they had now prevailed against him; to say
within themselves, Now that he lies, let him Psalm. 41. 8.
rise up no more; and once more to lay that in his Dish, which they objected to
him on his Cross; He saved others, Mat. 27. 42
himself he cannot save.

With these buisy mockers which gnashed upon him with their teeth; these
Atheists that could say, Where is the promise of his return? and that had
called him 2 Pet. 3. 4.
in express terms a Deceiver, St. Peter Mat. 27. 63
had to do; and had not the Holy Ghost appeared a little before in a cloven
tongue of fire on his head, his own could never have been able to make them
credit such a thing as a Resurrection; Christ's much less, to whom they were so
spightfull: It was necessary then that so great a Miracle should make way for
another as great, which was to persuade them into a belief of Christ's
Resurrection; Men so incredulous, that they would not Luke 16.
believe, though one rose from the dead, as Lazarus had done; who having
brought them news from another World, they, for his pains, would needs have
sent him Joh. 12. 10.
back to the place from whence he came; so that nothing now but the sight of
him they had so lately crucified (if yet that would do) was sufficient to
convince them; whom though St. Peter could not present to their Eyes, yet their
Ears hear the certain news of his return from the Grave; That he that was dead,
was now alive; That that body Rev. 1. 18.
which had been sown in weakness, was now raised in power; by a power no less
than divine, the power of an Omnipotent God; a power able to break in pieces
the chains even of death its self; strong ones indeed to hold all others, but
weak to hold him who was as well God as Man; Whom God has raised up, etc.

From which words, Four things are to be gathered.

1. The Certainty of Christ's Resurrection, set down here as matter of fact,
Has raised up. 2. The principal Agent, or rather, the sole efficient Cause of
Christ's Resurrection, God; Whom God has, etc. 3. The Manner how 'twas done,
Removendo impedimentum, by taking away whatsoever might obstruct it; the
rolling away the stone, as it were, from the door of the Sepulcher; the untying
of a hard knot; Having loosed the pains of Death. 4. And lastly, the Necessity
of all this; a most convincing and irresistible Argument, and therefore brought
up in the rear to make all sure, Because it was not possible he should be
holden of it.
Of these in their order, and of such practical Inferences as do arise out of
them: And first of the first Particular, the Certainty of Christ's
Resurrection, in these words, Has raised up.

1. There is not any truth in Scripture, Part 1. The Certainty of Christ's
rising.
which God has been so careful, or (as I may so say) curious to secure as that
of his Son's Resurrection; Which he did as by taking away all grounds of
doubting of it, so by making use of all manner of proofs to ascertain it. For,
first, whereas Skeptical Men might have questioned whether Christ died truly or
no; or, if so, whether his disciples did not come by night and steal him away;
These two grounds of suspicion God took care to remove: The first, by that
Evidence the Centurion gave in to Pilate of his real dying; besides that of so
many Spectators, who beheld that stream of blood wherein he poured forth his
Soul unto death: And the second, by the exact care of the High Priest, who
caused a vast stone to be rolled before the door of the Sepulcher, adding his
Seal and Soldiers of his own choosing to guard it from the attempts of the
Disciples; who, had they had a will, had neither power nor courage to break
open a Sepulcher hewn out of a new entire Rock, or force such a strong guard
as kept it; much less Money to bribe their silence, as the High Priests and
Scribes did; And to say that his Disciples stole him away, while Matthew. 28.
the stout Watchmen slept, was surely no better than a Dream, or rather not a
Dream, but a studied Lie; and yet such a Lie too, as does most clearly confirm
the truth of our Lord's Resurrection.

But then secondly, As God took away all cause of doubt, so did he draw
Arguments from all Topics to prove this great Truth. Heaven and Earth here
gave in their Evidence: For not only the Souls of Holy Men were fetched thence
to be united to their Bodies for proof of that Resurrection by which themselves
were raised; but the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven, the Angels, came down on
purpose to publish it to the Women, as these did to the Apostles, to whom
Christ showed himself alive too, after his Act. 1. 3.
Passion, by many infallible proofs, and exposed himself to their very Senses;
who did not only see and hear, but converse and eat with him after he was risen
from the dead, that they might not mistake his Body, as once they did, for a
Phantasm; or Christ for a Spirit, having flesh and bones, as they found he had;
and retaining still the marks and prints Joh. 20. 20.
of the nails and spear, to show the Identity, as well as Reality, of that Body
which arose; The very Infidelity of an Apostle being not the least confirmation
of our Faith too in this particular. Not to mention other instances, the
Earthquake, the empty grave, the stone rolled away, the linen cloths curiously
wrapped up together as dead Witnesses, when there were so many living ones,
Angels and Men; and among these, such as were ready to seal this Truth with
their dearest Blood; of such credit and honesty too, as might highly recommend
their Testimony to our belief; of such Prudence, Experience and Holiness
withal, as neither could betray them to Error, nor suffer them to abuse the
credit of others: Such were the Holy Apostles, who with great power gave
witness of the Act. 4. 34.
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and whose principal office it was to do so,
as appears upon the Election of St. Matthias into the place of Judas, grounded
upon this necessity, Act. 1. 21, 22. To whom we may add no less than five
hundred Brethren at once, all agreeing in the same 1 Cor. 15. 6, 8. Act. 1. 3.
story: ( Nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt;) which made their Evidence
rise to such a strong demonstration, as was sufficient to stop the mouths of
Christ's most contradicting Enemies, and open ours to confess with the
Disciples and Primitive Christians, The Lord is risen indeed, Luke 24. 34.

Thus we see how exact the Holy Ghost was, as in removing all such Doubts as
might in the least obstruct our Faith; so in using all manner of Arguments to
confirm and establish the undoubted Truth of Christ's Resurrection, not only to
show the possibility of a Resurrection in general by so pregnant and visible an
Example, but the importance of it in regard of ours, whereof our Lord's was the
Fountain and Pledge.

1. I say, the clearing of the Truth of Christ's Resurrection was absolutely
necessary, in regard of the slowness and indisposition of most Men, and in all
times, to admit of the possibility of a Resurrection. The Philosopher, we see,
could not digest it; To the Stoics and Epicureans it became matter of
laughter, who took it for some new Goddess, Act. 17. 18, 32. Nay, some of the
Disciples themselves looked upon it as a Fable, (...) Luke 24. 11. A
considerable Sect too among the Jews, the Sadducees, utterly denied it, Act.
23. 8. Simon Magus and the Gnostics were of the same persuasion, and so was
Marcion, as Tertullian informs De carne Christi, e. ^. De Resurrectione carnis,
c. 56. 2 Timothy 2. 18.
me, who denied the truth of Christ's flesh, and consequently his Nativity and
Resurrection, as Valentinus's Disciple did the Resurrection of that Flesh he
conversed in. Some there were who affirmed 'twas already past, as Hymenaeus and
Philetus; Others turned it into a mere Vid. Tertul. de carnis Resurr. c. 19.
Allegory, a Renovation, Matthew. 19. 28. A state of the Gospel called a New
Heaven and a new Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13. And the World to come, Heb. 2. 5. And
lastly, how do all loose Christians decry it as a thing utterly inconsistent
with their interest! It was requisite then that this foundation should be laid
very deep in men's Hearts, which the Holy Ghost foresaw so many would
endeavor to overthrow.

2. 'Twas absolutely necessary to clear this Truth, in regard of the importance
of it to Christ's glory, and the happiness of all true Christians.

1. To Christ's glory, which in the esteem of Men being much eclipsed by his
Death, was to shine out brighter by his Resurrection; for nothing but this
could take off that stain which his ignominious Sufferings had cast upon his
Honor. And hence Christ scarce mentions his Death, but he still closes with
his rising again the third day. Which was Mat. 20.
the reason of the Jews exquisite care to secure his Sepulcher, that the last
error, Mat. 27. 64.
as they called it, might not be worse than the first; That is, lest the
reputation of a glorious Resurrection should belly and confute all their former
Calumnies and Reproaches; as indeed it did: For by this his Resurrection his
Godhead was clearly manifested, which else must needs have been obscured and
called in question; there being nothing so unsuitable to a God as to suffer,
especially to dye. A little loss of Blood, we read, made Alexander the Great
quit all his Pretensions to Godhead: And St. Augustine tells Lib. 18. de civit.
Dei, c. 5.
us out of Varro, That the Egyptians made it Capital to affirm that their God
Apis was dead, forbidding any mention of his Sepulcher: Nay, St. Peter, v. 29.
concludes David inferior to Christ from his Death and Burial, and Sepulcher,
still remaining: For although Christ's Sepulcher did remain still to St.
Peter's, as it does yet to our times; yet his Body did not abide in it as
David's did, and still does in his; if we will take an Angel's Mat. 28. 6.
word for it; Come see the place Luke 24. 6.
where the Lord lay: and again, He is risen, he is not here. For had he
remained there, as David did in his Grave, he had then seen corruption, and so
had been no God.

2. This Truth was to be cleared and confirmed in regard of our advantage: For
had not Christ risen, we should still 1 Cor. 15. 17, 19.
have remained in our sins, and been of all men most miserable, by depriving
our selves of the Goods of this life, and having no expectation of those of a
better: Nay, in a worse condition than the Beasts that perish, who innocently
following their natural appetites, have nothing to check or restrain them. All
our Theological Virtues would be to no purpose too; Our Faith, our Hope, our
Charity vain, (the substance of St. Paul's whole discourse, 1 Cor. 15.) All our
Moral Virtues also would be not only useless, but troublesome: Justice,
Temperance, Fortitude, and the like, but so many insignificant Ciphers; adding
nothing to the sum of our Happiness, but much to the abatement of it; Si post
mortem nihil, ipsaque mors nihil. For who would stick to devour others, who
should himself so quickly be made a prey to Death, and be swallowed up of the
Grave? Who would deny himself the use of those Pleasures, which should never
return? There would be no Hope for us, if no Resurrection; and no Resurrection
for us to be sure, if Christ had not risen. Which consideration made the
Apostles (one main part of whose Office, as I told you, 'twas, to be Witnesses
of his Resurrection) to lay that still in all Churches as the first
cornerstone in that spiritual Fabric, as 1 Cor. 15. 4. St. Paul does, That
Christ rose again according to the Scriptures, calling this his Gospel, 2 Timothy
2. 8. and placing it among his grand fundamentals, Heb. 6. 2, 3. as it is a
principal Article of our Creed, which St. Peter offers here to his Auditors as
most necessary for them to know in order to their Conversion, who would never
have been persuaded to embrace a crucified Savior, a stumbling block to Jews,
1 Cor. 1. 23. and a rock of offense, which was to be taken out of their way
that they might come to Christ; who being now represented to them in a more
pompous and glorious shape of a triumphant Conqueror, might in some sort be
more suitable to those Idea's they had of a Messiah, and so be more willing to
become his Subjects. Thus did these few words, has raised up, take away that
veil that had hitherto been over their eyes, and made them see him they had
pierced; and readily own him for their Savior, who had so visibly been rescued
from the Jaws of Death; that the bare mentioning of the matter of fact, whereof
many of them had been eyewitnesses, without any other argument, was sufficient
to change those late implacable Persecutors into Converts.

II. And here, to stop the mouth of Part II. The sole Agent or efficient Cause
of Christ's Resurrection, God.
Carnal reason, which might be apt to fancy a Resurrection impossible, it was
necessary for St. Peter, in order to a full persuasion and assurance of
Christ's being truly raised from the dead, to let them know that this was done
by a divine Power; That God, to whom nothing was impossible, was the only Agent
here; He who could kill and make alive; Deuteronomy. 32. 39*
That 'twas his Hand alone which brought this mighty thing to pass, his own
right hand that had purchased himself this victory over Death: An Act beyond
the activity of any created Being. Whence it is that the Resurrection is in
Scripture called the power of God, Matthew. 22. 19. and the glory of God, Luke
11. 40. and the glory of the Father, Romans 6. 4. Such power and such glory, as
he can no more give away to another, than his Godhead. And therefore the Lord
is said to descend from Heaven to raise the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. It being his
own proper work that. For although an Angel shall blow the trump at the last
day, yet the voice of the Son of God must be heard before the dead can live.
Angels may gather the Elect Joh. 5. 25.
from the four corners of the Earth, but God must enliven them. An act so
incommunicably his, that the Devil cannot do it. He who is God's Ape in other
things, would fain be in this, or at least be thought able to effect it, to
raise his credit among the Sons of perdition. For that Samuel the Witch of
Endor called up, was but a counterfeit; he was not the Prophet himself, but
Satan under his Mantle. Nay all those Heathens, who seemed to have bid fair to
such Miracles as Christ did, as Apollonius Tyanoeus and Vespasian, whom
therefore Julian the Apostate opposes to our Savior to lessen and decry him,
although they are said to have done many strange things, yet do I not find
that ever they pretended to be able to raise the dead; As Pharaoh's Magicians,
who could counterfeit most of Moses's Miracles, could not with all their skill
put life into one single insect. Here they confessed the finger of God: and
such is the Resurrection, not only God*s finger, but his arm; an equal act of
Power in him to restore, as to create: which St. Paul going about to describe,
uses such an Exaggeration of lofty Expressions, as no humane Eloquence can
parallel; Ephesians. 1. 19. That we may know, says he there, what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the work of the
Might of his power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him up from the
dead. Where we may observe a sixfold Gradation, Power and Might, the Greatness
and Might of his Power, the exceeding Greatness of his Power, and a working of
the Might thereof; and yet all this still dull and flat, till he quickens it
with an active Verb, (...), which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him up
from the dead. An act proper to God the Father, who is entitled to it, ver. 33.
and by St. Paul too, Gal. 1. 1. Yet so, as that he has communicated this Power
to his own Son, Joh. 10. 17, 18. and 5. 21, 26. As the Father raises up the
dead and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will; who had a
Power to lay down his life, and to take it again; to dissolve Joh. 2. 19, 21.
the Temple of his Body, and in three days to raise it up; so that Christ here
did as much rise as was raised up; and this the word (...) in St. Luke imports,
a Verb of an active signification, implying a Power in himself to rise, and in
that respect a certain argument of his being the co-essential and
con-substantial Son of God, as the Apostle concludes him hence to be, Romans 1.
4. in spite of all those his adversaries; who by denying him this Power, prove
themselves worse enemies to him than the Jews were, who robbed him of his Life;
whereas these of his Divinity also, as far as in them lies.

III. The principal and sole Agent Part III. Of the Manner.
then in this great Work was God, the Father and the Son; And such an Agent was
necessary, since the task was so difficult; the knot which Death had tied being
so hard, required no less than a God to unloose it. Now by Death here is meant,
not only a separation of Soul and Body, (though that be the most natural import
of the word,) but all those sad things that preceded, as so many Prologues to
his last Tragedy, styled Propassiones; All those ingredients in the bitter cup
he drank of: Such as were Christ's natural apprehensions of the terrors of
Death, the curse of the Law, the load of our Sins upon him, and a lively sense
of God's wrath due to those Sins, which put him into an Agony, and made him
sweat great drops of blood; and, to close up all, the bitter pangs of that
cruel death he underwent to satisfy God's Justice: All which are compared here
to the Pangs of a Woman in travail; from which God at last freed him, by
raising him up to a life incapable of pain or sorrow; making him forget his
former Sufferings, as a Woman does her Pains when delivered of her Child, Joh.
16. 21.

This is implied in the word (...); But because to loose the Pains seems a hard
expression, and unloosing properly denoting the untying of some knot, and so
supposing some chain or cord wherewith Christ was bound, and which God
dissolved, which the following word (...) seems to make good; some conceive it
better to interpret the word Pains by Bonds, as the Syriack does, calling them
Funes Sepulchri, those adamantina mortis vincula, in the Poet; And Horace.
the rather, because the Psalmist promiscuously uses these words, Psalm. 116.
3. The snares of Death compassed me round about, and the pains of Hell gat hold
upon me. Both of them signify no more, but the power of death; those Shackles
and Manacles; which the Angel of the Covenant struck off from himself, and then
from us; which could no more hold him* than the withy bands could Sampson;
herein a Type of Christ, being but as Flax and Tow to him who was the Power of
God; and though he might suffer himself to be entangled, yet could not possibly
be holden of them. And that,

1. In respect of the Truth of God's Part IV. The Necessity of Christ's not
being holden.
Word, viz. those many Predictions and Types of Christ's Resurrection, which
else must have been voided. The Predictions are many and clear relating to this
point; That of Esaias 53. 8. That Christ should be taken from his prison; That of
Hosea 6. 2. After two days will he revive us, and in the third day he will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight: see Esaias 26. 19. But most expressly
that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 16. 10, 11. That his flesh should rest in
hope, and that God would not suffer his Holy One to see Corruption; which
Prophecy could not be applied to David himself, as St. Peter here in the Verses
immediately following tells his Auditors, because he did see Corruption; but
only to Christ, who did not, and who did rise the third day according to the
Scriptures, Luke 18. 33.

As for those Types too, which shadow forth Christ's Resurrection, they are
many and exactly representative of it; As Adam's awaking from sleep, a Type of
the second Adam's from death; Sarah's conceiving when old; Isaac's being
sacrificed, and yet living, Genesis 22. 12. An express figure of Christ's
Resurrection, Heb. 11. 14, 17, Joseph's being taken out of the Pit, and lifted
up out of the Dungeon, as Jeremy was too, and Daniel out of the Den of the
Lions, Dan. 6. 23. And more clearly, by Christ's own application, Jonah's being
taken out of the belly of the Jona. 2. 11.
Whale, Mat. 12. 40. All which Types would be mere shadows without their
substance, and insignificant Types, if they had wanted their Anti-types, and
should not exactly have answered them; which they could not do, if Christ
could have been holden by the pains or cords of death.

2. Not possible, by reason of that indissoluble tie of Christ's Personal
Union; (so strait, that Christ's Body, even in the Grave, was inseparably
united to the Deity which drew it to it;) For although Death could dissolve his
Natural, yet not his Personal Union; and therefore necessary it was, that his
Body and Soul should be reunited, that so he might become a perfect Man, which
could not be without his rising.

3. Not possible, in respect of God's immutable Decree so determining it; which
being still of force, nothing could render ineffectual. God had anointed his
Son from all Eternity as to be a Prophet and a Priest; so a King, to accomplish
the work of Man's Redemption; none of which Offices could be fully executed,
but upon supposition of his rising from the dead. (1.) The preaching of the
Gospel was to follow that, Luke 24. 47. (2.) As was also the preaching of
Repentance and Remission of sins through his blood; the Expiation whereof, as
well as our Justification, (the not imputing our Sins to us) was an effect of
his Resurrection, Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised
again for our Justification. God having declared, by raising his Son from the
dead, that he had accepted of his Death, as of a sufficient ransom for our
Sins. For if Christ had remained still under the power of Death, his
satisfaction could not have been perfect, neither could he have applied the
Virtue thereof to us. And in like manner was Christ's Resurrection our
Justification: For Christ being V. Reyn. on Ps. 110. v. ult.
our true pledge, after he had satisfied for us by his Death, returning unto
Life, gives us a clear Evidence, and affords us a sure Argument, that God was
fully reconciled, and Life purchased for us. Which assurance we could not have
had, if Christ our pledge had still remained under the power of death, for as
much as his continuance in his payment would ever have argued the imperfection
of it. The sum of all is 1 Cor. 15. 17.
this, That our Justification was begun in Christ's Death, but was perfected by
his Resurrection; That we have Redemption by his abasement, and Application of
it by his advancement. (3.) Again, The pacification of our Consciences, the
confirmation of our Faith, and the support of our Hope depended all upon the
Exercise of his Regal Office, which was mainly to triumph over his and our
Enemies; the last of them especially, Death; which he could never be said to
have done, while he still remained under its Dominion: For then he had never
ransomed Men from the power of the Grave, nor redeemed them from Death; but, as
it follows in Hosea 13. 14. Death had been his Plague, and the Grave his
Destruction; and so ours too. So far should he then have been from swallowing
it up in victory, or leading captivity 1 Cor. 15. 54. Ephesians. 4. 8.
captive, that himself should have been a slave and a captive to them; so far
from spoiling Principalities and Powers, or making a show of them openly;
triumphing Col. 2. 15.
over them, that the gates of Hell should have prevailed against Himself, and
consequently against his Church, contrary to his express Word and Promise, Mat.
16. 18.

4. Not possible, as the word (...) implies an unsuitableness or incongruity,
as well as an absolute impossibility; (for id possumus quod jure possumus;) And
according to this notion of the word, 'twas impossible, that is, 'twas
altogether unsuitable and unbecoming, as I may so say, God, to suffer Christ to
be under the power and dominion of Death; It did not become his Love thus to
forsake his only beloved Son; nor his Justice Joh. 3. 35.
to suffer his Holy One to see Corruption, to leave his Soul in Hell, i. e. the
Grave, who had done no violence, neither was guile Esaias 53. 9.
found in his mouth; or to let him go without his reward, who by his active and
passive Obedience; the Sufferings in his Life, and Obedience at his Death, had
merited Heaven for himself and us; Psalm. 110. 2: Phil. 2. 8, 9.
It being most unfit that he should remain any longer in Death's prison, who
had paid his own and our debt, even to the discharging of the very uttermost
farthing. And to conclude this point; How unbeseeming the Power of God was it
also, (even in the judgment of Reason,) That he that loses the bands of
Orion, should not be able to break Death's cords; That that Death, which God
never made, (a mere privation,) should fetter him who made all things, and that
nothing Heb. 1. 2.
command Omnipotency its self; That the Devil should be said to have the power
of death, and the Prince of life 2. 14.
be under that power. Such Chains of darkness suit well with that roaring Lion,
who goes about seeking whom he may devour; but not at all with the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, who was to rescue the prey out of his jaws. Certainly He that
had the keys of Hell and Death could open the gates of Death to himself, as
well as to all believers. The Grave to him was no other than a Womb, which soon
grew weary of its load; and 'twas as natural for Christ to force his passage
out thence, as for the Child, now ripe for the Birth, to drop from his Mother's
Womb. If the Creature groans to be delivered from the bondage of her
Corruption, it is but reasonable to imagine that the Earth could not choose but
be in pain, so long as she became an Instrument of her Creator's captivity; and
'twas as absolutely necessary for those Iron gates of death to let out the Lord
of life, as it was for those Everlasting ones to be lifted up to receive the
King of Glory into Heaven.

And into that place, whereinto his Applicat.
Resurrection has made a way for Himself, we hope one day to enter; that where
the Head is, there the Members may be also. We have ground for this Hope from
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 14. God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise
up us by his own power. He can, for he did raise up others before he raised
himself; Mar. 5.
Jairus Daughter, Luke 7.
the Widow's Son, Joh. 11.
Lazarus after four days rotting in the Grave, are all pregnant instances of
his Power; Et ab esse ad posse valet consequentia; What he has done, he can
still do; unless we shall fancy his Arm shortened, or that the Ancient of days
has lost his strength. And that he will, we have his own Word for it; Joh. 6.
40. Whosoever believes in me, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. If he can and will, why should we doubt of it? Who has
resisted his Will? Or what can tie up his Hands? Death, we see, could not; her
Cords were too weak to Manacle him; and why should we think they can now hold
us? He that could break them off from himself, can he not dissolve ours too?
Let me then put St. Paul's question to the most doubting Sceptick, Act. 26. 8.
Why should it be thought an impossible thing that God should raise the dead?
Since we see he has effectually done it in the Person of Christ, and every day
does it in Nature. For what is Nature its self but a continual Resurrection? We
may see it every Day in a perpetual orderly Succession of Nights and Days, in
the Setting and Rising of the Sun, in Winter and Spring. The Serpent's casting
off his old Skin; the Eagle's renewing his strength with his Beak; (not to
mention the Phoenix rising from her Ashes, which yet some of the Fathers, as
Clement and Tertullian V. Tertull. de Resurr. Carnis, cap. 13.
use as an argument to prove the Resurrection;) the Seed corrupted in the
Earth, and thence springing up into a full Ear, our Lord's and St. Paul's
instances, all Joh. 12. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 36.
Emblems, or rather Demonstrations of it. Our very Bodies (to go no farther
than our selves) even in our lifetime are continually altered, and those we
now carry about us are not the same they were a few years past; so that we may
change the Tense and read, not that we all shall be, but that we are
continually 1 Cor. 15. 51.
changed. Our sleep, what is it but a shorter death, and our awaking thence but
a return to life? What are Churchyards but (...) Sleepinghouses, from whose
Graves, as from so many Beds, we are one day to be raised up by the sound of
the last trump? And as Nature, so Art shadows forth a Resurrection; That Art,
whereby a little rude piece of Earth is refined into pure Metal; whereby a
Chemist can raise a flower out of ashes, at least to shape and color; And
shall not God be able to change our vile Bodies, and make them like unto his
glorious Body? And when he has turned Men into destruction, to say, Come Psalm.
90. 3.
again ye Children of Men. If the Disputer of this World, the conceited
Rationalist should deny a possibility of a return from a privation to a habit,
a re-production of the same thing once corrupted; Let me ask him, why that God
who created our Bodies out of nothing, cannot be able to recall them out of
something? For since even Philosophy its self will grant, that in every
dissolution the parts dissolved do not perish, the Materials still continuing;
All the Skill here will be but to join and reunite the scattered parcels. Quasi
non majoris miraculi sit animare quam jungere. Tertullian's reasoning here is
very concluding; De Resurr. Carnis, cap. 11.
and we cannot resist the argument. Utique idoneus est reficere qui fecit;
quanto plus est fecisse quam refecisse; initium dedisse quam reddidisse. Ita
restitutionem carnis faciliorem credas institutione. An Artificer can take a
Watch or Clock asunder and put it together again; and shall not the great
Creator be able to do as much here, to reunite what he has severed, having
still reserved the loose scattered pieces and fragments? The separation of our
Bodies and Souls by death, as 'twas violent; so their desire of reunion being
natural, shall not be frustrated. They are incomplete Substances in that state,
and long for their perfection, which is their reunion; for by that are the
spirits of just Men departed made perfect, and God will not leave them in an
imperfect condition, lest a power and inclination should for ever be in the
root, and never rise up to fruit. This may suffice to silence, though not to
satisfy Natural reason; especially if we consider, that many Philosophers have
had strong apprehensions of a Resurrection upon the dissolution of the World by
fire; a reduction of all things to a better state, as Seneca terms it. V. Sen.
Not. Qu. lib. 3. cap. 26, 27.
Nor was there any Article of the Faith more generally believed among the Jews
than this, as appears by Joh. 12. 24. and Act. 23. 8. The Patriarchs were
certain of it; witness their great care before their death, to have their Bones
carried away by the Children of Israel out of Egypt, that they might be buried
in Abraham's Field; out of a hope, no doubt, of being the first that, by virtue
of Christ's Resurrection, might rise from the dead; as it is very probable they
were of the Number of those many Saints which arose and came out of their
Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto
many, Matthew. 27. 53. But then to the Faith of a Christian, nothing is so easy
as a Resurrection; since God's Word clearly tells us, That Christ is our
Resurrection and our Life, Joh. 11. 25. and that our life, which is now hid
with him in God, shall one day be revealed, Colos. 3. 3. That God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living, Matthew. 22. 32. Nay, the Lord of dead and
living, Romans 14. 9. For that he will one day raise them up to life again. For
the dead Bodies of Saints, while they lie rotting in the Grave, being still
united to Christ, as his Body there was to the Deity, cannot be for ever
separate from him; the Members must at last be joined to their Head. If the
first fruits be risen, the 1 Cor. 15. 20.
whole lump shall follow. Not one hair of Mat. 10. 30.
our head shall perish. He that numbers the sand of the Sea, numbers our dust;
nor can the least Attom escape him. All our Psalm. 139. 15.
members are written in God's book. He that puts our tears into his bottle,
locks up the precious dust of his Saints in his Cabinet, can recall our
dispersed Ashes, and require our Blood of every Beast that has drunk it; fetch
those several parcels of us which have been buried in a thousand living Graves,
and been made a part of those Graves which have devoured them. God can make the
Esaias 26. 19
Earth cast out her dead, cause the Sea to disgorge them, and our dry bones to
gather together, as in Ezekiel's Vision, chapter 37. He that calls all the Stars
by Exodus 33. 12. Luke 10. 20
their names, knows his by name, (for their names are written in Heaven,) and
will call them by their names as he did Lazarus, bid them come forth, and by
bidding enable them to do so, in spite of all their bands. Now that we may be
of the number, and partake of the lot of these happy ones, we must hear
Christ's voice here, calling us to repentance and newness of life, that we may
hear that with comfort which shall hereafter call us to Judgment, and be able
to answer it with joy and confidence, Here we are. Let us be sure of our part
in the first Resurrection, that the second death may have no power over us. All
shall one day be raised; All must one day appear before the Judgment Seat of 2
Cor. 5. 10.
Christ, good and bad; But there is a Resurrection of damnation for these, and
for those, of life. Both shall come out of their Dungeons; but the one like
Pharaoh's Baker, to an Execution; the other, like his Butler, to an Exaltation;
The former shall have (...) the latter only, (...) Sinners shall arise, but the
godly be quickened. How happy would it be for wicked Men, if they Mat. 26. 24
should never have been born, or should never rise again, since they shall rise
no otherwise than as drowsy Malefactors, who lying down with their Sentence,
are afterward awakened to be set on the Rack. But it is not so with the Godly,
who sleeping in Christ, do rest in hope. I would not have you ignorant,
Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13, 14.
concerning them which are asleep, says St. Paul, that ye sorrow not, even as
other which have no hope: For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again;
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with Him. What do
thou fear then, O good Christian? Sin? Behold the Resurrection of thy Redeemer
publishes thy discharge. Thy Surety has been arrested and cast into the prison
of his Grave for thee. Had not the utmost farthing of thine Arrearages been
paid, he could not have come forth. But now that thou see, he is come forth;
now that the sum is fully satisfied, what danger can there be of a discharged
debt? Or is it the Wrath of God thou dreadest? Wherefore is that but for Sin?
And if thy Sin be defrayed, that quarrel is at an end; And if thy Savior
suffered it for thee, how can thou fear to suffer it in thy self? Surely that
infinite Justice hates to be twice paid. He is risen, and therefore he has
satisfied. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, Romans 8. 34. Lastly, Is it Death that affrights thee? Behold thy
Savior overcoming Death by dying, and triumphing over it in his Resurrection.
And can thou fear a conquered Enemy? What harm is there in this Serpent but
for his sting? ( The sting of death is sin.) 1 Cor. 15. 56.
And when thou see that pulled out by thy powerful Redeemer, how can it now
hurt thee? It may possibly hiss at, but it cannot bite thee: Look upon the
Serpent lifted up for thee on the Cross; and this Serpent's sting, if it has
any to wound, it can have none to kill thee. If thy Savior has not quite
destroyed this thine enemy, at least he has brought it under and made it
subject; like the Gibeonites, if not banished, it is enslaved, and made now
instrumental to Christ's Kingdom. Loose thou then the bands of thine iniquity,
and those of death, which Christ has broken, shall no more be able to hold
thee, than they could do him. Death in its most affrighting shapes to thee is
but a scarecrow, it is but the shadow of death, while God is with thee; Nay,
it is but an (...) a going out, a departing in peace to a Holy Simeon. 'Twas no
more between God and Moses, but go up and dye, as 'twas said to another
Prophet, up and eat. Ever since our Lord has swallowed death up in victory, our
Tombs become Death's Graves more than ours. Sepulchrum 1 Cor. 15. 54.
non jam mortuum, sed mortem devorat; says a Father. Our Bodies are not lost in
the Earth, but laid up to be improved; like Porcellane-dishes, which the ground
does not consume, but refine. In the Transfiguration, that body of Moses, which
was hid in the valley of Moab, appeared glorious in the Mount of Tabor. And
though we appear now like Aaron's dry rod, yet that dry rod shall at last bud
and bring forth fruit unto glory. The Israelites garments* indeed, in the
Wilderness, waxed not worse for wearing; but though our Bodies, which are the
garments of our Souls, do so, and are rent and torn by afflictions and death,
yet God can and will mend them: Nay, when these Temples of the Holy Ghost we
carry about us are dissolved, he will so build them up, that as it was said of
the first and second Jewish Temples, Haggai 2. 9. the glory of our latter
houses shall be greater than that of the former. -- Diruta stante Major Troja
fuit -- God will bless us as he did Job, more at our latter end than at our
beginning, and Exalt us, as he did Christ, by our Sufferings. If with him we
drink of the brook in the way, (taste of his Cup) he will lift up our heads too.
We shall be like him as now He is. A golden Head, and Members of Clay, suit not
well together. This is our great comfort, that Christ is risen; for if the Head
be above water, the Body is safe. Joseph is alive (said Jacob) and that news
revived the drooping Patriarch. So when we hear that Christ, our elder Brother,
the first-begotten from Rev. 1. 15.
the dead, is alive too, let us take courage, go and find him out, seek him not
in the Grave, ( He is not there, he Luk 24. 6. Mat. 28. 6.
is risen; and why should we seek the living among the dead?) but in Heaven,
where he now is; and set our affections on things above, and not on things
below. It befits us not to lie in our Beds of ease and pleasure, to lie
sleeping there when Christ is up: such a spiritual Lethargy does not suit with
a Resurrection. How are we conformable to Him, if when He is risen up, we
remain still in the Grave of our Corruptions? How are we Limbs of his Body, if,
while He has perfect dominion over death, death has dominion over us; if,
while he is alive and glorious, we lie rotting in the dust of death. O let us
then rouse Applic. to the Sacrament.
our selves up this day with the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: Let this be our
Resurrection-day too; and that it may be so, let it be our Passion-day also, as
it is our Lord's: For as he rose this day for us, so does he now this day dye
for us too. And although St. Paul tells us, Romans 6. 9. That Christ being raised
from the dead, dies no more; and that death* has no more dominion over him;
or, to speak in the Language of the Text, that he be not holden of it; yet in
regard of the constant virtue and benefit of his Death and Passion, he may be
said to dye daily for us, who receive him worthily in the Blessed Sacrament.
Let me then bespeak you in the words of St. Thomas, uttered upon another
occasion, Joh. 11. 16. Let us also go and dye with him; Dye with him unto sin,
that we may live unto God through him, Romans 6. 9, 10. Let us feed on him by
Faith, flock like true Eagles to his Holy Carcass, and eat thereof that we may
live. This is the way to be raised to glory: Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has Eternal life, (is even now in possession of it,) and I
will raise him up at the last day, says Christ himself, Joh. 6. 54. The very
touch of the Prophet Elias's bones, Ecclesiasticus 48. 5. could raise up a dead
Man to a Temporal; and shall not the sense and application of Christ crucified
be able to quicken us, who are dead in trespasses and sins, to a spiritual and
immortal Life? O let Heb. 13. 20, 21.
us then be planted with him in the likeness of his Death, that we may be also
in the likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 5. Now the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep,
through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
work to do his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, and c. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON Preached on Whit-sunday.
JOHN XVI. 7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that
I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
depart, I will send him unto you.
WE find the Disciples here in a very sad and disconsolate Condition; Christ
had told them, that He was going his way to Him that sent Him, V. 5. and
thereupon Sorrow had filled their hearts, V. 6. And no marvel; for they were to
be separated from one who hitherto had been their only comfort and support. Had
we been under the same circumstances, we should, no doubt, have equally
resented that loss. They had had the happy advantage of beholding his glorious
Miracles, wrought by his All-powerfull Voice, in the cure of Diseases, in the
confusion of Devils, and the raising of the Dead; They had heard those his
ravishing Discourses, which forced his most implacable Enemies, in spite of
all their prejudice against Him, to confess, That never Man spoke as He did:
They had been Eyewitnesses of that Eminent Holiness, that pure and unspotted
Innocence, which gave beauty and luster to all his actions; and of that glory
too, which discovered Him to be the only Son of God, full of Grace and Truth.
And now unless we can suppose them void of all natural affection and humanity,
they must needs have been highly concerned to hear that He was to leave them.
Happy sure not only the Womb that bare, and the Paps that Luke 11. 27
gave him suck; but the Ears which heard, the Eyes which saw, the Feet which
followed, and the Hands which ministered unto Him. Abraham rejoiced to Joh. 8.
56.
see the Lord's day, though at a great distance; and St. Augustine could not
propose a greater satisfaction to himself, next to the Beatifical Vision, than
to have seen Christ in the flesh. But these Disciples had not only the
happiness to see Him, but withal, to be of his train; to be instructed by his
Divine Lessons, comforted by his Christian Promises, animated and encouraged by
his Example, and fortified by his Aid and Assistance. Upon all which accounts,
our Lord Himself pronounces them Blessed above those Prophets and Righteous
Men, who wanted such advantages, Mat. 13. 16, 17.

Blessed then they were in this, as well as other respects; and therefore by
how much the enjoyment of Christ's presence was beneficial unto them, by so
much the more was the very apprehension of losing Him harsh and unpleasing: For
although our Lord's Ascension-day (which was the day of his leaving the Earth)
was to Him a day of Glory, yet to the Disciples it could not be but a day of
Sorrow: It was his going to the Father indeed, but it was a going from them.
And how could it be, but that these Children of the Bridegroom should mourn
when the Bridegroom Mat. 9. 15.
was to be taken from them? This sole Consideration was enough to beget sorrow
in them; but there were other Circumstances which helped to fill up the measure
of it; and the chiefest this, That He was to forsake them in their greatest
needs: For troubles were now hard at hand, persecutions were suddenly to arise,
a storm was coming, and all looked black; they were to be put out of the
Synagogues; nay, the time was now coming, That whosoever should kill them,
should think that he did God good service, v. 2. So that to lose a friend, such
a friend and at such a time, was a very uncomfortable prospect, and there was
but too much reason that their hearts should be filled with sorrow. Nor does
our Lord altogether blame it. 'Twas not his business to root out those
affections which Nature had given Men, but to moderate them. He that took our
infirmities, was not severe to those of his disciples. It was indeed a mistake
in them to think that their Lord's departure would be disadvantageous to them,
but a mistake of carnal Love to his Person, that was so dear to them, which he
minds them of, and rectifies; Quam incertoe providentioe nostroe! How
shortsighted are the best of us, even in those things which most nearly concern
us! How apt are we to fancy a loss in our greatest benefit! How earnestly bent
many times on that which would be inconvenient, if not mischievous, to us! And
how ill a Judge is flesh and blood, of what tends to God*s glory and Man's
good! St. Peter had no sooner been alarmed with the news of Christ's Passion;
but he presently suggests, Be it far from thee, O Lord, Matthew. 16. 21, 22. And
while He and the rest of the Disciples here were possessed with Carnal
thoughts, how ill did they relish Spiritual things? Nothing so much bars up
Men's minds against God's truths as worldly prejudice. While they thought
Christ was to reign on Earth, they could not so much as dream of Heaven. Upon
the strength of this fancy, so deeply rooted in them, they give all for lost if
they lose their Master. It was high time then for him to show them their error,
to let them know, That that supposed loss would be their gain, and the cause of
his absence, if well understood, would raise a joy in them above their present
sorrow; since his going away for a time was only to prepare a place for them to
all Eternity, where He and they should one day so meet, as never more to be
parted. In the mean while He assures them, That he would not leave them
comfortless, but after his departure send one from Heaven who should more than
supply the defect of his Presence on Earth, even the Comforter Himself, who yet
could not come till He were gone: A truth, which though never so ungrateful,
yet being profitable, they must hear, and that from the mouth of Truth it self:
Nevertheless, I tell you, etc.

In the handling of which words, I shall briefly and plainly discourse of these
following Heads: Show you,

1. Who the Person promised here is, and how described. 2. Who was to send him.
3. When, not till Christ was gone away. 4. How expedient it was that the Holy
Ghost should come, and that not only to the Apostles, but to all faithful
Believers, by representing to you the infinite Benefits we and all the
Faithful do reap by his coming.
Of these in their order: and,

1. Of the Person promised here, and his Office.

It cannot be denied but that the knowledge of the Third Person in the
Ever-blessed Trinity was a Mystery locked up for many Ages. Holy Men of old
spoke indeed as they were moved by the 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Holy Ghost; but it is to be questioned whether they were well acquainted with
Him they spoke by: They were his Organs and Instruments, but at that time
perhaps little sensible of that divine Breath that did inspire them. He was
scarce at all known before under the legal Dispensations; those passages of
Scripture being dark and obscure which point at him, and Men not ripe then for
so high a Revelation: Which is so true, that till the Holy Ghost came down upon
the Apostles, and appeared in cloven tongues as of fire on their heads, the
knowledge of him was very imperfect; It being reported of some, (who had been
baptized into John's baptism,) Act. 19. that they had not so much as heard
whether there were any Holy Ghost; not that they had never heard any thing at
all of his Being, (having been baptized by John, who had seen him descend upon
Christ at his baptism in the visible shape of a Dove, Mat. 3. Joh. 1.) but that
they had not yet been so thoroughly acquainted with his Gifts and Graces, as
afterward they were. Our Blessed Lord then was the first who clearly revealed
him in his Gospel, especially in that of our Evangelist: As Joh. 14. 26. he
promises Him to his Disciples to be their Instructor; But the Comforter, which
is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He shall teach you all
things. He repeats it again, chap. 15. 26. When the Comforter is come whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth which proceeds
from the Father, He shall testify of me. And so here in the Text, where there
is such a manifest discovery both of his Person and Godhead, that none but an
Arrian or a Macedonian; none but He that resists, can doubt of his Existence.
Taking therefore this truth for granted, I shall only speak to his Office,
described here by 2. Office Paraclete.
the word (...) which signifies two things: 1. A Comforter. 2. An Advocate.

1. A Comforter; and such He was to be, 1. To the Apostles themselves. 2. To
the whole Church. 3. To each faithful Believer.

1. To the Apostles themselves: It was indeed a seasonable time to talk to them
of a Comforter, when sorrow and distress were coming upon them, and they were
to be as sheep without a shepherd. They had left all for Christ; but while he
was with them, they found all in Him, who was dearer to them than all their
possessions. While He lived with them, their joy and satisfaction was full and
complete; but a joy that was to last no longer than his Corporal presence,
which the Holy Spirit was to supply, and that abundantly. For although they
could no longer have recourse to their Lord for Resolution of Doubts, or
Protection from Dangers; yet should they not want an Oracle to clear the one,
nor a Sanctuary to secure them from the other; The Holy Ghost should both
enlighten their Understandings, and dispell their Fears; Being endewed with
power from on high, Afflictions themselves should prove Consolations unto them;
and they should find more satisfaction in their very Sufferings, than worldly
Men in their highest Enjoyments; as we find they did, Act. 5. 41. when
departing from the presence of the Counsel, they rejoiced, and that with joy
unspeakable, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's Name.

But then 2. The Holy Ghost was to be a Comforter, not only to the Apostles,
but to the whole Church of God. The Father under the ancient legal Dispensation
was a severe Lawgiver; rewarding Obedience, and strictly punishing Rebellion.
He appeared terrible on Mount Sinai; Nothing was to be seen there but Fire and
Smoke, and thick Darkness; Nothing to be heard but Thunder, and the Trump of an
Angel; insomuch that Moses himself trembled and quaked; Such an Appearance
suiting well with the Promulgation of the Law, as denouncing nothing but Woes
and Curses to Offenders. But under the Gospel-Oeconomy there was another face
of things. The Son of God, while in the Flesh, had no such marks of terror and
severity attending him, more proper to a Creator than a Redeemer: He came not
with a Rod, but in the Spirit of Meekness. His condition was a condition of
Humility, agreeable to one whose Kingdom was not of this World; and suitable to
his appearance in the Flesh was that of the Holy Ghost, whose descent was
indeed in Fire, but to warm and cherish, not to consume; In a mighty rushing
Wind to represent his divine Power and Efficacy, not his Impetuosity. 'Twas not
such a Wind as God came to Elijah in, which rent the Mountains and brake 1
King. 19. 11.
the Rocks in pieces. The motions of the Holy Spirit are not violent. He does
not affright those He lights on, nor create Fear, but Love in that Heart he
fills. It Is He that makes us cry, Abba Father; That begets in us a holy
generous Confidence, and speaks peace to his People. The cords he brings with
Him are those of a Man, such as chain and captivate Hearts. The Economy of the
Divine Spirit was to be an Economy of Sweetness and Consolation to the Church,
becoming the Gospel of Peace and the God of all Consolation.

3. The Holy Ghost was to be a Comforter to all true Believers, not only as
begetting Faith in their Hearts, and dispelling that Darkness which naturally
possesses their Understandings, but as giving them Peace of Conscience, and
that unspeakable joy which the World is unacquainted with, and cannot take from
them. Hence He is said to seal them unto the day of their Redemption, Ephesians. 4.
30. To be the Earnest of their heavenly Inheritance, and to make them fore-tast
the joys of Heaven here on Earth. What comfort, what ravishing joys does he
still raise in the Souls of all the Faithful, by the apprehension and sense he
gives them of the Love of God, and that certain hope they have by him of
enjoying Him in Heaven? Grace is the Paradise of the Soul, Holiness its Crown;
and the assurance it has of God's Love to it, the choicest flower of that
Crown. Nor is he thus only a Comforter to each true Believer, but he is so too
as his Teacher; and another-guess Teacher than Men are to one another. For let
their Methods of Teaching be never so perspicuous, and their care and pains to
inform us never so great; yet when all is done, they cannot communicate unto us
either clearness of Apprehension* faithfulness of Memory, or soundness of
Judgment; and where they find us dull or stupid, all their pains and skill are
but thrown away upon us. But the Holy Ghost does so teach, as withal to change
the natural temper and disposition of men's Minds; working so upon their
Understandings, by the clearness and evidence of those Reasons he proposes,
that they are not able to resist or stand out against the force of his
Demonstrations; drawing them to Him in so sweet, and yet effectual a manner,
that although sensible of the effect, yet the way of his Attraction is as
imperceptible to them as the power thereof is uncontrollable. The Manner of the
Holy Spirit's operation on Believers now is very different from that on the
Prophets of old; which was so forcible, that Elisha could not Prophecy without
the help of Music to compose and tune his Spirit. But under the
Gospel Dispensation the Holy Ghost deals otherwise with his Servants. No such
Enthusiasms or Transports here; Their Understandings are enlightened without any
disturbance to their Bodies; They receive the Holy Ghost's Inspirations without
the least astonishment or discomposure, while he gently glides and descends
into them like rain into a fleece of wool, in the Prophet David's expression,
Psalm. 72. 6.

And thus the Holy Ghost is a Comforter. But then, 2dly, He is withal an
Advocate. The word (...) properly signifies so much; one that maintains the
Cause of a Criminal, or at least of an Accused Person. Now the Spirit does so
by justifying our Persons and pleading our Causes against the Accusations of
our Spiritual Enemies, 1. Against the Severity of God's Law, and that most
righteous undeniable Charge of Sin laid thereby upon us. 2dly, Against the
Devil, who, we know, is styled the Accuser of the Brethren; and does not only
load our Sins upon our Consciences, but farther endeavors to exclude us from
the benefit of Christ, by charging us with Impenitency and Unbelief. Here the
Spirit enableth us to clear our selves against this Father of lies, to secure
our Title to Heaven against the Sophistical Exceptions of this our subtle
Adversary; and when by Temptations our Eye is dimmed, or by the mixture of
Corruptions our Evidences defaced, he, by his Skill, helps our infirmities,
and brings those things which are blotted out and forgotten, into our
remembrance again, Joh. 14. 26. He admonishes and directs us his Clients how
to order and solicit our own business, what Evidences to produce, how to manage
and plead them, making up our failings by his Wisdom; and not only so, but (as
the word Paraclete here imports) he intercedeth also with God for us; not in
such a manner as Christ is said to do, whom St. John also calls (...) our
Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. For as much as that Blood which He shed
for us on the Cross speaks for us better things than that of Abel, and
continually pleads our Pardon before the Tribunal of God; but the Holy Ghost is
said to make intercession for us with Romans 8. 26.
groanings which cannot be uttered, because he stirs us up to Prayer,
prompting and teaching us also how to pray as we ought to do in all our
Necessities: So that as Christ is the first Advocate, by working our
Reconciliation with God; so is the Spirit our other or second one, by
testifying and applying the same unto our Souls.

2dly, He is our Advocate, not only in respect of God, but of Men too, by
maintaining our Cause against the World, against Tyrants and Persecutors.

1. Against the World, as often as it accuses us by false and slanderous
Calumniators, laying to our charge things we never did: The Spirit in this case
makes us not only plead our Innocence, but rejoice in the Reproaches of
Christ; count our selves happy in this, that it is not such low marks as we
are, which the malice of the World aims at; but the Spirit of glory and of
God, which rests upon us, who is on their part evil spoken of, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

2dly, Against Tyrants and Persecutors. Whence it is that our Savior, Mat. 10.
19. bids his Disciples not be concerned what they should speak, when they
should be delivered up to Men, because it should be given them in that same
hour what they should speak. And he adds, verse. 20. It is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you. And we know how that God in
all Ages did by the mouths of Infants maintain his Truths, to the shame and
confusion of Tyrants, who endeavored to suppress them.

But here it may be objected; Was not the Holy Ghost given to the Jewish Church
before the coming of Christ? Did He not comfort and support them under a long
and tedious expectation of his appearance? Was He not then a Teacher of the
Faithful? and when that Cloud of Witnesses suffered for the Cause of the God
of Jacob, when they were sawn in pieces and stoned, was not the Holy Ghost
their Advocate as well as the Martyrs under the Gospel? Did He not speak by the
Mouth of Daniel, when cast to the Lions, and of the three Children who chanted
out the Praises of God in the midst of the flames of the firey furnace? How
then does our Lord say here, If I go not away, the Comforter will not come to
you, since, so many Ages before, He was come, and as a Comforter too? For
Resolution hereof, we are to observe, That although the Three Persons of the
Blessed Trinity be equally the Principles of all those Acts they produce
without, according to the received Maxim of the Schools; yet with Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
a considerable difference in relation to those three distinct Oeconomies or
Dispensations toward the Church. That of the Father lasted till the Coming of
Christ in the Flesh; yet so, as that in that space of time it is generally
believed, that the Son of God did sometimes appear, as to Abraham, Jacob and
Joshua, (being a kind of Essay or Prelude to his Incarnation,) and the Holy
Ghost did then also impart some degree of Efficacy to the Faithful. However,
This is properly to be reckoned the Economy of the Father. The second, was
That of the Son, from his Incarnation to his Ascension; yet so, as that the
Father made his voice to be heard at Jordan and Mount Tabor; This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well-pleased, hear ye Him. As at another time, in the
Audience of the People, Joh. 12. 28. I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again. Then also did the Holy Ghost appear in the form of a Dove;
yet still this is to be accounted the Economy of the Son; That of the Holy
Spirit commenced from his Descent upon the Apostles, and shall last unto the
end of all things; Differing herein from the other two, That in the two first
Dispensations Men's senses were usually affected with some extraordinary,
miraculous and sensible Objects; God the Father showing himself in a Cloud and
Pillar of Fire; giving out his Oracles from between the Cherubins; consuming
the burnt-offerings with Fire from Heaven, and filling the Sanctuary with his
Glory: And the Son of God conversing so familiarly with Men, that it made St.
John say, That which was from 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life, declare we
unto you. Whereas, I say, All was, as it were, visible and palpable here; 'Twas
far otherwise in the Dispensation of the Spirit; The Heavens were not seen to
part, nor was God's terrible Voice heard in the Air; no Shechinah, no Glory or
sensible Mark of the Presence of the living God in his Temple. For which reason
the third Person in the Trinity has the Special Name of Spirit given Him. For
as He is styled Holy in respect of that Sanctification he works in us;
(though that same Title belongs also to the other two Persons, as having the
same Spiritual Essence;) yet the Holy Ghost bears the name of Spirit, in regard
of his altogether Spiritual Dispensation, and those Graces he imparts to each
faithful Soul, which are Heavenly and Spiritual; such as are the Knowledge of
the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, and his inward Virtues and Consolations.
As for Knowledge, it was so weak and imperfect under the Ancient Economy, that
in respect of that our Lord preferrs the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e.
the meanest Christian, to all the Prophets, not excepting the Baptist himself.
Nor can it be denied, but that the very first Principles and Rudiments of
Christianity do far surpass the highest Seize of the Law. The Jews were
under a Cloud, and the Doctrine of the Prophets was but as a light shining in a
dark place. All was then Shadow, or rather, Night; and Moses his Veil was over
the Eyes of the whole Nation. God made himself known to the Jews, as the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, not as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; of whom
They had a very wrong Notion, looking upon him as the Conqueror of the World:
such was the very Apostle's fancy of him, and that even after his Resurrection,
Act. 1. The ineffable Mystery of the Trinity, that of Godliness, which without
controversy is great, God manifested 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory, were then all
riddle. And as our Knowledge now is far clearer than that of God's ancient
People was; so is our Consolation and Joy also, being established on better
Promises, revealed with more Evidence, and embraced with more Firmness and
Certitude. Death is now swallowed up in victory, and has lost its sting; so
that our Fears are less, as our Hopes are stronger, sweeter and more
comfortable; being now not under the Spirit of Bondage, but of Adoption, which
makes us go boldly to the Throne of Grace. The Result of all is this; That the
Economy of the Spirit followed that of the Father and of the Son; That the
Holy Ghost was not properly to be styled a Comforter, till Christ went up from
Earth to Heaven; and that if our Lord had remained here below, the blessed
Comforter would not have come down in that plentiful Effusion of his Gifts and
Graces, as he did after our Lord's departure, which is the Third thing
proposed* But before I enter upon this subject, I shall first take notice of
the sender of Him, which our Lord says was Himself.

I will send him unto you. Christ had Part II.
before told his Disciples, That He would pray the Father that He would send
them another Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. and v. 26. That the Father would send Him
in his Name. But chap. 15. 26. (as here in the Text) He takes it upon Himself
to send him; I will send Him unto you from the Father. And both with Truth: For
the Father and the Son sent, and had an equal share in sending Him. He is
therefore called The Spirit of the Father, Mat. 10. 20. and The Spirit of the
Son, Gal. 4. 6. For he proceeds from both. From the Father it is said
expressly, Joh. 15. 26. and from the Son, if not in express terms, yet virtually
implied, in that He is said to be Romans 8. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 11. Phil. 1. 19.
the Spirit of Christ as well as of the Father, and must therefore come from
Him, because sent from Him too. The only difference being this, That the Holy
Ghost is sent by the Father as from Him, who has, by the Original
Communication, a right of Mission, which denotes only distinction of Order: The
Father being as the Spring, the Son as the Fountain; and the Holy Ghost as the
Stream flowing from both. From whence we may collect two Things:

1. That the Holy Ghost is a real distinct Person from the Father and the Son,
in as much as He is sent by them. For how can He be the same with them that
send Him? If he proceed from the Father, he must be distinct in subsistence;
and if his Coming depended on the Son's going away, and sending Him after he
was gone, He cannot be the Son, who therefore departed that He might send Him.

2. It follows hence, That the Holy Ghost is equal to the Father and the Son;
For whatsoever proceeds from God, must be God; whatsoever partakes of his
Essence, must be equal with Him. And surely if the Son have the same right of
Mission with the Father, as we learn from the Text, he must be acknowledged to
have the same Essence with him too. And had not the Holy Ghost been Equal with
the Son, as with the Father, how could He have supplied his Place? Or what
Expediency could there have been in the Holy Spirit's coming, when, being less
than Christ, he could have never been able to do as much as Christ did, and so
the exchange must needs have been to the Apostle's loss, and not, as Christ
himself had told them it should prove, to their benefit and advantage? St.
Augustine's Prayer then was not impertinent; Domine, da mihi alium Te, alioqui
non dimittam Te; Give me, Lord, another as good as thy self, or I will never
leave Thee, nor ever consent that Thou should leave me. Nor is it any
diminution to the Deity of the Holy Ghost, that He is said here to be sent by
the Son. These Expressions, To be sent, or, To come, and the like, being not
Expressions of disparagement; For He was so sent as to come too, and to come of
his own accord; His coming being free and voluntary. He came in no servile
manner, but as a Lord; as a friend from a friend in a Letter, the very Mind of
him that sent it; which shows an agreement indeed and concord with Him that
sent him; but implies no Inferiority, nor any the least degree of Subjection.
It Is the Spirits honor to be sent to be a Leader; and though sent He be, yet
is He as free an Agent as He that sent him. Tertullian calls Him Christi
Vicarium, Christ's Vicar on Earth; But if that argued any inequality in the
Spirit, it might as well in the Son too, who is styled in Scripture the Angel
and Messenger of God, and is said to go about his Father's business that sent
Him.

But to leave this Argument, as more Part III.
proper to convince a Macedonian Heretic, than needful for any true Believer;
I shall proceed to the third Thing, namely, The time when the Holy Ghost was to
be sent; and that was after our Lord's departure; If I depart, I will send him
unto you. But what necessity was there, may some say, of Christ's departing in
order to the Spirit's Coming? Might He not have tarried here, and the Spirit
have come for all that? Was the stay of the one any let or hinderance to the
coming of the other? Or might not Christ have sent for, as well as go away
himself to send him? To this I say, 1. That it was decreed from all Eternity;
That God the Father should draw us to his Son, Joh. 6. 44. 2dly, That God the
Son should instruct us, chap. 17. 6, 8. And, 3dly, That God the Holy Ghost
should assist and establish us in all Truth; And so the whole Work of our
Redemption should be ascribed to the Father as electing; To the Son as
consummating; and to the Holy Ghost as applying it: God the Father had done his
part; God the Son was at this instant doing his too; It remained only that the
Comforter should come to perfect both, which could not be till the Son had
performed his Task here on Earth, and should go away to Heaven. For the Acts of
the Holy Ghost pre-suppose those of a Redeemer. It Is the part of that Blessed
Spirit to inflame our Souls with the Love of God; but in order to this effect,
it is absolutely necessary that the Redeemer should first appease God. Our first
Parent was not able to endure the terror of the voice of his provoked Majesty,
but was forced to hide his head. And what is each Sinner but as Flax before the
consuming fire of his Justice? Till our Redeemer then had disarmed that
Justice; till he had made men's Peace and Reconciliation, the Holy Ghost could
not excite any motions of Love in them. It was the design of his Spirit to
imprint his Image in their Hearts, which consisted in true holiness and
righteousness: But how could that Image be imprinted on them, till they were
first adopted his Children? Or how could they be owned for his Children, but in
and through Christ his only begotten and beloved Son? That Peace, which his
Holy Spirit brings into and settles in our Consciences, is founded in that
other which our Mediator has procured and merited for us by his Death and
Sufferings; nor could our Minds ever have been calmed, had not the Lamb of God
taken away the sins of the World. Our Peace was to be prepared by the Father,
ere it could be purchased by the Son; and purchased by the Son, ere it could
have been applied by the Spirit. The Gift of the Comforter was an effect of
Christ's Intercession, I will pray the Father, and He shall send you another
Comforter; And it was requisite that He should go away to send that Comforter,
since he was the Effect of his Intercession, and that Intercession the last Act
of his Sacrifice in the Heavenly Sanctuary.

But then, 2dly, it was not fit that Christ should bestow his best and most
excellent Gifts on us, till he had recovered his first Majesty; or that the
Members should be thus adorned, till the Head was perfectly glorious. It Is at
the time of their Coronation and Triumph that Kings and Emperors scatter their
Largesses; When our Lord had ascended up on high, and had led Captivity
captive, Ephesians. 4. 9.
then was it a proper time for him to give gifts unto men; and among the rest
of his Gifts, the Fountain and Giver of all Gifts and Graces, the Holy Spirit
it self. This St. Peter tells his Auditors, Act. 2. 33. That Christ being by
the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of
the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Christ was
first to rise from the dead, and to be glorified, before he could send down the
Spirit: And this we learn from Joh. 7. 39. where it is said, That the Holy Ghost
was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; nor could he be
fully glorified without the descent and testimony of the Spirit. For, 1. It had
been some impeachment to Christ's equality with the Father, had our Lord still
remained on Earth; for as much as the sending of the Spirit would have been
ascribed to the Father alone, as his sole Act. This would have been the most,
That the Father, for his sake, had sent Him; but He, as God, had had no honor
of sending Him. 2. Nor indeed till he ascended up to Heaven, could he have been
fully glorified on Earth; his appearance here having been very mean, void of
all pomp and state; nothing about Him to strike men's Senses; nothing of
worldly grandeur to affect them who conversed with him; neither wealth nor
honor; exposed he was to want, and other inconveniences of life, and put at
last to a cruel and an ignominious Death. What strong prejudices had both Jews
and Gentiles against Him upon this account? And how could those prejudices be
removed, so long as he continued in that low state and condition? But they were
now quite taken away by the descent of the Holy Ghost, which he had so often
promised to send after his departure; and which when they saw he made good,
their mean opinion of him was soon changed into veneration, when they saw him,
who was made a little lower than the Angels, (nay, who had Heb. 2. 9.
appeared on Earth lower than the lowest of Men,) for the suffering of death,
crowned with such glory and honor: And how can we but adore Him as God, when
we now behold Him, that once stood before Herod and Pilate as a criminal,
exalted above all the Kings and Potentates of the Earth, whose pride and glory
now it is to be his Disciples, to do him homage, and to lay down their Crowns
and Scepters at the foot of his Cross? We now see Temples everywhere erected
to his honor; The most remote obscure Regions of the World enlightened by his
beams; That Jesus, once so much despised, become now the glory of the Earth;
His Name dreadful to Devils, adored by Turks and Infidels, so that his Kingdom
knows no bounds, as it shall never have an end. Had he still remained here
below, he had been looked upon as no better than what the Arrians once styled
Him, (...) But now his Godhead is as visible to each Christian, as his Manhood
heretofore was to each Man; the Spirit of God, whom He sent down, having born
witness to Him in all those wonderful Signs and Miracles that were wrought by
his Apostles through his Name. And thus we see how that Christ could not have
been glorified on Earth as God, had he not ascended up into Heaven, and from
thence sent down the Holy Ghost.

Nor 3. could the Holy Ghost himself otherwise have been discovered. Christ's
stay here would have been a let to the manifestation of his Godhead also,
which appearing in those many great signs and wonders done by Him, had not our
Lord gone away, those glorious Works would in all probability have been wholly
ascribed unto him; and so the Holy Ghost should have lost that honor which was
due to him, while his Deity should have been concealed from the notice of the
World.

4. A fourth reason of the necessity of Christ's departure, respects his
Apostles and all other his Disciples. 1. His Apostles, who we know were to be
sent abroad into all Coasts, to be dispersed over the whole Earth to preach the
Gospel, and not to stay in one place. Now Christ's corporal Presence could
herein have availed them little in order to this purpose: He could not have
been with St. James at Jerusalem, and St. John at Ephesus, whatever
Ubiquitaries, Papists or Lutherans, say to the contrary, in flat contradiction
to all Philosophy and Scripture too, which allows not this privilege to
Christ's Body now glorified; Whom the Heavens must receive, says St. Peter,
until the times of Restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. There He must be
till He comes to fetch us to Him; and when He promised his Apostles to be with
them, always even to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. He meant no otherwise
than by his Holy Spirit, who should comfort and guide them into all Truth. And
therefore it was expedient for them, as our Lord says here in the Text, that
himself should go away to make room for the Spirit, as fitter for his Disciples
in their dispersed disconsolate condition, since He could be and was present
with them all, and with every one of them by himself, as filling the compass of
the whole World; which cannot be affirmed of our Lord's bodily Presence. 2.
Besides, had this manner of Christ's Presence been possible, without
confounding the Properties of his humane and divine Nature; it had been very
inconvenient for his Apostles that He should still have remained with them,
considering how carnally affected they were to him; Nay, very convenient it was
for them that he should withdraw his Presence, when they grew too fond of it;
as we see Mothers deal with their little Children in the like case. We know
nothing would satisfy them but Christ's Flesh and his fleshly Presence,
nothing but that still them; And we know who said, If thou had been here,
Lord: As if absent, he had not been as able to do it by his Spirit, as present
by his Body. We know also that St. Peter would have built him a Tabernacle Mat.
17. 4.
to keep him still on Earth; and ever and anon his Disciples were dreaming of
an Earthly Kingdom, and their chief Seats therein. All their Thoughts and
Fancies being gross and carnal, 'twas time to refine them. They were not to be
held as Children still, but to grow to Men's estate, to perfect age and
strength. If they had hitherto known Christ after the flesh, 'twas fit that
henceforth they 2 Cor. 5. 16.
should thus know him no more; And so it is for all Christians too, who so long
as they should stand affected in like sort as the Apostles here were, would, no
doubt, run into the same error with them, as to conceit they could not be
without Christ's bodily Presence, though the Spirit it self should supply it.
Surely it is much better for us by faith to converse with Christ in Heaven, than
by sight to behold him on Earth. Because thou have seen, thou believe, says
he to St. Thomas; Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believe, Joh.
20. 19. Better it is for us to look to those things that are not seen, than to
those that are seen. The time will come when it shall be our chiefest happiness
to see our Redeemer, as Job says, with these fleshly Eyes we carry about us:
But that we cannot now do; or, if we could, that very sight would but astonish
and confound us. The only Glass to behold him in here, is his Gospel; as the
only place to find him in, is Heaven. Thither he is now gone from us, and it is
well for us, as it was for his Apostles, that he is so, and so has left us to
the guidance and conduct of his Spirit. Nay I dare say farther, that it is
expedient for us Christians that Christ should withdraw even his Spiritual
Presence from us in some cases. As, 1. when we grow faint in seeking, and
careless in keeping him. When, with the Spouse in the Canticles, we lie in bed
and take him Cant. 3. 1.
there. When, 2. we grow high conceited of our selves, and say with David, We
shall never be moved, Psalm. 30. 7. But then may it not be said, If Christ leave
us, if he withdraw his spiritual Presence from us, shall we not then fall into
Sin? And can that be expedient for any one of us? It is good that I have been
in trouble, for before I was troubled I went wrong, says David, Psalm. 119. 67.
But is it good for any of us to fall into Sin? If I should say so, I have St.
Augustine's warrant for it, Audeo dicere, I dare affirm, says that Father,
Expedit superbo, ut incidat in peccatum; It is not amiss sometimes for a proud
Man to fall (with David and Peter) into some notorious Sin, to fill his Face
with shame, and to teach him Humility; That this Messenger of Satan should
sometimes thus 2 Cor. 12. 7.
buffet him, as he did St. Paul, to keep him down; for the Holy Ghost will not
come to him, till he find him in this posture; He will come to none, rest on
none, nor give grace to none but to the Esaias 57. 15 1 Pet. 5. 5.
humble. In all respects then we see how expedient it is that Christ should
leave us; that he should withdraw himself from us, as he did from his Apostles;
that he should go away to prepare a place for us, where we may be with him for
ever; and that we should prepare our selves, too for that better place he has
prepared for us, by withdrawing our Thoughts and Affections from that we now
are in. For if that fond affection the Apostles had for his corporal Presence
was a hinderance to the Spirit's coming to them; much more will our impure
earthly ones keep him off from us. Nor ought we to be troubled, but rather to
rejoice, that Christ, our forerunner, Heb. 6. 20.
is gone before to take possession of a heavenly place for us in his flesh; or,
to imagine, that we shall lose any thing by his absence, as if his Spirit could
not abundantly make up that loss; or that with his bodily Presence he had
withdrawn his love or care from us. In the midst of his Glories he still minds
us; He is not only a compassionate High Priest to pity, but an Advocate to
plead, and an Intercessor still to mediate for us. Amidst the Angelical
Acclamations and Hallelujahs, he not only hears our sighs and groans, but joins
in the Consort, and shares with us too in our Sufferings. Nay, it is now that
he is most intimately present with us, that he dwells in our hearts by faith;
and if thereby we hold him fast, he will then never leave us, at least never
leave us comfortless, no more than he did his Apostles, but will send the Holy
Ghost to comfort us as he did them, for his promise of sending him was not so
tied up to them as to exclude us, but is general here to all the faithful, If
I depart, I will send him unto you. And thus we see how expedient and necessary
it was that our Lord should depart, that his Holy Spirit might come to us; That
without his Ascension-day there had been no Pentecost for us, and so we should
have wanted our Comforter and all those inestimable Blessings He brings along
with Him. 1. For had He not come, the work of our Salvation had been but half
done. It Is true indeed that our Lord, just as he breathed out his Soul on the
Cross, did pronounce a Consummatum est; and if we consider the Work it self, he
completed all he came to do for us here below, (for he exactly performed the
part of a Mediator, by putting an end to all the Ceremonies of the Law which
prefigured Him,) but in regard of us, and making that his work ours, all had
not been finished without the Coming of the Holy Ghost. For, to speak after the
manner of Men, we know a Word, though written, a Deed, is of no force till the
Seal be added; it is that which makes it Authentical. Christ is indeed the Word,
but the Holy Ghost is the Seal, In whom ye are sealed unto the day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. 2. Nor is this all: The Will of a Testator is of no
force, when sealed, till Administration be granted; Christ is the Mediator of
the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15. But the Administration is the Spirit's, 1 Cor.
12. 11. And without that the Testament is of no advantage. 3. Besides, to make
our Estate good, is required Investiture: so that although Christ has made a
purchase, and paid a price for us; yet what would this advantage us without
Livery and Seizin, which the same Apostle calls The Earnest of the Spirit? 2
Cor. 5. 5. Lastly, What are we at all the better for what Christ did for us, if
we be not joined to Him, as He was to us? and it is by his Spirit that we are
joined unto Him: For he that has not Christ's Spirit, is none of his, Romans 8.
9. and then Christ will profit him nothing. From whence it plainly appears,
That what the Father and the Son did for us, could not be complete or available
without the concurrence of the Holy Ghost: They could do nothing for us
without Him, nor we any thing for our selves, in order to our Salvation. For,
first, without Holiness we cannot see God, who is therefore called Holy,
because he is the cause of Holiness in us, his Office consisting in the
sanctifying of us. We are by Nature void of all saving Truth, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
None knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God; And it is the Spirit that
searches all things, and reveals them unto the Sons of Men; That dispells
their Darkness, enlightens their Understandings with the knowledge of God, and
works in them an assent unto that which by the Word is propounded unto them.
Again, 2dly, Unless they be regenerate and renewed, they are still in a state
of natural Corruption; Now it is the Holy Spirit that regenerates and renews us.
According to his mercy he saves us by the washing of Regeneration and renewing
of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. And, Except a man be born again of Water and the
Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. We are all at
first defiled by the corruption of our Nature, and the pollution of our Sins;
but we are washed, but we are sanctified, but we are justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Thirdly, We are not
able to guide our selves, and it is the Spirit that leads, directs and governs
us in our Actions and Conversations, that we may perform what is acceptable in
the sight of God. It Is He that gives both to will and to do; and, As many as
are thus led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 14.
Fourthly, If we be separate from Christ, we are as branches cut off from the
Tree, which presently wither away for want of sap to nourish them. Now it is the
Spirit that joins us to Christ, and makes us Members of that Body whereof he is
the Head; For by one Spirit we are all baptized into that one Body, 1 Cor. 12.
13. And hereby we know that God abides in us by the Spirit which he has given
us, 1 John 3. 24. Fifthly, Till we be assured of the Adoption of Sons, we have
no comfort, no hope; for it is that which creates in us a sense of the Paternal
love of God toward us. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5. 5. And the Spirit it self bears
witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. who is
therefore said to be the Pledge and the Earnest of our Inheritance. In a word;
had not the Holy Ghost been sent to us, we could have done nothing to any
purpose; no means on our part would have availed us: Not Baptism, which might
wash spots from our Skins, nor stains from our Souls; No laver of Regeneration
without renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Not the Word, which without the
Spirit would have proved but a killing letter: Not the Sacrament; The Flesh
profits nothing, it is the Spirit that quickneth, Joh. 6. 63. Lastly, Not
Prayer, which without the Spirit, is but lip-labor: For unless he help our
infirmities, and make intercession for, and with us, we know not what we should
pray for, as we ought, Romans 8. 26. To sum up all; It was expedient, nay
absolutely necessary, that the Spirit should have his Advent as well as Christ.
Christ's Advent was necessary for the fulfilling of the Law; and the Spirit's,
for the completing of the Gospel: Christ's, to redeem the Church; and the
Spirit's, to teach it: Christ's, to shed his blood for it; and the Spirit's, to
wash and purge it in that blood: Christ's, to preach the acceptable year of the
Lord; and the Spirit's, to interpret it: The one without the other is
imperfect. Christ's Birth, Death, Passion, Resurrection, are good news, but
sealed up, a Gospel hid, till the Spirit come and open it. Of such importance
was his coming, and so expedient, yea and necessary for us it was, that our
Lord should go away to send Him to us.

And as he did send Him to the Apostles, in an extraordinary manner, in cloven
tongues, like as of fire, as at this time: so all Christians have a promise of
the Comforter, though not of the firey tongues. The promise is to you and to
your Children, and to all that are a-far off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call, Act. 2. 39. That is, To all that wait for, and are in such a fit
posture and condition to receive Him, as the Apostles themselves were: To all,
that are like Him, Holy, Pure, Charitable, Peaceable; That have those fruits of
the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5. 22, 23. That are void of carnal sensual
Affections, than which nothing will more obstruct his entrance, He being a
Spirit, and having therefore no commerce with the Flesh. Christ carnally
apprehended, we see, could not avail any thing; and so long as our Thoughts and
Desires run after things here below, his Spirit from above will not fill or
inflame them. Therefore sur sum corda, let us lift up our hearts toward Him.
He will meet us, and Christ will send Him to us, if we meet Him in his way;
Send Him, if we send for Him too, if we send up our Prayers to fetch Him down.
For being a Spirit of supplication, Zach. 12. 10. the proper means to obtain
Him is Prayer. And surely He is worth the asking for, being the greatest gift
God can give us, or we receive; In giving whereof, He is said to give us all
things, Mat. 7. 11. In whom we have a Teacher, to instruct, The Spirit of
Truth, to lead us into all Truth, necessary for us; An Advocate, to plead for
and defend us; A Comforter, in all our outward and inward distresses: so that
Direction, Protection, Consolation; and all that is beneficial to us, or we can
desire, we have in Him. But then when we have got, let us be sure to retain and
to cherish Him; not chase Him away, for then we had better never to have had
Him: Be sure not to resist Him by our Pride, quench Him by our Carnality, and
so grieve Him who is our Comforter; if so, the following Verse here will tell
us, That He can Reprove as well as Comfort. But on the other side; if we obey
his Motions, submit to his Dictates, follow his Guidance and Direction, in a
word, be led by Him; we shall then be the Sons of God, and the only-begotten of
the Father will not fail to send him to us, as He did to his Apostles; Then
especially, above all other times, when we eat and drink his flesh and blood in
the Holy Sacrament: For as his Blood was the meritorious Cause to procure us
his Spirit; so is his Holy Sacrament the Pipe or Conduit to convey Him unto us.
For hereby we are all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And then as
there is plentiful Redemption here on Christ's part; so if we duly partake of
that Redemption, there will be plentiful Effusion of his Spirit on us. Which
God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON Preached on Michaelmas-day.
HEB. I. 14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be heirs of salvation?
IT IS the great happiness and privilege of Saints to be under the care and
protection of an Almighty God: Others have the benefit of his general
Providence; These of his particular Love and Kindness. The clearest Evidence of
that his Love appears in sending his only beloved Son oh. 3. 1^6.
into the World to merit Salvation for them; and next to that, in employing
Angels to further it; He being our alone Savior, These our Guardians and
Assistants. Wherein the Almighty has abundantly provided, as well for the
honor as the security of his Servants. For what greater honor, next to the
having Christ for our Brother, than that we should have such glorious Creatures
Psalm. 8.
as Angels for our Ministers? Their Nature, we know, places them above us, and
yet God's Love and their Humility sets them here below us. Even while those
excellent Spirits attend on the Throne of God, we may see them waiting on us
Men; While they behold his Face there, they cast a benign aspect on us here.
These bright Morningstars do at the same time praise Him, and assist and guide
us; Their Employment in Heaven does not exempt them from their Services on
Earth, dividing them as it were between those two places, ever ascending and
descending, i. e. perpetually employed in discharging their Duties to their
Creator, and for his sake performing all good Offices to their fellow Creatures.

2. And hence it is, That in consideration of those great and various Benefits
she receives by their appointed Aid and Ministration. The Church has set apart
this Day as to praise Him who makes use of such glorious Instruments for her
safeguard and protection; so gratefully to commemorate those advantageous
Services they do her. And although the Title of this Festival carries but a
particular denomination of St. Michael's Day, yet does the Church herein
celebrate the general Memorial of all Angels; and the Text I have chosen leads
us to it, as the Scope thereof does to the whole Chapter; wherein the Apostle's
design is to compare Christ with Angels, and to prove his Superiority over
them, which He does by several Arguments taken.

1. From his Sonship: He God's Son Job 1. 6. 38. 7. Luke 3. 38. See Phil. 2. 10.
by Eternal generation, These only by Creation and Resemblance, v. 2. 2. From
his Name, more excellent than that of Angels, v. 4. 3. From the Worship
peculiarly due to Him, even from Angels themselves, v. 6. 4. From his being the
Head of Angels, who, at best, are but his Ministering spirits, v. 7. 5. From his
Kingly Authority over all Creatures, Men and Angels too, v. 8. 6. From his
creating the Heavens and the Earth, which Angels neither did, nor could do, v.
10. 7. And lastly, from his sitting as Equal with God at his right hand;
whereas the most glorious Angels do but stand there as Ministers of his Will
and Commands, and to serve the necessities of his Chosen ones, in the question
here put,
Are they not all, etc. In which Words you may observe, Divis.


1. Something implied or supposed; and that is, Their Existence, Are they not,
etc. The Apostle speaks of them as of persons really and actually subsisting.
2. Something plainly expressed; and those are four Particulars here mentioned: 1.
The Essence or Nature of Angels; They are Spirits, i. e. intellectual, immortal
and incorporeal Substances. 2. Their Office, Ministering spirits, and that
without any reserve; All of them such, none excepted, not the most glorious,
not the most excellent of their Order. 3. Their Commission from God who sends
them forth, deputing them their several Ministerial Charges and Employments. 4.
The End or Design for which they are employed, viz. God's glory and the benefit
of those who shall be heirs of Salvation.

These be the several Stages through which I shall lead you: And first, of the
Existence or Being of Angels, supposed in the question, Are they not all, etc.

1. Since the Being of Angels is here Part 1. Their Existence.
supposed and taken for granted, one would think there should need no farther
proof of it; and surely 'twould be needless, did not the Infidelity of some Men
make it necessary. And it is strange that Divine Revelation should not be
sufficient to settle this Truth among Christians, which Heathens by the dim
light of Nature have so clearly discerned. For whatever mistakes they were
guilty of as to the Nature, they believed the Existence of spiritual
Substances; and we find them very curious in ranking and disposing them into
their several Classes, and describing the Hierarchy of their (...) with as much
exactness, (I had almost said, as good ground) as the pretended Dionyfius has
done that of Angels, whom the Schoolmen so passionately dote on. And the same
reason which taught Heathens so much Divinity, fetches this Truth also from the
Order of Nature, which seems to require it. For as here we find some things
without life; others living, but without sense; some again sensible, and others
rational, yet so as to be of a mixed Nature, partly Corporal and partly
Spiritual; there would want one main link in the Chain of Providence, had not
the Divine Power made some Creatures purely Intellectual, such as might be a
Mean between God and Man, as Man is between them and Beasts, to prevent a chasm
or vacuum in Nature. Besides, since every part and place in the World is filled
with Inhabitants proper for it; it seems but requisite, that the highest
Heavens should not be left void of such as might be fit to dwell in those pure
and glorious Mansions.

But not to build so necessary and important a Truth on mere rational
Conjectures, we have a more solid foundation for it, which is Divine
Revelation; the Scriptures everywhere not only mentioning the Being of Angels,
but giving us a clear account of their Creation, of their manifold Apparitions
and Discoveries to Men on Earth, together with their several Actions and
Operations; All which clearly demonstrate their Existence.

For the first: Their Creation may be gathered, though it be not set down in
express terms from the first and second Chapters of Genesis, where they are
styled the Host of Heaven; an usual Title afforded to all Creatures in
Scripture Language, but in a more especial manner appropriated to Angels, as
it is by the Psalmist, Psalm. 148. 2. and most suitable to them in regard of
their great Power and exact Order. And so all Expositors allow it. It Is true
indeed, there is no such express mention of the Creation of Angels in Moses's
Writings, as in those of the other Holy Penmen; which he omits, not so much,
as some would have it, to prevent Idolatry in the Israelites, who, had they
known Angels, would have been apt to have adored them: as for these two
Reasons: 1. Because Moses applies himself to the simple Capacity of that
People, and describes the Creation of visible and sensible things, leaving
spiritual as above their lower apprehensions; and, 2dly, lest Men should think
God needed the help of Angels either in the production or disposition of other
Creatures; As if the Fabric of the World had been too great a Task for Himself
alone to undertake, as Heathens and some Heretics also have fancied, to the
manifest derogation of the Divine Omnipotency.

But for what reason soever Moses forbore to speak out here, the Psalmist is
plain enough; By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host
of them by the breath of his mouth, Psalm. 33. 6. and clearer yet, Psalm. 104. 4.
He makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire. And whereas our
Apostle. v. 4. tells us, That God made the Worlds, Colos. 1. 16. He explains
the meaning of that expression by things visible and invisible; and these
invisible things by Thrones, Dominions, Principalities V. Grot. in locum.
and Powers, the usual Titles Angels are designed by. So void of all Reason, as
well as of Religion, is that bold, or rather impudent, Assertion of the Author
Part 3. c. 34.
of the Leviathan, concerning the Creation of Angels, there is nothing
delivered in Scripture.

2. A second proof of the Existence of Angels may be taken from their sundry
Apparitions, both before and under V. Bucan. l. 1. p. 77.
the Law, and in the first dawning of the Gospel. There is nothing more certain
than that under those several Dispensations, especially at the beginning of
them, such Apparitions were very frequent. Holy Men in those times had a
familiar acquaintance and correspondency with Heaven. 'Twas no news then to see
an Angel of God. The Patriarchs scarce conversed so much with Men as with
blessed Spirits. They were their Guests and their Companions; of their Family
and of their Counsel. Nothing of importance was done either at home or abroad
without their privity and direction. And he must be a great stranger to the New
Testament that finds them not there too very often among the Servants of God.
For though God had for a long time withdrawn from the Jews all means of
supernatural Revelations, yet at the first publication of the Gospel he began
to restore them. 'Twas no marvel, that when that wicked people became strangers
to God in their Conversation, God should grow a stranger to them in his
Apparitions. But when the Gospel approacht, he visited them afresh with his
Angels, before he visited them with his Son. Joseph, Mary, Zachary, the
Shepherds, Mary Magdalen, the gazing Disciples at the Mount of Olives, Peter,
Philip, Cornelius, St. Paul, St. John the Evangelist, were all blessed with the
sight of them. In succeeding times, it is also very credible what Ecclesiastical
Writers report, That the good Angels were nowhit more sparing of their Presence
for the comfort of Holy Martyrs and Confessors, who suffered for the Name of
Christ. I doubt not but Constant Theodorus saw and felt the refreshing hand of
the Angel no less than he reported to Julian the Persecutor; Nor do I question
but that those retired Saints too of the prime Ages of the Church had sometimes
such heavenly Companions for the Consolation of their forced Solitude, as St.
Jerome reports of them. But this is evident too, that the elder the Church
grew, the more rare was the use of these Apparitions, as of all other Miracles,
Actions and Events; not that the Arm of God is shortened, or his Care and Love
to his abated, but that his Church being now settled in an ordinary way, has no
need of any extraordinary ones, no more than the Israelites Luke 16. 31 Gal. 1.
8.
had of Manna when they were once got out of the Wilderness. Nay, such
extraordinary ones now would perhaps be not useless only, but dangerous; and we
may justly suspect those strange Relations of the Romanists concerning later
Angelical Apparitions to Saints of their own Canonizing, when we see them made
use of to countenance Doctrines of Men. And yet notwithstanding their false
play here, it is hard to say that all those instances which sober learned Men
have given us of Modern Apparitions are utterly incredible. But it has often
fallen out indeed that Evil spirits have appeared in this wicked and corrupt
Age more than good ones. The frequent experience of later days gives in here
its Evidence, and it is unreasonable wholly to reject it, there being no other
reason but this to do so, that our selves do not see what others so
peremptorily affirm they did, which were to call in question all that our own
Eyes have not been witnesses to; and if we will believe nothing but what we
see, we may as well doubt whether there be Souls as Devils. And yet so far as
men's Eyes may discern Spirits, they may do it in those possessed Bodies they
usurp. For that such Possessions have been and still are in the World, (though
more frequent in our Savior's time than ours) is as hard to deny as that there
are Witchcrafts, which yet many will not allow of; and the Papists would take
it ill we should deprive them of this one great Argument to prove the truth of
their Doctrines, who, though they feign Possessions where there are none, and
conjure up imaginary Devils that they may have the credit to lay them, yet this
is no good reason to say there are no such things at all. And this once
granted, as we must needs do, unless we will contradict all credible sensible
Experience, there will be no ground left to dispute the real Being of bad
Angels, which is an Argument of equal force to prove that there are good ones.

But then 3dly, What if we do no longer nowadays see Angels in visible
shapes, may we not discover them by their several actions and operations? And
do not these necessarily imply the Being of things? Now, besides the Testimony
of Scripture, which represents Angels standing, moving, talking, and the like;
It is apparent that there are many effects in Nature, which as they cannot be
attributed to any natural Causes, unless we will have continual recourse to
Miracles, we must of necessity conclude them to be of a higher Efficiency.
Those many more than ordinary Tempests, devouring Earthquakes, firey
Inundations and Apparitions, which have been seen and heard of so many, though
they may indeed have natural Causes; yet it is highly probable that these things
are not the ordinary Effects of Nature, but that the Almighty, for the
Manifestation of his Power and Justice, may set Spirits, whether good or evil,
on work, to do the same things sometimes with more State and Magnificence of
horror: As the Frogs of Egypt, ordinarily bred out of putrification and
generation, were yet for a plague to that wicked Nation supernaturally also
produced. I might instance in sundry miraculous Preservations, whereunto, in
all probability, Angels concur. How many have fallen from very high Precipices
into deep Pits, past the natural probability of hope, which yet have been
preserved not from Death only, but from Hurt? How many have been raised up from
deadly Sicknesses, when all natural Helps have given them for lost? God's
Angels, no doubt, have been their secret Physicians. Have we had instinctive
intimations of the Death of some absent friends, which no humane intelligence
had bidden us to suspect, who but Angels have been our Informers? Have we been
kept from Dangers, which our best Providence could neither have foreseen nor
diverted, we owe these strange escapes to our invisible Spies and Guardians?
And thus Gerson attributes the wonderful preservation of Infants; from so many
perils they usually run into, to the super-intendency of Angels. Indeed where
we find a probability of second Causes in Nature, we are apt to confine our
Thoughts to them, and look no higher, yet even there many times are unseen
Hands. Had we seen the House fall upon the Heads of Job's Children, we should
perhaps have ascribed it to the natural force of a vehement Blast, when now we
know it was the work of a Spirit. Had we seen those Thousands of Israelites
falling dead of the Plague, we should have complained of some strange infection
in the Air, when David saw the Angel acting in that Mortality. When the
Israelites forcibly expelled the Canaanites, nothing appeared but their own
Arms; but the Lord of Hosts could say, I will send mine Angel before thee, by
whom I shall drive them thence, Exodus 33. 2. Nothing appeared when the
Egyptians firstborn were struck dead in one night; the Astrologers would
perhaps say they were Planetstruck, but 'twas an Angel's hand that smote them.
Balaam saw his Ass disorderly starting in the path; He who formerly had seen
Visions, now sees nothing but a Wall and a Way; but his Ass (who for the
present had more of the Prophet than his Master) could see an Angel and a
Sword. Nothing was seen at the Pool of Bethesda but a moved Water, when the
sudden Cures were wrought, which perhaps might be attributed to some beneficial
Constellation; but the Scripture tells us; that an Angel descended and infused
that healing quality into the Water. Elias could see an Army of the Heavenly
Host encompassing Him, when Gehezi could not till his Master's Prayers had
opened his Eyes. We need not make use of Cardan's Eye Salve to discern Spirits
in the Air; our Reason may discover them, though our Eyes cannot; and by the
manifest good Effects they produce, we may boldly say, Here has been an Angel,
though we have not seen Him.

All this may serve to confute the ancient Act. 23. 8.
Error of Sadducees, who made Angels to be nothing but good Motions or good
Thoughts, turning them into an Allegory, as Hymeneus and Philetus did the
Resurrection. And it is observed, that they who denied Angels, did withal deny
a Resurrection, and both upon the same ground; their loose temper which
prevails so much with their Successors, inclining 'em to baffle themselves out
of the belief of those things whose real Being brings them so little advantage.
It Is not strange that such men's Senses should swallow up their Faith, since it
deprives them of their Reason; though probably such fancies are rather the
issues of their Desires, than of their Judgment. Behold here a cloud of
Witnesses against them; not Revelation only, but even Sense too, backed with
Reason, Authority and Experience of all Ages, and of all Conditions of Men,
Good and Bad, Heathens and Christians. If nothing will satisfy their curiosity
but a Vision, I must tell them, that the commerce we have with Spirits is not
now by the Eye; nor shall any thing confute their Infidelity but Hell, where to
their cost, they shall meet with those Devils, whose company they are here so
fond of; and yet their very Infidelity methinks, were they not stupid as well
as impious, might serve to rectify their belief here; which being the
unquestionable effect of Satan, is no small evidence of his Existence. I shall
not stand to confute them, the Text does it for me; If their Faith be not
strong enough, their Eyes to be sure will be too weak to discern Angels; these
cannot be the Objects of Sense, since they are Spirits; which points to the
first thing expressed here, their Nature.

Spirits.] It Is an easier matter to Part. I. Their Nature.
prove that there are Angels, than to describe what they are. Spirits have so
little affinity with our Natures, that it is no marvel, if they exceed our
Apprehensions. But this notion suggests so much to us, that they are
intellectual Substances, immaterial, incorporeal, and consequently immortal. In
all which capacities, most resembling the Almighty, and the fairest Copies of
the great Original of all things. Yet are they not void of all kind of matter,
no more than the Soul of Man is; it being peculiar to the Father of Spirits to
be one most pure and simple Act; whereas every created Being, though never so
refined, admits of some dross, some alloy; is compounded either by natural
composition, as consisting of matter and form, or at least Metaphysical, of the
Act and the Power. Yet so far we may and ought to allow Angels to be
immaterial, as not to consist of any corporeal matter, though never so fine and
subtle; for this were to destroy the very Nature of a Spirit and our Savior's
argument, whereby he convinced the Disciples that he was no Spirit as they took
him for: Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, for a Spirit has
not flesh and bones as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39. I shall not trouble you
with any Philosophical discourse, to prove Angels incorporeal, nor with those
tedious and impertinent Niceties of the Schools grounded upon their being so;
How Millions of Angels can lodge together in one point, as a Legion of them
Luke 8. 30.
did in one Man; How they move in an instant, and pass from one extreme to
another, without going through the middle parts, and the like curious matters
contributing nothing at all to our edification. Some passages there are indeed
in Scripture which at first blush seem to favor the corporeity of Angels, but
in effect make nothing for it. As, first, that they have often appeared to Men
in visible forms and shapes, and performed such actions as are proper to us, as
eating, drinking, and the like; All which was by divine Dispensation for a
time, the better to accomplish their enjoined Duties. Yet were those Bodies,
whereby they performed such actions, no other than assumed ones; they were no
part of their Natures, but only as Garments are to us, and were laid aside when
there was no farther use of them: which being made of Air, quickly resolved
into it, and vanished away as their Meat also did. One passage there is in the
6th of Genesis, which being mistaken, has occasioned gross conceits in some of
the Nature of Angels; it is on the second Verse of that Chapter, where it is
said, That the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they were fair, and
took them Wives of all which they chose. The not understanding of which place
has betrayed many, and among those some Ancient Fathers of the Church, as
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, V. Crackenthorp. Metaph. p 85, 86.
Lactantius, Ambrose, and Sulpitius Severus, into so foul an error, as to
conceit, That those Sons of God were no other than Angels, who being enamoured
with the Beauty of Women, and defiling themselves with Lust, of Angels became
Devils: and which is yet as ridiculous a Paradox, That those Giants there
mentioned were their Offspring: As if those blessed Angels, who continually
behold the Face of God, could be taken with the Beauty of a little varnisht
Dust and Ashes; As if Spirits could beget Men, or Holy Spirits wicked Men. Nay,
Tertullian Lib. de Veland. Virgin. c. 7.
(who as he had greater Parts than most of the Fathers, so had greater Errors
too) to establish one Error by another; adds withal, That for this reason the
Apostle bids Women be Veiled in the Church, lest some of the Angels 1 Cor. 11.
10.
should once more be Captivated by them. Thus does one gross mistake usually
draw on another as gross; and the first great one proceeds only from hence,
That in many Copies of the Seventy Interpreters, heretofore the word Angel
crept in, as St. Augustine has observed. But that those Sons of God were not
Angels, but Men, and of the Posterity of Seth, besides the express words of
Moses, both St. Cyril and Incubi Succubi.
St. Augustine have at large demonstrated. And what some erroneously have
fancied of the good, others as ridiculously have done of bad Angels, which
Aquinas and Fr. Valesius maintain as a Part. 1. Sum. Qu. 51. Art. 3.
probable opinion; and accordingly Bellarmine himself is not ashamed to affirm,
That Antichrist shall be born of the Devil, and a Woman. (Surely none so fit to
be his Father as the Devil, the Father of Lies; nor to be his Mother, as the
great Whore in the Revelations.) And therefore one of his Tribe in a book to
the like purpose, fraught with no less malice than absurdity, endeavors to
prove that Luther was so. But it is no marvel that they who hold that Accidents
can subsist without their Subjects, should also with equal contradiction to
Philosophy, affirm, That Devils can be the Fathers of Men; or they who can
paint God the Father in a piece of Arras, should make Angels corporeal. All
this, I say, proceeds from a false apprehension of the Nature of Spirits; and
Philastrius ranks such Opinions among his other Heresies, which Wierus at large
shows, to be as void of Sense as they are full of evil Consequences. For we
find that Heathens, who held the Corporeity of their Deities, did withal
render them obnoxious to all those vile Lusts and Impieties, which the most
profligate Wretches on Earth were capable of committing, and found opportunity
of doing so upon the strength of that prevailing fancy. To which purpose Lib.
18. Jud. Antiq. c. 4.
I might produce several instances, and among them one famous one, recorded by
Josephus of one Paulina, the Wife of Saturninus, in the Reign of Tiberius, a
noble, beautiful and virtuous Lady, whom one Dacius Mundus, by the assistance
of the Priests of Isis, much abused upon such an account. These are the wicked
Consequents of drawing Spirits into a participation of our Natures, and then of
our Vices. I shall not dwell any longer on this subject, nor trouble my self to
satisfy their curiosity, who cannot understand how such incorporeal Beings can
be capable of that punishment by Fire, which the Scripture says shall be their,
as well as their associates, portion. Surely no Man ought to question how they
can be liable to such a punishment, that finds a Soul within him troubled with
Passion, even while no offense or distemperature arises from that corporeal
part; nor how such spiritual Beings can be wrought on by material Fire, till he
can understand what nature Hellfire is of. That they shall suffer by it, the
Scripture assures us, but how, it tells us not; nor can our best Reason tell
us, no more than St. Augustine's could tell him, who plainly here confesses his
ignorance. Our care should be not to examine what Hellfire is, but to avoid
it; and though we cannot resolve all those difficulties which arise from the
Nature of Angels, yet since the Text here tells us they are Spirits, we must
have so much Faith as to believe it, and consequently that they are Immortal;
it being impossible that Spirits, as such, should be Mortal, since there can be
no internal Cause of their corruption, nor any external physical one: but God,
who as he made them of nothing, can indeed Ps. 104. 29.
reduce them to nothing. In which respect no Creature is Immortal, none but the
great Creator of all things, who alone, as the Apostle tells us, has
immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. as eternally subsisting by himself, and by no other.
But not to speak of the absolute Power of God; it is certain, that as to their
Nature, Angels are immortal; and therefore by God's Decree too it is said of
them that have their share in a blessed Resurrection, that they cannot dye for
this reason, because they shall then be (...), as the Angels in Heaven, Luke
20. 36. And this is a quality as proper to bad as good Angels, who though
Devils are still Spirits, and shall remain objects of God's everlasting Justice
as the elect Angels of his Love and Mercy. For though they lost their Purity,
they can never lose their Nature. All of them then are Spirits, and so by
Nature immortal; and those good ones which kept their station, Heb. 9. 5.
glorious, Mat. 24. 36.
heavenly, and 1 Timothy 5. 21.
elect ones, and yet such noble Creatures as these has God designed for the
Ministry of his Saints: The second Particular to be considered.

Ministering Spirits.] To God himself Part. II. Their Office.
in the first and chiefest place; They are his Creatures, and consequently his
Servants. The Psalmist expressly calls them so, Psalm. 103. 21. O praise the Lord
all ye his Hosts, ye servants of his that do his pleasure: and Psalm. 104. 4.
his Ministers. Such they are, and Estius well observes it out of the Text; Non
dicit Apostolus, says he, eos mitti in Ministerium hominum, sed propter
homines, quod est long diversum. They are God and Christ's Ministers, but
employed by them for the procuring and furtherance of the Elects Salvation. So
that their Looks and Services are directly levelled toward God, and but glance
and reflect from Him upon us. All things, says our Apostle, even Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities and Powers, were created as by Him, so for Him, Col.
1. 16. For Him in the first, and for our help and benefit in the second place.
And therefore they adore and ascribe glory to him, Esaias 6. 3. and Luke 2. 14.
They stand in his presence, ready to execute his Commands; some of them being
for this very reason, says a School-man, styled Thrones, because they still
attend on God's. Hence the Ark of God's presence was between the two Cherubins,
Exodus 25. 22. And as the Psalmist, in allusion to that place, represents Him
sitting between them, Psalm. 99. 1. so riding and flying upon them, Psalm. 18.
10. Dan. 7. 10.
in regard of that quick and ready Obedience they perform to his Commands, and
to Christ as the Head of his Church, as it is ver. 6. Let all the Angels of God
worship him. They proclaimed his Conception, Mat. 1. 20. and his Birth, Luke 2.
11. They Ministered to Him at his Temptation, Mat. 4. 11. Comforted Him in his
Agony, Luke 22. 43. Waited on Him at his Sepulcher, Mat. 28. 2. At his
Resurrection, Mat. 28. Ascension, Act. 1. And give glory to the Lamb now in
Heaven, Revel. 5. 11, 12.

But as their chiefest and immediate Services are for God, so by his
appointment do they minister to his Elect, to their Bodies and Souls.

1. Their Bodies. These are not without their care; the very dead Bodies of
Saints they have a care of, Jude 9. much more of the living. And our Lord
deters Men from doing any hurt to his little ones by this argument, that the
Angels of God are appointed for their Guardians, Mat. 18. 10. and when the
Psalmist says, There shall no evil befall thee, nor any plague come nigh thy
dwelling, Psalm. 91. 10. He gives the reason, ver. 11. For he shall give his
Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all his ways; They shall bear thee up
in their Genesis 24. 7.
hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. It is impossible to describe
the variety of their assistances to us here below. One while they lead us in
our way as they did Israel, another while Genesis 32.
they fight for us as they did for Joshua; They purvey for us as for Elias,
foretell our danger as to Lot, Joseph and Mary, and free us from it as they did
St. Peter, and the three Children; They Act. 12. 7.
cure our Diseases as at the Pool of Bethesda; They instruct us as they did
Daniel and St. John; The Law was given by them, Act. 7. 53. and they were the
first Preachers and Publishers of the Gospel, Luke 1. 31. chapter 2. 10, 11. And 1
Pet. 1. 12.
as God made them instruments to convey Knowledge to his Church; so by the
Ministry of the Church, as it were in requital of that good Office, the
manifold Wisdom of God is made known unto them too, Ephesians. 3. 10. Do we run on
in our own evil ways, they resist us as they did Moses, Balaam, and St. John,
who would have adored them, restraining our presumption as the Cherubin before
the Gate of Paradise. Does Satan tempt us to Sin, they rebuke him, and hinder
him when he is most busy, as in the case of Joshua the High Priest, Zach. 3.
1. They remove our hindrances from good, and our occasions of evil; mitigate
our temptations, comfort us in our sorrows, further us in our good purposes,
assist us in our devotions, 2 Kin. 2. 11. Luke 16. 22 Mat. 24. 31 13. 30. 1
These. 4. 16.
present our prayers and holy performances to God, promote our conversion and
rejoice at it; and as if this life were too narrow a bound for their Charity,
they extend it to the next, carrying up our Souls to Heaven, when our Bodies
return to the Earth, as they shall gather together the Elect of God at the last
day, when those Reapers shall separate the Tares for the fire, and the Wheat
for God's barn.

This is their Ministry to the Saints of God. But what need of it, some will
say? Is it not the Lord that orders Psalm. 37. 23.
all our steps? And have we not Him for our help who never slumbereth nor
sleeps? Did he need the Ministry of Angels in the Creation of the World? and
if not there, why in the Government of it? True indeed, he needed it not, nor
does need it, yet is he pleased to use it, to manifest and illustrate the Order
of his Providence in the conduct of his Creatures, resigning some part of its
administration and execution to them, while he reserves the whole authority to
himself; Not out of any inability or necessity as Earthly Princes, who make use
of others Eyes and Hands in the managing of their affairs, since they cannot be
present everywhere but by their Substitutes, but to express his Wisdom in this
Order and Power in this subordination and dependence of one Creature on
another, and of all upon himself. Nor does that Wisdom more clearly appear
any-where than in the choice of those instruments which he has designed to
govern the World under him. The Kings of the Earth do not always observe the
strict Rule of Justice in the distribution of Charges and Employments, allowing
something to Favor and something to Passion, setting many times such persons
over others as are fitter to be commanded than to command, assigning blind
Guides to the more clear-sighted: But the All-wise God disposes things in a
far different manner; He chooses out the noblest, strongest and most enlightened
Creatures to guide the meanest, most infirm and least knowing; makes his Angels
so many Intelligences, not only to move and turn about the Heavens, but to
regulate and steer the motions of all sublunary affairs. So that the Ministry
of Angels is so far from extenuating, that it very much extolls the Goodness
and Greatness of the Almighty toward us, in the execution of his high and holy
Providence. It adds to God's glory, and to the honor of Angels themselves to
be employed by him in so many good and great Affairs; It advances the order and
beauty of the Universe, while no creature in it is idle; It begets a greater
and more strict friendship between Men and Angels, and affords us strong
Consolation in having such a powerful and mighty Protection.

For these and the like reasons it seems good to the Almighty to use the
Ministry of Angels; and as they are most zealous for his glory and the good of
Mankind, especially since it is reconciled to God by Christ, so is there not one
amongst them but is most willing here to be employed. All of them, says the
Text, are Ministering spirits. It has been a question much disputed, whether
every one Man have a particular Angel for his Guardian. I find several of the
Ancient Fathers, most of the Schoolmen, and some Protestant Divines on the
affirmative. And were this the worst opinion of the Romanists, we should not
quarrel much with them, since some passages of Scripture seem to favor it.
Whether this be so or no, I shall not here undertake to determine, nor indeed
need I. For to what purpose were it to prove that every Man has a peculiar
Angel assigned him, when we are here and elsewhere so clearly told that all of
them do serve every one of us, while we serve and obey God. He has given his
Angels charge over thee, says the Psalmist in the forecited Psalm. 91. 10. i.
e. many Angels over one particular Man. And as we find more than one appointed
to carry Lizarus's Soul into Heaven, Luke 16. 22. so sometimes we read of one
Angel attending many Men, as in the case of Israel in the expulsion of the
Canaanites and Amorites, Genesis 24. 7. and at other times of many Angels
attending one Man; as in that of Jacob, Genesis 32. 1, 2. and of Elisha, 2 King.
6. 17. It Is not for us to limit the Almighty, nor to retrench that guard He has
assigned us. While we have an heavenly Host about Mat. 18. 10
us, why should we content our selves with one single Assistant? And when we
are certain of their protection, why should we dispute their Number? And as it
may seem some scanting of the bountiful provision of the Almighty, who is
pleased to express his gracious respects to one Man in the allotment of many
Guardians; so a Platonic piece of Divinity in the Schoolmen, to reduce them
to one single one, for each individual person.

But to let this pass as an innocent, though perhaps erroneous Opinion, their
conceit of an exterior and interior Mission, whereby some are said to
illuminate others, and fit them for their several Charges, but never to stir
abroad themselves, may justly, in St. Paul's Col. 2. 18.
expression, be styled an intruding into things which they have not seen nor
can see, and is indeed no better than a flat contradiction to the Text, which
tells us, That All, none excepted, are Ministering spirits, to serve the
necessity of God's Elect ones. These blessed Spirits know no such state, as to
think it a disparagement to wait on the meanest Saint. When God sends them, the
best of them go, be the errant never so slender. They measure not their
Obedience by the lowness of their employment, but the Will of him that employs
them, thinking no message beneath their Dignity, which God is pleased to put
them upon. The highest Angel does not esteem himself too good to Mat. 20. 28
obey his Commands in the lowest instances of Obedience. And since the Son of
God came down on Earth to minister to Men, no Archangel will deem it an
abasement unbefitting him to serve them. The measures of humane Grandeur are
not to be applied to that of Heaven, where every abasement (if there can be any
such thing in doing God's Will) is Exaltation. Let us then imitate them in
their humble submissions to their Maker; but then let our Prudence be as
Angelical as our Humility; if that teaches us to go when God sends us, this
should teach us also not to stir or act till he sends us; which leads me from
their Office to their Commission, They are sent.

The very name Angel signifies a Messenger, Part. III. Their Commission.
and consequently implies a subordination and dependence on some superior Being
that employs him. It Is a name of Office, not of Nature; This belongs to him as
he is a Spirit, That, as he is an Agent. God is the supreme cause and disposer
of all things, Angels but his instruments. They act not but by his Commission;
nor do they run, till he sends them. The Heavenly Host do nothing without
Orders from their General, and, like the Centurion's Soldiers in the Gospel,
go and come when he bids them. He gives his Angels charge, Psalm. 91. 11
says the Psalmist, and as his Ministers Ps. 103. 21.
they do his pleasure; not their own, ours much less; They are not our
Familiars. And though their Help be more powerful, yet is it not more absolute
than that of other means, since it depends still on the Will of God too; and
whatever Message they deliver, or Commands they execute, it is that Will still
that gives them Motion and Authority. And therefore when St. Stephen says the
Law was received Acts 7. 53.
by the disposition of Angels, we must not fancy them to be Authors of it, but
only the Heralds. 'Twas Christ that gave, these did but publish it. The Law was
ordained by Angels, but still in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. The
Ministry was indeed of Angels, but the Authority of Christ. And therefore
Junius renders those words, Act. 7. 53. You have received the Law in the midst
of the ranks of Angels, i. e. among them, attending God, when he delivered it.
Thither then they came only to assist at the Ceremony, not as Lawgivers, but
Attendants, That being a Title peculiar to the one great Lawgiver, who gives
Laws as well to Angels as to Men. These they constantly observe; and if we do
so, they shall be Ministering spirits to us, for their Employment lasts still,
and the word (...) a Particle of the Present tense implies it: Thus as they are
God's Ministers, they shall still be ours too, if we be God's Servants, and
consequently heirs of Salvation: The last Particular.

Who shall be heirs of Salvation.] i. e. To Part. IV. The End or Design of
their Ministry.
those that shall one day possess, what they now do certainly expect and wait
for. They who are already in Heaven, need not the assistance of Angels, being
themselves, though not Angels, yet like them, and equally happy in the fruition
of the same God. Their Ministry is necessary to bring us thither, but ceases
when we are there. They are our Guides here, There they shall be our
Companions. Nor are their Services designed but for those whom God has chosen
out of the rest of lost Mankind to fill up the void places of Apostate Spirits.
For as Christ himself is by our Apostle styled the Savior of all Men, but in
an especial manner of those that believe: So may Angels be said to be, in some
sort, Ministering spirits to Mankind, but with a reserve to those who are God's
chosen Vessels. Those may possibly have their common protection, but their
particular attendance is on these. For as the Almighty makes his Sun to shine
as well upon the just as the unjust, and sometimes more gloriously on the
latter than the former; so is it in the Ministry of Angels, from which even
wicked Men may reap a general benefit, in some instances more perhaps of an
external help and assistance than the good, while the best of their Offices are
reserved for the best. We know, that whosoever stepped down first into the Pool
of Siloam, was Joh. 5. 8.
cured, whether good or bad; and the Angels brought down Manna in the
Wilderness to the rebellious, as well as Psalm. 78. 25.
to the obedient Israelites. These are favors scattered promiscuously on all;
which God is pleased to deal out to all Men by the hands of his Ministers, the
Angels. But they come not down on the Ladder, but to his Jacobs; nor rescue any
out of the spiritual Sodom, but his Lots. Nor did the Almighty ever design them
to be Ministers for good Psalm. 91. 12. Mat. 18. 10
to any but the Righteous: Over them he gives his Angels charge, and They are
styled Their Angels, with an Emphasis; and, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord
tarrieth round about them that fear 2 Timothy 2. 10.
him, and delivers them. And, as our Apostle, endured all things for the
Elect sake; so do the Angels do all for them: To this purpose it is observed,
That God never speaks by his Angels, but he puts some character on those he
speaks to; as such as fear the Lord, are heirs of Salvation, and the like. And
this is so true, that if wicked Men enjoy any good in this life by the Angels,
it is for the Elect's sake they do so. I will bless them that bless thee, says
God to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. Even Reprobates fare the better here for the
Saints. God sometimes gratifies his Children with the Temporal preservation of
the wicked, as he did St. Paul with the Lives of those Infidels that were in
the Ship with him, Act. 27. 24. and Lot with all that were in Zoar. The Jews
have a Saying, Absque stationibus non staret Orbis; The Prayers of God's People
uphold the World. The Holy Seed are Statumen Terrae, Esaias 6. 13. with David,
They bear up the Pillars of the Earth. Hippo could not be taken, while St.
Augustine lived; nor Sodom destroyed, while Lot was in it. And St. Ambrose is
said to have been the Wall of Italy. And therefore it is ill policy, as well as
impiety, in any to wrong the Saints of God, much more to endeavor to root them
out of the World, as Heathen Persecutors did. Wherein they resembled the Stag
in the Emblem, that by feeding on those Leaves which hid him from the Hunter,
did but betray themselves to his fury; and, Sampson-like, by pulling down those
Pillars, brought the house upon their own heads. Were it not for the Elect, God
would make a short work in the Earth, and no flesh should be saved. Romans 9. 28.
Every Angel of his would then be a destroying one; so that whether they
preserve or punish the wicked it is still in order to the Salvation of those who
shall be the heirs of it.

And now what remains, but that while we behold God's Angels ascending and
descending, we make their Ladder ours too, to mount up to God, who sits at the
top of it, and employs them for our good, and with them give him the glory of
those his benefits, which they convey unto us: For all the helps and
assistances they afford us, are nothing without his. And therefore when God
promised Moses that an Angel Exodus 33.
should go before Israel, but withal threatened them with the subduction of his
own Presence; I marvel not if that Holy Man were no less troubled, than if they
had been left destitute and guardless; and that he ceased not his importunity,
till he had won the gracious Engagement of the Almighty for his Presence in
that whole Expedition. For what is the greatest Angel in Heaven without his
Maker? Or what are their Services to us, if his Favor go not along with them?
Let him then have the chiefest glory who is the Author of them. The Psalmist
directs us to this duty; For no sooner had he said, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of
the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him: but he adds in the following
Verse, O taste and see how gracious the Lord is; To let us know whom we are
beholding to for all the good Angels do us, and to whom we are to pay our
Thanks.

Yet while we pay the main tribute of our Thanks to God, he is content we
should have a respect too for his Ambassadors. They are to be honored for his
sake, and next to him that sends them. Nor can any Reverence be too high, which
diminishes not of that we owe to our common Maker. We ought to be willing to
give them so much as they will be willing to take from us. If we go beyond
these bounds, we offend them, as much as St. John did, when he would have
adored them. The Rev. 19. 10
excess of Respects to them, have turned to abominable Impiety; which, however
St. Hierome seems to impute to the Jews ever since the Prophet's time; yet
Simon Magus was the first that we find guilty of this impious flattery of the
Angels; who fondly holding that the World was made by them, could not think fit
to present them with less than divine Honor. And near akin to these were the
Angelici of old, who professing true Christianity and Detestation of Idolatry
(as having learned that God only was to be worshipped properly,) yet reserved a
certain kind of lesser Adoration to the Angels. Against this opinion and
practice, the Apostle seems to bend his style in his Epistle to the Colossians,
forbidding a voluntary humility in worshipping of Angels, whether grounded upon
the superstition of ancient Jews, as St. Hierome; or the Ethnic Philosophy of
some Platonicks, as Estius imagines; or the damnable Precepts of the Simonians
and Cerinthians, as Tertullian, we need not enquire. Nothing is more clear than
the Apostle's Inhibition, nor more evident than the Papists direct opposition
to that Inhibition, who are no less guilty of the same voluntary humility than
they were, who thought it too much boldness to come immediately to God, without
making their way to his favor by the Mediation of Angels; which whether it be
not justly to be charged on Papists, let any sober Man judge. Surely as the
Good Angels deserve our Reverence, so do they not desire our Adoration. The
Evil Angels indeed still required it, and the Devil begged it of Christ, that
he would fall down and worship him, Mat. 4. 9. but the Good refuse it, Revel.
19. 10. And therefore St. Bernard is too liberal, when he tells us, we owe to
the Good spirits Reverence for their Presence, Devotion for their Love, and
Trust for their Custody. The former indeed we do, and we come short of our
Duty to them, if we entertain not in our Hearts a high and venerable conceit of
their wonderful Majesty, Glory and Greatness, and such a reverential awe of
their Presence, as to do nothing which may offend them. Take heed that ye
despise not these Exodus 23. 21.
little ones, says our Lord, for their Angels are with my Father in Heaven.
They may perhaps forgive us, these will not. And therefore we shall do well to
consider whether they who behold the face of God, will endure to look upon us
(much less to assist us) when we do that which makes God turn his face from
us. We are a spectacle to Angels as well as Men, 1 Cor. 4. 9. They are
observers and witnesses of all our Actions, but especially of our religious
Duties. And for this Luke 1. 10, 11.
cause ought the Woman to have power on her head, because of the Angels, says
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 10. While Zachary and the People were praying, he sees an
Angel of God; who, as Gideon's Angel went up in the smoke of the Sacrifice,
came down in the fragrant smoke of his Incense too. Those glorious Spirits are
indeed always with us, but most in our Devotions; They rejoice to be with us,
while we are with our God; nor will they any longer be with us, than while we
are with Him; while we keep in his ways, they will keep us safe; if we go out
of his Precincts, we forfeit their Protection: They will certainly leave us,
when we forsake God; and when the Good ones go from us, the Evil will come to
us, as in Readiness case: And therefore, to prevent 1 Samuel 16.
the coming of the bad, let us be sure to make the good ones our friends; which
we shall best do, by being like them, by imitating them in their Obedience, as
our Savior bids us, in their Purity Mat. 6. 10.
and Humility, as also in their Charity, by ministering to others, though never
so mean, as they do to us, who are so much below them, that so we may be the
true heirs of Salvation; be sure of their Protection here, and enjoy their
Society hereafter. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant for his sake, who is
the Angel of the Covenant, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON Preached on All-saints-day.
COLOS. I. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
SAint John reflecting on the Honor and Dignity of God's Children, is so
affected with that very Thought, that in a Divine Rapture he breaks forth,
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! 1 John 3. 1. And then describing the future happiness
that Relation should entitle us to, he does it in such terms as show it
unconceivable, ver. 2. We are now, says he, the Sons of God, but it does not
yet appear what we shall be. In like manner St. Paul speaking of the Joys
above, describes them Negatively; telling us rather what they are not, than
what they are: Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
Heart of Man the things which God has prepared far them that love him, 1 Cor.
2. 9. That is, they exceed the apprehension not only of humane Sense, but
Understanding.

Now if any could have given us an exact description of those things, then
surely these two Apostles: For since Heaven did as it were come down to the one
in Visions and Revelations; and the other went up thither, having been caught
up into it: Who fitter than these Persons to display the Glories of that Place
which themselves had seen? And yet we see the only account they give, or indeed
could give us of them, is but this, That they are unaccountable; not to be
reached by Thought, nor to be known but by Enjoyment.

But how obscure soever or inexpressible those Glories appear to such as expect
them; This is certain, that they are reserved and laid up in a sure place for
as many as God shall account worthy of them. An Estate they have in Reversion,
though now incapable of its actual Possession, during their minority. They are
Heirs apparent of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14.
even in this their nonage, and are as sure of Heaven as if they were already
in it. For it is their certain Inheritance. Yet, lest any should wax proud of
their Title, they are to remember, that they owe it not to themselves, but to
the mere goodness of their Heavenly Father, who both gives them the thing it
self and their capacity for it. Gives them Heaven, and makes Heavenly too, and
therefore may justly challenge their most hearty acknowledgment of so great a
Mercy; which is that the Apostle requires of these Colossians, That they should
give thanks to the Father, who had made them meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light.

So that we have in these words,

1. A Description of the future Happiness of God's Children, consisting of two
Particulars: 1. That it is their Inheritance. 2. An Inheritance in light.
2. The Persons who are the true Heirs and Proprietaries thereof, The Saints.
3. The Manner of its Conveyance to them, and that is, by Freegift; It descends
not to them by any natural succession, nor is it the fruit of their own pains
or purchase; But it is God the Father that makes them both Partakers, and meet
Partakers thereof. 4. Lastly, Here is a Duty on their part to be performed,
arising from so high an Obligation, That since the Father had been so
bountiful in bestowing on them so goodly an Inheritance, they should not fail
to be thankful to Him for it, Giving thanks, etc.
These be the Parts, whereof briefly in their order; And, first, of the
Inheritance it self, with the Nature and Condition thereof, An Inhertaince in
light.

An Inheritance, (...) in the Singular, (...) There is it seems but one common
Inheritance, as but one Jude 3.
common Salvation, wherein all God's Saints are Heirs in solidum. And let not
this trouble any of them. For Heaven is big enough and God sufficient for All.
There, not the Elder Brother is the only Heir, and goes away with the
Inheritance, when many times the younger are Beggars; but we shall All be Heirs
and Coheirs with Christ. Earthly Inheritances are indeed impaired and lessened
by being parcelled out; But this Inheritance in light, like light, loses
nothing by being communicated to All, wherein every one shall have his Part,
and that Part shall be his All. Each vessel of honor shall be filled up, it
shall have as much as it can hold, and that is as much as it shall desire. All
shall shine as stars in the Kingdom of their Father, though with different
luster, As one star differs from another star in glory; 1 Cor. 15. 41. Joh.
14. 2. All shall be in their Father's house, but in several Mansions, and with
several Portions assigned them. Which difference shall be so far from abating,
that it shall increase their mutual Glory, when none shall complain that
another has too much and himself too little; when each other's share shall be
his own, and more his own for being another's; so that he shall be glorified in
that very glory wherein his fellow Saint shall outshine him, and his own Crown
for this reason be brighter, because his Neighbor's shall be so.

And as this Inheritance here is but one, so is it a durable one. That very
name speaks a lasting Title. What comes thus unto us we look upon as our own,
and our own for ever. And indeed without Propriety, and that perpetual, all we
have or enjoy is nothing. We are at best but usu-fructuaries, not true
Possessors. Glorious things are spoken of Psalm. 87. 3.
the City of God, and we may say of them what the Queen of Sheba said of the
Glory of Solomon's kingdom, that the half thereof is not told us. But surely 1
Kin. 10. 7.
among those many glorious things spoken of it, nothing is more glorious than
this; That it is a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 11. 10. And that in Heaven we have an house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.
1.
but eternal. An House that shall last as long as its Builder, and whose
Inhabitants shall last as long as both, and dwell therein for ever. For what
would all the Glories of Heaven be to us, if we had no other advantage but what
Solomon says worldly men have of their riches, to behold them with our eyes.
Eccles. 5. 11.
What should we be the better for them, if we might never enjoy them, and have
no right to the place where they are to be found? What is a Kingdom to him to
whom it belongs not? Or a Crown of glory to that man whose head shall never
wear it? Had we such a sight of all the kingdoms of the world and of the glory
of them as the Devil showed our Savior, but withal as little right to any
part of them as that Tempter could give Him; That glittering sight might
perhaps dazzle our eyes, but never raise any other passion in us, than that of
Envy toward them who should enjoy them. And thus it would be with us as to the
kingdom of Heaven. To behold this spiritual Canaan afar off without any hope of
ever possessing it, to view it as another's Country, not our own; would be but
such a sad and melancholy prospect as the rich man had when he saw Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, or as our Lord gave the Jews, when he told them, that they
should see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of
God, when they themselves should thence be thrust out, Luke 13. 28. There is no
true satisfaction to be had in any thing wherein we have no Interest, no
lasting Propriety. Without this, Heaven it self would be a Hell to us, as it is
to the Damned. But it is the peculiar advantage and comfort of God's Saints,
that they can look upon it, even while here below, as their Inheritance; Christ
has entailed it upon them, Matt. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you. They have his word for it, which is as sure to
them as Freehold.

II. But what kind of Inheritance is prepared for them? The Text tells us, It Is
an Inheritance in light, and that in opposition to another sort of Inheritance
(if I may so call it) styled in the following Verse the power of darkness,
Verse. 13.
yea and Darkness it self, Act. 26. 18. As that which lies in darkness, is
maintained and upheld by it, and shall bring men, without repentance into outer
darkness, into the blackness of darkness Jude 13.
for ever. From which dismal state the godly being delivered, are said to be
called out of darkness into God's mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Out of the
darkness of ignorance (the natural state of man) into the light of the glorious
Gospel Ephesians. 4. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
of Christ, which will at last bring them to that of eternal glory. So that the
Inheritance here is an Inheritance in light in two respects: 1. In respect of
the light of Faith, and the knowledge of God, which englightens us in this
life. And 2dly, In respect of that light of Glory which shall adorn and crown
us in the next. We have here the outward light of the Word before us, and the
inward light of the Spirit within us; And if we walk in these lights as
children of the light, we have a promise of shining forth hereafter as the Sun
in the kingdom of our Father, Matt. 13. 43. Both which lights are in effect but
one; That of Faith, a light in part; and that 1 Cor. 13. 12.
of Glory, a full and perfect light. For Grace is nothing else but the dawning
of Glory; They differ not in substance, but in degree, no otherwise than as
light in the Sun when it first peeps out above our Horizon, from that of the
same Sun when it is in its Vertical point, shining out in its full strength.
Both these lights, I say, of Faith and Glory, make up but one great united
Light. And therefore it is (...) in the Text, An Inheritance not in lights, but
in light; There being but one Light, as there are but one sort of Inheriters
thereof, The Saints.

For who fit to partake of this glorious unspotted light, but they who are so
themselves? or, who have a proper right to this Inheritance, but the Children
of the most Highest? Psalm. 82. 6. So St. Paul argues, Romans 8. 17. If Children,
then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ; Heirs of God indeed, but
through Christ, Gal. 4. 7. Holding their Inheritance in Capite, in the right of
Him, who is the Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. He the natural Heir, They but
adopted ones, Romans 8. 15. But still in Him, Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined
us unto the Adoption of Children by Christ Jesus unto himself. Whence they
claim the Inheritance by promise also. For being Christ's, says the same
Apostle, they become Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to the promise, Gal.
3. 23. And so Heb. 9. 15. They receive the Promise of an eternal Inheritance.
Not that they have not the Promise also of temporal Inheritances: ( For
Godliness has the Promise of the life that now is as well as of that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.) But because the Heavenly is settled only upon them,
whereas Temporal Inheritances may, and do, fall to their share, and that in
large Proportions, who have neither part nor lot in the Heavenly. I have
blessed Ismael, says God, Twelve Princes shall he beget, but my Covenant will I
establish with Isaac, Genesis 17. 20, 21. Esau had the like Temporal blessing as
Jacob had, But not with a, God give thee the Dew of Heaven, Genesis 27. 28. God
gives gifts unto men, even to the rebellious, Psalm. 68. 18. Common, giftless
gifts; But the Inheritance, and, to abide in his house for ever, is for the
Children, Joh. 8. 35. Nor will these be put off, or sent away, with a few
gifts, as the sons of Abraham's Concubines were; nothing less will content them
than the Inheritance it self. The Children of this world indeed have Genesis 25. 6.
their Portion in this life, and they are satisfied with it; This is our
Portion, and our Lot is this, say they, Wisdom 2. 9. But the Children of
light, and of a better world, reckon otherwise, The Lord himself is the Portion
of mine Inheritance, says David, Psalm. 16. 6. They are fellow Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, Ephesians. 2. 19. Their (...) their Burgeship, is there; They
live according Phil. 3. 20.
to the Laws of Heaven, and, even while on Earth, enjoy the Privileges
thereof; being even now Heirs of a kingdom, Jam. 2. 5. The wise that shall
inherit Glory, Prove. 3. 35. Heads destinated to a Diadem, in Tertullian's
expression, which their Heavenly Father has prepared for, and will at last put
upon them, who alone too makes them fit to wear it, meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light.

III. How differently soever the Children of God may share in the same
Inheritance; This is certain, that every one's share therein shall be the Gift
of his Heavenly Father. The word (...) here imports it; The Apostle alluding to
the Division of the Land of Canaan, (a Type of Heaven,) which God had appointed
to be done by lot, wherein Himself we know had the main hand; according to that
of Solomon, Prove. 16. 33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. Thus it was in the Choice of Matthias to
the Apostleship, Act. 1. And thus it is as to our share in the Inheritance of
Glory; It falls to us by lot, by the disposition of God the Father; we have no
part here but what he gives us. And if so, then no merit of Condignity, nor so
much as of Congruity, can be pleaded by us.

And truly one would think it were sufficient to partake of the Inheritance,
without making out our own Title to it; That we might be content to be Heirs,
without coming in as Purchasers; or, if we will needs be so, to be Purchasers
on Christ's score, and not our own. But this is too low and mean for some men,
who come with Counters in their hand, ready to reckon with God, to show Him how
much he is in their debt, and who stick not to tell Him to his face, that He is
an unjust Master, if he pay them not their due wages.

But, 1. Our Lord Himself has told us, That God is beforehand with us; That
whatsoever we can do is due from us to Him; That when we shall have done all
those things which are commanded us, we must say, that we are unprofitable
servants, and have done but that which was our duty to do; Luke 17. 10. And
then what merit can there be in paying just debts?

And, 2. St. Paul has told us, That we can do no good thing without Him too,
who works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. So
that He crowns His own gifts in us, and rewards not our deservings.

Besides, 3. Our goodness extends not to God, says David, Psalm. 16. 2. And
being unusefull, how can it be meritorious? Nay, our best works are so
imperfect and so sinful too, that the utmost they can expect is but a Pardon,
and not a Reward; And were they never so good and perfect, yet what proportion
can they bear to such a Reward as an Inheritance in light? Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, to a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory? 2 Cor. 4. 17. where we must not let pass an elegant
Antithesis; For Affliction there is Glory; For Light affliction, a Weight of
glory; And for Momentary affliction, an Eternal weight of glory; to show the
vast disproportion between these things; so vast, that even Martyrdom it self
(the highest, utmost proof of our love to God) is, in St. Paul's account,
nothing in comparison of that Glory we expect; For I reckon, says he, that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us; Romans 8. 18.

IV. And lastly, The very word Inheritance excludes all Purchase on our part.
For this were to renounce Succession, to cast off all Filial Duty and
Affection, not to own our selves Sons, but mercenary Purchasers; yea, and
Purchasers of an Inheritance already purchased for us by Christ, and for his
sake freely bestowed upon us by our Heavenly Father out of His own pure
Goodness and Bounty, to which alone we must ascribe it. For we all (the best of
us) have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23. And we are
told, chapter 6. 23. that, The wages of sin (our proper wages) is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life. The Apostle might have said (and indeed the
Antithesis or Opposition there seemed to require it) But the wages of
Righteousness is eternal life; But he altered the Phrase on set-purpose, and
chose rather to say, The gift of God is eternal life; That we might from this
change of the Phrase learn, That although we procure Death unto our selves, yet
it is God that bestows eternal life on us; That as He has called us to his
kingdom and glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. so he gives that glory and that kingdom for
no other reason but because, He is pleased so to do; It is your Father's good
pleasure, for into God the Father's good pleasure Christ resolves it, to give
you a kingdom, Luke 12. 32. No merit, nor so much as any good disposition in
us for it; He propares it for us, Matt. 20. 23. And he prepares us for it too
here in the Text, by making us meet to be partakers thereof.

For what meetness could he find in us for such an Inheritance? Title to it we
have none, being by nature the Children of wrath and disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2,
3. Mere Intruders here and Usurpers, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and we, the violent take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. Qualifications proper for it
we have none too; That, An Inheritance in light, we, darkness; That, An
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. we
corruptible, polluted, and still decaying. (...) -- cries out our Apostle, We
are not sufficient, not fit (for the word signifies either) as of our selves,
but our sufficiency, or fitness, (call it which you will) is of God, 2 Cor. 3.
5. 2 Pet. 1. 4. who as He makes us Partakers of his divine Nature, so meet
Partakers of the divine Inheritance, not by pouring out the divine Essence, but
by communicating to us those divine Qualities which will fit and prepare us for
the Sight thereof; by putting light into our Understandings and holiness into
our Wills, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. By cleansing
our hearts, and washing our hands, that so we may ascend into the hill of the
Lord, dwell and rest in his Tabernacle, Psalm. 15. 24. He gives us Faith, and
with that a Prospect of our Inheritance; and He gives us Hope, and with that an
Interest therein; And, to sum up all in one, He gives us his Holy Spirit, the
earnest of that Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. who works all our works in us,
writes his laws in our hearts, and by Esaias 26. 12. Jer. 31. 33.
softning, makes them capable of his divine Impressions: In short, That divine
Spirit, which by Regenerating makes us new Creatures, and so fit Inhabitants
for the new Jerusalem, calling us first to Virtue, and then to Glory: to that,
as the Way; to this, as the End, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

2. But besides this divine Operation, we need divine Acceptance also, whereby
we may be accounted worthy of the Kingdom of God, our Inheritance, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
5. For all our works and graces here being imperfect, can never capacitate us
for it without God's gracious Acceptance. And therefore (...) says St.
Chrysostom. here. It Is God's (...) not our (...) his dignifying of us, not our
own dignity, that renders us worthy. And, (...) He makes us accepted in the
Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. And when the Saints of God are said to be worthy to walk
with Christ in white, Rev. 3. 4. it is because He casts his garment of
Righteousness about them; and if their good Works (which yet are but God's own
gifts) weigh down, it is because He puts his grains of Allowance into the Scale.

But what need all this, either Divine Operation or Acceptance, to make us
meet partakers of the Inheritance in light, may the Enemies of God's Grace here
say? What need we go farther than our selves and our own Nature for it? For
Pelagius will tell us, That we are in as good a condition now as Adam himself
was before his Fall; Our Faculties the same, as strong and as able as ever; Our
Understandings as clear to discern, and our Wills as free to choose good and
evil; That all the harm our first Parent did us, was but to give us a bad
Example, which it is our fault if we will follow, and since our Happiness
depends on our selves, that we are to blame our selves, if we miss of it. And
although some have thought this too gross to make Man the sole Author of his
own Fate, yet they have very little mended the matter, by so parting stakes
between God and him, that they still allow the latter the better share in the
work of his Salvation. For they deny all preventing Grace (the proper mark of a
Semi-Pelagian) although they are pleased to grant a concurrent and subsequent
one on God's part to enable him to do his work with more ease and sureness,
which otherwise would cost him more pains and hazard. However they so far agree
with Pelagius, as to place this meetness for the Inheritance in Man himself,
putting it into his own power to dispose himself to his Conversion by an Act of
his own Free Will, antecedent to God's Grace. A piece of Heathen Divinity
borrowed from Seneca and Tully. For Seneca in a Stoical brag could say, That we
live, is from God; but that we live well, is from our selves. And, This is the
Judgment of all Mankind, says Tully; That Prosperity is to be sought of Cicero
de Not. Deor.
God, but Wisdom to be taken up from our selves. On which Saying of his, St.
Augustine passes this Judgment, That by making August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 5.
Men free, he made them sacrilegious. For what greater Sacrilege than to rob
God of his Power to convert us, or at least to let him go but as a sharer with
as therein? When, as to the first Act of our Conversion, we are as purely
passive as to that of our Creation or Resurrection. We cannot create our
selves, and, being dead in trespasses and sins, no more raise up our selves to
a spiritual, than to a natural life: No, God must convert us, that we may be
converted: Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, says the
Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 5. 21. and Jer. 31. 18. Nay, The very preparations of
the heart in Man are from the Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 16. 1. And, It is God
who works in us both to will and to do, says St. Paul, Phil. 2. 13. We
cannot come to Christ, except the Father draw us, Joh. 6. 44. Nor when we are
drawn to Him, do any thing without Him; Himself plainly telling us so, Joh.
15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing; He does not say a little, but nothing.
God must prevent and follow us with his Grace, plant good inclinations in us,
and nurse them up too. He has chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of the
World, that we should be Holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. not that we were so before he chose
us. He chose us first too, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, Joh.
16. 15. 1 John 4. 10. He chose us also out of his own love, and then loved us
for his choice, and made us Holy by his very choosing us. No Prevision of our
Faith or Good Works, but his own free Goodness and Mercy determined his choice;
He found us not meet to partake of the Inheritance, but made us so, says the
Text; Could we make our selves meet, we might thank our selves and not the
Father, as the Apostle here exhorts the Corinthians and us to do, in the last
place.

Giving thanks to the Father, or, as some Translations have it, To God the
Father. God is content we should have the Benefit upon this easy and pleasant
condition, that we give Him the glory of his Blessings. And surely he that
grudgeth Him so little for so much, deserves not the continuance, much less the
increase of any of them. Still to partake of the streams of the divine Bounty,
and never to bless, not so much as to mind the Fountain; still to be receiving
and never returning, argues an ingratitude as void of all Ingenuity as of
Piety. Rivers pay their Tribute to that Ocean from whence they flow, unto the
place from whence they come, thither they return, Eccles. 1. 7. Nature teaching
us to make our Returns thither, from whence we derive our Benefits. Praise and
Thanksgivings are the Reflection of God's glory upon Himself; the constant
employment of Saints in Heaven, and most becoming those on Earth, who hope to
share with them in their Inheritance; so that of all others it becomes most
the Just to be thankful, Psalm. 33. 1. And indeed it is not only a becoming
thing, a piece of Decency this, but of Justice. For Thanks are a Debt we must
always be paying to God; A Rent our great Landlord requires and indents for,
the omission whereof will forfeit our Tenure. Offer unto God thanksgiving --
and call upon me in the time of trouble; so will I hear thee, and thou shall
praise me, Psalm. 50. 14, 15. But then let us be sure to be thankful to Him,
and to none besides Him, since He is the only Author of all our Good. For to
misplace our Thanks here, would be as bad as to deny them; Nay, to pay this our
Rent to a wrong Landlord, worse than not to pay it at all to the right one. God
will by no means give this his Glory to another, nor suffer any to share with
Him in our Thanks, since from Him alone we receive All those Thanks are due
for. We must then give them to God alone, and to God the Father, as some
Translations have it; not excluding the other Persons in the Trinity, but
chiefly directing our Thanks to Him; who as He is the Fountain of the Deity,
and of all operations in the Divine Nature, so of all our gifts and graces too,
Every good and every perfect gift (whether of Nature, Grace or Glory) coming
down to us from the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. especially the Inheritance in
light, which is so peculiarly his gift, that our Savior appropriates it to
Him, telling his Apostles, Mat. 20. 23. That it is not his to give, but the
Father's. Hence that Blessing of St. Paul, Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 3. directing his Thanks to Him as the Original of all our Blessings,
whether Temporal or Spiritual. Now of these two sorts, the latter being far the
greatest, our Thanks for them ought to be so too. We are to thank God then, 1.
That He has made us partakers, and 2. meet partakers of the Inheritance in
light. First I say, That He has made us partakers of so glorious an
Inheritance as that in light, it being nothing less than his very self, who is
Essential 1 John 1. 5.
light, and who dwells in that light, which no Man can approach unto, 1 Timothy
6. 16. A rich and a glorious Inheritance indeed, fit Ephesians. 1. 18.
for the Majesty and Mercy of an Almighty God to bestow, the unvaluable Blood
of his Son to purchase, and the dearly beloved of his Soul to enjoy. How
thankful ought we then to be for being made partakers of such an Inheritance,
as is as far above those here below, as Heaven is above the Earth, or God above
All things! But this is not All. We are in the second place to thank God the
Father for making us meet partakers thereof, which is a greater Blessing than
we are aware of. We would fain have the Inheritance at any rate, but we
consider not whether we be fit for it or no; and if we be not, Heaven it self
will be no place of Happiness to us, nor shall we take pleasure therein. For
Pleasure being nothing else but the suitableness of the Object to the Faculty,
(because things agreeable alone can agree together,) then what satisfaction
should we find in Heaven, while our selves were altogether Earthly? Light is a
pleasant thing to an Eye prepared for, and that can bear it; not to that of a
Bat or of an Owl, nor to that of a Man that should suddenly be brought into it
out of a dark Dungeon; it would rather blind his Eyes than delight them. And
what would the Inheritance in light be to a Child of Darkness, but as the
pleasure of a rational Man is to a Beast, or of an Intelligence to a brutish
Man? He who is wholly taken up with Sensual Objects, and so unacquainted with
Intellectual, rests there and seeks no farther. Tell a Mahumetan of such a
Heaven as the Gospel describes, and you may then make him fall in love with
that place; when you can persuade a Hog to leave his Stye for a Palace; or that
to lie in perfumes, were better for him than to wallow in the mire. What a
Transcendent blessing then is it, and how thankful ought we to be to God for
it, that He makes us meet for the Inheritance above, in order to our better
partaking of it; that He gives us his Grace here as a preparative to Glory
hereafter; makes us Holy in this life, that we may be capable of being Happy in
the next; his Goodness being not more conspicuous in the reward He designs us,
than in the manner of bestowing it; in giving us a Crown of Glory, than in
fitting our Heads for it? It Is a greater honor to be accounted worthy of it,
than to wear it; As Virtue is beyond a Title, and a Man more than a Place.

And now since our lot is fallen unto Psalm. 16. 7.
us in so fair a ground, and that we have so goodly a Heritage, let us highly
value it; make it our chief Treasure, that our Hearts may still be there, where
we have such a glorious Inheritance laid up for us, and such an indefeisible
Estate, as shall never be either in another's power to defeat us of, or in our
own to lose when once possessed of. How do we value our Earthly Inheritances! How
dear are they to us! How loath are we to part with them! The Lord forbid it me
that I should give the Inheritance of my Fathers unto thee, said Naboth to
Ahab, when he would have wrested it from him, 1 King. 21. 3. And yet this being
but an Earthly Inheritance, whereas ours is an Heavenly; He chose rather to
part with his Life, than with the Inheritance of his Fathers; and we are
willing to part with the Inheritance of the Saints in light for nothing, to
sell our spiritual Birthright with profane Esau, for a mess of Pottage, while
every trifling Argument shall make us disbelieve, and every trifling Lust make
us forfeit it. Is the price of Christ's blood, the purchase he has made for us
of an Eternal Inheritance, become so cheap unto us in comparison of those
uncertain perishing ones which the malice of Men can, and death in a very short
time will be sure to strip us of, so subject to alteration and decay, so
polluted and defiled? The Inheritance of the Saints in light is by St. Peter
described by three such properties so peculiar to it, that they are not to be
found in worldly ones. He tells us, 1 Pet. 1. 4. That it is an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away. Now, 1. Worldly
Inheritances, even Kingdoms are Transitory, whereas that of Heaven cannot be
moved, Heb. 12. 28. Estates here shift their Landlords; what is one Man's to
day, is another's to morrow; nay, all the evidence Men have of their Estates
here, shall one day be burnt with the World, and be made void at the Day of
Judgment. And yet how do they call their Lands after their Psalm. 49. 11.
own names, when those names and those very lands that are called after them,
shall perish together; when they who are Owners of them shall one day become
part of their own lands, retain nothing of all their Possessions but Graves,
and in a short time scarce be distinguished from that Earth wherein they were
buried. 2. Again, Should Inheritances here be continued to their Owners never
so long, yet are they fading, still losing their beauty, verdure and luster;
there is some moth or canker that continually frets, and at last eats them up.
But in Heaven, as we shall have an Incorruptible so an Immarcessible Crown; 1
Cor. 9. 25.
Not like Olympic ones, of Bays or Herbs, which immediately withered, even on
the heads of those that wore them, but always fresh and green. 3. Lastly,
Worldly Inheritances are so far from being undefiled, that their Owners may
well blush when they consider how many times they come by them; with how much
sin Themselves enjoy, and Others, to whom they must leave, shall spend them.
Yet as pitiful things as they are, how thankful are we to those who bequeath
them to us! And if we think we have reason to be so to Men for such mean
Inheritances, how much more ought we to be to our Heavenly Father for this
Inheritance in light? Now since we cannot be thankful to him for an
Inheritance which we are not well assured does belong unto us, it will concern
us here to try and secure our Evidence; and for that we need go no farther than
the Text. If, as that tells us, it be an Inheritance of Saints, and an
Inheritance in light, what Right or Title can we pretend to it without being
our selves Saints and Children of the light? And if, as St. Peter has
described it, it be an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, how can we hope
to partake of it, unless our Corruptible even here put on Incorruption, and we
endeavor to be pure, as God, who is our Inheritance, is pure? 1 John 3. 3.
Heaven is no place for the polluted. Into the Heavenly Jerusalem shall in no
wise enter any thing that defiles, or is defiled, Revel. 21. 27. Nor will
Christ receive any into his Kingdom but whom He shall find, when He comes,
without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 9. If these things be found in us,
Innocence, Virtue and Holiness of Life, an entrance shall then be ministered
unto us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11. And so when St. Peter bids us give diligence to make our
calling and election sure, 1 Pet. 1. 10. He shows us the way how to do so, and
that is by adding to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and so on,
verses 5, 6, 7. by practicing the Virtues of the Moral Law there set down.
These are the clear Evidences of the Inheritance in light, as well as the means
to attain it; which we are to find in our selves continually, and to clear up,
still fearing lest any of us come short of our Inheritance, Heb. 4. 1. If we
do these things, we shall never fall. Let our 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Inheritance be as sure as God can make it, yet is it not sure to us, till our
Consciences can bear us witness that we are the Children of God by obeying our
Heavenly Father.

And since he has provided such a glorious Estate for those that do so, how
ought we to despise those poor Inheritances He allots us here below, in
comparison of what He prepares for us above? How willing to part with those for
that, when He requires it, and we cannot keep both? Heaven will make up all our
losses here; it will pay for all at last. And this is the main Argument the
Apostle uses here to persuade the Colossians unto all patience Ver. 11.
and long-suffering with joyfulness, in the precedent Verse, because by outward
afflictions God did make them meet to be partakers of such an Inheritance in
light, as could not be taken from them, as their Earthly Ones daily were by
Heathens, Tyrants and Oppressors; That, with other Saints of God, they should
take joyfully the Heb. 4. 34.
spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in Heaven a
better and an enduring substance. Lastly, As God the Father first makes us meet
to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light; so when he has once
made us meet by his Grace, let us endeavor, by the assistance of that Grace,
still to make our selves meeter, always blessing and thanking him as for all
sorts of Blessings he bestows upon us, so in an especial manner for this in the
Text, for the blessed hope and assurance he gives his Saints of partaking one
day of such an Inheritance, as is All Blessedness. Here He crumbles his
Blessings unto us, we have them here by Retail; In Heaven we shall have them
all in a lump, and that for ever: All the satisfactions and enjoyments of this
present life are so thin, empty and comfortless, that we have need of patience
to be able to endure them. The Prophet David found them so; and had He not had
a prospect of far better things, as a Cordial to cheer up and enliven his
Heart, it would quite have failed him; I should utterly have fainted, but that
I believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
Psalm. 27. 15. Let this Faith bear up our drooping spirits, as it did his; And
let our Thoughts continually dwell on Heaven, and on the Happiness we shall
there enjoy, when we shall come into the City of the living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem; to an innumerable Company of Angels; to the general Assembly and
Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of
All, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, who now partake of the
Inheritance in light: To which blessed Society God bring us all, Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON Preached on the Fifth of NOVEMBER.
St. Matt. VII. the former part of v. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits.
THE main design of Satan, as it has ever been the same to ruin the Church of
God; so his arts and methods to compass it have been various and different.
Sometimes he has endeavored to destroy her by force, otherwhiles to undermine
her by subtlety. His first attempt was to crush her in the Birth; and the
second Man that ere was born, died a Martyr. Ever since, the Church has been an
Acheldama, a Field of Blood, and its Calendar marked all along with Red letters;
the profession of truth having still been fatal as to its Author, so to all his
followers in succeeding Ages; distinguishable not so much by the several Reigns
of Heathen Emperors, as those various storms that in their times have fallen
upon Christians.

2. But as these storms were ever blown away by the breath of God, and Satan,
by strictly winnowing the Church, gat nothing thereby but his own tares; when
he saw that Phoenix grew fruitful from her own ashes, and the fertile blood of
her Martyrs did but bring her in a larger harvest of Proselytes: He then
shifted the Scene, laid aside those terrible Arguments of Racks and Gibbets to
compel Men to come into his Kingdom, and took up other more plausible and
insinuative, the allurements and blandishments of this World to baffle them out
of the rewards of another, thinking by out-bidding Christ to gain a more
numerous party to himself; wherein how successful he has been, the frequent
Apostasies of Men in all Ages do abundantly testify.

3. Lastly, As he met with some of a stouter and wiser temper than to be
prevailed on by either of these Methods, Men not to be beaten off from their
Profession by threats, nor drawn away from it by such mean hopes as this World
could afford them; His subtlest policy has been to work upon their Judgments,
to deprave their Understandings, by poisoning the very Fountains of Knowledge,
the Scriptures. To which end he made choice of corrupt Teachers as the most
proper Engines, who under pretense of greater light and stricter severity,
might easily beguile unstable Souls; and by speaking perverse things, Act 20.
30.
draw Disciples after them.

Such were the false Prophets mentioned in the precedent Verse, of whom our
Savior bids us beware, as the most dangerous Enemies of the Gospel; and by so
much the more dangerous, by how much the more sly and cunning; who since they
should come in their Sheep's-cloathing, in the disguise and with the taking
pretenses of Innocence and Meekness, when inwardly they were ravning Wolves,
full of Hypocrisy, Malice and Cruelty, he gives us here a badge or cognizance
whereby to distinguish them; Ye shall know them by their fruits.

Our Savior speaks here in general of false Prophets, and by them, no doubt,
principally designs all such cunning Seducers, as should in process of time
pervert the Truth of the Gospel, by introducing damnable Heresies into the
Christian Church; yet so as to glance at the Scribes and Pharisees, who by
their false Doctrines and Glosses had corrupted the Mosaical Law, as he shows
they did all along, chapter 5. expressly naming them there, ver. 20. and not
obscurely describing them here by their Sheep's-cloathing, the ordinary habit
of the true Prophets in the time of the Law, and abused by these false ones,
who had nothing of those Prophets but their Mantle.

Accordingly I shall consider these words in a twofold Capacity; First, As they
relate to all false Prophets in general; And, secondly, as they concern the
Scribes and Pharisees, and their Successors in particular. And so the Parts
will fall out to be three.

1. That notwithstanding all their paint and daub, false Prophets are to be
found out by the true Disciples of Christ; Ye shall know them. 2. That the
proper marks or signs, whereby to distinguish them, are their fruits; Ye shall
know them by their fruits. This for the Doctrinal part. 3. The third thing
shall be the Application of it; where, after some reflection on the Scribes and
Pharisees here pointed at, I shall endeavor to show you, how far their Modern
Successors may be concerned in their imitation, which I suppose will bring all
home to our present occasion.
I begin with the first thing proposed, The discovery of False Prophets, Ye
shall know them.

That the Church of God has ever Part. I.
been pestered with False Prophets, and shall still be so to the end of the
World, we learn from 2 Pet. 2. 1. There were false Prophets among the People,
even as there shall be false Teachers among you. A Prophecy sufficiently
verified by the constant experience of former and latter Ages; God in his most
wise Providence so permitting it, partly for the 1 Cor. 11. 13. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Esaias 29. 13, 14.
trial of men's Faith; partly in his just Judgment on those who love not the
Truth; and partly for the clearing of that Truth, by that very opposition that
should be made against it. For these and the like reasons, as the Scripture
plainly tells us, there must be Heresies; so does it at the same time assure
us, that they may easily be discovered, if we will but make use of that reason
God has given us. I know there are who can by no means endure to have their
Opinions sifted, nor their Authority questioned; but they are the false
Prophets of the Text. Unsound Doctrines can no more endure the touch, than
false Wares the light. Their Sacra Eleusinia, Mysteries of Iniquity, are
venerable only by not being understood; like the Turkish Alcoran, they must not
be looked into; because the very discovery of such fallacies is their
confutation. Wherein the prudence of Romish Inquisitors is to be commended,
like that of the unjust Steward, though not their honesty; Nor can I blame them
for not allowing Men the use of so dangerous a weapon as their Reason. But our
Faith is not to be pinned on others sleeves, be they never so great or learned;
nor are we to see with other men's Eyes, be they never so quick-sighted. Our
blessed Lord having taught us to call no man Master on Earth but Himself; Mat.
23. 10
we must wholly resign up our Understandings to Him, to others no farther than
our Reason tells us they submit to his. And such a judgment of discretion
cannot be denied the meanest Christian, without plainly contradicting those
Scriptures which exact it. St. John bids 1 John 4. 1.
us try the spirits, and St. Paul prove all 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
things. Himself appeals to other judgment; I speak as to wise men, judge ye 1
Cor. 10. 15.
what I say: And the practice of this Duty is commended in the Beraeans, in
that they searched the Scriptures whether Act. 17. 11.
those things were so, as the Apostles preached, although they were assisted by
an infallible Spirit. And this is no more than what sober Reason will allow.
For as we are not to condemn all Opinions of Men, because there may be Truth
among them; so neither to approve all, because some must needs be false; The
danger being equal of swallowing all by a blind credulity, or rejecting all by
a rash precipitancy. If we reject all, we shall never be in the right; and if
we embrace all promiscuously, to be sure shall ever be in the wrong. Therefore
unless we will expose our selves to an inevitable necessity of an eternal
delusion, we must not be debarred such a sober exercise of our Understandings
as may enable us to distinguish between the Doctrines of God and those of Men;
it being impossible to know the false Prophets from the true, but by stripping
them thus of their sheeps-cloathing.

But who shall know them? Our Lord here furnishes an Answer to this Question,
Ye shall know them. Ye, my Joh. 7. 17.
Disciples, Ye that do my will, shall know of the doctrine, and judge of those
that bring it. There is a strong Emphasis in this Pronoun, Ye. If so many be
misled by false Prophets, it is a clear Argument, that they are none of Christ's
Discipiles. Nor is it strange that all others should be imposed on. For while
some are naturally ignorant, and cannot; others are wilfully negligent, and
care not to try what is offered them by any hand (frighted from an Enquiry
either by the imaginary difficulty or trouble of it) either unable to judge
what is true, or desirous for their ease to embrace any thing, be it never so
false; Again, while a third sort are of so squeazy a stomach, that they cannot
digest any thing but what suits with their carnal appetite, nor relish any
Doctrine, but what makes for the interest of that Flesh they are enslaved to:
It Is easy to see why they are so obnoxious to the attempts of those who lie in
wait to deceive them, and by working on their natural or affected ignorance;
or, which is worse, their vices, blow them like glass into any shape or form at
the pleasure of their breath. Nothing is so natural to all men as to err; and
nothing more common than for most men to be deceived, especially when
themselves are so willing, and God in his just judgment suffers them to be so,
sending them strong 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10, 11. Romans 1. 28. Heb. 13. 9.
delusions, because they receive not the love of the truth, that they should
believe a lie; and delivering them up to those whose interest it is still to
keep them in it, and whose business, to beguile unstable Souls that have no
ballast in them; Their Proselytes being usually such as are weak or loose, men
that have lost Mat. 24. 5.
either their reason or their conscience.

This being the condition of the greatest part of mankind (to be blinded with
ignorance or prejudice against the Truth, and of corrupt lives) no marvel if
they be so easily deluded by those who come with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness, with their (...) their slight of Ephesians. 4. 14.
hand and cunning craftiness, creeping first into men's houses, and then into
their hearts and affections, dazzling the eyes of such silly people with
glittering pretenses of stricter severities, with a Col. 2. 18.
show of wisdom, and neglect of the body, of self-denial, rigorous observances
1 Timothy 6. 20.
and mortifications, of notions of a higher and sublimer strain, oppositions of
science falsely so called, that puzzle their own and others understandings, 1
Pet. 2. 18.
and of greater favor and liberty to nature, while they promise liberty, and
allure through the Lusts of the flesh and a thousand such artifices; No marvel,
I say, if every one has not wit enough to discover such gaudy impostures, nor
grace to withstand them. These are disguises able to deceive, if it were
possible, the very Elect. But that they shall not, we have our Savior's
warrant for it, Matt. 24. 24. The gates of hell shall never finally prevail
against the Church nor the true Members of it. Their eyes can see through the
sheeps-cloathing, and pierce into that corruption which lies under the painted
sepulchers. In vain is the Net spread in the sight of these Birds, not to be
caught with such chaff. Ad populum phaleras, Christ's Disciples will soon smell
out a Cheat be it never so well laid, these Children of light being in their
generation not be outwitted by the children of this world. They will not dance
after every Seducer's pipe, nor be charmed by every Siren, charm he never so
wisely. Christ's Sheep are rational, and will not follow a Stranger. They are
all taught of God, and have Joh. 10. 5. 6. 45. 1 John 2. 27.
an Unction from above which teaches them all things, to discover error and
truth, that they may avoid the one and embrace the other. True indeed, the 1
Cor. 12. 10.
Apostles had a more extraordinary gift of discerning Spirits than others had,
and St. John, upon the very sight of a Cerinthus, could immediately pronounce
him Satan's Firstborn: But every true Disciple of Christ has as infallible a
light V. Aquin. 22. Qu. 8. Art. 4.
to guide him, which is a holy prudence, and a sanctified reason, that is, as
the Apostle phrases it, senses exercized to Heb. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
discern good from evil. Let him then make use of these, and they will safely
direct him in his choice; nor will the Spirit of God be wanting to him, if he
be not wanting to himself. Should an Angel from Heaven object against the Gal.
1. 8, 9.
truth, he would not yield to him; or, Should an Angel of darkness transform
himself into an Angel of light, his own natural ugliness would soon betray him
at last to the eye of a Disciple of Christ, and his noisome stench to his Nose.
Satan and all his Minsters have a cloven foot that will show them; Be their
leaves never so glorious or flourishing, yet these trees shall be known by
their fruits, which is the Second thing to be considered.

By their Fruits]. Not by any secret Part. II.
character of Reprobation nor mark of the Beast stamped on their foreheads,
which some with the advantage of their Enthusiastical Spectacles can so plainly
see, when they are invisible to all other men's eyes; not by the blossoms of
good purposes, nor the thin fig leaves of a hollow profession; (For Satan may
Mark 5. 7. 16. 17.
confess a Christ as well as a St. Peter, and Pirates may hang out the Flaggs
of those Princes whose Subjects they intend to rob; every one can wear Christ's
Livery, and none boast more of it than they who are the Devil's servants, as
you may find these false prophets here did, v. 21, 22, 23.) It Is not by such
signs as these then that we must know them, but by their fruits, i. e. by their
doctrines, as some; by their practices, as others understand them; or rather
indeed, by both of them joined together, and so making up a full and complete
Criterium, whereby to judge of them.

And, first, We may know them by their doctrines: For indeed these be the
proper and genuine fruits of a Prophet; Nor can we better judge of the quality
of a Messenger than by the nature of that message he delivers. They who make no
other use of their being counted Prophets, but to infuse higher degrees of all
kind of Piety and Charity, without doubt are sent from God (for the Devil would
never help them to credit and reputation in the World, who should employ it
only to the advancement of Piety.) On the other side, if their design be to
infuse into their Followers seeds of impiety and injustice, of uncleanness and
uncharitableness, of fedition and rebellion, be their pretenses never so
specious, or their behavior never so fair, to be sure they are to be rankt
among the false prophets. The wisdom that is from above, says S. James, Jam.
3. 15, 16, 17, 18.
is first pure, then peaceable, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy; whereas, that which
descends not from above, is earthly, sensual and devilish; always levelled at
interest, lust, or pride. And therefore St. Paul yokes seducing spirits and
doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. v. 1. To let us know that the latter is an
infallible sign of the former. But here it may be objected; How can we know
doctrines to be true or false? To this I answer, 1. Negatively; Not by the
maxims of natural reason, which are so far from being infallible, that, if
extended beyond the sphere of Philosophy, for whose Meridian only they are
calculated, they are for the most part defective, if not wholly false; stretch
them never so far, they can never be adequate to those things which are to be
believed, nor any foundation for a divine Faith, all assent wrought by them in
the Soul being but opinion or science. Nor, 2. from Antiquity, which is so far
from being a certain rule, that it can be no certain mark of Faith. Nor, 3. by
the writings of learned men, which at best can never pretend to infallibility,
and being humane judgments, can make up no more but a humane testimony, and
which can never exactly be known by all men, some having neither skill nor
leisure to inquire, much less ability to find it out. 2. I answer Positively;
That the Scripture is that which must direct us in our search for Truth; this
alone being a Rule in it self infallible, as dictated by an infallible Spirit,
in respect of us also clear and known, and in respect of doctrines, to be
examined, full and adequate: And to this we are sent by Moses to judge of a
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. where though a Prophet should work Miracles, or
foretell things to come, yet if he delivered any doctrine contrary to the
Precepts of the Law, he was to be rejected. The very Rule St. Paul gives us
too, 1 Timothy 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, or any other thing ((...)) and
consent not to wholesome words, Tit. 1. 1, 9. 2 Timothy 1. 13. 4. 3.
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing. So Gal. 1. 8, 9. Though
we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Here then is the Test all
doctrines are to be brought to, viz. to the Written Word of God* to the Law and
to the Testimony; we must weigh them all in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and
judge of them by that Analogy and Proportion of Faith mentioned Romans 12. 6.
That form of doctrine delivered, Romans 6. 17. and of sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
That (...) the whole Body, as I may call it, of divine Truths, between the
parts and members whereof there is an exact harmony; so that as in the natural
body a member would become monstrous should it exceed its due proportion to the
other its fellow members; if we carefully compare a doctrine concerning one
Article with a truth concerning others, we may then exactly judge of the part
by its symmetry and proportion to the whole. Wherever then we find any
doctrine either expressly contained in Scripture or deducible thence by
necessary consequence and agreeing to the Analogy or Proportion of the
Christian Faith, we may conclude it is of God: if not, to be none of his. Every
spirit that confesses not 1 John 4. 3.
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, (that denies his Incarnation or his
Gospel) is not of God; no more than that doctrine can be, which tends to the
drawing us off from Christ, and the promoting the interest of Sin and Satan;
and they who bring any such doctrine are infallibly Satan's Emissaries, not
Christ's Apostles; Their very Speech bewrays them, and we may easily
distinguish them by their Shiboleth; Their corrupt and abominable doctrines
will certainly tell us whom they belong to.

2. A Second sort of Fruits, whereby we are to distinguish false Prophets from
true ones, are their corrupt practices, the natural issues of their corrupt
doctrines. Heresies are indeed properly seated in the Understanding, and yet
Saint Paul ranks them among the works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 20. because they
dispose us to, and ever determine in them. Men first dream, says St. Jude,
Verse. 10.
i. e. are intoxicated with their own fantastical and carnal opinions, and then
defile the flesh; first cast off all obedience to God, and then to men, by
despising Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities. It has therefore been a
constant Observation, that most Heretics have been Ill-livers; and the
Scripture 1 These. 2. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 3. 3 John 9. Act. 20. 29. 2 Cor.
11. 13. 2 Timothy 3. 6. Jude v. 4. Esaias 30.
still brands them, wherever it mentions them, sometimes with the Character
of Boasters, otherwhiles of Flatters and Menpleasers; sometimes representing
them as Self-seekers, and doing all for filthy lucres sake; at other times, as
ambitious and affecting pre-eminence; sometimes cruel as Wolves; and sometimes
subtle and insinuative as Serpents, working upon the weakness of silly People
laden with iniquity, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
as Satan did on Eve, and soothing them in their Corruptions, to keep them fast
and maintain a Party, being full of Jude v. 8.
all impurity themselves, notwithstanding all their braggs of extraordinary
light and sanctity, such as the Scripture describes the Gnostics to be, who
professing to know God (much better than Tit. 2. 16.
all other Christians) did in works deny him, and were abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate. It Is true indeed, that the first addresses of
false prophets are usually made with all the semblances and exterior
appearances of holiness; but those appearances prove no better at last than
fantastical illusions; like false meteors, which after a little blaze usually
expire in a stench. Nemo potest diu personam far. Those vizards Seducers put
on either fall off of themselves, or are so transparent, that every prying eye
may see through them. The sheeps-cloathing is too thin a veil to conceal the
Wolf, though he wrap himself up never so close in it. The very affectation of
Sanctity renders the pretenders to it suspected; and their too much subtlety
often betrays them, nothing being so gross and palpable as too curious a
disguise. Truth as it is always constant to it self, the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever; so are they who teach and follow it. Their lives will still
be answerable to their Principles, and we shall seldom or never find them
halting. They are no wandering Planets, but fixed Stars, that know no excentrick
motions. It Is not so with them who have but the form of godliness; These wax
worse and worse, and 2 Timothy 3. 9, 13.
their folly will at last be made manifest to all men who have but any common
reason and prudence to try them. Their golden heads are supported by feet of
clay; If they seem to begin in the Spirit, they end in the Flesh. Sometimes you
shall find them stooping low, but it is to mount the higher; at other times
soaring high, but if you follow them with your eye, you shall quickly see them
lighting on some carrion. Their pretense is Zeal, but their design Gain; God is
in their mouths, and Diana* in their hearts. Notwithstanding all their feigned
mortifications and abstinences, it is their Belly they serve, and not Christ.
Observe then their carriage all along; This truly speaks a man, and what he
does and does constantly, to be sure, That he is. For though every bad act
denominates not a Sinner (as we are not to call Noah a Drunkard, because he was
once overtaken with Wine) yet a bad habit does. Some withered or blasted fruit
may possibly be found on a good tree; but that must needs be a bad one which
constantly yields bad fruit. Here then is the trial of a false Prophet; and
therefore the Pharisees themselves did not argue amiss, Joh. 9. 16. This man is
not of God, because he keeps not the sabbath day. The Proposition was sound,
had they not mistaken themselves in the Assumption. He that keeps not the
Sabbath is not of God. We may safely reason in like manner; He that
transgresses Christ's Law, can never be a true Disciple of his, no more than
he who teaches men to do so, his true Apostle.

But because each of these fruits distinctly considered may prove but a partial
and incomplete Rule whereby to judge of men, according to that of Seneca, De
toto, non de partibus, judicandum; Let us put both together, and we shall be
sure then not to be mistaken. The doctrines and practices of men in conjunction
will prove a true glass to show them in; But take them apart, and each of them
may perhaps misrepresent them. For as a false Prophet does not always deliver
false doctrine, but may sometimes speak well, though he do ill (as the Scribes
and Pharisees Mat. 23. 2, 3.
when they kept to the Law of Moses were to be listened to, though not to be
imitated) so neither does every true one always deliver true doctrine: The
best, being fallible in their judgment, may themselves be deceived, and
consequently deceive others who rely too much upon them. On the other side we
know that, as many false Prophets may act their part so well that many times we
may take them for true; so they who are really true ones, by reason of those
failings which are incident to men, may possibly sometimes be mistaken for
false ones. It Is the constant aim then of men's doctrines and their settled
habitual course of life which must give us a clear sight and judgment of them.
They who break God's commandments, and teach men to do so, and that
constantly, can never be other than false Prophets; since Faith and a good
Conscience cannot possibly be parted. 1 Timothy 1. 19.


And now, having explained our Savior's Rule, give me leave to apply it in the
first place to the Scribes and Pharisees, and in the next, to those who are
their genuine Successors; The last and main thing I purpose to insist on, and
wherein I must bespeak your farther patience and attention.

We find the Scribes and Pharisees yoakt all along in the New Testament, and
their principles and practices agreed well. All the difference between them was
but this, That the former were more Textual, and the later Luke 11. 45.
more Traditional; Those were, as I may term them, the Schoolmen; These the
Casuists; Each of them in high esteem among the People. But the Pharisees were
ever reputed the strictest and most exquisite Sect, not only by the generality
of the Jews, but by St. Paul also, who was himself both the Act. 26. 5. Phil.
3. 5.
Son, and the Act. 23. 6.
Disciple of a Pharisee, and seems to give it the Act. 5.
advantage and precedence to all other Sects among the Jews, as Tract. de vita
sua.
Josephus also does, as well for Learning as Piety, (...) That for exactness in
all points they exceeded all others whatsoever.

Now these men, by the opinion all had of their great skill in the Law, and
their exemplary holiness, had *so bewitched the hearts of the Jews, that there
was no holy man amongst them which was not termed a Pharisee, and they seemed
to have so engrossed all piety to themselves, that it became a familiar proverb
and unquestionable truth among the People, That if the many mansions of heaven
could allow quarter but to two Tenants, The one must be a Scribe, and the other
a Pharisee. And as it cannot be denied but that in some things they expounded
the Law not amiss, (since our Savior grants it, Matthew. 23. 2, 3.) so on the
other side it is certain, that they were very strict Observers of the Letter,
and to all appearance of the Duty of it; For they prayed often, fasted twice a
week at least; yea, their very meals were abstinences, and their outward
mortifications might vye with those of Baal's Priests or the severest
Flagellants. No men were more exact in their Tithes; if God would have a Luke
18. 12
Sabbath kept, they over-keep it; if he commanded the wearing of Philacteries,
they will enlarge them. These and many the like I might instance in, which they
observed even to Superstition; so that, as St. Paul speaks of himself when he
was one of them, touching the righteousness Phil. 3. 6.
which is in the law they were so blameless, that they were not liable to any
humane exception.

And yet all this was but the sheeps-cloathing, the Wolves are still behind,
and you may discover them by their Principles and Practices, both soured with
the leaven of Hypocrisy which leavened their whole lump, and is so rank and
strong, that you may easily both taste and smell it. I shall give a sey of
each, and that briefly. And,

1. Of their Principles and the drift of them. Among which their Traditions
shall lead the Van. God had forbidden to add or diminish ought from his Law,
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. And they did both, embase the pure metal of his Word by the alchimy
of their brass and leaden Commentaries, or clip his Coin by unjustifiable
Defalcations. This was their Cabala or Talmud, those (...), or fantastical
suppliments of their Doctors, whereby they would needs fill up those gaps which
they found in the Mosaical Law, and teach the Almighty a better way of
worshipping Him than Himself could prescribe, as if that rule He had given them
had been too scant a measure for their overgrown devotion; And hence our
Savior plainly tells them, That they transgressed the commandments of God,
teaching for doctrins the commandments of men, Mat. 15. 3, 9.

2. A second Principle of these Rabbi's was, That the due observation of the
Law consisted in a bare external obedience thereunto (the opus operatum) and
that the forbearance of an actual Commission was a full compliance with all the
negative Precepts thereof: So that, in the Pharisees account, to be a just or
an innocent man was no higher a perfection than what Seneca condemns, Ad legem
bonum esse, and that which a Heathen would not grant sufficient to make a man
honest in the sight of men, was enough, in their reason, to render him upright
in the sight of God. And that this was their conceit of the Nature of
obedience appears by those many false Glosses our Lord confutes, chapter 5. For
instance, God's Law inhibited Murder, the Pharisees confined it to the hand,
and Christ extends it to the heart and tongue. The act of Adultery with Mat. 5.
21, 22.
them was the only Crime, whereas Christ makes the very eye and thought v. 27,
28.
guilty. In a word, All obedience in their account was no more than what the
Magistrate would be satisfied with; it laid no restraint on the heart, but only
on the outward members, consisting, as they shaped it, in a bare Omission of
such things as humane justice could take cognizance of, or a forced compliance
with the Letter of the Law, whether the mind or conscience were concerned in it
or no; A principle which served to render men cautious, rather than truly good,
and to advance formality and hypocrisy.

3. And as this was their conceit of the Nature, so did they entertain another
as false concerning the Merit of their obedience. For we find him in the Gospel
giving in to God a swelling Catalogue of his own seeming virtues in an
Eucharistical boasting, Lord, I Luke 16. 15. 18. 9. Mat. 9. 12, 13.
thank thee. Remission of sins was a thing a Pharisee stood not in need of, who
could not only fulfill the Law, but exceed it. Which legal Righteousness of
theirs St. Paul has taken great pains to beat down, but could never beat the
Pharisee off from it, who was not content to stand upon equal terms, unless he
might have the advantage of his Maker.

4. A fourth strange opinion of theirs was, a fancy they had of a temporal
flourishing Messiah, which served to promote their carnal ambition by filling
their heads with designs of worldly grandeur, and begetting a contempt in them
of and hatred to all other Nations, while they looked upon themselves as the
only true Subjects of their misshapen Messiah, and on all others as Rebels to
Him, and consequently such as they were obliged to persecute with Fire and
Sword, and by force of Arms to compel to come into his kingdom, and so to
prepare the way of the Lord, (as we see our modern Chiliasts have attempted,)
hating all foreign Princes as Usurpers, and deeming it no better than a sinful
Vassalage, to stoop to a Heathen Scepter; and dispensing with their oaths and
obligations upon the account of their Religion and Customs: which was the
ground of their frequent Rebellions, especially against the Roman Emperors, and
of the final Ruin of their State and Religion.

I might here give you in a larger Catalogue of other their erroneous doctrins;
Concerning their over-strict observation of the Sabbath; Of an Astronomical
Destiny and Fatality held by them; Of Vows of Continency, though not Mat. 16. 14
perpetual; Of the necessity of Washing Cups and Pots, with a farrago of more
ridiculous and burdensome Ceremonies, as Abstaining from certain kinds of
Meats as naturally unclean, though God himself had not prohibited the use of
them; and many such like Fopperies their Talmud is stuffed with, which is
nothing else but a Shop and Legend of such Impertinences. But by those main
doctrines I have mentioned, and which are indeed of the very essence and
constitution of a Pharisee, it is easy to discover their design and drift, how
full of impiety they were, tending to the disparaging of God's Laws and the
weakening of that Obedience which was due to them and men's too, and to the
fomenting of hypocrisy, superstition and rebellion; the natural conclusions of
such false and dangerous premises.

2. Nor did their Actions belly their Matt. 23.
Principles; If we look into their carriage, we shall find there nothing but
Hypocrisy, a mere form of godliness, Luke 11. 27
without the power of it. Painted Sepulchers they were, offering to the
purblind view of men the scum and outside of their nobility and merit in the
large characters of Marble Statues, Heraldry and Epitaphs, while they
entertained the all-piercing eye of God with the nasty prospect of a
Charnel-house. For such they were, crammed with the bodies of those martyred
Prophets whose bones they so hypocritically enshrined. Bodily worship (which is
but the rind and bark of Religion) was the main of the Pharisees sanctity,
which usually concluded like the Turkish Lents after Mat. 6. 16. 2. 5. 23. 23,
24.
the vizarded austerity of a few spare hours in nightly Bacchanals. They would
not fast without a smeared or disfigured Face, nor give alms without a Trumpet,
19. 13.
nor pray without Witnesses and vain repetitions. Strict observers they were of
the mint and cummin, and as great neglectors of the weightier matters of the
law, judgment, mercy and truth. They could strain at a Gnat, and swallow a
Camel; were so much for Sacrifice, that they neglected Charity; observed the
Sabbath, Matt. 12.
but had no Love; laying heavy loads on others, which themselves would not
touch with one of their fingers. God Deuteronomy. 6.
had charged them to bind the Law to their hand and before their eyes, meaning
thereby the meditation and practice of it; and they extended the dimensions of
their Philacteries to fill the gazing eyes of the People, bearing them not in
their hearts and lives, but in their foreheads, hands, and heels also, as whipped
and branded Malefactors have no more of Law than what is legible in red letters
of Justice on their backs or fists. In a word, all they aimed at in their works
of Charity was, to be seen, and Mat. 6. 1, 2, 3. 15. 8.
get glory of men, to make clean the outside of the platter, and draw near unto
God with their lips, when their hearts were far from him.

This is the description our Savior gives of their Hypocrisy; Nor was their
Ambition less in affecting the Title of Rabbi's, and greeting in the markets,
the Matt. 23. Luke 16. 7. 20. 46.
highest seats in the Synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts. This was their
carnal; and their spiritual Pride, which is worse, was as great, while their
enthroned righteousness looked down on the integrity of all the World besides as
its footstool. They were not as other men; true indeed, for they were much
worse, for this very reason, because they thought themselves so much better.
And upon this account they avoided all communication with any but those of
their own Tribe. They Mat. 9. 11, 12, 13.
would not board with a Samaritan or a Publican, falling foul with Christ for
tasting of their bread (a crime as bad with them as to eat Swines-flesh) herein
showing themselves the true Successors of those in the Prophet Esaias, 65. 5.
whose Motto 'twas, Stand apart, Come not near me, for I am holier than thou.
And thus we find the Pharisee praying by himself, leaving the despised Publican
in the utmost Porch of the Peoples Court, whom he brands with the odious
contemptible Mat. 7. 1, 3, 4. 11. 18, 19.
name of This Publican, Uncharitableness being the natural brat of Pride, and
none more ready to spy a mote in another's eye than he who has a beam in his
own.

To their Hypocrisy and Pride, I may add their excessive Covetousness and Luke
16. 14.
Extortion charged upon them, which was so unsatiable, that their throat was an
open Sepulcher, swallowing up whole Widows houses and the Estates of Orphans,
dressed in the poynant Sauce of their owners Tears, and eaten with their
leavened Bread of deceit in a traitorous Executorship. And what was their
Corban, but an art to fill their Treasury, by cheating Parents of their due
upon the score of Religion? Or what were all their subtle arts to gain and
uphold a Party, but Interest? Wherein their blind zeal and industry did vye
with their policy, compassing Sea and Land to make Mat. 23. 15
but one Proselyte; who when they had made him such, would be sure to be
twofold more the child of Hell than themselves. As Renegadoes among the Turks
exceed the Natural Turks in their hatred and malice to Christians, and for that
reason have privileges above the Natives. And indeed it is hard to say which
was greater, their Malice or Cruelty, to those who refused to subscribe to such
dictates as they Magisterially delivered Matthew. 10. 16, 17. 23. 2. Joh. 12. 42.
v. 10. Mat. 12. 24 and v. 38. chapter 16. 1. chapter 8. 11, 12 chapter 21. 33. v. 45, 46.
Joh. 12. 42, 43.
out of Moses's Chair, which were to be received as infallible Oracles. Of such
invincible Incredulity too, that though they continually required Signs and
Miracles, yet none, though as clear as light, could convince them; so far were
they from believing Christ, that they were most jealous lest any others should
do so. Do any of the Pharisees believe on him? Joh. 7. 48. Nay, Were there
not many that durst not confess him, lest they should be cast out of their
Synagogues? Thus would they neither enter into the kingdom of Heaven
themselves, nor suffer others, who were willing to do so; Taking away that key
of knowledge, which might Luke 11. 52
unlock the gate thereof, and hoodwinking the people that they might not find
their way thither, being very jealous lest Christ should show it them, or the
Multitudes run after any but themselves, every Proselyte of Christ's Joh. 12.
19.
being an Apostate from them: And accordingly they dealt with him; thrusting
some out of their Synagogues, scourging others, contriving the death of a
third, and finally of Christ himself; who as He was a Rock of Offense to them,
so by falling on them at last, ground them to powder.

To conclude this point, (for 'twere endless to follow a Pharisee through all
his windings and turnings) They were as great Boutefeus in their time, as
Jesuits are in ours, sowing Sedition and Rebellion wherever they went,
especially against the Romans, whom they Joh. 11. 48.
most suspected and feared as those who would take away their place and nation,
which at last they did, being enraged by the frequent insurrection of the Jews
whom the Pharisaical Zealots continually stirred up, as you may read at large
in Josephus.

Thus have I shown you the Pharisee, the grand Original, as I may so style him,
of all succeeding False Prophets, plucked off his vizard and his
sheepscloathing, in this brief account I have now given you of his Doctrines
and their Tendencies, together with his practical Commentary on his corrupt
Text. 'Twere to be wished that that Hypocrisy, which was the very soul and form
of a Pharisee, had not by an unhappy kind of Transmigration passed into others.
This spreading Leprosy, like the Jews themselves, is the Catholic plague of
all other Sects too, and particularly of those many ones among us; so that that
leaven or bread of faces, grown stale in Jewry, is now become the ordinary
Entertainment at an English Table. The Wolf, which by the care of our prudent
Ancestors, has been long since banished, has of late days, to our great
annoyance, crossed the Seas, and walked uncontrolled in the staple dress of the
Land, our sheeps-cloathing. The difference between that of the ancient and of
our modern ones being only this, That theirs was of a courser, and ours is of a
finer-spun thread. Were they dressed up in all manner of gaudy appearances, we
outshine them. Their Fringes were neither so long, nor their Phylacteries so
broad. Our Pharisees out-doe them in Eyes lifted up to Heaven, in sowred Looks,
whining Tones, seraphical Expressions and starcht Behavior. Our Principles are
of a higher strain too. If they justled out God's Law with their Traditions, we
quite extinguish the Gospel with our New Lights. Did they corrupt That with
their Cabalistical Glosses, we wrest This to our own and others Damnation by
our false and carnal Interpretations, making it speak to Interest and Ambition.
If they placed Religion in the Hand, we place it in the Ear, in those many
Sermons we hear, but never practice, gadding after those corrupt Teachers we
heap up to our selves. While Pharisees boast of their legal Righteousness, we
quite cast off that and Evangelical too, being above the Ordinances of God;
some among us making perfection to consist in sinning, and not being troubled
at it; others by a contrary, but as bad an error, being so far from owning an
Inherent Righteousness, that they make it wholly Imputative, crying up Faith
even to the decrying of all good works, and making Christ's Cross a Ladder to
get up to Heaven by, though they never climb one Round of it. Were ancient
Pharisees so over-strict in keeping the Sabbath, some among us are as strict,
even to the exclusion of Charity and Mercy. Wherein did their Stoical fatality
differ from our absolute Decree? Or their Temporal conquering Messiah, from
that which our Millenaries have shaped to themselves? I dare say in these and
many the like instances, our Christian Pharisees do as far surpass the Jewish
ones in their corrupt Doctrines, as in all the pernicious Consequences of those
Doctrines, either in Hypocrisy or Ambition, Covetousness or Cruelty, Hatred
and malicious Uncharitableness to all Dissenters, blind Zeal and indefatigable
Industry in gaining Proselytes; or lastly, in all those factious, schismatical
and rebellious Practices, which the most Pharisaical Zealots among the Jews
were ever guilty of, and that upon the very same account of a more peculiar
relation to God.

I cannot stand to make out the Parallel, but must leave it to your own
thoughts; being in pursuit of other Wolves wrapped up in as fair a
sheepscloathing as any of those I have mentioned, and who come to us with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness. Give me leave to uncase them too, and that I
shall endeavor to do, by displaying their Doctrines and Practices; the
natural fruits whereby we are to know Them also.

As to their Doctrines, I shall instance 1. Popish Doctrines.
first in their Traditions; which they not only equal to the written Word of
God in the modest language of the Council of Trent, requiring them to be
received with the same affection of godliness and reverence that is due to the
books of the Old and New Testament, but impudently prefer them, as most of
their eminent Doctors do; for this reason, because the Scriptures, say they,
have no Being, unless they be established by Traditions; whereas Traditions
without Scripture are firm and stable in themselves; Thereby charging the Holy
Writ with obscurity and imperfection, which the Pharisees never had the face to
do, whose corrupt Glosses and Interpretations were Orthodox in respect of
those which these Men give us, and which do indeed much more make void all the
Commandments of God than ever theirs did. For we do not find that the Jewish
Pharisees were wrong as to the first and second Commandments, whereas the
Doctrines of the Romish ones are injurious to both; 2. Not only to the first by
dispensing with God's Laws, and coining new ones* which they obtrude on the
Consciences of Men as equally binding; but to the second much more, having
quite razed it out of their Decalogue, and divided their Worship between the
Creator and his Creatures, not the highest only, as Saints and Angels, but the
very lowest and most contemptible of them, even Stocks and Stones (for such are
their Images) which rather than they will forego, they will part with one of
God's Commandments. 3. What are their many impertinent repetitions, but so many
takings of God's Holy Name in vain? Or their Maxim of not keeping Faith with
Heretics but a Doctrine of flat Perjury? 4. The Sabbath, which was sacred even
to Superstition with a Pharisee, has far less respect with them than a Saint's
Holy Day, though of their own Canonization. 5. When God commands us to be
obedient to our civil or natural Parents, they can not only dispense with our
Allegiance to, but give us withal remission of Sins as a reward for our
Treason to the former; and by their Pharisaical Corban defeat the latter of
that Obedience which is due to them from their Children; forcing them sometimes
into Monasteries as unwilling and oft-times blemished Sacrifies, against their
own and not seldom their Parents consent too. 6. and 7. What excellent
Doctrines they deliver concerning Murder and Adultery, let the Provincial
Letters tell you. He that kills an Excommunicated person, with them is no
Murderer; and let him be never so wilful a one, he shall be sure to find
protection at their Altars: And how severe exactors they are of that Continency
they so religiously profess, their public allowance of Stews and Fornication,
even to the preferring it to Marriage in Ecclesiastical persons, does
abundantly witness. 8. I might tell you how little conscience they make of
Sacrilege too, (the worst of Thefts) as appears by their exposing all to sale,
Heaven and Earth, Hell and Purgatory to boot. 9. Have not their juggling
Doctrines of Equivocations and mental Reservations made all sober and just Men
hiss at them as false witnesses? 10. And have they not with the Pharisee,
restrained the Tenth Commandment to consent of Will, and made Lust and the
first motions of it no Sin at all? One Commandment indeed they have taken out,
and to make up the number have cut the last into two; one while making two of
one, and another while of those two they make none, and so of any other
Commandment when they please they can make any thing. Surely 'twas not without
good reason that the Pope in the first Session of the last Council of Lateran
laid the Scriptures at his feet, to let us know that it was his and his
Successor's design to trample them under them.

What He and his false Prophets have done to the Law, you have heard; and what
they do to the Gospel, will appear by such Antichristian Doctrines, (whereof
I am now to give you some brief account) which destroy the Truth and Purity of
it. 1. The Truth of it, as their cunningly devised Fables, 1. That of
Transubstantiation, a flat contradiction to Philosophy and our very Senses, a
scandal to Jews and Mahumetans, and which nothing but their Covetousness and
Ambition (both which it is most excellently fitted to) could invent; there
being, if well examined, no real proof in Scripture for, but many irrefragable
ones against it. 2. That of Purgatory borrowed from Virgil, and countenanced
neither by the Word of God nor remoter Antiquity. 3. That of Miracles they so
much boast of, but can never show us (their Scene being always laid so far off,
that they know none but their own befooled Bigots will be at the charge or
pains to hunt after them,) or if they could, ought not to baffle us out of the
belief of those Truths which the Scripture so plainly delivers, the pretenses
of such Lying Wonders being those very marks which Deuteronomy. 13. 12, 3.
Moses, Mat. 24. 24. and v. 21, 22.
Christ, and 1 Timothy 4. 2* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11.
St. Paul brand false Prophets with, and coined by them to no other purpose but
to tempt God and give credit to such untruths as do apparently contradict and
overthrow his Precepts. He that shall compare Popish Legends with the Jewish
Talmud, or even the Alcoran its self, must be forced to confess, that the
former are many of them sober Histories to these spiritual Romances. But it is
no marvel that the generality of Popish Prophets should dote so much on such
useful Lies, when one of their Popes has been pleased to Le^ 10.
style Christianity its self a Profitable Fable.

2. Other Doctrines of theirs do weaken the force and destroy the purity of
the Gospel; some of them nursing up formality, and consequently stupidity and
dullness of Devotion; others all manner of looseness and debauchery, spiritual
and carnal Pride, Covetousness and Injustice, Uncharitableness, Superstition
and Rebellion: I need but point at them.

1. Can any thing contribute more to Hypocrisy and flatness in Devotion than
their Pharisaical Doctrines of External Performances, the mere Opus operatum,
(as bad Divinity as it is Latin,) and which being in St. Paul's account but
bodily exercise, leaves nothing for 1 Timothy 48.
the Mind to do: which whether it be present or no, the matter is not great
with them, who can allow of a Sacrifice without Fire and without a Heart; And
accordingly we find that all men's Devotion there is but feet or lip-labor,
consisting in Pilgrimages and gadding after such Saints, as it is a question
whether many of them be not now in Hell; I am sure 'twas much disputed by most
Universities of Europe whether Thomas Becket were saved or damned, and the
greatest part concluded for the latter, and yet this Man is reputed the great
Patron of the English and his Anniversary Festival kept with great Solemnity in
Rome in the College of English Jesuits, who in their Refectory or Dining Room
show us also the Pictures of Garnet and suchlike Tyburn Saints; Their
Religion, I say, consists in running after such Saints as these, and dealing
out their Prayers to them by tale and measure, mumbled over like Charms, all
whose force lies in an External application of them, and are as much understood
by the People as by those Images they are made to. Thus did the Jews rest in
the Law, and thus do Papists in all those Duties which are enjoined them by
their Confessors; who if they can but perform their task, or others do it for
them, think themselves safe enough, and can satisfy their Consciences that
they have done all that was commanded them, though they have done but the least
part of what God has required of them.

2. Can any thing be more effectual to debauch men's Manners than their
Doctrine of Repentance and the Power of the Keys, whereby they can turn
Attrition into Contrition, when they please, and make a very Judas a true
Penitent if he can but say he desires to be so. What is there here required
which a Libertine will not admit? To sin and to confess, to confess and sin on;
to be drunk and vomit, to vomit and again be drunk, who would dislike? But then
have they not very severe strict Rules, some may say? and do they not enjoin
harsh Pennances and Mortifications? They do indeed make as fair a show in the
Flesh as any Pharisee whatsoever, and bind as heavy burdens on other men's
shoulders which themselves touch not with one of their fingers, and can remove
from others with a wet one, either by a total Remission, a complying
Interpretation, or a Commutation, where a little Alms shall make amends for a
great deal of Injustice, and an Indulgence dispense with not only past but
future sins too, be they what they will, or the party what he please; sold many
of them at Fairs with blanks for names and crimes too, ratable at sums
proportionable to the Purchaser's abilities, where a Man may buy himself out of
Hell while he lives, and his Executors and Friends out of Purgatory when he is
dead: From whence it is evident, That these Lions are not so fierce as they
look, nor so terrible as they paint themselves; that although nothing be so
dismally strict in appearance, yet nothing is so loose as they in effect. Trace
these Worshippers of Bell by the print of their feet in the ashes, and you shall
find whither they go, and what their pretended Abstinences end in. And yet
should they in the austerity of their Will Worship go beyond us, I am sure
Baal*s Priests went beyond them; such things make them not better than us, or
make Baal's Priests far better than them; while they leave that which God
commands them, to do that for which He will never thank them.

To this I might add, as a great Motive to dissoluteness, their Catholic
implicit Faith, while they require Men to believe at a venture as the Church
does, and so save them the labor of searching. A Doctrine easy to flesh and
blood, and excellently fitted to the designs, as their perpetual Vow of
Continency does promote the Lusts of it, exposing some to an inevitable
Temptation by denying them those remedies which the Gospel freely allows every
Man.

3. Can any thing more advance the pride of Nature than their Pharisaical
Doctrines of Merit and Supererogation, which teach Men to purchase their own
Glory without being beholding to God's Mercy, and by fulfilling his Law, to
out-brave his Justice? Nay, that they can do more than they need, and may, if
they please, help their neighbors too? What an excellent lesson is this to
make Nature run mad of self-conceit, while it is assured that it can carve out
its own destiny by an exorbitant freedom of Will, that Men can dispose
themselves to Conversion, work out their own Salvation without Christ's help,
or, if not themselves, with the assistance of others, who can furnish them with
a supply out of their super-abundant stock of Merits. Thus while they run away
with such fond conceits, they become careless and negligent of doing any good
themselves, while they are made to believe that others can do it for them, as
if the lashes of Saints (supposing them such) could heal us as Christ's stripes
do, that God's Justice would suffer its self to be paid with any other coin
than that which bears his Son's image and superscription, or that his blood
could not be able to cleanse us without being mixed with the water of our own or
other men's tears. What can be more effectual I say than this, to puff up Men
with spiritual pride, or more derogatory or injurious to the Savior of the
World? And yet this is the Doctrine of the false Prophets of Rome, who stick
not, some of them blasphemously to affirm, That we are more beholding to the
Mother's milk than to the Son's blood.

And as their Doctrine of Merit and Supererogation promotes spiritual pride; so
does that of the Pope's Infallibility and Supremacy as much foment their
spiritual and carnal too, while by the former they allow no more possibility of
Error in St. Peter's, than the Pharisees did in Moses's Chair, and consequently
exclude all hope of any Reformation of the Pope's abuses, which all Men must
swallow and digest as the dictates of God's Spirit, to whom he entitles them,
and from which there lying no Appeal, he may Lord it as he pleases over God's
heritage, let his pretended Predecessor say what he will to the contrary, 1
Pet. 5. 3. and over all the Princes of the Earth too by virtue of his Dabo tibi
claves, in spite also of the same Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Doctrines which
serve to swell him up with Pride, as that of Transubstantiation fills all his
Emissaries with it too, which giving them a power to make their God, must needs
make them look upon themselves as some great ones, and the people admire and
stand in awe of them who can create their Creator, and, which is worse, sell
him too, as some of them do, at a lower price than Judas did his Savior,
though others can sometimes raise the Market, when they see occasion. And
surely there is nothing more certain than that they do so as by virtue of
this, so of their other forementioned Doctrines of Purgatory (whereof the Pope
keeps the Key as well as of Heaven, and has kindled a fire there on purpose to
make his Pot sees) of Masses for the Dead, who are to be released thence by
their own or friends Money, and Indulgences to the Living, that when they come
thither they may also find a quick dispatch, being, in their description of it,
as hot, though not so close a quarter as Hell its self; wherein Men desiring to
continue as short a time as possibly they can, would be glad at any rate to
provide themselves a Passport to an easier place.

To which Doctrines I might add their forbidding of Marriage to many degrees of
Men, a subtle way too of driving on their Trade of Merchandise; For the more
Prohibitions, the more Dispensations; and the more Dispensations, the more
Money, (No Penny, no Paternoster with them.) Thus do their Doctrines empty
themselves still into the Churches Treasury, and the Sins of the whole World
must be taxed to increase St. Peter's Patrimony, (though himself could tell us
he had neither Silver nor Gold,) and rather than the Pope's Coffers shall stand
empty, he will set a price upon Damnation its self, and the very Stews shall
become Tributary to his Holiness's Purse, that so that very Purse may maintain
his Grandeur to the lessening of that of all other Princes. That these are the
aims of suchlike Doctrines, is plainly discernible by any that have not lost
their Senses; And surely Purgatory yields him so considerable a Rent that (as
Bishop Jewel well said) the Pope would be content to lose Heaven and Hell too
to save that; And nothing can render his Indulgences tolerable but this one
Consideration, That they gave the first occasion to the Reformation of this,
and all other his Abuses.

The time would fail me to discover the aims of other Popish principles; How
some of them do preach downright Falsehood and Injustice, such as are the
Jusuitical Maxims of, No Faith to be kept with Heretics; of Equivocations and
mental Reservations, whereby they can make any thing signify any thing; of
Probabilities and rectifying of Intentions, mentioned at large in the
Provincial Letters, and which the Jesuits have made such excellent use of for
deciding Cases of Conscience: To which I might add, Their uncharitable and
non-sensical Principle of their Particular Churches being the Universal
Catholic one (as the Pharisees and Donatists of old, and our over-strict
Precisians of late) dooming all to Hell who are not of their cut and garb, as
if none could be saved that were out of their Ark: Besides those innumerable,
burdensome and superstitious Ordinances they load men's Consciences with; (A
yoke, as they make it, heavier than that of Moses, whose whole loins are not so
thick as their little finger.) But I forbear, and shall conclude this part with
a brief account of their Doctrine of Obedience to Magistrates; which how
destructive it is to all civil Government, will appear by the very proposing of
these four Particulars.

1. That they so exempt all Ecclesiastical persons from Subjection to Princes,
as to allow these no co-active, but only a directive Power over them. 2. That
by the Seal of Confession they tie up their Priests from revealing any
traitorous Plots of Rebels against their Sovereigns. 3. That the Pope by his
Authority can, when he pleases, absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity
to them. 4. That it is not lawful for Christians to obey an Heretical Prince.
By which Maxims it is evident how impossible it is for any Man that believes
them to be a good Subject. He must be no Papist if he be true to his Prince,
since he can be so no longer than the Pope will suffer him. Whatever such a
Man's practice may be (as, no doubt, many noble Gentlemen of that persuasion
have been Loyal to their last breath,) yet his Principles are rebellious; and
if his natural generosity, or some other respect, keeps him fast to his King,
his Religion I am sure does not bind him. And when there happens a contest
between Honor and Religion, it is odds but the latter will carry it. For put
the case the Pope should command one thing, and the King another, I would fain
know, whether of the two a Papist conceives himself obliged to obey; If he
says, His King, he can be no good Roman Catholic; If the Pope, (as he must
say, unless he will renounce his profession,) it is impossible for him to be a
good Subject, since the Pope, whom with Bellarmine he acknowledges the Head of
the Church, one that cannot err, and that has power to make Articles of Faith
according to the determination of the Council of Trent, has ex Cathedra
declared these forenamed Principles of Rebellion to be such Articles of Faith,
and the denying them to be so, no less than Heresy.

You see the doctrines of these false Practices of Romanists.
Prophets of Rome, and they have exemplified them all by their practices. The
Pharisees were great boasters of their Father Abraham, and so are these of the
Fathers of the Church, as if they were their only legitimate offspring, and the
sole heirs of their learning and piety. And these two they have so engrossed to
themselves, that they look upon all the world besides as bankrupt. As to
learning, it is so confined to the Colleges of Jesuits, that, if we may believe
them, it very seldom travels beyond their walls; who being the only Rabbi's
have appropriated to themselves the swelling Titles of Angelical, Seraphical,
and the like; All besides them having but one eye, while these, like the
Chinese, have two. As to piety and devotion, the Catholick-church, like the
Temple of the Lord among the Jews, is ever in their mouths; They are the only
godly Party, the Favorites and Minions of heaven; Nothing to be seen in their
Churches but miracles, and nothing on their Walls but devotion; and indeed all
their religion is but paint. The very habit of a Monk with them is miraculous
beyond St. Paul's handkerchief, and a Franciscan's frock wrapped about a dying
man, shall as infallibly make him a Saint, as Rablais his gown a Physician. All
the Pharisee's arts of dawbing and pargetting are but rude and gross, and his
colors faint to those of a Mendicant. View him with his shaven head, his long
beard and longer beads, his ill habit and worse looks, prostrating his body to
the ground before his wooden god, and what Pharisee can compare with him? And
yet this is the best side of the man and of his religion, which, like an
Egyptian Temple, belies and shames its fair frontispiece with some ridiculous
Ape within. There is no such hypocrisy as that which lurks under a Cowle, no
pride to that of a feigned and voluntary humility, nor any such lewdness as
that which is gilded over with devotion. Should I lay the dirt of their Cells
before you, or rake up the bones of buried Infants, the prospect would be too
nasty and dismal. We know what good use they make of their Confessions. They
who are well acquainted with them find them one thing abroad and another at
home; one thing at their Altars and another in their Chambers. These Pedlers of
devotion carry all on their backs abroad, while their storehouses lie empty.
They can appear to the eye of the world like so many Baptists with their Camels
hair and leathern girdles, which they brag of, as Antisthenes of old did of the
rents of his garment, that served only to let in light to sober Spectators to
view the Wearer's vanity. And what is all their Tinsel devotion, but a
Pharisaical will worship? That rabble of insignificant and superstitious
ceremonies, wherein they out-doe the most hypocritical Pharisees in Crosses,
Relics, Agnus's, Exorcising of devils of their own raising, and ridiculous
cringings and postures, not to be found among the Pharisees, whose behavior
was sober and grave in comparison of that antic Mascarading and religious
Mummery practiced by these Romish Augurs who cannot choose but laugh
sufficiently at themselves for them, and do no doubt much more at them who are
so silly as to admire them. The Pharisees had their superstitious washings it is
true, but they had no holy water to fright away the Devil, nor did they wear
their Philacteries as these men do a piece of St. John's Gospel about their
necks to charm him. Indeed those many Sects of religious orders among Papists
derive from them, but are far more numerous and ridiculous, exceeding them as
much in their Crimes as they do in their Fopperies. Did they compass sea and
land to gain a Mat. 23. 15
Proselyte, these will run farther than the Indies to gain Souls, that is, to
extend Empire, like subtle Foxes, preying far from home, or rather, going about
like 1 Pet 1. 8.
roaring Lions, seeking whom they may devour. And, when they have gained men,
they make them much more the children of the Devil than themselves, being sure,
when once they have them, to keep them fast and tame enough, either by a gross
ignorance, or the consciousness of those sins which they have picked out from
them by Confessions, and which they continually nurse up by their Indulgencies.
Had the Pharisees subtle ways to entrap men, these their disciples can out-wit
them, and a Pharisee is but a Dunce to a Jesuit in his art of Legerdemain,
spiritual juggling and holy frauds, whose fundamental Principle it is, That Gain
is Godliness; If the 1 Timothy 5. 6.
Pharisees were covetous, these have hearts exercised with all manner of
covetous practices. Let the Quarry be never so mean, these Hauks will stoop to
it. To say the truth, The religion of these men is founded in policy and
interest, and the whole current of their doctrines and practices run that way;
as it is easy for any one to see that well considers them. It Is this that sets
the Friars and Jesuits together by the ears, all the quarrel between them being
this, Who shall bring most grist to their several mills. A man can scarce die
quietly for them here, and much less abroad. There you may behold their
numerous Orders flocking to departing men like Vultures to a Carcass, and
weeping over those preys like Crocodiles. They will watch, talk and hare men
into their religion, not so much by the fear of that Hell they set before them,
as of those many Devils in Prophets mantles, which then visibly torment them,
and which it is good policy to keep by them, lest others, like fresher Flies
swarming in, should suck out that little blood which the former had left in
their purses to defray the charges of a burial. One poor widow's cottage filled
the panch Mat. 23. 14
of an old Pharisee, but large Patrimonies and fair Revenues will not stop the
throat of a Jesuit, who is always building that he may still be begging, and
although he devours the Land like Pharaoh's lean kine, yet he still looks
hunger-starved. This sets all other Orders desperately against him, and indeed
they have reason to be angry with him. For though they have as good a mind to
money as he can have, notwithstanding their rule will not permit them to finger
it, yet they fall very much short of him in their Art of Coinage. So that as
Josephus, speaking of the Pharisees, says, they had (...), bare greater sway
with the people, and so made greater advantage of them than the Scribes; the
Jesuits carry away the Trade from all other Romish Merchants, and drive it on
with greater policy and interest, having an Oar in every Boat, and a hand in
every Purse; their Emissaries in all private Families, and their Spies in all
public Counsels, entering, like those Frogs the Psalmist speaks of, even into
Kings Chambers, over many whereof they have got so great an Ascendant, as to be
able to steer all their Affairs by their own private Compass; their Ambition
being not content with the highest seats in their Synagogues, unless they may
have them too in Princes Cabinets.

And truly how they serve even Princes of their own religion when they suspect
them, their Attempts on the persons of some late Kings of France, and Practices
at Venice do clearly manifest, for which they were, with shame enough to
themselves, turned out of the Foregates of those States, but, to the wonder
even of the Loyaller Romanists, received in again at their postern ones. And
now they are as busy in all places as ever, though most with us, whom of all
others they hate and whose ruin they most study, carrying it on with the
utmost policy that Satan and their own Malice can furnish them with. For what
are their Seminaries abroad, but so many Nurseries of Rebellion and Mischief,
where the most pregnant Wits of our debauched Youths are trained up in all the
methods of Satan? These they send out thence, as out of a Trojan Horse armed at
all points against their Lawful Prince, and that Religion many of them have
forsaken, which they conceive themselves the more obliged furiously to
persecute, to give the more colorable pretenses to their defection, and a
firmer pledge of their future fidelity to their Party. These are the fittest
Decoys to fetch in more game, having been themselves first decoyed into the
Pope's Net by the alluring hopes of those great Preferments which were often
promised, but never intended them. But having once got them fast there, he is
sure to hold them. Vestigia nulla retrorsum. Or if they come back, it is only to
trouble our waters, the better to fish in them; nay, it is to scatter fire
wherever they go, that they may warm their hands by those flames they kindle.
Ever since these Comets have appeared, nothing has been seen in Christendom but
War and Bloodshed. And who is able to describe those black Arts they use to
disturb us, who, like Cameleons, can take all colors upon them but white; Be
all things to all men, but in another sense than St. Paul was; Take all shapes
upon them, and all disguises, of Agitators, Ranters, Levellers and Quakers?
Come into all Companies with false faces and falser hearts: A man may sooner
find them in our Churches than in their own Colleges abroad by their own names,
but here they have so many that it is much they should remember them. And
indeed, what is a Jesuit, but one great Equivocation? what does his extemporary
preaching on a stall in the corners of streets at Rome, and that Trade which
every Novice with him is obliged to take upon him, spell, but an illuminated
Cobbler or a Butcher here, who crying up the Spirit, and decrying Universities,
and running furiously at Antichrist, but meaning our Church, shall pass for a
sanctified brother, when in effect he is a most unsanctified hypocrite, one
that makes a false thrust at the Pope, but really wounds his Prince, and does
but more cunningly and safely spread his error, while he seems to declaim
against and smother it. That learning which has been found under a russet
Cloak, did not proceed from Inspiration, the very art of decrying discovered it
self, and sometimes the Author. Such instances we have had of their detection
in our late times of trouble, but now they walk not in vizards, nor, like the
Pestilence, in the dark, but in the face of the Sun it self, and are in every
corner of the Land, there being scarce a house which is not haunted by these
spirits. It Is as possible to fathom Satan's depths as theirs, and so various
are the changes of these Protei, that they cannot sit down to be drawn, and
they are so in every place, that it is hard to find them long in any. But that
these Wolves are thick among us, we may find by the daily lessening of our
flocks; And we know who it is that sends them out, He who like Romulus has
sucked one, whose interest those lesser ones serve, and are but as so many
Jack-calls to fetch him in store of prey. Alas! they do but hunt for him, nor
is he content with small game. He will have Sceptres bow to his Mitre, and
Kings to kiss his Feet, that in requital of their submission, he may tread upon
their Necks. This has been his practice for many past Ages, but indeed this
later one has taught him better manners, since Kings by long experiences of his
insolency have learnt so much dear bought wit as to keep their Consciences and
their Kingdoms too. There is nothing more certain than that Popes for above a
thousand years have both taught and practiced rebellion, though not with equal
success; and this 'twere easy to prove out of the Popish Histories themselves
and those Historians who have written their Lives, but I need not to those who
are so well versed in them. I shall only desire you to look a little back to
the French Holy League, and see who 'twas that headed it, even He that exalts
himself above all that is called God, and loves to raise Tempests in States and
Kingdoms, that he may enrich himself by their wrecks. And to this purpose, like
another Aeolus, he lets fly his boisterous Winds, his Seminary Priests and
Jesuits. Alas! He is the principal Author of our disturbances, These but the
Instruments, who like so many Puppets, dance by the motion of his hand. It Is no
marvel if these his sworn Vassals, his Janissaries in continual pay, should
advance the Interest and fight for the Cause of their great Lord and General,
wherein themselves are so much concerned: Nor do they boggle at any thing that
may promote it, be it never so impious, while the good of the Catholic Cause,
as the Pharisaical Gold did their Altar, shall sanctify all their lewdest
practices: It Is no marvel, I say, that such men should do any thing who are
members of such a Church, whose tender mercies are cruelty; whose piety,
butchery; religion, faction; devotion, sedition; zeal, fire; and martyrs,
traitors. Surely such Cannibals as daily devour their God, will make no bones
to swallow up whole States, or, which is worse, to blow them up.

This was their attempt this day, and this is still their design no doubt. It Is
no Fable this, but a History. Habemus confitentes reos. What need we any
farther Witnesses than the Parties themselves. All Garnet's tricks and
equivocations at last failed him, when, being put to it, he could not deny but
that he had a head and hand in it; confessing withal that his principal motive
to this villainy was, an Excommunication thundered out against Queen Elizabeth by
Pius Q. and Sixtus V. which sticking still on King James as not repealed, but
rather confirmed by their Successors, obliged him in Conscience to attempt the
Murder of his Sovereign, in obedience to the Pope, his greater Lord. This Bill
was produced in the indictment of the said Garnet, and gave occasion to the
Oath of Supremacy. So that the matter of fact being as clear as the confessions
of the Contrivers and Instruments themselves could make it, all the subtlety of
Papists can never disprove or disguise it. Here is no shift, no starting-hole
left them. The Mine was contrived at Rome, though 'twas to be sprung here, at
Westminster. The Pope himself laid the Train, which his Ministers by his order
were to give fire to. And how near were they to do it, and we to be undone!
There wanted but a little light Match to have sent up a Church and State into
the air. Nor did our Enemies make any doubt but that they should have seen us
flying there; and, which was their charity, that our Fall thence should have
been as low as Hell. However, lest the Plot should possibly fail (as through
God's infinite mercy it did) of its intended effect, they had a Declaration
ready to indict the Protestants of that Treason. For the Brat would have been
too foul for the Pope to father, though himself very well knew it was his own
natural issue, and all the world besides. And indeed the very shape and
complexion of this Monster shows it not to be of an English Extraction. Nothing
but the Pope and the Devil could lay such a Cockatrice's Egg, nor any but a
Jesuit hatch it. Let them take it between them, and let it remain an eternal
blot upon them and their religion, guilty of a design than which nothing yet
ever looked more like Hell, the darkness and the flames of it being all in it.

I need not display the horror of it, the very prospect thereof being ghastly
beyond all expression; Let your thoughts supply the defect of my rhetoric and
tell you whether such fruits as these be the fruits of the Spirit of God, or of
his true Prophets. Surely their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, their Grapes are
Grapes of Gall, and their clusters bitter. And yet how many are there that can
relish no other but what an Italian soil produces, though they be as mortal as
those of the forbiddentree. Without doubt our English palats have been
strangely corrupted of late days, that we should be so bewitched and
intoxicated with the cup of Rome's abominations, as to suck out the very lees
and dreggs thereof with such delight and pleasure. I know the troubles of our
late Wars have given the Romish Emissaries opportunity of beguiling many, who,
discontented with their sufferings at home and pincht with necessity, or
offended with the many Sects which the licentiousness of the War had begot, or
couzened with the pretenses of antiquity, vanity, glory and splendour of the
Romish Church, and perhaps allured by those pleasing doctrines and opinions
whereby their Casuists gratify Sinners, have revolted from us, and do still
revolt. Much talk there is of the increase of Popery, and if true, it is not
much to be wondered at, (for a Plague is infectious and a Gangreen spreading,
and evil as well as good communicative.) But surely Papists need not bragg much
of their gain when they consider how and whom they get. They are such as we can
spare them, men that had no religion till they found them one, and whose
noreligion was better than what they have gotten; who living like Atheists,
that they may seem at least to be of some religion, pretend to be Papists, and
being cast out by us, were fit for them to receive. These be their prey; These,
their spoils. I envy them not such Proselytes who add nothing to the repute of
any side but number, nor do we lose any thing but what would shame us; our
Church being but the purer for having such dreggs purged out. Ancient Rome had
at first wanted men to inhabit it, if Romulus had not opened an Asylum; and
modern Rome would not be so much replenished, if there were not a Sanctuary
there for such Converts. Let me bespeak such as St. Paul did his Galatians, O
ye foolish Gal. 3. 1. 4. 19. 10.
People, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? That having
known God as ye have done, ye should turn again to weak and beggarly Elements,
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage; Lick up your vomit, and forsake the
truth of God, to follow lies and Jewish fables. For, what is Popery, but one
great one? what are its new doctrines, but old heresies patched and tricked up,
and only so old as to be rotten? Look into its practices too, whether that
which Tacitus says of Ann. lib. 15
Rome heathenish be not as true of Rome apostate, That all shameless and
heinous enormities ran into it as into a common sewer. Christian- Rome now (if
I may give it that name) is no more like what once it was than Jesuits are like
Apostles. And yet these be the men ye dote on, and if you can get any one of
their Tribe into your houses, you can say to your selves as Micah did, Judge.
17. 13. Now I know the Lord will do me good, because I have a Priest. Such a
Priest indeed as his was, who like a Serpent cherisht in your bosom, will
sting you to death. Let me apply the old Proverb, It Is ill going in Procession
where the Devil says Mass; Sure I am, that if once these evil spirits get
possession of you, you will find it a harder task than you are ware of to turn
them out.

But in vain do I speak to such men as are fast in the Snare; Let us take heed
how we fall into it. To this end let us compare the doctrines of Protestants,
contained in their several public Confessions, with those of Papists set forth
by their Council of Trent; and such a comparison will show who are the true or
false Prophets, whose doctrines suit best with the Gospel and the Analogy of
Faith, and whose practices with those of Christ and his Apostles. I dare say,
should a sober rational Heathen, who had seriously read over the New Testament,
judge impartially between us, his very natural reason would tell him, that all
that Popish trash, which is obtruded on men as Gospel, does not so much as look
like it. I put this case, because we had the like See Mr. Breval's Sermon.
instances in a late converted Jew, who upon a serious consideration of each
Party's tenets chose rather to be baptized with us, (though much to his own
temporal disadvantage) than with them, merely upon such an account.

But to come nearer home to our present purpose, and to speak to the point of
Obedience, I confess indeed that some Protestants in the World have been
Rebels. But there is no Protestant Church that ever taught and constantly
maintained Rebellion, or allowed the practice of it, as that of Rome does. I
appeal to their several Confessions extant in print. The difference between
Protestants and Papists in this case is indeed this, That disobedience with
them is a crime, and with these a law; That they punish Rebels, and the Pope
rewards them, promising them no less than Remission of sins and Eternal life;
That they abhor the Murderers of Kings, but the Pope sets them on by his
Excommunications, and after the murder is committed, makes Panegyricks on them.

But whatever the doctrines and practices of other Churches may be, nothing can
be more clear of Rebellion than the Church of England is. Let any man judge of
their doctrine as to that point by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which
Priests and Jesuits will no more own than they will do us for a Church, and
can no more swallow such a morsel than a Pharisee could Swines-flesh. Some
Priests indeed, as Blackwell for one, took the Oath of Supremacy, and
Withrington wrote a book in defense of Obedience to the Civil Magistrate; but
were so far from having any Thanks from, that they were severely checked by
their Masters. But as to the generality of these False Prophets, they are still
the same, and bear the same bad fruit. These Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing will
sooner change their Hair than their Opinions. Try them by this Shiboleth, and
they will Judge. 12.
quickly appear to be Ephraemites. It Is true indeed some who would be thought
Protestants, have been guilty of the same Jesuitical Doctrines and Practices,
but they were no more Protestants than Jesuits are Protestants; They went out
^ Joh. 2. 19.
from us, but were not of us. They never sucked such Principles from the Breasts
of that Church they were born in, but from those Emissaries of Rome who
debaucht them. Before the Troubles began we were most of us Orthodox. 'Twas
Anarchy brought in Schism into our Church, and Rebellion into our State. While
Penal Laws were in full force, we could scarce ever see a Priest, but in a
Prison, or on a Gallows. Let not Rome then charge our Church with their own
Principles, nor tell us we have been Rebels, since they made us such. No true
Member of our Church ever was, nor indeed could be one; He could no more be a
bad Subject, than a Christian (as Athenagoras said) could be a bad Man. Many of
us have died for our Prince, but none of us have taught to kill him either by
Precept or Example, as some Popish Priests have done, or else they are very
much belied. Our Ministers were never found preaching Rebellion in Conventicles
as Jesuits have been found to do, some faces having been seen there which
never appeared to any before but in Rome or Madrid. In a word, we have confuted
the Church of Rome as much by our Lives as by our Writings in this point, and
undergone as many trials for the defense of this Truth, as Primitive Christians
have done for that of their Religion. Patience and Meekness are the fruits we
own, others are of a foreign growth. By these our Church desires to be known;
and when the Church of Rome can show the like, she shall be ours too; but she
must then cease to be what now she is. But if she will not come to us, as it is
to be feared, her pride will not suffer her to bow, though it be to the Scepter
of Christ; let us not go to her, but keep where we are, nor forsake our own
Church till we can be sure to find a better. And surely no better argument of
her being a good one than this, That the Church of Rome persecutes her, as Nero
did her, when once Apostolical. And should the time ever come that she should
use her strongest and best arguments, Inquisition and the Faggot, I hope, by
God's help, we should be as ready to confute them by our Patience, as we have
done others by our Pen. But God who in his Mercy has so miraculously* preserved
us from their fury this day, will, no doubt, still do so, while we continue
true Sons to him and his Church: Nor is it possible that his Vicegerent should
ever have a good opinion of those False Prophets who would have blown up his
Grandfather, and in Him himself; and would, no doubt, were there the like
occasion, endeavor to blow up his Royal Person, their principles and their
malice being still the same.

To sum up all, Let us bless God that we can meet here to bless him. Without
the wonderful Mercy of this Day some of us had never been, and perhaps this
Church had not too. No place then so fit to praise God in, since it is its self
so great and signal a Monument of his Goodness in its own and our preservation.
And while we praise him with joyful Lips, let us at the same time beg of him
still to preserve our Church and the Nursing Father of it, our Sovereign, from
all attempts and practices against his Crown or Person, either by Heretical or
Schismatical Men, Foreign or Domestic Traitors, praying God that under him we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, and that
obeying God, and his Laws, God may own us for his, by those fruits of
righteousness we bring forth, that so having our fruit unto holiness, we may
obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; To whom,
etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
A SERMON Preached on the Fifth of NOVEMBER.
JOHN XVI. 2, 3. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service.

And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father nor Me.


THAT Religion is the great Instrument of that happiness they expect hereafter,
is what all good men do believe; And that it is withal a special means of
procuring Temporal happiness, is what the most unbelieving do allow, by making
it, or at least the pretense thereof, so necessary to the *well-being and
support of humane Societies, that without this foundation they cannot, in their
opinion, possibly subsist; And therefore Politic men finding this Engine so
forcible to turn and manage the World, have always successfully employed it to
that purpose, and governed others, though Themselves were least governed by it.

And certainly if the bare appearance of Religion has been thought, even by
the worst of men, so effectually conducing to the peace and benefit of Mankind;
It is a plain confession, that the Reality thereof must needs be much more, and
that not only by a Divine, but also by a Moral Causality. For besides that
Religion, by over-awing men's Consciences, keeps them firm and steady in their
Obedience to Magistrates; It does in its own Nature and Constitution carry such
a mollifying uniting Virtue in it, as is apt to soften the most obdurate, and
pacify the most turbulent Minds, having such a powerful Influence as well on
the Persons as Actions of Men, that it turns Wolves into Lambs; and where it
once lays hold on Conscience, is the strictest band of humane Laws, the best
security for Princes, and the greatest Endearment of Obedience, which can never
be firm and lasting without it; It being impossible that He should ever be true
to Man, that is not so to God. But if this be the natural Effect of Religion,
how comes it then to pass that it is not constant? If it disposes Men to Peace
and Order, why does it so often break them? How comes that, which is the Cement
of humane Societies and the bond of peace, to be such a Makebate in the World,
as we see it is by those bitter Feuds and Animosities, those mortal and
implacable Hatreds, it raises and foments everywhere to the ruin and
destruction not only of private Families, but even of States and Kingdoms?
This, I confess, is a fatal Consequent and an accidental Event, not any proper
and natural Effect of Religion, but rather of men's Lusts, Passions, or their
Mistakes about it; Of the Hypocrisy of some, who make it a stalking-horse to
temporal Interest, carrying on their worldly designs under its Mask and Vizard;
As the Pharisees Mat. 23. 14*
made long prayers to devour Widows houses; or, Of the misapprehensions of
better-meaning people, who fight against God under his own Banner, break his
Laws in pure Obedience to them, and while they turn his Servants out of their
Synagogues and kill them into the bargain, think thereby to do their Master
service; with these in the Text.

One would think it should have been impossible for any Men to be so persuaded,
but that our Lord has here plainly foretold it, and the Experience of all
Times, and of ours especially, has abundantly verified his Prediction. For we
see Men, though most opposite in their Judgments, yet perfectly agreeing in
this Point, That whosoever is not with, is against Them; and whosoever is
against Them, is against God, and so to be run down as an Enemy to him. So that
when once people make their own God's quarrel, no quarter then is to be
expected from them; and to be remisly cruel, shall pass with them for a doing
of the work of the Lord negligently. And this shall justify, yea and sanctify
all inhumane bloody acts, propitiate for all other faults, and turn Murder it
self into a Sacrifice; and by slaying all that stand in their way, Men shall
consecrate themselves to the Lord, as they are said to do who slew the
Idolaters, Exodus 32. 29. or, as it is in the Text, (...), which the Chaldee
Paraphrase renders, Offer an oblation unto God. Now it seems very strange how
any Man should be able so far to subdue his Reason, as to persuade himself that
to persecute, excommunicate, nay and to kill another merely for differing from
him in opinion, can be an acceptable service unto God. But what Natural Reason
boggles at, Religion we see, or rather a false conceit thereof, not only
swallows but digests as a pleasing Morsel, making some do that out of choice,
which others do out of rage and frenzy, and corrupting their Judgments to that
pass, as to persuade themselves they do best where they do worst. Such were
the Persons our Lord speaks of, forewarning his Disciples that they might not
be offended, v. 1. when they should be counted as sheep appointed to be slain;
Psalm 44. 2^
when they should see themselves set apart for the Altar, killed all the day
long for his sake and the Gospel; Appointed unto death in the design and
intention of their cruel and implacable Enemies, who should not only safely,
but meritoriously kill them as so many proscribed Persons, on whose heads
rewards are set, and who thereby should not only deserve well of Men, but of
God.

1. Now who they were that should Divis.
do so, and what were the Reasons or Motives prevailing with them to make them
think they should do God service by such violent ways as the putting Christ's
Disciples out of their Synagogues and killing them, I shall in the first place
inquire into. And then in the next, 2. I shall show you our Savior's judgment
of, or rather, the heavy doom He passes here upon all such Men and their
Practices, as proceeding from perfect ignorance, from their not knowing the
Father nor Him; And wherein this their Ignorance did consist, shall be my
second Inquiry. Which two Heads of discourse, when I shall have gone thorough,
I shall 3. In the third place conclude with some Application.
The first thing to be inquired into, is, Part. I.
who They were our Savior here points to. And to this Query my Answer in short
is, That they were three sorts of very different people, Jews, Heathens, and
Christians.

1. Jews, Against whom these words are here directly levelled. For who could
those be that should put Men out of their Synagogues but the Jews, especially
the leading Men amongst them, The Scribes and Pharisees, The Elders or
Sanedrim, who were the Highest Ecclesiastical Court in that Nation? Had they
not agreed among Themselves, That if any man did confess that Jesus was Christ,
he should be put out of the Synagogue? Joh. 9. 22. And in pursuance of that
Order and Agreement do we not find that they did cast out the blind Man for
owning Christ to be the true Messiah, ver. 34? Nor did their rage stop here,
but as in process of time they proceeded to the Murder even of the Son of God
Himself, so to the Persecution of all his Followers, They both killed the Lord
Jesus, and have persecuted us, says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Adding this
farther character of them there, That they pleased not God, and were contrary
to all Men; That is, to all that were not of their way, but to Christians above
all others. Which is that our Lord had expressly foretold they should do, Mat.
23. 34. and St. Stephen upbraids them for having done, Act. 7. 52. And we see
what havoc St. Paul himself made of the Church before his Conversion,
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Act. 8. 3.
9. 1.
Lord; And himself tells us why he did so, namely out of a full persuasion that
he was in conscience obliged to persecute Christians, who were, as he then
thought, the main Enemies of the Jewish Religion; I verily thought with my self
(says he) that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of
Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. And he tells us, Phil. 3. 6. That out of zeal he
persecuted the Church; Affirming the same of the Gal. 1. 14.
other Jews, being all zealous of the law, Act. 21. 20. So that all his and
their rage against Christ and his Disciples proceeded from their great Zeal to
the Mosaical Law. For the Mosaical Law having been of divine Institution, they
looked upon all those that opposed it as professed Enemies to God, as guilty of
the highest presumption and sacrilege, who should endeavor to repeal and make
void what God Himself had once enacted. And then what more acceptable service,
think we, what better sacrifice could they offer up to Him than the blood of
such Miscreants, who should presume to set up a way of Worship in opposition to
what Himself had prescribed? We find this charged upon St. Stephen as his great
crime, That he should affirm, That Jesus of Nazareth should destroy the holy
Place, and change the customs which Moses had delivered them; Act. 6. 13, 14.
And so strongly were the Jews possessed with a conceit of their being the
peculiar People of God, that they could not endure the least mention of any
others sharing with them in this Privilege, insomuch that they could hear St.
Paul with patience enough till once he spoke of his being sent to the Gentiles;
They gave him audience till then, says the Text; And then cried out, Away with
such a Fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit that he should live; Act. 22.
21, 22. Contradicting and blaspheming the truth Paul preached unto them; Act.
13. 45. And stirring up the devout and honorable v. 15
Women, that is, such as had embraced the Law of Moses and the Jewish Religion,
being led with blind Zeal against the Gospel which they knew not, and so were
the fittest Agents to their Party and for their turn, to promote Persecution
against the Church, as having a great Interest in men's Affections. All this
plainly shows, that what the most part of the Jews did in opposition to the
Gospel, was out of pure Zeal to the Law, and out of a conscientious, but blind,
Persuasion; That* it was their Duty to persecute and destroy All that were
Enemies thereunto, wherein many of them did bono animo errare, err with a good
Mind and holy Intention, Thinking thereby to do God service.

But although the Generality of the Jews did Think so, yet some, and They the
leading Party among them, did think to do themselves some service as well as
God, driving on their Politic designs under the fair and colorable pretense
of Religion. Of this sort were the chief Governors, who dreaded the ruin of
their Synagogue; That their Law and Government would sink together; and that
Christianity, if not timely crushed, would sweep away both. This appears clear
from that saying of theirs, Joh. 11. 48. If we let this Man (that is, Christ)
alone, All men will believe on Him; And then what will become of our Power and
Authority? The Romans shall come and take away both our Place and Nation. This
was their great Fear; They saw that the World was already gone after Joh. 12.
19.
Christ; And if things should go on at that rate, they should then be left
alone, and the People should fall off from them from whom they sucked no small
advantage. It was this Apprehension that vexed them at the heart; This made
them straightly threaten the Apostles not to preach any more in Christ's name,
left a doctrine, so dangerous to them, should spread any farther; Act. 4. 17,
18. The Law was their great Pretense, but Interest their chiefest Motive to
persecute Christians, who were such dangerous Enemies to their Religion, and,
which was more considerable to them, to Themselves, to their Sway and
Authority; And both these meeting together, would not fail to give their rage
the keenest Edge. But this consideration was not perhaps that which moved the
generality of the People, who had no such deep reach, and had more sincere
Hearts and honest Intentions, being but so many Tools in the hands of more
cunning Designers. These men being possessed and acted by a Religious frenzy,
bore all down before them, not valuing their own Lives to be masters of other
men's. Such were those devout Assassins who had bound themselves under a great
Curse, (an Oath of Execration,) That they would neither eat nor drink till they
had killed Paul* Act. 23. 12. Like those among the Mahumetans, who strongly
deluded and besotted with their Superstition, count it meritorious to murder
any Enemy thereof, though Themselves perish in the Attempt. And thus you see
who were the principal Persons our Lord here aims at, to wit, the Jews; And
what were the main Grounds and Motives that transported them with such rage and
fury against Christ's servants, a blind zeal for their Law, and a strong
persuasion that they were bound in duty and conscience to use all manner of
violence against them, who were, in their account, utter Enemies to their Law,
and consequently to Themselves as well as to God, the Author of it.

2. But these were* not the only People here pointed at. The time comes, faith
our Lord, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. That
Time was not yet come, but it was coming, and near at hand too, when every one,
as much bigoted as the Jews could be, should think they should perform the
same service Deo opiniativo, as St. Augustine phraseth it, to what they took
for God, to those false Gods they worshipped as the Jews did to the true, by
mingling theirs as Pilate once did the Galileans blood with their Sacrifices.
Luke 13.
This points to Heathens. So Tertullian, speaking of Maximilian, tells us, That
he thought the blood of Christians a most pleasing Sacrifice to his Gods;
Christianorum sanguinem Diis gratissimam esse victimam. Budoeus is of opinion,
In Pandec.
that St. Paul, speaking of Christians, being accounted as the filth of the
World and the off-scowring of all things, (...) and (...) 1 Cor. 4. 13. Alludes
to those Expiations, in use among Heathens, where certain condemned Persons
were brought forth with Garlands on their heads in manner of Sacrifices, and
offered up to Neptune, being termed (...) And Suidas Suidas, in (...)
tells us, that for the removal of the Pestilence they sacrificed certain Men
to their Gods, whom they styled (...) Filth, loading them with revilings and
curses. Such were all Christians accounted among Heathens, who looked upon them
as the vilest sort of men upon Earth, fit to be offered in Sacrifice to their
Gods. For,

1. They thought them guilty of the highest immoralities and debaucheries,
adultery, incestuous copulations, murdering and eating their own Children in
their nocturnal private Assemblies; and then no marvel if they thought their
utmost severity toward them to be an act of Justice and of Religion too, as
being in their apprehension the Causes of all those public Calamities that
befell the World.

2. They looked upon them as profane, atheistical men, and so worthy to die,
because they did not worship the heathen Deities, nor had any Altars or
Temples. For so the Charge runs against them in Tertullian, Deos non colitis;
and in Minutius Felix, Nullas aras habent Christiani, nulla templa. Nay, They
looked upon Christians as Affronters of the Gods and of Religion, That laughed
at their Sacrifices, despised their Temples, and threw down their Altars and
Images. And hence they passed for (...) Atheists, as Socrates did, who was
thought to believe that there was no God, because he had a very mean opion of
those the World then worshipped. The very same crime objected to Christians, of
being of no Religion, because they would not embrace the heathenish
Superstition. So the Pagans in Arnobius, Christus ex orb religiones expulit,
Their Master Christ had driven all Religions out of the World. He had indeed
destroyed all those false worships the besotted World ran after, together with
their ridiculous, abominable Deities, having silenced their Oracles, and forced
those Gods they worshipped to confess themselves to be no other than Devils; As
his Disciples and primitive Christians could and did frequently drive them out
of those bodies they possessed; which was such an affront to their Gods as
Heathens were not able to endure, and thought themselves concerned to vindicate
by the utmost severity that either wit or malice, helped on by the Devil
himself, could find out. And then,

3ly. What Cruelties think we were left unexercised upon Men, who, besides the
ruin of their Religion, had, in their apprehension, designs, against the State
too, and wherever they were, were thought still to endeavor the undermining
of their Empire? Which though it was a pure groundless calumny, yet the
Apostles finding this apprehension so deeply rooted in their minds, thought it
necessary earnestly to press subjection to heathenish Princes and Governors,
to take off this foul aspersion; And the rather, because the malicious Jews did
still labor strongly to possess all in Authority with such an opinion of them,
as if they were Enemies as well to their State as to their Religion. Thus
Christ himself was accused of perverting the Nation, of forbidding to give
Tribute to Caesar, and of saying, that He Himself was a King, Luke 23. 2. St.
Paul, of being a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world, Act. 24. 5. And the Charge was general against all the
Apostles, That they had turned the world upside down, Chap. 17. v. 6. Calumnies
invented and fostered by the Jews; It being expressly said, Chap. 14. verse. 2.
That the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil
affected against the brethren, envenoming them with hatred and prejudice
against them, as People hating their Government as well as their Worship,
though in effect none did it more than the very Jews themselves. There is no
doubt but that Interest as well as Religion set Heathens so much against
Christians, and the latter not the least. For besides that they had been in a
long and uninterrupted Possession of their idolatrous way of worship, and so
thought themselves to have the advantage of time over Christians, who were in
their account but Upstarts; They could not digest such an absurd Religion as
did teach, that a crucified Man could be a God; And so morose and strict a one,
as not to allow them their old luxury, hatred, pride, envy, and all those
abominations whereof their very Religion was made up, nor suffer them to be as
wicked as they desired and the Devil would have them to be; And therefore by
the insinuations of his chief Instruments, the Priests, who were undone if this
new way should prevail, did he labor to root them out from off the face of the
Earth, as a most pestilent sort of people: A work, in their opinion, Joh. 4.
18, 19. and 7. 7.
very meritorious, as no doubt it was, to their Gods. And therefore Suetonius
in the Life of Nero, amongst other good things done by him reckons,
Persecutiones Balz. Soc. Christian. cap. 4.
contra Christianos factas; And that bloody Tyrant and Persecutor Dioclesian,
in an Inscription engraven on a Monument he had set up, makes his brags, that
he had purged the Earth of the Christian Nation, abolished the Christian Name
in all parts of his Empire, and propagated the worship of the Gods;
Superstitione Christianorum ubique deleta, and cultu Deorum propagato. Wherein
he reckoned without his host, having, to his great grief and sorrow, lived to
see the ruin of Heathenism, and the establishment of Christianity by
Constantine; which did so enrage Julian the Apostate, that, finding all his
Arts to destroy the Faith ineffectual, he vowed, that if he sped in his
Expedition against the Persians, he would at his return offer up the blood of
all Christians to his Gods. And thus you see our Savior's prediction verified
in respect of Jews and Heathens, and what were the grounds and motives of their
hatred and rage against Christians; blind zeal, blended with worldly Interest,
which made them think that by persecuting them to death they did God service.

3. But we are not to confine our Lord's prediction wholly to the Jews and
Gentiles, but to extend it even to Christians themselves, who have verified it
in its most rigorous and worst sense. And truly it is a sad thing to consider,
how no sooner Jews and Heathens had laid down the quarrel, but that Christians
took it up, carrying it on against themselves with as much heat and fury as
ever the former had done. The mutual Contests between them, even in the earlier
times of the Gospel, were so bitter and intemperate, so fierce and bloody too,
that they have been objected to them by Pagans, and derided in their open
Theaters. Clemens Alexandrinus brings in Heathens upbraiding them with their
quarrels; And Ammianus Lib. 22.
Marcellinus, a heathen Author, has observed long since, That no Beasts were
so cruel to one another as Christians in his time were. And there was but too
much ground for his observation, when he could see them not only reviling and
libelling, as in the Council of Nice, but killing and treading down each other
in that of Ephesus. What would he have said, had he lived to behold those
fatal* Tragedies which have been acted since on the Theater of the World upon
the score of Men's different persuasions? How have they put one another out of
their Synaguoges, cast them out of their Churches by Excommunications, and, by
worrying them to death, turned them out of the World too, and so, as much as in
them lay, destroyed peoples Souls as well as their Bodies? I dare say that Jews
and Heathens put together have not spilt so much Christian blood as Christians
themselves have done. For proof whereof I might appeal to Massacres foreign and
domestic, Croysades, Persecutions raised and carried on against Men with the
utmost rage and violence, merely for not being able to bring their Judgments to
the same pitch and level with that of their Persecutors; not to mention the
bloody design of this Day, which, had it taken effect, would at once have blown
up a Church and a State; And all this with the same pretenses of holy zeal and
pious intentions that Jews and Heathens had, and with as equal ignorance too.
For however they thought hereby to do God service; yet God Himself we see does
not think so, nor Christ neither, who charge all such Zealots with utter
ignorance, both of the Nature of God the Father, and of Himself also; These
things will they do unto you, says He, because they have not known the Father
nor Me. Which leads me to the second Head of my Discourse, to wit, Our Lord's
Judgment of, or rather, Sentence of Condemnation past here upon all such
persons and their practices.

They have not known the Father nor Me. I know not what good opinion some Part.
II.
may have of Ignorance in matter of Devotion, so as to make it the Mother
thereof; I am sure the Scripture all along makes it the source of all impiety;
of atheism, oppression, cruelty and of all that confusion that is in the World;
Have they no knowledge, that they are all such workers of mischief, eating up
my people as it were bread? Psalm. 14. 8. It was this Ignorance that crucified
Christ; Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 8. And he thanks his ignorance for his persecuting and
blaspheming, 1 Timothy 1. 13. They are the dark places of Act. 3. 17.
the earth that are full of the habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74. 20. And when
men walk on still in darkness, all the foundations of the earth are out of
course, Ps. 82. 5. That is, There is nothing then but confusion in the world.
They proceed from evil to evil, because they know not me, says the Lord,
Jerem. 9. 3. And here we see that Christ Himself charge all the cruelty, that
should be exercised on his Servants, upon men's not knowing the Father nor
Himself.

But wherein did this their Ignorance consist? It consisted, I say, in these
two Things.

1. In that they thought that such violent courses as they took to bring men in
to them, as their putting them out of their Synagogues, and their killing them,
could be an acceptable Service to God.

2. That their pious Intentions, Their thinking thereby to do God service,
could be able to bear them out, and justify this their way of proceeding.

1. I say first, That they were grossly mistaken in thinking that those violent
courses they took could possibly please God. This was their (...) their First
grand mistake. For there was nothing in the Divine Law to show God's
approbation of any such thing. Nor do we find that the ancient Jews, who alone
worshipping the true God, and being his peculiar People, might in that regard
have had some colorable pretense to persecute all, that were out of God's
Covenant, as enemies to Him, did notwithstanding use any rigorous, much less
barbarous and cruel ways, to compel men to come into their Church. The Law
indeed required the life of an Apostate to Idolatry, whether 'twere a single
Person or a City, Deuteronomy. 13. And therefore to prevent the Jews running into
Idolatry, to which they were so prone; Death, which was the only proper
restraint in that case, was put into the Law by God, who was Himself then the
Supreme Magistrate in that Theocracy, against whom it was exact Rebellion and
Treason to take another God, and therefore was by Him punished with Death. But
this Law concerned those only who were within the Pale of the Jewish Church;
nor do we find that any who were without, were forcibly compelled to come into
it. This was wholly left to their own choice, and they were suffered to go on
in their own way, without being obliged to receive the Mosaical Law. It was
never God's method this, to drag men to his Service, nor otherwise to work on
their understandings than by rational convictions. He might have made use of
his great Power to confound, but he has always pleaded with men by way of
Argument, a Way most suitable to the nature of reasonable Creatures and to his
own, abhorring all manner of cruelty, and by his forbearance, long-suffering
Romans 2. 4. Exodus 34. 6
and goodness seeking to lead men to repentance; And therefore they who have
any other apprehensions of a Divine Being, measure Him by their own fierce and
inhumane Temper, thinking wickedly that he is such a one as themselves; and, be
they who they will, They know not the Father.

Nor do they know the Son neither; I say, Whosoever employ any violent ways or
means to force men's consciences in matter of Religion, do not know Christ. Let
me not here be mistaken, as if I were against all manner of legal compulsion. I
deny not Magistrates the power of constraining them to outward acts of Justice,
Honesty and Religion too, who are destitute of the inward Virtues, such acts
falling within their Jurisdiction, serving to preserve Civil Societies, of whom
Magistrates are properly Lords, and who do obtain their ends, if the outward
acts be done. There are two Swords among Christians, the Lord Bacon, Essay 3.
spiritual and the temporal; and both these have their due office and place in
the maintenance of Religion: But we may not take up Mahomet's Sword, or, like
unto it, that is, We must not propagate Religion by sanguinary Persecutions,
nor force consciences so long as men's opinions destroy not faith or morality,
that they keep them to themselves, and do not spread them, to the ruin of the
established Religion and Government. For when they do so (as some Peoples very
Religion is treasonable) the Treason, not the Religion, is then punished by the
Magistrate. But setting a-side this case, I say, That as all outward compulsion
to oblige men to quit their present Persuasion without any rational conviction,
is directly contrary to the Will of God the Father, (as I have already shown
you) so to that of his Son Jesus Christ, as will appear upon these three
following accounts.

1. Because it crosses the very end and design of his Coming into the world,
and is expressly contrary to his Doctrine and Example. 2. Because it is a very
improper way to advance Religion by. And, 3. Such as does not serve their
purpose who make use of it, which is, To gain Proselytes to their Cause.
1. I say, It crosses the very end, etc. For as God the Father was not in the
1 King. 19. 11, 12.
whirlwind, but in the still voice; so his Son's coming into the world is said
to be like rain coming down into a fleece of Psalm. 72. 6.
wool, scarce to be heard; He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man
hear his voice in the streets, says the Prophet Esaias, speaking of Christ, chapter
42. v. 1. His behavior was, to be mild and gentle, not boisterous and
clamorous; such a way becoming Him who was the Prince of Peace, whose business
it was to reconcile men to God and to themselves, and who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. He tells us indeed in Luke 9. 56.
one place, that, He came not to send peace on earth, but a sword, Matt. 10.
34. or as it is in St. Luke, chapter 12. v. 51. divisions; yea, and such divisions
as should set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against
her mother, v. 35. that is, He foresaw what would be the event of his coming,
That the nearest Relations would hate and persecute one another to death upon
the score of Religion; That different pretenses thereunto would separate those
whom nature and blood had most closely linked together; That none here would
pardon less, than they who were by nature obliged to love most; And we see how
sharp-edged this Sword has always proved, even to the cutting asunder all
natural and civil ties and obligations, so that a man's greatest foes are many
times those of his own household. Now this was no natural, but an accidental
effect of Christ's coming, and of that Doctrine He brought with Him, whose
proper character it is to be pure, and then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. mild and
gentle, not, like the Law, a killing letter, much less like Draco's Laws writ
in blood, but admirably fitted for the perfecting men's Natures and the
sweetning of their Tempers and Spirits, and calculated for the peace and order
of the World; which how inconsistent it is with those violent ways of
Excommunications and Murders some Men practice against such as differ from
them never so little in opinion in matters of Religion, I cannot see. Nor
indeed can I find any thing in the Gospel, in the Doctrine or Practice either
of Christ Himself, or of his Apostles, to authorize or countenance any such
violent proceedings, but enough to condemn them. When an enemy had sown Tares
in the field, and some overhasty people were presently for plucking them up,
our Lord we see forbids them, and will have them both grow up together till the
harvest, when God should make the separation; Matthew. 13. 28, 29, 30. So when
the Disciples would call down fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, who
were both Schismatics and Heretics, He checks them for it, telling them, That
they knew not what Spirit they were of; Luke 9. 54, 55. That however the doing
so might suit with the firey temper of Elias, it did not at all with that of
his Disciples. It is not for Christianity to assume a power to inflict itself;
nor is it commissionated to plant it self with violence, or to destroy all that
refuse or oppose it. If it be to be writ in blood, it is in that of its own
Confessors only, as it was in that of its Author, whose practice was as mild
and gentle herein as his doctrine. For when some of his Disciples being
scandalized at the eating of his flesh, went back and walked no longer with
Him, (which was direct Apostasy,) does He use any menaces or force to reduce
them? No; He leaves them to themselves, and only cautions his Disciples to
beware of their pernicious Example by gently expostulating with them, Will ye
also go away? Joh. 6. 67. And when He afterward sent out those his Disciples to
convert the World, He sent them forth as Lambs among Wolves, Luke 10. 3. which
does not found like a Commission to tear and worry them that would not come
into the flock, but rather to be torn and worried by them. Their Commission was
to preach the Cross, not to inflict it. And when any City would not receive
their Doctrine, all they were to do in such a case was only to shake off the
dust of their feet against it; That is, to suffer nothing of theirs to cleave
unto them, to have nothing more to do with them, but to leave them to their
own ways and to God's judgment. How well our Modern Apostles have copied out
this Doctrine and these Examples, I leave it to all the World to judge. Surely
those qualifications, which St. Paul requires in the servants of the Lord, not
to strive, but to be gentle unto all men, and in meekness to instruct those
that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. are not to be found in them who now
call themselves Converters, who carry the Gospel in one hand, and a Sword in
the other; That if Men will not receive That into their Heads, They shall be
sure to have This sheathed in their Bowels.

2. But this, as it is a most unchristian, so is it a very improper way to
advance Religion by; it being impossible to settle That by violence, which
cannot be forced; and where it is forced, it is not Religion. The Understandings
and Wills of Men are not to be bound with the same fetters their Bodies are.
The Apostle indeed says, There is a way of bringing every thought into
Captivity to the obedience of Christ; but he tells us withal, that the
weapons, by which that victory is obtained, are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4. One
may as well invade and think to get a conquest over thoughts, and chain up a
mind, as force a Man to will against his own will. Not whole Armies can besiege
ones Reason, nor Cannons batter his Will. Religion is seated in those
Faculties, to which outward force can have no access. The Sword has no
Propriety that way; Silence it may, but it can never convince, and rather breed
an aversion and abhorrence of that Religion whose first address is in blood and
rapine. For,

3ly, It is certain that all compulsion here gains nothing to any Cause, but
the infamy of those rigours that are used to promote it. Outward force may make
a Man more a Hypocrite than he was before, but never more a Convert; It may tie
up his Tongue or his Hand, not change his Heart; make him perhaps dissemble his
Opinion, but never constrain him to alter it. And what is the advantage that is
got by such Proselytes, who shall still bear an Enemies heart toward those who
force them outwardly to profess what inwardly they abhor, and to be of their
Church when they cannot make them of their Religion? I do not think that those
Christianos nuevos, those new Christians, as they call them in Spain; That is,
such as the Inquisition has made Christians of Mahumetans, do much love the
Religion they turn to, and much less those who turn them to it by employing
Fire and Faggor. These indeed are undeniable Evidences of cruelty in them that
use them, but slender Motives of credibility to beget belief in them that
suffer by them. And this way will not fail to multiply enemies, instead of
procuring friends to any Cause, though never so good. For as Persecution to the
true Church is but as the Pruning to the Vine, which gains in its bulk and
fruit what it loses in a few luxuriant branches lopt off; so even Heresies
themselves thrive by being pruned too; the cropping of these Weeds does but
serve to thicken them; the blood of the Devil's Martyrs proves as much the Seed
of his Synagogue, as that of Gods Saints does of his Church; and the destroying
of the Persons of Heretics, supposing them such, does but add life to their
Cause. And indeed what encouragement have Men to receive a Religion from their
Oppressors? or how can they think that they, who torture and kill their Bodies,
are really concerned to save their Souls? And while the felicities of another
World are recommended to them only by such as do deprive them of all in this,
we cannot wonder at their little appetite to embrace them, or to find the
oppressed Indians protest against that Heaven where the Spaniards are to be
their Cohabitants. Add we to all this, That such Motives as these can never
demonstrate Truth. For how successful soever their force proves, yet it cannot
prove the Doctrines true. For by that argument it proves the Religion, it goes
about to settle, true; It proves that that which it destroys was true before,
while it prevailed and had the power. And then such a testimony is given to the
truth of Christianity which Heathenism had before, and Turcism has since. And
thus you see how all violent ways to propagate the Faith, cannot be acceptable
to God the Father, as being directly contrary to his Nature and Will; nor yet
to his Son, since they cross the very end and design of his coming into the
World, his Doctrine and Practice; Fly in the very face of Religion it self, and
can never serve their turn who make use of it: From all which it follows, That
they who pursue such ways, neither know God the Father, nor his Son Jesus
Christ.

I know what is commonly said by some who practice this way of compulsion, in
excuse and defense of it; That many who serve God at first by compulsion, may
come after to serve him freely; That these sorts of Conversions do not augment
the number of Saints, but they diminish that of Heretics; That although some
among them may prove bad Converts themselves, yet they have Families to be
saved, that their Children may make good Christians; and though the stock be
naught, yet the branches may be sanctified. But the answer hereunto is easy;
That neither good Intents nor casual Events, can justify unreasonable
Violence; which instead of rendering Men orthodox Christians, makes them rather
Atheists, Hypocrites and Formalists: For being constrained to practice against
Conscience, they soon come at last to lose all Conscience: Nor are Men to owe
the Salvation of Souls to any unwarrantable proceedings, because they must not
do any present evil in prospect of any future good: This was another gross
error of these persons in the Text, as I am now to show you in the next place.

2. The Jews here thought their Zeal to the Temple, and their Ritual
Observances so invincibly meritorious, that no crime could defeat it. And we
see how apt many Christians are to ascribe so much to the force of a good
meaning, as if it were able to bear the stress and load of any sins that can be
laid upon it. A good purpose shall hallow all they do, and make them boldly
rush into the most unchristian practices, in prosecution of what some call, The
good old Cause; others, The Catholic Faith. For how do Men swallow down the
deadliest Poison, Perjury, Sacrilege, Murder, Regicide, and the like, in
confidence of this their preservative, and say grace over the foulest sins! How
many have made themselves Saints upon that account that would never have been
such upon any other! And how much Religion groans under the Reproach of all
those Evils which zeal and good meanings have consecrated, is notorious to all
the World. Men call the overflowing of their gall Religion, and value their
Opinions so high, and their eagerness in abetting them, that they think the
propagating of them so important a service to God, as will justify, all they
do in order to this end. Now not to speak of their Error in the choice of
their Opinions, That of many opposite, one only can be the Right; my present
business shall be to show you, 1. The Impiety, and 2. The Danger of this strong
delusion, in respect of that Malignant influence it has on Practice.

For the clearing of which two things, we are to observe, That to the making an
Action good and warrantable, these three things are requisite: 1. A good
Intention in the Doer. 2. That the Matter of the Action be in it self good; and
3. That it be rightly circumstantiated. For a failure in either of these three
things quite vitiates the whole Action.

1. The first thing necessary to a good Action, is a good Intention in the
Doer. This we learn from Matthew. 6. 22. If thine Eye (that is, thy Intention,
for so Interpreters generally understand it) be single, thy whole Body shall be
full of light. Be the matter of an Action never so good, yet if a Man's aim and
intention in the doing of it be not so, all is stark naught. For, Actus moralis
specificatur ex fine; And, Finis dat speciem in moralibus. And as the End is
the first thing that sets an Agent a working, so is it the last that perfects
its work. Nay, so valuable in the sight of God is a good Intention, wherever
it be found, That as He sometimes prevents an evil Act in him in whom He
discovers a good Intention, as in Abimilech; so does He sometimes reward a good
Purpose, though it proceeds not to act, as in David. It Is true, that a good End
alone does not justify any action; but it is as true that there can be nothing
good or tolerable without it; And although a good meaning does not wholly
excuse, yet an evil one wholly condemns it.

But then, 2dly. Besides a good Intention, two things more are requisite to the
making an Action good. 1. That the Matter of it be such. 2. That it be rightly
circumstantiated.

1. That the Matter thereof be good. For our Intention, as our zeal, must be
always in a good thing. And a thing is Gal. 4. 18.
then good, when it is conformable to that Rule which is the measure of its
goodness, namely God's Will revealed unto us in his Word, which if it condemn
an Action, no Intention, how good soever, can warrant it.

2. That it be duly Circumstantiated; That is, that all necessary circumstances
be found in it. For, bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu; A thing
may be evil upon one circumstance, but it cannot be good but upon All; and
every partial defect in the Object, End, Manner, or other suchlike
circumstances, is sufficient to render the whole action bad; but to make it
good, there must be an universal concurrence of all requisite conditions in
every of these respects.

These principles being taken for granted, (as I think no good Christian will
question the truth of them,) the Conclusion is clear and evident, That no
Intention, how good soever in it self, can make any Action good, where either
the Matter thereof is bad, that is, Repugnant to the revealed Will of God, or
it fails of those necessary circumstances that must concur to its goodness. And
the main Reason hereof is, Because no good purpose can alter the nature of Good
and Evil; It can neither alter the nature nor change the degree of Sin, so as
to make it less in one Man than in another, because the nature of Good and Evil
depends not on Man, but on the Will of God; And the differences between Good
and Evil, and the several degrees of both, do spring from such Conditions as
are intrinsecal to the things themselves, which no outward Respects, much less
men's Opinions, can vary, nor sanctify the use of them. What is evil in some
circumstances, may be good in other; but if the thing be wholly bad in it self,
it can never be made good till there come a cause as great to change the Nature
as to make it. Nor is sin de numero eligibilium; It can neither be chosen for
its own sake, nor in reference to any farther end. E malis minimum, may hold
true in Evils of pain; but in Evils of fault or sin, E malis nullum, is the
Rule. For as there is neither form nor beauty in sin that we should desire it,
so neither any good use we can put it to. For that, Actio peccati non est
Ordinabilis ad bonum finem, is the common Resolution of the Schools. It Is true
indeed that God can, and many times does, order the very sins of Men to a good
end; but that is beyond our skill; nor must we commit any, though accidentally
and in the event it may possibly turn to his glory. We are not to tell a lie,
although through it the truth of God may more abound to his glory; as St. Paul
speaks, Romans 3. 7. And the reason is, because God Himself, whose Will ought to
be our Rule, has expressly forbid us so to do. Will ye speak wickedly for God?
or talk deceitfully for Him? says Job, chapter 13. 7. Will He borrow Patronage to
his Cause from falsehood? Or will he be glorified by those Sins which he
forbids and abhorrs? I find indeed a sort of people in Esaias 66. 5. who when
they hated their Brethren and cast them out for God's name sake, (either out of
their company, as not fit to be conversed with by their lesser Excommunication;
or out of their Synagogue, as deserving V. Hammond on Joh. 9. 22.
to be cut off from the Congregation of the Faithful, by their greater one,)
could wipe off all their crime by saying, The Lord be glorified. But what says
God Himself of them? They have desired their own ways, and their Soul
delights in their Abominations; They did evil before mine eye, and chose that
in which I delighted not; ver. 3, 4. That is, they did their own Will, not
mine; and pretended to advance my Glory in such a way as themselves fancied,
but I never allowed of. God will as soon part with his Glory as have it thus
promoted. With Him it is much the same thing, to be made the End as the Author
of Sin; and whether we do good to a bad end, as the Pharisees did, or evil to
a good one, with these in the Text, we are equally guilty in the sight of God,
who will be sure to punish us even for our good but unwarrantable Intentions;
As He did King Saul for reserving the best of the flocks of Ameleck, which he
had devoted to utter destruction, though it were for a Sacrifice; And King
Uzzah for putting forth his hand to support the tottering Ark, (out of a very
good intention, as he thought,) because that was no part of his, but of the
Levites office. Does St. Paul justify himself for having persecuted the Church
of God, though with a very good intention? So far was he from that, that he
calls himself the chiefest of sinners 1 Timothy 1. 5.
for the Commissions of that time, wherein he says, he served God with a Act.
23. 1.
pure conscience, and did what he thought in his heart he was obliged to do;
His good conscience could not then, in his account, sanctify his actings, nor
make his bloody hands undefiled; 'Twas blasphemy and persecution for all 'twas
Conscience; I was before, says he* a blasphemer and a persecuter, and
injurious; v. 13. So that a conscientious, or, which is here the same thing, a
well-meaning Man, may for all that be the chiefest of sinners; nor will it
avail any one to shroud his soul actions under handsome intentions. What more
abominable than Idolatry? or what more acceptable service to God than to
destroy it? And yet those Christians who in a preposterous Zeal, and, as they
thought, a good Intention, brake down Heathen Images, and deservedly suffered
for it, were never thought fit to be received by the Church into its
Martyrology. The persons here had as good a pretense as could be; it was to do
God service. What better Intention? And yet they excommunicated and killed
Christ's Disciples; What Action could be worse? Are they thankt for their
pains? Nay, are they not therefore charged by our Lord with gross Ignorance,
with not knowing the Father nor Himself?

This may suffice to show the Impiety of this opinion, That a present Evil may
be done in prospect of a future Good: Give me leave now, in a word, to show you
also the Mischief of it, the bad Influence it has on practice. It is impossible
for me to tell you what destruction Psalm. 46. 8.
it has brought, and daily brings, upon the Earth; How many Churches it has
devoured, how many Countries depopulated, how it has filled the World with
blood and rapine, and must of necessity still confound it, by begetting and for
ever perpetuating religious feuds and quarrels among Christians. For while each
Party thinks he has God on his side, and that he has as good a right to his
Opinion as he that opposes it has to his, which is a strong persuasion that
he is in the right till he be convinced that he is in the wrong; There can be
no end of quarrels and divisions. For this gives all men an equal right to
persecute as many as differ from them in Religion. For by the same reason that
I have a good opinion of my persuasion, and call it true, because I think it
so; Another, who is as strongly convinced of the truth of his, may justly and
upon equal pretense do the like. It matters not where the truth or error lies,
the mischief is still the same; For so long as men continue in such a
persuasion, be it right or wrong, they will be sure to act vigorously according
to it; And it is certain that they who use bad means to compass a good end
against others, do arm them with the same power, resolution and justice to
employ the like, when ever occasion serves, against themselves.

And thus you see both the Impiety and the Mischief of pious but misguided
Intentions; which though not allowable in ordinary practice, yet in cases
extraordinary some think may be justified by that common Maxim, That All great
Actions have aliquid Iniqui, something bad in them, which public advantage
afterward makes amends for. How far this may go in State Policy, I know not;
but I am sure it will not pass for good Divinity, if our Savior's word here
may be taken, or St. Paul's Rule be good, Romans 3. 8. That we must not do evil
that good may come of it; Not any the least Moral Evil for the greatest either
Temporal or Spiritual Good whatsoever. Which Rule some finding too strict and
severe for them, and those designs they carry on, as utterly inconsistent
therewith, usually plead the Examples of some holy Men in Scripture, who having
served God by strange violences of fact, have for his glory laid hold on
Instruments not fit to be used by a Christian: As for example; Jacob's telling
a downright lie to get his Father's blessing; David's making use of Hushai as
a spy; Elias and Jehu's causing a sacrifice to be proclaimed to Baal with
intent to destroy that Idol and its Worshippers, and the like Instances of
humane frailty, which God was pleased to overlook and pardon in those that did
them, but never intended them as Patterns for us to imitate. Many things have
been done by good men in their heat, which had God's approbation after they
were done, but not his Law to countenance the doing them, and therefore can be
no certain Rule for us to go by.

From what has hitherto been said, we may now perceive what ill Commentators
they are of those words of our Savior ( Compel them to come in) who put this
sense upon them, by threats and torments force them into the Church. Than which
Doctrine nothing certainly can be more unreasonable but the way of excusing it
by a good meaning, a fair pretense of advancing God's glory by any, though
never so bad means; as if God would be served by taking in the Devil into his
service. Surely as the wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God; so
neither can any good end of Jam. 1. 20.
his, if carried on by bad instruments, advance his glory. He may make great
allowances to the miscarriages of sincere, but he will never do it to the
errors of such wicked Intentions, as are besides his Commission, yea and
against his express Will and Command.

Now as this was the Jews and Heathens way, so I could heartily wish that many
Christians did not follow it. The former, to wit, the Jews, had still recourse
to their Excommunications, and both Jews and Gentiles fell to killing Christ's
servants out of equal Zeal and pious Intention no doubt; The one, for their
Law; and the other, for their blind Superstition. But neither of these two ways
suit with true Christianity. As for Excommunication, which some Men are so apt
immediately to fly to upon every trivial occasion, they do not well siconder
what a dreadful thing it is.

A forestalling of the great-day of Judgment; It is the delivering up of a 1
Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Mat. 18. 17
man to Satan, a declaring him to be as a Heathen-man and a Publican, one that
has nothing to do with the people of God, but is to be cast out of their
Church and Company. Now as this is the last Remedy to reclaim Sinners by; so is
it but rarely to be made use of, and but in cases extraordinary. We do not find
that our Lord Himself ever practiced it, nor any of his Apostles, except St.
Paul, and he but in one Instance. He bids us indeed, Reject an Heretic after
the first and second admonition, Tit. 3. 10. Not presently anathematize, much
less kill him. I would they were even cut off that trouble you, says he, Gal.
5. 12. It was but an I would, I could wish it done. And when himself did it, it
was but to one single person, and that for an enormous crime, Incest; nor was
it done at last, but with much solemnity too, by calling on the name of Christ,
1 Cor. 5. 4. so seldom, even scarce at all, were these spiritual arms employed
even by those who were Boanerges's, Sons of thunder, and surely knew best how
to manage them. And when they did it for the destruction of the flesh, that is,
for the mortifying and destroying the old man (for that only is meant there by
flesh) they did it for the saving of men's souls, That their spirits might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, v. 5. Excommunications are such edge-tools
as will cut their hands who have not skill to manage them, but seldom or never
hurt or hit those at whom they are lanc'd at random. Is it not then strange
that some men should think to approve their Christianity by ruining that of
their Brethren, or to secure themselves of Heaven by keeping others out of it?
Though with these men in the Text they should think it a service to God to kill
men's bodies, methinks they should not think it one to destroy their Souls. How
the Council of Trent can be excused in this particular, I understand not. For
who-ever looks into the Canons of that Council will find, That as there is
scarce any one there without its Anathema; so that most of them are either for
such matters as cannot deserve so heavy a Censure, or for such plain
Scripturetruths as deserve none; being some of them of Christ's own
Institution. Nor are these Church-weapons for the most part Bruta Fulmina; They
carry a fatal Train after them; Deposition, Absolving Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance to their natural and lawful Sovereigns, who are thereupon
abandoned to whosoever shall think it fit to kill them, follow close upon them.
These Thunderclaps are not without their Thunderbolts, which will be sure to
do Execution one way or other, either on men's Souls or on their Bodies, if
not on both. So that when once People are devoted to Hell, all the mischiefs of
the Earth immediately pursue them. The Instance of this Day's intended work is
an evident demonstration of this Truth. For he who was a main Instrument in the
design and management thereof, did at his Examination confess, That Garnet.
his principal motive to this villainous attempt was an Excommunication thundered
out at first by Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth, and kept still on foot by
Sixtus Quintus, which sticking on King James, obliged him in conscience to
attempt the murdering of his Sovereign in obedience to that Bull. And how did
he excuse that Fact? Was it not by his pious intention to promote God's glory
and the good of the Catholic Church? A fit cover for such a foul fact, but
commonly made use of by such as himself was, in justification of the like
wicked practices. St. Paul we see has expressly doomed all those that do so to
no less than eternal Damnation. Romans 3.
But those men and he are not agreed in this point. For should his doctrine be
good, what would then become of all their Piae Frauds, Feigned Legends and
Miracles, Indices Expurgatorii, Equivocations and mental Reservations,
Allowance of common Stews for the preventing unnatural Lusts, that is, of one
Sin to hinder another: For which, and the like, the Catholic defense is the
Catholic cause, and men's pious Intentions; which in case they should prove
never so faulty, yet a little rectifying of them will rectify all that is
amiss in them. A piece of spiritual Chemistry this, of late Invention, which
can extract the finest gold out of the basest metal, to guild over all the
Villainies which the heart of man can devise, or his hand execute. I know not
whether any can really think that by such vile artifices they can do God any
service; But I am apt to believe that they rather think to do themselves one,
and that it is the same humane policy, not to give it a worse name, and not
Religion, that acts such men, which did these persons in the Text. But if any
men do in good earnest think they do God any service thereby, It is such a one
as our Lord Himself here flatly tells them neither his Father nor He will ever
thank them for.

But since it will be in vain for me to tell them so who will not take Christ's
own word for it; I shall turn my discourse to you who now hear me, and for the
preventing any such dangerous error in you, leave some few Rules of caution
and direction with you, and so conclude.

1. And the first shall be concerning your Zeal, That you be as careful and
industrious to employ it in a good as some do theirs in a bad cause, but with
this proviso, That your Zeal be a right and well-tempered one. A right one it
will be, if it be always in a good thing; Gal. 4. 18.
And well-tempered, if it be according to knowledge, Romans 10. 2. St. Paul's
rules both. If your Zeal be not in a good thing, it will do the same mischief
that fire does out of its proper place, the hearth; And if it have not light to
see its way by, it will prove very dangerous company in the dark, and lead you
into bogs and precipices. There is nothing so pernicious to man as a blind
frantic zeal, which instead of eating them up who are possessed with it, eats
up God's people, as if they were bread; Nor is there any thing so injurious to
God, it being common for people in their indiscreet and furious zeal for God,
to run farthest from Him, and either to break the two Tables of his Law with
Moses, or at least, to dash them one against the other. And can we think they
should ever do God service, who know not what they do themselves? May not he
say to such Zealots what King Achish did of David, 1 Samuel 21. 15. Have I need
of mad men? And does not too much ignorant zeal much more than too much
learning make men so? Surely there is no madness to the religious one, which,
like the Devil in the possessed man in the Gospel, casts them sometimes into
the fire, and sometimes into the water, that is, into contrary excesses and
extravagances, scattering mischief wherever it goes, turning the World into a
Chaos, and the Church into an Acheldama; while Melancholy is made the seat of
Religion by some, and Frenzy by others, what can follow thence but confusion?
And therefore we ought to have a special care that our Zeal be guided by
knowledge and discretion, lest we over-shoot our selves with these men here,
and when we put Christ's servants out of our Synagogues, and kill them too into
the bargain, we become so foolish as with them also to think we shall thereby
do God service.

2. Our next caution must be, that we be well assured of the soundness of the
Principles we act by. What a dangerous thing it is to be herein mistaken our
Savior tells us, Matt. 6. 23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness? that is, If thy mind and conscience be defiled, Tit. 1.
15.
if thy Judgment be corrupt, how great and dangerous will those mistakes prove
that mislead thee! For the farther thou shall go on in thy wrong way, the more
shall thou be out of the right one; And when thou art once out, it will be
impossible for thee to get into it again, so long as those false Guides, which
are as so many Satan's standing at thy right hand, still prompting and tempting
thee to evil, shall remain in thee. He that commits a sin by principles has
nothing to retrieve him from his error while he retains such principles, and
as long as he is under the power and guidance of ill ones, they will not only
dangerously expose, but highly encourage him to evil, by turning the greatest
crimes into merit, and making him hope to gain Heaven by such practices as
directly lead him to Hell. The Physicians maxim, That an error in the first
concoction is never to be mended, holds as true in Religion as in Nature. And
therefore it highly concerns us, that our first choice here be right, lest we
set out amiss, and offend God most, even there where we think most to please
Him.

3. The last Use I shall draw from my Text is an Use of Direction or Trial, how
to judge of the Truth and Goodness of a Religion, and that is, by the Mildness
and Harmlesness thereof. This is the proper Chraracter of true Christian
Religion; It has all of the Dove, and nothing of the Vulture in it. That which
breathes nothing but Curses and Slaughters, to be sure is not of God the
Father, nor of His Son. I think there is no true Member of our Church that
understands his Religion well and the nature of it, but would be willing to
submit it to this Test; But I can scarce believe that they who talk so much of
the Cruelty of ours would be content to put the Truth of their Religion upon
this issue. We need but compare Q. Mary and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns to see
which of the two Religions they were of was the mildest. No fire and faggot to
be seen in the latter's time; Even that bloody Butcher Bonner, who showed no
mercy to any Protestant, found his share in hers; He was only put under a
little restraint, but such a mild one as differed very little from liberty, and
ended his days in peace. I am sure that the design of this day was no good
argument of the good nature of that Religion which the Designers professed, no
more than a standing Inquisition is. Many who are persecuted abroad for their
Religion run to us for shelter and protection; But we send out none hence to
complain of our like usage toward them. Some indeed are so confident as to deny
there is any such thing, though many of us see it done abroad, and whole shoals
of suffering people daily flocking hither do themselves tell us so, and should
they not, their very wants and miseries would lowdly proclaim it. But that
which seems strangest to us is, to hear some of our brethren, or at least such
as pretend to be of the same Religion with us, talk so much of that Egyptian
slavery they have been rescued from. I think there are no footsteps of any
Bricks or Lime kills yet remaining amongst us; Nor do I believe that we were
ever such severe. Taskmasters to any of them as they were to us All when it
was our chance to be under them. Their little finger then was heavier upon us
than all our loins ever were to them. Those very people who now cry out so much
on former Persecution, may remember, if they please, That there was a time when
themselves were the Persecutors, and we the Sufferers. The only difference
between them and us is this, That what they did was against Law, and what we
did was by it. In a word, Our answer to both these sorts of men is this, That
as we never had any hand in the business of this Day, so neither in that of the
30th of January. Now if the innocent Doctrine of our Church and our constant
practice suitable thereunto will not sufficiently plead for us, we have then no
other Apology left us but that of St. Paul in the like case, With us it is 1
Cor. 4. 3, 4.
a very small thing that we should be judged of you or of man's judgment: He
that judges us, and you too, is the Lord, who will, one day, make manifest the
counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have praise of God. In the mean
time let us keep to our Rule, Do all indeed to the glory of God, but do it in
such a way as Himself will have it done by. We are to look to our way, God will
take care of his own concerns. It Is high presumption in us to go about to
teach Him how He should be obeyed. If we will serve Him acceptably, Let us do
it according to His own will and prescription. Then shall we do Him service
indeed, and when our great Master shall come and find us so doing, He will
then, to our unspeakable comfort, say unto us, Well done ye good and faithful
servants, enter ye into the joy of your Lord, Which he bring us unto, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON ON 1 COR. XV. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are
of all men most miserable.
THAT all men have an apprehension of another Life (which Tully calls,
Saeculorum quoddam Tusc. Qu. lib. 1.
augurium futurorum, A kind of presage of a future world) is hereby evident,
That they so infinitely desire and labor to extend their memory beyond the
limits of this, to make their fame outlast their persons, to survive themselves
in their Issue, or in an Inscription, and that sometimes engraven on the very
houses of corruption, their Sepulchers, fancying a remainder of Life even in
the abodes of death; or, which is yet stranger, to perpetuate their fame by
their very infamy: So dreadful a thing to Man is the very thought of
Annihilation. And by how much stronger men's apprehensions have been of another
Life; by so much has their contempt of this been the greater. This Reditur^
parcere vitae. Lucan. of the Druids.
made some Heathens so prodigal of a Life which in their opinion should return;
And as it made them valiant, so has it in all Ages made Christians more. It
brought them cheerfully out into the Field, and these more cheerfully to the
Stake. And indeed as the meditation of death is a good remedy against the fear
of it to those who look beyond it; so if it bound up men's thoughts, and shut
up their prospect within the grave, if it be considered as ultima rerum linea,
that, beyond which there remains nothing, not as a passage to another Life, but
an utter close of this, it cannot but fill their Souls with the greatest horror
and amazement. Now nothing can well remove this but the Doctrine of
Christianity, and it is the great scope and design of it to do so. It
represents death to us not as an annihilation, but a change; not as a ruin,
but a dissolution; not as a bare privation of this life, but a door to another:
So that when we dye now, we leave nothing behind us but our mortality; part
with nothing but our corruption; nor are we so much buried in our graves, as
laid up, they being but so many beds from whence we are to be rouzed; when
Christ, who raised himself, shall raise us up, he who is the Head draw us after
Him, who are the members; without which blessed hope we should still remain in
the chambers of death, the pit should not only swallow us up, but shut her
mouth upon us; our graves should devour our hopes with our selves, and we
should not so much dye, as in St. John's expression, Rev. 2. 23.
be slain with death. But now since Christ has abolished death, and 2 Timothy 1.
10.
brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel; now that he has not
only discovered but imparted it to us, the face of things is quite changed;
That which we dreaded before, we now expect; what was once a threat, is now
become a promise; our greatest hope is in that which was our greatest fear; If
death affright us as natural men, it comforts us as Christians; If we be its
Prisoners, we are the Prophet Zachary's Zach. 9. 12
prisoners of hope; It does but the office of a gentle Jailer, only unlock our
Prison door, to let us out thence into everlasting Mansions.

Of all Articles then of the Creed, there is none more comfortable than that of
the Resurrection to good Christians, nor any so important even to their
tranquillity in this life, whose miseries are so great and whose satisfactions
so thin and empty, that without hope of some release from them, they should be
more condemned to live than to dye; Their life it self would even kill them;
They should sink under the perpetual apprehension of a future nothing, hate
life and still fear death, that is, not enjoy themselves here, and be afraid of
losing themselves for ever hereafter. Upon which score it is that our Apostle
here is so earnest and so concerned in asserting the necessity of a
Resurrection, which Heathens and Sadduces Act. 23. 8.
utterly denied, and many weak and seduced Christians scarce believed (some
affirming it already past, others turning 2 Timothy 2. 18.
it into a mere Allegory.) The former he labors to convince by reasons fetched
from nature; The latter here in the Text by an argument ad hominem drawn from
the particular interest of Christians, who of all others should most suffer, if
their hopes should determine with this life: A sad and uncomfortable
Consequence would then follow to All, but a most absurd one also to these;
Others should then be miserable, but these of all others most miserable; For,

If in this life, etc. we Christians, we Apostles especially and Ministers of
Christ, should be of all men most miserable.

In which words you may observe,

1. A false hope, a hope in Christ in this life only, with its effect, misery,
and greater misery to Christians than to there is, who, upon such a supposition,
are pronounced of all men most miserable. 2. A true hope, a hope in Christ not
in this life only, with its effect also, Happiness. For if the other make its
owners miserable and most miserable; Then this, by the Law of contraries, happy
and most happy; Happy in this world as well as in the other; Though there most,
because there is most happiness; yet here too, because here is some.
The first hope and its effects are more plainly expressed; the second and its
effects as necessarily implied, and both of them together make up the full
contents of the Text.

I shall not consider the Parts so minutely as I have proposed them, but draw
out the substance of them into these three following Propositions which
naturally result from the Text.

1. That they who have no other hope but what this life affords them, are
miserable. 2. That upon supposition of no better hope, all good Christians, but
the Ministers of Christ especially, should be not only miserable, but of all
other men most miserable. 3. That there is another Life to come, the
expectation whereof makes them who have it most happy both here and hereafter.
Of these in their order. And first,

That they who have no other hope Part. I.
but --

And indeed how can they be otherwise, since this life is so? Our early tears
prognosticate our future unhappiness, and we come into this world with as much
sadness as we go out of it with horror. Some have cursed the day Job 3.
of their birth, with Job; others have not thought fit to allow that Title, but
to those days wherein Martyrs have suffered. Some Philosophers have affirmed,
Cic. Tusc. Qu. lib. 1.
that man's chiefest happiness had been not to have been born at all; his next,
to have dyed as soon as born. Nay the Scripture it self represents our Blessed
Savior groaning when he raised up Lazarus from the dead, for this reason say
some, because he saw himself as it were obliged by his Sisters tears to fetch
him back from the happiness of the other to the miseries of this wretched life.
Nor can I much wonder at their fancy who have conceited that our Souls were
thrust into these our Bodies as into so many prisons, since those which are
most conveniently, are but ill lodged there, our Bodies at best, being but so
many hospitals, if our Souls be any better; for as diseases plague the one, so
passions and lusts as much torment the other. And here should I declame on the
miseries of humane life, the common beaten theme even of those who know no
other, 'twere easy to be Eloquent. But not to speak of those accidents which
befall it, we need not charge our Miseries on our Fortune, we owe them to our
very Nature. Every man is a several Enoch, miserable by his very frame and
make, and 'twere needless to borrow arguments from any thing but himself to
prove him such, or go about to demonstrate what he feels. His own Experience
shows him wretched in what he suffers, and Reason will so even in what he
enjoys. The Evil he endures sadly afflicts him, and the Good he possesses does
not much affect him; His Sorrows are many and great, and his Joys but few and
small; Those come unmixt, These at best but alloyed; so that Man is wholly
miserable, and but half happy. I shall not trouble my self to prove that he is
miserable in what he suffers, for he finds himself so; but, which I conceive
more proper to my present purpose, endeavor to demonstrate, that the things of
this life, were they as high as fancied, could never create any true
satisfaction, and consequently must leave a Man to misery, even in that
condition wherein he takes himself to be most happy. And this will appear upon
a threefold account. 1. Because they are unsatisfactory. 2. Because not
lasting. 3. Because, upon supposition of no other life, the continual fear of
death would render the enjoyments of them most imperfect.

1. Because they are unsatisfactory, as not 1. bearing any proportion or
fitness to the Soul. They are material, and This spiritual. The Soul of Man
being a substance of unbounded Desires, can never be pleased but with what is
infinite. 2. And this dissatisfaction we receive from things here below,
appears then most when we come to a trial: Our Enjoyment best confutes our
Opinion of them; then it is we find that they are bigger in our eye than in
themselves; in our desire, than in our review of them; and that our
expectations are far larger than our fruitions. These Apples of Sodom show fair
and beautiful, but the least touch turns them into dust, and presently
discovers all their painted beauty to be but Appearance and Illusion. 3. Add we
to this, that there can be no surer mark of the dissatisfaction we find in the
things of this life, than that they presently cloy us. Our continued enjoyment
of the best of them tires us out, as Happiness is said to have done Polycrates,
and Fortune Galba; We must be beholding to their variety for their comfort, nay
to some evil to make us relish any good in them. This is that which Heathens
themselves have expressed in those Metamorphoses of their Gods; thereby
intimating, that great Persons, tired out with their own Happiness, have been
forced to descend to the Actions of their Inferiors; to disguise themselves
sometimes, to ease themselves of the very burden of their Honors, and lay
aside that Grandeur which importuned them: so that the perpetual presence of
the same objects is scarce to be endured, though they tire us no otherwise than
as they are always the same. And now let Philosophy tell us there is no vacuity
in Nature; Divinity and our own experience will assure us, that there is
nothing else in the things of it.

2. But then secondly, Were the things of this life never so full in themselves
and satisfactory, yet, being not lasting, all the satisfaction we find in them
can be but as they are, short and fading too. What was said of Drunkenness,
That it is but a short and merry Madness, is as true of all those brittle
Comforts which carnal Men have in outward things; they are no better than one
day's vanities; born this light, and not seen the next; things of so swift and
dispatching a nature, that they just last long enough to have it pronounced of
them that they have been; having two characters stamped upon them by St.
Augustine, that they make wretched and forsake, these two glassy properties,
that they are glittering and breaking; like some pieces of dry wood that
imitate light, to whom belong these poor accomplishments, to shine and to be
rotten. And as these things are short, so are men too; They forsake men, and
men must leave them; As the fashion of this world still passes away, so those
that 2 Cor. 7. 31.
are in it; These earthly Tabernacles vanish like enchanted Castles; and they
that dwell in them; The Inhabitants decay as well as their Houses, and both, if
no other life, must for ever lie buried in their own rubbish.

3. Which sad apprehension of a future Annihilation, is the third thing which,
of all other, makes a Man miserable, and represents Death most terrible.
Annihilation is a thing of so dismal an aspect, that some prefer a bad being to
none, and think it better to be for ever miserable, than for ever not at all to
be. Now he that looks upon death not as a change, but as an irreparable ruin,
can never taste the joys of life; the constant apprehension of this future
nothing, makes every thing to him as nothing; That bitter pill shall still
sour his delights more than the want of one surly Jews knee did Haman's
felicity. What pleasure can that Malefactor take in any thing of this world,
who every minute expects his Execution? Or what relish can that man find in the
choicest delicacies of Nature, who, with Damocles, sits at the Table with a
Sword hanging by a little thread, ready to fall with its point upon his head?
Every morsel to such a person is gall. It Is so with him that sees his pompous
Scene of Greatness waited on by a fatal Catastrophe. And therefore Tully
speaking as a right natural Man, is plain when he tells us, Mortis timor tollit
omnem vitoe jucunditatem. This was a sad Tolling-bell to the triumphing
Emperor, Hominem te esse memento; as it is to him that lives like a God in a
kind of All Sufficiency of outward enjoyments, that he must dye like a Man, nay
like the Beast that perishes. Such a persuasion would make a Socrates look
pale at the sight of the Hemlock, in spite of all those Cordials his
Philosophy could furnish him with; and indeed it were easy to prove, that all
those remedies it affords to abate the terror of death, are very ineffectual,
and the Philosophers themselves but miserable Comforters, and that, upon
supposition of no other life to come, that so famous saying of Solon, That no
man was happy till dead, would rather give him a place among the greatest fools
than wise men of his time; and that part of Roman Valor so much magnified, for
men to offer violence to themselves, would, no doubt, appear as full of Madness
to a natural Man, if well considered, as it does of Impiety to a Christian, if
by depriving himself of his being, he must for ever put himself out of a
capacity of any future enjoyment.

By these considerations you may now perceive how miserable that person needs
must be who confines his hope to the things of this life, so unsatisfactory, so
brittle, so perishing in their use as he that uses them too, especially when a
man is persuaded he must shortly so perish as for ever not to be. Such a man is
most unhappy in his misery, because no prospect of a better condition can
lessen or alleviate it; and as miserable too in his fancied happiness, because
at best it is very low and but half possessed; miserable in what he suffers now,
but much more in what he expects hereafter: In a word, such a one is most
miserable in his misery, and cannot at all be happy in his happiness, because
he imagines a time coming, when he shall be neither miserable nor happy, but
eternally nothing.

II. If this then be the condition of Part. II.
a mere natural Man; then certainly that of a Christian is yet more miserable,
if his hope also be in this life only; Which is the second Observation. If we
consider what God's Saints have in all ages endured, and must continually
expect, we shall find that out of Hell none have suffered more. For proof
hereof, I need send you but to 1 Cor. 4. or rather to the 11th to the Hebrews,
where the bare recital St. Paul makes of their sufferings would fright us, nor
can our ears well bear what they endured. If any misfortune befell the Roman
State, then presently, Christiani ad Leones. If 1 King. 18. 17.
Israel be afflicted, then Elias must be the troubler of it. Man is born to
troubles Job 5. 7.
as the sparks fly upward, says Job; but the good Christian is engaged to more
than the Man is born to. It Is that he must expect; if he be to receive a
hundredfold in this time, it is with perfecutions: He that will live godly must
Mar. 10. 30
suffer them, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And, In this world ye shall have
trouble, says Christ, Joh. 16. 33. Such a man's profession is scandalous, and
his example odious. For not being of the World, to be sure the World will hate
him. Which as it is true of all good Christians, so of Christ's Ministers
especially. As they have a double portion of God's Spirit, so of afflictions.
If others be chastned with Whips, then these with Scorpions. For besides their
common profession, the nature of their office will expose them to troubles.
They that convince the world of sin, shall stir up its malice; and while they
defy the powers of darkness, inevitably procure their hatred.

And here, for the better making good my assertion, that Christians of all
other men are most miserable, I shall premise these two things. 1. That the
stronger men's apprehensions are of evil, the quicker the sense of them. 2.
That the higher their hopes, the greater their misery in the disappointment of
those hopes. For,

First, The apprehension, if strong and active, ever gives an edge and sting to
misery. The soundest body is most sensible of pain; and the quickest reason of
misfortune. Expectation and apprehension heighten Evils; the first anticipates,
and the second exasperates them. Now these two are highest in Christians. For
whereas wicked Men, who are so immersed in the things of this life, that they
scarce give themselves leisure to think of those of another, do far less
apprehend them: Christians who suffer their thoughts to dwell upon such
unpleasing objects, are most sensible of them, and that wrath of God which may
justly seize upon all offenders; and consequently they suffer these terrors
with much more troubled minds. And without question the keenness of Christ's
apprehension of what sin deserved was a high aggravation of what he suffered.
In which respect Christians also are more unhappy than the most brutish men,
yea than the beasts that perish. For whereas these feel their misery when it
comes, but do not anticipate it; those shall do what the Devils deprecated,
continually torment themselves before the time, and but with imaginary Evils,
if there be no such thing as a Hell; Mortality and corruption would then make
unreasonableness its self a privilege, and the Atheist would in this life be
far happier than the best Christian, and still happier than he is, if he could
bring himself to have as little reason, as he has religion. There is no doubt,
but that (supposing no other life) his enjoyments here would be so much the
greater, as his fears were less. Thus the Hog makes good cheer in a tempest,
while Men make vows and prayers; he is secure, while the Philosopher looks pale
and affrighted, and owes that tranquillity to his stupidity which the others
Philosophy and Reason shall but disturb. It Is certain that still as a man's
apprehensions of another life have been less, his enjoyment of this has ever
been more free and full. The Epicure who denied a God, or at least his
Providence, did little trouble himself with his Anger; while he fancied such a
Deity as would not disturb men's pleasures, so he might peaceably enjoy his
own; himself became as voluptuous as that God he made, and so 'twas his whole
business to create himself an imaginary Paradise, while he thought there was no
real one. This made such persons give themselves over to all licentiousness;
for their Principles being loose, their Lives could not be strict; while their
opinions were so low of the Soul, their care could not be but great for their
Bodies; The Immortality of the Soul once denied, the concerns for it could not
be much, it being not probable that such men should please themselves with a
pretense of virtue, who denied the future rewards of it. And from such premises
that conclusion here mentioned by St. Paul Ver. 32.
could not but follow; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye. It is but
reasonable to imagine that they who thought they should dye like beasts, should
live like them; husband that life the best they could, which should never
return when once gone, and make it as pleasant as they saw 'twas short. Which,
if there were no other life to come, was, no doubt, a rational course and the
highest wisdom. And this supposed, The Children of this World must needs be
wiser than the Children of Light; Martha's choice much better than Mary's; That
Cardinal who said he would not change his part in Paris for that in Paradise,
appear as wise as we can imagine him Atheistical; and those men's profession,
Malachi 3. That it is a vain thing to serve the Lord, and little profit to be
found in keeping of his Ordinances, were to be looked upon as the highest
reason; The true Christian should be of all other the most unprofitable
servant; To be virtuous and to be vicious would be all one, or rather, to be
virtuous would be but a trouble and a check to us, nothing else but a subtle
invention to debar our selves of the benefit of the good things of this world,
when no better were to be expected.

2. The second thing I laid down in order to the proving the Christian more
miserable than all other men, upon supposition of no future state, is this;
That the higher men's hopes are, the greater their misery in their
disappointment. If hope, but deferred, vexes the Soul; then hope, utterly
frustrated, must needs confound it. Which is so true, that the higher we rise
in our expectations, the greater must our fall be when we find them defeated.
Now no profession bids higher than Christianity. It bids the poorest beggar
look upon himself as a King, one born to a Throne, and by filling him with
expectations of a Scepter, which he shall never have, turns that Heaven he
strongly fancies into a fool's Paradise. His fall from that place he so eagerly
aspires to, is like that of Lucifer from that he was once possessed of. He
hopes to shine as a star in the firmament, when his glory must suffer an
eternal Eclipse. Thus does he please himself with an empty title, when he shall
never enjoy the Inheritance; and so in pursuance of a dream shall he lose the
more solid comforts of this life, and let go a substance to catch at shadows of
good things to come, if those good things be only in his Imagination; if that
death, which puts an end to his misery, shall add a greater one, by for ever
depriving him of his fancied enjoyments.

I shall add this one Consideration more, that Christians, as they are more
miserable than other men by their Profession; so do they make themselves yet
more miserable by their severe Principles of Mortification and Self-denial,
debarring themselves of those Comforts and Satisfactions which others freely
enjoy. Thus shall the very Religion they profess persecute them more than
another's rage and envy; and while the World shall deprive them of things
convenient for this life, they shall do more, of things necessary; That shall
deny them things lawful; They themselves things expedient too. If Providence
has given them a plentiful fortune, their Religion shall forbid them the full
and free use of it. They must be poor in spirit in the height of honors; low
in their desires, though never so high in wealth and plenty; Thus in the midst
of enjoyment do they scarce enjoy; their Appetite must be curbed in the
opportunities of its utmost indulgence; and while good things are presented to
their view, they must not reach out their hand to them, neither touch, taste
nor handle, nor use the World, but as if they used it not. In which respect as
they suffer more than others, so shall they enjoy less too, while they lose the
good things here, and fail of those hereafter.

But here some may object; That although there were no God nor life to come,
yet there is so much satisfaction in living according to the rules of right
reason and virtue, that even that consideration should oblige men to do so,
and so make them most happy.

I confess that to live according to the rules of right reason is most
agreeable to humane nature and conducing to happiness in this life, and that
they who keep closest to such rules, should have a considerable temporal
advantage over those that break them. For sobriety, temperance, meekness,
chastity and the like, do no doubt add as well to the pleasure as length of
men's days, and therefore Christians, who best observe and practice those
Virtues, must needs upon this account enjoy themselves most in this World,
although they should fare no better than others in the next. But to this it may
be replied; That besides that the use of Virtue should be very mean, if it
should no otherwise make us happy than beasts are, who contenting themselves
with what merely suffices nature, are more vigorous, and some of them longer
lived than men; It may be questionable, whether a dry Platonical Idea of a
Virtue perishing with our selves or a bare moral complacency in it, might in
the balance of reason weigh down those other more sensual delights which
gratify our lower faculties, or a severe and morose Virtue have charms in it
equal to all those various pleasures which sooth and flatter our appetites;
much more whether a calamitous one, such as that of a Christian usually is, a
virtue still under a cloud, and ever as it were on the rack, persecuted, hated
and afflicted here, and never to be considered hereafter. Far be it from me to
decry moral Virtue, which even Heathens have granted to be a reward to it self,
but surely in the supposed case of annihilation, very short of a full and
complete one, and to cry it up, as some do, to the weakening of our belief and
hope of the Immortality of the Soul, however at first blush it may seem
plausible, is in effect no better than a subtle invention to ruin Virtue by it
self, since it cannot possibly subsist but by the belief and support of another
life. For setting this aside, what would Virtue be but a bare Notion? what but
a gaudy rattle to still and please Children? but of little force to persuade
men to quit a present sensible delight for a bare Philosophical, though never
so taking Speculation. Virtue may carry a big Title, she may appear the fairest
thing of the world and be the least useful, while men expect no other
advantage of their good actions but the content of having done them. It Is what
she brings charms us more than her self, her beauty would have no attractive
had she no dowry; she would soon be laid aside as the most unprofitable thing
of the Earth, did she not give us assurance of some better reward hereafter
than what she now bestows. The joys virtuous actions afford do so far affect us
as they are an earnest of greater, and those satisfactions which spring from
good deeds are so far to be prized as they promise and entitle us to higher
ones. If we are pleased in doing good here it is that we may hereafter find it,
and if we sow in grace, it is because we hope one day to reap in glory. Virtue
without Immortality can never content us, and our longings after that are
strong arguments of it; when we wish we prove it, and that we may attain it
it is evident, because we so passionately desire it. O Sen.
quam vilis and contempta res est homo, nisi supra humana se erexerit, says the
Moralist. That man is not so much as a man, that is not a great deal more than
so, that raises not himself above himself, that looks not beyond his threescore
and ten years, nor above the ground he treads on. The vilest worm were happier
than he, if his hopes were laid up where his body shall be. He has a Heaven in
prospect, and the expected joys of that quite swallow up his miseries on Earth.
Now indeed is the time of his sowing, but not of his harvest; His work is here,
but not his wages. His good Master that employs shall one day fully pay him,
who gives him some of that pay in hand, but bids him look for more; and that
blessed hope bears him up against all the discouragements of this life,
sweetens his afflictions here, and makes him happy in his very unhappiness,
while he comfortably expects to be more happy than he can now fancy himself
ever to be, because he is fully persuaded that there is another far better and
more glorious life in reversion, which brings in the third and last Observation.

III. That there is another Life remaining, Part. III.
the Expectation whereof makes a Christian of all other men most happy both
here and hereafter.

This I am not now to prove to Christians, because it is a truth to be supposed
by them, as it is in this Text by St. Paul. Christ has sufficiently
demonstrated it by his rising from the dead, and the force of our Apostle's
argument here would be quite lost, if we should in the least doubt of it. And
to speak clearly, This grand Article of the Christian Faith, The Resurrection,
is a Truth to be taken for granted by all good Christians. Infidels may deny
it, Atheists may wish it were not, but all good Christians must confess and
hope it. They have little reason to question that, which it is their highest
interest should be. All their designs are laid in it and their hopes built upon
it. If they be 2 Timothy 2. 12.
content to suffer here, it is in hope to reign hereafter. If with Christ they
be willing to endure the cross and the Heb. 12. 2.
shame of this life, it is for the joy that is set before them in the next. A
joy which thoroughly apprehended cheers them up in their greatest dumps,
enlightens their very dungeons, turns their prisons into Palaces, their Hell
into a Heaven, their torments into delights, and their beds of hot burning
coals into those of down. It makes their afflictions infinitely more pleasant
than the Epicures most exquisite pleasures can be. A joy before which sorrow
can no more stand than a mist before the Sun, that presently chases away that
evil Spirit of Melancholy, which seizes the happy Worldling in the midst of all
his jollities, damps his spirits, makes his chaplets of Roses wither on his
head, and is that stinking fly which spoils his most fragrant ointment, as often
as he shall seriously consider, that he must one day become a part of his own
lands, lie down for ever in the dust and his honor with him; which yet is the
best he can expect. For such a one can no otherwise look upon Death than as a
Sergeant to arrest him, whereas to the good Christian it is but a Messenger of
joyful tidings to tell him that his corruption must put on incorruption. This
is his hope, and it is founded in Christ's Resurrection, who ever since he
tasted Heb. 2. 9.
death for us, has sweetened that bitter Cup; so bitter before that time, that
St. Paul assures us, That through fear of Heb. 2. 15.
death men were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For it made their
pleasures less delightful, their virtues more harsh and tedious, and all their
afflictions most insupportable. Whereas now they are so far from being
insupportable, that they are most easy to us, who know, that being light, and
but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
they work for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory. How sad and
deplorable then must their condition be who are without this hope, and without
God in the world, as the Apostle describes Heathens to be; and yet how many
Christians content themselves with no better, whose thoughts are bounded with
the same objects their sight is, that of all the parcels of time regard but the
present, and of all things but the face and appearance, men that only mind
earthly things; of so low and base a spirit, that their Souls are but as salt
to them, and of so brutish a temper, that such a Transmigration as Pythagoras
fansied a punishment to bad men, would with them pass for a happiness, and,
with the Devils, they would make it their desire that they might be suffered
hereafter to enter into Hogs. Such men dare not openly deny an Immortality, and
yet they will not believe it; or, if they do, it is so faintly, that their lives
wholly confute their judgments. It Is strange to see how many there are that
having nothing but frost in their veins and earth in their face, do yet so much
dote on that life which they have now scarce any part in; whose faith reaches
no farther than their senses, and yet scarce retain they those senses; whose
frame should lift them up above the Earth, and their affections carry them
wholly to it; They are unwilling to leave the World, though they see they
cannot keep it; in their weak and enfeebled bodies they carry strong desires to
it, being dead to every thing but to the pleasures thereof, which yet they
cannot now enjoy, because they cannot taste, and do then covet most when they
are just leaving them: Than which as there cannot be a greater folly, so let us
take heed how we imitate it, learn to look off from these temporal things 2
Cor. 4. 18.
which are seen, to those eternal which are not seen; get such a perspective of
faith as may draw Heaven nearer to us, show us those glories which Christ has
prepared for us and already taken possession of in his own flesh, that so ours
may rest in hope and one day inherit His kingdom. And now since Christ has
given us an assurance of Immortality, let us endeavor to lay the foundation of
a happy one in this life, to work it out even in this world, this common shop
of change, work it out of that in which it is not, out of riches by not
trusting in and well using them, out of the pleasures of this world by loathing
and forsaking them, out of the flesh by crucifying it with the lusts and
affections thereof, and out of the world it self by overcoming it. Lastly, and
above all, let us labor to secure this blessed Immortality which lies before
us by such good works as may follow us through the huge and unconceivable tract
of Eternity. Else we may be so eternal as to wish we were mortal; wish against
our interest, that in this life only we had hope; make our selves, who now fear
death to dread immortality too, hope that there were no eternal joys, and
tremble at the thoughts even of that everlasting bliss which our ill lives
should give us no just ground to hope for. But if while we enjoy this life we
make lasting provisions for the next, by good works, then do we truly hope in
Christ, and then the seeds of Virtue and Piety well cultivated here, shall
hereafter yield us the happy fruits of a glorious Immortality; which he grant
us who has brought life and immortality 2 Timothy 1. 10. Col. 1. 27.
to light through his Gospel, Jesus Christ in us, the hope of Glory; To whom
with the Father, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON ON ROMANS XII. 1* I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service.
SAint Paul being from a Jew converted to a Christian, has taken great pains
not only to prove the reasonableness of his doing so, but that Judaism it self
was to be Christened, the legal Washings to be at last baptized; That whole
Economy to be done away, that it might be made complete, and to be destroyed,
that it might be perfected. And it was well that it was to be so; For the Law
could not justify, because its performances were but low, its Promises but
near, and its strength weak. The Law then could not justify had it been
observed, but being broken it could condemn; so that our Savior, to upbraid
the Jews, refers them not only to himself, but to Moses in whom they did trust.
And indeed it is as visible that the Jews did break their Law, as that they did
boast of it; They were equally zealous in observing, and industrious in
transgressing it; Instead of Religion they had brought themselves to be a Sect
humorsome and peevish, arrogant and censorious; All the world was to be of
their way, and yet themselves not of it; so that they were as I may so say,
Idolaters of the true God, whose Circumcision was uncircumcised; As if that
fact of Moses when he brought the Law had been the Type of the future
observance of it, when at the time of bringing the Tables, he brake them.

But not to upbraid the Jews with their failings, let us see what use there is
to be made of them; while they perform the letter, let us obey the meaning;
while their Sabbaths are lazy, let ours be holy. They wrote the Law on their
Garments, let us write them on our Hearts; They boasted of it, let us do it;
While they sacrifice their Beasts, let us offer up to God the more precious
blood of his own Lamb, and with that blood our selves. For we Christians as
well as the Jews have an Altar, says Heb. 10. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Apoc. 1. 6.
St. Paul; and are Priests too, a royal Priesthood, says St. Peter; Aaron and
his Successors offered up Bulls and Rams, unreasonable Creatures, that were
first slain, and then offered; But we our Bodies, and those such living
Sacrifices as make up a reasonable Service. No Calves Hos. 14. ^.
here to be presented, but those of our lips. For a Lamb and a Dove, meekness
and innocence, and for a Goat, our Iusts must be sacrificed. No death here, but
of inbred corruptions; no slaughter, but of the old man, whose death enlivens
our Sacrifice, and so fits it for an Everliving God; and makes it Holy, and so
becoming a Holy God. And if we crown our Sacrifices with such flowers, they
must needs send forth a sweet and acceptable odor to God, and pass with Him
not only for a Sacrifice, but, which is more, be heightened to a reasonable
Service.

And this our Gratitude calls for and our Interest. We owe it to God, as to our
Creator, who made our Bodies, and as to our Redeemer, who has purchased them.
We owe it to our selves too, if we will be happy in the enjoyment of God, who
as He is not a God of the dead, but of the living, will have a living Body for
a Sacrifice, and not a Carcass. And this in all respects is so reasonable, that
it may well be matter of wonder, why our Apostle should spend so much
passionate Rhetoric to persuade us to give up that unto God, which it is our
highest advantage He should vouchsafe to accept. But then sure it will be a
much greater wonder, if we shall refuse to hearken to his so pathetical and
earnest Entreaty, conjuring us by the mercies of God, with such humble
condescension and submissive insinuation, calling us His Brethren, whom he
might have commanded as our spiritual Pastor and Father in Christ; And all
this but to make us more our selves by being God's.

The Text then consists of two Parts, a Preface, and a Duty.

I. The Preface in the former part of the Verse, I beseech you, where we may
observe,

1. The Apostle's method of proceeding here, not by way of Command, but
Entreaty, I beseech you, and that too backed with a double Argument, The former
couch't in his affectionate Compellation, Brethren; The latter drawn from the
Bounty and Goodness of God, appearing in his Mercies, which the Illative
Particle Therefore points to, implying a former experience and taste of.

II. The Duty, comprehended in the latter part of the Text, That ye present,
etc. Where we have,

1. What we are to present, Our Bodies.

2. How we are to present them, by way of Sacrifice.

3. The Properties of that Sacrifice, which must be, 1. A living, 2. A holy
one; And, which is rather an effect or consequence, than a property, as such,
it will be acceptable.

4. And lastly, Here is the Conclusion of all, by way of an Exegesis, or
farther Explanation, what such a Sacrifice imports, viz. A reasonable Service.

Of these in their order; And, first, of the Preface, and that very briefly,
for I must not detain you long in the Porch.

I beseech you. The Apostle might have said, I command you; But such a smooth
way best became a Preacher of the Gospel. The Prophets indeed take another
Course suitable to the Preaching of the Law, which is usually delivered as it
was first promulged, in thunder and lightning, every sentence in the Law
carrying death in it, and every letter thereof being a killing one. But
Christ's Ambassadors are to use a different dialect; We pray you in Christ's
stead, be ye reconciled unto God, is our Apostle's language, 2 Cor. 5. 20. And
such Court-ship as this commonly prevails more on men than severe and sullen
arguments, and gentle insinuations do better persuade them than the
peremptoriness of strict reason commands; It being an easier matter to surprise
than force, to lead than to drag them to duty.

But then, secondly, I beseech you, Brethren; A word of humble condescension in
so great an Apostle, especially to inferior Christians; A more charming word
than Cesar's, Commilitones, whereby St. Paul, like a skillful Orator, labors
to beget a good opinion of his Person, the better to make way for his Advice,
which is seldom ineffectual where the Party to be persuaded has a good opinion
of its Author; The affection of a Brother disposing him to a more ready
entertainment of his Counsel.

And yet, thirdly, As if the Apostle suspected the weakness and insufficiency
of this motive, He adds a stronger, The Mercies of God; That if they would not
hearken to him for his own, they would do it for God's sake; A God whose
mercies were more infinite than their sins or their necessities could be. Now
mercy as it is an endearing, so is it withal an engaging word; It does cover
sin and present it; It makes disobedience to be unkindness, and ill manners to
be ill nature. If an enemy had done me this dishonor, I would have born it,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 55. 12. When Caesar shall receive death from the hand
of Brutus, the hand is more grievous than the death it brings, to behold that
was more insupportable than endure it. Our blessed Lord, who had greater
Agonies of love than sorrow is now capable of, finds no greater sorrow than to
see his love neglected. Our Intemperance fills his Cup with a more bitter Gall;
our Ambition wreathes him a sharper Crown; our ranking Religion, among other
stratagems, places him again among worser Thieves; and that we own Him in words
for our Lord, is but the civility, or rather mockery of Pilate, who when he
nailed Him to the Cross, cried out, This is Jesus, the King of the Jews. If he
be a King, and his Subjects not obey Him; if a Father, and his Sons abuse him;
if a Lord, controlled by his Servants; or a Savior, and condemned by those he
saves: The Sufferings are enhansed by the Authors of them; Nay, what he suffers
from us, receives weight from what He deserves of us; so that He bears the
burden of his own Merits; is afflicted with his Love, and grieved with his own
Compassion; That very kindness which does endure, makes it not to be endured;
His tenderness becomes to Him a burden so insupportable, that nothing but love
could bear it from us, and yet that very love does make it more insupportable.
I beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God, etc.

Of all those things which have a black character, Ingratitude is the most
confessed so; The Vice this not of a Man, but of a Fiend. Kindness is
Obligation, and the cords of a Man stronger than those of Iron. The
consideration of the Mercies of God should not only make us do our Duty, but
love it; not only submit to God's Commands, but be glad of them; It should make
us rejoice when we have an occasion to deny our selves for his sake; for then
indeed we can only discover whether we are grateful in earnest. Who, the most
profligate wretch, would not serve God if it were to be done only by gratifying
of his own pleasure; if God were to be pleased only by doing what his own lust
would prompt him to? But this consideration chiefly should make us enamoured
with our hardest duties, that they are opportunities of discovering our
thankfulness for past blessings. And is any so stupid as to reflect on the
Mercies of God, and not be refresht with the very thought of them? Doubtless
they are as it were once more received by being considered, nor can we thank
God for them without enjoying them over again; we recall past Favors by
remembering them, and double our present Mercies by taking notice of them. But
for the most part so unworthy are we as not to value Enjoyment till Want
teaches us to do so; God is to be angry with us to make us love Him, to
remove his Mercies to make us taste them; and he has little reason to continue
these Mercies to us, which are only valued when He takes them from us.

And yet methinks St. Paul is as high in Rhetoric as he is in Devotion, when
he beseeches us by the Mercies of God. If his Love cannot prevail, his Empire
surely should not. His Commands, one would think, should be of less force than
his Promises; for They indeed lay hold upon us, but These within us. St. Paul
then has here used his strongest argument; when he beseeches, he does most
effectually command; and the most sweet, but withal the most powerful Motive
is the Mercies of God. The word here implies Tender compassions, even beyond
those of Mother; Bowels of Mercies, not one Mercy, but a Esaias 49. 15.
cluster of them; nor those common ones, promiscuously scattered on good and
bad, but such as concern our Souls and better life, which the Illative Particle
Therefore implies; sending us back to the former part of this Epistle, wherein
the Apostle had at large discoursed of God's infinite Mercies from all Eternity
prepared for us, of our Predestination, Election, Justification in Christ, and
the like. These are those Bowels of Mercies, by which the Romans and we are
conjured, The Mercies of God indeed; for who but He could bestow them? And who
so hard a Flint, whom such soft Feathers cannot break? Who such an Adamant,
whom the Blood of God shed for him cannot soften? Who as he gave Himself for
us, may well expect we should offer up our selves unto Him; Which leads me to
the main Duty of the Text, in these words* That ye present your Bodies, etc.

And here the first thing to be considered, Part II. The Duty
is, What we are to present unto God, to wit, Our Bodies, and those, first, in
the most strict and literal sense, as being the most visible part of our
Christian Sacrifice, the Organs of our Souls whereby they both work and
discover their Operations. There is indeed a hidden man of the heart, as St.
Peter calls it, 1 Pet. 3. 4. whose inward Oblations are as invisible as that
God to whom they are made, and only discernable by that Eye, to whom all things
are naked; But there must be something visible that must take and affect ours.
The smoke of our Incense must yield a pleasing odor to Men as well as to God,
and the fire of our Sacrifice blaze out on the Altar. There are who would
exempt their Bodies from the Service of God. God, say they, is a Spirit, and
Joh. 4. 24.
must be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and Evangelical worship is
Spiritual worship. These Men are so Angelical, that they forget themselves to
be Men; and yet St. Paul will tell them that the very Angels themselves have
their knees; Phil. 2. 10. and we find that Holy Men have ever employed them in
the Worship of God, and yet never thought their Worship the less spiritual for
all that. The Prophet David calls for falling down and worshipping, and
kneeling before the Lord: Nay our Lord Himself in his prayers lay prostrate on
his body, and bowed his head on the Cross with adoration as much as languor;
thereby teaching us, that our addresses to God are not the less spiritual for
being mannerly. It Is true indeed that an humble Body and a stiff unpliant Soul
do ill suit together. The service of That, like the Mint and Cummin, is not to
be left out, while the inward devotion of the Soul, like the weightier matters
of the Law, claims the precedence, and is the main part of our Sacrifice;
without this the bowels thereof will not be sound and entire, but like Caesar's
portentous Sacrifice, want a heart, or resembling that hypocritical one of him
in Lucian, who presented his Deity with an Oxes bones covered with the Hide,
when the Flesh and Entrails were gone. But St. Paul has made up the Christian
Sacrifice full and complete, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify God in your body and in
your spirit; and he has given us a very good reason why each of them should be
employed, because both are God's; both bought with a price; and therefore it is
no less than such a kind of Sacrilege, as was that of Ananias and Saphyra, to
keep back any part of this price, to make any reserve where all is God's. Our
Bodies and Souls cannot be parted here, and it is the Devil that would fain
divide them. And therefore well knowing that God would be glorified in both, he
required but one part of Christ for his share, only the homage of his outward
Man; being assured, that if God had not both, he would have neither.

But not to trouble you with the proof of so clear a truth, let it be our
endeavor so to present each part to God that it may be acceptable. And first,
Our Bodies. The Psalmist prophetically bringing in Christ into the World,
shapes him a Body; A Body have thou prepared me; Psalm. 40. 5. For what end and
purpose? It follows, ver. 7. To do thy will, O God. And we must Heb. 10. 5.
endeavor so to fit and prepare ours, that by them God's will may be done too;
And that we shall do, by making them, as much as in us lies, Spiritual and
Angelical, active and nimble in the Service of God, by laying aside every
weight that clogs and renders them unapt for that service; by keeping them
under, and making them servants to those Souls which have a natural right over
them; by preserving these garments of the Soul unspotted from the world and by
Jam. 1. 27. Jud. 23.
the flesh, so far should we be from presenting God with Bodies worn out in the
drudgery of Sin and Satan, and which have as it were passed through the fire to
Moloch, to whom our Souls, like Mezentius guests in the Poet are tied as to so
many loathsome Carcasses; Bodies not of God's making, but of our own; ours
indeed, appropriated to us, but not such as the Apostle here beseeches us to
offer up unto God. But then,

2. As our Souls do as far exceed our Bodies, as Jewels do their Caskets; so
should our main care be for them, so to adorn and enrich them with all
spiritual graces, that they may be fit presents for God. For if our Souls,
which are but like Salt to keep our Bodies from Corruption, shall themselves be
rotten and unsavory, wherewith shall they be seasoned? Now as these have their
fleshly part too, which must be mortified and consumed; so have they their
spiritual part, which must be refined. St. Paul calls it the spirit of our
mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. wherein we are chiefly to be renewed, viz. the superior
faculties of Reason and Understanding, which we are to offer up unto God as the
purest part of our Sacrifice, and which is properly our Reasonable service. For
God who is a God of Understanding, is to be worshipped pura mente, in those
faculties which carry in them a more express character of his Image, and
whereby we do in a more especial manner partake of the divine Nature, as we
do by our Reason, which in a Heathen's expression is nothing else but Deus in
Sen. Ep. 31* and 41.
humano corpore hospitans. And this we give up to Him when we wholly resign it
up to his Wisdom; when we sacrifice this our Isaac at the foot of his Altar.
We give Him our Wit by maintaining his Truths, and our Memory by treasuring
them up; We give Him our Thoughts, by meditating on his Word and Works; Our
Wills, by thoroughly conforming them to his Will; and our Affections, by
setting them on things above.

3. And this is properly that Sacrifice which the Text enjoins us, alluding to
that manner of Worship, which was ever in the World, and is as ancient as
Religion it self. 'Twas so before and under the Law; Abel, Noah, Job sacrificed
then. And under the Law the Jews were expressly commanded so to do, Exodus 8.
20. and 10. 26. And as Nature did of old, so does it still prompt Heathens to
this way of worship, thereby doing homage to the great Creator, and
acknowledging him Lord of all things, and themselves absolutely depending on
Him. For Almighty God, from whom we had all our subsistence, has in all Ages
required one thing of us back again, that we should repay something as an
acknowledgment that he deserved all; and hence probably came the Original of
Sacrifices. But the Jews were instructed in another super-added meaning of that
custom besides, viz. That God was not only to be adored as a Lord, but to be
appeased as a Judge; his Empire, by being so owned, was to be dreaded too. When
we slew our Beasts, we were to remember that our selves deserved that death we
inflicted, and punished only what we were to have endured; That innocent Beasts
were to be offered up for guilty Men; Heb. 10. 3.
and what was due to the Sacrificer, was to be laid on the head of the
Sacrifice.

Et viles animas pro meliore damus. Ovid. Fast.


Poor man! whose sin has brought him to so great a distance from his Maker,
that the very Beasts must set him nearer. Sin has strangely transformed us,
that we are not to approach Heaven, unless a Brute make way. Man is placed in a
strange order of being, when it is a disputable case whether Beasts are below or
above him. On the one hand we command them; on the other they atone for us;
Here, we give Laws to them; There, we beg pardon by them; We feast upon, and we
sacrifice by them; They are our luxury, and they expiate it; by them we sin and
we pray, who make up so much of our crime and our devotion too; make up a great
part of our guilt, and then remove it. Here God has certainly represented unto
us the meanness of sin by the vileness of the price that is paid for it; and
Man is fallen into an order below that, out of which he takes his Intercessor.
But however the Jews or other Nations might think that Sacrifices could remove
the guilt; certainly they did but upbraid it, and rather signify our death
than remove it. It is not possible that the Heb. 10. 4. Psalm. 50. 13
blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sin. There is need of better
blood to satisfy the God that is offended; and there must be other Purgations
for the Conscience that is defiled. The Law was in its Ways and Institutions
too weak for so high a purpose; It could little more than adumbrate what the
Gospel did perform. St. Paul, who understood the Nature of Judaism, handles
that argument in all his Epistles, especially in this and that to the Hebrews,
and there uses those terms which express not how the Law of Christ does oppose
that of Moses, but how it does exceed it; how it does accomplish what that did
barely signify, and by their figures expresses our duties. He does not take
away Sacrifice (for without Sacrifice no Religion) but only change it. For the
Law being changed, it is necessary that the Sacrifice should be so too; That
what was before Carnal, should now be wholly Spiritual; That now Men should be
sacrificed instead of Beasts; That Innocence and Meekness should be the Dove or
the Lamb, and Lust the Goat; The Heart the only Altar, Mortification the Knife,
and Charity the true Fire. In a word, Devotion now is the proper Sacrifice of a
Christian, and Himself the Temple, the Priest and Sacrifice too.

Whereby we may clearly see how much more favorably God deals with us
Christians than he did with the Jews, among whom certain persons had right to
sacrifice, and at certain places and times, whereas now those distinctions are
quite taken away, every Christian being a Priest of a nobler order than that of
Aaron, and not confined either to time or place. 2ly. In that God requires not
now of us such an expensive Devotion as formerly he did of the Jews; no herds
of Bulls and Rams, nor Rivers of oil, no such costly Sacrifice as Solomon
offered up at the Dedication of the Temple, and such as would perhaps undo us.
We need not go to the herds to fetch an Offering: were we now to sacrifice as
did the Jews, the loss of a Beast would perhaps restrain us more than the sense
of God's anger or our own demerit. But here he that cannot give a Lamb for his
Transgression, may give some of himself, offer hunger for shewbread, and
thirst for a drink offering, consecrate a meal instead of a beast, and shed a
sour fasting sigh for incense. And such an easy way no doubt we will well like
of, who as we can object that legal Sacrifices were an insufficient expiation,
can at the same time quarrel with them too for being an expensive one. When we
rejoice that we are to be atton'd by a nobler Sacrifice, we are better pleased
Deum frugi colere.
perhaps that it is also a cheaper one. But are our Beasts spared from the
Altar think we only to glut our Tables? Has the great God remitted them only
for the sake of our other God, our Bellies? Is our devotion changed only to
gratify our lusts? or, shall we be content to offer up to God what costs us
nothing? God did indeed once say, That He did not eat the flesh of Bulls, or
drink the blood of Goats; But there is a sense in which he does do both, viz.
when a poor Man feeds upon them; Then do we atone for Gluttony, when we feed
the Hungry; Restitution expiates for Injustice, and Charity for Rapine. And
thus St. Paul calls Alms, An odor of a sweet smell, A sacrifice acceptable,
wellpleasing to God, Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. And not only our Charity, but
our Ps. 141. 2. Rev. 5. 8.
Prayers, Phil. 2. 17.
our Faith, Psalm. 50. 14, 23. and 116. 15. Heb. 13. 15.
our Praises, our Obedience, our Repentance and Mortification are in Scripture
language Sacrifices too, and such, as without them, all others are but
abominations to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. Dead Carcasses, not living Sacrifices,
which is the first property here required to render them acceptable.

I beseech you, Brethren, that you present your bodies a living Sacrifice; And
that 'twill be, 1. If it be a dying one. The Beasts heretofore we know dyed,
when they were sacrificed. Mortification is the life of a Christian: If ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, says our
Apostle, Romans 8. 13. 2. A living; That is, A quick and active Sacrifice? The
Soul of a Christian as well as of a Man, is (...) a kind of perpetual motion.
And therefore those Blessed spirits, whose Psalm. 104. 4
activity in God's service Christ proposes to our imitation, are by the
Psalmist styled, a flaming fire, active and restless for God's glory. That
Maxim in Tully, De natura deorum, Qui nihil agit, esse omnino non videtur, is
most true in matter of Piety; Here it is the same thing not to be, as not to be
doing; Nor was it without reason that the Stoic observing one given over to a
Lethargy of Ease and Idleness, pronounces him morally dead, and makes his
Epitaph, Vacia hic situs est, so does Saint Paul, her that lives in pleasure,
That she is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. And surely we may well conclude
him sick in Religion whose Pulse beats slow, and dead, when it ceases, and to
have a name only that he lives, Rev. 3. 1. 3ly. Those things we count living
that move of themselves, not like an Engine, or Automatum, Alienis mobile
nervis. Compelled service to God is but a lame offering, and as unacceptable in
the Gospel as it was in the Law. Heathens counted it an ill presage when their
sacrifices did not as it were court their own deaths; nor will ours pass for
any better in the sight of God, if they come with reluctance and dragged as it
were to his Altar. The word (...) here implies a voluntary Act, an offeringup
of our selves, not a being offered up. God who gives us all things freely, does
Himself also love a cheerful giver. Lastly, Our Sacrifice will then be a
living one, when it is offered up in Faith and Love. For as Faith is the true
life of a Saint, ( The Just shall live by faith, says the Prophet, Habac. 2.
4.) so without that it is impossible to please God, says our Apostle, Heb. 11.
6. Our gifts will be as unacceptable without our persons as Cain's Genesis 4. 5. 1
Cor. 13. 3. Mat. 5. 23, 24, 25.
was. And where there is no Love, our hand only presents them, not our heart,
the only true Altar that sanctifies our gifts. But then, 2ly. As our Sacrifice
must be a living, so a holy, one; For without holiness it can never please a
holy God. And we find that for want of this necessary qualification, he often
Esaias 1. 11. 66. 3. Hos. 5. 6. 6. 6. Psalm. 50. 8. ad 14. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
disclaims, nay seems to abhor, what Himself had commanded in the time of the
Law.

Now to make our Sacrifices holy two things (shadowed to us by legal
Sacrifices) are requisite.

1. That they be entire, and that in all their parts: For as God would not then
endure a maimed Sacrifice, Levit. 22. 22. Mal. 1. 8. so neither will he now
away with it. The whole Spirit, Soul and Body, all, and every part must be
God's. Lust must not have the Eye, nor Folly the Ear; Oppression must not have
the Hand, nor Covetousness the Heart. There is no serving God by halves; no
serving Him and Mammon too. The true Mother would not suffer the Child to be
divided, nor will our heavenly Father his. 'Twas Ananias and Saphira's
sacrilege to keep back part of what they had once voluntarily offered up; and
'twill be no less in us too.

2. The Sacrifices of the Law were to be pure and separate from common Act. 10.
14.
use, Levit. 3. 1. and 12. 5. such our Apostle makes Christ, our Sacrifice,
undefiled and separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. and without spot, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. Lev. 22. 20
1. 19. such must ours be too, spotless, pure, and separate from the world, the
least touch of that will pollute it. And as we are to keep our selves unspotted
from the world, Jam. 1. 27. so are we likewise to hate even the garment spotted
by the flesh, Jude, v. 23. In a word, We must cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit ere we presume to present 2 Cor. 7. 1.
our selves unto God.

Now as Holiness in the Gospel-sense commonly signifies the whole complexum of
Duties and Graces; so has it sometimes there a distinct peculiar signification
both as to the Body and to the Soul. And here, according to the observation of
a late excellent Annotator, the Purity of the Body is particularly designed in
opposition to the Uncleanness practiced by the Gentiles and applauded by the
Gnostics; A sort of Christians, if they might deserve that name, whose
practices made the name of Christ to be abhorred by the soberer Jews. And
indeed whosoever shall look into the first Chapter of this Epistle and there
observe what manner of lives the Heathen Romans led, will allow this
Interpretation as most pertinent to the scope of our Apostle. For when they did
no longer like to retain God in their knowledge, they quickly left off to be
men, and when they ceased to hearken to their natural reason, they soon fell
into a reprobate sense. For they not only changed God into Stocks and Stones,
but their Worship into most abominable Wickedness; not only made the vilest
Creatures, Deities; but the foulest Actions, Religion; they turned a Passion
and a Disease into a God, and Sin into Devotion; They thought it a most sacred
thing to prostitute their Bodies, and their very Altar-fires did kindle those
foul heats; whence Uncleanness is so often called Idolatry in Scripture.
Practices taken up and even outdone by viler Christians, and that in the first
and purest times of the Gospel, and frequently objected to them by the Jews,
who could boast, and that with some color of truth, that their Doctrine was
opposed not so much by sharp Intellectuals, as by debauched Morals. And not
only the Jews, but Heathen Philosophers also, as Hierocles for one, could make
the same objection, and upon the same score, detest the Religion of Christians,
or rather, as he mistook it, the Wickednesses of the Gnostics, which made the
name of Christ to be evil spoken of throughout the whole World, and are indeed
directly opposite to the Spirit of Christ which is a Spirit of Purity, and to
the Rule of the Gospel, which every where forbids us to walk in the lust of
concupiscence as did the Gentiles who knew not God; and which commands every
Christian to possess his vessel 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1, and 3, 4. ^
in sanctification and honor; there being no Vice so dishonorable to a Man as
that of fleshly impurity, which turns him into a Beast, making him have as foul
a Name as a Body, as loathsome a Character as a Carcass, rendering him despised
by all Men, and not the least by himself; when David fell into this sin, at his
repentance he prays for his free spirit once again; he found that Ps. 51. 12.
thereby he had lost not only the Spirit of God, but of a Man, being ashamed of
himself and afraid of his servants. The strange woman's house, says Solomon,
leads to death; and sure a death it is where the poor wretch is not less corrupt
than if he were buried; and that ditch he mentions is no less noisome than the
Grave. He goes on and tells us, That her house leads to hell, and doubtless
it is a part of it, where there is not only the stench but the heat of it, all
its Attendants, whether sin or punishment, the blackness, and the flames
withal being found in it. It Is not for this place to describe what such
persons deserve and endure; The very reproof of this sin must consist of such
foul things as a modest man will scorn to name. Surely such persons as these
are not like to be a sweeter sacrifice to God than they are to themselves,
being scarce a proper Holocaust for the Devil. Behold then what a severe Master
our Lord is, who forbids his Followers shame and filth, will not suffer us to
be the loathing of all the world and of our selves, enjoining us such a purity
of body as will not only save our Souls, but our Reputations too, requiring of
us a pure conscience, a clear body, and a fair fame, and giving us such Laws,
as will secure unto us both health and honor, and, which is more, render us
acceptable to God as well as to all good men.

These Laws if we observe, we shall then be fit Sacrifices for God, and
acceptable ones too, especially if they have these Conditions in them.

1. Purity; I will wash my hands in Innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to
thine Altar, Psalm. 26. 6.

2. Humility, implied in the very nature of the Sacrifice under the Law, which
was to be destroyed by the Fire or the Knife. Humility does as it were waste
and consume to nothing, makes us as an Holocaust, a whole Burnt-offering,
nothing in our selves, nothing in respect of God; and this exaninition exalts
all God's graces in us. He needs none of our Presents, we enrich him not with
them ( our goods and our persons are nothing unto him) but we benefit our
selves by a just apprehension of our own emptiness and unworthiness.

3. Sincerity, which sets a high value on our meannest gifts. The Heathen Poet
could put the question, In Templo quid facit Aurum? and he calls for Compositum
jus fasque animi -- a true sincere heart and mind, and with these, says he,
far litabo. If we bring our Sheep to God's Altar, and them alone, we had as
good leave them behind us as an unprofitable Carriage. Wherewithal shall I
Micah 6. 6, 7, 8.
come before the Lord? with Burnt-offerings and Calves of a year old? Will the
Lord be pleased with Thousands of Rams, or Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil? No,
learn another Oblation. He has showed thee, O man what is good, and what does
the Lord require of thee but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God? God looks into the inward Frame of the Heart, and values not the
offerer by the gift, but the gift by the offerer.

4. Lastly will thou offer up an odor Ephesians. 5. 2.
of a sweet smell well-pleasing unto thy God; Let thy Savior's Merits perfume
thy Sacrifices; For if they be not sprinkled Heb. 9. 22.
with the Blood of this Lamb of God, they will smell as rank as a Carcass.

There remains one thing more in the Text, and that is, that the Apostle here
calls the Christian Sacrifice, a Reasonable Service, which seems to imply that
lagal ones were in the Letter, and as the Jews understood and practiced them, a
Service scarce Reasonable. Not that in its time it was altogether unreasonable,
(For it had been commanded by God, whose Will is Man's highest Reason, as a
service very fit for a carnal People; who being as it were Children under the
Pupillage of the Law, were most taken with an External gaudy Pomp of Religion;
Besides that Sacrifices were Ps. 50. 5.
Seals of the Jew's Covenant with God; Ge. 8. 20*
A solemn profession of gratitude for Mercies received, and very proper
Instruments to keep them from that Idolatry, to which they were so naturally
prone) but only, I say, comparatively, in opposition to the Christian way of
worship which is so far above it. For the Jewish service consisted in such
things as had no suitableness to the Nature of God, (For what are Blood and
Smoke to the God of Spirits?) and were but shadows of better things, but such
shadows as did darken them, and were mistaken for those very things of which
they were but Types, and so did hinder that very good they were intended to
promote. They did so quite defeat the End for which they were commanded, that
God often professes with Truth and anger too, that he did not command them at
all; As in Esaias 1. 13. Incense is an Abomination unto me; If ever it dare to
approach Heaven, it shall only serve as a Cloud to darken it; New Moons,
Sabbaths, and the Calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is Iniquity,
even the solemn Meeting. The Sabbath was grown to be that Day of whose Rest God
was most weary. It was a question which was most abominable, to see their
Altars swim with Blood, or their hands to be so full of it; Their Devotions
might vye Iniquity with their sins, nor did they least provoke God when they
thought they did most appease him. And it is observable that the greatest
Sacrificers under the Law were mostly the greatest Sinners, being so taken up
with the Ceremony, that they wholly neglected the Substance. And therefore at
best these things being but Relativi Juris and not for themselves, when they
came alone, or with no better a retinue than those Sins and Irregularities they
did countenance, no wonder if God removed them as he did the High Places, if he
cut them down as he did the Groves and stamp them to Powder like the abused
Brazen Serpent, especially when he saw that the Jews rested in them, and made
them the only considerable thing in their Worship, as if God were to value a
Man not by the greatness of his Soul but the largeness of his Ox, that his only
Excellencies were his Cattle, and his Virtues those alone which grazed in his
Pasture.

It was high time then for God to put an end to these Typical Services, which
were every where so grossly mistaken, as if because they were expensive to Man,
they were to be accounted beneficial to God. They thought (as Himself
complains, Ps. 50. v. 13.) That He did eat the flesh of Bulls and drink the
blood of Goats) (a ridiculous fancy Heathens had too, as appears by Lucian, who
makes himself merry with it, and it is not improbable but that the grosser Jews
had the like) and accordingly they were made use of not only as an Atonement
but as a Bribe, to pacify the Almighty by such a vile Trick. Heaven in their
Conceit was to be reconciled by the Vices of the Earth, by gifts to be
corrupted, that so by pardoning Men's sins, he might share in them too. Had not
the Antecedent been abominable, the Consequent had not been amiss. If God would
be luxurious with their Luxuries, He was not to revenge them, not to punish the
sin He shared in, nor to be angry with that guilt He did partake of, and if He
would be content to receive one part of the Rapine, surely He could not in
reason punish the other. This in short may serve to show how little reason
there was in the legal Sacrifices in themselves barely considered; And
therefore we find that for a long time they were not commanded, but freely
offered by men out of their Zeal, which alone recommended them unto God, and
not any Excellency they had in their own Nature, being not good but only in
respect of what was worse, (It being better to sacrifice to God than to Devils)
nor otherwise than as Types of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World,
and did therefore vanish as soon as He was once offered upon the Cross: Whereas
true Religion remains still a Juge Sacrificium, and is more lasting than the
Heavens themselves; which as it was long in the World before any Command came
forth for Sacrifice; So is it now most glorious when Jewish Altars are down.
It Is not confined to time or place, nor ever to be dispensed with as we find
legal Sacrifices oft-times were; And as it is in the sight of God the best of
all Sacrifices (who requires Mercy and not brutish Oblations) so is Hos. 6. 6.
Jer. 7. 22, 23.
it a most Reasonable Service, being not founded in mera voluntate imponentis,
but in the Reason of the thing it self; the Sacrifice not of a Brute Beast, but
of a man endued with Reason, and withal most suitable to the Nature of God, who
as He is a Spirit, will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: and as He is a
most wise God, will not away with the Sacrifice of Fools, Eccles. 5. 1. But
Lev. 2. 13. Mar. 9. 49.
will have the Evangelical as well as the Legal Sacrifices salted with salt,
our Col. 4. 6.
words and actions seasoned with discretion. For we are fed with the (...) as 1
Pet. 2. 2.
well as with the (...) as well with the Rational as with the sincere milk of
the Gospel; so far is Christian Religion from divesting men of their reason,
that it strictly requires them to be ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them; 1 Pet. 3. 15. Being
in it it self, as it is easy to demonstrate, of all other the most Reasonale
service; and to present God with any other worship, were but to offer strange
Fire before him.

And now let me bespeak you in like manner, as Naaman's Servants did their
Master, 2 Kings 5. 13. If the Lord had bid us do some great thing, should we
not do it? Might he not require of us as of the Jews whole Herds of Cattle, and
Woods of Spices and Incense? Nay, which is more, the Sacrifice of our Bodies in
the most strict and severe Sense? He might surely as being Lord of all, but
here we see He does not. No other Blood now to be shed, but what St. Bernard
calls sanguinem animi vulnerati, that of a wounded troubled Spirit, of a broken
and contrite heart. Slay thy lust Ps. 51. 16.
and thou shall offer him a Beast; give him thy Reason, or, which is perhaps
dearer to thee, Thy Will, and thou shall sacrifice a Man to him; He will accept
thy Tears for drink offerings, and prefer thy very Fasts to meat offerings.
Thou need not appear before thy God empty, while thou presentest thy self to
him; every part of thy Body and every faculty of thy Soul, nay, every thing
thou possessest, and which many times thou accountest more precious than that
very Soul of thine, may be a Sacrifice and a far more acceptable one too, than
all the Beasts of the Forest. Give the Lord thy Heart, and that will be the
Fat of thy Sacrifice; As thy Charity the true fire of it, without which the
Incense of thy Prayers and of thy Devotions will not smoke nor ever ascend up
to Heaven; nay, without which Martyrdom it self will prove a vain and
insignificant oblation, and though thou should give thy 1 Cor. 13. 3.
Body to be burnt, yet thou should be nothing. In a word, give thy God thy
self, and in such a manner as He requires thee to do it, and thou can give
him no more, and yet when all this is done, no more than what he first gave
thee. Thus shall thou make him Thine, and be infinitely more thy self by being
His. It Is like laying up Treasure in the Temple, which thereby becomes more
sacred and more assured too.

But then in the last place, let us remember that what we have once solemnly
dedicated to God, cannot without Sacrilege be alienated. Our Bodies being once
his, they are no more then our own. For to whom we yield our selves Servants to
obey, his Servants we are to whom we obey, Romans 6. 16. Our gifts here like
God's must be without Repentance; nor can we recall, much less employ them to
any other use, either of the World or Satan, as we cannot serve God and Mammon;
so neither ought we to give him the Lean, and this the Fat of our Sacrifice. If
our God will not part stakes; surely he will not content himself with the
worser share.

Let us then give him all, and that all will be our Heart and our Affections,
that when we appear before him, our Souls may ascend up to him as the Angel
Judges 13. 20.
did in the flame of the Altar, and that Flame may still be kept alive upon it,
be a continual Sacrifice, such as may never cease, and we may do that
constantly on Earth, which shall be our Eternal Employment in Heaven, still
praise and adore our Creator. Then shall he change these our Sacrifices into
everlasting Temples for himself to dwell in; what we now present him natural
Bodies turn into spiritual, and make these our vile ones like unto his glorious
one. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, etc. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria in aeternum.
A SERMON ON ESAIAS V. 20. The former Part of the Verse. Woe unto them that call
Evil good and Good Evil.
THE great Creator has never been wanting to Man in prescribing him such Laws
as might be sufficient if obeyed, to make him happy, whether we consider him in
the State of Primitive Integrity, or out of it. In the former God so left him
in the hands of his own Council, as to make himself his own Rule. Nature was to
him instead of Revelation; he had then the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
planted in him; Conscience was his Oracle, and Reason his Guide, and to know
his Duty was but to consult himself. God did not only wind him up as a Watch to
a regular Motion, but did withal place in him a Sun-dial* to set himself by, if
he should go false; so that his very Essence and Rule was then so much the
same, that to transgress was not so much to break a Law, as a Man.

Nor did he by his Fall wholly forfeit all his natural Advantages, either to
himself or his Posterity. For though our first Parent brake the natural Tables,
as Moses afterward did those of Stone, yet from the scattered pieces thereof
set together, we may all of us, though imperfectly, spell out our Duty. The
worst of men are born with a certain Decalogue; Their Souls are not mere Rasae,
Tabulae, there is a Book of Conscience wherein the different Characters of Good
and Evil are plainly legible, and by the help of those practical Notions, which
make up the Law of Nature, each Pagan may confute an Infidel, and each Sinner
himself. That there is a God to be worshipped, is founded in that natural
Dependence Rational Creatures have on their Creator; and that Good and Evil are
different things, is the Voice and Dictate of Natural Reason too, which he that
contradicts, unmans himself, and is to be looked on as a Monster in Nature.

Such there have been in all times, and which is strange, even in those of
Divine Revelation; for we find the Jews themselves upbraided here with this
Impiety; which was so much the grosser in them, because besides the unwritten,
they had withal a written Law to instruct them better; Both in effect the
same, the same Precepts in stone and in the heart; The Mosaical Law being
nothing else but a Digest of that of Nature, where the only difference is in
the Clearness of the Character. For Moses did but display and enlarge the
Phylacteries of Nature; This was still the Text and all his Precepts, but so
many Commentaries on it. He did but trim up that Candle of the Lord, natural
Reason, which before burnt dim; set off Virtue with a better Luster, and expose
Vice in its proper shape and hue, giving That all its natural Advantage, to
charm the Eye, and painting out This in such lively Colors as might represent
it in its utmost Deformity. Yet such was the perverse blindness of some, that
they could see no difference here at all, no distinction between an Angel of
Light and a Fiend; Good and Evil were to them both alike, or rather not alike,
for they preferred Evil to Good; did not only confound the Names and Nature of
these things, but in a cross manner misplace them, putting Darkness for Light
and Light for Darkness, like those Antipodes to mankind, who by their strange
way of living turn Day into Night and Night into Day; This is that abomination
the Text takes notice of, which drew this severe Imprecation from the Almighty,
uttered by the mouth of his Prophet.

Woe unto them that call Evil good, etc. Which words seem to point to the Jews,
but are indeed directly levelled at all those who remove the natural Landmarks
and Boundaries of Moral Good and Evil, and they present us with these three
Observations.

1. That there is a Real and Natural difference between Virtue and Vice, called
here Good and Evil. 2. That there always have been (and still are) such as
labor to take away this Difference, Men that call Good Evil and Evil Good. 3.
That to do so, To endeavor to alter the Nature and Property of Moral Good and
Evil, is such a heinous provocation as will inevitably bring a Curse upon it.
Of these in their Order. And,

1. That there is a real and natural Difference between Virtue and Vice, called
here Good and Evil.

It seems the Academician and Epicurean Sects were rife in the Prophet Esay's
Days, who being a loose sort of men, and impatient of all natural and moral
Restraints, would fain persuade themselves and all others, That nothing was in
it self good or bad, that there was no such distinction in Nature, but only in
the opinion of men, who were pleased to make an enclosure, where God and Nature
had laid all in common. Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquum, was their
fundamental Principle. A Principle which because I find taken up and improved
by some of the like depraved Judgment, and it is the very Source and Fountain
of much of that Corruption that is in the World, deserves to be considered, and
the direct way to disprove it will be to make out a real and natural Difference
between moral Good and Evil; which I shall endeavor to do. 1. From the Nature
of a Divine Being. 2. From our own Make and Constitution. 3. From the natural
Beauty of Good and Deformity of Evil, whereof every Man's Reason is the proper
Measure and Judge. 4. From such contrary Effects as must of necessity argue a
Contrariety in their Causes.

1. The first proof of this Truth I shall fetch from God Himself, in whose very
Nature and Being the difference between Good and Evil is conspicuous. For it is
evident, that there is something simply Good and something simply Evil even to
Divine Being; something which God is by the Necessity of his Nature, and
something which by the same Necessity He cannot be. For should I ask Epicurean
Christians, whether God can be other than what He now is, or the Scripture
represents Him: They must needs resolve the question in the Negative, unless
they will deny Him to be God; or, which is the same thing, grant him mutable:
Immutability being so essential to him, that what he now is he ever was, and
what he ever was he ever shall be, and cannot choose but be so. Now God from all
Eternity was just, merciful, good and true; It Is the Description he gives of
Himself, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering and abundant in Goodness and Truth. And were not these his essential
and unalterable Properties, the Reverse of that Description might as well befit
him, which were the highest Blasphemy imaginable, and the Manichees needed not
to have invented two distinct Principles of Good and Evil, when by the
Epicurean Doctrine, these so contrary things might well enough be reconciled to
one and the same Divine Being; whereas the Scripture tells us; that some things
are impossible for God to do, As to lie Heb. 6. 18. Genesis 18. 25
and to be unjust. And surely what He cannot, Man ought not; What is good or
bad to Him, must be so to us too; and what is contrary to the divine, can never
be a part of humane Perfection. If God cannot be other than good, merciful and
just; Man, who was created after his Image, must of necessity resemble his
Creator, and the Copy to be complete in all points, answer its Original.

2. As indeed it does. For upon this account of a natural resemblance it is that
we are said to be Partakers of the 2 Pet. 1. 4.
divine Nature, and God has so wrought and woven his Image into the very frame
of our being that (like Phidias his Picture in Minerva's Shield) it can never
be totally defaced without the ruin of that frame. And herein also the
differences of Good and Evil are apparent. For our Passions, Fear and Shame
especially, do manifestly betray them. Omne malum aut timore aut Apologet. c. 1.
pudore persudit* natura. Nature, says Tertullian, has dashed every Vice with
Fear or Shame. As for the first of these, Fear; The continual Frights, the pale
Countenances, and broken Sleeps of wicked Men do plainly argue the inward
dissatisfactions of natural Conscience when they do amiss; the guilt of the
heart usually spreading it self over the face: As on the other side, Innocence
is ever quiet and bold, and they who act by the rules of right reason, always
calm and serene. Of which so apparent contrary effects no better account can be
given than this, that there is something in its self so bad, that natural
Conscience startles at it, and Reason abhorrs; And something so good, that at
first blush it gains our approbation and commends it self to our choice. Nor is
it enough to say, That such Fears proceed from a false prepossession, fomented
by ignorace and custom, of God's being angry with Men for their faults, which
makes them timorous; As Children are apt to fear every thing in the dark. For
were this an effect only of such an erroneous persuasion, it could never be so
universal as we find it is. All panick fears and groundless misapprehensions
dye as soon as born; whereas those which are founded in nature are perpetual
and lasting. Time, says Tully, confutes those Errors which owe their rise to
Opinion, but confirms and strengthens the Sentiments of Nature; And therefore
whatsoever does constantly maintain it self must needs be more deeply rooted
than in uncertain apprehensions. The Epicureans we know have still made it
their business to deliver Men of those natural Terrors by openly preaching
Impiety (As the Prophet David too complains Psalm. 14. 1.
of some such Fools as denied a God, or at least his Providence) But all in
vain. For 'twas not in the power of all their Sophistry, assisted by Men's
strong Inclinations to Profaneness and Licentiousness, to suppress and stifle
those implanted Notions; Nature and the Fear of God's wrath still prevailed
against all those petty Arts. They could do no good upon the Authors
themselves, much less upon their Disciples; And common experience shows, That
the more wicked Men strive to subdue, the fiercer their Consciences are, and
that when Impiety has invented all the ways it can think of to satisfy its
self, it usually takes Sanctuary in Superstition; The stoutest Offenders to
find ease must at last betake themselves to their Devotions; Their Fears still
drag and hale them like unwilling Sacrifices to the Altar: Or, if Religion
cannot lay that evil Genius that haunts them, they will seek to charm it by
drowning their Reason in Sensuality, which recovering it self a-fresh, grows
more importunate and troublesome than ever; It faring with such Men as it does
with drunken Malefactors, who, when those fumes of wine wherewith they strive
to smother their discontents and abate the edge of their melancholy, are
evaporated, and their sober thoughts have leisure to reflect on their Crimes,
tremble at the apprehension of those Racks and Gibbets that are preparing for
them. Which is so true, and so common to all Men, that they who have no cause
to fear others, do notwithstanding fear themselves, and never more than at the
approaches of Death, which as it is most dreadful and ghastly to the bad, so
is it most welcome and lovely to the innocent and virtuous, who by clearing
their accounts here, secure themselves from the danger and apprehension of an
afterreckoning.

And as the Passion of Fear discovers a natural difference between good and
bad, so does that of Shame no less; which, as soon as our reputation is
wounded, veils the face with a ruddiness, as if it proceeded from that wound.
And so apprehensive is Nature of every little thing which seems to reproach it,
that a bare suspicion thereof shall many times create a bashfulness; and
innocence it self will sometimes be dipped in a blush as well as guilt; not for
any conscious ground in its own bosom, but out of a timorous apprehension of
sinister thoughts in others. We see that it is not in the power of the worst Men
wholly to master this Passion; and he that is most deep in the guilt of a sin,
will labor all he can to avoid the imputation of it. Whence is it that the
most impudent, whose faces continual sinning has hardness against the
tenderness of a blush, seek corners to hide their foulest actions? Why do they
not act them without doors and in the face of the Sun with the Cynicks? or, why
do they varnish them over with false colors? Does not Hypocrisy it self wear
the mask of Piety and the mantle of Religion? Does it not still appear abroad
in its garb and dress, and though it want the substance, court the shadow of
it? And when this Satan transforms it self into an Angel of light, will it not
do all it can to hide its cloven foot? Did not Vice take upon it some fair
disguise, surely no Man would entertain so vile a guest. Covetousness must be
called good-husbandry, and prodigality, generosity; And the lewdest Persons
many times do most affect the reputation of being chaste. Est aliqua'
prostitutis modestia, and ipsum lupanar honestum est. What sad shifts do Men
betake themselves to when they are obnoxious to any thing that looks base in
the world, and to avoid a just blame, what unjust excuses will they not take
up? or, If they cannot wholly excuse, at least they will extenuate their error
by necessity, humane frailty, ignorance, false information or guile; and with
Pilate, wash their hands of it, if they cannot cleanse their consciences. Which
evidently shows, that the hardest hearts have sometimes tender foreheads.
Charge a Malefactor never so home, he will hardly confess his crime to the
rack, and perhaps better endure that; or, which is a harsher punishment, his
own guilt, than he will dare to publish it, a secret smart being not so quick
as a public shame. Which is a sufficient indication of the deformity of Vice,
of whose least approaches Nature is so tender. And so sensible are Men of what
it owns as its disgrace, that they are ready to fly in the face of those that
upbraid them with it. Such a vile Master is Vice, that the greatest Slaves to
it dare not wear its livery; Its best Friends scorn to be Retainers to it; They
may love the Treason, but naturally hate this Traitor; and so loath are they to
father such a brat, that although they do all they can to procure themselves a
bad name, yet even then are they most studiously concerned for the reputation
of a good one.

But here some may say; Are not many things reputed vile and dishonorable
which in themselves are not so? True indeed; But then this false apprehension
can never alter the nature of the things themselves. Satan will still be a
Devil, though we cloth him with a garment of light, nor is he one jot less
ugly because some put a glory about his head; no more than a good Angel is
black, because Ethiopians, to flatter their own hue, paint him so. There are I
confess who blush at Virtue, and think Modesty the only thing to be ashamed of;
A Virtue which in the common esteem of some not only beggars all other virtues,
but reproaches them. But how few are such monsters in comparison of the rest of
mankind? And what incompetent Judges of what is vile or honorable? From these
we must appeal to the general sense of sober mankind as to the true value of
things. Did ever any rational sober Man commend another for his rudeness and
debauchery? Was any man's lust and intemperance ever reckoned among his Titles
of honor; who ever yet raised Trophies to his Vices, or thought to perpetuate
his Memory by the glory of them? Where was it ever known that Sobriety and
Temperance, Justice or Charity, were thought the marks of reproach and infamy?
Nay, so far from this thought are the most profligated Wretches, that they have
a secret honor and value for those that are good, and while they seem to
marvel at and even hate all those who refuse in a vicious compliance to run on
with themselves into the same excesses of riot, they do at the same time
inwardly admire and applaud them. Show me a Man so bad that would have another
like himself whom he has a real kindness for? What Father, though never so
vicious, would be content his Son should imitate him; that would rather have
him a drunkard than a sober man, or be gladder to meet him in a Stews than in a
Church? Some possibly to show the goodness of their wit in being able to
maintain a Paradox, may extol Vice as others have done Gouts and Fevers, but
who, without violence to his reason, can seriously prefer it to Virtue? There
cannot then be a plainer Evidence nor a more convincing Argument of the natural
difference between Virtue and Vice than this, that the general sense of sober
mankind, which in the judgment of Tully is the very Law of Nature, ( In genere
consensio omnium gentium Tusc. qu. 1.
lex naturoe putanda est) immediately approves the one as honorable, and
condemns the other as base and ignominious. And thus from these two Passions of
Fear and Shame, the real difference between moral Good and Evil is
demonstrable, which being found in us, not as Christians, but as Men, the
opposition clearly appears natural.

But not to rely solely upon the judgment of Passions, let Reason here give in
its Evidence. This Christ calls the eye of the understanding, and the light
that is in us, Matt. 6. 23. Nazianzen, (...), a domestic impartial Judge of
Good and Evil; A natural Monitor, which, like Socrates's good Genius in
Apuleius, is every one's Overseer and Guide, to advise and direct him. The
measures then of Good and Evil are to be taken from that proportion or
disproportion they bear to this prime Canon, which like a direct Line does at
the same time show what is straight and what is crooked by its application
thereunto; discovers as natural a comeliness in Virtue and deformity in Vice as
the Eye does in any of those sensible objects that lie before it. And as it is
impossible for sense to be mistaken about its proper object, supposing all
necessary conditions to the right use and exercise of it: so is it as
impossible too for natural reason to be deceived in matters which are within
its proper verge and cognizance. One man's judgment may perhaps vary from
another's in determining what kind of external beauty were best, but it is hard
for any Man to persuade himself that deformity is beauty, or that Thersites was
a more graceful person than Achilles, as Homer describes them. Herein while
the Eye judges according to the exactness of color and proportion which are
the Elements of beauty, it cannot be imposed on. And therefore the Philosopher
said, 'twas the question of a blind man to ask what was beauty? because it is
such a thing as every man must needs see and know that has his eyes about him.
The same may be said of Virtue and Vice, whose beauty or deformity consists in
that proportion or disproportion each of them bear to a man's natural Reason.
Which made Isocrates affirm, That if it were possible for Virtue to take a
humane shape; 'twould infallibly charm the beholder; and we may as truly say on
the other side, that if a Man could behold Vice in its native ugliness, it
would as certainly affright him. And therefore, to make their Children abhor
Drunkenness, some have thought it enough to represent it to them in their
Slaves; and Seneca, to cure an angry Man, only bids him look into his Glass.
And surely could not Reason as well tell a Man what were good and bad to him,
as Sense does Beasts what is so to them, he should be worse provided than the
meanest sensitive Creatures; And 'twere no less than a contradiction to say,
that God should give him such discerning and electing faculties as Reason and
Will where there should be no difference at all between those things it were to
judge of or choose. From whence we may rationally Deu. 30. 19
conclude, that he has distinguished good from evil by those several marks he
has put upon them, and sets Reason as a competent Judge to decide all moral
Controversies, which by her first seeds of light manifestly discovers an
honorable beauty in goodness, and an inseparable blot in wickedness. Nor is it
a Paradox to affirm, that there is as wide an opposition between some moral as
between the most distant natural things; For example, between Truth and a Lie,
as between Light and Darkness, or Being and not Being. For truth results from
the being of things which it represents, and every lie is as it were the Image
of not being. And therefore the perfection of Man's understanding consisting in
the knowledge of things which exist conformable to the nature of their being,
and consequently in truth and veracity, there follows anatural rapport or
relation between the truth of things themselves and our understandings which
are perfected by it and cannot choose but hate a Lie as soon as they discover
it, as a cheat put upon them, and an abuse to Nature which has given Men
language for no other use and purpose but to express the reality of their
conceptions suitable to the things themselves, at least as they are
apprehended; and they who abuse the credit of others do as much as in them lies
destroy all commerce among men, by weakening that fidelity which entertains and
supports it: which is the reason why Liars are so hated and scorned by all
mankind, and that even they who know themselves to be so, are so angry with all
that call them by that name, that many times they will not be satisfied without
washing off that reproach with the blood of the Reproachers. I might here
instance in other Vices; as disobedience to natural and civil Parents,
injustice, cruelty, ingratitude, and show in what a direct opposition they
stand to and are condemned by nature too; but I proceed to the last argument or
reason of the natural difference between moral good and evil, which I shall
fetch from the prime design of Nature, viz.

4. Self-preservation. It cannot be denied but that whatsoever opposes and
contradicts that must needs be an enemy, and whatsoever maintains it, a friend
to Nature. Now it is evident that whatsoever is morally is also naturally good;
and that as Vice tends to the ruin of humane nature, so Virtue to its
conservation, and that not only by a divine benediction, but by a natural
efficiency. Let us then cast up our several mischiefs, and see how many of them
are owing to our virtues; whether Temperance did ever drown our parts, or
Chastity make us roar under the Chirurgeon's hand; whether the sleeps of sober
men be not sweet, and their appetites constant; whether the symmetry of
Passions in the meek, their freedom from the rage of them, with that admirable
harmony and sweetness of content, do not by making them cheerful, render them
healthy too. Whereas the contrary of these do manifestly impair our bodies,
waste our estates and ruin our reputations. For what are the fruits of
Intemperance but Collicks, Surfeits, Aches, and the like? Who has Pro. 23. 29.
woe and sorrow, redness of eyes, contention and wounds* but the Drunkard? What
vast expense does the Glutton put himself to, not to allay his hunger, but to
provoke it? How dearly does he buy new wants? when a small cost would relieve
nature, how much is he at to oppress it? And how does he many times pay more
than one Farm for a Fever? And yet when all this is done, the best that can be
expected is, that the feast must be fasted of. Whereas it often proves worse
than so, that a horrid potion must purge off the too full goblet, and it shall
cost as much to remove the Surfeit as to procure it, and yet after all this
charge and trouble the Man can scarce hope to be so well as he was before it;
such enemies are Vices to our health, and they are no less to our reason. For
whereas Virtues improve our understandings by subduing our lusts and moderating
our passions; These fully and darken our minds, and by clogging our spirits,
render them unapt for higher and nobler acts of reason. Even the most refined
ones, such as envy, hatred, pride and malice, tincture the mind with false
colors, and so fill it with prejudice and undue apprehensions of things. Let
experience here give in its verdict; and if it be so that Virtue preserves
Nature, and Vice destroys it, they cannot possibly be the same things; such
different effects arguing a manifest contrariety in their causes.

And were it not so, were not the opposition here very natural, I know not how
natural Men, without any help of divine Revelation should by the mere Light of
their reason be able so clearly to discern and so exactly to make it out as
some of them have done. A task well performed by Tully in his Offices, Et de
finibus bonorum and malorum, wherein the several bounds of moral good and evil
are so precisely set out (as they have been by some ancient Philosophers,
especially Aristotle) that Reason and Scripture do herein little differ; Non
aliud natura, aliud sapientia dicit: Nature and Revelation speak the same
things, and we may well say with Tertullian, Tam facile pronuncias quam
Christiano necesse est; Reason here utters baptized truth, and each man's Soul
is Christian. And therefore the same Father, in his Book De Testimonio Animae,
draws such a plain Confession of these Truths from a Heathen Soul, that he
wonders how a thing not Christian should have so much Christianity as to
rejoice at good actions, and to grow sullen after bad; to promise itself a
reward for Virtue, and fear a judgment to come for Vice; Rather than be an
Atheist to commit Idolatry, and rather than God should not be worshipped, to
offer Sacrifices to the Devil, and then concludes, That it is all one here to go
by Reason or Revelation; Nec multum refer an a Deo formata sit Animae
conscientia an a literis Dei, that the difference is little between the Book of
the Law and the Conscience of a Man. Some Principles of Law breathed into us
with our Soul being so manifest, that they are seen by their own light, and
stand upon their own bottom. Nature approves them, and condemns the contrary;
and this we learn from St. Paul himself. For as Romans 1. 26. he brands some vile
Practices of the Gentile Romans, as so many Violences and Contumelies to
Nature; and Ephesians. 5. 12. mentions other things done by them in secret, which
'twas a shame to name, that is, such as were in the very Nature and
Constitution of them shameful: So Phil. 4. 8. He speaks of other things that
were true and honest, just, praiseworthy and of good report; and to show the
difference of such things to be natural, he appeals in a certain case to the
Judgment of Nature, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not even nature it self teach you? (not
general custom as Grotius there, the word (...) refuses De Com^.
that interpretation, and the learned Salmasius clearly confutes it.) And our
Lord himself does the same too, Luke 12. 57. Why even of your selves judge ye
not what is right? As if he should have said, you need go no further than your
selves to learn your Duty, your own Reason is able to tell you what is right
and what not.

But there are, whom nothing can satisfy, Part. 2.
and though God and Nature, the general Sense and Reason of Mankind, and
Scripture to boot, do make a plain difference between Good and Evil, yet either
will own none in the Nature of the things themselves, or else are so partial as
to give Evil the precedence to Good, if we may measure their Judgments by their
Lives and Conversations; Those I may term speculative, and these practical
Epicureans.

1. Of the first sort are they who resolve all Morality into the Wills and
Pleasures of Legislators, that will allow nothing to be good or bad, but what
civil Magistrates in order to politic Ends shall declare to be so; making all
under them with the first matter equally susceptible, of whatsoever Forms they
shall please to introduce: As if Virtue and Vice, like Coin, were to have a
public stamp upon them to make them current, or that Morality like changeable
Taffety, were to vary according to the different Reflection of that Light men
cast upon it. An opinion, which if it should prevail, would leave no moral
Honesty, much less Religion in the World. For should Governors be as bad as
they who broach this Doctrine are and would have them to be, what a strange
Rule should Mankind have to go by? And if public Interest were to be the
Measure and Standard of Good and Evil, when that should alter (as nothing is
more variable) what is now a Virtue, might perhaps in a short time become a
Vice, and so Rewards and Punishments, have their Vicissitudes also, and at last
interfere. It Is certain that some Laws have been enacted that were so many
direct Violations of the Law of Nature, and contrary to the general Sense of
Mankind, and that such might still be made, it is not impossible, while there
remain in men the same unreasonable Lusts and Passions; whereof such Laws were
the results; and yet these, if they have the public Seal upon them, shall be
as good and binding as the best that ever were established in the opinion of
these Promoters of a moral Indifferency; whereas in the Judgment of all Learned
men, humane Laws are then void and null, when they do in the least swerve from
that of Nature. And it is a great Error to think that men's Laws do make things
morally good or bad, whereas they do but declare them to be so; supposing them
to be such in their own Natures, and deriving all their Virtue from that very
supposition. They take it for granted that there are such things as Virtue and
Vice, and add Rewards and Punishments to invite or deterr us from what
naturally we are prone or averse to, but would not so readily embrace or
decline without these External motives or restraints. All they do here is to
graft on Natures stocks, to cherish and nurse up those Seeds of Virtue which
are already in our very Being and Constitution. For before there were any
positive Laws of men there were Natural, certain moral Principles of Good and
Evil, which Reason obliged all men to; As, To do as we would be done to, to
worship God, obey and honor Parents; The latter so congenial to us, that Moses
and other Legislators have thought it superfluous to order any Punishment for
parricide, imagining none could be so unnatural as to commit it. Such natural
Obligations are antecedent to any humane Constitutions, and in the Judgment of
Aristotle as fixed, and determined as any physical Beings: So that as there will
be Colors though there were no Eye to view them; there will be such a thing as
Virtue and Vice, though there were no Law either for or against it.

Nor can any pretense of public Interest alter their Property. Utilitas prope
justi matter and aequi, though in some sense very commendable, (for all Laws
should aim at the public good, without which they should be no better than
Snares and Traps) yet in that wherein some take it, it is in no wise tolerable;
Their meaning by it being in short this, that there is no Interest but what is
merely secular, that Virtue and Vice are in themselves insignificant things, to
be taken up or laid down as they are subservient to politic Ends; As if God
and Nature were to stoop to Mammon, or that the distance between Honestum and
Utile were so irreconcilable, that 'twere impossible for them to meet
together. An Error as old as Tully's Days, which he complains of and confutes,
which excellently serves the turns of loose men, who cannot better defame and
exterminate Morality than by persuading the World it is an useless thing, as
indeed it is to them that desire not to be bound up by it, and therefore decry
it in all others, especially them who are to make Laws and see them executed,
who if they should be virtuous must of necessity shame and punish all those who
resolve to be vicious. But could these men once persuade Legislators, that just
and unjust were things indifferent and alterable at their pleasure, they would
no doubt at last as easily persuade themselves too that obedience, and
disobedience to them were as arbitrary and indifferent. What disorder and
confusion this one Principle would introduce into the World, that Virtue and
Vice were founded only in humane Constitutions and politic Interest, and not
in the Nature of the things themselves, is easy to judge by putting this one
Supposition. Suppose the reverse of all we now call Virtue were solemnly
enacted, and the Practice of Fraud, Perjury and Falseness to a man's word, and
all manner of Vice and Wickedness were established by a Law. I ask now if the
cafe between Virtue and Vice were thus altered, would that we call Vice in
process of time gain the reputation of Virtue, and that which we call Virtue
grow odious and contemptible to humane Nature? If it would not, then there is
something in the Nature of Good and Evil, of Virtue and Vice, which does not
depend upon the pleasure of Authority, nor is subject to any Arbitrary
Constitution. But that it would not be thus is most certain, because no
Government could subsist upon such Terms. For the very enjoining of Fraud and
Rapine, Perjury and breach of Trust does apparently destroy the greatest End of
Government, which is to preserve men in their Rights against the Encroachments
of Fraud and Violence. And this End being destroyed, humane Societies would
immediately fly in pieces, and men would necessarily fall into a state of War.
Which plainly shows that Virtue and Vice are not Arbitrary things, but that
there is a natural immutable and eternal Reason for that we call moral Good,
and against that we call moral Evil. God has established these things upon as
firm and solid a Basis, as he has done the Earth which none can remove. And
therefore what Tertullian Apolog. c. 5.
Ironically said of the Roman Senate, that would not allow Christ a Room among
their Gods at the Instance and recommendation of Tiberius; Nisi homini Deus
placuerit, Deus non erit; is applicable to all those who make the Wills of
Legislators, the Measure of Good and Evil; Virtue, must not be Virtue, nor
Vice, Vice, without men's Consent and Approbation.

2. But besides these there is another sort of men, who not content to make
Good and Evil indifferent, are so wickedly partial as to prefer Evil to Good.
These are all practical Epicureans, who set up Anti-tables in opposition to
those of God and Nature, live as if they aimed at being scandalous as well as
vicious, and loved the Guilt as well as the Pleasures of Sin, that give all the
reputation they can to Vice, which is the natural Reward of Virtue, decry all
Goodness in themselves and others, and stamp God's Image on Satan's Dross. Such
are all they who as St. Paul says, glory Phil. 3. 19. Tacitus.
in their shame, Quorum novissima voluptus infamia est (the Character which the
Roman Historian gives of a prodigious Impiety) that boast of their Infamy; one
of his Atheism, another of the Trophies of his Drunkenness, and a third of the
Variety of his Uncleanness. Pride compasses them about like a Chain, Psalm. 73.
6. They deck themselves with it as with a Robe of Honor, wear it as their
Ornament, and bring it forth into open view like Agrippa and Bernice in the
Acts, (...), with Act. 25. 23.
much Pomp and State, glorying as much in the Scars they receive in Satan's
service as ever St. Paul did in the Marks of the Lord Jesus, and have not so
much as the Religion of Hypocrisy. Sin is Ephesians. 5. 11.
called the Work of Darkness, because they who commit it usually hate the
Light; and therefore They that are drunk, are drunk in the Night, says the 1
These. 5. 7.
Apostle. This was wont to be the Custom: Vice durst not show its ugly Face by
day. But how many turn the Works of Darkness into Works of Light, and produce
them on the Theater of the World; not content with the Conscience of them,
unless as the Pharisees dealt their Alms and said their Prayers, they may do
them so as to be seen of men. Matt. 6. 5.
And hence it is that many belie themselves in Sin, usurp Vice, and steal the
glorious Reputation of exceeding Sinfulness, as if the Impiety were
meritorious, and the shame of doing ill the only thing to be ashamed of. St.
Augustine in his Confessions complains of himself, that in his younger Days he
did so; that in compliance with some of this shameless humor, he did often
boast of imaginary Vices, and attributed Sins to himself he never had
committed, being more afraid of displeasing his vile Companions than his God.
And doubtless many, to avoid the Imputation of Temperance, and the Scandal of a
singular and affected Sobriety, labor all they can to be thought more wicked
than sometimes they are. Nor is it enough for such to wear out all the
Impressions of the Law written in their own Hearts, and wholly to subdue their
own Consciences, unless they may shame and baffle all Goodness out of those of
other men, by setting off Vice with all Luster and Advantage that possibly may
recommend it to their esteem; while on the other side they labor as much to
put Virtue out of countenance and render it unfashionable and ridiculous, by
the antic Dress they give it, clothing it, as the Jews did our Lord, in a
Fool's Coat, to move Laughter and Contempt; the Business of every drolling
Buffoon, who thinks he cannot better disparage Virtue, than by representing it
as a melancholy and pedantick thing, an Enemy to good Manners and civil
Conversation; a Contradiction to Nature, and a restraint on that Liberty and
those Appetites it gives us. Now if this be not to cast off all discriminating
Notions of Good and Evil; if this be not to expose Nature Travesty, and by a
perverse kind of Heraldry to set Evil before Good, it is hard to say what it is:
Doubtless of all other men, these best deserve the Prophet's Character here,
and fall directly within the Compass of his Curse. The last thing to be
considered.

The Law of Nature, of which Morality Part III
is the most considerable part, is so unchangeable, that some, how warrantably
I know not, do affirm it is not in the Power of God himself to alter it. It Is
hard to say that he that has Power to make a Law, cannot alter it, since in
some Instances we find he has done so; but they are indeed more rare than his
miraculous Dispensings with the ordinary Course of Nature. And as God is
pleased sometimes to vary that to show himself Lord of Nature, so has he
sometimes changed this, to let us know He is that one Lawgiver St. James Jam.
4. 12.
speaks of, who can prescribe to the Conscience. To endeavor then to alter the
property of moral Good and Evil is to entrench upon the Almighty's Prerogative,
and to call Evil Good; to stamp our Impression on his Bullion, is the worst
sort of Coinage, and no less than flat Rebellion against the Supreme Majesty of
Heaven. Job expressly Job. 24. 13. Heb. 6. 4.
calls it a rebelling against the light, the Light of Nature, chapter 24. ver. 13.
A Sin in some measure against the Holy Ghost too, (all natural as well as
revealed Light being from Him) especially when it is done out of that reprobate
or injudicious mind Heathens were given up to, who held the truth in
unrighteousness; i. e. did by their wicked Romans 1. 18.
lives and conversations, so imprison those common notices of God and Morality,
which naturally shined in* their Understandings, that they could no more appear
or come forth than men that are shut up close Prisoners in a dark Dungeon. This
was the great Crime of the Heathen World, and for this Cause God gave them up
to vile Affections to be directed by such a crooked Rule as they had framed to
themselves, and be led by the Wisp of their false Imaginations, over Boggs and
Precipices into ruin. It Is usual with God as to make one Sin the punishment of
another; so to suit Punishments to Crimes. Thus when Heathens abused natural
Light, he suffered them so far to be besotted, as not only to worship Stocks
and Stones, but Vices and Sins. Thus while some Jews abused revealed Light, he
threatens them Zeph. 11. 17. See Micah 3. 6.
with putting out their Light in obscure Darkness; as he does Christians who go
against the Light of the Gospel, to remove their Candlestick, and send them
strong Delusions to believe a Lie, take Darkness for Light and Light for
Darkness. And if the Light that is in Man Mat. 6. 23.
be Darkness, how great must that Darkness be? Surely by so much the greater,
by how much their Light was so. And therefore Christians, who besides the
Natural and Mosaical, have the glorious Light of the Gospel to direct them as
to the Measure of Good and Evil, must needs be much more inexcusable, if Jude
10.
they shall err in their choice, and in what they know naturally as brute
Beasts, in those very things corrupt themselves, and so have nothing left to
distinguish them from Heathens, but a better Name and worse Practices. For how
many Heathens were there, who if they should now appear on the Stage of the
World, would shame most Christians of it? What Justice, Temperance, Frugality,
Conscience of Oaths and Promises, Severity and Strictness of Life among them?
and what Injustice, Intemperance, Prodigality, Falseness and Universal
Depravation of Manners among these? Certainly if our Righteousness exceed not
theirs, We shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; But if our
Unrighteousness shall exceed theirs, what Hell will be deep or dark enough for
us? Shall not Uncircumcision, which is by Nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge
thee who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law, said St. Paul
to the Jews? Let every Christian make particular Application to himself, and
see whether with the Advantage of a far clearer Revelation he does not come
short of Jews, nay whether he makes any Conscience of doing those things which
the bare Light of natural Reason taught Heathens to abhor; and yet while he
damns them for their moral Virtues, he can absolve himself, though guilty of
their foulest ones. It were to be wished that many Christians were but as good
as some Heathens were, that they would at least follow Nature (the Dictates of
natural Reason) their Errors would be fewer, and their Account less; and were
they faithful in this smaller Talent, God would then entrust them with a
greater. The common Notices of Good and Evil are the natural Man's Book, as
Papists say Images are Laymens; and he that well studies this Book and is
learned in it, may not despair of taking a higher Degree of perfection in the
School of Christ, Christianity being nothing else but Nature refined and
exalted, and all the Laws of Christ concerning moral Actions, the very Law of
Nature but in a clearer Character, and more correct Impression. Indeed the
Light of Nature is but dim and its Assistance weak, and they who followed that
did but grope in the Dark, and were apt ever and anon to stumble. And no
Marvel: For some Evil does so well imitate Good, that it is hard for a natural
Eye to make out the just Bounds and Limits of each of them. The (...) or Rule
that marks out Virtue from its neighboring Vice being not so plain in every
place as to chalk out exactly, to this point thou may come and no farther;
and therefore we find the best Philosophers, Ethics, so imperfect, that some
Heathen Virtues are little better than Christian men's Vices. Besides the
Universal ill practice of mankind, by putting a false gloss on Evil did so
disguise it, that the mistake of that for Good was very easy. But Christ
having in his Gospel given us such exact Rules whereby to judge of them, One
would think it were impossible now for men to be deceived. And yet we find
nothing so common, and the moralists Observation most true, -- Pauci dignoscere
possunt vera bona atque illis multum diversa -- For while some look upon these
things through such false Glasses as do alter their shape and proportion, or
their Organ is vitiated by some such bad humor as discolours every Object
presented to it; while the strength of passion blinds some men's reason or the
pleasures of sin corrupts it, and wicked men do so cunningly suit their
Principles to others bad Tempers, that they are presently swallowed See 2 Pet.
2. 18.
without chewing; It Is hard to know things that are excellent, (...) as the
Apostle's word is, Phil. 1. 10. things that differ, especially men being
willing to believe all lawful that gratifies their vicious humor and
inclination. And this was it which rendered the Heathen Divinity so plausible to
the World, and the vile Doctrines of Gnostics to loose Christians, that it
brought in such Shoals of Proselytes to them. Upon all which Accounts David's
Prayer will be very seasonable for every one of us, Psalm. 119. 66. Teach me, O
Lord, good Judgment and Knowledge. In the Original it is, good taste, to try and
relish what is good; or in the Language of the Apostle, give me Senses
Exercised to discern Good and Evil. And while we thus beg Heb. 5. 14.
God's Light and Direction, let us as Christ bids us, make our Eye good and
Mat. 6. 22.
single, by clearing it from all carnal prejudice, and that Dust and Filth
which Satan and the World cast into it, still rubbing and polishing natural
Truths, that they may shine out brighter and continually blowing up these
Sparks into a flame. Thus if we be not wanting to our selves God will improve
our natural into a divine Light: He will show us what is good by lifting up the
Light of his Countenance upon us, and enable us not only to call every thing by
it proper Name, Good, good, and Evil, evil; but withal to choose the one and
refuse the other; That so the Curse of the Text may be turned into a Blessing,
and the Seeds of moral Virtue well cultivated here, may yield us the Fruit of a
blessed Immortality hereafter; Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.Amen.

Soli Dei Gloria in aeternum.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. SAint Luke XI. 27, 28. And it came to pass as he spoke these things,
a certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. But he said, Tea,
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Page 1 SERMON
II. Tit. II. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. p.
34 SERMON III. Tit. II. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. p. 61. SERMON IV. St. Luke II. 22. And when the days of her purification
according to the Law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought him to
Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord. p. 87 SERMON V. Joh. XIX. 37. And again
another Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they have pierced. p. 124
SERMON VI. Acts II. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of
death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. p. 159
SERMON VII. Joh. XVI. 7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is expedient
for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. p. 197 SERMON VIII. Heb. I. 14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall
be heirs of salvation? p. 242 SERMON IX. Colos. I. 12. Giving thanks unto the
Father which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light. p. 287 SERMON X. St. Matthew. VII. 16. Ye shall know them by their
fruits. p. 321 SERMON XI. Joh. XVI. 2, 3. They shall put you out of the
Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he
does God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have
not known the Father nor Me. p. 399 SERMON XII. 1 Cor. XV. 19. If in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. p. 458 SERMON
XII. Romans XII 1. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that
ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, SERMON XIII. holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service. p. 490 SERMON XIV. Esaias V. 20. Woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil. p. 529
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
AThenae Oxonienses: or, an Exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who
have had their Education in the Ancient and Famous University of Oxford; from
1500, to the End of the Year 1690; Representing the Birth, Fortune, Preferments
and Death of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their
Lives; the Fate and Character of their Writings: The Work being so complete,
that no Writer of Note of this Nation, for near Two hundred years past, is
omitted, fol. 2 Vol.

Sir William Davenant's Works, fol.

Comedies and Tragedies, by Tho. Killigrew, fol.

Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays, fol.

Shakespeare's Works, fol.

Voyages and Adventures of Ferdinand Pinto, a Portugal; who was five times
Shipwrackt, sixteen times Sold, and thirteen times made a Slave, in Aethiopia,
China, etc. Written by Himself, fol.

Dr. Pocock on Joel.

A Critical History of the Text and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with a Refutation
of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
England.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God, Pathetically discoursed of, in
a Letter to a Friend: by the Honorable Robert Boil. The Seventh Edition, much
Corrected.

Memoirs of the Court of Spain: Writ by the Ingenious French Lady, and
Englished by Mr. Tho Brown, Octavo.

Memoirs of the Court of France: by the same Author, Octavo.

Books Sold by T. Bennet.
The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Roman Emperor: Translated out
of Greek into English, with Notes: by Dr. Causabon. To this Edition is added,
the Life of the said Emperor: with an Account of Stoic Philosophy; As also
Remarks on the Meditations: All newly written by the famous Monsieur and Madam
Dacier.

Waller's Poems complete, in Two Parts.

Sir John Denham's Poems.

Aristeae Historia LXXII Interpretum, accessere Veterum Testimonia de eorum
Versione, e Theatro Sheldoniano.

The Works of the Learned, or an Historical Account, and Impartial Judgment, of
the Books newly Printed, both Foreign and Domestic: together with the State of
Learning in the World. Published Monthly, by J. de la Crose, a late Author of
the Universal Bibliotheque. This first Volume beginning in August last, is
completed this present April; with Indexes to the whole.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy at his Primary Visitation, May 5.
1691.

Five Sermons before the King and Queen: by Dr. Meggot, Dean of Winchester.

A Sermon before the King and Queen, by the Lord Bishop of Worcester.

A Sermon before the House of Commons on the Thanksgiving-day: by Dr. Jane,
Dean of Gloucester.

ERRATA.
Page 148. lin. 13. for (...) read (...) P. 149. l. 2. dele 11.

P. 237. l. ult. for nor, r. not.

252. l. 14. for miracles, r. miraculous.

264. l. 21. for Dacius, r. Decius.

275. lin. penult. r. abasement.

278. l. 1. for Particle, r. Participle.

289. l. 19. r. makes them heavenly.

331. l. 14. r. not to be.

338. l. 17. for flatters, r. flatterers.


