THE MALICE OF THE Independent-Agent AGAIN REBUKED, And his Falsehood Detected;
Chiefly about the Man Christ Jesus; in Reply to his Answer to a Sheet,
Entitled, The Independent-Agent.
His Ly^s shall not so effect it, Jer. 48. 10.
SInce that William Haworth (an Independent-Guide) has pretended he was
encouraged to print against us, and that we might well say, that we have all
this while waged War not only with single W. H. but with all the Independent
Party in England; and that be need not fear but that he shall have their
Prayers and Encouragement to stand by him, etc. in his Book entit. J^s. Naz. p.
38, 39.

Thus eminent, thus popular, thus potent an Agent and Representative of all the
Independent Party has W. H. rendered himself, which if true, their Cause must
needs be concluded in him, either to stand or fall with him. But being closely
urged in our last sheet against him, To produce his Deputation for this his
undertaking against us under the hands of some of the chief Pastors of the
Independent Congregations, or otherwise we shall absolutely look upon his Work
as the Fruit of his own silly Presumption and Usurpation: as we had cause so to
do since he bragged so loud, and so lively undertook to personate all the
Independent Party in England. But instead of producing such Deputation, he
gives us this put off, viz. My Deputation for this Work is from the Word of
Christ, Jud. 3. I need no other Deputation, p. 8. of his sheet Answer.

Whereas any Counterfeit may pretend the same from others Lines; an immediate
Mission he pretends not for his Work against us; he comes off after a sorry and
beggarly manner here; what is this to his approbation from his honorable Party,
the Independents, whom he has taken on him to represent and personate? but we
thought they were wiser then to trust their Cause in his Hands or Management;
therefore how plain is it, that his Work against us in his several Books and
Pamphlets, is a Fruit of his own silly presumption and usurpation, and that he
is but a Counterfeit Agent, who appears to represent such an honorable Party,
as he calls them, and not so much as two or three of those most honorable
among them dare trust him with their Cause, or adventure to own him in print;
it is probable the wiser sort of them also look upon Him to be a presumptuous
Busie-Body, except some of his prejudiced Hearers, Benefactors, and such like.

Note also, that we referred him for a more full Answer (to the Substance of
his Book) then we have given about Christ's manhood, entitled, The Way Cast
Up, etc. by George Keith: But this he takes no notice of, but proceeds to cover
himself with his former Falsehoods and Reiterations of Matters already answered.

To make his Independent Cause seem very credible, he gives us this proffer,
viz. If the Independents please to take cognizance of the Debate, I dare appeal
to them, page 1. What a wonderful Hazard this man dares run! that he dares
adventure to appeal to his Own Party! It seems he has far more Confidence in
them then they have in him, in that hitherto they dare not so far trust him as
to allow him a Deputation, or vindicate his Work in Print, he is left to shift
for himself; only he would make us ^elieve, he has them all on his side,
because of his owning their Savoy Confession, whenas he has writ far more
against the Quakers then that comes to in his several Books and Pamphlets,
containing many false Doctrines, Contradictions, Slanders, Abuses and
Perversions, which are not in that Confession; and had he not persisted
therein, we might have forborne farther taking notice thereof; but we must yet
show what a bad Cause his is, that needs Lies and Slanders for its Refuge.

And now again, as to some of those horrid Falsehoods and Blasphemies which he
most falsely says Are the Quakers Doctrines, whereof he says, Three are culled
out of Thirteen, so that Ten remain upon us still, page 2. as if we granted all
we have not cited, which also is an implicit Untruth; for we plainly tell him
(after the citation of a few of his Slanders and Reproachful Language) viz.
These, with many more Slanders and Revilings are dispersed throughout W. H's
last Book; see Independent Agent, p. 3.

The first of the three that he says are the Quakers Doctrines, is, That the
Ordinances of the Gospel are vain and ceased. This being denied, he quotes
William Penn thus, viz. I affirm, Circumcision is as much in force as
Water Baptism, and the Pascal Lamb as Bread and Wine -- the Appellation
Ordinances of Christ I therefore Renounce as -- Inevangelical -- they are --
not now required, Reason against Railing, page 108, 109. From whence this
Independent Agent concludes, viz. There is Proof enough that the Quakers
Doctrine is, that the Ordinances of the Gospel are vain and ceased. Wherein his
Charge and Inference is still false, even as to matter of fact; as if the
Quakers did so teach concerning what are really the Ordinances of the Gospel;
which is a falsely begging the Question. W. P. believes not that Water Baptism
and Bread and Wine, practiced by the Anabaptists, etc. (against whom he was
writing) to be Ordinances of Christ, or now required; he does not say, that the
Ordinances of the Gospel or of Christ are vain and ceased, but only that these
are not such. See now how W. H. has plainly belyed the Quakers.

2. His second Doctrine charged upon the Quakers is, That it was the s Devil
that suffered without the Gates, etc. for proof he brings u this Certificate,
viz.

WE whose Names are subscribed do testify, that when this Question was asked
Samuel Pryor a Quaker (now dwelling at Hatfield Hall in Hartfordshire, by
Joseph Saward, concerning the Soul of Christ being made an Offering for Sin,
whether it was God or the Devil that was made an Offering for Sin? the said
Samuel Pryor answered, That it was the Devil that was made an Offering for Sin.

Joseph Saward, Sarah Saward, Sarah Far.

Note here, that though they have varyed in this Certificate from the words [
Suffered without the Gate [first charged by W. Haworth, and instead thereof to
[ was made an Offering for Sin] which shows his Uncertainty and Fallacy in
stating matters of fact; yet both, as stated by him and his Witnesses, being
bad enough, are utterly denied by the Quakers, as falsely charged upon them. And
by the way let us query of W. H. and his Witnesses about their Question, 1st, If
the Question in the said Certificate be owned by the Independent Teachers, etc.
as a Learned, Sound or Scriptural Question? And secondly, If the Independents
do use thus to Catechize their People, viz. of the Soul of Christ being made an
Offering for Sin, whether it was God or the Devil that was made an Offering for
Sin? implying that the Soul of Christ (which was made an Offering for Sin, and
which he poured out unto Death, etc. Isa. 53.) must needs be either God or the
Devil; which is as condemnable as the Answer, which they say Samuel Pryor gave:
for, to say it was the Devil, is Blasphemy; and to say it was God, is not only
Unreasonable and False Doctrine, but also contraty to what W. H. has frequently
said of the Soul of Christ's Manhood, as against its being turned into an
Immense Deity; therefore he should have reproved Joseph Saward for his foolish
and ungodly Question (seeing he own; it to be his) as well as Samuel Pryor, if
guilty of such an Answer, and teach his Hearers better then thus irreverently
to catechize any Persons, or to expose their Folly therein in Print, as he has
done his Disciple's unsavory Question, without Reproof. But hear what the
Person accused says to clear himself, viz.

THese are to certify all Persons concerned, that whereas William Haworth has
published in Print, that I Samuel Pryor was asked this Question by Joseph
Saward, concerning the Soul of Christ being made an Offering for Sin, Whether
it was God or the Devil that was made an Offering for Sin? unto which Question
it is said that I answered, That it was the Devil that was made an Offering for
Sin, subscribed Joseph Saward, Sarah Saward, Sarah Far. Now this I affirm is a
most false Accusation and wicked Slander; for never was any such Question asked
me by Joseph Saward, or any other, nor did ever any such Blasphemous Words
concerning the Soul of Christ proceed out of my Mouth, or enter into my Heart
or Thoughts; and I am clear in the Sight of God. So the just God, that knows
the Secrets of all Hearts, judge betwixt my Accusers and me in this matter.

Samuel Pryor.

Now hear what his Father and Brother say in this Matter, viz.

THis is to certify all whom it may concern, that I am Father to Samuel Pryor,
and that my Son was by me instructed in a Profession of Religion before he was
one called a Quaker, and since that also has been careful in reading the
Scriptures; and having always lived with me, I have oftentimes discoursed with
him about his Principles since he was a Quaker, and he has been asked by me,
whether he owned the Scriptures, (because he talked of a Light within him) he
told me, he owned them from the beginning to the end, and that Christ which
suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem was both God and Man, and that it was
this Christ Jesus that was made an Offering for Sin, and not the Devil, as
Joseph Saward, his Wife and Maid have wrongfully accused my Son, in saying, it
was the Devil that was offered for Sin; for I never heard him speak any such
words, neither do I believe he ever had such a Blasphemous Thought or Word: I
my self have been a Hearer of William Haworth, and formerly had a good Opinion
of him, until I found him so forward to print Lies.

John Pryor the Elder,

THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that I am Elder Brother to
Samuel Pryor, and did live with him twenty years, and since he has been called
a Quaker I have had often Reasoning with him, and several Disputes, and he
always owned Christ Jesus that suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem. And
whereas Mr. Haworth has printed an Accusation against him of Joseph Saward,
and his Wife and Maid, I dare believe it is very false; for I never heard my
Brother hold or speak such Principles and Blasphemous Tenants, as he is in that
Certificate accused to say.

John Pryor the Younger.

Note that the said Samuel Pryor has come some years amongst us, called
Quakers, and we never understood that ever it was his Judgment to slight or
disesteem the Sufferings of Christ for Sin, much less to speak any such
contemptible words of Christ, or his Suffering, as are charged upon us
concerning him; but if we could find, that he did but at unawares speak any
such words as those before cited, in answer to Joseph Saward's absurd and
tempting Question about the Soul of Christ, we should severely reprehend and
admonish him about it; howbeit, if it had been so, 'twas no ingenuous part of
W. H. or his Hearers to catch and snatch away words unadvisedly slipping from
any Person upon a surprizal by a corrupt Question, and then to expose him in
print to be knocked in the Head in the Streets or Highway for a Blasphemer,
without first moderately enquiring into his Principle and Faith in the Matter
after such words unwarily spoken; and not only so, but it must be charged as
the Quakers Doctrine, how absurd and blasphemous soever: O disingenuous
Persons! is this your Religion? far short of common Civility and Morality among
the very Heathen.

3. The third Doctrine charged by William Haworth upon the Quakers is most
horrid, viz. That Mary was a Whore, and Christ a Bastard. And for Proof he bids
us read the following Certificate, viz.

THis is to certify all whom it may concern, that I whose Name is subscribed
did hear James Naylor the Quaker say these words at York, in Contempt of Christ
Jesus, viz. Mary was a Whore, and Christ a Bastard.

William Craven.

William Craven should have certified the time when, and in what place it was
in York, and in whose Presence besides himself, that he did hear J. Naylor say
these words in Contempt of Christ, and on what Occasion? he should have been
plain, if he had not been conscious and afraid of being manifestly detected in
this thing; for we are fully persuaded he is a False Accuser, and has most
grossly belyed James Naylor in this matter.

1. Because he has written and divulged so much in his Books in Honor to Jesus
Christ, according to the Scriptures.

2. Because neither W. C. nor any other of his Brethren have given us any such
Certificate against J. N. either in his Lifetime, or since, for above these
twenty years, until of late (many years after J. N's Death) that W. Haworth was
minded through his deadly Malice to brand the People called Quakers therewith,
as by telling the World, These are the Quakers Doctrines, viz. That it was the
Devil that suffered without the Gates; that Mary was a Whore, and Christ a
Bastard; which are so horrid and monstrous, that its with a Dread and a kind of
Reluctance that we are occasioned to recite them.

By what follows the Reader may see how uncertain and inconsistent William
Craven (who is William Haworth's Witness) is with himself, viz.

ABout those words concerning Mary and Christ, whereof William Haworth has
charged James Naylor and the People called Quakers in Print, William Craven
lately told me, That James Naylor was Prisoner in York Castle when he spoke
those words, and that it was about thirty years since.

Witness H. Stout.

Which I suppose is as true as the Story he told of a Man, who being set upon a
Watch on a High Tower (fell asleep upon a great Gun) and fell down upon a
Pavement, and had no hurt, and came and knocked at the Castle Door, to the
Amazement of theCLOSER that were within.

H. S.

Something farther added to William Craven's Certificate against J. N. as to
time and Place, etc.

THese may certify, that on the 15th of the 2d month, 1678. at the House of
William Rudd in Hertford, W. Craven being asked in what year James Naylor
should speak those words which were charged to be spoken by him in a
Certificate under William Craven's Hand in Print in William Haworth's late
Sheet, he further says, that it was between twenty six and thirty years since
and that he (J. N.) was then a Prisoner in York Castle, and that he could take
his Oath of the Truth hereof.

William Rudd, Richard Thomas.

Note. So some through Envy and Malice, or Self-Interest, will Forswear
themselves (and so become perjured) to injure others by Falsehoods and
Forgeries. And if William Craven should swear to his Certificate before cited,
with these Circumstances of Time and Place, it would be no hard matter (if it
were before a Judge of Assize) to invalidate his Testimony, and prove him a
Forsworn Perjured Person to his utter Disgrace and Shame; since 1st, it is
evident that James Naylor, the Quaker, so called (who as such a one is accused)
never was Prisoner in York Castle. 2. That between twenty six and thirty years
since (before the 2d Month, 1678.) he was not a Quaker that we can understand
(but an Independent, and one of the more Religious and Serious sort too) much
less a Prisoner in York Castle as a Quaker (between twenty six and thirty years
since) for it was near the latter-end of the year 1652. that he was Prisoner at
Appleby in Westmoreland, and but the Summer before in the same year came forth
as a Quaker, and it was some time after his coming forth that his Mouth was
opened to preach and dispute for Truth, having before that been a Member of an
Independent-Society at Horbery in Yorkshire, having been an Officer under
General Lambert in his Troop; vid. Readiness Errand, page 29. and the Narrative of
his Examination, page 2. with the following Testimony.

York, the 13th of the 2 d Month, 1678.
EDward Nightingall and Thomas Wait, who served their Apprentiships in the
City of York, and both having been Housekeepers near thirty years, the said
Thomas Wait being all along conversant with Prisoners that came in upon a
Conscientious Account, yet neither of them ever knew James Naylor a Prisoner in
York Castle. Also Judith Key, Widow, aged about Eighty Years, and has lived
in the City of York Fifty years or upwards, and near Thirty years of the time
has gone under the Name of a Quaker, and her House always at Friends service;
she affirms, that in all that time she knows that James Naylor never was a
Prisoner in York Castle.

Witness their Hands Thomas Wait, Edward Nightingall, Judith Key, John Hall.


THis may certify all Persons to whom this present Writing shall come, that I
Audry Nunns, Wife of John Nunns, formerly Wife of Thomas Bayock Jailer of York
Castle, was well acquainted with James Naylor, and to my knowledge he was never
Prisoner in York Castle in all his time.

York, this 12th of April, 78. Witness my Hand, Audry Nuns.

THis Audry Nuns abovementioned says, that she and her former Husband
Thomas Bayock entered in the year 1651. and kept the Goal six years (and says,
she durst swear it if required: she keeps an Inn in the City) This we are
Witnesses to, as also to the Certificate above.

Edward Nightingall, Jo. Tailor, John Hall.

See now, Reader, how we have traced and evidently detected William Craven in
his Certificate, and found him false in his Evidence, to his own and his
Abettor William Haworth's utter Disgrace; for publishing such a malicious
Slander against James Naylor, as that Mary was a Whore, and Christ was a
Bastard; and W. Haworth most wickedly charging the People called Quakers
therewith, as being one of their Doctrines, for which let Shame cover this
Independent Teacher, and those that take his part.

And now to conclude, we have this further to add, appealing to our more
moderate Neighbors in Hertford, who have known us many years, whether they
ever apprehended us to be of so Unchristian Practices in our Conversation; for
if there be such Antichristian Principles and Blasphemous Tenants held and
professed by us (as William Haworth and his Adherents have wickedly scandalized
us withal) they would sometime or other break forth into Unsavory and
Antichristian Practices (as Christ says) By their Fruits you shall know them.
But it does most evidently appear now what the drift of W. H. and his
Accomplices designed in their scribbling and contesting against us, that by
writing and asserting Lies they may render us as odious as may be (not only to
get our Nest at Hertford (as he calls it) broken up (which W. H. says, its
high time it were) but also (as much as in him lies) to render us such as
assert Blasphemous Principles (because he has gotten some Forgers to witness
it against one or two Persons (all which is denied) that so our Lives and
Estates might be endangered through their Malice, by casting that upon many
which is unquestionably false concerning any one, as by what has been before
said does more fully appear.

And as for our Principles, we are still ready by the Lord's assistance to
maintain them by Scripture and otherwise in Print and Testimony to all
ingenuous and impartial Persons: but it seems evident it is, our Destruction he
longs for, or otherwise he would not print such horrible Lies of us: Oh Wicked
Wretch!

And now hear James Naylor's own Confessions to Christ Jesus, out of his Books.

[ Possession of the Living Faith] printed about 1658. and reprinted 1664. and
inserted after the Preface in the later Impression (viz.) Christ Jesus, the
Immanuel, (of whose Sufferings the Scriptures declare) him alone I confess
before men, for whose sake I have denied whatever was dear to me in this World,
that I might win him, and be found in him, and not in my self, whose Life and
Virtue I find daily manifest, etc. In the Fear of God the Father, in Honor to
Jesus Christ, etc. He was a perfect Example at Jerusalem, p. 6. This Redemption
I found in Christ Jesus, etc. page 20, 21. Concerning the Name of Christ, viz.
That he sits at God's Right Hand in Heavenly Places -- by his Sufferings to
redeem them -- and they who are gathered into this Name, hold it as a Holy
Power, and DARE NOT BLASPHEME IT -- Let every one that names the Name of Christ
depart from Iniquity, which Name to such is Salvation, page 65. Our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, etc. That the holy Name of Christ may be glorified in
you, etc. page 71, 74. (as printed with others of his Books.

James Naylor's Love to the Lost, printed about the year 1655. He confesses to
the Redeemer Christ Jesus, page 18. The Reproach of Christ as great Riches,
page 19. Christ honored as Lawgiver, Judge and King, page 32. Christ Jesus
God's Righteousness, page 36. -- and his Son, page 37 -- to the same Spirit
which raised Jesus from the Dead -- all as they are baptized therein grow into
one God the Father, and the Son Jesus Christ, page 47. Follow Christ, page 50.
Suffer the loss of all to witness Christ, page 51. God the Father has given
his Son for a Leader and Guide, p. 52. Now Israel -- of them was Christ to be
born, was made of a Woman under the Law, page 68. God the Father revealed, and
his Power and God head in his Son Jesus Christ, which in him dwells, etc. page
70. [ Thus far James Naylor.]

Obs. Now see how contrary these serious Confessions of the Honor, Power and
Glory of Jesus Christ, and his being the Son of God, etc. are to what William
Haworth and William Craven have accused him; and how unlikely their Accusation
is, and how it favors of a Lie and Forgery, or a gross Mistake at least
against J. N.

Also in his Vindication and Answer upon his Examination at the Sessions at
Appleby, in the 11th month, 1652. in the Book entitled, Readiness Errand, page
25. Christ is not divided, if he be, he is no more Christ: I witness that
Christ who is God and Man, etc. -- separate God and Man and he is no more
Christ, page 31. I own no other Christ but he who witnessed a good Confession
before Pontius Pilate, page 32. This may sufficiently detect W. H. and his
Reproachful Calumnies against J. N. and us about Jesus Christ.

His Allegation for his saying, That these are the Quakers Doctrines, viz. [
That it was the Devil that suffered without the Gates; and that Mary was a
Whore, and Christ a Bastard] runs thus, viz. It Is enough for me to call those
things of a Religious Concern which any Quaker writes or asserts in discourse
Doctrines, while they all pretend always to be guided by one infallible
Teacher, the Light Within, p. 3.

1st, That any Quaker has writ or asserted such Doctrine we find not; but the
contrary (as before hinted) and look on it as mere Malice and Baseness so to
accuse them.

2. Set Case any one had so writ or asserted, it follows not that the whole
People are chargeable therewith [as the Quakers Doctrines without exception]
that is no good Consequence nor natural inference from their all pretending to
be guided by the same infallible Teacher, the Light within.

See what a rare Logician this man is! Either the Light within must be
chargeable with such Doctrine against Christ and Mary, as before, or else all
the Professors of it, because some pretending to it, have (if he says true) so
discoursed. What gross Fallacy and false Logic is this! Whereas such an
Absurdity was never the Assertion of the People called Quakers, viz. that
either every one pretending to be guided by the Light Within, on distinguished
by the Name [ Quaker] is therefore guided by the same Light in all Discourses,
or so to be owned by the said People. Therefore his general Inference is silly
and groundless, as well as unjust and Fallacious. Would the Independent
Congregations be thus argued against, as to be thus universally charged with
all the Private Opinions or Discourses of every Independent, because they all
pretend the holy Scriptures to be the Rule, as well as the Quakers do the Light
of Christ within? Let them answer this Question, and see if the Reason will
hold. Are they all willing thus to be concluded? If so, then

1st, These, which are some of William Haworth's Doctrines; may be charged on
all the Independents, viz. That [God] the Father poured out all his Wrath upon
his Son Jesus Christ.

2. And his Brother Powell's Doctrine, viz. That Jesus Christ was the Greatest
Sinner in the World, vindicated by William Haworth.

3. And his asserting, That Paul when a Christian counted his spiritual
Obedience Loss and Dung for Christ; and that this is very good, sound, blessed
and comfortable Doctrine, received by Millions of Saints in Heaven and Earth,
etc.

4. And that our own Righteousness (which the Apostle calls his own in Phil. 3.
9.) consists in those Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our
Minds, and we express those outwardly, etc. [Thus far W. H.]

Now who and how many of the Independent Teachers besides William Haworth will
own and subscribe these Doctrines as Orthodox? le^ them plainly answer us. If
they are not generally owned by them, would they take it well to tell the
World, these are the Independents Doctrines, which are so evidently impious
against Jesus Christ, against the Gifts and Virtues of God's holy Spirit, and
spiritual Obedience among Christians? ^ut besides his fallacious Attempts, to
fasten these forecited Doctrines upon the Quakers (concerning the Virgin Mary
and Christ) like a hardened wilful Person, having a Conscience seared. He
persists in his general Accusations and Slanders upon Reports against that
solemn Attestation that we have given to the contrary, in answer to those
things before, which he has asserted to be the Quakers Doctrines, where we have
said, viz. To all which in the Sight and Presence of the holy God we answer, We
are certain that it is an abominable Slander in that General Charge upon the
Quakers; and he has most infamously abused us in this matter, in saying, These
are the Quakers Doctrines, which we testify against as so gross and abominable
that nothing like them has entered into our Hearts ever to imagine, Much less
to preach for Doctrine, as, That it was the Devil that suffered without the
Gates; and that Mary was a Whore, and Christ a Bastard. And yet he tells the
World, These are the Quakers Doctrines. What abominable Wickedness is this!
thus to make infamous a People who abhor such Blasphemy, page 2. of our sheet
Independent Agent.

It appears that this Independent Preacher had not the Modesty to tell the
World, that such and such things are reported of some among the Quakers; but
such lying Reports as he has against us, he both espouseth and asserts them
positively, as, These are the Quakers Doctrines, their Blasphemies; not these
are reported to have been discoursed by some among them. Thus the man's
Outrage, Malice and Revenge exceeds all Bounds of common Reason, Civility or
Humanity, as if he were mad against us, and envyed not only our being at
Hertford (wishing that our Nest at Hertford were broke up, as his words are)
but even our Prosperity and Being (as a People) upon Earth, as deserving to be
stoned to Death by the Righteous Law of God, if it were in force, page 3. But
it is much if he and his Accomplices and Abettors be not made ashamed of his
Malice and Outrage ere we have done with him, if he will not study Quietness
among his Neighbors, not doubting but God who is with us will rebuke his
Baseness and Malice against us; who having falsely accused us from malicious and
false Reports of others, Suspicions and Jealousies of his own, proceeds thus,
viz.

W. Haworth, My Thoughts are, That the Quakers no more believe Christ to be a
real Man in Heaven, then I believe there is a Man in the Moon, page 4.

Reply, No wonder he should harbor Evil and Unbelieving Thoughts of us, and
what we have confessed to Christ's real and most glorious Manhood in the
Heavens, since he is so apt to believe, assert and spread lying Reports and
Slanders against us for Truths, if it were possible to destroy us from off the
Face of the Earth: Such as are given up to believe and assert Lies, will
disbelieve and oppose the Truth: He would have us appear bad, and therefore
he will believe no good of us. But why thinks he the Quakers do not believe
Christ to be a real Man? His main and frequent Reason is, he says, We say that
the Soul of Christ is in every Saint, and that his Body is changed as to
substance, page 5, and 7. of his Sheet. For the first he quotes the 6th page of
our Testimony, where we confess Christ's Spiritual Presence with his Saints,
which he dares not deny, he having confessed Christ's Soul to be his Spirit
from Luke 23. 46. in his Antidote, and we have opposed his arguing against the
extent of Christ's Soul (or Spirit) to the Saints on Earth, seeing he is both
God and Man; his Soul or Spirit, even as Man, as Mediator, virtually and
effectually (through his divine Power and Authority) extends and reaches to the
Saints on Earth; and at length he is made to grant, that the Man Christ is
virtually present on Earth, in his Book Jes. of Naz. p. 20. l. 7. But how can
this be, that Christ's Soul should be in the Saints on Earth? for then (says
he) it is immense, and turned into a New God, page 5. of his Answer. Whereas it
is virtually in the Saints, through the Divine Power of the Father, being both
God and Man, without destroying, annihilating or confounding the Properties of
the Manhood with the Deity, or leaving his Body dead in Heaven, as has been
most vainly argued by this Independent; for does the Virtue of the Vine in the
Branches and Fruit leave the Vine or Root empty and dead, because it extends to
every Branch?

Besides his own Confession, viz. That the Deity perfects all good IN US, but
then the Humanity is in union with it, and ACTS with it, and they must not be
put assunder; and that the Deity acts in it and through it as an Organ or
Instrument.

What Is more plain, then that the Deity and Manhood of Christ do act together
in Union in perfecting all good in us? Does not then the Soul of Christ extend
to the Saints on Earth? When will this Adversary see how he is self-condemned
and confuted! For do the Deity and Manhood of Christ together act and perfect
all Good IN US, and yet his Soul have no place in us, nor so much as extend to
us? And what though the Manhood does not extend so far as the Deity, which is
infinite, is it a good Inference, that therefore it cannot extend to Saints or
Men on Earth? Are they so infinitely remote from the Man Christ Jesus their
Head? But his Inferences and Arguing against us in this matter is like his
concluding, that we deny the Manhood of Christ, from our confessing to the
Change, Spirituality, and Glory of his Body, and the powerful extent of his
Soul, and spiritual Presence to and in the Saints on Earth, which does not at
all lessen the substantial Dignity, but exalt it; so that instead of denying or
dissannulling the Man Christ Jesus, we magnify him more then William Haworth
allows of, that is the Case.

One great Exception that lies heavy upon our Adversary William Haworth's
Argument, and which he gets not off nor answers, is his confessing Satan to be
an Angel, yet but a Creature; and notwithstanding, that he is here on Earth to
tempt the Saints because he is not yet bound in Hell, page 36. of his Jesus of
Nazareth. So that still he allows Satan more Power to tempt the Saints (though
in many places at once far distant) then the Man Christ to relieve them, though
he be their Mediator and Head, and is touched with the feeling of their
Infirmities, and succors them that are tempted, and has promised to be with
his Disciples to the end of the World.

But says William Haworth, It is the Will of God, that Satan should yet be here
on Earth to tempt the Saints, he is not yet bound up in Hell.

What then! is it the Will of God, that the heavenly MAN Christ Jesus (who is
the Son of God) should remain bound in Heaven, so as not to visit and relieve
his Saints or Members on Earth; nor his Soul or Spirit so much as extend to
them? Has Satan more Liberty and Privilege given him of God then his dear Son
Christ Jesus has? Oh miserable and uncomfortable Doctrine!

To his arguing, That the Soul of Christ cannot be in Millions Myriads of
places, no not in two places at once; for then it would be immense, turned into
a New God, etc.

He has argued better for Satan then thus. Is Satan immense then? He has placed
Satan's Liberty to tempt the Saints on Earth and limiting Christ to Heaven (the
mean while) upon the Will of God, Jes. Naz. page 36. so that his Plea of
Christ's Soul or Manhood not being God or immense is now removed as no Argument
either to prove it in no wise IN the Saints, or not extending to them on Earth;
seeing Satan himself reaches to many places at once; and Christ Jesus is above
and greater then he. And sure the Will of God is more eminently concerned in
Christ the Mediator, for the Good of Mankind, and the Consolation of the Saints
in their Trials, then in Satan's tempting them. And seeing we have always
believed and confessed the Immortality and entire Beings of the Souls of all
other Men, it must needs be evidently unjust to accuse us with denying the
Manhood of Christ, or Jesus of Nazareth, to have a Being both as to his Soul
and Body, as this Adversary has frequently insinuated.

And as for Christ's Body being changed, as to substance, which he often infers
upon us, from our arguing against his asserting Christ's Body (in Heaven) to be
a Natural Body, of an Earthly Substance. The Terms Natural and Earthly, as
given to the Glorious Body of Christ were and are offensive to us, as well as
contrary to his own confessing, that it is such a Glorious Body, that it is
more bright then a Thousand Suns. So that then it must needs be a very glorious
heavenly Body, which sure is not the same with Earthly (neither is Natural and
Spiritual both one quality.) And we believing such a Change in the Body of
Christ, we do not thereby (nor ever did) conclude, that the Body of Christ
which suffered was annihilated, and that his Flesh saw Corruption. No such
matter. May there not then be a wonderful Change in the Body, and yet the
Substance not annihilated nor destroyed? Nor does it follow from our not
believing nor owning his Characters of natural and Earthly on Christ's Glorious
Body, that therefore nothing of that Body remains, or is in being, as he falsely
and frequently argues in his Books. For he has confessed, Christ has a
Glorious Body, and all the Saints shall have like Bodies, Phil. 3. ult. And
that both his is, and theirs will be spiritual, heavenly, glorious for
Qualities, page 29. of his Jesus of Nazareth. And grants it Angelical,
Spiritual, Celestial as to Qualities, page 31. ibid.

If SPIRITUAL, and HEAVENLY or CELESTIAL, etc. be Qualities, then NATURAL, and
EARTHLY, and CARNAL are Qualities also. And if we must believe our Adversary
when he says, Christ's Body in Heaven is very glorious, spiritual and heavenly
for Qualities, yea, brighter then a Thousand Suns, then we must not believe him
where he says, it is natural, earthly, etc. which are contrary to spiritual and
heavenly. If he will yet infer, that then there is nothing of the Substance in
being, we deny his Inference, it being also contrary to his own Confession,
viz. That the same Substance remains: so that it may be so wonderfully changed
as to Qualities, and yet the Substance neither destroyed, lost, or nullified.

But to wave many more of W. Haworth's Untruths and false Consequences in his
Books and Sheet, take two or three Instances of his Falsehoods and Forgeries,
which are very obvious in matter of fact, in the 6th and 7th pages of his Sheet
touching Christ's Ascension, where he says, that When we say, the same man
ascended, by ascending into HEAVEN (he says) we mean the Globe which we call
the EARTH: Which is all one as to say, that by HEAVEN we mean EARTH. For proof
of this notorious and most absurd Falsehood he refers the Reader to the 16th
page of his last, and says, According to our Principle there was nothing of
the Man Christ to ascend.

As if we allowed nothing of the Man Christ, either of Spirit or Body to have a
Being (after his Resurrection) to ascend; a most horrid Falsehood brought to
prove another such as his Book and Page quoted is stufft with. His pretended
Reason is answered elsewhere in this, viz. If the Body was changed as to
Substance, etc. For though it was changed, and become more excellent, refined
and glorious in the Substance, it follows not that 'twas annihilated.

He adds, And the humane Soul Immense.

Another Falsehood still imposed on us in his own Unscriptural Phrase. Though
Christ be God and Man in a most glorious Union and Power, yet the Manhood is
not the Deity, nor the Deity the Manhood, yet inseparable in the Heavenly Man
Christ, who is Lord from Heaven.

W. H. says, He remembers one of G. Fox 's Interpretations, that when it is
said, he took upon him the Seed of Abraham, that Seed was the Light within. On
this we asked, Where does Geo. Fox so interpret that Scripture? we do not
believe he ever did so. William Haworth gives us this answer, viz. I did not
say, I received it in his Books, but I Remember, etc. I have heard it, and from
good hands, whether they have heard it from his Mouth, or read it in his Books,
I know not -- I do believe it.

Rep. Observe how wonderful Credulous this man's Malice makes him against us,
to make a direct Charge from a Report, viz. That he remembers that it was one
of G. Fox's Interpretations on the Scripture cited. But now he remembers he
has heard it so REIORTED, and he does believe it. One while, he remembers it
was Geo. Fox's Interpretation; another while, he believes it, as having had it
from other Hands, but whose Hands he tells us not, that we may know or enquire
how good: it is greatly to be questioned, whether he has not herein belyed good
Hands to cover his Lie against G. F. and us. But to support his Credit in this
matter, he bids us, Hear Naylor interpret this thing in the very same way, Love
to the Lost, Preface, viz. So to the Light within -- makes for the gathering
Creatures together, to that one Name and Seed wherein all the Nations of the
Earth are blessed. Do but see how hard the man's put to it for a Proof to save
his Credit. But how much besides the Point in two respects, 1st, as to the
Person; 2dly, as to the Thing: for 1st, James Naylor is not G. Fox. 2dly, The
Light of Christ within (or what proceeds from him the Root) making for the
gathering Creatures together in that one Name and Seed, wherein the Nations are
blessed, is not the same with saying, That Seed Romans 1.
of Abraham, which according to the Flesh Christ took upon him, was the Light
within; nor either of them the Interpretation of that Scripture. For that Name
and Seed wherein Nations are blessed, is Christ himself. Not that the Fleshly
Seed (taken by Christ) was the Light within. How miserably has this Adversary
come off! Oportet mendacem esse memorem.

Also, where William Haworth accuses the Quakers; Now to say, That what Paul
says in Romans 4. 6. is contrary to what David says in Psalm. 32. 2. For this he
quoteth the eighth page of our Vindication, Doct. 11. with this addition, viz.
They cite the words of Romans 4. 6. and then say contrary to Psalm 32. 2. Thus
(says he) they set one Scripture against another.

Rep. Here he has committed an abominable Falsehood twice over; 1st, in his Jes.
Naz. page 8, 9. and 2dly, in his Sheet. For in our Vindication there is no such
thing, as that what Paul says, Romans 4. 6. is contrary to Psalm. 32. 2. Neither
do we say, that these words cited Romans 4. 6. are contrary to Psalm. 32. 2. Nor
yet do we set one Scripture against another, as he has most falsely accused us,
but his own false Exposition and Perversion on David's and Paul's word; in
Psalm 32. 2, and Romans 4. 6. As where David describes the Blessedness of the Man
unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works. What Works, says William
Haworth? and then answers, Done by the Spirit surely; for such were David 's
Works: see his Antidote, page 18. line 25. Whereas 'twas not David's words, but
these last words of William Haworth, viz. [ DONE BY THE SPIRIT SVRELY] (these
were showed by great Characters) that we opposed to David's words, Psalm. 32. 2.
As to say, That God imputes Righteousness without Works done by the Spirit;
this we affirm is contrary to David in Psalm 32. 2. where the blessed
Qualification of that man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity is
intimated, viz. in whose Spirit there is NO Guile. Now a man's Spirit can
neither be sanctified nor clear from Guile without the Work of the Spirit of
God. Therefore to say that a man is imputatively Righteous or blessed of God,
without any Works done in him by his Spirit, is erroneous, and directly
contrary to David's Testimony in the Psalm cited; See now where the
Contradiction is evidently placed by us. It Is between W. Haworth and the
Prophet David, and not between the Apostle Paul and David.

Another of William Haworth's Forgeries is, that William Bates says, He is
ONLY SORRY for his Weakness and Oversight in giving him any such Answer. We
told him, he adds [ Only Sorry] and makes himself work on this Lie. To come
off with an Excuse here, he tells us, The word [ONLY] the Printer should have
put into another Character. As if another Character would make that true which
is an apparent Lie, as in his saying, That William Bates (in his Retractation)
says, he is only sorry, etc. for 'twas none of his saying, nor sense of all he
says in his Retractation; and neither consist in the Emphasis which a different
Character may show. And William Haworth does not at all amend his matter, by
saying, that William Bates mentions not any more that he is sorry for, but that
he gave him such an Answer; If for nothing else, for that only. Here he makes
his own implicit Consequence, to prove that William Bates said that in his
Retractation which he did not say, viz. that he is ONLY SORRY, etc. which words
are not there. William Haworth is a Forger in this and many more things against
us then as yet we divulged. Besides, William Bates did not only acknowledge his
Weakness in giving any such Answer, as is cited in his Retractation; but also
clears the People called Quakers from teaching or holding any such thing to his
Knowledge; and likewise from William Haworth's Reproaching them on that
Occasion, as being No Christians, but Seducers, etc. which with many more False
Aspersions he has cast upon us.

Subscribed on the Behalf of Truth, our selves, and the rest of our Friends
concerned, Hertford, 3d mon. 1678. Henry Stout, Henry Sweeting, Richard Thomas,
Richard Martin, Edward Plumsted.


The Publication of this has been occasionally delayed; for 'twas writ not long
after our Adversary's Answer came out.

A Postscript, in Answer to William Haworth 's QVESTIONS.

SInce that William Haworth has been far louder in his Charge against us then
in his Proofs, either from the Dispute at Barbican, London, which in his
Antidote he unjustly quoted; or from any of our Writings since pretended by him
for Proof, viz. That we deny the Manhood of Christ, and Jesus of Nazareth to be
the Christ. But on the contrary, to discover his shortness and failure of
proof, he is fain after all to Query us, and put Questions to sift us further
(p. 8.) for matter against us. However, we will adventure a brief and plain
Answer.

Question, I do but query what is become of that Flesh wherein he (i. Christ)
was manifested? is that Flesh now in being? and if so, where is it, in every
place, or circumscribed in Heaven?

Answer, That Flesh saw no Corruption, but was raised from the Dead, Acts 2.
31. Christ did rise in that Body wherein he suffered, and in the same ascended
into the Heavens, where the Patriarch David did not, as to his B^dy, which was
in the Sepulcher, Acts 2. 29, to ver. 36. And that very Body of Christ which
was raised from the dead, or that flesh which saw no Corruption, how should it
but be in being? In our Testimony for the Man Christ, page 7. we plainly told
him our Belief, viz. That the Man Christ did neither vanish nor perish in any
thing essential to him, either as to his Soul, Spirit or Body.
(that is, in that Spiritual Sense we have given) seeing he dyed not again,
according to Romans 6. 9, Knowing Christ being raised from the dead, dies no
more, Death has no more dominion over him; his dying was only as to the Body,
he was put to death as concerning the Flesh, therefore the Flesh was raised
from the dead. [ Circumscribed] It is so far circumscribed or encompassed in
the Heavens as it is capable of, and as is proper to it; and though it be
spiritual and glorious, yet a Body, therefore not in every place where God is.
[And as he has told us, It is not limited or confined to any one place or
corner (as it were) of Heaven.] To be Omnipresent is only proper to God, and
not to Bodies.

Q. How do they but deny the Manhood of Christ, that say, the Body of Jesus is
changed as to Substance, and his Soul is in every Saint?

Answ. 1st, They do not deny the Manhood of Christ that say his Body is so
changed, as to the quality and glory of it, that it is a spiritual, heavenly
and glorious Body, in a higher state then when on Earth under Sufferings: this
is no annihilating of the Body. 2dly, That his Soul does powerfully extend to,
and is in every Saint in some sense and degree; this must needs be, if it act
together in union with the Deity in perfecting all good in us, as our Adversary
has coufessed; as also, that it is virtually in the Saints Though we grant that
it is in more fullness in himself then in us, yet of his fullness we have all
received.

Q. They own they say the real Birth, Suffering and Resurrection of Christ; but
do they own bis Intercession in his Manhood as an High Priest in Heaven?

Answ. Yes, we do. He is entered into Heaven it self to appear in the Face of
God for us; yet not wholely exclusively out of the Saints. For this High
Priest, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
Heavens, is a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which is
with men, even with such whose Minister and Leader Christ is. And God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into our Hearts, crying Abba, Father. The Spirit
makes intercession with Sighs and Groans, etc.

W. H. So that as man he is not materially here on Earth.

Answ. An impertinent and fallacious Addition, if he own him not as man in any
sense on Earth. For does not this imply, that as Man he is immaterially on
earth. If by materially he means he is not corporally on earth, as in the days
of his Flesh, we grant it. But then we may not deny his being on Earth
Spiritually and virtually as Man, he being the spiritual and heavenly Man, the
Lord FROM Heaven, and a quickening Spirit. Else how are any on Earth quickened
by him? And how did he walk in the midst of the seven Golden Candle-sticks,
which were the seven Churches? Rev 1.

W. H. These are Scripture words, Acts 3. 21. Whom the Heaven must receive (or
contein, the reading will bear it) until the time of the restitution of all
things. Is not that [whom] the Man Christ? His Deity cannot be contained any
where.

Answ. 1st, Whom the Heaven must receive or take, it is not contein nor retein:
and sometimes Heaven in the New Testament-Scriptures is put for God himself. 2.
It is [times] in the plural, viz. whom Heaven (chiefly respecting God that
dwells therein) must receive or take until the times of the restitution (which
is the reparation or reformation) of all things, spoken by the holy Prophets.
Those times are the Gospel times, and the last days, wherein God is making
good his Promise of the Blessing in Christ to all Nations, in turning every man
that receives him from Iniquity, Acts 3. 26 So that now the last Adam or second
Man is revealed from Heaven, and known to be a quickening Spirit, and the Lord
FROM Heaven. That [ whom] was Jesus Christ, the Heavenly Man, whom Heaven
received into Glory, into a more hidden condition (when the Earth had contemned
and rejected him) until those more glorious times of his Outgoings and
Discoveries in the latter days, for the gathering of Nations and Peoples, and
blessing them, in turning them from their Iniquities. And though those Times of
Restitution are begun, he who is the Restorer shall yet more fully and
universally appear for the accomplishment of that his Work.

Q. Is not Heaven a place remote from the Earth?

Answ. Heaven is higher then the Earth, and so distinct or remote. But there is
a plurality of Heavens; some more near, and some more remote: as also spiritual
Heavens, as well as natural.

Q. Is not Containing Circumscribing?

Answ. What Is contained within the compass or circumference of place, more or
less, may be said to be circumscribed.

W. H. So that as man he is not on Earth locally.

Answ. Why is [ locally] added? In what other sense then locally is Christ as
man on earth? Is he not on earth spiritually as a quickening Spirit, being the
Lord from heaven? even that man by whom came the Resurrection of the dead? who
quickens whom he will? If in no sense this second man appear on Earth, how are
any quickened by him?

Q. Is that Restitution of all things fulfilled; or yet to come? answer plainly.

Answ. That Restitution of all things, spoken by the Mouth of all God's
Prophets is not wholly fulfilled. But both the times thereof are begun, and
Jesus Christ is about and carrying on the work of restitution foretold. The
Deliverer is come out of Zion, and the Restorer of Paths to dwell in is come;
he is on his way: And he will yet more fully and gloriously appear to fulfill
the Promises spoken of him.

W. H. Obj. But belike they have a notion, which in time they will speak out,
That Christ was Man before he was a Man, i. e. (which Penington says) heavenly
Flesh, Blood and Bones came down from Heaven, and tabernacled in that Body;
That was the Man Christ that came into the Man Christ.

Answ. Whether he has rightly cited Isaac Penington in all these words or no,
is some question. What Book and Page of his they are to be found in, he tells
us not. That I. P. in some Questions has distinguished between that Flesh and
Blood of Christ which came down from Heaven (which is meat and drink indeed, of
an inward, spiritual and eternal nature) and the Body, Flesh or Vail, that was
prepared for him, is true. And what has our Adversary to say to this? Does it
thence follow, that Christ was man before he was a man? or that there are two
man Christ's, one that came into the other? what absurd Nonsense would this man
brand us withal? might not Christ the Son of God be the heavenly man, the
mediator, before he took upon him the Body that was prepared for him? which is
not a being man before he was a man, but before he was so invested, or came
into that Body. Surely his saying, A Body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 5.
does not make him two man Christ's.

THE END.

