A Strange and wonderful ACCOUNT Of a most Barbarous and Bloody MURDER,
Committed by five notorious Villains, on Tuesday the 11th of this instant May
about ten at night, in a widdow-womans house at Grays in Essex, where entering,
they Robbed the house and Murdered all the family except the woman her self,
who escaped their Cruelty by getting out at the backdore, with the manner of
their being pursued cross the water, to the Halfway-Tree, near Earif.
SO frequent are the bloody Murders, Villainies, Attempts and Cruelties
perpetrated, that few weeks expire without some barbarous exploit or dismal
Trajedy Fate hovers round this Earthly Ball, and on securer Mortals lays his
dreadful hand, crushing them untimely deaths and most prodigious slaughters,
Hells envious power still thirsts for Blood, and prompts on desperate Wretches
to engage in all the direst Cruelties his Malice can be capable of, forming
Horrors and destruction sits upon his Brows, which he infuses into desperate
Villans, thereby to make them sierce; and much delight in Slaughter, so that
when he has prompted them on to pass the bounds of all humanity, naught but
Death can glut their furious Rage, and when they have committed any vile
Design, as Robberies or such notorious outrages, to stifle which, or keep it
close from being known abroad, Fear so begets a thought of making all secure,
that many times one Villainy is augmented with a greater Crime; endeavoring to
lay that silent thereby, when most commonly their blind Revenge and barbarous
Deeds mistake their purposed End and only make Heavens dreadful Justice fall
more dreadful on their Guilty Head, for blood of Innocents cries loud to that
great God who sees what e're is done. But among all the barbarities and
inhumane Cruelties that have of late been Acted, this of which we now shall
give the Reader an Account of, may be Characterised in Rubric and bear the
Crimson stains unto posterity, for sure it is, no Villains hands these many
Months have been dyed so deep in blood, the Relation of which take as
follows, on Tuesday the 11th of this instant, five fellows in Seamens habit
were observed to lie lurking about a Village called Grays near Rumpford in
Essex, and curiously to eye as they passed and repassed the house to which this
Trajeck Fate be^e^, but there being many Ships lying in the River, near
adjoining to the place aforesaid, they were thought Seamen indeed, that
belonged to some of those Vessels; so that they were not much scrupled nor at
all questioned; but as the Scripture well denotes, they having marked out the
house they intended in the day time, that when night came they might break
through and steal, etc. about ten of the Clock in the Evening aforesaid, they
beset the house wherein they committed this Murder and Robbery it being a
house distant from Neighbors and near adjoining to the water side, about the
hour aforementioned, they being assured that all the Family were within, began
on the backside of it, to force an entry with such Iron impliments as they had
brought for that pernicious Use, whereupon the Maid of the house hearing a
noise started up to see what the matter was, not dreaming that her Life was so
near to an end; but before she could well look about her they had forced a wide
passage through the Wall, and with Swords and other weapons three of them had
entered; so that unlocking the door for the rest, they altogether rushed
forwards and one of them seized the Maid, whilst the others went to secure the
rest of the Family, which according to Report consisted of only the Mistress of
the house, her Daughter about sixteen or seuenteen years of Age, and the
Servant-Maid; so that after breaking open several Doors in the house, they at
last came where the Daughter was in Bed, who at their Approach, being as it is
supposed much surprised, shreamed out, which her Mother hearing, and
understanding there were Thieves in the house got as it is reported, out at a
back door or window undiscovered, and went to raise the Town, but they having
made a privy search and missing her, supposed she had escaped their hands,
being sure she was in the house when they first entered; so that fearing to stay
long l^st they should be surprised, they broke open the Trunks and Chests, and
so getting what moneys and Goods they could conveniently carry, yet not
contented with the Plunder, but as thirsty of Blood as Wealth, Hell screwed
them up to greater Villainies and not willing to depart before they left a
lasting stain of their Diabolick Cruelties they went as it is supposed where
they had left the two females bound, and with impious hands bereaved them of
their Lives by giving them several mortal wounds, whether they acted this
Barbarity to secure themselves from a discovery by Reason the Maids might know
them or whether their guilty Consciences suggested any such thing is not
certain, because they left none alive that could resolve the Cause, but sure it
is, they stayed not long in the house after the exploit, but taking a Boat,
which as it is supposed, they had brought with them, they with all speed
crossed the River of Thames, and landed near a place called the halfway Tree
near Earif in Kent; but made not so much have but that they were pursued, yet
the pursuers nor being strong enough to encounter with them, they durst not
venture to take them, lest their' bloody hands should have dispatched them too,
rather than to have been taken and committed into the hands of justice to be
punished for their deserved Crimes, whereupon they made their escape into the
next Wood, but great search has been since made for them throughout the
Country, but as vet none of them can be heard of. It Is thought they made for
London with all speed, for they did not carry away any thing that was weighty
or cumbersome thereby to hinder their Flight; when the Mother returned
rejoicing that she had by the Assistance of her Neighbors put the Villains to
flight, not dreaming of the barbarous exploits of Murder they had done; but
entering to her great Amazement and unspeakable Grief found her Daughter and
Maidservant weltering in their Blood; expanded in Deaths cold Convulsions on
the floor; at which falling in a swoon hardly to be recovered, but when
recovered she bathed in Tears; wished she had been there to have dyed with
them, and so continued comfortless.

And well may the horrors of an afflicted Parent be conceived in such an
extreme cause, for who can reflect upon maternal sorrow and not be sensible of
the prevailing Anguish that in the like case afflicts a wounded Soul, and not
condole such great distress to have a tender offspring murdered by the hands
of bloody Villains, and pay back Natures Debt without a summons of deliberation
hurried unto Eternity, by such untimely Fate; as likewise a faithful Servants
loss might in some measure bear a part, but Murders though cloaked with
darkness, and in secret laid, will not lie buried in Oblivion, for various ways
does the Almighty find to make discovery, and bring to light the horror of such
deeds; nay the trembling Murdered grows pale with fear, and often betrays
himself, when unaccus'd by Men. This Tragecal Scene Acted by the Cruelties of
Villains, may be a warning to all to be well Guarded and prepared against such
dangerous attempts; for if ever wickedness abounded to the suparlative degree,
it may be said it is now completed; that Monsters in humane shapes should dare
thus to contemn and violate the Laws of God and Man, to pull down Vengeance on
their heads by causelessly shedding innocent Blood, for certain it is, that
Divine Justice will not ever sleep, but early or late bring them to suffer the
deserved punishment for such notorious Crimes.

FINIS.

