Strange News FROM BARKSHIRE, OF AN APPARITION Of several SHIPS and MEN in the
AIR, Which seemed to the Beholders to be FIGHTING
They were seen by the Carrier of Cirencester and his Company, as they were
upon the Road coming for London, near Abbington, on Tuesday the 26th of August,
1679.
Of the truth of which you may be fully satisfied at the Sarazens Head Inn in
Carter-Lane, London
MAny have been the Signs and Wonders of late, that God has been pleased, to
declare himself by to this Nation, as the late Blazing Stars, the Effects that
succeeded them, are never to be forgot; and notwithstanding his many Just
Judgments Inflicted upon us, yet we retain the same (nay rather Improve in all
manners of) Debaucheries and Wickedness, that nothing but the Omnipotent Power
of a Merciful God could have preserved us from utter Desolation. The late
Apparitions that were observed by several persons in and about the City of
London, and also by some Watermen and passengers as they were upon the Thames I
will not undertake to prognosticate their Meaning, but advise all people that
wish well to their present as well as future State, to lay these things to
heart, and to enquire in themselves the cause of such Visitations, and
seriously repent them of their past Misspent time, and possibly God may divert
his Judgments that hang over our heads.

On Tuesday the 26th. of August, one John Nibb, a very sober Fellow, and
Servant to one Shearles, the Carrier of Cirencester, accompanied with five
Passengers, about 2 Mile Eastward of Abbington, on their way to London, The Sun
had not rose hardly a quarter of an hour, but toward the South part of the
Horrizon appeared the perfect similitude of a tall Man in blackish Habit, his
right hand guarded with a Broad Sword, stretched toward the South, and walked
slowly that way, all which was seen by the Parties above named, but it soon
vanished, and in it is place the Sky Appeared in the Form of Water or Sea and
Fishes of Diverse shapes were perfectly discerned to leap as it were out of the
Water, and fall into it again; it then looking as in a Perfect Calm at Sea,
which on a sudden began to be a little disturbed, as if with Wind, and
immediately upon that appeared about 100 Ships of several bignesses and several
Fashions of Building; out of which Fleet was discerned some small Ships that
continually sailed to and from the Fleet, as if they had been sent out as
advice Ships, or had come in to give account of the condition of an Enemy; this
Fleet continued in perfect view near a quarter of an hour, to the great
amazement of the beholders; after which the Sky was for some time perfect
Clear, and then appeared the perfect form of a very great Hill, whereon was
discerned in several places the Forms or Representations of little Villages and
several Woods, but the most part of the hill was plain or Rockey; on the plain
part of it was clearly discerned about thirty Horsemen, well Armed with
Pistols and Carbines, etc. and Marched on the plain side of the hill toward
the Villages upon a full Trot, and by the shadow of a rising ground from the
said Hill the sight of them was quickly lost, and the Sky as it were foulded it
self up, and the hill disappeared. This Relation will seem strange to many
people what the effects of it will be, but it is certain the apparition was not
in vain: Many may object it was only the fancy of a whimsical Brain; to such I
answer, that it is not possible for 6 Persons of different Constitutions to be
all seized with one and the same impediment at one and the same time, and which
is more, the people were all in perfect health and sound Memory; and if the
Curious are pleased to further satisfy themselves with the truth of this
Relation, they may repair to Mr. Curtice In-holder, who keeps the
Sarrazens-head-Inn, in Carter-Lane near the Old Change, and he or any servant
in the House, will satisfy, you of the whole matter, they being all ear
witnesses to the foresaid Relation, which will be atttested if required.

Wherefore I say once more such kind of Visits as these ought not to be
slightly passed by, without any notice taken of them, but all of us ought with
Prayers and Tears to supplicate him that sent them, to turn away that Wrath
which they Presage, that he would bless our Gracious King, and all that are in
Office and Authority under him, and once more Restore this Nation to a perfect
unity and concord, without which We must Expect nothing but continual Judgments
upon us.

These things should also quicken and stir up the people of God in their Duties
toward him, and to break forth into admiration with the Apostle St. Paul,
saying, O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and goodness of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

FINIS.

