Strange and Terrible NEVVES FROM CAMBRIDGE, BEING A true Relation of the
Quakers bewitching of Mary Philips out of the Bed from her Husband in the
Night, and transformed her into the shape of a Bay Mare, riding her from
Dinton, toward the University.

With the manner how she became visible again to the People in her own
Likneness and Shape, with her sides all rent and torn, as if they had been
spur-gal'd, her hands and feet worn as black as a Coal, and her mouth slit with
the Bridle Bit.

Likewise, her Speech to the Scholars and Contrymen, upon this great and
wonderful Change, her Oath before the Judges and Justices, and ^he Names of the
Quakers brought to Trial on Friday last at the Assizes held at Cambridge. With
the Judgment of the Court.

As also, the Devils snatching of one from his Company, and hoisting of him up
into the Air, with what happened thereupon.

London, Printed for C. Brooks, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1659.

The Quakers Trial on Friday last, at the General Assizes held at Cambridge.
AS the Wings and Motion of Time, are ushered into the Universe with various
Changes; so is the Creature transformed daily from his Rational Intellects, to
an irrational sensuality of Dumb Creatures. O monstrous! What Christians become
Beasts; what a sad Age do we live in? Woeful Experience makes it deplorably
evident: Iron sides, in Iron Times, suits well with a true Christians
Qualifications; but Satanical Delusions in Backsliders from the Truth, carries
a Badge of Infamy, as well against the Glorious and Invisible Creator, as
against His admired Works of Creation: Such Atheistical Spirits, are the
Original Rise, from whence the ensuing subject takes its Discourse; and true it
is, that the Judgments of God upon Witches and Inchanters, are clearly
manifested by Scriptural Examples, where the Lord says, Thou shall not suffer
a Witch to live, Exodus 22.18. There shall not be found amongst you one that
uses Divination, or an observer of Times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a
Charmer, or a Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or Wizards, or a Necromancer.
For all that do these things are an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11,
12.

Many such like Instances, may here intervene by way of similie to the people
called Quakers; and as Constantine forbad all to ask Counsel at Witches, or to
use the help of Charmers, upon pain of Death; so shall I admonish all people
from adhering to Sorcerers, which like so many Mushrooms (in this Age) spring
up in an instant, deviating from the Truth, and fancy a New Light, proceeding
only from the Prince of Darkness; as manifestly appears in the case of Mary
Philips, who falling from the Church of England, entered into the Society of
Robert Dickson, and Jane Cranaway, two unrefined Quakers; but after some few
weeks expired, she declined their ways, utterly renouncing them, and detesting
their actions; insomuch, that they adjudged her to be in a Reprobate Condition,
and not worthy of an Earthly Being; but rather a transfiguration from the
Glorious Image she was created in; which (poor Soul) she was soon divested of,
even in the Night, as she betook her self to rest with her Husband, being
bewitched or enchanted out of the Room where she lay, and transformed into the
perfect shape of a Mare, and so rid from Dinton to a Town within four miles of
Cambridge, where a Company of seeming Quakers were met: But upon the aforesaid
Inchanting-Witches alighting off, and hanging the Bridle upon the Pails, the
snafflle (or Bitt) came out of her mouth, and miraculously she appeared in her
created Form and Likeness, to the great astonishment of the Neighbors, who
beheld this unexpected change with abundance of admiration; and upon the Woman's
declaring of her self, and the state of her Condition, she went along with some
Officers to the Meeting, and coming into the Room, she pointed to the two
Quakers, saying, This is the Man and Woman that bewitched me: Whereupon they
were apprehended, and carried before a Justice, who committed them to safe
Custody, there to remain till the Assizes, which on Thursday last began at
Cambridge, and on Friday they were brought to Trial, where the Woman that was
bewitched made Oath against them, and showed her hands and feet, which were
lamentably bruised, and changed as black as a Coal, her sides being also
exceedingly rent and torn, just as if they were spur-gal'd, and her smock all
bloody: Evident signs of her sad sufferings; yet utterly denied by the
prisoners, who at last were cleared, notwithstanding the Grand Jury finding the
Bill of Indictment.

But to demonstrate more plainly, That there are Magicians and Witches, is
evident by these two ensuing Examples; to wit, Cleomedes a great Magician in
Rome, having practiced the death of many little Children, the Parents of them
at last sought revenge on him, who to shun their Fury, shut himself close up in
Coffer: but when they had broke it open, the Devil had carried away the
Magician.

The Governor of Mascon, a great Magician, as he was at diner with some
company, was snatched away by the Devil, hoisted up into the air, and carried
three times about the Town, to the great astonishment of the Inhabitants, to
whom he cried for help, but all in vain.

Thus it is evident, that as there are Magicians and Witches; so are there
diverse of the sons of Adam reaching out their hands to the forbidden Tree, and
catching at the fruit of it; yea, this offspring of Eve longing for the
greenest Apples, the precocious knowledge of Events, and New Lights, before they
come their just and perfect ripeness of maturity. And true it is, that there
are some who can find no satisfaction, no Sabbath, no quiet in their present
state, and therefore they would fain know what the next day, what the next
year, what the next age will bring forth; in the highest prosperity they fear a
mutation; in the lowest adversity they are impatient for a change; and hence it
comes to pass, that futurity is the mark at which all level the arrows of their
aspiring thoughts. As for instance, the Jews who had the Urim and Thummim, and
Prophets of God to enquire of, yet ran a madding after Wizzards, and such as
had familiar spirits, had their false Prophets by hundreds; yea, and sent to
Baalzebub the God of Ekron, an Oracle of the Devils, to enquire; as in the life
of Ahaziah will appear.

With how frequent and costly sacrifices did the Graecians adore their
Oracle-giving Deities, purchasing an answer with a Hetacomb, and with the blood
of a hundred dumb beasts conju^ing their dumb Devils, before the sullen Fiends
would vouchsafe to answer them*

To pass by the several kinds of madness expressed in Geomancy, by Circles in
the Earth; Pyromancy, by Fire; Hydromancy, by Water; Necromancy, by the Ghosts
of the Dead, we shall descend, and treat your view, to another Inspection of
the New Lights of these Dark Times; which appeass so visible, that they may be
discerned as far as Norwich, where a highflown Spirit, on Sabbath day last was
a sevennight, took the impudence to pull down his breeches on the Communion
Table, and laid there his most odious and nasty burden: But observe and tremble
at the Divine Vengeance; he was suddenly tormented with the griping in his
guts; and lamentably roaring out, died within the space of an hour or two. Will
any man now say, that this is a Generation of men endued with New Lights:
Surely no; for what is more obvious, than the proceeding of these Lights from
the Prince of Darkness.

And as there are some, who by their enchanted black Ribbons, tied about the
Creatures left Wrist, gain many Proselytes; so there are others who deny the
Lords Day, charging the Ministry of England to be Antichristian, and yet seem
to be strict in the ways of Holiness. I shall not therefore set bounds to other
men's knowledge, nor circumscribe them within the Circle of my own Ignorance;
they may have Dawnings, where I perceive no Starlight: yet take this along
with you, that God often in Text-hand declares his Mind, in a Comet, a
Blazing-star, and other fiery Apparitions; and not by the vain-bablings of
Magicians and Sorcers; Who may fitly be compared to the great Conjurer that
Picus Mirandulae writes of in his time, viz. That promising a certain Prince he
would present to him the siege of Troy, with Hector and Achilles fighting
together as when they were alive: But as he was about his Conjurations, the
Devil carried him away that he was never heard of after.

To conclude, As the Jews and Heathens formerly, so many of the Quakers in
these days, have been tampering about Futurities, how lawfully I cannot say,
and pretend a Vision seen in the Air, betwixt Kingston and London, figuratively
presenting the dividing of the City and Southwark; and of the Cities devolving
and extinguishing in smoke.

But doubtless, the best way is to acquiesce in Gods revealed Will; for He will
have his Children in some sense entertain Fortune by the day, choosing
gradually and leasurely to discover the thoughts he has concerning them, that
he might keep them in a waiting and obebient posture, in a posture of
dependence and expectation; not that I would have them with Anacreon cry out,
Give me to day, let who will care for to morrow; or with the Stoics lazily
expect the blind stroke of a conceited unavoidable Fate; but using all lawful
and probable means, endeavor their Countries, and in it their own future good.

FINIS.

