The Strange and Dreadful RELATION OF A Horrible Tempest OF Thunder, Lightning,
and of Strange Apparitions in the Air, accompanied with Whirlwinds, Gusts of
Hail and Rain.
Which happened on the Tenth of this Instant June, at a Place near Wetherby, in
the County of York.
With the Account, how the Top of a Strong Oak, containing one Load of Wood,
was taken off by a Sheet of Fire, wrapped in a Whirlwind, and carried through
the Air, half a Mile distant from the Place. As also, How it broke down several
Trees in Esquire; Belbye's Wood and Orchard, shattered his House, and did muth
Harm. The Truth of which, is Attested by Persons, whose Names are herein
Specified.

As likewise, Another Strange RELATION of a Monst^ous Child, with Two Heads,
Four Arms, Four Legs, and all Things thereunto belonging: Born at a Village,
called Ill-Brewers, in the County of Sommerset, on the Nineteenth of May last.
With several other Circumstances, and Curious Observations to the Wonder of all
that have beheld it.

Attested and Confirmed by several Persons of known Worth and Integrity.

GReat and Boundless is the Power of the All-Wise and Omnipotent God; who, by
his Eternal Word, from Chaos Rude and Wild, first raised this Glorious Fabric
of the Universal World; and so with equal Poise, disposed the Warring Elements
into their Proper Places of Abode: Yet when he pleases, can let loose their
Reins, and Routing Fires, permit to rend the Watery Fleeces of the Skies, Black
Clouds involving Rapid Whirlwinds, and Destructive Flame, command as Heralds
out, for to make known the Terror of his Might. Winged Lightning, and Red
Thunderbolts declare his Power through the wide Arch of Heavens Glittering
Canopy; whilst loud Storms and Tempests, mix with Prodigies and Portents,
(those Harbengers, and Fore-running Omens of some ill Event:) Two of which
lately happening in this Brittish-Isle, we here shall give the Reader a
Relation of, variously, both in Earth and Air, those Specious Elements.

But first, upon the Tenth of this Instant June, several People being abroad
for Recreations sake, or as Occasions otherwise required, at a Place called
Wetherby, in the County of York between Six and Seven in the Evening, it being
very Fair, and all the Skies serene; when, on a sudden, (to the Admiration of
the Observers) Black Clouds drove furiously on before, South-Western-Winds
obscured the Sun's bright Face, and spread themselves over Heavens
Crystal-Arch: So that, such Darkness strait involved the Earth, as many times
is usual in some Great Eclipse; the which made many stand amazed at the sudden
Alteration. When lo, the opening Clouds from their black Bosoms, sent out
Prodigious Flashes of Aetherial Fire, and Thunders loud, with Storms of Hail or
Rain, exceeding Great; the which no sooner ended, but the Black Clouds drew
off, and a Cloud more Bright appeared, yet Dusky; and from either side of it,
strange Flashes, without Thunder, came. And, as the People (who were then
Spectatours) do affirm, Appearances of several Shapes, were seen for to wave in
and out; whilst it still Thundered from the North-West, in equal Distances, and
rending Motions, seldom seen. This had not continued past half an Hour, but
from the Breaking Cloud, (to the great Consternation of all present) a swift
Gust of Fire descended; or more properly, a Whirlwind of Flame, much like a
Sheet, or little Cloud, which with headlong force, fell a considerable way.
Then turning a-slant, it took off the Top of a Large Oak, containing almost (if
not altogether) one Load of Wood; and, like a Hurricane, drove it before it
through the Air, with rapid Fury, till it came to Esquire Belbye's Wood, at a
great Distance whence it grew, and near to Wetherby; where entering, it forced
off Branches, Arms, and Tops of Trees, so large, as struck all with Admiration,
who have since (...). And passing then into his Orchard, the Tempest (...)
aptly, Hurricane) broke several young Trees, gro(...) House, shattered the
Corner of his Hall, blew (...), and broke the Windows. So that, the like Gust,
or Whirlwind of Tempestuous Fire, has never been heard of in these Parts
before; so Great, so Strange, and so Amazing.

The Top of the Tree first blown off, lies now at the Place where it fell, for
all Spectatours to behold; and not in vain: For Hundreds, in these Parts, have
vouchsafed to come, and view the Wonder, and those none of the meanest Rank.
And it is adjudged by some, to be now almost a Mile from the Trunck or Body,
from whence it was first taken; that being also shattered, singed, and a strong
Scent of Brim-Stone still remaining on it.

If any one question the Truth of This, they may repair for farther
Satisfaction, to Mr. Zacariah Thorp, at Mr. Wittherels, in Charter-House-Lane,
London; and there receive an Ample Testiny of the Truth of what has happened;
or to Cornelius Thorp, living in the Town beforementioned, where this Hap
befell. Attested likewise there, by many Hundreds.

Veritas Laudatur and Alget.

And now, to divertise my Reader, and satisfy his or her farther Curiosity, I
shall give them an Account of a Portent less dreadful, though perhaps, more
wonderful and amazing, as seldomer happening; for I must declare (to take off
the suspicion of that Ill any may conceive, or vainly prognosticate unto
themselves) that these kind of Hurricans or tempests of Collateral Winds, are
very common in the Western parts of the World; as Virginia, Guinnia, Barbados,
and other places; though seldom in the North.

But to our ensuing Discourse, or second Wonder, so great and Monstrous a
Birth, not happening in the Memory of Man, viz, A Child lately Born at a
Certain Village called Ill-Brewers, in the County of Somerset; so prodigiously
strange (beyond the ordinary Course of Natures handiwork) that all present (at
its first appearance) started back, and stood amazed with admiration, to behold
such an unexpected sight: For on the 19th. of May last past, from the Mothers
Womb, big with the Monstrous Birth, by Art and Natures Kind assistance, Sprung
a Female Child, or two Children joined together by the bodies, side to side.
Heaven and Providence so ordering, no doubt, In the dark Cells of Generation;
for from the united body, grew two necks; and on each, a Head proportionable,
adorned with all things suitable; as Noses, Eyes, Ears, Mouths and Tongues, as
if it had been two divided births. From out the Shoulders, on each side, grow a
Brace of Arms, with Fingers and Thumbs proportionable, all pliable, and fit for
Use; so dexterously fixed or grafted on, as any can Imagine or conceive: The
body seeming but as one, two Nipples where the breasts should rise, and but one
row of Ribs on either side; one falling Crease, or valley between, the belly
likewise seems but one, and to one navel suits; yet a Seem apears, as if
mutually joined; the Privities and Orifice, or Fundaments, for Vent or
Evacuation, are distinct; and from the Huckles grow, on either side the Neck,
two Legs, with Joints, and all things answering in proportion, just and equal
lengths; with Feet and Toes well fixed: So curious was Dame Nature, to let
nothing fail, that might conduce to make her Wonder great, and most admirable.
The father of this double Infant, Is named Herring, A Laborious man and of mean
rank; but of an honest Demean, and good repute. His Wife before this, having
born him several Children, to the number of five. When this Child was born,
(according to the report of the Midwife, and several other good Women,
assisting at the Labor) the two Innermost Arms were twined about the
different necks, the two heads seldom apply, their Mouths to the Breasts; but
suck divided, and when one sucks, the other often weeps.

A Day, or Two after the Delivery, the Parents were advised by several, to have
the Child (or Children so united) to be baptized; the which, (according to the
ceremony of the Church) was performed, with Godfather and Godmothers; naming
them Priscilla, and Aqvilla. After which, being tenderly looked to, they
gathered strength, and now look lively, brisk, and well, being likely to
continue: And it is designed, if they live, that they shall be brought to
London, there to be exposed to View, for the farther satisfaction of the
curious, or the unbelieving; whose faith can reach no farther, than their eyes
can see. The house where this Monstrous Birth of Nature was produced, Is next
adjoining to Justice Waldens, Esquire; in the Town and County aforesaid.

This is attested by many Persons of worth and Good repute. But especially, by
Mr. Thomas Warren, an Apothecary, living in Laurence-Lane, London, who received
it from the Parents.

Thus they all behold, and with wonder seriously consider the mavelous Deeds
of the All-wise Creator; who disposes of his works, as best seems fit unto him;
whose will, is his Law; and power Immense, Omnipotent, and boundless, without
end or limitation. So that, all the sons of (...)en are, before him, but as the
clay in the hands of the (...)ho can mould and form us, as it pleases Him,
without our (...) or least consent.

FINIS.

