Strange and wonderful News FROM YOWEL in Surry;

Giving a True and Just Account of One ELIZABETH BURGISS, Who was most
strangely Bewitched and Tortured at a sad rate, having several great lumps of
Clay pulled forth from her Back, full of Pins and Thorns, which pricked so
extremely, that she cried and roared in a vehement and out-ragious manner, to
the great amazement of all the Beholders.

AS ALSO, How great Stones as big as a Man's Fist, were thrown at her in the
Dwelling House of Mr. Tuers, which came flying into the House in a most strange
and amazing manner, the Doors being shut and Windows, so that it could not be
imagined how they should be conveyed into the House, and that none of the
Family was any ways hurt, but this Maid; Also how the Bellows was thrown at
her. Mr. Tuers her Master, finding his House thus troubled, after some time,
sent her home to her Mothers House at Asteed, about three Miles off from Yowel,
where by the way She was most strangely assaulted with Stones as before; and
after She came to her Fathers House, the throwing of the Pewter-Dishes,
Candlesticks, and other clattering of Houshold-Goods at her, besides the
displacing of a Musical Instrument, hanging up her Grandfathers Breeches on
the top of the Sealling.

With many more strange and miraculous things, filling the Spectators with
Wonder and amazement.

Printed for J. Clarke, Seignior; at the Bible and Harp, in West-smithfield,
1681.



Strange and Wonderful NEWS FROM Yowel in Surrey, etc.
LEt not the Incredulous question the verity of the Sequel, since diverse ocular
and auricular witnesses can and will upon occasion, testify the truth of what
shall be hereafter asserted, though I doubt not but to meet with many, who
being conscious of their own Romances, may suppose Writers to be (like
themselves) composed of nothing but deceit and Forgery; but to proceed to my
purpose.

On Thursday the 5th of October, one Mr. (...) a Gentleman, living at Yowell,
in the County of ^^^ry, together with his wife, went forth upon occa^^on,
leaving their Servant Maid Elizabeth Burgiss at home to officiate in their
absence as she found occasion; In the mean time or interim, one Joan Butts a
person that has been for a long time suspected to be a Witch, came to the
house of the aforesaid Mr. Tuers, and framing some discourse to the Maid before
named, she at last asked her for a pair of old Gloves; the Maid knowing her to
be a person of ill repute, and being willing to be rid of her company, gave her
a very short and sharp answer; telling her she had no Gloves for her, or if
she had she could not spare time to look them; whereupon this Joan Butts went
away, but in a little time returned, asking the aforesaid Maid for a Pin to pin
her Neckcloth, which she furnished her with, and so this Joan Butts departed,
leaving the Maid without dread or fear of any harm; but about fourteen days
after, there happened strange and miraculous wonders, amazing and frightning
all the Spectators, for stones flew about the Yard at such a strange rate, as
if it had rained down showers of them, and many of them were as big as a man's
fist, and afterward flew as thick about the house as before they did about the
Yard, notwithstanding the doors were close shut, yet for all they flew so thick
about, they hit no body but the Maid, to the great astonishment of her Master,
Mistress, and others: but more to be admired, the next day this maid was
suddenly attacqued with intolerable pain in her back, and such unsufferable
pricking of Pins, that she was not able to endure, or without lamenable
complaining, undergo the groans and skreeches she sometimes suddenly parted
with, would have moved a stony heart to pity her destress, and Mr. Tuers her
Master commiserating her condition, asked if he should put his hand down her
back and feel what might be the cause of her pain or Torment, which she
willingly agreed to, and he accordingly did, and to the amazement of all
persons present, pulled out a great piece of Clay as full of Pins as it could
well be, and throwing them into the fire, she was for that present at great
ease, but after that a second Torment did seize this Maid, which caused her to
complain more grievously and lamentably then before, whereupon one Mr. Waters
being there present, put her hand down her back and pulled out a piece of Clay
as thick of Thorns as the other of Pins, so throwing them into the fire, she
was again at ease for that time: The next day as she was going a Milking, she
saw in Nonsuch Park this wretched old Caitiff sitting amongst the Thorns and
Bushes, bedaggled up to the knees in Dew, and looking like one that had lately
had converse with some Infernal Fiend, and wondering to see her there so early
in that pickle, (being as it were doubtful of her wickedness) and supposing her
to be the cause of her (before mentioned) pain and misery, returned home to her
Masters house, telling him how she saw this Joan Butts in the place before
named, adding in what a strange Garb and posture she sat in, which added to the
suspicion of the (before doubtful) Master, but the same night the Maid going
into the chamber where she lay to fetch a Trunk which was intended to be sent
to London, all on a sudden cried out, Master, Master, here is the old Woman:
the master running hastily to see whether it were so or no, could see no old
woman, but the Andirons thrown after the maid, and all her own Linen thrown
about at such a rate, as it is hard to believe, but that it will upon occasion
be attested by unquestionable Evidence: and likewise a Wooden Bar which
belonged to the street door, was strangely removed and conveyed up stairs, and
came tumbling down after the maid in the sight of her master: about three days
after they were surprised with new wonders, for there was to be seen such
sights as they never saw before, viz. The Bellows flew about the house, and
Candlesticks and other things thrown after the Girl as she passed to and fro in
her masters house, and going to her Mothers house which was at Astead about
three miles distant from Yowel, such numberless numbers of stones were thrown
at her, that she found it hazardous to Travel, but had she returned it might
have been the same, and so she continued till she came to her mothers house,
where on Sunday the 9th of October, they were possessed with admiration as well
as those of her Masters Family, for her Grandfathers Britches were strangely
found to be on the top of the house as near as can be imagined over his Bed,
and besides such great quantities of Nuts and Acrons flew about, that the
Spectators never beheld the like before: The pewter danced about the house in a
strange manner, and hits a Gentleman such a blow on the back, that I suppose he
will have but little stomach hereafter to go to see the Devil dance: but the
same day happened another Wonder no less strange then what is before recited,
for there was a Fiddle close laid up in a Chest, which was strangely and
unknown to any of the house, hung up in the room, and after was removed to the
top of the Beds Tester, and the third time carried quite away, and has no more
been seen since: But on Thursday the 18th of this present October, there being
a Fair kept at Yowel, the mother of this afflicted maid came thither, and
meeting with this old suspected Witch (whom she had great reason to imagine so
to be) fell foul upon her, and so evilly Treated her, that she fetched out some
of her Hellish Hellish Blood, but the effects and event thereof, I must get
time to acquaint you with.

That I may without Derogating from the truth, imform you as I have done the
preceding story, honestly and justly, without adding or diminishing, and
though it may seem incredible, yet I doubt not but if any person be so curious
as (doubting the truth) to inquire, they will without doubt be sufficiently
ascertained of what I have here Attested.

FINIS.

