STRANGE NEVVS FROM SHADWELL, Being a TRUE and JUST RELATION of the DEATH of
Alice Fowler, Who had for many years been accounted a Witch; together (...) the
Manner how she was found Dead with both her great Toes Tied together, and laid
out on the Floor having a Blanket flung over her. She being left locked up
alone by her Nurse, with a discovery of what Marks or Teats were found about
her, when she was searched by the Neighbors.
IN King Street near Whapping, the one part of it being in the Parish of St.
Paul Shadwel, and the other in the Parish of Whapping; lately lived a Widow
Woman named Alice Fowler, she was about the Age of Forescore Years, and had
always been a malicious ill-natured Woman and for many years had been reputed
a VVitch; she was always observed to be muttering and grumbling to her self,
and was continually holding a Discourse as it were within her self, and some
that knew her would often say that at those times she conversed with Familiars
or Spirits; she was always poor, as it is observable that those kind of People
are* Her way of living being to sell Bisquets to Baudy houses, where she
generally got Drunk, and being a very Debauched and Lewd Woman, and despised
and slighted by the Neighborhood for this her lewd and base course of Life. By
such small Shifts, together with the Assistanae of the Charity of the Trinity
House into which by reason she was Ancient and a Seamans Widow she had of late
years gotten; she with much ado lived a necessitous and miserable life, being
continually in want, and at varience with all that knew her.

Above twenty years since she nursed a Girl who did always report that she was
a Witch, and after she was at a woman's Estate was still fearful and
apprehensive of her, until the time of her Death. It Is believed the Child had
been affrighted by some of her Tricks when she was Young, which made her in the
greatest Dread and Terror imaginable of her ever after.

About sixteen Years since, Walter Fowler her Son was Transported to Barbados,
who always used to declare that his Mother was a Witch, that she had bewitched
him and several others, and would relate several strange Exploits of her doing,
and saying often to others that she was there in the Room and tempted him to do
such and such Mischiefs, and would averr that he saw her present, when no one
else in the place could see any thing; this mind he continued in, always
accusing her of bewitching him, until about nine Years since that he was hanged
in the Island of Barbados, for Murdering his Wife and breaking open a House.

About six weeks since, she having lain sick a considerable time in King Street
aforesaid, where she had a mean Room Furnished, and having a poor Neighbor to
look after and nurse her; she sent her out of an Errand to fetch her something
shd had occasion for, and the woman going out of Doors, locked the Door and
took the Key with her, leaving no body there save the aforesaid Alice sick in
her Bed, and coming back again, found the said Alice stripped, dead and cold as
Clay laying on the Floor on her Back, and having her two great Toes tied
together, and a Blanket flung over her; the poor woman being very much
surprised at this, called in the Neighbors who were all in great astonishment
when they saw the Corpse lying, and had had an account how it was left, and the
rather in that there was so great a stink when they stirred the Corpse that they
could hardly endure the Room.

Several of the Neighbors were so curious to search the Corpse, and do all of
them affirm that they found in the private parts of the Corpse five Teats; to
wit, four small ones and one very big, and that they were all of them as black
as a Coal.

This considered, together with her ill report that she had when alive, made
all the neighbors refuse to accompany the Corpse to the Earth, so that the next
day she was put into the Church Coffin, and by the Bearers without any more
company buried in the Churchyard of St. Paul Shadwell; so that as in her Life
she was little beloved, at her Funeral she was as much slighted and scorned by
every body, no one offering to accompany her Corpse, as is before rehearsed.

If any one is so curious to make a farther inquiry into this Matter, it is so
known a Truth to the Inhabitants of King Street aforesaid, that there is not
one in the place but can affirm and justify the whole Relation; and the Matter
is so fresh, that it is impossible it should be yet forgotten, it being not
above six Weeks since the Woman died, as I am informed by a credible Person
that went to enquire of the Business amongst the neighbors, and was one that
well knew the said Alice Fowler in her Life time, and from whom I had this
Relation; which in regard of the strangeness, I thought fit to Publish.

LONDON; Printed by E Mallet, 1684.


