A Strange and Horrible MURDER Committed in WHITE-FRYERS Upon Mr. John
Blackston, who was found Murdered over against the Suger-Loafe, on the 7th of
April, 1684.
Mr. JOhn Blackston, the unfortunate Subject of this Relation was a Gentleman
of a good Family in the North of England, and Cozen to Capt. Blackston of the
Temple, who dyed about three years ago. His great and familiar Acquaintance,
with most Gentlemen of the Town rendered him publicly known, and equally
respected for a person of known Worth and unquestionable Courage. The Watch
going their Rounds in White-Fryers at one of the Clock on Tuesday Morning,
found his Body lying in the Kennel near the Suger-Loafe in White-Fryers;
Bleeding and lately Killed; upon which Notice being given to the Constable, he
imediately ordered it should be removed, which was accordingly done, and
carried into the Queens-Head Tavern where it lay till Wednesday Night, and was
then put into a Mourning Coffen and carried to his own Lodgings, several
Persons Gentlemen and others, who were late out in public Houses, were secured
and carriad to Bridewell, upon Suspicion of being privy to the Murder; but the
next day each person giving a fair Account of his Behavior and Course of Life,
They were all discharged by Sr. William Turner. The Gentleman by the freshness
of his Wounds, appeared to be lately killed, tho there was no person by, to
give a particular Account of it, only a Gentleman of the Temple, who was up at
his Study, hearing a Noise in the Street, and the clashing of Swords, looked
out of his Window, and saw three persons fighting, of which the Gentleman now
deceased was one. He had several Wounds in his left hand, through a Bust
Fringed Glove, and one mortal Wound on his right Side under the Ribs up into
his Body and through his heart: the Orifice was very wide, and upon all
Circumstances, it is believed was foully done, and that two persons at the same
time set upon him.

The Coroner sat upon the Body, and the Inquest found it wilful Murder, for
upon searching the Body* they found he had another Wound on his Back, which was
a Stab after he fell. Several persons were apprehended upon Suspicion: but more
particularly a Gentleman, who is supposed one of the persons who Killed him, is
now taken and committed to Newgate.

The Discovery of this person was thus; that coming to a Chyrurgeon to be dressed
of a Wound he had upon his B^east, he told him he had been lately in a Quarrel,
had run his Adversary through the Body, and closing with him shortened his
Sword, and stabbed him in the Back. The Chyrurgeon making this discovery upon
the Report of Mr. Blackstons murder, the Gentleman was secured. The Gentleman
of the Temple who looked out his of Window called out to the Watch, but being
late and no persons in the Street, the murderers got off before they could be
apprended. The Occasion of the Quarrel was about a Woman, whose Reputation has
been blotted in the Eye of the World, which Mr. Blackston taking Notice of she
vowed a Revenge, which she thus contrived and effected as may be most
reasonably imagined. For Mr. Blackston being at a Tavern and enquiring for some
Gentlemen of his Acquaintance was directed up Stairs, where he found a
Gentlewoman in company with his Friends, and blaming them for admitting person
so infamous in her Reputation turned her down Stair, whereupon she said he
should Repent that affront, and she would have her satisfaction before many
days past, which accordingly was done, by those Ruffians, who thus Barbarously
murdered him.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.


