Strange and wonderful News FROM LINCONSHIRE.

Or a Dreadful ACCOUNT OF A most INHUMANE AND Bloody Murder, Committed upon
the Body of one Mr. Carter, by the contrivance of his Elder Brother, who (...)
three more Villains to commit the hor^^^^^ (...) how it was soon after found
out, by the (...) a most dreadful and terrible Ghost, sent by Alm^ghty
Providence for the Discovery.

AS ALSO The Manner of its Appearance in several Shapes and Forms, with Fresh
bleeding wounds, still pursuing the Murderer from place, to place; with the
Relation how he endeavored to Conjure it down, and of its Appearance and
Declaration of the Murderers, and of the Confession of the Murderer when
Apprehended, with many other remarkable Circmstances.

This was Communicated in a Letter to a Gentleman of very good Quality in
London, The truth of which is Attested under the hands of George Smith, James
Simson, and Gregory Wilson, Men of good Repute and Fame, Iiving near Stampford.

LONDON Printed, in the Year 1679.

Strange and wonderful News From Lincolnshire.
WOnderful are the dictates of Providence, in all there effects, and Heavens
justice, seldom sleeps when Crimes, like these: cry Loud, Almighty vengeance
slacks not its dread Arm, but by some unexpected means pursues the Trembling
offender. Ghosts and infernal shapes; whose Midnight forms, Groan out
absconded horrors, are often Instrumeutal made, to the discoveries of Vilianous
Exploits, as may in this fratericid be amplified more open to the World; Mr.
Roger Carter, near Stamford in Lincolin-shire, dying not many Months since, and
leaving two Sonsonly (viz) William and Thomas, (his Wife being formerly
deceased) and for their maintenance, a considerable competency; as well in
Yearly revenue, as other goods, Chattels and Money, divided between them equally
thereby, thinking he had done discretly, to hinder all differances: that after
his decease might happen, but as the Glow Worm, Light of Humane Reason, cannot
see into futurity, so in this his expectation failed, for the Elder, (viz)
William being by Nature of an extravagant wild temper: and following Lude
Associate, was like Cain, Tempred to shed the Innocent Blood of his Younger
Brother, for sure it is, that such his envy Sprung at, first from the dislike
he conceived of his Virtuous proceeding, as to procure the posession of what
was fallen to his Lot, upon which he laid many Plots and contrivances, to make
him away, and then rather because he was but green in Years, and easiy to be
wrought upon, at last he prevailed with him so far as to go to the University
of Cambridge: and there to study Divinity, this the Youth agreed to, at his
more then ordinary imertunity, and it was given out on all Hands, amongst the
Neighbors, the better to Color the design, the time being appointed for his
departeur and things made ready, the Elder Brother had hired 3 of his Wicked
accomplices, to meet them upon their Journey, in the disguise of high way Men,
by such a Wood some distance from the Town, and that they there should Murder
his Brother, for which they were to receive Ten Pounds a piece, this they
effected on Tuesday, the 14 of this Instant November, at which Bloody and
Villainous design, the said William was not least Instrumental, for when the
Ruffians had shot the Young Man of from his Horse, then he run him through, to
make a sore dispatch, this being done, they bound the said William to make the
business more likely and plausable, and then away they Rid, not long after some
Gentlemen came by, who were much amazed at so strange a disaster, to whom the
said William with a lamentable Voice told them in many dissembling
Circumstances, telling them that his Brother being fore-most they were met by 6
High-way-men, desireing him to Yield to their Mercy, and not to make any
resistance, but he not taking his counsel, being well Horsed, endeavored to
Ride throw them, but one of them Fireing a Pistol, shot him, and another with
his Rapier Run him through, this daubing with untempered Mortar; gained not
only belief with the Gentlemen, but also with the whole Countery, Immediately
Hew and Cry, was sent after the Murderers, and the Body decently buried, the
Brother shedding many Crocadils Tears at the Funeral: the better to Blind the
Eyes of Men, but Heaven whose narrow searching Eyes can never be deceived,
thought sit to bring so Vile a deed to Light, and Innocent Blood cried Loud,
whereupon there was a certain rumor spread about the place, without a known
Author, that there had been a dreadful Ghost seen in Mr. Carters Yard, the
which he strove to Stifle, by threatening the reporters of it, but it proved a
Sceen to true, for by the Divine permission, an Airey form assumed the shape of
his departed Brother, with fresh bleeding Wounds, the which appeared not only
to him in dreadful wife, but at last to one of the Servants, upon this a
sudden change was observed in him, and a deep Melancholy overspread, no
doubt stirred up by inward Guilt; and powerful Conscience: sting at last the
Spirit or Airy form Grew so importunat (seeing the Servants had strict charge
not to reveal to any of the Neighbors any such disturbance) that for two or
three Nights together, there was heard most dreadful Groanings, and Laments:
and such a Lumbering Noise, as if the stools and Chairs; and all the other
Household Goods were Tumbling out of doors: the Hogs and Horses often making
an unusial Noise, so that it was heard by several of the Neighbors, upon which
the Rumor spread fresh, whereupon he thought convenient to remove to another
House, some distance from that being, the which still raised suspicion in some
Jealous Neighbors, all this while the Servants remaining faithful to their
Master, would by no means disclose what they had seen, but making slight, when
they were asked concerning any such Intreague, but this removal nothing did
avail, for still the dreadful Ghost persued, and often changed it self into
more fearful forms, as a Bear, a Lion, and the like with Ghastly countenance,
and horrid Eye, often sparkling fire, sometimes shril shreaks, and sometimes
Hollow Groans were heard, this he at last Imparted to Friend of his (but not
the cause of its appeatance) who advised him to get it Conjured down, amongst
the Neighbors still reports went doubtful, some said Old Mr. Carter had hid
monys, and that being not as yet discovered, was the cause his restless Soul
could find no fixed abode, but the Murderer himself, knew a more dreadful
cause, for its appearance, and therefore took his Friends, advice to lay it, if
'twere possible, upon which a Man was sent for that pretended to Astroligy, and
all things for the dreadful Intreague were prepared, and Midnight silence the
Hour for its appearance being come, first a Small Noise was heard and next, the
Room wherein they were did seem to shake, when lo the Image of the murdered
Youth appeared on Horseback just as he was slain, which sight so amazed the
Conjurer, that notwithstanding his Magnanimous art, he did begin to fly the
Room, when as the Spirit bid him not to fear, though it was not in his power to
lay him, till his blood (in part shed by his Brothers hand, and part by three
more: whom he Hired, Nameing them distinctly) was by Justice answered for,
whereupon showing his Wounds he vanished, upon this the murderer was
apprehended, and before a Majestrate confessed the whole enterprise, as before
recited, and thereupon was committed to the County Goal, to attend his Trial,
the other three being fled upon the discovery, and are not to be found, this
attested under the Hands of George Smith, James Simson, and Gregory Wilson, Men
of good repute and Fame, living near the place aforesaid, etc.

By this we may see and admire the power and Justice of an Almighty God who
alone is dreadful, and to be feared among all the Nations upon Earth.

FINIS.

