A Strange and Horrible RELATION Of a Bloody and Inhumane Murder Committed on
the Body of a Jewish Woman, by the Command of her Father a Jewish Priest.

OR THE Bloody Servant, Being a Full and True Account of The Trial,
Condemnation, and Execution, Of the Barbarious Murder lately Committed in
SHROPSHIRE BY ONE John Adams, Who Cut the Throat first of Anne Harris, his
Masters Wife, and afterward of Sarah Harris her Daughter, with a Knife (as he
said) given him for that purpose by the Devil, and then having Robbed them of
what Money they had, set Fire on the House.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

A Strange Relation of a Horrible Murder, Committed on the Body of a Jewish
Woman, by the command of her own Father a Jewish Priest.
A Jewish Priests Daughter being with Child by a Gentleman who pretended love
to her, but when her Father know it, he kept her in, and never allowed her to
see him afterward, but when her full time came that she should be delivered,
there was hired a Sedan to fetch a Midwife, and they carried her through so
many by Alleys and Lanes, and being Night, she knew not which way, nor where
she went, but they conveyed her to a house, where in the first Room she came
in, their was a very large Fire, and six Gentlemen all Maskt, the Midwife
being amazed, she asked them if they had any thing for her to do, they replied
they had, whereupon one of them had her up in another Room, where four
Gentlemen were in black and Maskt, and a very hansom young Gentlewoman in
pain, crying and taking on very much, the Midwife desiring her to be patient,
there was no fear of her safe delivery, but she said it was not that troubled
her, but she said that when she was delivered, she must be Burned in that fire
that was below, within an hour after she was delivered: After she had Delivered
the Woman, one of the Gentlemen gave her Thirty Guines in her hand, and sent
her away in the Sedan, she was hardly got down stayers, but she heard her
screech and cry. This action was performed so secreetly, that the Midwife
cannot tell in what part of the City it was acted, wishing she could make a
further discovery of those unnatural and Bloody Murderers.

THE BLOODY SERVANT, OR, The Horrid Murder in Shrop-shire, etc.
JOhn Adams, the Committer of this Barbarous Murder, which we are goeing to
relate, lived at a place called Streton in the County of Sallop, as an hired
(though not menial) Servant to John Harris a Sawyer in that Town, and had workt
with him Several years, and during all that time, carried himself very civilly
and honestly; but see! what a mighty Temptation is money, and how dangerous a
thing it is to set our Hearts upon Covetousness, and getting Riches by
unlawful means; this story is hereof a most pregnant Instance; For though this
poor man had hitherto led an unblamable life, yet not being solidly grounded in
virtuous principles, or to speak more properly, wanting the grace of God,
without which all our Inclinations are evil, altogether evil, and that
Continually; he was no sooner Baited by the Devil with an opportunity, but he
Committed one of the most Barbarous Crimes that has been heard of in our Age,
though to fruitful, and every day teeming with fresh and unheard of
Assassinations, and bloody Cruelties; For about the month of July last, his
Dame (who managed the business of a Dary distinctly by her self, as her husband
did his own trade) having sold two Cows, and received the Sum of Ten Pounds
for them, which this John their man very well knowing, presently began to
harbor the accursed thoughts of Robbing her of this money, and proposed
several stratagems in his wicked Brain for the accomplishment of this design;
At last the Devil and he concludeb their Consultation in a Resolution which he
forthwith Resolves to put in Execution, And accordingly on the 13. day of
January instant, his Master having taken some work at a place called
Cardington, about Eight Miles from Streton, went out somewhat early in the
morning with this fellow, intending to go thither to his business, But John
heareing as we said before, concluded on his black Project, in order thhreunto,
purposely leaves some of his Tools behind at home, and when they had wlakt
about a mile, All of a sudden, Cries out to his Master, that he had forgot
them, who presently bid him run back for them, and said that he would walk on
before, which was what his man desired; Accordingly the fellow came back
toward the house, approaching within sight of it, and revolving in his mind
what he was going about, his Conscience as yet not wholly seared, began to fly
in his face, and check him from so base an Action, though at that time (as he
has since affirmed) he meant his Dame no hurt, but only to have bound her or
the like, and taken her money, and so have run clear out of the Country, but
then he began to fear, she knowing him so well, Hue and Cry would be sent out
after him, and that he should not cleverly escape, whereupon he began to think
of waveing the design wholly, and doubtless had so done, If the Devil (who
always attends persons that go on such disperate attempts, still pricking them
forwards to their finial destruction) had not stepped in Just in the nick to
confirm him in the aforesaid Hellish Resolution, and render it more heinous, by
adding the Guilt of Murder to the Crime of Theft; For as he was walking near
the house in the feilds thus melancholy, and troubled in his thoughts, not
knowing what to do, Behold to his apprehension, two men in black (undoubtedly
two Feinds in Masquerade) appeared to him, and demanded the cause why he was so
Melancholy, and assured him it lay in their power to help him, whatsoever the
matter might be, He thereupon reveals his mind to them, and said his Dame had
received Ten pounds which was now in the house, and that he had a mind to it,
but did not know how to get it securely, whereupon one of the seeming men
pulled out a long knife with a black haft, and turning crooked, almost like a
little Scymetar from under his Coat, and said (as he since attested at his
death) go and Cut thy Dames Throat whith this, and thou shall never be
discovered, nor so much as mistrusted to be concerned in it, and besides, shall
never want as long as thou live, upon which persuasions, He takes new Courage
to perpetrate the villainy, and receiving the fatal Knife from them, goes
boldly with it to the house, where he found his Dame Innocently, all alone, at
her Wheel a Spinning, but little Dreaming that the tread of her life was so
soon to be Cut off; she no sooner saw him, but very kindly she demanded the
reason of his so sudden unexpected return, but his heart was too much set upon
wicked deeds to answer her with words, and therefore instead of a reply, he run
up furiously unto her, and draging her by the hair to the ground, with the
aforesaid Knife barbarously Cut her Throat, making an Orifice about Seven
Inches long, and above two deep, so that her Windpipe was Cut clear asunder,
At which enforced passage her affrighted Soul wasted forth in a Crimson Flood,
and left her soon breathless Corpse weltring in its own blood on the Floor
whilst the inhumane Murderer greedily fell to Search and pillage the house,
but looking through the Window saw his Dames Daughter comeing along the next
field, having been at Mill at the next Village; He now knew not what to do for
he found he should be discovered if he did not dispatch her also, and therefore
slipping behind the door, and holding his Knife ready Just as she came in, he
Caught her about the Neck, and Cut her Throat in the same manner as he had done
her Mothers, and then applied himself again to Ransack the house, where at last
he found the said 10. Pounds in money, and two Gold Rings which he put into his
Pocket, And to Cover his bloody Fact, Sets the house on fire, Concluding that
people would Judge it came by Accident and that the two Women were Casually
burned in it, and having set the Thatch all on fire he got away undiscovered
by any, but it happened that a Butchers boy coming presently by with some
Cattle seeing the house on fire gave notice to the neighbors, who came in so
Seasonably that in short time they quenched it, and then found the two Bodies,
their hinder-parts almost Burnt to pieces, but their Heads and shoulders
untoucht, so that their gaping Wounds still with fresh Blood plainly appeared,
whence it was evident that they must have been Murdered, and the House set on
fire on purpose, but who should do it, they were Ignorant, till providence
discovered it: For the Murderer, though before he resolved to run quit out of
the Country, yet had not now power so to do, nor yet durst he appear abroad,
but lay Lurking in Woods, and out-barns thereabouts, and the next Night Robed
another house, but met with very little booty, his absenting himself made his
Master and all others Conclude him the person guilty, and at last upon strict
search they found him on the top of an Hay-Reeke, and look the money and Rings
in his Pocket, Upon his Examination before a Justice, he Confessed the whole
matter; and being Committed to Goal, was at the Quarter Sessions of Shrewsbury,
Condemned to dye, and be Hanged up in Chains near the place where he did the
Fact; Before his Death, he seeemed exc^eding penitent, and desired very
passionately at the place of Execution, that all Servants might take warning by
him, not to Entertain the least thought of wronging those they dwell with, but
to be Content with their honest wages, and beware of Satan's temptations which
had brought him to that miserable and untimely End, the Knife was produced in
Court at his Trial, and is now to be seen publicly in Shrewsbery being of a
very unusual shape, and what is very remarkable, some of the blood sticking on
it, can by no means be got off, but remains still as fresh as if it had been
but just now contracted.

FINIS.

