Mr. Strype's SERMON Preached on the Day of the National Thanksgiving, etc.
April 16. 1696.

DAVID and SAUL. A SERMON Preached on the Day of the National Thanksgiving, For
God's gracious Deliverance of The King's Majesty From an ASSASSINATION, AND THE
Kingdom from a French Invasion. By John Strype, M. A. Vicar of Low-Leyton in
Essex.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1696.

TO MY Beloved Auditors of Leyton and Hackney.
IT was not only the general good Acceptance you gave this Sermon, when it was
Preached, that induced me to publish it, that you might Read that which you
heard with so much Satisfaction; But chiefly that I might Contribute my small
mite, for the better informing the Minds of you, and all others, in the Justice
and Happiness of our present Government under King WILLIAM, and to show what
small Reason any Persons have to disturb that Settlement that by God's
Providence is now established among us: Which this plain Discourse was intended
for. The Fruit whereof will be, to Convince all of the horrible Impiety of
those Miscreants, that Combined themselves together to Assassinate the King's
Sacred Person, and by Force and Violence to change the present easy and good
Government; and thereby to make us heartily sensible of God's merciful
Prevention of those Mischiefs, and duly thankful to him for the same: And
lastly, to Unite us all together as one Man, in the Defense of our King and
Laws.

Your Servant in the Ministry John Strype.

PSALM. cxix. 78. Let the Proud be ashamed: For they dealt perversely with me
without a Cause: But I will Meditate in thy Precepts.
DAVID, tho he were a good Man and a good King, A Man after God's own Heart,
and a King of God's own setting up, yet he met with a World of Dangers, Sorrows
and Afflictions. He had Enemies thick and threefold about him. But out of all
their Hands God delivered him. Insomuch that how desperately soever their Minds
were bent against him, tho they thirsted after his Blood, and Contrived and
Combined together many a time to shed it; Yet never could their Plots take
effect. Trouble enough indeed they put him to: But in spite of their Malice
and all their open Opposition and secret Conspiracy, he swayed the Scepter of
Israel many a year, Got many glorious Victories, Protected his Subjects in
their Laws, Liberties and Religion, Enlarged his Dominions, grew Greater and
Greater, and after all his Wars, before his Death God gave him Peace on every
side: And he got a Name of one of the Mightiest and most prosperous Monarchs
that ever sat upon the Throne of Israel.

In Commemoration of these Mercies of God to him (for David's practice was to
attribute all his Successes and Deliverances to God, and not to himself) he did
use to pen Psalms and compose Poems upon that Argument, to assist his own
Meditations and Thanksgivings: and that they might never be forgotten, he
ordered the Levites, and those that were over the Music of the Temple, that
these Psalms and Poems should be used there in their Sacred Assemblies and
Services. And in this CXIX Psalm there be abundance of Expressions whereby the
holy King sets forth these Matters, making frequent mention of his Enemies, and
of the Afflictions he suffered by their means, and his earnest Prayers and good
Resolutions which he made with respect thereunto. And this he is doing in the
Text. Let the Proud, (that is, the Wicked, for that Word in the Hebrew Language
is but another Phrase to express a (...)
Wicked Man by) be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a Cause.
But I will Meditate in thy Precepts.

For the taking more distinct Cognizance of these Words, and of King David's
Condition as to his Enemies showed by them, we may observe three things lying
before us.

I. David's Enemies. The Proud, that dealt perversely with him without Cause.

II. David's Prayer against them, Let them be ashamed.

III. David's Resolution and Practice, with respect to his Enemies. But I will
Meditate in thy Precepts.

I.
David's Enemies. Which are here described to be Proud or Evil Men, who dealt
with him perversely, and that without Cause. And who were these Enemies of
David, but the Friends of Saul? As God had set up Saul to Reign over Israel, so
for his Mis-government and Disobedience, the same God that exalted him deposed
him. I have rejected Saul from reigning over Israel. And accordingly God 1 Samuel
xvi. 1.
took from him that Spirit, or Gift, that he gave him, whereby he was enabled
to Govern the Kingdom, that God had advanced him to. The Spirit of the Lord
departed from Saul. And that Spirit of Government that God took from Ver. 14.
Saul, came upon David, to qualify him for that Kingly Office that God had
laid upon him. The Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward.
That is, from the day Ver. 13.
that Samuel the Prophet, by God's special Order, anointed him for King in
Readiness stead.

But notwithstanding all this, Saul, however deposed, rejected by God, and put
by his Kingdom, and David by God's own Appointment constituted King in his
room, yet had many that stuck to him; and, even before David assumed the
Kingdom, laid all the wait they could for him, to take him, to kill him, to
destroy him; as you read at large in the first Book of Samuel: Striving thereby
even to disappoint God's own Purpose, and to keep Saul in his Throne, whom God
had dethroned, and to keep David out whom God had put in. But he that chose him
preserved him, and at length brought him through all his Adversities to the
Kingdom. And Saul perished in Battle.

And when David was placed in the Throne, these old Friends of Saul still
continued their Enmity against him. They combine together, and set up
Ishbosheth Readiness Son, and made him King; And by their Influence a great part
of the Nation followed him. And hence ensued continual Wars between the House
of David, and the House of Saul. And so two Parties were set up, and the whole
Land of Israel brought into a miserable State of Civil War by the feditious and
unquiet Practices of these Malcontents.

And their rancorous Hearts they showed, not only in making open War against
King David, and disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom, but likewise in their more
secret Machinations, Plottings and Consultings to do him mischief. This is that
which David seems here in the Text chiefly to regard, when he says, They dealt
perversely with him. Which one of the Latin Translations of the Bible reads,
They consulted against me. They entered Consultarunt adversus me. Bib. Tigurin.
into Consultations to Compass some Designs of Mischief upon me. And another
Latin Bible reads, They frame Destructions for me: Or Exitia mihi Machinantur.
Castal.
Contrived them, by using certain crafty methods, and taking certain fitting
Seasons, the more surely to effect their bloody purposes. They plotted together
to Assassinate him, to use our modern Phrase. For these Words of the Text seem
to hold forth that Sense, that their Plots and Conspiracies were to take away
his Life. And in this meaning did the old Translators of our Psalms take it,
when they read it, They go wickedly about to destroy me. Wickedly indeed, to
Compass the death of an innocent Man, nay of a King, and one of so public a
Capacity, that many Thousands, namely, as many as were his Subjects, must feel
the blow, especially being so good and pious a Prince, as David was.

It added then unto their Crime, that they dealt thus perversely with him
without any Cause. For what good Cause can you assign, Oh ye Enemies of David,
why ye have dealt thus perversely with him: Why ye thus Conspire and Plot
against his Peace, his Honor and his Life? Is he an Usurper, whom God brought
to the Crown? He who is the great Disposer of Kingdoms; was not David advanced
by his peculiar Appointment, and wonderful Providence preserved, to sit on the
Throne of Israel? And did not the People know that it was he whom God had
established to be King over Israel? And did they not all joyfully accept him
for their King? Or since he came to Rule, what Mis-government, what Oppression
has he been guilty of? Has he infringed the Peoples ancient Rites and
Liberties? Has he vexed or spoiled them? Has he turned Idolater himself, or
encouraged and commanded Israel to forsake the God of their Fathers, and to bow
down to Baal, and the Gods that were round about them? Nay, Has he not set up
the true Worship of God, discouraged Idolatry, and given Himself a good Example
of Godliness unto his People? Has he not fought the Peoples Battles, and
Defended Israel from the Philistines, the Moabites and the Ammonites, those
Idolatrous Nations that bordered upon them, and mortally hated them?

Surely then none of these things could David's Enemies lay to his Charge, as
Crimes or Neglects of Government. For what Cause then was it, that they are
thus Confederate against him? Did they pretend the Restoration of Ishbosheth,
to sit upon his Fathers Throne? But did not God Depose Saul? And did not God
appoint David to be anointed King over Israel in his stead? And did not Samuel,
God's own Prophet, Anoint him? Or may not God dispose of States and Kingdoms?
Does not he set up Kings, and cast them down, according to that of Daniel, He
Dan. ii. 21.
changes the Times and the Seasons. He removes Kings and sets up Kings?
Does not the most high God rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and appoint Chapter v. 21.
over them whomsoever he will? Yea, that was the Doctrine God himself taught a
King that was loath to acknowledge it. In a Word, Are not all earthly Princes
God's Substitutes and Deputies? And may he not change them, if he pleases?
especially, when he sees they do not execute that high Charge which he
Committed to them in that Justice and Equity, and Moderation, and Care of the
Peoples good, that Government, the Ordinance of God, is on purpose Constituted
for. And therefore, O ye Malcontents, ye have no such Reason to be angry with
David, tho he possesses Readiness Throne: Nor ought ye to endeavor his Son's
Restoration, seeing it is the Lord's Doing, and brought about by his Hand and
Providence.

If ye say, Ishbosheth is wronged, and your Endeavors of taking away David the
present King is to do Justice to him, who ought by Right of Succession to
possess the Throne; Then I say, Will ye fight against God? Are you Wiser, are
you Stronger than He? And besides, what Right have you of your selves to take
this Authority to your selves? Who put the Sword into your Hands? Who gave you
the Privilege to call Kings and Princes to Account? Did God? Take heed that you
be not like the false Prophets, that ran when God had not sent them. And
Moreover, for the doing pretended Right to one, will ye do Wrong to many
Thousands, even to a whole Nation? Shall Ishbosheth be restored, tho the whole
Kingdom perish for it? Surely, if there be no other way to do Justice to
Ishbosheth, than to do Injustice to many Thousands beside, you ought to leave
Justice to God; and to Commit to him Ishbosheth's Cause, which you think so
good. But to Murder an Innocent King, to involve a Nation in Blood; to bring
in all the Miseries, the Devastations and the Confusions of a Civil War, among
a People that be in Peace and Quiet, and live easy under David's Government;
this ye can never justify, but must needs be guilty of most horrible Impiety,
and draw God's as well as the King's heavy Displeasure upon you. Ye can never
have God's Approbation, nor bear out your selves by any good or tolerable
Cause, for your dealing thus perversely with him. And thus they dealt perversely
with David without Cause, as you have seen. And so we have considered David's
Enemies, and their Pretenses. We proceed next to the second particular
observable in the Text, Viz.

II.
David's Prayer against these his Enemies, for his own Safety. Let them be
ashamed. That is, let them be disappointed. O my God, overthrow their unjust
Purposes against me. David's constant Course in all his Distresses was
Application to God, taking him to be his best Refuge. He knew his Cause was
just and good; and therefore he did, with the more Assurance, address himself
to God to take his part against his Enemies. He was well aware how malicious
they were, and how diligent to Work his ruin. And tho he could not always
understand what they were contriving against him, yet he knew God saw all well
enough; And that he was able to prevent their more curiously spun mischiefs,
however secretly they carried them, and however true they were to one another.
And therefore he put his Trust in God, and fled unto him to be his Protector,
and by his Power and Wisdom to countermine all their Devices, to demolish all
their well-laid Designs; which possibly they themselves were extraordinary sure
must take effect, being founded, as they thought, on such true Maxims of humane
Policy. I say, he leaves the Wise God to deal with these worldly wise Men, as
knowing that they were not, with all their Subtilty, a Match able to Cope with
him.

He was careful of keeping himself in God's Way, and of doing his Duty in all
good Conscience: And then he committed his Cause to God, and beseeched him to
confound his Enemies. Let the Proud be ashamed. He was not wanting by the best
means he could to Defend himself; by Force and Preparations to resist any
Assault or Invasion on him or his Kingdom. But when he had done this, he relied
not thereupon. He was not confident in an Arm of Flesh, but put his Trust only
in the living God, the Lord of Hosts, whom he knew, (and had often experience
of it) was wont to put to shame wicked and bloody minded and unpeaceable Men,
and to rescue the Poor and the Needy out of most imminent Hazards and Dangers:
that he might thereby get to himself Praise, and Renown and Glory before the
Face of all the World. We hasten to the third Particular, Viz.

III.
David's Resolution and Practice upon all the Troubles and Dangers he underwent
by Reason of his Enemies, these Proud Men that dealt perversely with him without
Cause. But I will Meditate in thy Precepts. That is, Let what will come of it,
I am resolved to make God's Law my Meditation, or my Practice, as the Word may
signify. And so our old Translation reads according to the Latin, I Exercebor.
Vulg.
will be Occupied, or Exercised, in thy Commandments. As he that meditates
diligently upon any thing, he is wholly Exercised, employed and taken up
therein. David knew, that the best way in the World to make God his Friend was
to take heed to his Commandments. He that keeps close to God and God's
Precepts, God will keep him. And hereby we do effectually put out selves under
his Care and Protection. For God loves the Righteous and keeps him as the
Apple of his Eye. Touch not these mine Anointed, says God to all his Creation,
and have a care you do them no harm. All good Men are a People neur unto him,
as well as Israel of old were said to be. A Ps. cxlviii. 14.
Conscientious heed to God's Commandments brings us near to God. And he to be
sure will take care of that which is near him, and as it were under his very
Eye.

This then was this holy King's Resolution and firm Purpose: However it falls
out to me, whatever Evils my undeserved Enemies endeavor to bring upon me, it
shall not put me out of God's way, it shall not break off my Course of Piety: I
will never fall off from the Fear of my God, and from my Obedience to him.

And thus I have given at good length an Exposition and Paraphrase upon these
Words of King David. And I have done it the more largely, that you may in your
own Thoughts accommodate it the better to a present Case of the King and State,
the Solemn Occasion of our Meeting here this day. Wherein we are required
openly to show our thankful Sense of the late great Mercy of God expressed
toward him and our selves, in delivering both so seasonably from a very
desperate Conspiracy. Wherein our King David was to have been dealt very
perversely withal, and the Peace of our Israel disturbed by our Neighbors,
those uncircumcised Philistines, that the Friends of Saul had stirred up
against us. Who were just ready to Invade our Country, and by Force and
Violence to intrude upon us a King, of the Rigor of whose Government we have
had already so much sad Experience. Insomuch that when he departed from us, and
left the Kingdom, we thought it one of the greatest Blessings and Deliverances
that ever God vouchsafed this Nation. Especially, when in his stead he gave us
another Prince of the Royal Family, who was of our own Religion, a true
Defender of our Faith, and a Patron of our Liberties, of our Properties and of
our Peace; and whose easy and moderate Government now for above Seven Years,
we have had the comfortable Experience of: And who still fights our Battles
against our Enemies, and the Common Enemy of the Peace of Christendom, that
undoubtedly before now had made us a miserable People, like his own, had not
God raised up this Wife and Valiant Prince to withstand him; Like another
Michael, which we read of in Daniel, that stood up for the Oppressed Jews; that
great Prince; which stood, Dan. xii. 1.
for the Children of our People.

It would have been a sore Judgment upon this Land, had those Miscreants that
sought after his Life, obtained their purpose, and we should all have felt the
stroke most sensibly But the Supreme Governor of the World would not suffer
such Courses to take place. He hates such impious Methods. And it appeared,
methinks, most evidently, that it was his own Work, the Lord's own Doing, to
frustrate these Men. For what was it, but his Commandment to his Winds, that at
that time they blew so long a space from one Quarter, stopping thereby our
Enemies from coming to us, and staying our Friends, I mean our Ships, from
going away from us; that they might be ready at hand to defend us in case of
any Hostile Invasion. This alas! then we saw not, nor dreamed of; and were apt
to repine, that our Merchantmen with their Convoys could not proceed on their
Voyages. But this was God's Embargo for our good: Which tho we knew not then,
yet now we see well enough, and are fully convinced of it, that the gracious
Hand of God was in it. And we cannot now but admire the infinite Wisdom and
Goodness of God, even in his Crossing and Disappointing our Desires and Wishes.
And herein, methinks, God seemed to say to us as Christ once said to St. Peter
upon the Washing of his Feet, which that Apostle did so oppose, What I do thou
know not now, but thou Joh. xiii. 7.
shall know hereafter. We knew not then God's wise and good designs and
purposes by those Cross Winds, as we thought them to be; but now we know them.

And as God's Hand did most notably appear in stopping of the Invasion after
that manner, so what was it but the Lord's doing, that the other part of the
Conspiracy, the Assassination, was disappointed also after such a manner; by
making those Conjured desperate Villains betray one another. And that by
turning their Wisdom into Foolishness. So that in them was verified that of the
Wife Man; His own Iniquities shall take the Wicked, and he shall be Prove. v. 22.
holden with with the Cords of his Sin.

Surely, all these things deeply considered and weighed, the Preventing of this
Mischief after such ways, with all the horrible Consequences of it, may justly
require a National Thanksgiving, and that the Memorial of this God's abundant
Goodness to England should be Celebrated, and that not only for a Day, but for
Ever; and be added in our English Calendar, to the many other signal
Deliverances and Salvations of God vouchsafed this Land.

God has clothed with Shame these perverse Dealers with us, not only in
frustrating and breaking their Intentions, but in that their Treasons and base
Designs are exposed to the World, to the Abhorrence of all that hear them, not
only in these Kingdoms, but abroad in other more Foreign Parts. All, whosoever
and whatsoever they be, except those that have joined hands in this Practice,
and are Brethren in this Iniquity, do Condemn and Detest it, when they hear it.

Thus God has made them ashamed. And he has also clothed some of them with
further shame, by bringing them either to the shame of an open Confession and
Acknowledgment of their Crime, or, which is worse, of being Judged, Condemned
and Executed as Traitors by the Hand of Justice. God has clothed them with
Shame, but upon the King's Head the Crown, Blessed be God, still Flourishes,
and seems to sit much Faster than it did before.

And that the King's Crown may Flourish still, and the whole Kingdom may
Flourish with him, let us now once more cast our Eyes upon the Text, and learn
hence from David what to do, and how to behave our selves, that our Enemies for
the future also may be put to shame. Let the Proud be ashamed; for they dealt
perversely with me without a Cause: But I will Meditate in thy Precepts. From
whence I infer two excellent Expedients of Success against our Enemies; the
former is Prayer; and the later a Resolution and Purpose to continue in the
Study and Practice of God's Precepts. I shall speak but a Word of each of
these, and so Conclude.

I. In all our Apprehensions of our Enemies, let us fly unto God by Prayer; and
earnestly implore him to save and defend us; and to guard us by his Almighty
Power from all our Adversaries; those whom we know not of, and those whom we
know to be so. Indeed we are never secure in this evil World: And there is no
Man's Innocence can free him from Danger. And we of this Nation must never
expect to be without Enemies. For, if there were nothing else, it is our
Religion, it is our happy Constitution and Government, that will Create us
Adversaries and Ill-willers. Well, let us therefore be instant in Prayer for
God's Protection: that he would make haste to help us; that he would be our
Rock and our Shelter from all our Foes; that he would Watch over us, and
Discover the Snares that at any Time are laid for us. And we must never be
weary of these Prayers. And then God, I trust, will not be weary of hearing
them, and giving a gracious Answer to them.

And surely for my part, I cannot but attribute our many late notable
Deliverances, to those frequent and earnest Petitions sent up by many thousands
of good Men and Women in all Parts of the Nation, which we use in our daily
public Prayers: As where we pray, O God make speed to save us. O Lord, make
haste to help us. And again, Defend us thy humble Servants in all Assaults of
our Enemies. That we surely Trusting in thy Defense may not fear the Power of
any Adversaries. And again, when we Pray, That we being defended from the fear
of our Enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness. And as it is in our
Litany, Graciously hear us, that those evils which the Craft and Subtilty of
the Devil or Man works against us may be brought to naught, and by the
Providence of thy Goodness be dispersed. And again, Turn from us all those
Evils that we most righteously have deserved. And diverse other of the like
Import. Great is the Efficacy of these frequently repeated Petitions, when put
up in the Places where God's Honor dwells, by Multitudes of devout People with
ardent and holy Affections. And as these Prayers have had such happy Effect, so
let us still continue in them for our future Preservation.

II. In all our dangers of our Enemies let us resolvedly persist in the Study
and Practice of God's Law. This was holy David's Resolution: The Proud dealt
perversely with me: But I will be occupied in thy Commandments. As tho he should
have said in other Words, I am well satisfied, it is the best Course to be
safe, to Fear God and to Walk in his Way, and to Depend upon him in Well-doing.
Then may I confidently pray to him, and expect all Supplies whatsoever from
him. For he will not forsake the Righteous, nor suffer him to be moved. And if
we would have God still to watch over our Land for good, let us steddily
persevere in our Protestant Profession, and especially in the Practice of our
Protestant Doctrines, which so effectually and indispensably require of us a
very sober, strict and holy Conversation. Which God grant us all Grace that we
may do for the Peace and Safety both of our selves and of our King, and of our
Country, for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom be all Honor, Glory and Adoration
for Evermore.

Sermons new Published, and Sold by B. Almer in Cornhil.
THE Bishop of Gloucester's Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Lords, at
Westminster-Abby, April 16th. 1696.

Mr. Stephens of Sutton in Surrey his Thansgiving Sermon, preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Bow-Church; April the 16th.

Mr. Showers his Thanksgiving Sermon, also upon the 16th of April.

Mr. Gardener his Thanksgiving Sermon, preached at St. Michael Crooked-Lane in
London the same Day.

FINIS.

