THE BISHOP of Chester's Charge IN HIS VISITATION.

THE BISHOP OF Chester's Charge IN HIS Primary Visitation AT CHESTER. May 5.
1691.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Church Yard,
1692.

THE Bishop of Chester's Charge, etc.
My Dear Brethren;
SInce nothing can more conduce to the Edification of the Church in Faith and
Holiness, than that its Pastors be duly qualified for their Work: I think my
time cannot be better employed in this my Primary Visitation, than in putting
you in remembrance, what manner of Men the Pastors of the Church ought to be;
and in quickening you and my self, to the faithful Discharge of those great
Duties which are incumbent upon us.

In Order to both which Purposes, you need do no more than seriously reflect
upon those things, which before your admission to this Sacred Office, you
solemnly before God and his Church, professed to believe, and promised to
perform.

The first Question proposed to you, as preparatory to your Ordination to
Priesthood, was, Do you think in your heart that you be truly called, according
to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Order of this Church of England,
to the Order and Ministry of Priesthood? To which you Answered, I think it:
That is, I think it in my heart, I am verily persuaded, that I am so truly
called, according to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Order of this
Church of England.

These latter Words [The Order of the Church of England] are not put to denote
another Rule, different from the Will of Christ; but are rather added, by way
of Explication, to show, Who those are that are called according to his Will,
viz. Those who are so qualified as the Church of England requires.

The Call here meant, is the inward Call from God; which must go before to
prepare a Person, for the outward Call from the Church, in setting him apart to
this Office, by Prayer and Imposition of hands.

This inward Call consists in the due qualification of the Person, for this
weighty Work (for God never calls a Man to any Employment, which he does not
before in some good measure fit him for): These Qualifications may be reduced
to Three General Heads: That the Life, That the Learning, That the Design of
the Person be such, as are agreeable to the Sacredness of the Office. All which
are contained, in the Caution the Bishop gives to the Person who presents to
him the Persons to be Ordained. Take heed, that the Persons whom you present to
us, be apt and meet for their Learning and godly Conversation, to exercise
their Ministry duly, to the Honor of God, and the edifying of his Church.

First, That he be for Life, blameless, sober, just, holy, temperate, as St.
Paul prescribes in his Epistle to Titus: That is, that he be not addicted to
any of those Vices, which would be a Disparagement to his Ministry, and hinder
the good effect of it; and that he be endued with all those Virtues, which may
adorn it. Whosoever therefore lives in the Practice of any such Vice, as will
lessen his Authority, and expose his Ministry to Contempt, he is not qualified,
according to the Order of the Church of England.

Secondly, That he be for Learning, so well acquainted with the Sense of the
Holy Scriptures, as to be able to instruct his Flock, in all that is necessary
for them both to know and to do, in order to their Eternal Salvation; and to
press their Duty upon them by such Considerations, as may be apt to work upon
their Wills, and induce them to the Practice of it. Thus St. Paul advises
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2 2.
to make choice of such for Pastors, who shall be able to teach others; and
commands Titus to see, that those he ordained were such, as were able by sound
Doctrine, to exhort and convince Gainsayers. Tit. 1. 9.
Whosoever therefore is so ignorant, that he is not able to instruct his People
in every necessary Point, both of Faith and Practice; and to enforce their Duty
by fit Perswasives, he is not called according to the Will of Christ. No man
doubtless can imagine, That it is the Will of Christ that the Blind should lead
the Blind; that they should be set to be Guides to others, who know not the way
themselves. The

Third, Necessary Qualification, is a due Intention; That a Man be inwardly
moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon him this Office and Ministry, to serve
God for the promoting of his Glory, and the edifying of his People; as it is
expressed in the Office for the ordering of Deacons. Not but that a Man's
intention may be approved by God, that has in it a mixture of respect to
Secular Advantage; but then it must be so much Inferior, in such perfect
Subordination to the other, as his principal end, that he despise all Worldly
Regards in comparison with it; and resolve to persevere in his Work, though he
meet with all the discouragements in the world to oppose him.

Though, blessed be God, there are many of you, my Brethren, not only whose
Life and Learning are such, as your Adversaries can make no just Exception
against; but who also give sufficient Proof, that your intention was right, by
your unwearied diligence, in the whole and every part of your Work; yet I fear
there may be some, who if tried by this Rule, will be forced to confess, that
they are not so qualified, as the Laws of Christ, and of this Church require.
Can it be thought, that they have the Glory of God principally in their eyes,
who endeavor to get into this Holy Employment, by such unworthy Means as God
abhors, by false Titles, and forged Certificates? Can they be thought to aim
chiefly at the Salvation of Souls, who leave the Work wholly to others, and
take the Wages only to themselves? Who for their ease and pleasure absent
themselves from their Charges, and think that Curate the best qualified, who
may be hired at the cheapest rate?

And here, my Brethren, I shall charge your Consciences with Two Things
relating to this Matter.

First, That you never send a Person to be Ordained, with a Lie in his hand;
that is, that you never signify to the Bishop, that you will take a Person for
your Curate (in case he shall think fit to Ordain him) whom you intend never to
employ in that Service: For though a Title is indeed no Qualification for the
Office, but a cautionary Provision, only for the Maintenance of the Person;
yet to bring a false Title, is a plain Argument, that the Man is destitute of
that Truth and Honesty, which are necessarily requisite to so Sacred an Office
as this is.

Secondly, That you never give a Testimonial of the good Life and Conversation
of any Person, whose Life and Conversation you do not certainly know to be
such. Considering, that if the Bishop gives Orders to any unworthy Man, upon
the Credit he gives to your Certificate, you must answer to God, for all the
Scandal that is brought upon the Church thereby, and for the Ruin of all those
Souls, which are misled by his bad Example.

In the next place, these Two Questions were proposed to you, before your
Admission to the Office of Priesthood. I. Are you persuaded that the Holy
Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity for eternal
Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus? II. Are you determined out of the
said Scriptures, to instruct the People committed to your Charge, and to teach
nothing (as required of necessity to eternal Salvation) but that which you
shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the Scriptures?


To the First you Answered, I am so persuaded: To the Second, I have so
determined by Gods Grace.

That the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently, all Doctrine required of
necessity to eternal Salvation: That is, That they not only contain all such
necessary Doctrine, but in some place or other, so clearly contain it, as that
it may be understood by all those, for whose Salvation the Scriptures were
designed, I take it for granted you all firmly believe; It being the main
Foundation of the Religion of Protestants, in opposition to the Church of Rome,
which by asserting the deficiency of the Holy Scriptures, in both these
respects, has thereby opened a door to those many Innovations She has
introduced into the Christian Doctrine and Worship, and may (if opportunity
shall serve) introduce as many more: I shall not therefore insist upon this.
That, which it may be more needful to speak to, is;

Secondly, What by God's Grace you determined to do, viz. To instruct the
People committed to your Charge, out of the said Scriptures; and to teach
nothing as required of necessity to eternal Salvation, but that which you shall
be persuaded, may be concluded and proved by the Scriptures.

One of the prime Qualifications St. Paul requires in a Pastor, is, 2 Timothy 2.
24.
That he be (...), not only able, but apt and ready to teach; and elsewhere he
describes him, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
as one that labors in the Word and Doctrine; and that This Labor in the Word
and Doctrine, was Necessary, not only in the Apostles days, when the Christian
Religion was to be planted in the World; but is still so, is manifest, from the
ends, for which he tells us, Christ appointed Pastors and Teachers; which were
not only the converting of Infidels, the gathering of the Sheep that were
scattered abroad into the Fold; Ephesians. 4. 12.
but the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of the Body of Christ.

It Is indeed strange, That any Man should think this Work unnecessary, as long
as there are Sinners to be converted from the Error of their ways, and Saints
to be edified in their Holy Faith; as long as Souls are in so great danger of
being eternally lost, through the daily Assaults of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil.

And it would be yet more strange, if any Men who own themselves Ministers of
the Church of England, should think they can be excused from it; when in the
Exhortation before their receiving of Priests Orders, they were told, That to
teach, and to premonish, to seek and provide for the Lords Family, was that
they were called unto. When upon the Bishop's demanding, Whether they were
determined to instruct the People committed to their Charge out of the
Scriptures? They Answered, They had so determined by God's Grace. When in the
very Words of Ordination, it was laid upon them, as a Charge, To be faithful
Dispensers of the Word of God.

Now this Teaching is either public or private: Of the private I shall speak,
when I come to the next Question save one: That which is public, is to be
performed these Two ways especially; by Preaching and by Catechizing. And,

First as to Preaching, Consider that solemn and dreadful Charge St. Paul lays
upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick
and the Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Preach the Word. Consider also,
That our Church has enjoined every allowed Preacher that is beneficed, Can. 45.
to have a Sermon every Lord's Day in the Year. And as a farther Enforcement,
That His Majesty has charged all the Bishops, Letter to the Bishop of London.
To see that the Clergy in their respective Diocesses, be duly resident upon
their Livings, preaching the Word of God plainly.

How assiduous many of the Ancients were in this part of their Office, and how
necessary they thought it so to be, I need not tell you; but methinks a serious
reflection upon it, should make those not only blush but tremble, who live in
the Neglect of it, who are so far from observing the Laws of our Church, while
they boast of more than ordinary Conformity to it, that they have not perhaps
more than one Sermon in a Year, for two Benefices.

Now, that we may in this way of Teaching, be successful to the Salvation of
our Hearers, we are here directed both as to the Matter and the Manner of it.

First, As to the Matter of our Preaching, it must be out of the Holy
Scriptures: But since of the things contained in the Holy Scriptures, some are
necessary, some are profitable only; and since of these things which are only
profitable, some are more, others are less profitable; our Pulpit-Discourses
should be chiefly confined to those Truths, which are necessary or highly
profitable, in order to eternal Salvation; omitting all School-Niceties, and
subtle Disputes, which are of no Practical Use; and never let any Truth, which
is called in question by none of your Hearers, be made a Matter of Controversy
in the Pulpit.

Endeavor effectually to convince your Hearers, how by our Apostasy from God,
we have made our selves obnoxious to His heavy Displeasure; and that there is a
necessity of a Mediator between God and Man. Show them who this Mediator is,
and how he is qualified for this great Work; what the Terms are, upon which God
has graciously promised to pardon our Sins, and how ready he is, upon these
Terms, of Faith, Repentance, and sincere future Obedience, to receive us into
his Favor: Press those Graces and Duties most, which are most comprehensive,
as Justice and Charity. Teach them to render to all their dues, as tribute to
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, etc. Represent CHARITY to them, in
all those branches of it, in which it is described by St. Paul in 1 Cor. 13.
Set your selves especially against those sins, which are most visible in your
Auditors; as St. Paul, who reasoned of Righteousness and Chastity, when he
preached before an unjust and adulterous Felix. Acts 24. 25.
More particularly, in pursuance of His Majesty's Letter, preach frequently
against profane Swearing, Perjury, Drunkenness, and Profanation of the Lords
Day; and when such a Sermon is to be preached, read to your People such
Statute Law or Laws, as are provided against that Sin, which is the Subject of
the Day: Which Statutes, together with his Majesty's Letter, I have formerly
sent you. And let not only the more gross Sins of the Flesh, but the more
subtle Sins of the Spirit, (such as Pride, Envy, Malice, etc.) be exposed to
your People in their odious nature, and aggravating Circumstances. Acquaint
them not only with those Duties, to which they are all in common obliged, as
they are men and Christians; but with those special Duties, which are incumbent
upon them in their different Ages, States and Relations. In short, let that be
the drift of your preaching, which is the design of the whole Gospel of Christ,
Tit. 2. 11, 12.
To teach men to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World.

Secondly, As to the Manner of Preaching, passing over other particulars, I
shall mention Three only at present, Two of which are here sufficiently
employed: Preach the Word sincerely, plainly and affectionately.

1. Sincerely; Which is employed in these Words, That you will teach nothing as
required of necessity to eternal Salvation, but that which you shall be
persuaded may be proved by the Scriptures. For Sincerity consists, as in
teaching all that the Scripture makes necessary; so in teaching nothing for
necessary, that is foreign to the Scripture; as the Church of Rome does in her
new Creed, imposing many Doctrines as necessary to Salvation, which are not
only Strangers to the Scriptures, but plainly contrary to the Doctrines, which
are there taught.

2. Plainly, and to the capacity of your Hearers; which is employed in the Word
instruct: For how can a man be instructed by a Discourse, which he knows not
the meaning of? He defeats the design of his Preaching, and betrays his
Hypocrisy, who renders that obscure, which he pretends to reveal. To which I
add;

3. Preach Affectionately, with that warmth and earnestness of Spirit, which
becomes matters of the greatest moment: It would grieve a Man to hear matters
of the greatest moment, so coldly and drowsily delivered, as if the Preacher
did not himself believe what he said, and were afraid lest his Hearers should
be brought to believe it. O my Brethren, let us but seriously consider the
inestimable worth of souls, the unvaluable price that was paid for them, what
danger they are in of being eternally lost, how dreadful our accounts will
shortly be, if they be lost through our slightness and laziness: Let us but
consider what Heaven and Hell mean, what it is to be everlastingly saved or
damned, and we shall then think our greatest zeal and fervency, will be little
enough, for such a Work as this.

I shall say no more concerning Preaching, but proceed to the next way of
public teaching, which is;

Secondly, By Catechizing, or instructing persons in the Principles of
Religion: Which is indeed but a more familiar way of Preaching. This is a Duty
laid upon you by the Canon and Statute Law both. The Fifty Ninth Canon under a
severe Penalty, requires every Rector, Vicar and Curate, upon every Lord's Day
in the Afternoon, to examine, and instruct the Youth, and the more ignorant
People of his Parish in the Catechism. The same is made your Duty by Act of
Parliament, in the first Rubric after the Catechism; and because some (who are
apt enough to censure their Brethren for breaking other Laws) can too easily
dispense with themselves in this, His Majesty has charged the Bishops to see,
Let. to the Bish. of Land.
That all the Clergy in their respective Diocesses do Catechize the Youth. To
which, if we add the Practice of the Apostles, (the great Master Builders of
the Church) who first taught Men the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: And
lastly, the voluntary Engagement you lie under to it, methinks nothing can be
thought wanting to oblige you effectually to this Duty.

But now should we set aside all these Considerations, and consider only, how
advantageous this Work is to the Welfare of the Souls committed to our care;
the great Benefits they would reap by it, the great Mischiefs they fall into by
the Neglect of it, one would think we should need no other Motive to put us
upon the diligent practice of it.

What is the Reason that our Sermons are generally of so little effect? That
our People hear us year after year, and many of them are never the wiser, are
ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth? One main Reason
doubtless, is, because they were never prepared to understand our Sermons, and
to profit by them, by being first more familiarly instructed in the Principles
of Religion. What Is the Reason, That many are so easily seduced to Error and
Vice, but because they were never well rooted and grounded in the Faith? Prove.
22. 6.
Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and he will not depart from it
when he is old.

As therefore, my Brethren, you tender the Salvation of your People, set your
selves without delay, to this so advantageous and necessary a Work: And that
you may do it the more effectually, I give it you in Charge, to preach
constantly in the Afternoon, upon some part of the Church Catechism; and to
Examine some of the Young People of your Parish quite through it, as often as you
preach upon it. And that Parents and Masters may take the greater care to send
their Children and Servants, to be instructed by you, do not only frequently
and earnestly exhort them to it, but thoroughly acquaint them with the great
Benefits that will accrue, not only to their Children and Servants, but
likewise to themselves thereby; as their Children will by this means be
rendered more dutiful and obedient, and their Servants more faithful and
diligent.

Having solemnly declared, That You are persuaded, that the Holy Scriptures
contain sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity to eternal Salvation;
and that you were determined out of the said Scriptures, to instruct the People
committed to your Charge: In the next place you promised, To give your faithful
diligence always so to minister the Doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline of
Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Church and Realm has received
the same, according to the commandment of God; that is, as God has prescribed
in the Holy Scriptures.

Of Ministering the Doctrine of Christ, I have already spoken, in what I have
said about Preaching and Catechizing.

As to the Sacrament of Baptism, I shall at present only put you in mind of
some few things, which are either expressly or implicitly required by the
Rubricks.

First, Let your People know, That Baptism being the solemn Admission of a
Person into the public Society of Christians, it is very unbecoming its Nature
and Design, to have it administered in private. Rubric before private Baptism.
Admonish them therefore to bring their Children to be baptized in the public
Congregation, lest by their refusing so to do, Christ should reckon them in the
number of those, who are ashamed of him and his Religion before men.

Secondly, Rubr. before public Baptism.
Admonish your People, That it is most convenient, that Baptism should not be
administered, but upon Sundays and Holy Days, when the greatest number of
People come together; because in the Baptism of Infants, every Man present, may
be put in remembrance of his own Profession, made to God in his Baptism. Exhort
them therefore diligently to attend throughout the whole Administration, to
reflect upon their past lives, and to consider how far they have kept, and
wherein they have broken their Baptismal Vow.

Thirdly, Rubr. before private Baptism.
Admonish your People, not to defer the Baptism of their Children longer than
the first or second Sunday next after their Birth, lest by unnecessary delay
the Child die, before it be dedicated to the Service of the Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, I add, (as being nearly allied to Baptism) That you take due care to
prepare the young People of your Parishes for Confirmation: Can. 61. Rubr after
the Catechism
So soon as Children are come to a competent Age, and can say in their Mother
Tongue, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, and can answer
to the other Questions in the short Catechism, they are to be brought to the
Bishop to be confirmed: But they are not to be thought to be of a competent
age, (though they can repeat the Words) till they be capable of knowing the
meaning of them, and their own great Concernment therein. For what profit can
they receive by Confirmation, unless they understand what the design of it is,
and the Obligation they take upon themselves thereby? And this, my Brethren, is
to be your care. Rubr. after the Catechism
You are required either to bring or send in writing, with your hand subscribed
thereunto, the Names of all such Persons within your Parishes, as you shall
think fit to be presented to the Bishop to be confirmed: And how can you think
them fit, before you have examined them, and find that they have a competent
knowledge of these things, and are willing to consent to the Vow that was made
in their Names, and to take it upon themselves?

As to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, (the too general neglect of which,
is just matter of lamentation) make your People know that they are not left at
liberty, whether they will receive it or not; but that it is a necessary Duty
laid upon them, by the express command of Christ: That if they sincerely love
Christ, or have any Value for Christ's Love to them, they will need no other
motive to induce them to it; That it is their Duty to receive it, not only
sometime or other before they die, (perhaps at their last breath) but
frequently while they live, if they have opportunity: That the first Christians
made it a constant part of their public Worship. And I beseech you to
administer it in your Churches, as often as you can get a convenient number
together to receive it; to be sure, so often that every person may have
opportunity of receiving it at least three times in the Year.

As to Discipline, observe more especially the Rubric before the Communion, in
keeping back those Offenders from the Lords Table, whom you are there required
not to admit, (viz. Notorious evil Livers, or such as have done any wrong to
their Neighbors, by which the Congregation is offended) and in giving an
Account of them to the Ordinary.

And here, my Brethren, I desire you seriously to consider, That in this, and
in your Answer to the next Question, You promised faithful diligence, in doing
the Duties of your Office; so many and so weighty indeed are they, that the
utmost diligence imaginable, is little enough for the due performance of them;
our Comfort is, all that God requires is faithful diligence. If we do not choose
to neglect any Duty, or to do it carelessly; but sincerely endeavor to perform
them all as we ought, in what we fall short, God will be merciful to us, and
graciously accept the Will for the Deed. And this is the least that God will
accept; be not therefore slothful in this great business, but apply your selves
constantly to your Work, and whatsoever your hand finds to do, do it with all
your might. I might tell you, that the nature and design of our Work requires
this; That the Names by which we are in Scripture signified, (as Stewards,
Ministers, Shepherds, Watchmen, Laborers,) do all import diligence and
industry; that the Work is of all others, the most excellent, worthy of all the
pains we can lay out upon it; I might set before you the example of our blessed
Savior, and his Apostles, of all those faithful Pastors who have gone before
us: But I shall only add for your encouragement, That your Recompense from God,
will be proportionable to your labor; by how much the more abundant you are in
this work of the Lord, by so much the more abundant will your Reward in Heaven
be.

But to proceed.

In the next place you promised these Two Things in the general. I. That you
would be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all
erroneous and strange Doctrines contrary to God's Word. II. To use both public
and private Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the Sick as to the Whole
within your Cures, as need shall require, and occasion shall be given.


First, That You would be ready with all faithful diligence, to banish and
drive away all erroneous and strange Doctrines contrary to God's Word.
Concerning which Observe;

1. That the Erroneous Doctrines here meant, are those only, which your People
(some of them at least) are already infected with; for no Errors can be
banished from them, but those which they have given entertainment to. As for
other Errors, which they know nothing of, never so much as mention them, lest
by acquainting your People therewith, you may endanger their being ensnared by
them. Observe,

2. That though all Erroneous Doctrines, are with faithful diligence, yet not
all with equal diligence to be opposed; but as the Errors are more or less
mischievous, so our Zeal against them ought in proportion to be more or less.
Some Errors there are which do not touch any part of the Foundation, which have
no visible tendency to an evil Life, or to the disturbance of the Peace of the
Church: Others there are which oppose some Articles of our Creed, as that
Christ is not the Eternal Son of God, begotten of the Father before all Worlds,
etc. and which are inconsistent with Peace and Holiness. The former sort do not
deserve to be opposed with so much Zeal as the later, against which we can
never too earnestly contend: Of which for instance, are these; That no Man is
bound to repent of his Sins till he come to die; That Christ's Righteousness is
so made ours, that we need do nothing our selves in order to the obtaining of
Eternal Salvation, etc.

Secondly, The next thing you promised, was, To use both public and private
Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the Sick as to the Whole within your
Cures, as need shall require, and occasion shall be given.

First, To the whole; To use not only public but private Monitions and
Exhortations, as need shall require. And truly, my Brethren, there is commonly
but too great need of this: For the Reproofs and Exhortations we use in
public, being not directed to this or that Person in particular, but to all in
common, who are guilty of the Sin reproved, or of the Neglect of the Duty
exhorted to: They who are concerned, do commonly find some way to shift them
off from themselves; but when you address to each Sinner in particular, and
plainly tell him, that he is the Man, who lives in the practice of this or that
known Sin, etc. he can then find no way to make his Escape.

And here, my Brethren, I beseech you, not to be strangers to your People; but
as you have leisure and opportunity, to go to their Houses, and acquaint your
selves familiarly with them, that you may the better know, what their
particular Tempers and Inclinations are, what are the Prejudices they lie
under, what the Temptations they are most obnoxious to, and may accordingly
apply your selves to them. By one hours familiar Discourse with them in
private, you may work more good upon them, than by many Sermons in public.
Public Preaching has, I grant, this great Advantage, that therein you speak to
many, and by consequence may do good to many at once; but an Application to a
Sinner in private, is usually much more effectual, as to him in particular.

To satisfy you, that this is your Duty, I need not tell you, that St. Paul
taught not only publicly, Act. 20. 20, 31. (...).
but from house to house: That Night and Day he ceased not (as he had
opportunity) to warn every Man; not all collectively, but every one apart, as
the Words in the original import; That he exhorted and comforted, amd charged
every one. It will be enough to tell you, 1 These. 2. 11.
That to rebuke a sinning Brother, and to exhort one another, are the bounden
Duties even of private Christians, and therefore much more of those, who by
their Office are to watch over Souls, and to give an Account to God for them:
But suppose this were not made your Duty antecedently by God, yet you have made
it so Your selves, by your voluntary Promise to perform it.

But that this weighty Work of private Instruction, Exhortation, Admonition and
Reproof, may be the more successfully managed, take the most convenient seasons
for it, when the Persons are the most apt to be wrought upon; and do it with
that meekness and demonstration of love, that it may plainly appear to your
People, that you do it out of mere Kindness and tender Compassion to their
Souls.

Secondly, The next thing you Vowed, was, Faithful diligence in your Monitions
and Exhortations to sick Persons: Which is a Work of the greatest moment, in
order to the engaging them to a HOLY Life, if they recover; or the preparing
them for a Happy Death, if they be taken away by their sickness; and therefore
requires a proportionable care in the management of it. To see a soul entering
upon the other World, likely within a few hours to be in an endless state of
happiness or misery inexpressible, should, methinks, make us bestir our selves,
to save it from Death, before it be too late.

Do not therefore stay till you be sent for, but go to them of your own accord.
Deal faithfully, and withal prudently with them about the state of their souls.
If you find them grossly ignorant, instruct them (as you have opportunity) in
those Truths which are absolutely necessary to be known. If they be such as
have lived in any notorious sin, or whom you have great Reason to fear are mere
strangers to a Holy Life, labor to awaken them, by the most moving
Considerations, to a sense of their sin and danger; but let them withal know,
that their Case is not so desperate, but that there is still ground of hope
concerning them: Show them the greatness of that Salvation which Christ has
purchased for them, and upon what Terms it may be still obtained by them. And
though in their sickness they cannot give Proof of the sincerity of their
Repentance, by resisting and overcoming those Temptations which formerly
prevailed over them; yet put them upon all that which in their present
circumstances they are capable of doing; upon confessing their sins, and
imploring the mercy of God through Christ; upon patient submission to God's good
pleasure; upon forgiving those from the heart who have offended them: and upon
making Restitution (as far as they are able) for any Injuries they may have
done to others; upon Resolutions and solemn Promises, by the assistance of
God's Grace, of forsaking their former sins, and of leading a new Life, if God
shall please to raise them up again. And if they recover, go to them again, and
seriously mind them of the Vows they made upon their sick beds, and quicken
them to the performance of them. Do not fail to let them know, that their
condition will be much more deplorable, if they shall again relapse into their
old sins.

In the next place, these Questions were proposed to you, Will you be diligent
in Prayers, and in reading of the Holy Scriptures, and in such studies as help
to the Knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of the World and the
Flesh? To which you Answered: I will endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being
my Helper. So that you promised by God's Help these Four Things: I. That you
would be diligent in Prayers. II. That you would be diligent, in reading the
Holy Scriptures. III. In such studies as would help to the Knowledge of the
same. And therefore, IV. That you would lay aside the study of the World and
the Flesh.


First, That you would be diligent in Prayers. That is, both in public and
private Prayers.

1. In public Prayers. Which we ought more especially to attend to, since GOD
is much more honored by our public Addresses to him, than he can be by those
which are made to him in private; and because we our selves may expect a
greater Blessing from those Prayers which are put up to God by many jointly,
than from those which are put up by our single selves. As therefore anciently a
Morning and Evening Sacrifice was every day publicly offered up to God in the
Temple at Jerusalem; so I heartily recommend it to you, my Brethren, That in
all your Parishes, where a Congregation (though but a small one) can be got
together, you would every day have Morning and Evening Prayer in your Churches.
And that you read the Prayers not partially, but entirely; and with such
seriousness as becomes them, as may invite all piously-disposed People to them,
and quicken their Devotion when they are at them. I know not how any Minister
can dispense with himself in this matter, or what Salvo he can have for his
Conscience, who does otherwise. But though public Prayers be the more
excellent; yet,

2. This cannot excuse you from being diligent in private Prayers; and that
both for your People, and for your selves.

First, Pray much and earnestly for your People: Of this St. Paul has set us
an Example, as he himself testifies in his Epistles; thus he prayed for the
Colossians, Colos. 1. 9, 10, 11.
That they might be filled with the Knowledge of the Will of God, in all Wisdom
and spiritual Understanding, that they might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Thus he prayed for the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, would give unto
them, the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of
their understanding being enlightened; that they might know what is the hope of
his Calling, etc. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
That God would grant them according to the riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with all might, by his spirit in the inner Man; that Christ might
dwell in their hearts by Faith, etc. Thus he tells the Romans, Romans 1. 9.
That without ceasing he made mention of them always in his Prayers. In like
manner he prayed for the Philipians; Phil. 1. 4.
Always (says he) and in every Prayer of mine for you all, making request with
joy. He thought it not enough to pray once or twice, but he ceased not still to
pray for them. It cannot be thought, that any Pastor, who aims, as he ought, at
the salvation of his People, can forbear to pray for them.

Secondly, Pray constantly and earnestly for your selves. For such assistances
of God's holy spirit, as may enable you rightly to discharge the Duties of your
holy Calling. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but
all our sufficiency is of God. We made our Ordination Vow in expectation of,
and dependence upon Gods help. I will do so by the help of the Lord; I will,
the Lord being my helper. And we need not doubt of God's help, if we sincerely
and importunately pray for it; for he has promised Luke 11. 13.
his Holy Spirit to them that ask it; That is, all the Gifts of his Holy
Spirit, we stand in need of. But to proceed: 2. You promised, To be diligent in
reading the Holy Scriptures. And, 3. In such studies as help to the knowledge
of the same. I put them both together for brevities sake.


St. Paul commanded Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
to give attendance to reading, viz. of the Holy Scriptures; and that not only
in public to others, but also in private; that he himself might be the more
thoroughly instructed in them. And if this was needful for Timothy, who had
learned the Holy Scriptures from a Child, it will I fear, be much more needful
for many of us. The Scriptures were inspired by God to this very end, 2 Timothy 3.
17.
That the man of God (that is the Minister of the Gospel) might be thoroughly
furnished to all good Works. That he might be instructed in every part of the
Duty which belongs to his Office; whether it be to teach, or to reprove, or to
correct, or to instruct in righteousness. Out of this sacred repository, and
this only, we may be supplied with whatsoever is necessary for us and our
People, to know, and to believe, and to do.

I therefore earnestly press you to the study of the Holy Scriptures day and
night; to get such parts of them by heart, as may be of most frequent and
necessary use, that you may have them in readiness upon all occasions. And in
your reading of them, to observe those places which are most obscure, to
compare them with the Originals, and with the words coherent; to consult some
one or more of the best Commentators upon them, that you may attain to the true
sense of them. And for those who have leisure and ability for it to read the
Fathers, at least, of the three first Centuries; the History and Antiquities of
the Church; the Babylonian, Persian, Greek, Roman and Jewish Antiquities; and
such other parts of Learning, without which many places of Scripture cannot be
well understood. And that you may be thus diligent in Prayer, and in reading
and studying the Holy Scriptures.

Fourthly, You promised To lay aside the study of the World and the Flesh. For
the more you study the World, the less will you study the Holy Scriptures; the
more you consult the ease and pleasure of the Flesh, the less will you attend
to the pleasing of God, and the saving of Souls. In what degree soever your
affections are set upon the things on the Earth, in that they will necessarily
be taken off from the things above. O remember, That every Clergyman is a man
of God, dedicated to him in a more eminent service than others are; and that
you rob God of all that time and study, which are needlessly spent upon other
matters. Remember, that you are obliged, not only by your Baptismal Vow, to
renounce the World and the Flesh, as Lay Christians also are; but more closely
bound to it than they, by this solemn Vow you made at your Ordination. Let it
appear to all Men, that you pay your Vows by your living above this World, and
having your Conversation in Heaven.

In the next place you promised these two things: This part of the
Ordination-Vow was made the Subject of the whole Charge at another place; and
therefore is here the more briefly spoken to.
I. That You would be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves and your
Families, according to the Doctrine of Christ. And which is somewhat more, II.
To make both your selves and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome Examples
and Patterns to the Flock of Christ.


First, You promised to be diligent, To frame your own selves according to the
Doctrine of Christ; to have your Conversation in all things suitable to the
Gospel you preach. He can never be seriously concerned for other men's souls,
who has not first a care of his own; nor make it his chief study to conduct
others in the narrow way that leads to Life, who walks himself in the broad way
that leads to destruction. But suppose he could sincerely endeavor to destroy
that sin in others which he cherishes in himself; yet what success can he in
reason expect? Can it be thought that his People should pay any regard to what
he says, when they see that he does not regard it himself? Can they think, that
he does in good earnest believe what he preaches, when he unpreaches the same
again in his life? And is it then likely, that they should believe it,
especially when it thwarts their beloved Lusts?

But if there should be any among us, whom this Consideration does not affect;
yet methinks it should awaken them to consider, That a vicious Preacher, is in
a much more miserable and deplorable Condition, than a vicious Hearer; because
his sins are much more aggravated, and consequently, his Punishment will be
proportionably more intolerable. Thou that teach another Man should not be
drunk, if thou art a Drunkard: Thou that preachest another should not be
covetous, or proud, or contentious, if thou art so thy self, thy own Sermons
will rise up in Judgment against thee; out of thy own Mouth shall thou be
condemned to that utter darkness thou have warned others to make their escape
from; and shall have the darkest and most dismal Portion in it. But this is not
all: For,

2. That measure of Grace and Holiness which may suffice for a Layman, will
not be enough for those who are to be their Guides. You cannot go to Heaven at
so cheap a rate, as your People can; as your Calling is more holy, and stands
in a nearer Relation to God, so also must your Lives be. You must be Patterns
of all those Graces and Virtues you recommend to them; that they by looking
upon you, may be able to discern wherein they are defective. In all things
showing thy self a Pattern of good Works, says St. Paul to Titus; Tit. 2. 7.
which he also gives in charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
Be thou an Example to the Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity. Which Commands, though given to those who were of
the higher, yet are in proportion applicable to those of the lower Order of the
Clergy: For as Bishops ought to be Examples to the inferior Clergy, so the
inferior Clergy ought to be Examples to the Laity.

It is indeed the Duty of all, even the most vulgar Christians, if compared
with the men of the World, to be Patterns to them; so our Savior tells his
Disciples, Mat. 5. 13, 14, 15, 16.
That they were to be the salt of the Earth, and the light of the World; and
commands them to let their light so shine before men, that others seeing their
good works, might glorify their Father which is in Heaven. What then is
required of you, my Brethren, who ought to be Examples to them, who are to be
Examples to the rest of Mankind? What manner of Persons ought you to be, in all
holy Conversation and Godliness?

Nor must we only endeavor to frame our selves, but our Families too,
according to the Doctrine of Christ; and to make them Examples to other
Families; to make our Children and Servants, as much as in us lies, Examples
to those of others, in all those Graces and Duties, which are proper to those
Relations: Which must be done by more fully instructing them in their
respective Duties, and by frequently pressing their Duties upon them by such
Considerations, as may be of power to overawe their Consciences, and oblige
them to the performance thereof; and by hearty Prayers to God, to make our
endeavors this way successful.

There is one thing more in your Ordination-Vow, which I shall but very briefly
recommend to your Consideration and Practice; and that is, That you will
maintain and set forward as much as lies in you, quietness, peace, and love
among all Christian-People; especially among them who are, or shall be
committed to your Charge.

As to make peace, not only between God and Man, but also between man and man,
was one great thing our blessed Savior had in his eye, when he came into the
World; so, in order thereunto, he has enjoined the Practice of all those
Virtues, which tend to the begetting and promoting of Peace, and has forbidden
all those ill-natured qualities, that are Enemies to it. As he has commanded,
Romans 12. 18.
If it be possible, as much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all men: So
he has pressed us with great variety of the most powerful Arguments, Ephesians. 4.
1, 2, 3. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3.
to be at peace among our selves. So much was Peace his Design, that he is
styled the PRINCE of Peace, and his Gospel is called, the Gospel of Peace. As
therefore we are the Ambassadors of this Prince of Peace, and entrusted with
the dispensation of his Gospel of Peace, we are above all other men in the
World, obliged, to the utmost of our power, to prevent or reconcile
differences; and to maintain and promote Peace among our People.

To that end, go to them that you hear are at variance, endeavor ^o remove
their Prejudices, to correct their Mistakes, to allay their Passions, to
persuade them to mutual Condescension; and by all other fair means to make them
heartily Friends: Ever remembering, That, Blessed are the Peacemakers for they
shall be called the Children of God. Mat. 5. 9.


To the last part of your Ordination-Vow, (viz. That you will reverently obey
your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, to whom is committed the Charge and
Government over you, etc.) I shall say nothing, but leave it to your own
Consciences to comment upon it, presuming you will be impartial therein, and
less favorable to your selves than I should be.

There is one thing still behind, that I must give you in Charge, and that is,
Can. 62.
The strict observation of the Canon against clandestine Marriages. I hope
those who practice contrary to it, are in comparison but few, (notwithstanding
the many Complaints which have been made to me about it) That they are no other
than the idle, loose and vagrant; that is, the Scum and Refuse of the Clergy,
who drive on this scandalous Trade: For I cannot persuade my self, That any Man
who has not very much debauched his Conscience, and lost all sense of Honor
and Reputation, can be easily prevailed with to make such Marriages,
considering how express and severe the Laws of our Church are against them; and
considering the many sins and mischiefs which are the usual Consequents of them.

I shall pass over those which are of a more general extent, and only mention a
few of those Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which more particularly relate to
our own Church.

In a Council convened at Westminster in the Year 1175, it was Ordained, That
if any Priest shall be found to have joined any in Marriage clandestinely, he
shall be suspended from his Office for the space of Three Years.

In a Council held after this, in the Church of St. Paul's in London in the Year
1328, it was decreed, Lynw. l. 4. Tit. 3. c. 1.
That all Priests who shall presume to be present at any Matrimonial Contracts,
before the solemn publication of Banns, shall be suspended from their Office
for three Years. And that every Priest, whether Secular or Regular, who shall
without the special leave of the Diocesan, presume to Celebrate Marriage in any
place but a Church or Chapel, which has Parochial Rights, shall be suspended
a whole Year ab Officio.

In another Council held at St. Paul's London, in the Year 1342, it was decreed,
Lynw. l. 4. Tit. 3. c. 2.
That all Priests who shall presume to be present at any clandestine Marriages,
shall ipso facto incur the Sentence of Excommunication; and shall be publicly
denounced four times every year. Which Decrees are still in force, by the
Statute of the 25 th. of Hen. 8. C. 19.

But we need not look so far back; one would think, it might be sufficient, to
consider the 62 d. Canon, made in the Convocation in the year 1603. In which
every Minister upon pain of Suspension for three years ipso facto, is
prohibited to Celebrate Matrimony between any Persons without a License, except
the Banns of Matrimony have been first published three several Sundays or
Holy Days, in the Parish Churches or Chapels, where the said Parties dwell.
And is also upon the like Penalty prohibited, under any pretense whatsoever, to
join any Persons so licensed, in Marriage, at any time but between the hours of
8 and 12 in the Morning; or in any place, but in the said Churches or Chapels
where one of them dwells. It is not enough barely to have a License, if the
Circumstances of Time and Place be not duly observed, you incur the Penalty of
three years Suspension.

And as our Church has set such a strict Fence about Marriages, so there was
great Reason she should be so severe in punishing those that break thorough it;
considering those enormous Sins, and those intolerable Mischiefs, which are the
usual Attendants and Consequents of Clandestine Marriages.

One too common effect of such Marriages, is the Sin of Incest, in joining
those Persons in Matrimony who are within the Degrees prohibited. In one of
those Ecclesiastical Laws, I have now recited, this is mentioned as the Reason
of it. A Proof of which (as I am informed) you have lately had, in Two
Incestuous Clandestine Marriages made in this Diocese.

Another Sin usually attendant on these Marriages, is the violating the Rights
of Parents, and contempt of their Authority. Nor do they only deprive Parents
of the Duty of their Children, but in effect of their Children themselves;
which is one of the worst sort of Thefts, and deserves a much more severe
Punishment, than many other Thefts, which are by our Laws punished with Death.

The Dishonor they reflect upon our Church, and our Holy Profession, is
intolerable; so much has the Reputation of the Clergy been thereby lessened,
that it has been moved more than once, in the great Council of the Nation,
that this Work might be taken out of their hands, and entrusted to others, who
might be more faithful in the Execution of it.

How mischievous these Marriages commonly prove to the Parties so Married, and
to their Children after them; how fatal they often are to considerable
Families, even to the ruin of them; and consequently, What Mischiefs do hence
redound to the Public, I need not tell you. I forbear to proceed to other
particulars, because these already mentioned, will, I hope, be sufficient, to
deter every man from this scandalous Practice, who has not sinned away all
Conscience and Shame.

What remains, but that I charge the Church wardens under Pain of Perjury, to
present all those Ministers, whom they either know, or have been credibly
informed have been this way guilty. And if the Churchwardens shall neglect
their Duty, I beseech you, my Brethren, to take care, that they may be some way
or other presented; that I may take care to see them punished according to Law.
And if any Ministers shall after this Admonition given them, proceed to make
such Marriages, as thinking their Danger will be past, as soon as the
Visitation shall be over, I shall not fail, upon Information given me, to
execute the Canon in its rigor against them.

To Conclude.

Let us now, my Brethren, seriously reflect upon what has been spoken. Let us
consider the Trust committed to us, the Vows that are upon us, the Account we
must shortly give to the Almighty, All-seeing and Impartial Judge; the dreadful
Woe we shall incur, if we be false to our Trust; the Glorious Reward we shall
have, if we be faithful. For your Peoples sake, if you desire to save them: For
your own sakes, if you desire to save your selves, and would not be condemned
to a more intolerable Hell, than the worst of your People shall be condemned
to: For God's sake, if you have any regard to his Commands, For Jesus's sake,
if you have any Love for him, Feed his Flock which he has purchased with his
own Blood; feed them, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre,
but of a ready mind. Be instant in season, and out of season. Reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering and patience: Make full proof of your Ministry;
That so when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, you may receive a Crown of Glory,
which fades not away.

FINIS.

