A LIGHT Shining out of DARKNESS: OR Occasional Queries SUBMITTED To the
JUDGMENT of such as would enquire into the true State of things in our TIMES.

Job 8. 8, 9, 10. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy
self to the search of their Fathers.

(For we are but of yesterday and know nothing, because our days upon earth
are a shadow.)

Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLIX.

TO THE READER.
Reader,

THou have here a few Questions proposed by one, who desires to lie low in his
own eyes: and after all his Reading, rather to doubt, (doubting is no more the
way to error, than to truth) than to assert. I know not how long thou may
be in perusing them, I am certain they were not long in penning: yet this thou
may be secured of, that the citations here are not obtruded upon thee at
second hand, being not transcribed out of men that misalledged them, but
fetched from their Original Authors. He who queried, did not so much as trust
his memory, or juvenile collection, but brought all to thetest by a faithful
reveiw.. The interrogatories are of such moment, that he thought they might
deserve a satisfactory answer: and he had observed that neither the Pulpiteers,
nor VVriters of these times did contribute by their labors any thing toward
such conscience-work, though the posture of their Affairs require it. He
thought fit in his questions, to produce such testimonines as made for the
Negative and Heterodoxe part. Unto which process he was inclined by several
reasons: One is, because that the general prejudices of many in this age, are
such, that if he had not done this, they would not have thought these things
questionable. Secondly, he had a tender regard to those who have made the
subject of these queries to be their Assertions: in the behalf of these, he did
set down what you see, that their Opponents (though they pride themselves with
the conceit of learning and esteem of others as illiterate) may at last own
them for less than fanaticall and groundless Opinionists. He did not allege
any proofs for the other part, both because he knew that others would do that
for him; as also because he had not that esteem for quotations to the contrary,
which he had for these: not that he is much prepossessed through prejudice, but
upon an old protestant consideration, that records and presidents differing
from the received ways and interests of men, are more to be regarded from any
that make for them; since the forgeryes and falsifications of precedent Ages
make it propable, that such passages might be inserted and foysted in, but why
or how these should be adulterated he did not see. Even in matters of common
transaction, in our English Courts of judicature, he thought he had been (...),
that one precedent or verdict against the jurisdiction of a Court is of more
validity than a thousand for it: because it is supposed that none will,
contrary to right and equity, infriage their own power. Further; if any should
oppose the sayings of others in the behalf of humane learning, to what he had
vouched, he hoped they would produce them out of Authors contemporaries with
his, or else they should not imagine that he would think any such averrements
to be contradictory to what his query may seemingly assert, nor yet
satisfactory to the question, nor does he think (and. Heraldus, Ouzelius and
others concur with him herein) that out of Antiquty they can alledg any such
quotations. If they oppose his query with the practice and use of humane
learning which is found in Clem. Alexandr. Orig. Tertullian, Lactantius,
Arnobius, Minucius Felix, etc. He shall not think such dealing to be fair:
since the question is what was their judgment? not what they did practice? Of
the latter no man will suppose the querist to be ignorant; and if any should,
yet would the Objection be of no value, until they shall evince that every man
did in those times live up to the light he had; and acted as he spoke. He
thinks it may have been with the Ancients as with [Vega] that excellent
methodest in Physic, who being sick of a feavour, a friend visited him, and
found him drinking wine; whereupon he charged him with having formerly
prohibited the use thereof in feavours by his writings: The infirm replied, in
my books you see the practice of Physic, but in me the practice of Physicians.
He supposes that after persons have been brought over from Paganism to
Christianity, something may stick by them, as an ill scent may when one comes
out of a jakes, yet that is their failing, not their justification. If Moses
learnt the Egyptian skill, it was whilst he remained in Pharaoh's Court: And so
Paul was learned in Heathen Authors, but it was before he came to the School of
Christ, he has used them but three or four times in his works, whereas now
they are more frequent than Texts of Scripture. Athanasius against the
Gentiles, says the Scriptures are sufficient to declare the truth of
themselves; and that if his friend Macarius did read other Religious writers,
It was but (...), as a lover of Elegance, not as a lover of Christ. Other
things there were which he saw might be objected, which he will not now insist
upon, having weighed them in the balances and found them light. About the call
of the Ministry and the first Reformers, he hopes not to be opposed with the
afterjudgment of Luther, or the rest. He is not of their Opinion, who think
the first reformers did use that Artifice of bending a crooked stick, as much
the other way, that so it may at least become straight. Such dealings are not
to be admitted in the service of our God, who is a consuming fire: It is to
charge them with a great hypocrisy (since they never owned any such actions,
but delivered all as precious and glorious Truths) and to make them guilty of
the ruin of those poor souls, who dyed in the profession of a belief their
teachers did not intend them. In fine, it is to make the first Reformation as
bad (or not much better) away as that of Popery, and all that embraces it, and
adhere thereunto, to be in a different only, and sinful estate. It is a slur
to the greatest wonder God has produced after the Churches being 1200. years
in the Wilderness: How much more ought we to prejudge all succeeding times from
their Doctrines? and having such pregnant motives to believe they were spirited
by God, let us impute their afterchange to failings upon carnal
considerations, when Luther went to settle himself. Pope in Germany, and his
writings were advanced as the test of truth; and an Oligarchy of Ministers
settled elsewhere. Let us owe our Reformation to God and not Belial or
Antichrist, to the call and excitement of the former, not consecration of the
latter. Let us acknowledge their zeal, their chatity and those more glorious
principles of spiritual graces, rather than prudentiall contrivements. Are not
those there first works which are here quoted? are not those the works by which
Luther said he would have men and Angels tried? If you say, that there is a
difference betwixt a Church settled and unsettled: a question will arise (if that
can be questioned) whether the Papists did not say their church was then
settled? and whether any settlement political will suffice to debarr those
actings? for then the first Reformers, yea, first Christians, and Christ
himself, all are cast. If only what is a settlement of truth, or Gospel-
settlement be intended, does not this resolve all into a try all of doctrines?
and a proof that the present way is the sole Gospel-way? Which whosoever shall
avow, he need not want employment for his thoughts from the several writings
of Papists, Episcoparians, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. however the
Questionist should rest.

OCCASIONAL QUERIES, SUBJECTED To the Judgment of such as desire to enquire
into the true State of things in these our Times.
I.
WHether there be any certain or peculiar Name in the New Testament that
signifies a Minister? Or any name whence an Office may be convincingly
inferred? * If there be not (as there is just cause to doubt) whether the
present Ministers are not to blame, whilst they pretend to an Office and
Function grounded upon Divine Right, which has no other Foundation than the
Hay and Stubble of humane Conjecture?

THe words used in Scripture to signify a Minister, (as they are vulgarly
applied) are (...), and (...), and (...). Now none of these determinately
signifies an Officer, but any one that performs such or such a work, whether
out of Du^ or Charity. Minister Executor merus est, say the Civil Lawyers:
(...) signifies either a Deacon or Churchwarden, Acts 6. or else it may be
taken in as large a sense as has been specified. Philem. v. 13. (...), that he
may minister to me in your stead. Was this an Office? so the Civil Magistrate
is called (...), the Minister of God, Romans 13. 4. and 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is Paul?
who is Apollo? (...), but Ministers (or instruments) through whom you have
believed. And Satan, (though he be a great Imitator of Christ) is not said to
have a constituted Ministry by way of Office for his service, yet he has
Ministers, 2 Cor. 11. 15. Satan is said to transform himself into an Angel of
Light. (...) therefore it is no great thing if his ministers be transformed as
the ministers of righteousness. This is not meant of any peculiar Function or
Office, but a general performance of any thing accordingly as an Officer,
servant, or minister would. In like manner is (...) used in that general sense:
Magistrates are said to be (...), Gods mini^ters Romans 13. v. 6. And Paul says
of Epaphroditus that he was (...), he did minister to his wants, Phil. 2. v.
25. yet was not he his small officer, that we know. So (...) is taken also Acts
13. 5. John was the (...), or minister, or servant of Paul and Barnabas. Yet
does it not appear that he was so by duty, but respect. See Acts 20. v. 30. and
Acts 24. v. 24. Is it not then probable, (and that is all that is desired at
present) that there was no distinct office, because there is no distinct name
for Ministers? and it is not evident that such an office cannot be proved
thence, the places being aequivocal, and capable of a different sense then what
is usually put upon them?

II.
Supposing there were such a name, yet would not such a name be more General
then that of Apostles; and comprehend not only them but Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and all such as should labor in the work of the Ministry of the
Gospel? And is it not an Act of Arrogance in them who would be the Apostles
successors in ordinary, (though by the way it was something Extraordinary that
made an Apostle, and if that was wanting, then the person was not an Apostle,
but some other Officer: besides, how did the Pastors or Teachers or Presbyters
succeed them who were their contemp raries, and never resigned up or deserted
their stations?) Ordinary Ambassadors from the most high, to assume a name of
greater latitude than that of Apostle or Ambassador Extraordinary? or at
least, is it not as absurd as if the Ants should assume the single name of
Animal: and the Lacquey that of Servant.

III.
WAs not the name of Minister brought in by the first Reformers, many whereof
were Private Christians, who did assume that Title, either because they Let any
one give a better reason and prove it.
found themselves not rankable under the name of any other Evangelicall
Officers: or in opposition to that Romish Hierarchy and Priesthood, whence the
Modern Episcoparians and Presbyterians derive their successive Ordination?

IV.
WHether the name of such as officiated in the first centuries were not
Presbyter, an Elder, and in afterages Sacerdos This is asserted by Salmasius
under the name of Walo Messalinus.
a Priest? and whether that change were only of names, or of the nature of
their Office through the working of the mystery of iniquity, aggrandising
himself, and turning the Lords Supper in an Oblation? If the latter be true,
where is succession? How shall it be revived? Is it in not this case as in the
adoption of children, where a lineage fails? Is it a Succession, where there
is an Intercision and Discontinuance, or rather a Similitude and Resemblance?

V.
WHether the present Ministry do not pretend to be Ministers of the Church
Catholic? Whether there be any mention of such a Church in Scripture, or in
any Ancient Creed of the first Ages? (a) And whether Luther did not place
instead thereof in his Creed the Christian Church? (b) Whether any body can
tell what is the Determinate meaning of that word (c) and show, without
absurdity, how one may be a Minister thereof? And whether if any should be
found so to do, yet would not our present Ministers in General be culpable,
who know not of what Church they are Ministers, or how she is Catholic?

(a) Of this see Bishop Usher de symbolis page 8. 9. Vossius de symbolis page
27. Gerard loc. Comm^n. de Eccles. Meisnerus de Ecclesia sect. 4. c. 3. Major
advers. Ualerian. magnum in praefat.

(b) This is averred by Gerard in his common places somewhere: And Fulke upon
the Rhemish Testament objecteth; some have taken the word (Catholic) out of
their Creed, putting Christian for it, which in the Margin, he says are the
Lutherans in their Catechismes, which objection he admits, see Fulke upon
Acts 11. near the latter end. And indeed it is generally acknowledged that
Luther could not endure the name of Catholic; insomuch as if that word were
found in his writings with approbation, the Book or passage was thereupon
suspected by his Scholars, as not his: see Colloqu. Altemberg. in Resp. ad
Accus. Cor. 2. fol. 254. see also Beza in his preface upon the new Testament,
to the Prince of Conde.

(c) There are no less than seven significations thereof, as the case is
audited by Miesnerus de Eccles. sect. 4. c. 3.

VI.
WHether Ecclesia (which is a word signifying a Church) be not a Law-terme
deduced from freestates, in which common wealths, the supreme popular Assembly
acted and Organ^sed by the Archon and Proedri (as a Church f^rm'd and
Pre^^yterated by a Minister and Elders) which did not rule but Preside? (a)
Whether any other sense but tha^, can be a Foundation of Argument? since no
term can be the subject of a rational discourse, whose meaning is not agreed
on: but of a figurative speech, no man (none but the Spirit hat gave it out at
first) can determine satisfactorily to others how far the Analogy extends: how
far the cords may be stretched, and what is the just and full scope of the
holy Spirit there.

(a) This is so evident, that he must not have conversed in any Greek Story,
who denies it. They who have not read Thucidides, nor Aristophanes, may satisfy
themselves about it out of Sigonius de Rep. Athen. and Ubbo Emmius's vetus
Graecia Illustrata.

VII.
WHether such a sense of the word Ecclesia, or Church, does not unchurch all
the Parochial Churches in England, and unminister all their Ministers?

VIII.
WHether the Ministers do well to derive their succession unto Christ by the
means of Antichrist? Whether the Reformed Divines, being solemnly met at Poissy
before the King and Nobility of France, did not reject such Ordination? as also
Luther and Sadeel and Beza? Whether ours do not ill to impose upon them a call
and Ordination which they disowned.

Thuan: Hist. lib. 28. page 45. Espencaeus demirari se subinde saepius dixit,
qua authoritate Protestants, and a quo vocati and instituti ad ministerium
essent, and cum neminem citarent a quo manus impositionem suscepissent, quomodo
legitimi pastores censeri possent, nam manif^stum est, vocatione ordinaria
minime institutos; Cum autem ad extraordinariam miraculis opus sit, nec ea ipsi
edant, necessario sequi, nec secundum ordinem, nec extra ordinem, eos in domun
Dei ingressos esse. (Thuan. page 46.) Beza ad vocationem legitimam respondit,
manuum impositionem non necessariam legitimae vocationis notam esse; pracipuas
esse atque adeo substantiales, in mores ac doctrinam inquisitionem, and
electionem, nec vero mirum esse, si ab iis, qui vulgo ordinarii vocantur,
manuum impositionem non acceperint; An enim ab illis, quorum depravatos mores,
superstitionem ac falsam doctrinam improbant: aut expectandum, ut ab illis
approbarentur, qui veritatem oppugnant, quam ipsi tuentur. Neque vero semper
miraculis ad extraordinariam vocationem opus esse, idque exemplis Isaiae,
Danielis, Amosi, Zachariae, postremo Pauli confirmat.

The Protestant Lascicius (in further proof hereof) alleges in the book
entitled De Ruscor. Muscovit. Et Tartaror. Relig. page 23. Calvin saying, quia
Papae tyrannide abrubpta fuit vera ordinationis series, novo subsidio nunc opus
est. etc atque omnino extraordinarium fuit hoc munus, quod Dominus nobis
injunxit. And Beza at the conference at Poissy being demanded of the calling of
himself (and his other then Associates) affirmed the same to be extraordinary.
Sarav. in d^fens. tract. de. D^vers. g^ad m^nish. evangel. p. 3. has recorded
his words thus. Sed pra^terea qu^nam est ista qua so ordinaria vocatio, quam
eos habuisse dicis, quos Deus paucis exceptis, excitavit? cer^e papistica: nam
h^c tua ve^ba sunt; hodie si episcopi Gallicanarum ecclenarum se and suas
ecclenas a Tirannide episcopi Romani vindicare vel^nt, and eas ab omni
Idololatria and superstitione repurgare; non opus habent alia vocatione ab ea
quam habent.

Quid ergo papisticas Ordina^iones, in quibus neque novum examen praecessit,
neque leges ull^ servat sunt, inviolal iliter ex divino jure in electionibus
and ordinationibus Pra script^, in quibus puri etiam omnes canones
impuden^issime violati sunt; quae nihil aliud sunt quam foedissima Romani
prostibuli Nundinatio quavis meretricum mercede, quam Deus templo suo inferri
prohibuit, inqu^natior; quibus denique alii, non ad pradicandum sed
pervertendum evangelium; alii, non ad docendum, sed ad rursus sacrificandum and
ad abominandum (...) sunt ordinati, usque adeo firmas tecum esse ceusebimus, ut
quo^ies tali cuipiam pseudo-episcopo Deus concesserit ad verum Christianism^m
tran^re, omnis illa istiusmodi ordinationis impuritas simul expurgata
censeatur: imo qui sic animum per Dei gratiam mutavit, quo ore, quo pudore, qua
conscientia, Papismum quidem detestabitur, suam autem inordinatissimam
ordinationem non ej rabit? Aut si ejuret, quomodo ex illius jure au^oritatem
docendi habebit? Fulke against Stapleton and Marshall p. 2. about the middle
says, the Protestants that first preached in these last days, had likewise
extraordinary calling.

Brerely p. 361. that there is in Babylon, no holy order or Ministry indeed, no
lawful calling but a mere usurpation, see Propositions and principles disputed
in the University of Geneva page 245. about the middle. And Mr. Gabriell Powell
in his consideration of the Papists Reasons etc. p. 71. says, the Popish
Ordination is nothing else but mere prosanation etc there is no true
ecclesiastical vocation in the Papacy etc. And see further hereof Mr.
Surcliffe in his answer to the Priests supplication to the 19 section; And Mr
Fulke in his Answer to a counterfit Ca^holique p. 50. about the middle says to
the Papists; you are highly deceived, if you think we esteem your off^es of
Bishops, Priests and ^eacons any better than laymen; and you presume too much
to think that we receive your Ordering to be lawful. And s^ Mr. Whitaker
contra Dur^eum lib. 9. p. 821. in the beginning, and Mr. Fulke in his reten^ive
etc p. 67. about the middle says, with all our heart we d^fie, abhor, detest,
and spit at your stinking, greasy Antichristian Orders etc.

IX
WHether the Arguments of the first Reformers about their vocation do not
justify any that shall take upon them to preach? and in particular that of
Morney Du-Plessis de eccles. c. 11. p. 243. * [which is allowed of by Saravia
de diversis gradibus ministrorum: who was an episcopal man] whether Dominicus
Soto do not prove it lawful jure naturae? and yet he is a Papist.

* [Phil. Mornay du Plessis, being urged about the call of the first Reformers
says, such intergatories are but the tergiversations of men already convinced
in their own judgments, who dare not abide the trial. just as Sedecias the
false Prophet replied to Michaiah: 1 Kings: c. 22. v. 24. when went the Spirit
of the Lord from me, to speak to thee? And thus the Pharisees, Thou art the son
of a Carpenter, who sent thee? To whom we might determine the controversy by
Christ's own words, The words which we speak they bear witness of us. The Jews
prided themselves in their long descent from Abraham, and being his successors.
But what says Christ? you are, indeed, the seed of Abraham, but yet you are of
your Father the Devil, Joh. 8. and Paul tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Let no man
seduce you, for Antichrist shall set in the Temple of God. Having premised
these things, Mornay thus argues: When a Town is on fire, or assaultted by the
enemy by scalado in the night, if any body shall raise the sleepy watchmen, or
give Alarm to the corpse dugarde, whether stranger or citisen, none ask by what
authority he does it, but all run for water to quench the fire, or to the walls
to repulse the enemy, men inquire into the case whether his discovery be true,
and do not arraign or implead him otherwise; yea, such a man receives thanks
for his timely discovering the danger. But we (says he) alarm the Christian
world by descovering how Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, we offer to
prove it, yet are we not regarded, nor our reasons listened unto; but they
clamor who are you? and punish us more heinously than if we were Traitors.
Should any Governor of a Cittadell demean himself thus in cases of
intelligence, would not he soon be surprised by the enemy, and would he not be
condemned by his General or Governors for neglect? In the conspiracy of
Cataline the Roman Senate derived that intelligence, which prevented the plot,
from an Harlot: when the Capitol was stormed by the Gauls they took an Alarm
from the Geese. Let us therefore be never so mean, we ought to be afforded
Audience. The Question is not, who we are, but whether that be Antichrist:
seek not into the Quality of the relators, but the truth of the relation:
Christ was promised to the Jews, but revealed to the Shepherds; these
Shepherds divulged it among the people; if we may credit our adversaries,
those men ought to have been questioned for it. The brethren of Ephesus should
also have ejected un-commissioned Apollos for preaching, but they received him,
commended his Zeal, desired him to pass into Achaia, and wrote to the
brethren to receive him. -- At the dreadful day when men are to give an
account of their Talents, it will not be a sufficient reply for any to say,
they wanted ecclesiastical vocation, when they wanted not the great inducement
of Christian charity to employ that talent which was given them to profit with.
The French Ministers, against whom Cardinal Perron writ, argue thus: in the
old Testament some were extraordinarily raised to instruct the people: why may
it not be so under the new? the same motives are still remaining. Moreover they
say, That it is not to be expected that Antichrist should commission men to
distroy himself, see Champney de vocat. Min^str. In fin^ (...) Paipsts think
they have sufficiently refuted the call of the first reformers, by showing how
ali sect, may use the same plea.]

F. Dom. Soto in quart. sentent. Distinct. quinta. quaest. V^ic. Art. 10. p.
154. Conclus. 1. Ecclesia Christi primum ac proinde unusquisque mortalium jus
habet tam divinum quam natural promulgandi Evangelium ubique terrarum,
probatur, 1. ex illo Marc. ultimo, euntes in mundum universunt pr^dicate
evangelium omni creaturae, and Matthew. 28. data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo
and in terra, euntes docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos etc. quasi dixisset,
quam ego potestatem in hac part habeo, vobis confero; habuit autem potestatem
in ^oto o^be praedicandi, ergo illam nobis contulit. 2. Jure naturae
unusquisque libertatem habet and facultatem docendi alios, ^isque pe^suadendi
illa quae facere tenentur, sed universi mortales tenentur christianam fidem
suscipere, ergo unusquisque potest id universis usque ad persuasionem suadere,
id quod tertio sic confirmatur. Potest quisque quemque ea quae sunt juris
natural docere, neque illo docendi jure privari valet, ergo ea qu^ sunt
evangelicae fidei; ut pote quae nec m^nus sunt obligatoria, and magis sint
salutaria. Non dico quod possit cogere and convincere: nam supernaturalia
intellectum non convincunt, sed tamen ea docere and explicare suo jure valet:
res est clara.

Luther. De abrog. Miss private. fol. 248, 249. Invictis Scripturis firmabimus
legitimum illud and unicum verbi ministerium esse commune omnibus Christianis,
and quod omnes loqui and judicare possunt: dicit enim Paulus 2 Cor. 4. qui
idoneos nos fecit Ministros novi Testamenti, non literae sed spiritus; hoc enim
de omnibus Christianis dicit, ut omnes faciat Ministros spiritus. Est autem
Minister spiritus is, qui tradit verbum gratiae; sicut Minister literae, qui
tradit vocem legis: hoc Moysis erat, illud Christi est. Item Petrus dicet
omnibus Christianis, ut virtutes annuntietis ejus qui de tenebris vos vocavit
in admirabile lumen suum. Quis Christianorum non est vocatus de tenebris; at
hujus est and jus and potestas, imo necessitas annunciandi virtutem sese
vocantis. 1 Cor. 14. Luther. Ita interpretatur. Mulieres Panlus prohibet loqui
non simpliciter sed in ecclesia ubi sunt viri, potentes loqui, ut non
confundatur honestas and ordo, cum vir multis modis sit prae muliere idoneus ad
loquendum and magis eum deceat, sed nec ex suo capite Paulus hoc prohibet, imo
adducit legem, dicens subditas esse debere, sicut and lex dicit; qua autoritate
divinae legis certus erat, quod spiritus sibi ipsi non contradiceret, and
mulieres prius per eum viris subjectas, nunc supra viros non elevaret: quin
potius memor and tenax sui instituti, prasentibus viris, viros magis quam
faeminas afflaret. Alioquin quomodo solus Paulus resisterit spiritui Sancto,
qui in Joele promisit, and prophetabunt filiae vestrae? and Act. 21. erant
Philippo quatuor virgins prophetantes: and Maria Mosis soror erat prophetissa,
and Dibora ducem Barac instruxit: and Olda prophetissa consuluit Sanctissimo
regi Josiae. Denique beatae virginis canticum vniversa celebrat Ecclesia per
orbem, and ipsemet c. 11. docet malierem debere velato capite orare and
prophetare; Ordo itaque and honestas est, ut viris loquentibus in Ecclesia,
taceant mulieres: nullis autem loquentibus viris, necesse est ut loquantur
mulieres.

X.
WHether it be rational to think, that our Ministers can derive a call from
the Popish Clergy: since they do not ordain Ministers of the Gospel, but
Massing Priests? (a) Do not the Papists allow laymen to preach even out of
cases of necessity? and that publicly? (which is the main act of our
Ministry, but no ministerial Act with them) (b) And whether the Sheriff of
Oxford in Edward the sixths days did not publicly preach in Mary's Church at
Oxford, without censure, or prohibition? (c)

(a) This is proved by the assertions of Beza formerly alleged: as also
Lancilotus against Hunnius does avowe it, that their Doctors degree in the
University is but a testimony of their abilityes, and though they do then
receive liberty to preach, yet he (a Papist) thinks them mad, who thence
conclude them to be Priests, or able lawfully without further Ordination to
administer the Sacrament. Capistr. Hunn. c. 8. Luther de. Ministr. Eccles. etc.
p. 366. Hoc merito exhorrere debet quisquis Christum amat, and quidvis potius
pati, quam ordinari se a Papistis, quod omnia in istis ordinibus summa and
impiissima perversitate geruntur and aguntur, ut nisi caecitate and amentia
percussi essent, viderentur de industria Deum in facie deridere velle. Nam cum
ista ordinatio autoritate Scripturarum, deinde exemplo and decretis Apostolorum
in hoc fit instituta, ut Ministros verbi in populo instituat, Ministerium
publicum, inquam verbi, quo dispensantur mysteria Dei, per sacram ordinationem
institui debet, ceu res, quae omnium in ecclesia and summa and maxima est, in
qua tota vis ecclesi astici Status consistit. Papistae autem mei de hoc
Ministerio ne somniant quidem, in suis ordinibus, quid autem faciunt?

Primum caecitate percussi simul omnes, ne norunt quidem quid sit verbum aut
ministerium verbi, praesertim episcopi ipsi ordinatores; quomodo ergo fieri
posset, ut ministros verbi, ipsi instituerint suis ordinibus? deinde loco
Ministrorum verbi ordinant Sacrificulos suos, qui Missas sacrisicent, and
confessiones audiant. Hoc enim vult episcopus, dum calicem dat in manum, and
conferri potestatem illam consecrandi, and Sacrificandi pro vivis and mortuis,
nempe, potestatem illam quam gloriantur neque Angelos neque Virignem matrem Dei
habere, ipsi etiam Lenonibus and Latronibus impuriores. Item cum illis,
Sacrosancto mysterio Spiritum in aures inflat, and confessores facit, dicens:
accipite Spiritum Sanctum; haec est illa potestas consecrandi and absolvendi
glorio^issima.

Dic, rogo, me crassum, fingere aut mentiri, si invenias unum ordinatum istis
Ordinibus, qui audeat dicere, sibi inter ordinandum esse mandatum, ut mysteria
Christi dispenset, and evangelium doceat, and eccle^iam Dei regat, quam
acquisivit sanguine suo. Plane nullus hoc audet unquam, nec ad se pertinere
putat, calicem vero accipit. and hoc totum esse putat, quod ordinatur, ut
liceat Christum in Missa consecrare, and sacrificare, deinde confessiones
audire. Quin hoc tantum quaeritur an Titulum beneficii habeat, quo ventrem
alat; ut alio prorsus non spectent, quam ad Missarum Sacrificium: his
absolvitur tota ordinatio: qui hoc tulit, hic ordinatus est ab ecclesia
Sacerdos, hanc potestatem tum nulli alii habent, hoc scilicet testatur unctio
digi^orum and rasura verticls.

(b) F. Dom. Soto in quart. Sent distinct 1. quest. 5. Artic. 6. Ex jure divino
praedicare non est officium annexum ordini Sacro; imo prophetae antiquitus
praedicatores erant, essentque modo si existerent: and eremitae patres
praedicabant in eremo, nec tamen sacerdotes erant, neque ideo mos ille
reprobatur, quinimo Gregor. 1. Dialog: lib. quendam Laicum nomine Equitium
laudibus commendat, quod praedicaret populo: add quod in ordinatione
Saterdotum nulla fit mentio praedicandi, neque illis deceret absque majori
examine parem facultatem impertiri. Benedictus Arias Mortanus was a Physician,
and studied Physique under Petrus Mena at the University of Complutum: and
being afterward practitioner of Physique in his native Country near Scivill,
he was sent for by the Magistrate and masters of the inquisition at a town
called LLerina bordering upon Portugal (without any Ordination) Sacri verbi
Populo per quadragesimae tempus enanciandi and exponendi causa, that he might
expound and preach the word of God to the people in Lent: which work he
performed as well out of regard to the honesty of the Action, as of the dignity
of the persons which called him thither. This he relates of himself in his
preface to Arceus. de cur: vuln.

(c) This is clear out of the preface to a book of Sr. Thomas Cheeke's,
called, the subject to the Rebel, published by Doctor Gerard Langbaine late
head of Queens College, and Antiquary to the University of Oxford. His words
are these. What rare preachers shall we imagine they had in the University at
that time, when Mr. Tavernour of Water-Eaton High-Sheriffe of Oxford shire,
came in pure Charity not ostentation, and gave the Scholars a sermon at St.
Mary's with his gold Chain about his neck, and his sword by his side? etc.

XI.
WHether the Papists say they sent them, or deny it? and whether Commissions
and Delegations are to be interpreted according to the intention of the
Granter, or fancy of the Grantee? Whether in rules of common Policy, he who is
a Justice to keep the Peace under an Usurper, may by virtue of such a
Commission draw a sword against him? Is not it understood by peace, that
particular Governors peace? and is it not so in matters of truth?

Concerning Preaching, Churches, Tyths, Universities, Languages, and
Philosophy, Degrees, Habits, Garments, and Complements, etc.

XII.
WHether to make up a Divine of the best rank (for the generality of them are
not so qualified) more be necessary than skill in tongues, knowledge of
Antiquity, and school divinity? Whether any of the first Centuries after the
Apostles, did understand Hebrew? How many of the Latin Fathers before Jerome
did understand Greek? in particular whether Austin did much understand either?
Whether there can be any knowledge of Antiquity? (a) and whether
school divinity be not a novell thing, slighted and condemned by the learned in
all Ages? (b)

(a) Eusebius in his preface to his Ecclesiastical history does acknowledge,
that as to the Records of precedent times, be had little certain help, besides
the Acts of the Apostles; But this question is handled at large in a learned
treatise of Mr. Daille's, about the use of the Fathers.

(b) See a book of one Launoy de varia Aristotelis fortuna. Where it appears
that most of Aristotel's works were several times publicly burned, and the
reading and having of them forbid in the University; because it was an occasion
of error, Blasphemy, profaneness, Atheism and the like: it appears likewise
that those (whom they call the Fathers) and many godly persons, beside several
Synods and Counsels did condemn Philosophy, and the study of it upon the very
same account. A brief Catologue whereof I have here set down, the better to
satisfy the Reader. Hieron: lib. 1. Contr. Pelag. Quid Aristoteli and Paulo?
quid Platoni and Petro? Tert. lib. de praes. Haeret. c. 7. ipsae denique
haereses a philosophia subordinantur: Hinc illae fabulae and Genealogiae
interminabiles, and questiones infructuosae, and sermones serpents velut
cancer, a quibus nos Apostolus refraenans nominatim Philosophiam contestatur
caveri oportere, scribens ad Colossenses. c. 2. v. 8. quid ergo Athenis and
Hierosolymis? quid Academiae and ecclesiae? nostra institutio de porticu
Solomonis est, qui and ipse tradiderat, Dominum in simplicitate cordis,
quaerendum esse: viderint qui Stoicum, Platonicum, Dialecticum, Christianismum
protulerunt. -- Non opus est Rhetorica post Evangelium, nec philosophia post
Jesum Christum. c. 7.

Launoy p. 10. de Eusebius, persuasus est Eusebius faciliores ad fidem nostram
patefieri non posse aditus, quam si gentilium and cum primis Aristotelis
philosophia tolleretur. -- si quando haeretici Scripturarum sensum corrumpunt,
id praesertim Aristotelis opera moliuntur.

There is a great cloud of witnesses, who have left their testimony against the
study of Philosophy, and have discovered how it has corrupted the pure
simplicity of the Gospel: which in the same are obvious for any to read.

See likewise the judgment of Melanchthon in his Apology or Luther against
the University of Paris. Lud. Luther. a Sorbon. Damnat. Tom. 2. p. 193. quid ad
nos quid Aristoteles impurus homo dicit? p. 192. Videtur Lutetia non peccare
nunc primum, sed jam olim ineptire, eum doctrina Christi humanis
disputationibus vitiata philosophari caepit; constat enim.

Lutetiae natam esse prophanam illam Scholasticam, quam vocari volunt
theologiam: qua admissa nil salvum reliquum est Ecclesiae. Evangelium
obscuratum est, fides extincta, doctrina operum recepta, and pro Christiano
populo ne legis quidem, sed moralium Aristotelis populus sumus, and lex
Christianismi contra omnem sensum spiritus facta est Philosophica vivendi
ratio, etc. p. 193 quae schola unquam pure docuit sacras literas. -- Itane
prodita est Scriptura ut non sine conciliorum, ^atrum and Scholarum expositione
certa ejus sententia colligi possit; non video cur oportuerit edi Scripturam,
si spiritus sanctus non voluit certo constare quid nos sentire vellet. Ibid.

I have heard that there is a collection of such persons, as have in all ages
witnessed against the mixture of Phlosophy with Divinity, beginning with the
Apostle who bids men beware of vain Philosophy and continuing on to Gerson, and
Picus Mirandula: It was collected by a Papist. To that Catalogue may be added
the judgment of Merric Causabon, now living in England, and a Minister, who in
his piety or defense of his Father Isaac Causabon, when the Jesuit had charged
him with ignorance of School Divinity; Thus replies Meric Causaubon. Pietas
contra maledicos patrii nominis and religionis hosts p. 122. Restar illa
dialectica, sive scholastica (uti volunt) theologia; haec vero qualiscunque
sit, si neque Dei Verbo comprehenditur, and a veteribus omnibus ignorata est,
per me fuerit illi is ignarus pater vosque semel viceritis adversarii (...) and
(...) ninmia plerunque curiositate non minus prop^^mas impialque, quam putidas,
and ineptas, omnes denique (...), quas olim peperit and meliorum literarum
penuria, (quae (...) illorum saeculorum miseria) non minori studio semper
aversatus est, quam alia utilia ac profutura consectatus est.

If any shall object that the Apostle in condemning vain Philosophy does not
prejudice what is true. I shall not only desire that Person to ascertain me of
what is true in Philosophy, but further demand whether this dealing in making
that distinctive, which is exaggerative, be not like that of Gregorde Valentia,
who glosses upon the text of (...) abominable Idolatry; that there is some
which is not abominable.

XIII.
WHether the knowledge of Tongues lead us to one sense of Scripture, or many?
Whether al^ such dealings lead us not to put our trust in man? (an any matter
of Faith be built upon the strength of a criticisme?

XIV.
WHether the first Christians used much and long Preaching amongst themselves?
(a) Or did build their doctrine upon humane learning and criticismes?

(a) That they did not, it is probable; because the Apostle says they might
all prophecy one after another: and that usually more than one, two or there
did speak at one meeting. Besides Pliny upon examination of them, reports no
such thing: besides some came with a Psalm, etc.

XV.
WHether Sermons be the indubitable Word of God, and whether that can be said
by any Reformed Divine, since they have condemned all addition, even such as is
Explicative? Vide Colloqu. Ratisponense.
If they be the undoubted Word of God, why are they not bound up with the
Bible? Are there not four Gospells? Ar there not the same things reiterated in
the Epistles? Is there not D^uteronomy as well as Exodus and Leviticus? And
Cronicles as well as Kings?

XVI.
WHether they, who were teachers of the People of God in the Primitive times,
were not Handycrafts-men of several Trades? (a)

(a) So Paul was a Tent-maker, and followed that occupation in the time of his
Apostleship, and Celsus objected it to Orign. (Origin. lib. 3^ adv. Celsum)
that the Christian Teachers, such as propagated the Gospel were (...) Weavers,
(or Combers of Wool) Cobblers, Fullers, and Illiterate and Exceeding Rusticke.

XVII.
WHether there were not as much cause for learned disputes in th^se times, as
now? Are there any new opinions in our days, as such as are mantained with
more Rhetorique, or Subtility than those of Old?

XVIII.
WHether the first Christians were not against humane Learning, of Heathenish?
And whether it was only an effect of Julian the Apostat's malice, or Christian
Prudence, that went about to keep the People of God from reading Heathen
Writers? *

* Hieron. in Epist. 22. ad E^o ch p. 62. Qu^ enim communicatio luci cum
tenebris? quis consensus Christo cum ^elial? quid facit cum Psalt^rio Horatius?
Cum Evangelio Mar^ Cum Apostolis Cicero? Non oportet bibere calic^m Ch^sti and
Daemoniorum. Interrogatus de cond^tione, respondi me esse Christianum; Aut
judex, mentiris, ait, Ciceronianus es, non Christianus, ubi enim Thesaurus tuus
ibi and cor tuum, etc. Domine, si unquam iterum habuero co lices saeculares, te
negavero. Minuc. Fell. speaking of the heathenish Gods mentioned in Poetry. Has
fabulas and errores, and ab imperitis parentibus d scimus, and quod gravius
est, ipsis stud^is and disc^plinis elaboram^, carminibus pracipue Poetarum, qui
plurimum quantum verita^i ipsa sua authoritate nocuere. L^b. de Justin^nani
saculi moribus, part 1. c. 26. p. 90. Chr^stianos sane veteres non legimus
unquam palam and in Scholis Philosophiam Ennarasse, cum eam potius
aversarenter. Ostendi vero ab aliquo ve^m Philosophiam palam a Christianis
tempore Justiniani Imperatoris aut etiam antea unquam traditam, c. 27. p. 91.
Justini opera qui insp^cit, novit eum ideo trans^isse ad Ecclesiam, quod nihil
certum in Platonis Schola deprehenderet; abstinuit itaque a Platone,
caeterisque operam impendens divinis literis. Machiavell in Livium in disputat.
de repub. lib. 2. c. 5. Usque adeo enim d^ligentes, assiduique erant primi illi
Christianae Rel^gionis institutores and moderatores, in extirpandis Ethnicorum
superstitionibus, ut and Poetas, and Historicos, quibus aliquid tale
cotineretur, comburendos putarent, Idola de^icerent, and quicquid
superstitionis, illas aliquo modo redoleret, id onme, in universum tollere
conarenter. Herald. animadv. in Arno^. lib. 3. p. 137. Certe Christiani quod ab
Honoribus and Magistratibus semoti privatam vitam agerent, eas literas, quae ad
forensia aut politica officia cum laud obeunda, pra^cipue necessariae sunt,
etiam negligebant: praeterea quia sophistae and Philosophi erant Christiani
nominis hosts praecipui, idcirco vel hoc nomine philosophiam ipsam plerique
aversabantur. De humanioribus and floridioribus literis asperiora etiam fuerunt
veterum Christianorum judicia. Tragedias enim and comedias, aliaque caetera
Poetarum scripta, precipuam eruditionis par, tem, quod ea ad solidam doctrinam
confer existimarent, praeterea laseivia ac turpitudine seaterent, denique
fabulosae Idolatriae promptuarium esse crederent, aspernabantur and damnabant.
Hinc exist^at Tertull. lib. de Idolatr. (...) Magistros and c^teros professores
literarum a^ines esse Idola^ multimodae, quibus necesse est Deos nationum
praedicare, nomina, genealogias, fabulas, ornamenta honorifica quaeque eorum
enunciare, etc. p. 138. generaliter de sacula^i eruditione paulo tristiora
erant fidelium suffragia. Id. p. 139. ergo sa cula^ is eruditio apud veteres
Christ anos periclitara est, quod inde et iam accidit, quod h^c probra a
Gentium sapientibus identidem inculcari audiebant, ^hristianos Idiotas esse,
literarum profauos and expertes; Eccle^ae doctores ^udes and imperitos esse
homines, Lanarios, Sutores, Fullones; h^ inquam, quia a Gentibus vulgo
exprobrari videbant, id^co and literas ipsa, quibus tantopere gloriari
videbantur adversarii, inutiles esse and ad salutem nihil confer, imo ipsis
saeculi sapientibus ad exitium quasi vehiculum esse Christiani contra
referebant: hae igitur caus^e quare Christianos tanquam literarum rudes and
imperitos despuerint: hinc dicebat Celsus, sapientes a Christianis expelli
folos stolidos admitti. Origin. lib. 3. Ibid. quia Christiani cla^bant omnibus
ad Salutem patere aditum, humilibus, servis, idiotis, rusticis, iis etiam quos
mandus stultos existimat: hinc Celsus (in cod. lib. Origin.) haec in
Christianorum conventibus proclamari dicebat. (...).

Ourel. animadv. in Minuc Fell. p. 25. sicut autem Gentes sermonis stribiliginem
and verborum vitia Christianis objiciebant, illosque rudes and agrestes
vocitabant; ita Christiani contra per irrisum eos polito, eloquentes, and
doctos appellabant. etc. Tertull. de Testim. Animae. sed non eam te advoco quae
Scholis formata, bibliothecis exercitata, Academicis and Porticibus Atticis
partam Sapientiam ructas; te simplicem and ^udem and impolitam and Jdioticam
compello, qualem habent qui te solam habent, illam ipsam de compito, de trivio,
de tentrina totam, imperitia tua mihi opus est ut sciam quid sit anima.

I shall not dispute whether the constitutions of Clemens Romanus be his, they
are ancient, and in them lib. 1. c. 6. there i^, Ab^ine ab omnibus libris
Gentilium quid enim tibi cum alienis sermonilus, aut legibus aut falsis
prophetis, quae quidem homines leves a fide recta detorquent. In the Council
of Carthage is there not a Canon: Episcopus Gentilium libros non legate? And are
not these and the like passages in Gratian. Sacerdotes Dei omissis Evangeliis
and prophetis videmus Comaedias legere, amatoria Bucolicorum versuum verba
canere: Virgilium tenere, and id quod in pueris necessitatis est, crimen in se
fa^ere voluptatis. Nonne nobis videtur in vanitate sensus, and ols^uritate
mentis ingredi, qui diebus and noctibus in dialectica art torquetur: qui
physicus perscrutator oculos trans coelum levat and ultra profundum terrarum
and abyssi quoddam inane dimergitur: qui Iambum ferit, qui tantam metrorum
sylvam in suo studiosus cord and distinguit and congerit? Was it not a Pope,
Gregorius Magnus, that prohibited all Prelates in general the reading of
Heathen Authors. Se Joan. Diaconus de vita Gregor. c. 33. If you say that there
is not now any danger of infection from the reading of heathenish books: you
give but the same reason for them which Bellarmine does, de laicis c. 20. Art.
19. and which is refuted as a Childish and illiterate answer by Jacobus
Laurentius a Protestant Minister de lib. Gentil. p. 40. 41. how much do these
reasons agree with what motives Julian (epist. 42.) alleadges for the
prohibiting Christians from reading heathen writers. (...).

* Of this Libanius is a witness in his Life tom. 2. p. 51. amongst other his
misfortunes he laments the great contempt, and scorn that was cast upon the
greek tongue after the death of Julian. (...) by (...) he means learning, and
not only Rhetorique. So afterward he says he was afraid least the Greek tongue
should be suppressed by a law. Ibid p. 71. (...).

XIX.
WHose Sepulchers do our University men build up, whilst they uphold Aristotle's
Philosophy, which has been so generally condemned of late, and Heretofore by
Popish assemblies, and particular men of that way; as also by the first
Christians, and honest men of All Ages?

XX.
WHether the first Christians ^ad any Churches, or did not assemble only in
private houses? (a) Whether their want hereof can be attributed to their being
under pers^ution, since they never made that excuse for themselves to the
Pagans, who objected it to them? Whether if it had not been their judgment, and
not a nec^ssitous practice, the heathen would have upraided them with such
their detest; or upon that account have termed them Atheists?

(a) We read of a Church to be saluted in such, and such a private house, in
Scripture: and it is confessed by Minuc. Felix p. 10. Christiani nullas a^as
habent, templa nulla, nulla not a simulacra, Animadv. Ourel. p. 57. and Arnob.
in the beginning of the sixth Book p. 189. and in the observat. p. 173. Arnold.
adv. Gentes: in hac enim consuestis part crimen nobis maximam impieta^is
affige^e, quod neque aedes Sacras venerationis ad officia construamus; non
Deorum alicujus (...) and formam constituamus, etc.

XXI.
WHether heresy be not attributed to Christianity in-Scripture? Whether
Tertull. does not call the Christians fectam Christianorum? Whether the meeting
places of the first Christians were not called conventicula, before they were
in Latin either Basilica, or Ecclesia? (a) Whether they used to bury in
Churchyards? And why they did at last take up that custom?

(a) Arnob. lib. 4. Nam nostra quidem scripta cur ignibus meruerunt dar^? Cur
immanitur conventicula dicui, in quibus summus oratur Deus? Lactant. lib. 5. c.
11. aliqui ad occidendum praecipites extiterunt, sicut unus in Phrygia qui
universum populum cum ipso pariter conventicula concremavit. Oros. lib. 7. c.
12. Trajanus Plinii secundi relatu admonitus Christianos praeter confessionem
Christi, honestaque conventicula nihil contrarium Romany legibus facere.

(b) Gaudentius de Justinianaei saeculi moribus. part. 1. c. 26. p. 34. where
after examination of rites and customs concerning it, he says thus. Quis non
inde colligat consuevisse Christianos tempore Justiniani Imperatoris sepili^e
privatim in agris suos mortuos? in the same chapter he speaks somewhat how that
custom came to be changed, but more fully in the 26. chap. he gives this
reason. p. 36. cur vero Christiani ceperunt velle condi intra ecclesiarum
ambitum, id causae fuit, quod consanguinei, qui orant in templo, preces pro iis
fundant; add merita Martyrum and Apostolorum, Legimus apud Augustinum de cura
pro mortuis c. 5. Fidelem matrem, fidelis filii defuncti corpus desiderasse in
Basilica martyris poni, siquidem credidit ejus animam meritis martyris adjuvari.

XXII.
WHether amongst the Papists that have Churches or solemn meeting places, the
Jesuits do not usually, notwithstanding that, preach in the Market places and
Streets? (a) What it is that makes teaching a public Act? If to teach
publicly be to teach accordingly as it is now practiced, whether the Apostles
did ever teach publicly.

(a) This liberty was granted to them by Pope Paul the third: the same is
practiced by the Friars minors and Dominicans, and Augustine Friars: and
grounded upon the practice of the Prophets in the old testament: Jerem. 17.
Amos. 5. Proverbs. 1. and of Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament;
besides that Matthew. 22. and Luc. 14. in the Parable of the marriage Christ
sends them out to the highways and streets for guests. All this is illustrated
at large by Franciscus Bernardinus a Popish Doctor in his book de ritu
concionandi lib. 2. c. 24. and confirmed by this reason; and sane egregium est
opus hominibus otiose in foro degentibus, nec ecclesiam alioquin adituris,
divina annunciare monita, moresque dicendo formare and corrigere.

XXIII.
WHether the division into Pharisees was not introduced by the Pope Dionysius?
And whether the Ancient Christians paid Tithes? If they did, whether they did
not pay them as Alms.

This is proved by Mr. Seldom of Tithes. Joseph Scaliger did write against
Tithes, the Protestants Generally beyond sea have disowned and disused them.
The Bishops of Old in Ireland had but the allowance of three mi^h kine: Camdens
Britann: speaking of the County of Cauon in Ireland. Gaudentius de Justinianaei
saeculi moribus part. 1. c. 23. p. 30. 31. An exigebantut Decimae in usum
sacerdotum temporibus Justinani Imperatoris? id negaverit, qui cogitat nihil de
decimis legi in codice, in quo tamen multa reperiuntur sancita de Episcopis,
and clericis and Ecclesiis. Quod si consulas acta conciliorum Oecumenicorum,
itidem vix quicquam reperies p. 31. decimae hortantibus Episcopis collatae
proderant and Sacerdotibus and Pauperibus, non tamen compellebantur a Judice
fideles ut largirentur decimam partem, ideo Justinianus de ea materia nihil in
leges retulit. And a little after constat fideles olim ex fructibus solitos
sponte aliquid confer, quod ab Episcopo dividebatur, partim Clericis, partim
Pauperibus; Quae vero libere solvebantur, ob inveteratum morem abierunt in
necessitatem: hinc profectae sunt tot leges Pontificum de modo solvendi
decimas, deque ratione compe^endi eos qui ipsas non solverent; qua de re passim
interpretes Canonum, and ipse praesertim Pontifex Gregorius toto Titulo. lib.
3. decretal. c. 30.

XXIV.
WHether they had the use of Bells in the primitive times? And whether the
Bells in England that remain ever since the Reformation, have not been popishly
and superstitiously christened.

The former is proved out of Vossius upon the two epistles of Pliny and Trajan
and Bernardinus de ritu concionandi. Pancirollus de Campanis Tit. 9. Campanae
repertae fuerunt circa annum 400 a Paulino Episcopo Nolano. Est autem Nola
Campaniae oppidum. Dictae fuerunt Campanae, quia in Campania inventae; and
Nolae, a loco, in quo primum fuerunt factae. The later is known from the common
practice even now for the Papists to baptize bells.

XXV.
WHether it were not an act of superstition in former times to build Churches
and Chappells in the form or fashion of a Cross? Whether it were not a sin of
the like nature in ancient times to build their Churches East and West, that so
the People might bow and pray toward the East, whence (upon a gross mistake
of the word) they expected the sunn [of Righteousnesse] should arise? (a) And
whether both these superstitions have not been renewed and practiced lately in
one of the Reformed Colleges of Oxford? (b)

(a) Clem. Alexandrin. Stromat. lib. 7. circa med. (...). Quoniam autem diei
natalis imago est Oriens, atque illinc quoque lux augetur, quae primum illuxit
e tenebris; iisque qui volutantur in ignoratione exortus est dies cognitionis
veritatis, quemadmodum sol oritur, ideo ad ortum matutinum habentur preces,
unde etiam templorum antiquissima respiciebant ad Occidentem, ut qui vultu
stant ad imagines converso, doceantur verti ad Orientem. This reason likewise
the common people give for their being buried with their feet toward the East,
that so they may be in a fitter posture to meet the sun of righteousness when
he shall appear with healing in his wings, viz. at the resurrection:

XXVI.
WHether the primitive Christians had any Universityes, or other Schools of
Learning than such as Origin did catechize in at Antioch?

(a) Gaudent. de mor. Saec. Justin. part 2. c. 26. p. 90. Christianos sane
veteres non legimus unquam palam, and in Scholis Philosophiam enarrasse, cum
eam potius aversarentur, etc.

XXVII.
WHether Ancient times (and those not very ancient neither) record any more
than that of Bologna, Paris, Oxford, and Salamanca? And whether Christianity at
that time were not of farther extent, than the Kingdoms those stood in?

XXVIII.
WHether it were not the design of the Reformers in King Edward the sixth's
days to put down Universityes? (a) Whether the then Dean of Christ-Church had
not such intentions? (b)

(a) Langbain in his preface to Sr. Jh. Cheeks book, the subject to the Rebel,
has these words. The very Vniversityes which had been the glory, were now
become the scorn, or pity of the Kingdom; their Libraryes robbed and spoiled
either by pretended authority or connivence, their libertyes and privledges
invaded and borne down by the prevailing parties, the Townsmen of Oxford and
Cambridge. Much of their present Maintenance, and the main hopes of their
future preferment taken from them; at least in their opinion: when they saw
most or all their revenues of their Colleges given ^o the King. Some
Bishoppricks actually dissolved, and the whole jurisdiction inclining to ruin.
This did strike them with such a Panick fear, as did justly deter parents
from beslowing upon their Children that ingenuous education which was attended
with so great charges, and so small hopes; and such as were already entered
upon that way, were forced to quit their professions, and betake themselves to
another kind of life. And a little after speaking of some privileges which Q.
Mary bestowed on the University, he says, and though this did persuade with
some, that to be a Scholar was none of the greatest curses; Yet I do not see,
that the people were hearty friends with learning all Q. Maryes days, nor in
the beginning of Q. Elizabeth.

(b) See Bryan Twyne about the Antiquity of Oxford in his miscellany appendix.
At that time the Library was destroyed, and many other things done or designed,
which are reported by the said Bryan Twyne to be registered in the Archives.

XXIX.
WHether the rise of our present fashioned Univesityes and University-habits
was not from the Dominicans; an Order instituted by the Pope to suppress the
Waldenses, those Predecessors of the Protestants? And whether it is well done
to derive their office and garb from the Persecutors, and their Doctrine from
the persecuted?

XXX.
WHether the institution of Doctorall Degrees be not novell? (a) And accounted
Antichristian by the Reformed Churches in Scotland, France Holland,
Switzerland, and the Calvinists in High Germany? And whether they have any in
those Countries? Or any habits in their Universityes? (b)

(a) Gaudent. de. mor. saec. Just. c. 24. p. 87, 88. An Doctores renunciabat
eos mos saeculi Just. qui peregissent studia, magisteriumque jam docti
exuissent? nihil ejusmodi reperire est, nam id inventum ad superiora saecula
referendum est, non ad prisca Justiniana; postquam inquam disciplinae caepere
instaurari, trecentis fere abhinc annis, Doctorum quoque dignitas and nomen
emersit, collatum solenni more.

(b) This may be resolved by every Travailer.

XXXI.
WHether there are not in our, as well as other Antichristian Universities
beyond sea, the same or rather more Popish, Idolatrous and Superstitious
habits, Ceremonies and Customs? Nay whether they do not rather exceed them in
pomp as well as Number?

Compare the University statutes with that description of their formalityes at
Paris in Ludus Lutheri a Sorbon. damnat. Insignia Doctoralia, annulus,
Pyrrhetum, liber, osculum, cheirothecae, and Pyrrheta distributa in aula
Doctorali, ultimo egregium convivium Doctorale, Bedelli cum sceptris
praecedunt: To these of Paris, Oxford and Cambridge have added many more, For
let any man take notice of all their Ceremonies, Processions, Attire and
attendance which the Bacchelours in Lent, and the Masters and Doctors at the
Act and commencement appear in, and he will readily confess that these places
of Antichrist at home are the more triumphant. And consequently let any one
judge whether such, who are brought up in so much state, and Pride, be fitly
qualified to converse with the poor of the people, in whom Christ so much
delighted, and of whom his Kingdom does chiefly consist. The Genevians in
their Annotations upon the ninth of the Revelation, ver. 3. where the Locusts
came out of the Smoke, say they were and are false teachers, Heretics, and
worldly subtle Prelates, with Monks, Friars, Cardinals Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, DOCTORS, BATCHELORS, and MASTERS. Does not this note
apparently fasten the name of Locusts on all the Clergy of this land, and all
such as are graduated in the University, by the name of Doctors, Batchelors,
and Masters? And does it not as plainly yoke them with Friars, Monks, and
Cardinals, principal instruments in all times to advance the Popedom? I know
the words which follow after are alleged by some, to take off the envy of this
note, viz. who forsake Christ to maintain false doctrines. But the enumeration
of so many particulars makes not that not ethe less invidious, the said
explication notwithstanding; because the note had been as perfect and
significant, had it gone thus in generals only, that is to say, by Locusts
here are meant false teachers, Heretics, and other worldly subtle men, that
seduced the people, persuading them to forsake Christ to maintain false
doctrine. Pet. Heylin against Fuller. p. 179, 180.

XXXII.
WHether the University hood be not the product of the old Monkish Melote,
spoken of by Cassion de institutione Monachorum: and grounded upon the
superstitious exposition of that place in Hebr. c. 11. They w^ndred about (...)
in Sheepskins? Whether it were not a Religious habit, it being a badge of
Monkery according to Cassian, and Jerome upon Pachomius's rule?

Hospinian de Origin monachatus c. 77. paragr. 11. fol. 273. reliqui Monachi
cucullis passim ab initio usi sunt, more sumpto ab Egyptiorum monachis, Melotis
item etc.

XXXIII.
WHether it be not a superstitious and detestable exposition of that Scripture,
Stand fast having your loins girt, etc. To accommodate it to the Episcoparian
Girdles, with which they tie in their Canonical Coats, the rose or knot being
on the left side?

XXXIV.
WHether it be not a pretty foundation for the Oxford Doctors to stand booted
and spurred in the Act? (a) because there is mention made in the Scripture of
being shod with the preparation of the Gospel? And whether the Benedictine
Friars do not the same. (b)

(a) See statut Acad. Oxon Tit. 7. sect. paragr. 17. (b) Hospinian de Origin
Monachat. c. 77. fol. 273. Benedectini qui proprie dicuntur, nigro hodie
amiciuntur color, tunica laxiore ac discincta, and ad pedes usque demissa,
amictu capitis quem cucullam vocant, in humeros and scapulas brevius rejecto,
Ocreati etiam incedunt.

XXXV.
WHether the Ring, and Gloves, and corner Cap, which the Doctors are to put on,
and the Kiss which they receive from (the university Baud) the Doctor that
creates them, at the Act, are not of a Popish Original, and now practiced
amongst the Papists?

Hospinian de Orig. Monachi. c. 72. p. 270. or there abouts. Surgit Pontifex
and Benedicit annulum, and aspergit aqua Benedicta, and infigit eum digito
annulari dextrae Abbatis, dicens, Accipe annulum fidei, scilicet signacullum,
quatenus sponsam Dei sanct m^ viz. ecclesiam, intemerata fide ornatus, illibate
custodias. His peractis Episcopus and Assistentes recipient Abbatem Benedictum
ad Osculum pacis. Deinde Mitram aqua Benedicta aspersam imponit capiti Abbatis
Benedicti, dicens, Imponimus, Domine, capiti hujus famuli tui Galeam munitionis
and salutis, quatenus decorata facie and armato capite cornibus utriusque
testamenti terribilis appareat adversariis veritatis, the gloves were
instituted to signify that they should keep themselves in all their Actions
undefiled in the things of the world. Ibid.

XXXVI.
WHether the Universities of Oxford, do well to give for their arms the Book
with seven seals? Is not that a gross abuse of what is laid down in the
Revelations: as if the seven Liberal Arts, (two whereof are Grammar and
Fidling) were typified by those Seals, which none were worthy to open but the
Lamb?

XXXVII.
WHether Ministers do well to go in black, or the Universityes to command it. *

* See Statut. Acad. Oxon. Tit. 14. paragr. 1. The words of the Statutes are in
English thus. It is Ordered that all heads of Colleges, all fellows and
Scholars wear black or sad colored clothes, and all that are initiated into
holy orders, as it becomes those of the Clergy to do. Clemens Alexandrinus
expressly condemns all colored clothes, and makes it the command or Doctrine of
the great Christian Schoolmaster [Christ] to go in white, as any one may read
in his Paedagog. l. 2. and l. 3. (...).

XXXVIII.
WHether there were not of old amongst the Jews a sort of men called Chemarims
or Black-coates? Whether those were the People of God? (a) And whether the
Translators of the Bible into English did well to conceal the true meaning of
this word by by^ting others for it, or the very word it self in En^h letters?
And whether the other words of the Bible, if they had been ordered in the like
manner, had been yet translated?

(a) See Fuller concerning the Jewish Garments c. 6. These Chemarims were the
Idolatrous Priests of B^l, and got that name from their black clothes (the word
being originally deduced from Chemar, which in the Hebrew signifies to black or
burn, and we usually complain of that colored cloth to be burnt in the
dying.) A peculiar Habit no doubt to themselves, and which in opposition to
them, I conceive few would wear. These Chemarins or Black-Coates God threatens
to cut off from Jerusalem, Zeph. 1. 4. They were prophesied against by Hosea,
Hos. 10. 5. and rooted out by. Josiah, 2. Rings 23. 5. the word is in the
margin.

XXXIX
WHether in Tertullians time, every one that did turn Christian, or at least
was made a Presbyter, did not renounce his Gown, (which was the Roman
Vestment) for a long dark-colored Cloak? Whether afterward the Clergy and
Laity did not relinquish that, for Coats (lacernae) and both were alike
habited? In Fine, was not one, a Bishop, condemned at the Council of Gangrae?
for introducing the fashion of long-sad-coloured cloakes, that wear being
counted at that Assembly, (...), unbeseeming the Priesthood?

All this is clear to any man that shall read out Tertullian de Pallio, with
the notes of Salmasius thereon. Hieron. in pist. ad Nepotian. c. 11. vestes
Pullas aeque devita ac candidas. etc.

XL.
WHether the Doctors Scarlet Gowns, were not at first instituted as an Emblem,
or representation of the Zeal which they either had, or at least ought to have?
(a) And whether those Doctors of Oxford and Cambridge who wear Scarlet-Gowns
have not as little Zeal, as those Doctors which wear none?

(a) Erasin. Encom. Mor. de Cardinal. quid purpura, nonne (...) in Deum
amorem? etc.

XLI.
WHether any of the Ceremonies and habits now used in the Universities, had a
very good Original, or have been employed to a good use since,

XLII.
WHether those things that had a good Original and use (if they be not still
necessary or commanded by God) when once they have been abused unto Idolatry or
Superstition, are not quite to be abolished?

It Is much if it be not objected here by some, that though their Orginall were
Popish and Antichrstian, yet since they are employed to better ends and uses,
viz. for distinction, Order and Decency, they may be lawfully enough retained.
To this I shall answer, might not the Jews have objected the same reason to
their Reformers that the Golden Calfe and Groves might not be consumed and
turned into Ashes, because they might be employed hereafter to better uses? The
One for exchange and Traffic, the other for building, fuel or a pleasant
shade, very convenient in that hot Country. Might not the Brazen Serpent,
though it were worshipped by some, yet still be preserved? because it might
serve to put others in Mind of God who had cured; as well as the Pots of Manna,
which were laid up to remember them how God had miraculously fed their fathers
in the Wilderness? yet when the Brazen Serpent was once abused to ^dolatry,
away it must go. In like manner was not Baali a proper Significant good word,
yet when once an Idol was called by it, the Lord, who is a jealous God, would
have it no more used in his worship and service, but commanded them to call him
Jshi.

Yet we do not find that true neither that they are employed for distinction
and decency, but rather in Pride, pomp, vainglory; so that by reteining of them
they do no more then the Levite who stole away Micha's Gods from Mount Ephraim,
and set them up at Dan, where Idolatry became a more public worship. It Is true
that while the Army continued in Action it was thought fit by the University Men
in part to lay them a side, at least for awhile, but since the Honest party of
the Armies have been scattered and weakened in great measure, they have again
brought them into full credit and fashion, just like the Jews, who had learnt
to make a calfe in Egypt, but had no opportunity to show their skill till Moses
and Joshua were gone out of the Camp.

XLIII.
WHether the whole use of that Complement, your Servant, was not anciently
Condemned?

* See the book called a Treatise of use and Custom p. 160. 161. his words are
these, he is not counted a civil man now of late years amongst us, that thinks
much to subscribe himself servant, though it be to his aequall or inferior. Yet
Sulpitius Severus was once soundly chid by Paulinus Bishop of Nola, for
subscribing himself his servant in a letter of his: but you shall hear him
speak, if you please, and see what he though^ of it; In epistolae titulo,
imitari praestantem in omnibus mihi fraternitatem tuam timui, quia tutius
credidi vere scribere; cave ergo pocthac, servus in libertatem vocatus, hominis
and Fratris and conservi inferioris servum te subscribere, quia peccatum est
adulationis magis, quam humilitatis justificatio, honorem uni domino, uni
Magistro, uni Deo debitum; homini cuilibet, ne dicam misero peccatori d^ferre.
etc.

XLIV.
WHether Persecution for Religion be not condemned by the Ancients? (a) Was not
a toleration granted to all by Constantine? (b) do not some of the Papists
themselves teach that no faith is to be enforced? (c)

(a) Lactant. Oper. lib. 5. de justitia p. 353. Lugdon. Sed defendenda sunt
inquiunt suscepta public sacra. O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant?
Sentiunt enim nihil esse in rebus humanis Religione praestantius, eamque summa
vi oportere defendi; sed ut in ipsa Religione, sic in defensionis genere
salluntur. Defendenda enim Religio est non occidendo, sed mori^ndo; non
saevitia, sed patientia; non scelere, sed fide, illa enim malorum sunt, haec
bonorum; and necesse est bonum in religione versari non malum: nam si sanguine,
si tormentis, si malo religionem defendere velis: jam non defendetur illa, sed
polluetur atque violabitur: nihil enim est tam voluntarium quam religio, in qua
si animus sacrificantis aversus est, jam sublata, jam nulla est, recta igitur
ratio est ut religionem patientia vel morte defendas; in qua fides conservata,
and ipsi Deo grata est, and religioni addit autoritatem, etc. Tertull. ad
Scapulam. Tamen humani juris and naturalis potestatis est, unicuique, quod
putaverit colere; nec alii obest aut prodest alterius religio, sed nec
religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debet non vi. Magistrum
neminem habemus nisi Deum solum. And Julian as bad as the Clergy makes him, see
what he says. Epist. 43. (...). Equidem de Galilaeis omnibus adeo clementer
and humaniter statui, ut nemini vis inferatur, neque in templum trahatur, neque
alia de re ulla praeter voluntatem suam contumelia afficiatur. And again Julian
Bostrenis Epist. 52. (...) (scil. Christianorum) (...). Sane neminem istorum
trahi ad aras nostras in vitum patimur. And a little after speaking to the
Citizens (to whom he wrote) not to fall out with one another, or do harm to
the Christians by reason of their diverse Religions, his words are these. (...).
Quippe oratione persuadere, docerique satius est homines, quam verberibus ac
contumeliis, corporumque suppliciis: Ergo iterum ac saepius admoneo, qui in
veram religionem voluntate sua feruntur, ne qua injuria Galilaeos afficiant,
neve in eos impetum faciant, aut contumeliis vexent; Etenim misericordia potius
quam odio digni sunt, qui maximis in rebus calamitatem patiuntur, etc.

(b) Scip. Ammirat. dissertat. politic. lib. 3. p. 92. sed com^rtissimum est,
postquam Constantinus Baptismatis lavacro re^eneratus Christianos fovisset,
Ecclesias exaedificasset, persecutiones sustulisset, privilegia and immunitates
Christianis largitus esset, nihilominus Gentilium templa ab eo minime
destructa; imo permissum fuisse ut unusquisque arbitratu suo quam vellet
religionem coleret, quod Eusebius clare docet lib. 2. c. 59. de. vit. Constant.
adeo ut nullus dubitationi locus fit.

See likewise Themistius his twelfe oration made to Jovini^n the Emperor, all
which oration was to commend him for his giving toleration, and to exhort him
farther to it, where the Reader may abundantly satisfy himself with his
arguments.

(c) Quod Fides nec potest nec debet eogi. this Fr. Dom. Soto in quart sentent.
distinct. 5. Artic. 10. p. 154. 155. has proved by very many excellent
arguments; and answered all objections to the contrary. Certainly where there
is not a liberty of dissenting allowed, there Paul does not dispute in the
school of Tyrannus, but Tyrannus in Paul's.

FINIS.

