MEMORIALS OF The Most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Cranmer, SOMETIME Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY. WHEREIN The HISTORY of the CHURCH, and the
REFORMATION of it, during the Primacy of the said ARCHBISHOP, are greatly
Illustrated; and many singular Matters relating thereunto, now First Published.

In Three Books.

Collected chiefly from RECORDS, REGISTERS, Authentic LETTERS, and other
ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS.

By JOHN STRYPE, M. A.

LONDON; Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

EFFIGIES VERA REVERENDISSIMI C^^^MERI ARCHIEPISCOPI CANTUARIENSIS



H Holbein pinxit

Natus. 1489 July. 2.

Consecratus 1533. Marzo.

Martyrio. Coronatus. 1556. Mar 21.

page 179: Printed for Ric: Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Church
yard

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, By the DIVINE PROVIDENCE, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBVRY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; AND One of
Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Grace,
TO pardon the Presumption of the Obscure Person that dedicates this Book to
Your GRACE, for the sake of the Renowned Man it treats of, Viz. One of your
Illustrious Predecessors, an Archbishop of Canterbury, that has deserved so
eminently of that See, nay, and of the whole British Church; I may say, that
deserved Best of any Archbishop before him, that wore that Mitre. To whose
solid Learning, Deliberation, and indefatigable Pains, both the Kings and
People of this Realm owe their Deliverance from the long and cruel Bondage of
Rome. For it is true what the Romanists say in Obloquy of this Archbishop, and
we Protestants say it to his Eternal Fame, That he was the first of all the
Archbishops of Canterbury that made a Defection from the Papal Chair; Thereby
vindicating this Crown from a base Dependence upon a Foreign Jurisdiction. In
his Three Conversions.
But whereas Parsons says, That this was the first Change of Religion in any
Archbishop of Canterbury from the beginning unto his days; this is not so true;
For sundry of Archbishop Cranmer's Predecessors, (to look no further than Two
or Three hundred Years backward) were of different Judgments from the Church of
Rome in some Points. His immediate Predecessor, Warbam, approved of the King's
Title of Supreme Head of the Church under Christ, in his own Kingdom, against
the Doctrine of the Pope's Universal Authority. And a Century of Years before
him, Archbishop Chichely, tho he were made the Pope's Legate, refused to
exercise his Power Legantine, further than he should be authorized thereunto by
the King. And Archbishop Islip, as long before him, disliked of Dissolving
those Marriages that were contracted by such as had before vowed the single
Life. For tho he laid a Punishment upon a Countess of Kent, who being a Widow,
and then Professed, afterward secretly married to a certain Knight, named
Abrincourt; yet he divorced them not, but permitted them to live together. And
the Judgment of Archbishop Arundel, who lived in K. Richard the Second's Reign,
was for the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, and for the
Laities use thereof. For He, preaching the Funeral Sermon of Queen Anne, the
beloved Wife of that King, after she deceased at Sheen, in the Year 1392.
commended her, as for her other Virtuous Accomplishments, so particularly for
her Study of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Sense of them; and for having them
in the Vulgar Tongue; as I find by an Ancient MS. Fragment, E Foxij MSS.
writ near Three hundred Years ago, formerly belonging to the Church of
Worcester, in these Words following; Also the Bushop of Caunterbury, Thomas of
Arundel, that now is, sey a Sermon at Westminster, thereas was many an hundred
of people, at the buryeng of queen Anne, (of whose Soul God have mercy.) And
in his commendation of her he said, That it was more joy of her, than of any
woman, that ever he knew. For notwithstanding that she was Alien born, [being
the Daughter of the Emperor Charles IV.] she had on English all the iiij
gospels, with the Doctors upon hem. And he said, that she sent them unto him.
And he said, that they were good and true, and commended her, in that she was
so great a Lady, and also an Alyan, and would study so holy, so virtuous
books. And he blamed in his Sermon sharply the negligence of the Prelates, and
other men, etc.

So that it is not true what Parsons says, if he mean, That no Archbishops of
Canterbury before Cranmer, varied from the Church of Rome in any of her
Doctrines. But true it is, tho not so much to their Credits, that none of them,
however sensible they were of the Roman Errors and Superstitions, did in good
earnest bestir themselves to set this Church free of them, before our
abovenamed Archbishop (being the sixty eighth from Augustine the Monk)
resolutely and bravely undertook and effected it. Indeed they spent not their
Zeal, their Treasure, and their Interest this way so much, as in contending
about Superiority and their Prerogatives, in exempting their Clergy from the
Cognizance of the Temporal Magistrate, in Applications to, and Courting of the
Bishops of Rome, in Persecuting those they called Heretics, in Eternizing
their own Names, by founding Religious Houses, and building Stately Palaces,
and Shrines, and in exhibiting themselves in great Worldly Pomp and Appearance.

But blessed be God for Archbishop Cranmer; by means of whose Reformation
succeeded a Series of better, tho not so splendid, Archbishops. Who made
conscience of minding things more suitable to their high Vocation, and the
Spiritual Trust committed to them: Men that regarded little or nothing the vain
shows of exterior Grandeur and Glory, nor sought Great Things for themselves,
but with their great Predecessor St. Paul, (on whom lay the Care of all the
Churches) spent and wore out themselves in the Restoration of the Kingdom of
Christ, so happily begun by the said Archbishop Cranmer in this Island. Such
were Parker, Grindal, Whitgift, the Three first Protestant Archbishops next
after him; what he planted they watered, and God gave a Blessed Increase to.
Whose most excellent Lives and Conducts in the Government of this Church, as
well as in their own more private and Domestic Conversation; their rare Piety,
Prudence, Patience, Courage, and Activity, I can scarcely temper my Pen from
making excursions into. Of which I could fill even Volumes (had I Leisure,
Favor, and Countenance) from those Large Collections which I have for diverse
Years been storing up with great delight, partly out of their own Original
Letters, and partly from other MSS. in their times.

But besides these first Archbishops during the Long Reign of Q. Elizabeth, who
by their Care and Diligence established and settled that Reformation, of which
Archbishop Cranmer laid the first Stones, we are beholden unto the same
Archbishop for all the rest of the Worthy and Painful Prelates of that
Metropolitical See, who have taken Care of this Excellently Reformed Church,
even unto Your GRACE. Whose Deserts toward this Church and the Reformation,
have raised you to sit in Archbishop Cranmer's Chair; tho with as much
Reluctance in You, as was in Him. Of Your GRACE'S Endowments to qualify You for
this most Eminent Station, I will be wholly silent; knowing how abhorrent Your
Generous Nature is from Reading or Hearing Your Own Commendations.

Nor, MY LORD, is this my End in this my Dedication: But this it is, That You
would so far Encourage these my Weak and Imperfect Labors (done out of a Good
Intent) as to cast a Favorable Eye upon them, for the sake of Your Glorious
Predecessor, the Subject of this Book; and to repute me among the Number,

May it please Your GRACE, Of Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servants,
JOHN STRYPE.

THE PREFACE.
I Think it fit, by way of Preface to these Memorials, to admonish the Reader
of a few things preparatory to the Perusal thereof: As, What it was put me at
first upon making these Collections concerning Archbishop Cranmer, and the
State of the Church in his time: What induced me to make them Public: And,
What Credit may be given to them; with some other occasional matters.

I. As to the first, I have been for a long time not a little addicted to read
whatsoever I could of the Reformation of this famous Church; that I might truly
understand, for what Reasons it was at first attempted; in what Methods it
proceeded; by what Men it was chiefly managed and carried on; and how it stood
in truth as to its Doctrine, Discipline and Government, Reputation, Learning,
Piety, and such like, in its first Establishment, and the Earlier Times of it.
For which purpose I did not only read over what we have in Print of these
Matters, but for more satisfaction I was carried on to look into MSS. whether
Registers, Records, Letters, Instruments, and such like: A great sort of which
by Providence fell into my hands. And besides them, I have turned over many
more in Libraries and elsewhere; from whence I made Transcriptions, Extracts,
and Collections, for my own use and satisfaction; which swelled to no little
bulk. And while I was doing this, I took always a more curious View into the
Lives, Manners, and Doings, Learning, Virtues, and Abilities of the chief
leading men, whether Archbishops and Bishops, or other Churchmen; of whom we
have but little Account extant, tho many of them very Great and Good men;
little more remaining of some of them, than their Names.

The Reverence I bore in my mind to Archbishop Cranmer, the Father of the
Reformation here in England, and the first of that Ancient Metropolitan See,
that so bravely shook off the Pope and his Appendages, inclined me especially
to gather up what Notices I could of him. Afterward, as my leisure served me,
out of my indigested Mass of Notes, I compiled into some order, Memorials of
him, and of the Affairs of the Church during his Primacy; in which he for the
most part was concerned, and bore a great share with K. Henry, and the Lord
Cromwell, his Vicegerent in Spirituals. After some Years, these Memorials lying
by me, I enlarged considerably, and digested them into Annals, and had thoughts
of making them Public, being excited and encouraged thereunto by my Friends,
who were privy to these my Doings.

II. And indeed many Considerations induced me hereunto: As, in general, the
great Benefit of reading Histories of former Times; which what that is, take in
the Words of John Fox; In his Protestation to the whole Church of England.
For the things which be first, are to be preferred before those which be
later: And then is the reading of Histories much necessary in the Church, to
know what went before, and what followed after. And therefore not without
cause, History in old Authors is called, The Witness of Times, the Light of
Verity, the Life of Memory, the Teacher of Life, and Shewer of Antiquity.
Without the knowledge whereof, man's Life is blind, and soon may fall into any
kind of Error, as by manifest experience we have to see in these desolate later
Times of the Church, whenas the Bishops of Rome, under color of Antiquity,
have turned Truth into Heresy, and brought in such newfound Devices of strange
Doctrine and Religion, as in the former Ages of the Church were never heard of:
And all through Ignorance of Times, and for lack of True History. And therefore
the Use of History being so considerable, Historians in some Kingdoms have been
maintained by Public Encouragement. And so the Writer of the Epistle to K.
Edward, before Erasmus's Paraphrase Englished, propounded once to that King,
That there should be a Public Salary allotted to some able Persons, to
Translate good Books, and to Write Chronicles, for bestowing so great a Benefit
on the Commonwealth.

But particularly the History of the Church, and matters relating to Religion,
have a more special benefit, as being conversant about Spiritual things, which
are weightier by far, and concern us more a great deal than Temporal. But, the
more is the pity, in this sort of History there is a greater Defect than in the
other; I speak of our own Nation; for tho the History of the State in the last
Age, was excellently done by the Pens of the Lord Herbert and Mr. Cambden; yet
the Matters of the Church they professedly declined, or did but touch at; the
former saying expressly, His intention was not in an History to discuss
Theological Matters, Page 418. Edit. 1672.
as holding it sufficient to have pointed at the places where they are
controverted. And the latter in his History, as often as he came to matters of
the Church, tells us, That he left his Readers to the Ecclesiastical Historian.
Which has made me wonder at, and apt to accuse the Slothfulness of that Age,
that during all the time of K. Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Mary, wherein Religion
was so tossed about, and took up so much of those Reigns, there is no one
Ecclesiastical History thereof written, except that of the diligent and learned
Mr. Fox; and during the long Reign of Q. Elizabeth and K. James, I think none
at all. Till of late years, when by length of time, and destruction of many
Original MSS. by the Civil Wars, diverse remarkable Transactions were buried and
lost, some few Learned Men employed themselves in Collecting and Publishing
what Memorials of Religion and the Church they could retrieve; as namely, Dr.
Fuller, Dr. Heylin, and especially Dr. Burnet, now the Right Reverend Bishop of
Sarum; to whom the English Church must be ever beholden for his great and happy
Pains contributed hereunto. But yet there be good Gleanings after these
Writers; and many things of remark there are, relating to the Church in those
Three busy Reigns of Henry, Edward, and Mary, whereof these Historians are
either wholly silent, or speak imperfectly, or erroneously: Some whereof in my
Searches I have met with; which I have disposed in these Memorials.

But besides the General Benefit of History, especially Ecclesiastical, this
Particular History now recommended unto the English Nation, may produce this
good effect, To make us value and esteem, as we ought, our Reformed Religion,
when we see by what just and fair ways it went on, and how it prevailed like
Christianity at first, notwithstanding the great Opposition it met with, and
what sort of men they were, such as Gardener and Boner, who especially set
themselves to stop it.

Moreover, Reading the Lives of Exemplary Men, and such as were Famous in their
Generation, has a great Virtue in it, to influence the Manners of men. Their
wise Saying^, their discreet Behavior, their just Management of Matters
committed to their trust; their Zeal, their Charity, their Awe of God, their
Contempt of the World, and such like, are not only delightful to read or hear,
but do insensibly instill into men's minds a secret Approbation thereof, and draw
them on to an Imitation. This Land has produced many admirable men; the
Knowledge of whom, and the Benefit of whose Examples, is utterly lost, for want
of some Writers to leave their Memory unto the World. It was a thing complained
of in the last Age, That as that Age abounded more in Writers, than any Age
before it, so there were very few that set themselves to Pen the Lives of
Excellent men; as Samuel, the Learned and Worthy Son of John Fox spoke: Life of
John Fox.
But he ever thought it, as he said, most unjust, notwithstanding, to deprive
the world of the memory of matters done by them, by whose Labors and worthy
Deeds, the common state of the Country was so much bettered. And if the Use of
History, as the same Author says, is to form the Lives and Manners of men,
that being the chief end of History; then I add, No part of History does more
promote this, than the History of the Deeds of Famous men.

It was another great Inducement to me to let this Work see the light, to be
grateful to the Memory of this Holy Prelate, that has so well deserved of this
Church; and to whom, under God, she owes that Excellent Constitution, and
Reformed State in which she is; which cost him so dear, so many Pensive
Thoughts, so many long hours Study, so many Consultations and Debates with
Learned men, so much Correspondence abroad, so many Speeches, Arguments, and
Strugglings, in the Parliament, in the Convocation, before the King, the
Clergy, the People; so much Danger, and Trouble, and Envy, and Reproach, and at
last his dearest Blood. Posterity would be highly injurious to such a Person as
this, if he should not be recorded with all due Respect and Honor. It was a
commendable Practice of the Ancient Persians, to write in Records the Names and
good Deeds of such as had deserved well of the King and Kingdom, to remain for
ever. And these Records Kings themselves did sometimes use to read. The King
Ahasuerus called one Night for them to be read to him, to entertain his waking
hours, Esther VI. And Xerxes in an Epistle of his to Pausanias, extant in
Thucidides, told him, (...).
That his Good Deed was upon Record in his Palace for ever. For these Records
were esteemed so precious, that they were kept within the Walls of the Palace.
And this Custom of Writing up the Remembrance of Men of Merit, seemed also to
be among the Jews. Thus it is said of Judas Macchabeus, That the Remembrance of
him was for a blessing for ever. (...), 1 Mac. III. 7.
To which does, I suppose, (...) that Book of Remembrance, or Record, allude,
(in Mal. III. 16.) that was written for those that feared God, and thought on
his name. And surely it is agreeable to God's Will, that this Piece of
Gratitude should be shown to men of singular Virtue deceased, to keep their
Names and Good Deeds upon Record, for Posterity to know, and to thank God for.

And this Office of Love and Duty seems highly convenient to be done toward
Archbishop Cranmer, that something might appear in the world for his
Vindication, under those many base Aspersions, and lying Insinuations, that are
and have been Printed by Papists, to defame and blacken him to Posterity. One
of them has these words, (which show that he cared not what he said, Parsons
Three Conversions, Part 3. p. 84.
so he might but throw his dirt upon the chief Lights of the Reformation), The
very Pillars of this Rank, [which he names to be] Luther, Bucer, P. Martyr,
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Rogers, Farrar, Tailor, Tyndal, all Married
Priests and Friars, [but some of them were never Friars, and others never
Married] were men given to their Sensualities, both of Women, and other like
their Commodities, after the fashion of other ordinary men. Neither is there
recounted any one eminent Action in all their Lives, that I have read, either
of chastening their Bodies, mortifying their Appetites, contemning the World
and the Pleasures thereof, while they might have and use the same; or finally,
any more excellent Spirit in them above the rest, or of any supernatural
Concurrence of God with their Actions in any one thing. But did he converse so
much in Fox, as to undertake in one or two Books to answer and confute him and
his Martyrs; and yet does he meet with nothing there of none of these men in
that Martyrology, but what was Ordinary to other men, and that showed not some
more excellent Spirit to be in them? It is a sign he read but little there, or
read with a cankered mind. This ensuing Book shall effectually confute these
Misreports and Slanders of Cranmer, one of these Pillars, as he calls them; and
shall abundantly make it appear, That he was no Sensualist, nor addicted
(notwithstanding his High Place) to the Pleasures and Commodities of this
world; and that his Life shone bright by his many eminent Actions of Piety,
Mortification, Contempt of the world; and that he was of a more excellent
Spirit than that of the ordinary rank of men; and that for some Ages there
scarce arose his Fellow; and finally, that he must needs have some supernatural
Concurrence and mighty Aid of God's Grace with him, in many of the Affairs that
passed through his hands.

III. The Third thing remains, (which is indeed the main matter that makes an
History of any account), and that is, What Credit may be given to what I have
writ: For if it stand not upon the Foot of Truth, it is not History, but a
Romance, a Legend, a mere Tale. And here I remember what John Fox said to Alan
Cope, concerning an History-Controuler, which is as true of an History-Writer:
If you will be a Controuler in Story-matters, Acts and Mon. Vol. I. p. 532.
Edit. 1610.
Diligence is required, and great searching out of Books and Authors, not only
of our time, but of all Ages, and especially where matters of Religion are
touched, pertaining to the Church; it is not sufficient to say what Fabian, or
what Hall says, but Records must be sought, and Registers must be turned over:
Letters also and ancient Instruments ought to be perused, and Authors with the
same compared; finally, the Writers among themselves one to be compared with
another; and so with Judgment to be weighed, with Diligence to be labored, and
with Simplicity, pure from all Addiction and Partiality, to be uttered.

Now to measure my self with this: Diligence and Faithfulness, I trust, has
not been wanting in me: I have been governed by a hearty Desire and Love of
Truth: I have read over such Printed Books as are of the best Credit and Vogue;
and I have often compared them with good MSS. especially when I have had
occasion to make use of them; which I have done but sparingly and briefly, that
I might not cumber the Book with what has been known and written before. But
the Collections I have here made* and do publish to the world, are chiefly from
Manuscript Records, Registers, Letters, Orders of Council, Original and
Authentic. For besides Archbishop Cranmer's Register, in a great Folio, in
which I have bestowed some considerable time, I have had the Perusal of several
Rare Papers (Volumes I may say) of Sir John Cotton, preserved in his Invaluable
Library; and of Archbishop Parker, that great Antiquarian, collected by him,
and now remaining in the private Library of Bennet-College in Cambridge; among
which there is a Writing, entitled, A Declaration concerning the Progeny, with
the Manners and Trade of Life, and bringing up, of the most Reverend Father in
God, Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury; and by what Order and Means
he came to his Preferments and Dignities. Which I perceive was drawn up by
Cranmer's Secretary, at the desire of Archbishop Parker, and for his use. I
have been conversant in what remains of the Papers of John Fox, communicated
to me by the Favor of my good Friend William Willys, of Hackney, Esquire.
Among which there is a MS. Life of Cranmer; Annals writ by an Augustine Monk of
Canterbury, from the year 1532. to 1538. Many Letters of Fox, and other Learned
Men to him, relating to the Affairs or Afflictions of the Church in those
Times; and abundance more, too long here to be inserted. I have consulted also
many MSS. of great Worth, originally belonging to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh's
Secretary, imparted to me by Sir Will. Hickes, of Low-Leyton in Essex, Knight
and Baronet: Wherein are diverse of Archbishop Cranmer's Letters, written by his
own Pen. By the Kindness of the Reverend Mr. Nicolas Battely of Kent, and his
great readiness and zeal to forward my Design, I have received a great many
material Excerpta out of the Registers and Records of the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury, and out of other Books and MSS. William Petyt of the Inner Temple,
Esquire, and Keeper of the Tower-Records, did with great humanity communicate
unto me his Collection of excellent Papers, contained in two large Volumes:
Which tho in these Memorials I have made but little use of, yet may be
admirably subservient to me, or whosoever's Lot else it may happen to fall to,
to give the world some account of Qu. Elizabeth's Archbishops, and the
Church Affairs in their times. In this Catalogue of Friends and Assistants, I
must mention also the Reverend Dr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Henry Wharton; Mr.
Laughton, Keeper of the Public Library in Cambridge, and Mr. Harrison, Fellow
of Sidney-College in that University. Unto all these Gentlemen now named, I do
here (as I ought in Gratitude) publicly acknowledge my self beholden.

I did also consult the MS. Library at Lambeth, by the favorable Permission of
the last, and the present Archbishop of Canterbury. But tho there be diverse
Shelves of very choice MSS. yet I found little or nothing there, serviceable to
my purpose; unless it should please God to lengthen my Life and Health, to
write in this Method concerning Archbishop Whitgift. Neither was I successful
in Enquiries which I procured Friends to make, from such as were Relations of
the Archbishop, in any Matters or Notices concerning him. There is one Mr.
Cartwright of Nottinghamshire, that is an Heir of that Ancient Family of the
Cranmers, a Worthy Gentleman, and now, or late, Justice of the Peace for that
County; who being made acquainted with my Design, and moved to impart any
Letters or Writings that might be of use thereunto, answered a Friend, that he
was plundered in the late Civil Wars of abundance of Papers, and not a few to
that effect; but that now he had not any thing left to contribute, but his own
good wishes to the Undertaker.

But still further, for the better satisfying the Readers in the Truth of what
I write, I have, according to a good practice first begun by Mr. Sumner of
Canterbury, In his Antiq. of Canterb.
cast the most material Records and Original Letters together by themselves in
an Appendix, that those that please may read them there, rather than in the
Body of the Story, where it might too much interrupt the Thread of the
Discourse, and make the reading more tedious. Which Appendix will serve both as
a Proof of the History, and moreover as a Repository for many choice Monuments
of Antiquity; which otherwise being in loose Papers, and private Studies, might
in time be utterly extinguished, and irrecoverably lost.

And I do here protest once for all, that I have not inserted into this Book
any one single Historical Passage out of mine own head, but such as I have
either found in some credible published History, or in some oldBook printed in
those times, or the Prefaces and Epistles to them; or, lastly, in some good MS.
or other.

I have digested these Memorials into Annals, and have laid matters under their
respective Years, and Months, and Days, as near as I could: Sometimes indeed I
have been left to conjecture at the true time; which I have done with as much
Care and Exactness, as by considering all Circumstances I could. Yet herein I
am not so confident, but that I may sometimes perhaps make a mistake. And if I
do so, it will, I hope, be excused to me, considering that I was fain
oftentimes to go by guess (grounded however upon the best probability I could
make), the Papers I used being not seldom without Date, sometimes of the Year,
sometimes of the Month, and sometimes of both.

I thought it not amiss, (tho I have not observed it done in any other History)
to set down under every Year, what Bishops, Diocesan and Suffragan, were
Consecrated in the Province of Canterbury, and by whom. And I am jealous some
of the Suffragans may be omitted by me; which Defect must be attributed to the
Registers rather than to me. I have taken particular heed to the Convocations,
and to what was done in them. And because the Affairs of the English Church
have such a near relation unto the Archbishops of the Church, so as their
Histories are but maimed and imperfect, without some respect had to those
Affairs, I have diligently interwoven many Ecclesiastical Emergencies into this
History; and a great many more I have been forced to omit, tho well worthy the
Public, left the Volume might swell too much.

If any might perhaps deem this a needless Work, the Life of this Archbishop
having been writ already in the Book of Martyrs, and the British Antiquities; I
answer such, that I have therefore been short, and it may be silent in some
things more fully and largely treated of elsewhere: But here are numberless
Notices given concerning the Archbishop, some which are no where else, others
very imperfectly, observed; besides the Narrations of the State, and History of
the Church, (which are every where interposed), in most of which the Archbishop
bore a part.

The Cathedral Church of Canterbury, now called Christ-Church, I have in some
places styled Trinity Church, because I so find it named in those particular
Records I make use of in those places; and it seems in some of the first years
of our Archbishop, it ordinarily went by that old Name.

My Style may seem rough and unpolished, and the Phrases here and there
uncouth; the reason of which is, because I confess I have often taken the very
Expressions and Words of the Papers I have used; and so may fall sometimes into
obsolete Terms, and a Style not so acceptable to the present Age, whose
Language is refined from what it was an Hundred and fifty or forty years ago.
But I have chosen to do this, that I might keep the nearer Truth, and lest that
by varying of the Language, I might perhaps sometimes vary from the true
meaning of my Writer. And in truth, he that is a Lover of Antiquity, loves the
very Language and Phrases of Antiquity.

The Reader will find some few things here, which are already published in the
late Specimen, put forth by Anthony Harmer; he and I, it seems, lighting
unwittingly upon the same Records, to wit, K. Edward's Council-Book, and the
Register of Christ-Church, Cant. Nor could I strike out of my Book what I found
published in the said Specimen, having fully finished it, and the Copy being
under the Press some Weeks before that Book came forth, and the matters there
related interwoven into the Contexture of my History.

And now after all this Pains that I have taken in fulfilling this Task, (which
I assure the Readers have not been small, nor of a few Years) let me not for
every little slip fall under their Censure and Reproach, but rather let them
use me with Gentleness and Charity; considering how few, tho much abler, will
trouble themselves to Labor and Drudge, and take Journeys, and be at Expenses,
in making such Collections for the Public Good. It calls to mind what happened
upon the Death of the Laborious Antiquary, John Stow, who had been a Collector
of Matters for the English History Seven and forty years, and dyed 1605. and
had all the Collections of Reiner Wolf, (another Historian, and a Printer in K.
Edward the Sixth's days), and if he had lived but one year longer, intended to
have published his long Labors: But after his death, there was not a man to be
found, to take the small Pains to review his Papers, and fit them for the
Press: Many indeed were talked of to do it, both Persons of Quality among the
Laity and Clergy, (For the World had great and earnest expectation to see Stow
in Print) But when they were spoke to to, take the good Work in hand, some of
them said, That they thought the giving out of their Names was rather done by
secret Enemies, on purpose to draw them into Capital Displeasure, and to bring
their Names and Lives into a general question. Others said, That they who did
such a Work, must flatter, which they could not, neither wilfully would they
leave a Scandal unto their Posterity. Another said, he could not see, how in
any Civil action a man should spend his Travel, Time, and Money worse, than in
that which acquires no Regard or Reward, except Backbiting and Detraction. And
one among the rest swore an Oath, and said, He thanked God that he was not yet
mad, to waste his Time, spend Two hundred Pounds a Year, (which it seems Stow
had done) trouble himself and all his Friends, only to gain assurance of
endless Reproach, loss of Liberty, and bring all his days in question. Yet at
last, one Edward Howes undertook it, and effected it: But it happened just so
to him, having been intolerably abused and scandalized for his Labor. So
slothful and backward are most to take Pains in Works of this nature, and so
apt to censure those that do. I hope I shall meet (if not with Thanks, at
least) with more candid men, and better usage.

But whatever happens, I shall arm my self with Patience to undergo it, since I
intend nothing hereby, but to be serviceable unto my Country, and God's
Church, and to Justify the excellent Reformation of it in these Kingdoms; and
finally to do Right unto the Memory of that truly Great and Good Archbishop of
Canterbury. And thus recommending the Success of this Work unto God's Blessing,
I here make an End.

J. STRYPE.
Sept. 29. 1693. Low-Leyton. I desire the Reader to take Notice, That when I
quote Fox's Acts and Monuments, it is the Edition in the Year 1610. And when
the Life of K. Henry VIII. by the L. Herbert, it is the Edition of 1672. And
when the History of the Reformation by Bishop Burnet, it is that of the Year
1681. Farewell.



A TABLE OF THE Books, Chapters, and Contents, OF THESE MEMORIALS OF ARCHBISHOP
CRANMER.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Cranmer 's Birth, Education, and Rise. A Worthy Work to revive his
Memory. His Family. Account of his younger years. Sent to Cambridge, An. 1503.
Sets himself to study the Scripture. Anno 1489, 1503, 1511, 1516, 1523, 1529,
1530*
Is made Doctor of Divinity. Marries. Refuses to go to Wolsey's College, Oxon.
He is made one of the University-Examiners. The King's great Cause first
proposed to the Universities. The occasion of his Rise. His Opinion of the
King's Cause. The King sends for him. Suitably placed with the Earl of Ormond.
Friendship and Correspondence between the Earl and Cranmer. A Providence in his
being placed here. Cranmer disputes at Cambridge. Grows dear to the King and
his Court. CHAP. II. Pole 's Book about the King's Matrimony. Pole's Book
against the King's dissolving his Marriage. Cranmer peruses it. Anno 1530.
His Account of it. His Censure thereof. CHAP. III. Cranmer 's Embassies. He is
employed in Embassies: To the Pope: Offers him a Dispute in favor of the
King's Cause. To the Emperor. Anno 1530, 1531, 1532.
Cornel. Agrippa gained by Cranmer to the King's Cause. Becomes acquainted with
Osiander; and marries his Kinswoman. Treats with the Emperor about the Contract
of Traffic; and about sending Supplies against the Turk. Sends the King the
News in those Parts; And the Proclamation for a General Council; And the Tax of
the States of the Empire. He goes in an Embassy to the Duke of Saxony, and
other Protestant Princes. CHAP. IV. Cranmer made Archbishop of Canterbury. Anno
1532, 1533.
Made Archbishop of Canterbury. His Dignities before he was Archbishop.
Archbishop Warham foretells a Thomas to succeed him. Archbishop Warham for the
King's Supremacy. Cranmer's Testimony of Warham. A Reflection upon a Passage
relating to Cranmer in Harpsfields History. Cranmer tries to evade the
Archbishopric. Declares the reason thereof to the King. The Archbishop's
Brother is made Archdeacon of Canterbury. The King linked Cranmer with him in
all his Proceedings about Q. Katherine. The King and Archbishop appeal from the
Pope to a General Council. The King writes to Dr. Boner his Ambassador in that
behalf. The Archbishop is Consecrated. The Pope's Bulls. The Archbishop
surrenders them to the King. The method of the Consecration. The Archbishop's
Oath for the Temporalties. The Archbishop pronounces the Divorce. The
Archbishop's Judgment of the Marriage. CHAP. V. The Archbishop Visits his
Diocese. The Archbishop forbids Preaching. Visits his Diocese. The delusion of
a Nun in Kent. Anno 1533.
The Archbishop appeals from the Pope. The Archbishop's Letter to Boner.
Disputes in the Parliament against the Pope's Supremacy. Licenses for Chapels.
CHAP. VI. The Archbishop presses the Translation of the Bible. Anno. 1534.
The Archbishop labors the Reformation of the Church. What he did this
Convocation. A Book for Preaching, and the Beads. Dispersed by the Archbishop
to all the Bishops. The Archbishop of York preaches at York. The Clergy and
Universities subscribe against the Pope. Cranmer and others administer the Oath
of Succession to the Clergy: And to Sir Tho. More, who refused it. Cranmer's
Argument with him. More offers to swear to the Succession it self. Bishop
Fisher offers the same. The Archbishop writes to Crumwel in their behalf. The
Archbishops endeavor to save the Lives of More and Fisher. CHAP. VII. The
Archbishop Visits the Diocese of Norwich. A Praemunire brought against Bishop
Nix. The Archbishop visits this Bishop's See. The Bishop of Norwich a
Persecutor. Anno 1534.
Go^dric, Lee, and Salcot, Consecrated Bishops. CHAP. VIII. The Archbishop
Preaches at Canterbury. Anno 1535.
The Archbishop preaches up the King's Supremacy at Canterbury. A Prior preaches
against him. Whom he convents before him. The Archbishop acquaints the King
with the matter. A Provincial Visitation. Winchester herein opposes him. The
Archbishop's Vindication of his Title of Primate. The Bishop of London refuses
his Visitation: And Protests against him. Cranmer sends him a part of the New
Testament to translate: And his Answer. Lawney's Jest upon Bishop Stokesly. Who
this Lawney was. CHAP. IX. Monasteries visited. Monasteries visited. The
Archbishop for their Dissolution. The Visitors Informations. Bishops, Diocesan
and Suffragan, Consecrated. Anno 1535.
Suffragan Bishops usual in the Realm. Bishops without Title. Nic. Shaxton,
Edw. Fox, Will. Barlow, Geo. Brown. A Memorial of the good Services of
Archbishop Brown in Ireland. Tho. Mannyng. John Salisbury. CHAP. X. The
Audience Court. The Archbishop's Audience-Court struck at. The Archbishop
defends it. Anno 1536.
The Archbishop promoting a Reformation in the Convocation. CHAP. XI. Articles
of Religion. Articles published and recommended by the King. The Original
thereof. Anno 1536.
The Original sent into the North to show to the Rebels. The Contents of them.
Articles of Faith. Articles relating to Ceremonies. A Conjecture that the Pen
of the Archbishop was here. CHAP. XII. Cranmer 's Judgment about some Cases of
Matrimony. Two remarkable Books published. I. The Book of Articles. II. A Book
against the Pope, called, The Bishop's Book. Anno 1536.
Certain Cases of Matrimony put to the Archbishop. His Solution. Refuses to
grant a Dispensation for the Marriage of a Relation. His Letter thereupon. He
restrains the number of Proctors. Which some complain of to the Parliament. The
Archbishop divorceth Q. Anne. A License for a Chapel. Bucer this year
dedicates a Book to the Archbishop. Bishops consecrated; Richard Sampson,
William Rugge, Rob. Warton. CHAP. XIII. The Bishop's Book. The Bishop's Book by
the Archbishop's means. Winchester's Opposition. The King makes Animad versions
upon it. Published. How esteemed. Anno 1537.
Enlarged and Reprinted. Some account of the foresaid Book. Names of the
Composers. CHAP. XIV. The Archbishop visits his Diocese. Goes down into his
Diocese. Gets a License to visit. The Vicar of Croydon. Anno 1537.
The Archbishop visits his Diocese. What course he took for the preventing of
Superstition. CHAP. XV. The Bible Printed. Anno 1537.
His Joy at the publishing the English Bible. Presents one by Crumwel to the
King. Cranmer's Letters to Crumwel. Some further Particulars* concerning this
Edition of the Bible. The Printer's Thanks and Requests to Crumwel* Grafton to
Crumwel. The Printer apprehensive of another Edition. Other Requests of the
Printer. CHAP. XVI. Many Suffragan Bishops made. The Feast of S. Thomas, etc.
forbid. Rob. Holgate Consecrated Bishop. John Bird; Lewis Thomas; Anno 1537.
Some account of Bird. Thomas Morley; Rich. Yngworth; John Thornton; Richard
Thornden; John Hodgkin; Henry Holbeach; Suffragans. CHAP. XVII. The Bible in
English allowed. The Archbishop reads upon the Hebrews. A Declaration for
reading the Bible. The Bible received and read with great Joy. Anno 1538.
The Archbishop had a hand in Lambert's Death. The Bishops dispute against
Lambert's Reasons. CHAP. XVIII. The Archbishop's Judgment of the Eucharist.
Anno 1538.
Cranmer zealous for the Corporal Presence. His Reasons for it. Sanders his
slanders of the Archbishop concerning his Opinion in the Sacrament. When
Cranmer changed his Opinion. Latimer of the same Judgment. Diverse Priests marry
Wives. The King's Proclamation against Priests Marriages. Anabaptists. A
Commission against them. The way wardness of the Priests occasions the King to
write to the Justices. The Archbishop visits the Diocese of Hereford. Bishops
Consecrated, William Finch, John Bradley. CHAP. XIX. The Act of Six Articles.
The Archbishop makes Nic. Wotton Commissary of his Faculties. The King offended
with the Archbishop, Anno 1538, 1539.
and some other Bishops. The Six Articles opposed by the Archbishop. The
Arguments the Archbishop made use of at this time, lost. The King's Message to
the Archbishop by the Lords. A Book of Ceremonies: Labored to be brought in. A
Convocation. The Papists rejoice. Two Priories surrendered to the Archbishop.
The Archbishop and Crumwel labor with the King about the new Bishoprics.
Bishops this year, John Bell, John Skyp. CHAP. XX. The Archbishop in
Commission. The Archbishop's Enemies accuse him. His Honesty and Courage in
discharge of a Commission. Anno 1540.
And his Success therein. Questions of Religion to be discussed by Divines, by
the King's Command. The Names of the Commissioners. Seventeen Questions upon
the Sacrament. The Archbishop's Judgment upon these Questions. The Judgments of
other Learned Men concerning other Points. An Act to prevent Divorces. The
Archbishop to Osiander, concerning the Germans abuse of Matrimony. CHAP. XXI.
The largest Bible printed. Some account of printing the English Bible. The New
Testament printed, 1526. And Burnt. Reprinted about 1530. Burnt again. Anno
1540.
The Scripture prohibited in a Meeting at the Star Chamber. The New Testament
Burnt the third time. The whole Bible printed 1537. Matthews, that is, Rogers's
Bible. About 1538, the Bible printed again in Paris. The Printers fall into the
Inquisition. The Bible printed with French Presses in London. The largest Bible
published in the year 1540. Boner's Admonition for reading the Bible. The Bible
suppressed again, Anno 1542/3. King Henry's Judgment for the use of the Bible.
CHAP. XXII. The Archbishop retired. The Archbishop keeps himself more retired.
The Archbishop issues out his Commission for the Consecrating of Boner. Boner's
Oath of Fidelity. Anno 1540.
The Archbishop makes a Commissary in Calais. Butler a better Commissary. His
Troubles. The occasion thereof, the discovery of a Religious Cheat. Glazier
Commissary in Calais. The Archbishop's Judgment of Admission of Scholars into
the School belonging to the Cathedral. Bishops Consecrated; Edmund Boner, Nic.
Hethe, Tho. Thirlby. Some account of Thirlby's Rise. CHAP. XXIII. All Souls
College visited. The Archbishop visits All Souls College. Visits it a second
time. The Archbishop gives Orders about Shrines. Anno 1541.
The King to the Archbishop for searching after Shrines. The Archbishop's
Orders accordingly to his Dean, his Archdeacon and Commissary. The Archbishop
lays Bekesburn to the Sea. Learned Preachers preferred by the Archbishop. The
Archbishop makes some recant. A Convocation. Their business. Bishops
consecrated, William Knight, John Wakeman, John Chamber, Arthur Bulkely, Robert
King. CHAP. XXIV. The King's Book revised. The King's Book revised by the
Archbishop. Diverse Discourses of the Archbishop. The goodly Primer. Anno 1542.
The Archbishop instrumental to the Reformation of Scotland. An Act procured by
the Archbishop. Paul Bush Consecrated. CHAP. XXV. Presentiments at a Visitation.
The King's Book published by Authority. A Visitation at Canterbury.
Presentiments. Reflections upon the former Presentiments. Anno 1543.
The Prebendaries and Preachers admonished by the Archbishop. CHAP. XXVI. A
black Cloud over the Archbishop. The Prebendaries Plot against the Archbishop.
Winchester the chief Manager. Winchester designs the Death of diverse of the
Court: Anno 1543.
And of the Archbishop and his Friends. The Papers relating to Archbishop
Cranmer's Accusation. The Contents thereof. The Canons and Preachers of
Canterbury* Cranmer's Chaplains complained of at the Sessions. They prepare the
Articles and pr^fer them. They Article against the Archbishop himself. London's
Practices. A great Mass of Articles against the Archbishop procured. The chief
Instruments Gardener, Serles, Shether. The Bishop of Winchester's discourse
with a Prebendary of Canterbury. Willoughby and London wait at the
Council Chamger. Willoughby brought to the L. Privy Seal, and to Winchester.
The Contents of the Articles against the Archbishop. More Articles against his
Commissary. More still. The Witnesses. The Prebendaries deliver the Articles.
CHAP. XXVII. The King the Archbishop's Friend in this Danger. The King himself
discovers all to the Archbishop. The Archbishop desires a Commission. The
Archbishop in Commission expostulates with his Accusers. Anno 1543.
Sh^ther in Prison sends to Winchester. Their Reasons which they pretended for
what they did. Cocks and Hussy Commissioners, and his Officers false. New
Commissioners sent down. The Register false. The Delinquents Chambers and
Chests searched. The Treachery of Thornton and Barber. The Archbishop's
discourse to them. The Conspirators are imprisoned. Their Release. Their
Confessions and Letters. The Ends of the Conspirators. CHAP. XXVIII. The
Archbishop falls into more Troubles. The Archbishop accused before the
Parliament. Anno 1543, 1544*
The Palace of Canterbury burnt. The Council accuse the Archbishop. The King
sends privately for him. Comes before the Council. The King rebukes the Council
for Cranmer. The King changes the Archbishop's Arms. CHAP. XXIX. Occasional
Prayers and Suffrages. Prayers to be made against immoderate Rain. English
Suffrages commanded to be used. Anno 1544.
The Contents of the King's Letter to that end. A Procession for the King's
Expedition. The Counc^l's Letter to the Archbishop. Popery prevails. Gardener
and the Bishops now carry all. Bishop of Landaff removed to York. His Oath.
CHAP. XXX. The Archbishop reformeth the Canon Law. Anno 1545, 1546.
The Archbishop sets upon reforming the Canon Law. An Act concerning it. The
Progress made by the Archbishop in this Work. The MS. of these Laws. The
Archbishop labors in this Work under K. Edward. The Archbishop employed in
mending Service-Books. The King consults with the Archbishop for the Redress of
certain Superstitions. The Opportunity of Winchester's absence taken. The
Archbishop prevails with the King in two great Points. Seeks to redress
Alienation of the Revenues of the Cathedral. Scripture and Sermons more common
by the Archbishop's means. Anthony Kitchen Consecrated. A Proclamation against
the English Testament. He interprets a Statute of his Church. The Archbishop by
the King's Command pens a Form for a Communion. His last Office to the King.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. He Crowns King Edward. COnceives great hopes of K. Edward. The
Archbishop takes a Commission to execute his Office. K. Edward Crowned by the
Archbishop. Anno 1546.
The manner of the Coronation. The Archbishop's Speech at the Coronation. CHAP.
II. A Royal Visitation. A Royal Visitation on foot. The Visitors. The method of
this Visitation. Anno 1547.
The Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase. CHAP. III. Homilies, and Erasmus 's
Paraphrase. The Archbishop to Winchester concerning the Homilies. The
Archbishop, etc. compose Homilies. Winchester in the Fleet. Anno 1547.
The Bishop of Winchester's Censure of the Homily of Salvation; And of the
Archbishop for it. Winchester's Censure of Erasmus's Paraphrase. His account of
his Commitment. Erasmus vindicated. Winchester's Letter to Somerset concerning
these things. The Archbishop appoints a Thanksgiving for a Victory. The
Archbishop to the Bishop of London. CHAP. IV. A Convocation. A Convocation in
the first year of the King. Anno 1547.
Dr. Redman's Judgment of Priests Marriage. The Archbishop's Influence on the
Parliament. The Communion in both kinds established. The Archbishop's Queries
concerning the Mass. The Archbishop assists at the Funeral of the French King.
The Marquess of Northampton's Divorce committed to the Archbishop. Processions
forbid by his means. Examines the Offices of the Church. CHAP. V. The
Archbishop's Catechism. The Archbishop puts forth a Catechism: And a Book
against Unwritten Verities. Anno 1547.
His Care of Canterbury. CHAP. VI. The Archbishop's Care of the University.
Anno 1547.
The Archbishop's Influence upon the University. Some of S. John's College apply
to him upon the apprehension of a danger. Offended with some of this College;
and why. The ill condition and low estate of the University. An Address of the
University to the Archbishop. The Sum thereof. The Success of the Universities
Address to him, and others. Another Address to him against the Townsmen. Roger
Ascham's Application to him for a Dispensation for eating flesh. Favorably
granted by the Archbishop. The Archbishop's Opinion concerning Lent. Ascham
acquaints him with the present state of the University, as to their Studies.
Sir John Cheke, the Archbishop's dear Friend: The prime Instrument of Politer
Studies there. The Impediments of that University's flourishing state laid
before him. CHAP. VII. Dr. Smith, and others, recant. Dr. Smith recants at
Paul's Cross. His Books. Gardener offended with this Recantation. Anno 1547.
Other University-men recant. Smith affronts the Archbishop. His inconstancy.
The Archbishop's Admonition to the Vicar of Stepney. The Archbishop licenseth
an eminent Preacher. Who preaches against the Errors and Superstitions of the
Church. Is bound to answer for his Sermon at the Assizes. How far the
Reformation had proceeded. Ridley Consecrated Bishop. CHAP. VIII. The Churches
Goods embezzled. New Opinions broached. Anno 1548.
Churches profaned. Church-Ornaments embezzl'd. The Council's Letter to the
Archbishop thereupon. A Form of Prayer sent to the Archbishop; With the
Council's Letter. New Opinions broached. Champneys revokes Six Articles; and
abjures. Other Heresies vented. Asheton's Recantation. Other Errors still. Joan
Bocher's Heresy. Latimer's Censure of her. George Van Paris. CHAP. IX. The
Archbishop visits. Anno 1548.
The Archbishop visits his Diocese. His Articles for the Clergy; and for the
Laity. An exchange made between the Archbishop and the L. Windsor. Farrar
Bishop of S. David's Consecrated. Some account of this Bishop. The Archbishop
swayed by Farrar's Enemies. CHAP. X. The Archbishop answers the Rebels
Articles. Rebellion in Devon. The Archbishop answers the Rebels Articles. Some
account thereof. Anno 1549.
Crispin. Moreman. Cardinal Pole. The Archbishop procures Sermons to be made
against the Rebellion. Peter Martyr's Sermon upon this occasion. The French
take occasion at this Rebellion. Bucer's Discourse against the Sedition. The
Archbishop's Prayer composed for this occasion. CHAP. XI. Bishop Boner
deprived. The Archbishop deprives Boner. Anno 1549.
Discourse between the Archbishop and him concerning his Book; and concerning
the Sacrament. Charge the Archbishop concerning the Preachers he allowed. The
Archbishop's Answer to Boner's Declaration. Papists insist upon the Invalidity
of the Laws made in the King's Minority. An Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
The Office of Ordination reformed. The Archbishop visits some vacant Churches.
S. David's. Gloucester. Norwich. London. A new Dean of the Arches. CHAP. XII.
Duke of Somerset's Troubles. The Common Prayer ratified. The Archbishop writes
to the Lords at Ely-House. Their Answer. The Archbishop gets the
Common Prayer Book confirmed. Anno 1549.
CHAP. XIII. The Archbishop entertains learned Foreigners. The Archbishop
harbors Learned Strangers. Bucer writes in the Archbishop's Family. The
Archbishop's Guests. Anno 1549.
Martyr dedicates his Lectures at Oxon to the Archbishop. The Archbishop writes
to Bucer to come over. Bucer and Fagius Professors at Cambridge Fagius dies.
The Archbishop sends Money to Fagius's Widow. Bucer laments his Loss. CHAP.
XIV. Peter Martyr disputes in Oxford, being challenged thereunto. Peter Martyr
challenged publicly to a Disputation. His Answer hereunto. Anno 1549.
Declines it at present; and why. They agree upon the Conditions of a
Disputation. They Dispute. Martyr sends the Sum of the Disputation to the
Archbishop. The Disputation published by Martyr: And by Tresham. Smith writes
to the Archbishop from Scotland. Disputations at Cambridge before the
Commissioners. Bucer disputes. His Judgment of the Sacrament. CHAP. XV. Matters
of the Church, and its State now. Relics of Popery remaining. The Council
gives Orders to the Justices: Anno 1549.
And writes to the Bishops. Neglect in London. Adulteries frequent. Books
dispersed by Protestants. Preaching against Len^. Gardiner's Judgment of a
Rhyme against Lent. Latimer counsels the King about Marriage. Foreign
Protestants their Offer to K. Edward. CHAP. XVI. Ridley made Bishop of London.
The Communion-Book reviewed. Ridley made Bishop of London. Rochester vacant.
Anno 1550.
Bucer writes to Dorset not to spoil the Church. The Common Prayer Book
reviewed. Bucer and Martyr employed in it. CHAP. XVII. Hoper's Troubles. Anno
1550.
Hoper nominated for Bishop of Gloucester. He and Ridley confer about the
Habits. The Archbishop writes to Bucer for his Judgment in this matter. The
Questions. Martyr writes to Hoper. Hoper's Two Objections: Considered. Another
Objection of Hoper considered. Other things urged by him. Hoper confined to his
House, and Silenced. Committed to the Archbishop's Custody. Sent to the Fleet.
Hoper Conforms. Martyr to Gualter concerning Hoper's Conformity. CHAP. XVIII.
Bishop Hoper visits his Diocese. Hoper visits his Diocese. His Articles of
Religion. His Injunctions and Interrogatories. Anno 1550.
Holds Worcester in Commendam And visits that Church and See. Goes over both
h^^ Diocesses again. The Councels Order concerning the two Canons. License for
the Bishop of Gloucester to attend upon the Duchess of Somerset in the Tower.
Other matters relating to this Bishop. CHAP. XIX. Troubles of Bishop Gardener.
Diverse great Lords repair to Gardener. The Council's proceedings with him.
Articles propounded to him to subscribe. Anno 1550.
Winchester sequestered for three months. The Sequestration expires. The
Commissioners sit to examine him. A Letter of some Noblemen whom he had belied.
Gardener offers his Book against Cranmer to the Commissioners. He is deprived.
The Council's Order for his strait Confinement. Poynet made Bishop of Winton.
CHAP. XX. Bishop Hethe, and Bishop Day; their Deprivations. Other Popish
Bishops dealt with. Bishop Hethe's Troubles. Sent for before the Council. Anno
1550.
Day, Bishop of Chichester, his Troubles. Bishop Day will not pull down Altars.
Appears before the Council. The Archbishop and Bishop of Ely reason with him.
The Council give him time to confer. Before the Council again. Before the
Council the third time. And the fourth time, when he was sent to the Fleet.
Commissioners appointed for Worcester and Chichester. They are deprived. Placed
the one with the L. Chancellor, and the other with the Bishop of London. Day
writes to Kings-College for leaving off Masses. His unnatural Carriage toward
his Brother. Preaches against Transubstantiation. His Change charged on him.
CHAP. XXI. Papists grow bold. Loose Professors restrained. The Papists write
Libels. Several Papists now taken up. Chedsey, Morgan, Sir Ant. Brown, Anno
1550.
White. Other Professors restrained. CHAP. XXII. Foreigners allowed a Church. A
Lasco. The Archbishop's care of the Souls of Strangers residing here. The Dutch
Congregation under John a Lasco. The occasion of his coming into England. Anno
1550.
His business here. From Embden he wrote to the Archbishop: And to Cecyl. The
sad condition of the Protestants there. Latimer mentions A Lasco to the King.
Contest among A Lasco's people. The care of A Lasco over his Church, and its
Privileges. Favorably received by the L. Chancellor Goodrich. Labors with the
Secretary to procure Letters from the Council in behalf of his Church. The
extent of his Superintendency. Melanc^hon thought to shelter himself under him.
His great Abilities for Government. Erasmus's Praise of him. Purchased
Erasmus's Library. A Lasco a married man. His Influence in the Reformation
under Q. Elizabeth. Blamed for meddling in our Controversies. A Church of
Italians constituted in London. Michael Angelo their Minister. The Service the
Archbishop did for this Church: And for the Minister. Diverse of this Church
fall out with their Minister, and go to Mass again. A Conjecture at the Cause
thereof. Their Minister sends their Names to the Secretary, and accuses them.
The Morals of this man tainted. Writes a Penitent Letter to the Secretary. A
French Church also in London. CHAP. XXIII. The Church at Glastenbury. Another
Church of Strangers at Glastenbury. Anno 1550.
Their Trade Weaving. Valerandus Pollanus their Preacher and Superintendent.
How they came to fix here. Conditions of Trade between them and Somerset. Their
Trade obstructed by the Troubles of Somerset. Apply themselves again to the
Council, and to the Secretary Cecyl. The Council become their Patrons, and
assist them. Orders from the Lords to set this Manufacture forwards. Pollanus
very serviceable to them. An Apology for the largeness of the former relation.
After the King's Death they remove to Frankford. Prove Friends to the English
Exiles there. A Spanish Church. Cassiodorus and Corranus their Preachers. Many
of K. Philip's Spaniards become Protestants. Great Numbers of Protestants in
Spain and Italy. CHAP. XXIV. The Archbishop's care of the Revenues of the
Church. Bucer dies. The Archbishop labors to preserve the Revenues of the
Church. The detaining the Church-Revenues a Scandal to the Reformation. Anno
1550.
Calvin to the Archbishop upon this matter: And to the Duke of Somerset. Bucer
publicly disputes at Cambridge. Dies. The University wrote up concerning his
Death. Bucer's Library. His Widow retires to Germany. The Correspondence
between him and Martyr. A Plot of the Papists at Oxon against Martyr, at an
Act. Martyr's Judgment of the Communion-Book. Bucer's great dangers. Poynet
Consecrated, and Hoper. CHAP. XXV. The Archbishop publishes his Book against
Gardener. Cranmer publishes his Book of the Sacrament. His first Book of that
Subject. Wrote against by Gardener and Smith. Anno 1551.
Vindicated in another Book by the Archbishop. The Method of the Archbishop's
Reply. The Judgments made of this Book. How the Archbishop came off from the
Opinion of the Corporal Presence. The Archbishop's great Skill in Controversy.
Peter M^rtyr enlightened by Cranmer. Fox's Conjecture of the Archbishop. A
second Book of Gardener against the Archbishop. The Archbishop begins a third
Book. Martyr takes up the Quarrel. Cranmer puts out his Book of the Sacrament
in Latin. Printed again at Embden. Cranmer's second Book intended to be ^ut
into Latin. Some Notes of Cranmer concerning the Sacrament. Martyr succeeds
Cranmer in this Province. Writes against Gardener: And Smith. CHAP. XXVI. The
Duke of Somerset 's Death. The Duke of Somerset's Death. Winchester supposed to
be in the Plot. Articles against the Duke. Anno 1551.
What he is blamed for. The new Book of Common Prayer established. Coverdale
made Bishop of Exon. Scory Bishop Elect of Rochester. The Archbishop appoints a
Guardian of the Spiritualties of Lincoln; And of Wigorn; And of Chichester; And
of Hereford; And of B^ngor. Hoper visits his Diocese. Two Disputations
concerning the Sacrament. Dr. Redman dies. The Archbishop and others appointed
to reform Ecclesiastical Laws. The method they observed. Scory, Coverdale,
Consecrated. CHAP. XXVII. The Articles of Religion. The Articles of Religion
framed and published. The Archbishop's diligence in them. Anno 1552.
The Archbishop retires to Ford. CHAP. XXVIII. Persons nominated for Irish
Bishoprics. Consulted with for fit Persons to fill the Irish Sees. Some
account of the four Divines nominated by him for the Archbishopric of Armagh.
Anno 1552.
Mr. Whitehead, Mr. Turner, Thomas Rosse, or Rose, Robert Wisdom. The Character
the Archbishop gave of the two former. Turner designed for Armagh: But declines
it. Goodacre made Archbishop of Armagh. Letters from the Council to Ireland,
recommending the Irish Bishops. CHAP. XXIX. The Archbishop charged with
Covetousness. Anno 1552.
A Rumor given out of the Archbishop's Covetousness and Wealth. Which Cecyl
sends him word of. The Archbishop's Answer for himself and the other Bishops.
This very slander raised upon him to K. Henry. K. Henry promised him Lands.
This Promise performed by K. Edward: His Purchases. The Archbishopric fleeced
by K. Henry. Lands past away to the Crown by Exchange. Lands made over to the
Archbishop. The Archbishop parted also with Knol and Otford to the King. What
moved him to make these Exchanges. His Cares and Fears for the King. CHAP. XXX.
His care for the Vacancies. Falls sick. Anno 1552.
His Care for filling the Vacancies of the Church. Labored under an Ague this
Autumn. The great Mortality of Agues about this time. That which most concerned
him in his Sickness. The Secretary sends the Archbishop the Copy of the
Emperor's Pacification. CHAP. XXXI. His Kindness for Germany. His Kindness for
Germany. Anno 1552.
His Correspondence with Germany; And with Herman Archbishop of Col^n. The
suitableness of both these Archbishops Dispositions. Their diligence in
Reforming. CHAP. XXXII. Troubles of Bishop Tonstal. The Troubles of Bishop
Tonstal. The Causes of this Bishop's Punishment. Anno 1552.
A Bill in Parliament to attaint Tonstal. The Care of the Diocese committed to
the Dean. CHAP. XXXIII. The New Common Prayer. The Archbishop in Kent. The New
Common Prayer began to be used. Ann^ 1552.
This Book put into French for the King's French Subjects. The Age still
vicious. A new Sect in Kent. The Archbishop's business in Kent. A Letter for
Installing Bishop Hoper. The Vicar of Beden. Sampson and Knox. The Council
favor Knox. John Tailor Consecrated. CHAP. XXXIV. A Catechism. The Archbishop
opposes the Exclusion of the Lady Mary. Great use made of the Archbishop at
Council. Anno 1553.
The Articles of Religion enjoined by the King's Authority. The Catechism for
Schools. A Catechism set forth by the Synod. The Archbishop opposes the New
Settlement of the Crown. Denies before the Council to subscribe to the
Exclusion of the Lady Mary. Sets his hand. The Archbishop ungratefully dealt
with. The Council subscribe and swear to the Limited Succession. CHAP. XXXV.
The King dies. The King dies. His Character. The Archbishop delights in this
Prince's Proficiency. K. Edward's Writings. The King's Memorial for Religion.
Ann^ 1553.
The Archbishop frequent at Council. His Presence in the Council in the year
1550. In the year 1551. In the year 1552. And 1553. John Harley Consecrated
Bishop.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Queen Mary soon recognized. The Archbishop slandered and imprisoned.
THE Archbishops and Counselors concern with the Lady Jane. Anno 1553.
They declare for Q. Mary: And write to Northumberland to lay down his Arms.
The Queen owned by the Ambassadors. The Archbishop misreported to have said
Mass. Mass at Canterbury. Which he makes a Public Declaration against. The
Declaration. Appears before the Commissioners at P^uls: And before the Council.
The Archbishop of York committed to the Tower; and his Goods seized, At
Battersea, At Cawood. Gardiner's passage of the two Archbishops. CHAP. II.
Protestant Bishops and Clergy cast into Prisons, and deprived. This Reign
begins with Rigor. The Protestant Bishops deprived. The hard usage of the
Inferior Clergy. Anno 1553.
Professors cast into the M^rshalsea. Winchester's Alms. P. Martyr writes of
this to Calvin. The state of the Church now. The Queen leaves all matters to
Winchester. The Queen Crowned. The Service still said. The Queen's Proclamation
of her Religion. Signs of a Change of Religion. CHAP. III. The Archbishop
advises Professors to fly. Anno 1553.
The Archbishop advises to flight. Cranmer will not fly. Whither the Professors
fly: And who. Duke of Northumberland put to Death. His Speech. Sir John Gates
his Speech. And Palmer's. The Duke l^bours to get his life. Whether he was
always a Papist. CHAP. IV. Peter Martyr departs. A Parliament. Ann^ 1553.
P. Martyr departs. Malice toward him. A Scandal of the Queen. A Parliament.
The Parliament repeal Q. Katherine's Divorce; And Cranmer taxed for it. CHAP.
V. The Archbishop attainted. Ann^ 1553.
The Archbishop attainted of Treason. The Dean of Canterbury acts in the
Vacancy. The Archbishop sues for Pardon of Treason. Obtains it. He desires to
open his mind to the Queen concerning Religion. CHAP. VI. A Convocation. Anno
1553.
A Convocation. How it opened. The Archbishop and three more crowded together in
the Tower. CHAP. VII. The Queen sends to Cardinal Pole. Ann^ 1553.
The Queen sends to Pole. The Contents of her Letters. Concerning the Supremacy.
Concerning the New Bishops. Pole's Advice to the Queen. Instructions to
Goldw^l. Disgusts his Stop. Sends to Rome about this his Stop: And to the
Emperor. His Judgment of two late Acts of Parliament. CHAP. VIII. The Dealings
with the Married Clergy. Anno 1553.
The Married Clergy deprived and divorced. Married Priests in London cited to
appear* Interrogatories for the Married Clergy. Turnor's Confession. Boner
deprives the Married Clergy in London without Order. Married Prebendaries in
Canterbury proceeded against. Edmund Cr^nmer deprived of all. The Injustice of
these Proceedings. Martin's Book against Priests Marriage. Wherein Winchester
had the greatest hand. Answered by Poyne^. The Confessions of the Married
Priests. Married Priests that did their Penance, hardly dealt with. CHAP. IX.
Evils in this Change of Parliament. Anno 1553.
A twofold Evil upon this Turn of Religion. The Dissimulation of the Priests. A
Parliament restore the Pope. A design to revive the Six Articles. CHAP. X.
Archbishop Cranmer disputes at Oxon. A Convocation appoint a Dispute with
Cranmer at Oxford. Ann^ 1554.
The Questions Sent to Cambridge. The Disputants of Oxford and Cambridge.
Cranmer brought before them. His Behavior. Ridley brought: And Latimer.
Cranmer brought to his Disputation. His Notaries. Cranmer's Demands. Cranmer
disputes again. The Papists undecent management of the Disputation. The
Protestants glad of this Disputation. Dr. Tailor to the three Fathers after
their Disputations. Ridley pens the Relation of his Disputation. The University
sends the Disputations up to the Convocation. Various Copies of these
Disputations. CHAP. XI. Cranmer condemned for an Heretic. Cranmer condemned
for Heresy. Cranmer writes to the Council. Disputation intended at Cambridge.
Their condition after Condemnation. Anno 1554.
Their Employment in Prison. Other Works of Ridley in Prison. CHAP. XII. A
Parliament. Pole reconciles the Realms. The Queen's Letters, directing the
Elections of Parliament men. Ann^ 1554.
Pole comes over. The Cardinal absolves Parliament and Convocation. The Clergy
again wait upon the Legate. A Commission granted by him against Heretics. His
Commissions to all the Bishops to reconcile their Diocesses. The Commission to
the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury. The Legate's Instructions to the Bishops.
Pole a severe Persecutor. CHAP. XIII. A Convocation. Articles framed therein. A
Convocation. Articles presented to the Upper-House. Anno 1554.
Cranmer's Book to be burnt. Men burnt to death without Law. CHAP. XIV. The
Condition of the Protestants in prison. Free-Willers. Popery fully established.
Protestants. The Pastors in Prison. Free-Willers. An^^ 1554.
Bradford's Concern with them. His Kindness to them. Bradford gains some of
them. Careless's pains with them. Philpot's counsel. Careless draws up a
Confession of Faith. Some few Arians. The Prisoners offer to justify K.
Edward's Proceedings. And again offer it. CHAP. XV. The Exiles, and their
Condition. The Exiles. The Lutherans refuse to give harbor to them. The
English at Wesel. The Lutherans Heat against Sacramentaries. At Zurick and
other places well received. Anno 1554.
Their Employments. Contentions at Frankford. Some Children of the Exiles
baptized by Lutherans. Pieces of Ridley's Writings conveyed to Frankford.
Exiles at Basil. Diverse of the Exiles, Writers. Scory, Old, Sampson, Turner,
Iuel, Becon, Humfrey, Traheron. Fox: His Acts and Monuments. Books by him
published in Exile. Translates Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament into Latin.
Lever to Fox, Bale, Knox. How the Exiles subsisted. CHAP. XVI. Many Recant.
Some go to Mass. Many Recant. The Persecution hot. Gospellers go to Mass. Ann^
1554.
Bradford labors to hinder it. Ann Hartipoll goes to Mass. The Lady Vane puts
certain Cases concerning the Mass. CHAP. XVII. A Bloody Time. The Queen's Great
Belly. A Convocation. Anno 1555.
Many burned. Instructions to the Justices. Orders sent in to Norfolk against
the Professors The effect thereof. The Earl of Sussex receives Information
against some* Popish Spies set every where. The Protestants frequently
ass^mble. Con^idently reported, that a Male Heir to the Crown was born. The
Queen's Great Belly. Like a Design. The Queen's Zeal. A Convocation. CHAP.
XVIII. Ridley and Latimer burnt. Anno 1555.
Some petition the Queen for Cranmer. He sees Ridley and Latimer going to their
Burning. Latimer's Character. Cranmer's Employment in Prison. Report of the
Queen's Death. CHAP. XIX. The last proceedings with Cranmer. Anno 1555.
Proceedings against Cranmer. Martin acts as the Queen's Proctor. Cranmer's
greatest Trouble at this time. Interrogatories put to him; with his Answers*
Witnesses sworn against him. Cited to Rome. The Pope's L^tters against him. The
Process against him at Rome. The Pope's Letters read. They degrade him. He
appeals. He is ill dealt with in his Process. The Reasons of his Appeal. He
presses his Appeal. CHAP. XX. Cranmer writes to the Queen. Ann^ 1555.
Writes two Letters to the Queen. The Contents of the first. The Contents of his
second Letter. The Bailiff of Oxford carries his Letters. Cardinal Pole
answers them. Some account of the Cardinal's Letter to Cranmer. Another
Letter of the Cardinal to Cranmer. CHAP. XXI. He Recants, Repents, and is
Burnt. Anno 1555.
He Recants. Notwithstanding his Burning is ordered. A Letter from Oxford
concerning Cranmer's Death. Cranmer brought to S. Mary's. Cole's Sermon. Turns
his Speech to Cranmer. After Sermon all pray for him. His Penitent Behavior.
Speaks to the Auditory. He Prays. His Words before his Death. Con^esseth his
Dissembling. His Reply to my Lord Williams. Goes to the place of his burning.
His Talk and Behavior at the Stake. He burns his Right Hand. Two Remarks
upon his Martyrdom. Who instigated the Queen to put him to death. No Monument
for him but his Martyrdom. His Heart unconsumed. The Bailiffs Expenses about
these three Martyrs. The Bailiffs not repaid. Humfrey to Archbishop Parker in
their behalf. CHAP. XXII. Cranmer 's Books and Writings. His Books and
Writings. His first Book. Other of his Writings. His Book of the Doctrine of
the Sacrament. Other Writings mentioned by Bishop Burnet. More of his Writings
still. Archbishop Parker was in pursuit of certain MSS. of Cranmer concealed.
What the Subject of his numerous Writings were. CHAP. XXIII. The Archbishop's
Regard to Learned Men. Paul Fagius, and Martin Bucer placed at Cambridge by his
means. Procures them Honorary Stipends from the King. Allowances to P. Martyr
and Ochin. Dr. Mowse Master of Trinity-Hall, favored by Cranmer. His
Inconstancy. And Ingratitude. Becomes Read^r of the Civil Law at Oxon. The
Archbishop a Patron to Learned Foreigners. To Erasmus, allowing him an Honorary
Pension. To Alexander Al^ss, a Scoth-man. By him Melancthon sends a Book to the
Archbishop. And to the King. Aless brought by Crumwel into the Convocation.
Where he asserts Two Sacraments only. Writes a Book to clear Protestants of the
Charge of Schism. Translated a Book of Bucer's about the English Ministry.
Received into Crumwel's Family. Aless Professor of Divinity at Leipzig. Four
others recommended by Melancthon to the Archbishop. Viz. Gualter. Driander.
Driander placed at Oxon. Eusebius Menius. Iustus Jonas. CHAP. XXIV. Melancthon
and the Archbishop great Friends. Diverse memorable Passages between Melancthon
and our Archbishop. Sends Melancthon certain Public Disputations in Oxford and
Cambridge. Melancthon's Reflections thereupon. Sends the Archbishop his
Enarration upon the Nicene Creed. The beginning of their Acquaintance. The
Archbishop propounds a weighty matter to Melancthon, for the Union of all
Protestant Churches. The diligence of the Archbishop in forwarding this Design.
M^lancthon's Judgment and Approbation thereof. His Caveat of avoiding ambiguous
expressions. Renews the same Caution in another Letter. Peter Martyr of this
judgment. What Melancthon thought of the Doctrine of Fate. CHAP. XXV. The
Archbishop corresponds with Calvin. The Archbishop breaks his purpose also to
Calvin. Calvin's Approbation thereof, and Commendation of the Archbishop.
Offers his Service. Excites the Archbishop to proceed. This excellent purpose
frustrated. Thinks of drawing up Articles of Religion for the English Church.
Which he communicates to Calvin. And Calvin's Reply and Exhortation. Blames him
for having not made more Progress in the Reformation. But not justly. The
Clergy preach against Sacrilege. The University-men declaim against it in the
Schools. And the Redress urged upon some at Court. Calvin sends Letters and
certain of his Books to the King. Well taken by the King and Council. What the
Archbishop told the Messenger hereupon. CHAP. XXVI. The Archbishop highly
valued Peter Martyr. P. Martyr and the Archbishop cordial Friends. The use the
Archbishop made of him. Martyr saw the Voluminous Writings, and Marginal Notes
of the Archbishop. Two Letters of Martyr from Oxford. An Instance of his love
to the Archbishop. CHAP. XXVII. The Archbishop's favor to John Sleidan the
Historian. The Archbishop's favor to John Sleidan. Procures him a Pension from
the King. The Payment neglected. Sleidan labors with the Archbishop to get the
Pension confirmed by Letters Patent. Sends his Commentaries to the King.
Designs to write the History of the Council of Trent: For the King's use. Sends
the King a Specimen thereof. In order to the proceeding with his Commentaries,
desires Cecyl to send him the whole Action between K. Henry VIII. and Pope
Clement VII. Bucer writes to Cecyl in behalf of Sleidan. John Leland. CHAP.
XXVIII. Archbishop Cranmer 's Relations and Chaplains. His Wives and Children.
His Wife survived him. Diverse Cranmers. The Archbishop's stock. Aslacton.
Whatton. The Rectories whereof the Archbishop purchased. His Chaplains. Rowland
Tailor. His Epitaph. A Sermon preached the day after his Burning Wherein the
Martyr is grossly slandered. John Ponett. Thomas Becon. Richard Harman. CHAP.
XXIX. Archbishop Cranmer 's Officers. Robert Watson the Archbishop's Steward.
His Secretary Ralph Morice. His Parentage. Well known to diverse eminent
Bishops. Presents Turner to Chartham. And stands by him in his Troubles for his
faithful Preaching. An Instance of the Archbishop's Kindness to this his
Secrerary. Morice his Suit to Q. Elizabeth for a Pension. His second Suit to
the Queen, to confirm certain Lands descended to him from his Father. He was
Register to the Commissioners in K. Edward's Visitation. Suffered under Q.
Mary. Morice supplied Fox with many material Notices in his Book. Morice a
Cordial Friend to Latimer. CHAP. XXX. A Prospect of the Archbishop's Qualities.
Morice's Declaration concerning the Archbishop. His Temperance of Nature. His
Carriage toward his Enemies. Severe in his behavior toward offending
Protestants. Stout in God's or the King's Cause. His great Abilities in
answering the King's Doubts. Cranmer studied three parts of the Day. Would
speak to the King, when none else durst. Lady Mary. Q. Katherine Howard. His
Hospitality. Falsely accused of Ill Housekeeping. CHAP. XXXI. Archbishop Cranmer
preserved the Revenues of his See. The preserving the Bishops Revenues owing to
the Archbishop. The Archbishop vindicated about his Leases. By long Leases he
saved the Revenues. Justified from diminishing the Rents of the Sea. O^ford and
Knol. Curleswood. Chislet Park. Pasture and Meadow. Woods. Corn. The best Master
toward his Servants. An Infamy that he was an Hostler. CHAP. XXXII. Some
Observations upon Archbishop Cranmer. Observations upon the Archbishop. His
Learning very profound. His Library. An excellent Bishop. His Care of his own
Diocese. At the great Towns he preached often. Affected not his high Styles.
His diligence in reforming Religion. Puts K. Henry upon a purpose of reforming
many things. The King again purposes a Reformation. Hs Influence upon K.
Edward. CHAP. XXXIII. Archbishop Cranmer procures the use of the Scriptures. A
great Scripturist. Procures the publishing the English Bible. The Bishops
oppose it. The first Edition of the Bible. The Preface to the Bible made by the
Archbishop. The Contents thereof. The Frontispiece of Cranmer's Edition of the
Bible. CHAP. XXXIV. Archbishop Cranmer compassionate toward Sufferers for
Religion. His Affection and Compassion toward Professors of the Gospel.
Particularly for Sir John Cheke a Prisoner; And the Lord Russel. A Patron to
such as preached the Gospel in K. Henry's days. His Succor of Afflicted
Strangers in K. Edward's days. England harborous of Strangers. The Archbishop's
favor to Foreigners. Unjustly charged with Covetousness. His Words to Cecyl
upon this Charge. Reduced as he feared to stark Beggary before his Death. CHAP.
XXXV. Some account of Archbishop Cranmer'^ Housekeeping. Some Account of his
Housekeeping. Retrenches the Clergy's superfluous Housekeeping. His Pious
Design therein. Others charged him with Prodigality. CHAP. XXXVI. Archbishop
Cranmer Humble. Peaceable. Bold in a good Cause. Humble and Condescending.
Peaceable and Mild. His Speech upon the News of Wars abroad. Unacquainted with
the Arts of Court-Flattery. Would never crouch to Northumberland. He and Ridley
fall under that Duke's displeasure. Bold and undaunted in God's Cause. Falsely
charged with Cowardice, and too much Flexibility. Of ardent Affections. Cranm^r
compared with Cardinal Wolsey. CHAP. XXXVII. Osiander 's and Peter Martyr 's
Character of the Archbishop. Osiander's Character of the Archbishop. And Peter
Martyr's. Bale's Character of the Archbishop. The difficult times wherein
Cranmer lived. CHAP. XXXVIII. The Archbishop vindicated from Slanders of
Papists. A lying Character of this Archbishop by a late French Author. Allen's
Calumny of the Archbishop. Wiped off. Cleared from his Charge of Apostasy.
Saunders Falsehoods of the Archbishop. Parsons his Complements to the
Archbishop. Fox in behalf of Cranmer. The Conclusion.
Errata and Emendations belonging to the Memorials.
Where the Reader finds this mark * after the Figure denoting the Line, he is
to tell from the bottom.

PAge 5. Line 21. for At read All. P. 29. l. 11. r. Imprisoned. P. 30, 31. in
the Margent, in three places, r. 1534.

P. 36. l. 8. after Appendix, Note, That the Dissolution of S. Swithins in
Winchester (tho laid here under the year 1535.) happened not that year, but
about five years after, viz. 1540. But the occasion of the Discourse there,
which was of the vast Wealth obtained to the King by the Fall of Religious
Houses, made the Author produce it in this place, as an Instance thereof. Ibid.
l. 20. * r. Diocesan.

P. 37. Among the Diocesan Bishops Consecrated under the year 1535* place Hugh
Latymer Consecrated Bishop of Worcester, and John Hildesly, or Hilsey, a Friar,
of the Order of Preachers, first of Bristow, and afterward of Oxford,
Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, next after John Fisher, Executed for Treason.
These two I had omitted in their Places, not meeting with them in Cranmer's
Register. The former I suppose was consecrated with Shaxton in April, as the
latter might be with Fox and Barlow in September, his Temporalties having been
restored to him in the beginning of October. This Hilsey was a great Assistant
to Archbishop Cranmer, and a learned man. He wrote a Book of Prayers, with
Epistles and Gospels (in English, I suppose) which he dedicated to the Lord
Crumwel; by whose command it was published.

P. 57. l. 17. After Him add, But he could not see his Desire effected by these
men, till it was happily done by other hands. P. 75. l. 7. r. Superstitions. P.
58. l. 6. * f. Three or four, r. Four or five. P. 59. l. 14. del. Some years
after came forth, etc to the end of the Paragraph.

P. 77. l. 4. * After Winton, Whereas I had said, That the Bishop of Winchester
was not in a Commission there specified, Hist. Reform. Vol. I. p. 274.
it appears by Crumwel's Speech, set down by the Bishop of Sarum, that that
Bishop was then indeed a Commissioner. Here my MS. deceived me. But be it noted
what the L. Paget testified before the Commissioners at that Bishop's Trial in
1549; namely, That Acts and Mon. first Edit. p. 815
because he was so wilful in his opinion, and addicted to the Popish part, the
King left him out of the Commission for Compiling the last Book of Religion.
And what that Book was, I know not, unless the Necessary Erudition.

P. 78. l. 13. * after Hands, dele the Period. P. 85. l. 21. * Remove the Close
of the Parenthesis after That. P. 94. l. 8. * r. Translation. P. 95. l. 13.
after Bulkley insert was Consecrated. P. 97. l. 4. * r. Abused. P. 104. l. 17.
* r. one. P. 109. l. 16. r. Archbishop's Endeavor. P. 126. l. 13. * After
Arms, Whereas it was conjectured there, that the King changed Archbishop
Cranmer's Coat of Arms about 1544, it must have been several years before: For
his New Coat of the Pelicans may be seen in the Frontispiece of the great
English Bible, printed 1540. And how long before that time, I know not. P. 135.
l. 16. * r. Church living. P. 146. l. 7. * f. Counties r. Episcopal Sees. P.
149. l. 25, 26. These words, When the old Order was broken, and a New brought
in by Homilies, to be within a Parenthesis. Ibid. l. 5. * after and, add said.
P. 151. l. 17. dele and. Ibid. after Charge, add was. P. 153. l. 4. r.
Protectors. P. 154. l. 17. after them, instead of a Period make a Colon. P.
186. l. 16. f. them r. it. P. 196. l. 15. * r. Bucer. P. 197. l. 4. in the
Marg. r. Vit. P. 219. l. 8, 9, 10, 11. dele the Comma's on the sides. P. 220 l.
1. r. Augmentations. P. 226. l. 4. r. Wreaked. P. 234. l. 25. r. Strangers. P.
235. l. 7. r. Embark. P. 237. l. 12. of the Marg. r. Extent. P. 238. l. 14. *
dele the Comma's before Leave. P. 239. l. 4. r. Strasburgh. P. 243. l. 14. r.
Glastenbury. P. 266. l. 22. r. Superstitious. P. 268. l. 5. r. Counsil. P. 270.
l. 12. * add in the Margent, The Sweating Sickness. P. 271. l. 12. r. two. P.
286. l. 12. f. were r. was. P. 306. l. 23. r. other. Ibid. l. ^5. dele the
Comma. P. 307. l. 16. * r. Hand. P. 311. l. 14. r. one. P. 314. l. 14. * r.
Joh. Ibid. l. ult. after Humfrey make a Comma. P. 315. l. 24. ^ r. convince. P.
349. l. 19. after all add and. P. 351. l. 11. * r. Conversation. P. 352. l. 5.
* after it add in. P. 354. l. 25. r. Corpus. P. 378. l. ult. r. but. P. 395. l.
10. f. Contrived r. Composed. P. 396. l. 21. del. With a Preface. P. 394, 395,
396, 397, 398, 399, 400. on the Top of each Margent, del. An. 1555. P. 411. l.
10. r. was P. 421. l. 21. * after him add be. P. 422. l. 1^. f. Flesh r. Fish.
P. 424. l. 4. * r. one. Ibid. l. 3. * f. John r. Thomas. P. 425. l. 2. after
two add to. P. 427. l. 20. after appointed add a. P. 437. l. 9. * f. Historiae
r. Historia. P. 444* l. 18. * f. 1538, or 1539. r. 1537, or 1538. P. 448. l. 1.
f. that r. the. Ibid. l. 9. * r. Sanctuary. P. 461. l. 5. f. infringing r.
incurring. Ibid. l. 28. after about add with. P. 464. l. 22. f. is r. was.

Errata in the Appendix.
PAge 7. in the Margent, for Sir W. S. read Sir W H. P. 8. l. 10. * r. Popes.
P. 45. l. 9. * r. Controversiam. P. 46. l. 13. * r. Oecolampadio. Ibid. l. 3. *
r. nec. P. 55. l. 9. dele the Colon. P. 56. l. 13. r. Concedant. Ibid. r.
concessit. P. 116. l. 18. after Parcyalyte add as. P. 131. l. 18. r.
Circumcision. And so P. 132. l. 21. and l. 29. and l. 31. P. 143. l. 15. * r.
praeponenda. P. 180. l. 6. * r. Decanatu. P. 183. l. 18. after Verbo add a
Comma; and after Consentientibus dele the Comma. l. 19. after Authoritatibus
add a Comma. P. 188. l. 18. after Liberantes instead of the Period make a
Semicolon. Ibid. l. 20. after Legati dele the Period. P. 190. l. 22. before dam
add quibus. Ibid. l. 6. * Draw the Comma after Eos, before it. P. 191. l. 12.
r. Procedetur. P. 193. l. 10. * r. deterrimo carcere. P. 194. l. 13. * f. ita
r. ira. P. 195. l 17. r. Bernher. P. 197. l. 6. * f. quin r. quum. P. 199. l.
5. Cognoscentiae perhaps for Ignoscentiae. Ibid. l. 11. * r. imbuerat. P. 212.
l. 3. r. your. P. 222. l. 14. Remove the Comma after Abripere, before it. P.
224. l. 20. * r. punitus. P. 232. l. 20. r. habes. P. 237. l. 16. * r.
angustijs. P. 238. l. 17. f. 1552. r. 1553. P. 251. l. 9. r. Appointment.

MEMORIALS OF Archbishop CRANMER. BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. Cranmer's Birth, Education and Rise.
THE Name of this most Reverend Prelate, A worthy Work to revive his Memory.
deserves to stand upon Eternal Record; having been the first Protestant
Archbishop of this Kingdom, and the greatest Instrument, under God, of the
happy Reformation of this Church of England* In whose Piety, Learning, Wisdom,
Conduct and Blood, the Foundation of it was laid. And therefore it will be no
unworthy Work to revive his Memory now, though after an hundred and thirty
Years and upwards. I pretend not to write a complete Narrative of his Life and
Death, that being scarce possible at such a distance of Time, and in the want
of full Intelligence and Information of the various Matters that passed through
his Hands, and the Events that befell him. All that I attempt by this present
Undertaking, is, to retrieve and bring to light as many Historical Passages as
I can, concerning this Holy Prelate; by a careful and long search, not only
into printed Books of History, but the best Archives, and many most precious
and inestimable Manuscripts that have fallen into my hands.

I shall pass over, in a few words, his earlier Days, His Family.
because I have so much to say of him in his riper Years. Aslacton, a Town in
the County of Nottingham, was the Place of his Birth; and the second Day of
July, in the Year 1489, was the Day of it. Anno 1489.
He was the Son of Thomas Cranmer Esquire a Gentleman of a right ancient Family;
whose Ancestor came in with the Conqueror: And for a long Series of Time the
Stock continued in good Wealth and Quality* as it did in France; for there were
extant, of his Name and Family there, in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. One
whereof came then into England, in company with the French Ambassador: To whom,
for Relation-sake, our Bishop gave a noble Entertainment*

Account of his younger Years.
Our Youth was put to learn his Grammar of a rude Parish-Clerk in that barbarous
Age. Under whom he learned little, and endured much, from the harsh and cursed
Disposition of his Schoolmaster. Though his Father were minded to have his Son
educated in Learning, yet he would not he should be ignorant of Civil and
Gentleman-like Exercises. Life of Cranm. in the MSS. C.C.C.C.
Insomuch that he used himself to Shoot. And many times his Father permitted
him to Hunt and Hauk, and to ride rough Horses: So that when he was Bishop, he
feared not to ride the roughest Horses that came into his Stables; which he
would do very comely. As otherwise at all times there was not any in his House
that would become an Horse better. And after his Studies, when it was time for
Recreation, he would both Hauk and Hunt, the Game being prepared for him. And
sometimes he would shoot in the Long-Bow, and many times kill the Deer with his
Cross-Bow, though his Sight was not perfect; for he was pore-blind.

Sent to Cambridg, An. 1503.
But to return to his younger Days. He lost his Father early; but his Mother, at
the Age of fourteen Years, Anno 1503, sent him to study at Cambridg. Where he
was nursled in the grossest kind of Sophistry, Life of Cranm. inter Foxii MSS.
Logic, Philosophy Moral and Natural: Not in the Text of the old Philosophers,
but chiefly in the dark Riddles of Duns, and other subtle Questionists. And in
these he lost his Time, till he came to two and twenty Years of Age. Anno 1511.
After that, he gave himself to the reading of Faber, Erasmus, good Latin
Authors, four or five Years together, Anno 1516.
unto the Time that Luther began to write. And then considering what great
Controversy was in Matters of Religion, not only in Trifles, but in the
chiefest Articles of our Salvation, he bent himself to try out the Truth herein.

Sets himself to study the Scripture.
And forasmuch as he perceived he could not judge indifferently in such weighty
Matters, without the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; therefore before he was
infected with any Man's Opinions or Errors, Anno 1519.
he applied his whole Study three Years therein. After this, he gave his Mind
to good Writers, both New and Old: not rashly running over them; for he was a
slow Reader, but a diligent Marker of whatsoever he read, seldom reading
without Pen in Hand. And whatsoever made either for the one Part, or the other,
of things in Controversy, he wrote it out, if it were short, or at least noted
the Author, and the Place, that he might find it, and write it out at leisure:
which was a great help to him in debating of Matters ever after.

Is made Doctor of Divinity, An. 1523.
This kind of Study he used, till he was made Doctor of Divinity: which was
about the Thirty-fourth Year of his Age, and about the Year 1523.

But before this, being Master of Arts, and Fellow of Jesus College, Marries.
he married a Gentleman's Daughter. And then leaving the College, he read the
Common Lecture in Buckingham College; before that called Monks College, because
Monks studied there; but now Magdalen College. But in a Year after, his Wife
travailing with Child, both she and the Child died. And being now single again,
immediately the Master and Fellows of his old College chose him in Fellow
again: where he remained.

During his Residence here, diverse of the ripest and solidest sort of Scholars
were sought out of this University of Cambridg, to be transplanted into
Cardinal Wolsey's new College in Oxon, Refuses to go to Wolsey's College, Oxon.
to be Fellows there. Our Cranmer was nominated for one by Dr. Capon, to whom
that Matter was, as it seems, entrusted by the Cardinal. And tho the Salary was
much more considerable there, and the way to Preferment more ready, by the
Favor of the Cardinal, to such as were his own Scholars; yet he refused to go,
choosing rather to abide among his old Fellow-Collegians, and more closely to
follow his Studies and Contemplations here: though he were not without danger
for his incompliance with this Invitation, giving them that were concerned
great Offense hereat. But of those that went from Cambridg at this time, who
were all Men picked out for their Parts and Learning, these were the chief,
Clark; Friar, afterward Doctor of Physic. Sumner; Harman, afterward Fellow
of Eaton. Betts, afterward Chaplain to Queen Ann. Cox, afterward
Schoolmaster to King E^ward. Frith, afterward a Martyr. Baily, Godman; Drum,
afterward one of the six Preachers at Canterbury. Lawney, afterward Chaplain
to the Duke of Norfolk. All these were cast into Prison for suspicion of
Heresy; and diverse through the hardship thereof died. So that well it was for
Cranmer that he went not.

Soon after he took his Degree of Doctor of Divinity, He is made one of the
University Examiners.
and became the Reader of the Divinity-Lecture in his own College. And out of
the value the University had of his Learning, he was appointed one of the
Examiners of such as commenced Batchelors and Doctors in Divinity. According to
whose Approbations, the University allowed them to proceed. In which Place he
did much Good; for he used to examine these Candidates out of the Scriptures.
And by no means would let them pass, if he found they were unskilful in it, and
unacquainted with the History of the Bible. So were the Friars especially,
whose Study lay only in School-Authors. Whom therefore he sometimes turned back
as insufficient, advising them to study the Scriptures for some Years longer,
before they came for their Degrees, it being a shame for a Professor in
Divinity to be unskilled in the Book, wherein the Knowledge of God, and the
Grounds of Divinity lay. Whereby he made himself from the beginning hated by
the Friars. Yet some of the more ingenuous sort of them afterward rendered him
great and public Thanks for refusing them; whereby, being put upon the Study
of God's Word, they attained to more sound Knowledge in Religion. One of these
was Dr. Barat, a White Friar, who lived afterward in Norwich.

Not long after this, The King's great Cause first proposed to the Universities.
King Henry being persuaded that the Marriage between him and Q. Katharine,
Daughter to K. Ferdinand of Spain, was unlawful and naught, by Dr. Longland
Bishop of Lincoln, his Confessor, and other of his Clergy; he sent to six of
the best learned Men of Cambridg, and as many of Oxford, to debate this
Question, Whether it were lawful for one Brother to marry his Brother's Wife,
being known of his Brother? Of the which Cambridg Doctors, Cranmer was
appointed for one, such was his Fame then in that University for Learning. But
because he was not then at Cambridg, another was chosen in his stead. These
Learned Men agreed fully, with one Consent, that it was lawful, with the Pope's
Dispensation, so to do. But if Cranmer had been there, he would have been of
another Mind, as we shall see in the Sequel.

The Occasion of his Rise.
This great Matrimonial Cause, gave the first step to Dr. Cranmer's Preferment:
For when Fox and Gardener, the one the King's Almoner, and the other his
Secretary, lighting by chance in Dr. Cranmer's Company, at one Mr. Cressies
House, situate in Waltham-Abbey Parish in Essex, had on design fallen upon
Discourse of that Matter, purposely to learn his Judgment therein, knowing him
an eminent noted Reader of Divinity in Cambridg: He gave his own Sense of the
Cause, His Opinion of the King's Cause.

Life of Cranmer, in theMSS. C.C.C.C.


in words to this effect: I have nothing at all studied, said he, for the
Verity of this Cause; nor am beaten therein, as you have been. Howbeit, I do
think that you go not the next way to work, to bring the Matter unto a perfect
Conclusion and End, especially for the satisfaction of the troubled Conscience
of the King's Highness. For in observing the common Process, and frustratory
Delays of these your Courts, the Matter will linger long enough; and
peradventure in the end come to small effect. And this is most certain, said
he, there is but one Truth in it. Which no Men ought, or better can discuss
than the Divines. Whose Sentence may be soon known, and brought so to pass with
little Industry and Charges, that the King's Conscience may thereby be quieted
and pacified. Which we all ought to consider, and regard in this Question or
Doubt; and then his Highness in Conscience quieted, may determine himself that
which shall seem Good before God. And let these tumultuary Processes give place
unto a certain Truth.

The King sends for him.
His Opinion, thus unwillingly drawn from him, was so much liked of by them to
whom he spoke it, that they thought it worth their acquainting the King with
it. Which they did within two days after at Greenwich. Whereupon the King
commanded he should be sent for to the Court. Which was done, and he brought
into the King's Presence. Who, having heard him discourse upon the Marriage,
and well observing the Gravity and Modesty, as well as Learning of the Man,
resolved to cherish and make much of him. This was about August 1529, Anno 1529.
the King having commanded him to digest in Writing, what he could say upon the
foresaid Argument; retained him, and committed him unto the Family and Care of
the Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, named Sir Thomas Bolen, dwelling then at
Durham-House: Esteeming him a fit Person for Cranmer to reside with, who had
himself been employed in Embassies to Rome and Germany about the same Matter;
and so able to instruct our Divine in particular Passages relating thereunto:
And likewise would be sure to afford him all the Security, and Favor, and Aid
possible, from the Prospect, that if the King's former Marriage could be proved
unlawful, and thereby null and void, his own Family would be in a fair
probability to be highly advanced, by the King's matching with his Daughter the
Lady Ann Bolen.

Sutably placed with the Earl of Ormond.
Nor was Cranmer unsutably placed here, in regard of the Disposition of his
Noble Host, being accounted one of the learnedest Noblemen in the Land, and
endued with a Mind inclined to Philosophy. Erasmus, who had good Intelligence
in England, and knew this Earl himself, gives this Account of him to Damianus a
Goes: Est enim Vir, ut uno ore praedicant omnes, unus prope inter Nobiles
eruditus, Epist. 19. li. 27.
animoque plane Philosophico. He was also much addicted to the Study and Love
of the Holy Scriptures, as the same Erasmus in an Epistle to him mentions,
and commends him for. Impensius gratulor tuae soelicitati, quod homini
potenti, Lalco, and Aulico, perspiciam etiam sacra^ Literas ^sse cordi, teque
nobili^ illius Margaretae desiderio ten^ri. Epist. 34. lib. 29.
I do the more congratulate your Happiness, when I observe the Sacred
Scriptures to be so dear to a Man, as you are, of Power, one of the Laity, and
a Courtier; and that you have such a desire to tha^ Pearl of Price. He was also
a Patron of Learning and Learned Men. And if there were nothing else to testify
this, it would be enough to say, that he was well-affected to the Great
Erasmus, and a true valuer of his Studies. The World is beholden to this Noble
Peer, for some of the Labors that proceeded from the Pen of that most Learned
Man. For upon his desire Erasmus wrote three Tracts: One was, Enarrations upon
the Twenty second Psalm, entitled, Dominus regit me; but more truly the Twenty
third. Another was an Explication of the Apostles Creed. And the third,
Directions how to prepare for Death. And from these Subjects, which this
Nobleman chose to desire Erasmus his Thoughts of, we may conclude also his
Pious and Religious Mind. At which his virtuous Accomplishments, as they
rendered his House a suitable Harbor for the Learned and Pious Cranmer, so they
were not a little increased by his Converse and Familiarity there.

For while Cranmer abode here, Friendshipand Correspondence between the Earl
and Cranmer.
a great Friendship was contracted between him and that Noble Family;
especially the chief Members of it, the Countess, and the Lady Ann, and the
Earl himself; who often held serious Conferences with him about the great
Matter. And in the Earl's absence from Home, Letters passed between them;
Cranmer writing to him of the Affairs of the Court, and of the Welfare of his
Family, as well as of other more weighty Things. In one Letter, dated from
Hampton Court, in the Month of June, (which by Circumstance must be in the Year
1530.) he writ to him; Anno 1530.
That the King's Grace, my Lady his Wife, my Lady Ann his Daughter, were in
good Health: And that the King, and my Lady Ann, rode the Day before to Windsor
from Hampton Court, and that Night they were looked for again there; praying
God to be their Guide.

And I cannot look upon this Pious and Learned Man's placing here in this
Family, A Providence in his being placed here.
but as guided by a peculiar Hand of Divine Providence. Whereby this House
became better acquainted with the Knowledge of the Gospel; and had the Seeds of
true Religion scattered in the Hearts of those Noble Persons that were related
to it: Particularly of Her, who was afterward to be advanced to that high and
public Station, to be Consort to the King. And that she became a Favourer, and
as much as she durst, a Promoter of the purer Religion, must, I think, in a
great measure be owing thereunto.

When Cranmer had accomplished the King's Request, Cranmer Disputes at Cambridg.
and finished his Book, he himself, the Secretary, and the Almoner, and other
Learned Men, had in Commission to dispute the Cause in Question, in both the
Universities. Which being first attempted at Cambridg, Dr. Cranmer, MS. Life of
Cranmer.
by his Authority, Learning and Persuasion, brought over diverse Learned Men in
one Day, of the contrary Part and Opinion, to be on his Part. For being now,
after some absence, returned to Cambridg, diverse of the University, and some of
those Doctors that before had given in their Judgments to the King for the
Validity of the Pope's Dispensation, repaired to him, to know his Opinion: And,
after long Reasoning, he changed the Minds of Five of the Six. Then almost in
every Disputation, both in Private Houses, and in the Common Schools, this was
one Question, Whether the Pope might dispense with the Brother to marry the
Brother's Wife, after Carnal Knowledge? And it was of many openly defended, that
he might not. The Secretary, when he came Home, acquainted the King with what
they had done, and how Dr. Cranmer had changed the Minds of Five of the said
Learned Men of Cambridg, and of many others beside. Afterward this University,
as well as the other, determined the King's Cause against the Pope's
Dispensation.

Grows dear to the King and his Court.
From an Academic, our Doctor being now become a Courtier, he so prudently
demeaned himself, that he was not only dear to the Earl of Wiltshire's Family,
but grew much favored by the Nobility in general; Li^e of Henr. 8. p. 375.
as the Lord Herbert collects from the Historians of those Times; and
especially by the King himself. He was very much about him, the King holding
frequent Communication with him, and seemed unwilling to have him absent. Which
may appear from hence; that when Cranmer was minded for some reason to resort
to the Earl of Wiltshire, who was then from Hampton Court, and as it seems at
London, upon some Occasions of his own, he doubted, whether the King would let
him go. And so he writ to him, that he would come the next Day to him, If the
King's Grace let him not.

CHAP. II. Pole's Book about the King's Matrimony. An. 1530.

Pole's Book against the King's Dissolving his Marriage.
ABout this time, a Book of Reginald Pole, afterward Cardinal, earnestly
persuading the King to continue his Marriage with his Queen, fell into Dr.
Cranmer's Hands. I do not find mention of this Book in any Historian, that has
come to my Hands. No, not in his Life published by Bacatellus, Bishop of
Ragusa, though he has there given us a Catalogue of his Books. But in
likelihood the Reason was, because this was some private Discourse, or Letter,
chiefly intended for the King's own Use; as appears from some words of Cranmer
concerning it, Viz. That it was writ with that Eloquence, that if it were set
forth, and known to the common People, [an evidence it was a more private
Writing] it were not possible to persuade them to the contrary. It was penned
about the Year 1530, as may be collected from another Passage in the said
Writing, wherein he mentions the King's living in Wedlock with Queen
Katherine twenty Years, the expiration of which fell in about that Time. What
induced Pole to write on this Subject, is to me uncertain; for he avoided, as
much as could be, to meddle in this Affair, out of Fear of the King's
Displeasure, which was the Reason of his departing Abroad. Probably it was at
the King's Command; like as some Years after he commanded him to write his
Judgment of the Title of Supreme Head, which he had lately assumed. Which
occasioned Pole's four Books of Ecclesiastical Unity. For some about the King
had told him, it would have a great Influence upon the People, especially the
Nobility, if he could bring Pole over to allow, and approve of his Marriage.
Who was a Person, tho then but Young, yet highly valued in the Nation for his
Piety, and Learning, and great Descent.

The Book was soon delivered, whether by the Earl of Wiltshire, Cranmer
per^^ses it.
or the King himself, unto the Examination and Consideration of Cranmer, now
the great Court-Divine. Who, after he had greedily perused it, sent the
Contents of it, in a Letter to his Friend and Patron the Earl, being then
absent from Court. The Book, though the Argument of it chiefly depended upon
Divinity, proceeded more on Political Principles than Divine. Take the
following account of it, as Cranmer gave it in his said Letter.

First, His account of it.
Pole treated of the Danger of Diversity of Titles to the Crown. Which might
follow, if the present Marriage with Queen Katherine were rejected, (in which
there was an Heir) and another consummated. As appeared by the Titles and
Pretensions of the two Houses of Lancaster and York. And that the King ought to
provide against the Miseries that might be brought upon his Realm by the
People, if he should reject his Daughter, whom they took for his Lawful Heir,
and should persuade them to take another. Then he urged the Danger of incurring
the Emperor's Displeasure, the Queen being his Aunt, and the Princess his
Cousin. Then he proceeded to consider the Reasons that moved the King to his
present Resolutions: Namely, That God's Law forbad marrying the Brother's Wife.
And that the People, however averse at first, (besides that it belong^d not to
them to judge of such Matters) would be content in the King's Doings, when they
should know, how the ancient Doctors of the Church, and so many great
Universities were on the King's Side. And, that however the Emperor might fall
out with the King for this Matter, yet God would never fail those, that stood
on his part, and refused to transgress his Commandments: and that England might
depend on the French King's Aid, by virtue of the League, which he had entered
into with the King, and the old Grudg, which he bore toward the Emperor.
Afterward Pole goes on to review these Reasons. And first, his Judgment was,
that Scripture might be brought to justify this Marriage, and that there was as
good ground of Scripture for that, as for the part which the King then took,
namely, the unlawfulness of it. That if indeed he thought the King's Part was
just, and that his Marriage were undoubtedly against God's Pleasure, then he
could not deny, but that it should be well done for the King to refuse it, and
take another Wife. Yet he confessed, that for his own part, he could not find
in his Heart to have any Hand, or be any furtherer or abetter in it:
Acknowledging however, that he had no good Reason for it, but only out of
Affection and Duty to the King's Person. Because he would not disannul the
Princess his Daughter's Title, nor accuse the most part of the King's Life, as
the Books written on the King's part did: As though he had lived in a
Matrimony, Shameful, Abominable, Bestial, and against Nature. This seemed an
high Complement of Pole's indeed, that he would rather choose to let the King
live and die in an habitual Breach of God's Law, than be guilty of something
that might argue a want of civil Affection and Duty in him.

And as concerning the People, his Judgment was, That neither by Learning, nor
Preaching, would they ever be brought into an ill Conceit of the King's former
Marriage, and to think so dishonourably of their King, as to live so many Years
in Matrimony so abominable. But as they had begun to hate Priests, this would
make them much more to do so: nay, and the very Name of Learning too. As for
the Authority of the Universities, they were many times led by Affection, which
was well known. And he wished they had never erred in their Determinations. He
showed, that they were brought to the King's Part with great difficulty.
Moreover, against the Universities Authority, he set the Authority of the
King's Father, and his Council, the Queen's Father, and his Council, and the
Pope and his.

Then he proceeded to Political Considerations, of the Pope, and Emperor, and
the French King. That the Pope was a great Adversary of the King's purpose, he
had showed diverse tokens already; and that not without cause. Because if he
should consent, he should do against his Predecessors, and restrain his own
Power, which he would rather gladly enlarge, and likewise raise Seditions in
many Realms, as in Portugal. Of whose King the Emperor married one Sister, and
the Duke of Savoy the other. Then he went on extolling the Emperor's Power, and
lessening that of the French King, as to his aiding of us. Mentioning the
Mischief the Emperor might do England, by forbidding only our trading into
Flanders and Spain. That the French never used to keep their Leagues with us,
but for their own Ends; and that we could never find in our Hearts to trust
them. And that the two Nations never loved one another. And that if the French
should but suspect, that this new Matrimony (of the King with the Lady Ann
Bolen now purposed) should not continue, we must not expect Succor of them, but
upon intolerable Conditions. And then lastly, he comes to deliberate for the
saving the King's Honor. Which as it was impossible to do, if he proceeded one
step further, for he had already, he said, gone to the very Brink; so he began
to propound certain means for the rescue of it. Thus far is Cranmer's Relation
of the Book.

But here he breaks off, the Messenger that tarried for the Letter being in
haste: promising the next Day to come to the Earl, to whom he wrote all this,
and relate the rest to him by Word of Mouth. These Means in short were (as I
collect from some other Passages of this Letter) to refer the Matter wholly to
the Pope, and to reject the thoughts of matching with the Lady Ann. The which
was now much talked of; For the King and She were very great, and about this
very time they both rode together from Hampton Court to Windsor* though she
were yet no more then the Lady Ann, without any other Title.

The Censure which our Divine gave of this Book, and the Writer, was this,
(wherein his Modesty and Candor, as well as Judgment appeared) That Pole had
showed himself both Witty and Eloquent: Cranmer's Censure thereof.
And that for his Wisdom, he might have been of Counsel to the King: and such
his Rhetoric, that if his Book should have been set forth, and known to the
common People, he believed it were not possible to persuade them to the
contrary. Concerning that which he chiefly drove at, namely, That the King
should commit his great Matter to the Pope's Judgment, Cranmer gave his
Opinion, That he seemed therein to lack much Judgment: And that though he
pressed it with such goodly Eloquence, both of Words and Sentence, that he were
likely to persuade many; yet him, he said, he persuaded in that Point nothing
at all. No, Cranmer had too well studied the Point, to leave such a Case of
Conscience to the Pope's Decision. But in many other things in this Discourse
of Pole, he professed, he was much satisfied. I have placed this whole Letter
in the Appendix at the end of these Memorials, Number. 1.
as I shall do many other Letters and Papers of value, partly for the
Satisfaction of more curious Readers, that love to see Originals, and partly
for the preservation of many choice Monuments, relating to this Man, and these
Times, and for the transferring them to posterity.

CHAP. III. Cranmer's Embassies.
IN the Year 1530, Dr. Cranmer was sent by the King into France, Italy, and
Germany, with the Earl of Wiltshire, He is employed in Ambassies,
Chief Ambassador, Dr. Lee Elect Archbishop of York, Dr. Stokesly Elect of
London, Divines; Trigonel, Karn, and Benet, Doctors of the Law, to dispute
these Matrimonial matters of his Majesty at Paris, Rome, and other places:
Carrying the Book he had made upon that Subject with him. From France they took
their Journey to the Pope; To the Pope.
where Cranmer's Book was delivered to him, and he ready to justify it, and to
offer a Dispute against the Marriage openly, upon these two Points, which his
Book chiefly consisted of, viz. Offers him a Dispute in Favor of the King's
Cause.


I. That no Man, Iure Divino, could, or ought to marry his Brother's Wife.

II. That the Bishop of Rome by no means ought to dispense to the contrary.

But after sundry Promises and Appointments made, there was no Man found to
oppose him, and publicly to dispute these Matters with him. Yet in more
private Argumentations with them that were about the Pope, he so forced them,
that at last they openly granted, even in the Pope's chief Court of the Rota,
that the said Marriage was against God's Law. But as for the Pope's Power of
Dispensing with the Laws of God, it was too advantageous a Tenet to be parted
with. But Dr. Cranmer boldly and honestly denied it utterly before them all.

The King's Ambassadors from the Pope repaired to the Emperor Charles V.
Cranmer only being left behind at Rome, to make good his Challenge, and withal,
more privately to get the Judgments and Subscriptions of the Learned Men there
in the King's Case: which was one of his Businesses also in Germany after. What
he did in this latter Affair, he signified by a Letter to Crook, another of the
King's Agents for that purpose in Italy: Hist. Refor. P. 1. p. 89.
Namely, That his Success there at Rome was but little: and that they dared not
to attempt to know any Man's Mind, because of the Pope, who had said, that
Friars should not discuss his Power. And added, That he looked for little
Favor in that Court, but to have the Pope and all his Cardinals declare
against them.

To the Emperor.
Here at Rome Cranmer abode for some Months. But in all the Journey he behaved
himself so learnedly, soberly and wittily, that the Earl of Wilts gave him such
Commendations to the King by his Letters, Life of Cran. inter Foxii, MSS.
that the rest coming home, he sent him a Commission with Instructions to be
his sole Ambassador to the Emperor in his said great Cause. Which Commissional
Letters of the King to him bare date January 24. 1531. An. 1531.
wherein he was styled Consiliarius Regius and ad Caesarem Orator. By this
opportunity of traveling through Germany, Hist. Luther. Per Seckendorf.
following the Emperor's Court, by his Conferences he fully satisfied many
Learned Germans, which before were of a contrary Judgment; and diverse in the
Emperor's own Court and Council also. One of the chiefest of these, and who
suffered severely for it, was Cornelius Agrippa, Knight. Doctor of both Laws, Judge
of the Prerogative Court, Cornelius Agrippa gained by Cranmer to the King's
Cause.
and Counselor to the Emperor, and a Man of deep Learning. Who confessed to
the said Ambassador, that the Marriage was naught, but that he durst not say so
openly, for fear both of the Pope and Emperor. Yet he was afterward cast into
Prison, where he died, for expressing his Mind, as was thought, somewhat more
plainly in this Affair.

Becomes acquainted with Osiander.
While he was now abroad in Germany, he went to Norimberg, where Osiander was
Pastor. And being a Man of Fame and Learning, our Ambassador became acquainted
with him: sending for him sometimes to discourse with him; and sometimes he
would go to Osiander's House, to visit him and his Study. This eminent Divine
of the German Protestant Church he also gained to favor the King's Cause. For
he wrote a Book of Incestuous Marriages, wherein he determined the King's
present Matrimony to be unlawful. But this Book was called in by a Prohibition,
printed at Augsburgh. And there was also a Form of a Direction, drawn up by the
same Osiander, how the King's Process should be managed: Which was sent over
hither. Multa graviter, multa sapienter, ^c plan^ divinitus d^ Christiana
doctrina, ac vera religione disputares. In Ep. Dedicat. ante Harmon. Evangel.
Cranmer's Discourse with Osiander, at these their Meetings, concerning diverse
Matters relating especially to Christian Doctrine, and True Religion, were so
wise and good, that that great Divine stood in admiration of him, as though he
had been inspired from Above. In one of their Conferences, Osiander
communicated to him certain Papers, wherein he had been attempting to harmonize
the Gospels: but by reason of the Difficulty that often arose, had thrown them
aside. A thing this was which Cranmer declared to him his great Approbation of;
as he was always a Man greatly studious of the Scripture, and earnestly
desirous that the right knowledge thereof might be increased. So he vehemently
exhorted him to go forward in this Study, and to finish it with all convenient
speed: For that it would not only, (he said) be of use to the Church of Christ,
but adorn it. These Admonitions gave new strength to Osiander to fall afresh
about this Work, and at last to bring it to a conclusion. In the Year 1537, he
published it, and dedicated it to Cranmer, then Archbishop, the great
Encourager of the Author.

In some of these Visits, Cr^nmer saw Osiander's Niece, And marries his
Kinswoman.
and obtained her for his Wife. Whom when he returned from his Embassy, he
brought not over with him: But in the Year 1534. he privately sent for her. And
kept her with him till the Year 1539, in the severe time of the six Articles;
when he sent her back in Secret to her Friends in Germany for a time. By these
Visits, and this Affinity, there grew a very cordial Love between Cranmer and
Osiander: and a great Correspondence was maintained by Letters between them
long after. A parcel of these Letters in Manuscript, the Right Reverend the
Bishop of Sarum mentioned in his History of the Reformation. Which he met with
in the exquisite Library of Mr. Richard Smith, as he told a Friend of mine. But
notwithstanding my enquiry after them, I had not the good fortune to see them,
nor to find into whose Hands they were come, after the selling of that Library
by Auction. Which Letters, if I could have procured a sight of, might have
served somewhat perhaps in this my Undertaking.

We are now slipped into the Year 1532. An. 1532.
And among other Services which he did Abroad, (besides his promoting the
King's great Matrimonial Cause among the German Princes and States, Treats with
the Emperor about the Contract of Traffic.
as well as others) he was employed for the establishing and securing a
Traffic, between the Merchants of England, and the Emperor's Low Countries.
Concerning which the former Contract, it seems, began to shake, occasioned by
that Luke-warmness of Affection, that now grew between these two Monarchs.
About this Affair our Ambassador had diverse Conferences with Monsieur
Grandeville, the Emperor's great Minister, at Regensburgh. The effect of his
last Solicitation was, that Gr^ndeville had told him that the Diet concerning
the said Contract was held in Flanders, where the Queen of Hungary was
Governess; and therefore that the Emperor would do nothing therein without her
advice; and that he would make answer by her, rather than by him. And so
Cranmer desired the King, that it would please his Grace no further to look for
Answer from him therein, but from the Queen, unto whom the whole Answer was
committed.

Another Business our Ambassador was now agitating at this Court for the King,
was, And about sending Suplies against the Turk.
about sending Supplies to the Emperor against the Turk: Who had now made a
formidable Invasion in Hungary, with an Army consisting of three hundred
thousand Men. The Emperor had lately, by virtue of a former League, and for the
Common Cause of Christianity, demanded certain Forces of the King for this
purpose. Now what measures his Ambassador was to take with the Emperor in this
Affair, William Paget, his Majesty's Servant (the same that was afterward
Secretary of State) was dispatched to him with Instructions: Wherein were
contained what Answer he should make to the Emperor's Demands. Which he
reported accordingly to Grandeville. The which Answer he delivered to him in
writing, upon the desire of Grandeville, for this Reason, as he urged, that he
might relate the same the more truly to the Emperor. He was now, in the Month
of September, drawing toward the Turk from Abagh, a Place not far from
Regensburgh, where our English Ambassador now resided; not having yet returned
any Reply to him, prevented by that hurry of Business that then lay upon the
Emperor. So that upon Grandeville's intimation to repair unto the Emperor at
Lintz, which was in his way to Vienna; and that there he should have an Answer
in Writing again, the Ambassador followed thither, in Company with the
Ambassador of France. And so he, with the other Ambassador, in eight or ten
days space, furnished themselves with Wagons, Horses, Ships, Tents, and other
things necessary to the Journey, for themselves and their Train.

Sends the King the News in those Parts;
But before his departure, he informed the King of the News in those Parts. As,
that the Turk resided still in Hungary in the same Place, environed on all
parts: Of which more at large he had written in his former Letters. That King
Ferdinando, the Emperor's Brother, who was then at Regensburgh, was to meet the
Emperor at Passaw, fourteen miles from thence: and so both were to pass forth
to Lintz, which was the midway from Regensburgh to Vienna. That the Emperor
would tarry there to take Counsel what to do, and there all the Ambassadors
should know his Pleasure.

And the Proclamation for a General Council.
He sent the King also the Copy of the Emperor's Proclamation concerning a
General Council, and a Reformation to be had in Germany, for the Controversies
of the Faith. Which he was constrained to do, his Affairs with the Turk
pressing him so much. The Sum thereof was; That his Imperial Majesty declared
Peace throughout all Germany: Enjoining, that none should be molested for the
Cause of Religion, until the Council should be called: or, in case there were
none, until some other Means should be found out by the States of the Empire,
for healing the present Divisions. And that he would use his utmost diligence,
that a Council should be denounced within six Months, and the Year after to be
commenced. And that if this could not be obtained, then these Matters should be
referred to the Imperial Diets, to be handled there. That in the mean time all
Judicial Proceedings, relating to Religion, should be suspended; and that no
Lawsuits should hereafter be commenced against the Protestants: and that in
case any were, Sleid. Comment.
he commanded that they should be void and null. This Edict was published in
the Month of August this Year.

And the Tax of the States of the Empire.
Together with the aforesaid Proclamation, he transferred over to the King the
Tax of all the States of the Empire; that is, How many Soldiers every Man was
limited to find for Aid against the Turk. Whence our Ambassador made a
particular Observation to his Master, for his better Direction, what number of
Forces it were equal for him to send; and to justify his Refusal to comply with
the Emperor, in case he should have demanded more than was his Proportion:
Taking his Measures from the said Tax. And the Observation, which he made was
this, That his Grace might perceive* that the greatest Prince in Germany (only
the Duke of Burgundy, and Austria excepted) was not appointed above 120
Horsemen, and 554 Footmen. A Transcript of this Letter of Cranmer to the King,
I have put in the Appendix. No II.
These Passages will serve to show Dr. Cranmer's Diligence, Wisdom, and other
Abilities in the Quality he now stood in of an Ambassador.

Being now resident in the Emperor's Court, He goes in an Embassy to the Duke
of Saxony, and other Protestant Princes.
the King made use of him in another Embassy, but to be more secretly made, to
the Elector Frederick, Duke of Saxony, that the Emperor might not be privy to
it. For in the Month of July, Dr. Cranmer departed incognito from Ratisbon,
(where the Emperor was, and had there appointed a Diet, Hist. Lutheranism. per
Seckendors.
in order to the coming to some Terms of Peace with the Protestants, until a
Council should be called) and came privately to the Duke, then abiding in a
certain Hospital, as it was called, and delivered Letters to him, and to Philip
Duke of Lunenburgh, and Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt. At this first Congress, he
assured the Elector of his Master the King of England's Friendship, as the
Letters he delivered imported. The next day he returned to the Elector's Court,
Pontanus and Spalatinus, two of the Elector's Counselors, being present. Here
at this Meeting he required diverse things concerning Peace with the Emperor,
the State of Religion, Aid against the Turk, and the Goods of the Church, which
the Princes were said to invade. He spoke magnificent things of the King his
Master: as what mighty Aids he had offered the Emperor against the Turk; and as
he told them, the French King would do. And so taking Letters to the King from
Frederick, dated July 15. he was dismissed. But four days after, he came again
privately with one Servant only; and had conference with Spalatinus all alone:
telling him, that he had forgot, as he pretended, one part of his Message: and
that was, That not only his Master, but the French King, was ready to give
Assistance to the Elector, and his Confederates, in the case of Religion. And
he desired to know in what state the Business of the Election of Ferdinand
stood; whom, being the Emperor's Brother, he had made King of the Romans by a
pretended Election. Which Election gave offense, and Frederick, Duke of Saxony,
had manifested Imperfect and Defective. What Answer was given to Cranmer was
not known: Only it was thought that this was somewhat unseasonably acted,
because says my Author, Seckendorf, ub^ supra.
there was Peace at this time between the Emperor and the English, which the
Kings Ambassador by those Offers did desire to disturb. This it seems was the
Judgment of the Protestants concerning this Overture to them by the King's
Ambassador, as tho it were not sincere. But I do not find, but, that whatsoever
Peace was now between the Emperor and the English, the former League with him
was shaking by reason of the Emperor's disobliging the King, in siding so
earnestly with Queen Katharine, in the Controversy between the King and her.

CHAP. IV. Cranmer made Archbishop of Canterbury.
Made Archbishop of Canterbury.
AND this great Trust the King, his gracious Master, committed to him, as a mark
of the Honor he had for him, and a Sign of further Preferment he was minded to
advance him to. And about this very time happened a fair Opportunity to the
King to manifest his Favor to him; Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury,
departing this mortal Life, whereby that See became Vacant. The Preferment
indeed seemed too great for Cranmer, at one stride to step into, without some
other intervening Dignities, to have been first conferred on him. But the King,
thinking him the fittest Man of all the English Clergy to be promoted to this
high Office, resolved to give it to him, though now absent abroad upon his
Business. Hereupon the King commanded him to hasten Home, though he concealed
the Reason from him, which was to take the Archbishopric he had designed for
him. Which when he came Home, in Obedience to his Majesty, though much against
his Inclination, and after many Refusals, proceeding from his great Modesty and
Humility, and certain Scruples, at length he did accept.

His Dignities before he was Archbishop.
It does not appear to me what Ecclesiastical Places he had before: only that he
was the King's Chaplain, and Archdeacon of Taunton. The Pope also, in honor
to his Master, had constituted him Poenitentiary General of England. He had
also a Benefice, while he lived in the Earl of Wiltshire's Family, which was
bestowed upon him by the King: A mention whereof I find in one of his Letters
to the said Earl.

Archbishop Warham foretells a Thomas to succeed him.
It was in the Month of August 1532, that William Warham, Archbishop of
Canterbury died: a wise and Grave Man, a great Patron of the most Learned
Erasmus, and once Lord Chancellor of England. Who seemed to foresee and
foretell, or at least to conjecture, that Thomas Cranmer should succeed him, as
judging him, in his own Mind, the fittest Person for the King's and Church's
Service in that juncture, to enter upon that See. For this truth, methinks, we
may pick out of those malicious words of Harpsfield in his Ecclesiastical
History, viz. That Archbishop Warham should say, That a Thomas should succeed
him; who by a loose and remiss indulgence of a licentious sort of Life granted
to the People, and by unsound Doctrines, would more disgrace the Church of
Canterbury, and all the rest of the Church of England, than Thomas the Martyr
did amplify it by his Martyrdom. And that he admonished his Nephew, and
Namesake, William Warham, Archdeacon of Canterbury, that if any Thomas should
succeed in the Sea, while he lived, he should not by any means enter into his
Service.

It is not unusual, (nay it is seldom otherwise) for Popish Historians to stuff
their Histories with strange Prophecies and Falsehoods, mixed with some Truth.
And I suppose the Matter might be no more than this. This grave and sober
Archbishop was sensible of the gross Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon
the Authority of the Kings of this Realm in their own Dominions: and his
Judgment stood for the restoring of this Imperial Crown to its ancient Right
and Sovereignty, and for the abridging the Papal Power. And knowing how learned
a Man Dr. Thomas Cranmer was, and perceiving what an able Instrument he was
like to prove in vindicating the King's Right to the Supremacy in his own
Kingdoms, the Archbishop upon these Accounts might think him the fittest to
succeed in the Archiepiscopal Chair, and might have some reason to believe that
the King intended him thereunto.

And that Archbishop Warham was of this Judgment, Archbishop Warham for the
King's Supremacy.
it may appear, if we trace some Footsteps of him. In the Year 1530, when all
the Clergy were under a Praemunire, and a Petition was drawing up in the
Convocation for that Cause, the King in the said Petition was addressed to by
the Title of Supreme Head of the Church, and Clergy of England. At this Title,
when the Archbishop found some of the Clergy to boggle, who were yet afraid
openly to declare their disallowance of it, he took the opportunity of their
Silence to pass the Title, by saying, That Silence was to be taken for their
Consent.

In the last Synod, wherein this Archbishop was a Member, and the main
Director, many things were debated about Abolishing the Papacy. This Synod was
prorogued from April 26, to October 5. A^t. Brit.
In the mean time he died. But had he lived, and been well, unto the next
Sessions, some further Steps had been made in evacuating the Bishop of Rome's
Usurpations; as may be guessed by what was done under his influence the last
Sessions, when the Supremacy of that foreign Prelate was rejected.

Something more of this Archbishop's Endeavors, Cranmer's Testimony of Warham.
of restoring the King to his Supremacy, appears by what Archbishop Cranmer
said to Brooks, Bishop of Gloucester, before a great Assembly, not long before
his Burning. Brooks had charged him for first setting up the King's Supremacy.
To which Cranmer replied, That it was Warham gave the Supremacy to Henry VIII,
and that he had said, he ought to have it before the Bishop of Rome, and that
God's Word would bear it. And that upon this the Universities of Cambridg and
Oxford were sent to, to know what the Word of God would allow touching the
Supremacy. Where it was reasoned and argued upon at length: and at last both
agreed, and and set to their Seals, and sent it to the King, That he ought to
be Supreme Head, and not the Pope. All which was in Archbishop Warham's Time,
and while he was alive, three quarters of a Year before ever Cranmer had the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, as he also added in that Audience.

So that these things considered, we may conclude, that Warham did think, that
none would be so fit to come after him as Cranmer, a Learned and diligent Man,
to carry on this Cause, which he, before him, had begun: and so might speak of
him as the properest Person to be advanced to this See.

To this I will add the Sense of an Ingenious and Learned Friend of mine
concerning this Passage in Harpsfield's History: A reflection upon a Passage
relating to Cranmer in Harpsfield's History*
Which the Author also of the Athenae Oxonienses has made use of to the good
Archbishop's Discredit: and which Somner also had unluckily selected, though
without design to hurt his good Name, and is all he writes of him. But may it
not be considered, says he, that the pretended Martyr Thomas Becket, Antiq. of
Cant.
though he died in vindication of the Privileges of the Church, yet he was the
first betrayer of the Rights of his See? He made the greatest Breach upon the
Authority of the Primacy of Canterbury, by resigning the Archbishopric into
the Pope's Hands, and receiving it again from him, as the Pope's Donation. But
it is the Honor of the blessed Martyr, Thomas Cranmer, that he was the first,
who began to claim the Primacy, and retrieve the Rights of his See from being
slavishly subjected to the Roman Power. Indeed, little credit is to be given to
the Author, who first published this Story; considering what a Violent Man he
was, and how much prejudiced against Cranmer, and interessed in the Popish
Cause: and coming into the Arch-Deaconry of Canterbury by the deprivation of
the Archbishop's Brother.

Cranmer tries to evade the Archbishopric.
Cranmer Noluit Episcopari, had no mind to be Archbishop. He loved his Studies,
and affected Retirement, and well knew the Dangers and Temptations of a public
Station. But especially he could not induce his Mind to take his Office from
the Pope, and to swear Fidelity to him as well as to the King: whereby he
should ensnare himself in two contrary Oaths. Wherefore when the King sent for
him home from his Embassy in Germany, with a design to lay that honorable
Burden upon him, he, guessing the Reason, first endeavored to delay his
coming, by signifying to the King some Matters of Importance, that would
require his tarrying there somewhat longer for the King's Service: Hoping in
that while, the King might have bestowed the Place upon some other. In fine,
our Historians say, he stayed abroad one half Year longer. But I find him in
England in the Month of November, which was not much more than a quarter of a
Year after Warham's Death. Then the King was married to the Marchioness of
Pembroke, and Cranmer was present. So that the King must have sent for him home
in June, two or three Months before the Archbishop's Death: probably while he
was in a declining dying Condition. But after, when that which Cranmer seemed
to suspect of certain Emergences in those parts, wherein the English State
might be concerned, fell not out; the King again commanded his return Home. Now
more perfectly knowing, by some of his Friends, the King's Intentions to make
him Archbishop, he made means by diverse of his Friends to shift it off,
desiring rather some smaller Living.

Declares the reason thereof to the King.
At length the King brake his Mind to him, that it was his full Purpose to
bestow that Dignity upon him for his Service, and for the good Opinion he
conceived of him. But his long disabling himself nothing dissuaded the King,
till at last he humbly craved the King's Pardon, for that he should declare to
him, and that was, That if he should accept it, he must receive it at the
Pope's Hand, which he neither would nor could do: for that his Highness was the
only Supreme Governor of the Church of England, as well in Causes
Ecclesiastical as Temporal; and that the full Right of Donation of all manner
of Benefices and Bishoprics, as well as any other temporal Dignities and
Promotions, appertained to him, and not to any other Foreign Authority. And
therefore if he might serve God, him and his Country in that Vocation, he
would accept it of his Majesty, and of no Stranger, who had no Authority within
this Realm. Whereat the King made a Pause; and then asked him how he was able
to prove it. At which time he alleged several Texts out of Scripture, and the
Fathers, proving the Supreme Authority of Kings in their own Realms and
Dominions: and withal showing the intolerable Usurpations of the Bishops of
Rome. Of this the King talked several times with him; and perceiving that he
could not be brought to acknowledge the Pope's Authority, the King called one
Dr. Oliver, an eminent Lawyer, and other Civilians, and devised ^ith them, how
he might bestow the Archbishopric upon him, salving his Conscience. They
said, he might do it by way of Protestation: and so one to be sent to Rome to
take the Oath, and do every thing in his Name. Cranmer said to this, It should
be super animam suam: and seemed to be satisfied in what the Lawyers told him.
And accordingly, when he was consecrated, made his Protestation, That he did
not admit the Pope's Authority any further, than it agreed with the express
Word of God. And that it might be lawful for him at all times to speak against
him, and to impugn his Errors, when there should be occasion. And so he did.

Whether Warham, the Archdeacon, The Archbishop's Brother is made Archdeacon
of Canterbury.
had conceived any Prejudice against our new Archbishop, by some warning given
him by the former Archbishop, as was hinted above; or whether he was willing
to give place upon Cranmer's Entreaty, that he might provide for his Brother:
so it was, that Edmund Cranmer, Brother to the Archbishop, succeeded Warham in
the Arch-deaconry of Canterbury, Somner Hist. of Cant. p. 322. ex lib. Eccles.
Cant.
and the Provostship of Wingham. Who parted with both these Dignities by
Cession. And by the Privity and Consent of the Archbishop, he had a Stipend,
or Pension, of sixty pounds per Annum, allowed him during his Life, out of the
Arch-deaconary; and twenty pounds per Annum out of Wingham, by his Successor
aforesaid. Who continued Archdeacon until Queen Mary's Days, and was then
deprived, and his Prebend, and his Parsonage of Ickham, all taken from him in
the Year 1554, for being a married Clerk. The first was given to Nicholas
Harpsfield; the second to Robert Collins, Bachelour of Law, and Commissary of
Canterbury; and the third to Robert Marsh.

The King had before linked him into his great Business about Queen Katharine
and the Lady Anne. The King linked Cranmer with him in all his proceedings
about Q: Katharine.
So now when he had nominated him for Archbishop, he made him a Party and an
Actor in every step almost which he took in that Affair. For to fetch the
Matter a little backward; Not long before the Archiepiscal See was devolved
upon Cranmer, the King had created the Lady Anne Marchioness of Pembroke, and
taken her along with him in great State into France, when by their mutual
Consent there was an Interview appointed between the two Kings. At Calais King
Henry permitted Francis the French King to take a view of this Lady, who then
made both Kings a curious and rich Mask, where both honored her by dancing:
This was in the month of October. In the Month before I find a parcel of very
rich Jewels were sent from Greenwich to Hampton Court by Mr. Norrys, Anno 1532.
Sept. 21.
probably he who was Groom of the Stole, and executed upon Queen Ann's Business
afterward. Which Jewels as some of them might be for the King's own wearing,
now he was going into France; so in all probability others were either lent or
given to the Marchioness to adorn and make her fine, when she should appear,
and give her entertainment to the French King. For the sake of such as be
curious, Append. No III.
I have set down, in the Appendix, a Particular of these most splendid and
Royal Jewels, from an Original signed with the King's own Hand in token of his
Receipt of them.

Immediately after the King's and ^^e Marchionesses return from France, he
married her. At which Wedding, though very private, the Archbishop was one
that assisted, Rex D. Annam Bullenam, Thoma Cranmero, sacra Ministrante, Vxorem
duxit.
according to the Lord Herbert; but, according to the Author of the Britannic
Antiquities, did the Sacred Office. When she was crowned Queen, which was
Whitsontide following, the Archbishop performed the Ceremonies. When, after
that, the King had a Daughter by her, he would have the Archbishop assist at
the Christening, and be her Godfather. And before this, when Queen Katharine
was to be divorced from the King, and the Pope's Dispensation of that Marriage
declared Null, our Archbishop pronounced the Sentence, and made the
Declaration solemnly and publicly at Dunstable Priory. Thus the King dipped
and engaged Cranmer with himself in all his Proceeding in this Cause. Now as
all these doings had danger in them, so especially this last highly provoked
the Pope for doing this without his Leave and Authority, as being a
presumptuous Encroachment upon his Prerogative. Insomuch that a public Act was
made at Rome, that unless the King undid all that he had done, and restored all
things in integrum, leaving them to his Decision, he would excommunicate him.
And this Sentence was affixed and set up publicly at Dunkirk. The King and the
Archbishop appeal from the Pope to a General Council.
Which put the King upon an Appeal from the Pope to the next General Council,
lawfully called. The Archbishop also, foreseeing the Pope's Threatening
hovering likewise over his Head, by the King's Advice, made his Appeal by the
English Ambassador there. I have seen the King's Original Letter to Dr. Bonner,
ordering him to signify to the Pope, in Order and Form of Law, The King writes
to Dr. Bonner in that behalf. No. IV.
his Appeal, sending him also the Instrument of his Appeal, with the Proxy
devised for that purpose. This bare date August 18 th from his Castle at
Windsor: I have reposited it in the Appendix. Which Order of the King Bonner
did accordingly discharge, at an Audience he got of the Pope at Marceilles,
November 7. And that Letter which the Lord Herbert says, he saw of Bonner to
the King, wherein he signified as much, must be his Answer to this of the King
to him.

An. 1533.
Dr. Cranmer having now yielded to the King to accept the Archbishopric, it
was in the beginning of the next Year, viz. 1533. March 30. and in the 24 th of
King Henry, The Archbishop is consecrated.
that he received his Consecration: But that ushered in with abundance of
Bulls, some dated in February, and some in March, from Pope Clement, to the
number of Eleven: as may be seen at length in the beginning of this
Archbishop's Register.

The first was to King Henry upon his Nomination of Cranmer to him to be
Archbishop. The Pope's Bulls.
The Pope allows and promoteth him accordingly. The second was a Bull to
Cranmer himself, signifying the same. The third Bull absolved him from any
Sentences of Excommunication, Suspension, Interdiction, etc. It was written
from the Pope to him, under the Title of Archdeacon of Taunton in the Church
of Wells, and Master in Theology; and ran thus:

Nos ne forsan aliquibus sententiis, censuris and poenis Ecclesiasticis,
ligatus sis, etc. Volentes te a quibusvis excommunicationis, suspensionis, and
interdicti, aliisque Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris, and poenis, a jure
vel ab Homine, quavis occas^^^e vel causa latis, etc. Authoritate praedicta,
tenore praesentium, absolvimus, and absolutum fore nuntiamus, non obstantibus
constitutionibus, and ordinationibus Apostolicis, etc. One might think, that
this Bull was drawn up peculiarly for Cranmer's Case. Who, by reason he might
have been suspected as infected with Lutheranism, or had meddled too much in
the King's Matrimonial Cause; and so entangled in the Churches Censures, might
have need of such assoiling. But I suppose it was but a customary Bull. A
fourth Bull was to the Suffragans of Canterbury; that is, to all the Bishops in
the Province: signifying Cranmer's Advancement, to be their Metropolitan.
Another to the City and Diocese of Canterbury. Another to the Chapter of the
said Church. Another to the Vassals of the Church; that is, to all such as held
Lands of it. Another to the People of the City. Another, wherewith the Pall was
sent to the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of London. Another, of the
Destination of the Pall: Which the Bull says, was taken de corpore B. Petri,
to be presented to him by the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of London, or
one of them, after he had received the Gift of Consecration. In this Bull of
the Destination is an Order, not to use the Pall but on those proper Days which
were expressly mentioned in the Privileges of the Church. On purpose to beget a
greater Esteem and Veneration of this, and whatsoever Baubles else came from
Rome, and brought such Treasure thither.

The Archbishop according to Custom, The Archbishop surrenders them to the
King.
received these Bulls, which the Pope sent him to invest him with the
Archbishopric. But he surrendered them up to the King; because he would not
own the Pope, as the giver of this Ecclesiastical Dignity, but the King only,
as he declared at his Trial before Queen Mary's Commissioners at Oxford in the
Year 1555.

As to the Act of Consecration, first, The Method of the Consecration.
They assembled in the Chapter House of the King's College of S. Stephen, near
the King's Palace of Westminster. Present as Witnesses Watkins, the King's
Prothonotary, Dr. John Tregonwel, Thomas Bedyl Clerk of the King's Council,
Richard Guent Doctor of Decrees, of the Court of Canterbury principal Official,
and John Cocks the Archbishop's Auditor of the Audience, and Vicar General in
Spirituals. The first thing that was done by the Archbishop Elect, was for the
satisfaction of his Conscience. Who was now before his Consecration to take an
Oath of Fidelity to the Pope, which will follow by and by. This he saw
consisted by no means with his Allegiance to his Sovereign. And therefore how
common and customary soever it were for Bishops to take it; yet Cranmer in the
first place, in the said Chapter House, before the said Witnesses, made a
Protestation; wherein he declared, that he intended not by the Oath that he was
to take, and was customary for Bishops to take to the Pope, to bind himself to
do any thing contrary to the Laws of God, the King's Prerogative, or to the
Commonwealth and Statutes of the Kingdom: nor to tie himself up from speaking
his Mind freely in Matters relating to the Reformation of Religion, the
Government of the Church of England, and Prerogative of the Crown. And that
according to this Interpretation and Meaning only he w^^ld take the Oath, and
no otherwise. This Protestation, because I think it is not recorded in our
Historians, De Minister. p. 154. No. V.
except Mason, (and in him imperfect) I have put it into the Appendix verbatim,
as I transcribed it out of the Archbishop's Register. And having made this
Protestation, he bad the Prochonotary to make one or more public Instruments
thereof, and desired the forementioned Persons to be Witnesses thereunto. After
this Protestation made, he in the presence of these Witnesses, being arrayed in
Sacerdotal Garments, went up to the step of the high Altar, to receive
Consecration; where was sitting in a Chair, honorably adorned, John Longland
the Bishop of Lincoln, having on his Pontificals, assisted by John Voicy Bishop
of Exon, and Henry Standish Bishop of S. Asaph; holding in his hand a Schedule
with the Oath, which he was now going to take to the Pope: and having withal
his Protestation, he, before the aforesaid Witnesses, asserted and protested,
that he would read the Schedule, and perform the Oath therein contained under
the said Protestation, which he said he made the same day in the Chapter House
before those Witnesses, and no otherwise, nor in any other manner. And then
presently after, kneeling on his Knees, read the Schedule, containing the Oath
to the Pope. No. VI.
Which I have reposited in the Appendix.

Then the Bishops proceeded to the consecrating of the Archbishop. And then
again, after the solemn Consecration was finished, being about to receive his
Pall, when he was to take another Oath to the Pope, he protested again in the
presence of the same Witnesses, that he took the following Oath under the same
Protestation as he made before in the Chapter House, nor would perform it any
other ways; and then took the Oath. And after he had taken it, desired the
Prothonotary the third time to make a public Instrument or Instruments
thereof. Which he did.

The Archbishop's Oath for the Temporalties.
To these Oaths I will add one more, which the Archbishop took with a better
Stomach to the King, for his Temporalties. This was for the most part the
accustomable Oath of Bishops to the King, when they sued for their
Temporalties; but hardly reconcilable with the Oath they had taken to the Pope:
Because in this Oath was mentioned a renouncing of all Privileges and Grants of
the Pope by virtue of his Bulls, that might be prejudicial to the King, and an
Acknowledgment, that they held their Bishoprics only of the King, which the
Archbishop worded more fully, viz. That he held his Archbishopric of the King
immediately and only, and of none other. No. VII. The Archbishop pronounces
the Divorce.
I refer the Reader to the Appendix for this Oath.

One of the first Services the Archbishop did for the King, was the
pronouncing the Sentence of Divorce from his former Queen Katharine, which was
done May 23; but drew an implacable hatred upon him from the Pope and Emperor
abroad, as well as the Papists at home. And Queen Mary would not forget it,
when She came to the Crown, taking then her full Revenge upon him: though in
the same Commission, wherein this Sentence was pronounced, sat the Bishops of
Winton, London, Bath, Lincoln, and many other great Clerks. And though he
pronounced the Sentence, he was but the Mouth of the rest, and they were all in
as deep as he.

There is a short Account of Archbishop Cranmer's Judgment of the unlawfulness
of this Marriage, digested under twelve Articles, The Archbishop's Judgment of
the Marriage.
with his own Name writ by himself on the top of the Paper. Which Bishop Burnet
transcribed from a Cotton Manuscript, Vol. I. Collect. p. 95.
and inserted into his History. It bears this Title: Articuli ex quibus plane
admodum demonstratur, Divortium inter Henricum VIII. Angliae Regem
Invictissimum, and Serenissimam Catharinam necessario esse faciendum. The
twelfth and concluding Article is this: We think that the pretended Matrimony
of Henry King of England, and Catharine the Queen, has been, and is none at
all, being prohibited both by the Law of God and Nature.

CHAP. V. The Archbishop visits his Diocese.
AFter his Sentence against Q. Katharine, The Archbishop forbids preaching.
and confirmation of Q. Ann's Marriage, one thing he did, which looked as if he
was not like to prove any great Friend to a Reformation. For he forbad all
Preaching throughout his Diocese, and warned the rest of the Bishops throughout
England to do the same, Foxii MSS.
as I have it from an old Journal made by a Monk of St. Augustine's,
Canterbury. But this was only for a time, till Orders for Preachers, and the
Beads could be finished: it being thought convenient that Preaching at this
Juncture should be restrained, because now the Matter of Sermons chiefly
consisted in tossing about the King's Marriage with the Lady Anne, and
condemning so publicly and boldly his doings against Q. Katharine, the Priests
being set on work by her Friends and Faction.

In October or November the Archbishop went down to Canterbury, Visits his
Diocese.
in order to a Visitation.

The third day of December the Archbishop received the Pontifical Seat in the
Monastery of the Holy Trinity. August. Monks Journal.
And soon after, viz. the Ninth of the same Month, began to go on Visitation
throughout all his Diocese, that he might have finished that Work before the
Sessions of the Parliament. The Delusion of a Nun in Kent.


This same Year a remarkable Delusion was discovered in the Archbishop's
Diocese, and even under his Nose, the Scene being chiefly laid in Canterbury,
by some belonging to the Cathedral Church. For a certain Nun, called Elizabeth
Barton, by mavelous Hypocrisy mocked all Kent, and almost all England: For
which Cause she was put in Prison in London; Where she confessed many horrible
things against the King and the Queen. This forenamed Elizabeth had many
Adherents, but especially Dr. Bocking, Monk of Christ's-Church in Canterbury,
who was her chief Author in her Dissimulation. All of them at the last were
accused of Treason, Heresy and Conspiracy. And so stood in Penance before the
open Cross of S. Paul's in London; and in Canterbury in the Churchyard of the
Monastery of the Holy Trinity, at the Sermon time they stood over the high
Seat: where of the Preacher they were grievously rebuked for their horrible
Fact. And in April the next Year, she, with Bocking and Dering, another Monk of
Canterbury, were led out of Prison through all the Streets of London unto
Tyburn, where she and these Monks, and also two Brothers of the Minors,
suffered with the rest upon the Gallows for Treason and Heresy.

The Archbishop appeals from the Pope.
In the Month of November the Archbishop sent a Letter to Bonner the King's
Ambassador at Marseilles, together with his Appeal from the Pope, to be there
signified, as was hinted before. The reason whereof was this; Upon the King's
Divorce from Q. Katharine, the Pope had by a public Instrument declared the
Divorce to be null and void, and threatened him with Excommunication, unless he
would revoke all that he had done. Gardener Bishop of Winton about this time,
and upon this occasion, was sent Ambassador to the French King; and Bonner soon
after followed him to Marseilles, Where Gardener at the interview between the
French King and the Pope, now was. For the King and the Council apprehended
some Mischief to be hatching against the Kingdom by the Pope: who was now
inciting the Emperor and other Princes to make War upon us. And indeed he had
vaunted, as the Ld Herbert declares, that he would set all Christendom against
the King. And the Emperor in discourse had averred, that by the means of
Scotland he would avenge his Aunt's Quarrel. The Archbishop in this Juncture
had secret intimation of a Design to excommunicate him, and interdict his
Church. Whereupon, as the King by Bonner, November. 7, had made his Appeal from
the Pope to the next General Council lawfully called; so by the King and
Council's Advice, the Archbishop soon after did the same: sending his Appeal
with his Proxy, under his Seal, to Bonner, desiring him together with Gardener,
to consult together, and to intimate his Appeal in the best manner they could
think expedient for him. And this Letter he wrote by the King's own
Commandment. It was not the Hand of the Archbishop, nor of his Secretary. So I
suppose it was drawn up by some of his own Lawyers; and is as follows:

The Archbishop's Letter to Bonner. Cleopat. E. 6.
In my right hearty manner I commend me to you. So it is, as you know right
well, I stand in dread, lest our Holy Father the Pope do intend to make some
manner of prejudicial Process against me and my Church. And therefore having
probable Conjectures thereof, I have appealed from his Holiness to the General
Council, accordingly as his Highness and his Council have advised me to do.
Which my Appeal and Procuracie under my Seal, I do send unto you herewith;
desiring you right-heartily to have me commended to my Ld of Winchester, and
with his Advice and Counsel to intimate the said Provocation after the best
manner, that his Lordship and you shall think most expedient for me. I am the
bolder thus to write unto you, because the King's Highness commands me this
to do, as you shall, I trust, further perceive by his Grace's Letter: Nothing
doubting in your Goodness, but at this mine own desire you will be contented to
take this Pains, though his Highness shall percase forget to write unto you
therein. Which your Pains and Kindness, if it shall lie in me in time to come
to recompense, I wol not forget it with God's Grace. Who preserve you, as my
self. From Lambeth, the xxvii th day of November.

Thomas Cantuar.


Cranmer being now placed at the Head of the Church of England, Disputes in the
Parliament against the Pope's Supremacy.
next under God and the King, and the chief care of it devolved upon him, his
great study was conscientiously to discharge this high Vocation. And one of the
first things, wherein he showed his good Service to the Church, was done in the
Parliament in the latter end of this Year 1533. When the Supremacy came under
debate, Life of Cranm. inter Foxii MSS.
and the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome was propounded, then the old
Collections of the new Archbishop did him good service; for the chief, and in
a manner the whole burden of this weighty Cause was laid upon his Shoulders.
Insomuch that he was forced to answer to all that ever the whole Rabble of the
Papists could say for the defense of the Pope's Supremacy: And he answered so
plainly, directly and truly to all their Arguments, and proved so evidently and
stoutly, both by the Word of God, and Consent of the Primitive Church, that
this usurped Power of the Pope is a mere Tyranny, and directly against the Law
of God: and that the Power of Emperors and Kings is the highest Power here upon
Earth: Unto which, Bishops, Priests, Popes and Cardinals ought to submit
themselves, and are as much bound to obey, as their Temporal Subjects, or
Laymen, (as the Priests call them) that the Issue was the abolishing of that
Foreign Papal Power, and the expulsion of it out of this Realm, by the full
consent of Parliament.

A License dated Feb. 13. this Year, Licenses for Chapels.
was granted by the Archbishop to Mary the Relict of Sir Henry Guilford Knight. to
have the Eucharist, Matrimony and Baptism, Cran. Reg:
ministered in any Chapel or Oratory within her Manors where she should
reside, during her Life. And such a License, dated also Feb. 13. the next Year,
was granted by him to Margaret Marchioness of Dorset. Whether indulged to them
by the Archbishop, the rather to free them from danger for not frequenting
their Parish-Churches, and for the avoiding the Superstitious and Idolatrous
Worship there performed; and that there might be some private Places for purer
worshipping God, and administration of the Sacraments; or only for the
Convenience of those Ladies, the Reader has liberty to judge.

An. 1534.
CHAP. VI. The Archbishop presses the Translation of the Bible.
The Archbishop labors the Reformation of the Church.
THIS Rub of the Papal Power being now taken out of the way, and the King's
Supremacy settled in the next Sessions of Parliament, in November. 1534. a Way
was opened for a Reformation of Errors and Abuses in Religion. So that, as the
Archbishop judged it a thing impossible to make any amendment of Religion
under the Pope's Dominion; so he thought it now (the same being dispatched out
of the Realm) a mee^ time to restore the true Doctrine of Christ, according to
the Word of God, and the old Primitive Church, within his Jurisdiction and
Cure; and with the said Pope, to abolish also all false Doctrine, Errors and
Heresies, by him brought into the Church; for the accomplishing of which he let
pass no Opportunities.

What he did this Convocation.
A Convocation now afforded him one. Our Archbishop, from his first entrance
upon his Dignity, had it much in his mind to get the Holy Scriptures put into
the Vulgar Language, and a Liberty for all to read them. The Convocation now
was so well disposed, by the influence of the Archbishop and his Friends, that
they did petition the King, that the Bible might be translated by some Learned
Men of his Highnesses nomination. And as this good Motion was briefly made in
the House by the Archbishop, so they agreed upon him to carry their Petition.
But they clogged it with another, which the Archbishop did not so well approve
of: For about the Month of December they passed this Order of Convocation. The
Bishops, Abbots, Priors of this Upper House of Convocation, of the Province of
Canterbury, met together in the Chapter House of St. Paul; unanimously did
consent, that the most Reverend Father the Archbishop, should make instance in
their Names to the King, that his Majesty would vouchsafe, for the increase of
the Faith of his Subjects, to decree and command, That all his Subjects, in
whose possession any Books of suspect Doctrine were, especially in the Vulgar
Language, imprinted, beyond or on this side the Sea, should be warned, within
three Months, to bring them in before Persons to be appointed by the King,
under a certain Pain to be limited by the King.

And that moreover his Majesty would vouchsafe to decree, that the Scriptures
should be translated into the Vulgar Tongue, by some honest and learned Men, to
be nominated by the King, and to be delivered unto the People according to
their Learning. This was resolved in the Convocation, December. 19.

Accordingly the King issued out soon after his Proclamation. What this
Proclamation was I do not know, unless it were one I meet with about this time,
against bringing in, or printing seditious Books of Anabaptists and
Sacramentaries, who were said to be lately come into the Realm: and against
some of his own Subjects, who publicly disputed in Taverns and other open
Places, upon those Points of Religion, which the King was offended withal. For
the Correction and Regulating of which, the King in the said Proclamation
commanded sundry Articles to be observed; which for the length of them I have
put into the Appendix. No. VIII.
Unless perhaps this Proclamation may belong to the Year 1538.

About the month of June this Year, A Book for preaching, and the Beads.
was a Book drawn up for Bishops and Priests, wherein was an Order for
preaching; and in the same were Forms devised for the Beads, as well for
Preachers, as Curates. In which Forms the King's Title of Supreme Head was
specified. In this Book was commandment given by the King, that ^very Preacher
should, before Easter, once in solemn Audience, de^^are the usurped
Jurisdiction, within this Realm, of the Bishop of ^ome, and the King's just
Cause to decline from the same: and also to open and declare such things as
might avow and justify the King's refusal of Marriage with the Princess
Dowager, and his contract anew with Queen Ann. And also in the same Book an
Order was given for the suppression of the General Sentence or Curse. Dispersed
by the Archbishop to all the Bishops.
This Book the Archbishop, who we may well suppose had a great hand in it,
sent, by the King's Commandment, to all the Bishops, and to the Archbishop of
York, though out of his Province: that Archbishop lying under some Jealousy as
it seems with the King.

Therefore after the receipt of the Book, The Archbishop of York preaches at
York.
the said Archbishop of York the next Sunday, which was the second Sunday
after Trinity, went from Cawood to York, and there in his own Person declared,
as well the King's Cause touching the Matrimony, as his refusal of the Pope's
Jurisdiction, so fully, that nothing that needed to be opened was left
unspoken, as that Archbishop wrote himself to the King in his own Vindication.
And that the Auditory might be the greater, he sent to York forthwith, upon the
receipt of the Book, to publish there, that he would be there the next Sunday
following, and caused the Churches to make an end of their Service in such
time, as every Man might have opportunity to be at the Sermon: and especially
required the Mayor and his Brethren, and one Mr. Magnus, and Sir George Lawson,
his Majesty's Chaplains to be there: And a very great Confluence there was.
Then the Archbishop preached from that Text, Vxorem duxi, etc. Whence he took
occasion to utter, and declare both his foresaid Matters, and the Injury done
to the King's Highness by Pope Clement.

As the Convocation this Year had declared the Pope to have no Jurisdiction in
this Kingdom, so this would not serve the King, The Clergy and Universities
subscribe against the Pope.
till all the Learned and Spiritual Men in England had subscribed to it with
their Hands. The Archbishop's Church of Canterbury began. For the Prior and
Convent thereof, moved and influenced not a little by their Diocesan, solemnly
subscribed an Instrument for abolishing the Pope's Supremacy, and for
acknowledgment of the King Supreme Head of the Church of England, under this
Position. Cleopat. E. 6. p. 208.


Quod Romanus Episcopus non habet majorem aliq^am jurisdictionem a Deo sibi
collatam in hoc regno Angliae, quam quivis externus Episcopus. That is,

That the Bishop of Rome has not some greater Jurisdiction conferred upon him
by God in this Realm of England, than any other Foreign Bishop.

This was consented to by the Prior's own Hand subscribed, and sixty nine of
the Convent besides. The Original whereof is in a Volume of the Cotton Library.
Page 458.
In another place of the same Volume is extant the Subscription of the Bishops,
Deans, and several Abbots; and after that, of the University of Oxford, and all
the particular Colleges: and after that, the Names of all the subscribing
Priors of England.

Cranmer and others administer the Oath of Succession to the Clergy.
The Archbishop was one employed about the Act of Succession, that was made the
last Sessions of Parliament: which was to invest the Succession to the Crown
upon the Heirs of Q. Ann; and that Q. Katharine should be no more called Queen,
but Princess Dowager. In the Preamble to the Act, there were certain Touches
against the Pope's Supremacy, and against his Power of dispensing in the King's
former Marriage with his Brother's Wife, carnally known by him. To this Act all
Persons were to swear, to accept and maintain the same, upon pain of Treason.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Ld Chancellor Audley, Secretary Crumwel, the
Abbot of Westminster, and others, were the King's Commissioners appointed to
tender this Oath. The Nobility and Gentry took it, none denying, to which they
set their Hands in a long List.

On the 13 th of April, the Commissioners sat at Lambeth to receive the Oaths
of the Clergy, and chiefly those of London, that had not yet sworn; who all
took it, not one excepted. And a certain Doctor, Vicar of Croyden, that it
seems made some boggle before, went up with the rest: of whom Sir Thomas More,
who then stood by, made an Observation, how, as he past, he went to my Lord's
Buttery-hatch, and called for Drink, and drank valde familiariter; whether,
says he sarcastically, it were for Gladness, or Dryness, or Quod ille notus
erat Pontifici. The Oath also now was taken by Dr. Wylson, a great Court-Divine
in those Days, who for Queen Katharine's Business was a Prisoner at this time,
though a great while he was unsatisfied, and consulted much with Sir Thomas
More about the Lawfulness of taking it.

And to Sir Thomas More who refused it.
The same Day were conveyed hither from the Tower, Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas
More, the only Layman at this Meeting, to tender this Oath to them. Who both,
being separately called, refused it. After the Clergy were sworn and
dispatched, immediately Sir Thomas by himself was sent for the second time. Sir
Thomas More's Letters.
Now he had much talk with the Lords, who would fain have brought him to
comply. They urged him to declare the Causes why he would not Swear: But he
excused his so doing. Then they charged him with Obstinacy: He said, it was not
Obstinacy, but because he might not declare his Mind without peril of incurring
the King's further Displeasure. He told the Commissioners, that for his part he
condemned not the Consciences of any; but that he was dissatisfied in his own
Conscience for certain Reasons. Cranmer's Argument with him.
The Archbishop taking hold of this, spoke to him thus, That it appeared well,
that Sir Thomas did not take it for a very sure thing and a certain, that he
might not lawfully swear, but rather as a thing uncertain and doubtful. But you
know, said my Lord, for a certainty, and for a thing without doubt, that you be
bound to obey your Sovereign Lord the King. And therefore are you bound to
leave off the doubt of your unsure Conscience, in refusing the Oath, and take
the sure way in obeying of your Prince who commands you to Swear. This
Argument, as Sir Thomas confessed in one of his Letters to his Daughter Roper,
seemed so subtle, and with such Authority coming out of so Noble a Prelate's
Mouth, that he could answer again nothing thereto: but only that he thought
with himself, that he might not so do, because that in his Conscience this was
one of the Causes in which he was bounden, that he should not obey his Prince;
since that whatsoever other Folks thought in the Matter, (whose Conscience or
Learning, as he said, he would not condemn, or take upon him to judge) yet in
his Conscience the Truth seemed on the other Side, wherein he had informed his
Conscience neither suddenly nor slightly, but by long leisure and diligent
search for the Matter.

In fine, the farthest Sir Thomas could be brought, More offers to swear to the
Succession it self.
and which he offered voluntarily that Morning, was to swear to the Succession,
(which was the main Design of the Act) though not to the Preamble. At parting
the Lord Chancellor bad the Secretary, before More, take notice, that More
denied not, but was content to swear the Succession. More assented and said, in
that Point he would be contented, so that he might see the Oath so framed, as
might stand with his Conscience.

Fisher Bishop of Rochester, offered the same before this Assembly, Bishop
Fisher offers the same.
that More had done: and in a Letter of his afterward writ to the Secretary,
assigned the Reason why he could, with a good Conscience, swear to the
Succession, viz. because he doubted not but that the Prince of a Realm, with
the Assent of the Nobles and Commons, might appoint his Successors according as
he pleased. No. IX.
In the Appendix this Letter will be found, which Bishop Fisher writ upon
occasion of the Secretary's Advice, who labored to gain him, that he should
write to the King, to declare his Mind to him in swearing to the Succession;
and to petition him to let that suffice, because his Conscience could not
consent to the rest of the Act. The Secretary also had sent unto Fisher, lying
in the Tower, Lee Bishop Elect of Lichfield and Coventry; to whom he declared
again, that he would take the Oath to the Succession; and moreover, that he
would swear never to meddle more in Disputation of the Matrimony, and promised
all Allegiance to the King. But he told Lee, his Conscience could not be
convinced, that the Marriage was against the Law of God, because of a
Prohibition in the Levitical Law. See Lee's Letter, in the Appendix, to
Secretary Crumwel. No. X.


The Archbishop, The Archbishop writes to Crumwel in their behalf.
soon after that meeting of the Commissioners at Lambeth, retired to Croydon:
And being a Man not kind to his own Party and Persuasion only, and fierce and
bloody-minded to them that differed from him, but compassionate toward all,
Friend and Foe; his tender Spirit suggested to him, to make this serve for an
Occasion to intercede for More and Fisher, to Crumwel; showing him in a Letter,
dated April the 17 th, how advisable in his Judgment it would be to be
satisfied with that Oath they had offered to swear, in case they would swear to
maintain the said Succession against all Power and Potentates: Urging to him
that there would be these Advantages gained thereby. First, That it would be a
means to satisfy the Consciences of the Princess Dowager and the Lady Mary; who
it seems made it a Matter of Conscience and Sin to abandon their Titles. Also,
that it might tend to stop the Emperor's Mouth, and the Mouths of other their
Friends, when Fisher and More, who had stickled so much for them, should now
own that Succession, which would be in effect a disowning of them. Secondly,
That it might be a means to resolve and quiet also many others in the Realm
that were in doubt, when such great Men should affirm by Oath and Subscription,
that the Succession mentioned in the said Act was good, and according to God's
Laws. And he thought, that after two such had sworn, there would be scarce one
in the Kingdom would reclaim against it. And thirdly, That though a great many
in the Realm could not be brought to alter from their Opinions of the Validity
of the King's former Marriage, and of the Bishop of Rome's Authority, that it
would be a great Point gained, if all with one accord would own and acknowledge
the Succession.

The Archbishop's endeavor to save the Lives of More and Fisher.
Weaver, the Author of the Funeral Monuments, transcribed this Letter out of
the Cotton Library, and inserted it into his said Book: and the thing he takes
notice of therein, is the Wisdom and Policy of the prudent Archbishop. I shall
take notice of another thing, and which I suppose was the great Cause that
employed his Pen at this time, namely, his tender Heart, and abhorrence from
Bloodshedding: Propounding these Politic Considerations to the Secretary,
which were the properest Arguments to be used with a Statesman, and for him to
use and urge before the King; that so he might be an Instrument of saving the
Lives of these Men, however they differed from him, and it may be were none of
his very good Friends. This Letter of the Archbishop's, as I my self took it
from the Original, I thought worthy depositing among Cranmer's Monuments in the
Appendix. No. XI.
But this Offer of theirs, notwithstanding the Archbishop's Arguments and
Endeavors, would not be accepted. The King would not be satisfied with this
Swearing by halves.

CHAP. VII. The Archbishop visits the Diocese of Norwich.
A Praemunire brought ag^^nst Bishop Nix.
THE Popish Bishops were now at a low ebb; and being under the Frowns of their
Prince, other Men took the opportunities, upon their Slips, to get them
punished. A Storm now fell upon Richard Nix Bishop of Norwich, a vicious and
dissolute Man, as Godwin writes. Cotton Libra^. Cleop. F. 1.
Against him was a Praemunire this Year (25 of Hen. VIII.) brought. That, De
tout temps, there had been a Custom in the Town of Thetford in the County of
Norfolk, that no Inhabitant of the same Town should be drawn in Plea in any
Court Christian for any Spiritual Causes, but before the Dean in the said Town.
And there was a Presentment in the King's Court, before the Mayor of the Town,
by twelve Jurors, that there was such a Custom. And beside, that whosoever
should draw any Man out of the said Town, in any Spiritual Court, should
forfeit six shillings and eight pence. The Bishop nevertheless cited the Mayor
to appear before him, pro Salute animae: And upon his appearance libelled for
that Cause, and enjoined him, upon pain of Excommunication, not to admit the
said Presentment. And whenas the Bishop could not deny his Fact, Judgment was
given, that he should be out of the King's Protection, his Goods and Chattels
forfeited, and his Body in Prison during the King's Pleasure. For which he had
the King's Pardon. Which was afterward confirmed in Parliament.

This Bishop's Diocese was now in such disorder, The Archbishop visit^ this
Bishop's See.
that the Archbishop instituted a Visitation of that See; wherein William May
LL. D. was the Archbishop's Commissary. The 28 th of July, the Bishop was
called and summoned to appear, but appeared not: And so was pronounced
Contumax. Cranmer's Reg.
But at another meeting he sent Dr. Cap his Proctor, by whom he made a
Protestation against their Doings and Jurisdiction; and that it was not decent
for that Reverend Father to appear before him, the Archbishop's Official.
However at another meeting, the Bishop not appearing at the Time and Place
appointed, Dr. May declared him obstinate, and to incur the Penalty of
Obstinacy. After this the Bishop, by his Proctor, was willing to submit to obey
Law, and to stand to the Command of the Church, and to do Penance for his said
Contumacy, to be enjoined by the Archbishop, or his Commissary. At another
Court the Bishop appeared in Person, and then showed himself willing to take
the said Commissary for Visitor, or any other in the Name of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. This Bishop was now fourscore Years old, and blind, as appears by a
Writing of his sent by his Proctor, dated September. 1534. He died two Years
after, and came in to be Bishop in the Year 1500.

This Bishop seems to have made himself very odious in his Diocese, The Bishop
of Norwich a Pe^secutor.
by his Fierceness and Rigors against such as were willing to be better
informed in Religion; whom he would style Men savouring of the Drying Pan. He
seized such Books as were brought from Beyond Sea, of which sort there were now
many, which tended to lay open the Corruptions of the Church; and especially
the New Testament, which he could not endure should be read. And when some of
these commonly gave out, that it was the King's Pleasure that such Books should
be read, he sent up studiously by the Abbot of Hyde, to have this showed to the
King; and begged his Letters under his Seal, to be directed to him, or any body
else whom the King pleased in his Diocese, to declare it was not his Pleasure
such Books should be among his Subjects, and to punish such as reported it was.
He sent also a Letter to Warham then Archbishop of Canterbury, making his
Complaint and Information to him, desiring him to send for the said Abbot, who
should tell him what his Thoughts were for the suppression of these Men; and
entreating the Archbishop to inform the King against these erroneous Men, as
he called them. Some part of his Diocese was bounded with the Sea, and Ipswich
and Yarmouth, and other Places of considerable Traffic, were under his
Jurisdiction. An. 1535.
And so there happened many Merchants and Mariners, who by Converse from
Abroad, had received knowledge of the Truth, and brought in diverse good Books.
This mightily angered the zealous Bishop, and he used all the Severity he could
to stop the Progress of Evangelical Truth, and wished for more Authority from
the King to punish it; for his Opinion was, that if they continued any time, he
thought they would undo them all, as he wrote to the Archbishop. This Letter
is in the Appendix. No. XII.


Bishops Consecrated.
April the 19 th, the Archbishop of Canterbury, invested in his Pontificals,
Goodrick Lee, and Salcot consecrated Bishops.
consecrated Thomas Goodrick, Doctor of Decrees, Bishop of Ely, in his Chapel
at Croydon; together with Rowland Lee, Doctor of Law, Bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry; and John Salcot, alias Capon, Doctor of Law, Bishop of Bangor: being
assisted by John Bishop of Lincoln, and Christopher Bishop of Sidon.

CHAP. VIII. The Archbishop preaches at Canterbury.
An. 1535.
IN order to the bettering the State of Religion in the Nation, the
Archbishop's Endeavors, both with the King and the Clergy, The Archbishop
preaches up the King's Supremacy at Canterbury.
were not wanting, from time to time. And something soon after fell out, which
afforded him a fair opportunity: which was this. The King resolving to
vindicate his own Right of Supremacy against the Encroachments of Popes in his
Dominions, especially now the Parliament had restored it to him, being at
Winchester, sent for his Bishops thither about Michaelmas, ordering them to go
down to their respective Diocesses, and there in their own Persons to preach up
the Regal Authority, and to explain to the People the Reason of excluding the
Pope from all Jurisdiction in these Realms. Our Archbishop, according to this
Command, speeds down into his Diocese to promote this Service for the King, and
the Church too. He went not into the nearer parts of Kent about Otford and
Knol, where his most frequent Residence used to be; because his Influence had a
good effect for the Instruction of the People thereabouts in this, as well as
in other Points of sound Religion: But he repaired into the East parts of his
Diocese, where he preached up and down upon the two Articles, of the Pope's
Usurpations, and the King's Supremacy. But the People of Canterbury being less
persuaded of these Points, than all his Diocese besides, there in his Cathedral
Church, he preached two Sermons: wherein he insisted upon three things.

I. That the Bishop of Rome was not God's Vicar upon Earth, as he was taken.
Here he declared by what Crafts the Bishop of Rome had obtained his usurped
Authority.

II. That the Holiness that See so much boasted of, and by which Name Popes
affected to be styled, was but a Holiness in Name; and that there was no such
Holiness at Rome. And here he launched out into the Vices and profligate kind
of living there.

III. He inveighed against the Bishop of Rome's Laws. Which were miscalled
Divinae Leges, and Sacri Canones. He said, that those of his Laws, which were
good, the King had commanded to be observed: And so they were to be kept out of
obedience to him. And here he descended to speak of the Ceremonies of the
Church: that they ought not to be rejected, nor yet to be observed with an
Opinion, that of themselves they make Men holy, or remit their Sins; seeing our
Sins are remitted by the Death of our Savior Christ. But that they were
observed for a common Commodity, and for good Order and Quietness, as the
Common Laws of the Kingdom were. And for this Cause, Ceremonies were instituted
in the Church, and for a remembrance of many good things; as the King's Laws
dispose Men unto Justice and unto Peace. And therefore he made it a general
Rule, that Ceremonies were to be observed as the Laws of the Land were.

These Sermons of the Archbishop, A Prior preaches against him.
it seems, as they were new Doctrines to them, so they were received by them at
first with much gladness. But the Friars did not at all like these Discourses:
They thought such Doctrines laid open the Truth too much, and might prove
prejudicial unto their Gains. And therefore by a Combination among themselves,
they thought it convenient, that the Archbishop's Sermons should be by some of
their Party confuted, and in the same place where he preached them. So soon
after came up the Prior of the black Friars in Canterbury, levelling his
Discourse against the three things that the Archbishop had preached. He
asserted the Church of Christ never erred: that he would not slander the
Bishops of Rome; and that the Laws of the Church were equal with the Laws of
God.

This angry Prior also told the Archbishop to his Face, in a good Audience,
concerning what he had preached of the Bishop of Rome's Vices, that he knew no
Vices by none of the Bishops of Rome. And whereas the Archbishop had said in
his Sermon to the People, that he had prayed many Years, that we might be
separated from that See, and that he might see the Power of Rome destroyed,
because it wrought so many things contrary to the Honor of God, and the Wealth
of the Realm; and because he saw no hopes of amendment; and that he thanked God
he had now seen it in this Realm; for this the Prior cried out against him,
that he preached uncharitably.

The Archbishop not suffering his Authority to be thus affronted, Whom he
convents before him.
nor the King's Service to be thus hindered, convented the Prior before him
before Christmas. At his first examination, he denied that he preached against
the Archbishop, and confessed that his Grace had not preached any thing amiss:
But sometime afterward, being got free from the mild Archbishop, and being
secretly upheld by some Persons in the Combination, he then said, he had
preached amiss in many things, and that he purposely preached against him. This
created the Archbishop abundance of Slander in those parts. The Business came
to the King's Ears, who seemed to require the Archbishop to censure him in his
own Court.

But upon occasion of this, the Archbishop wrote his whole Cause in a Letter
to the King, The Archbishop acquaints the King with the matter.
dated from his House at Ford, 1535. Declaring what he had preached, and what
the other had preached in contradiction to him. And withal entreated his
Majesty, that he, the Archbishop, might not have the judging of him, lest he
might seem partial; but that he would commit the hearing unto the Lord Privy
Seal, who was Crumwel: or else to assign unto him other Persons, whom his
Majesty pleased; that the Cause might be jointly heard together. He appealed to
the King and his Council, If the Prior did not defend the Bishop of Rome,
though he had said nothing else, than that the Church never erred. For then
they were no Errors, as he inferred, that were taught, of the Pope's Power; and
that he was Christ's Vicar in Earth, and by God's Law Head of all the World,
Spiritual and Temporal; and that all People must believe that de necessitate
Salutis; and that whosoever did any thing against the Sea of Rome, is an
Heretic. But if these be no Errors, then your Grace's Laws, said he, be
Erroneous, that pronounce the Bishop of Rome to be of no more Power than other
Bishops, and them to be Traitors, that defend the contrary. In fine, in the
stomach of an Archbishop, and finding it necessary to put a stop to the ill
designs of these Friars, he concluded, That if that Man, who had so highly
offended the King, and openly preached against him, being his Ordinary, and
Metropolitan of the Province, and that in such Matters as concerned the
Authority, Mis-living and Laws of the Bishop of Rome; and that also within his
own Church: if he were not looked upon, he left it to the King's Prudence to
expend, what Example it might prove unto others, with like color to maintain
the Bishop of Rome's Authority; and of what estimation he the Archbishop
should be reputed hereafter, and what Credence would be given unto his
preaching for time to come. And he left his Majesty to hear the Testimony of
Dr. Leighton, one of the King's Visitors, who was present at the Sermon the
Archbishop then made. This Letter, the Contents whereof I have now set down, I
have placed in the Appendix, No. XIII.
as well worthy the preserving among the rest of the Monuments of this
Archbishop, as I transcribed it out of the Cotton Library. I do not find what
Issue this Business had: but I suspect the Black Friars of Canterbury had a
black Mark set upon them by the King for this Opposition of his Archbishop, in
the discharge of his Commands.

But to speak a little of a Provincial Visitation, Iure Metropolitico, which
the Archbishop had begun the last Year, A Provincial Visitation.
viz. 1534, being his first Visitation. It was somewhat extraordinary; for such
a Visitation had not been in an hundred Years before. For this he got the
King's License, to countenance his doings, knowing what oppositions he should
meet with. In the Month of May we find him at his House at Otford about this
Business: The main End whereof was to promote the King's Supremacy, and, as
opportunity served, to correct the Superstitions of this Church, and to inspect
even Bishops and Cathedrals themselves.

In Apr. 1535, Winchester herein opposes him.
Cranmer had sent his Monition to Steph. Gardener Bishop of Winchester, that he
would visit his Diocese. The Bishop, who never loved the Archbishop, and being
a great upholder of the old Popish Superstitions, was the more jealous of this
Visitation, opposing himself as much as he could against it; and would have
picked an Hole in Cranmer's Coat, for stiling himself, in the Instrument of the
Process, Totius Angliae Primas; as though this had been an high Reflection upon
the King, and detracted much from his Supremacy. Of this therefore he went and
made a Complaint to the King himself: and taking it in some Indignation, that
the Archbishop should visit his Diocese, he pretended to the King, that the
Clergy of his Diocese would be driven to great streights, and mightily
oppressed, if it should be now visited again, having been visited but five
Years ago by his Predecessor Warham; especially being also to pay a new Duty,
enjoined by the Parliament, namely, their Tenths; hoping hereby to evade the
Archbishop's inspection into the Corruptions of the Diocese of Winchester.

All this Crumwel, his Friend, certified him of, by his Chaplain, The ABp's
vindication of his title of Primate^
one Champion. Winchester indeed, whatsoever he pretended, tendered not so much
the King's Cause, as his own, that he might not be visited. For otherwise he
would have complained to the King of this Matter before Cranmer's signification
to him of a Visitation, since he always bare the Title of Primate of all
England, as being the common Style of the Archbishop. And if this Style of
Primacy was a diminution to the King, it would have been so to the Pope, when
Winchester held him, as he did once, for Supreme Head of the Church: but then
he never made any complaint against those Archbishops that styled themselves
Primats. The Pope's Supreme Authority was not less thought of, because he had
such Primates under him, but rather more. And the King might therefore have
such as were Primates under him, without any derogation to his Authority. Nor
did Cranmer value at all Names and Titles; and if he thought it any thing
interfering with the King's Honor, he would himself have been the first to sue
for the taking it wholly away. This he signified in a Letter to Secretary
Crumwel; which because it has many excellent things declarative of the good
Temper and Spirit of Cranmer, I have presented it to the Reader's Eye in the
Appendix, No. XIV.
being an Original in the Cotton Library.

And as Winchester had picked a Quarrel with him for one part of his
Archiepiscopal Style; so Stokesly Bishop of London, The Bp of London refuses
his Visitation.
a Man of the same inveterate Temper against Cranmer, refused his Visitation,
because he styled himself, in his Monitions, Apostolicae Sedis Legatus. For
under that Title he Convented that Bishop, with the Abbots, Priors, and
Archdeacon of London, to appear before him at a Visitation, which he intended
to hold at the Chapter House in St. Paul's Church London. But the Bishop of
London, and the Chapter, warned him of assuming that Title, as making against
the King's Prerogative. And at the Visitation it self in S. Paul's, they made a
Protestation; which was openly read. The import whereof was, that they would
not accept him as such a Legate, and neither admit nor submit to his Visitation
under that Name; and required the Archbishop's Register to enter their
Protestation. And upon his refusal thereof, delivered a Certificate of what
they had done. Stokesly also contended with him for suspending all the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop, Dean, and Archdeacon, during his Visitation. To
which the Archbishop answered, it was no more than his Predecessors had
usually done in those Cases. In fine, they appealed, in their own
justification, unto the King, and desired his License to defend themselves
against him by the Laws, and as the Parliament had provided. Thus they showed
before, their secret Malice, and violent Opposition against the good
Archbishop, and how afraid they were of his Visitation; glad to catch any
thing to enervate his Authority. The sum of which Appeal drawn up by Stokesly,
being somewhat too long to be subjoined here, No. XV.
may be read in the Appendix.

Finally, upon the Archbishop's visiting of his Diocese, he entered three
Protestations against it (as may appear in Stokesley's Register) for preserving
his Privileges. And protests against him.


Cranmer sends him a part of the New Testament to translate. And his Answer.
This Man ever carried himself perversely to the Archbishop. It was not long
after this time, that the Archbishop, whose Mind ran very much upon bringing
in the free use of the Holy Scripture in English among the People, put on
vigorously a Translation of it. And that it might not come to be prohibited, as
it had been, upon pretense of the Ignorance or Unfaithfulness of the
Translators, he proceeded in this method. ^^xii MSS.
First, He began with the Translation of the New Testament; taking an old
English Translation thereof, which he divided into nine or ten Parts; causing
each Part to be written at large in a paper Book, and then to be sent to the
best Learned Bishops and others; to the intent they should make a perfect
Correction thereof. And when they had done, he required them to send back their
Parts, so corrected, unto him at Lambeth, by a day limited for that purpose:
and the same course, no question, he took with the Old Testament. It chanced
that the Acts of the Apostles were sent to Bishop Stokesly to oversee and
correct. When the Day came, every Man had sent to Lambeth their Parts
corrected, only Stokeslye's Portion was wanting: My Lord of Canterbury wrote to
the Bishop a Letter for his Part, requiring him to deliver them unto the
Bringer his Secretary. He received the Archbishop's Letter at Fulham. Unto
which he made this Answer; I marvel what my Lord of Canterbury means, that
thus abuses the People, in giving them liberty to read the Scriptures: which
does nothing else but infect them with Heresy. I have bestowed never an Hour
upon my Portion, nor never will. And therefore my Lord shall have this Book
again, for I will never be guilty of bringing the simple People into Error. My
Lord of Canterbury's Servant took the Book, and brought the same to Lambeth
unto my Lord, declaring my Lord of London's Answer. When the Archbishop had
perceived that the Bishop had done nothing therein, I marvel, said he* that my
Lord of London is so froward that he will not do as other Men do. One Mr.
Thomas* Lawney stood by; ^^wney's Jest upon S^okesly.
and hearing my Lord speak so much of the Bishop's untowardness, said, I can
tell your Grace why my Lord of London will not bestow any labor or pains this
way. Your Grace knows well, that his Portion is a piece of New Testament. But
he being persuaded, that Christ had bequeathed him nothing in his Testament,
thought it mere madness to bestow any labor or pain, where no Gain was to be
gotten. And besides this, it is the Acts of the Apostles; which were simple
poor Fellows, and therefore my Lord of London disdained to have to do with any
of them. Whereat my Lord of Canterbury, and others that stood by, could not
forbear from laughter.

This Lawney was a witty Man, Who this Lawney was.
and Chaplain to the old Duke of Norfolk, and had been one of the Scholars
placed by the Cardinal in his New College at Oxon. Where he was Chaplain of the
House, and Prisoner there with Frith, another of the Scholars. In the Time of
the six Articles he was a Minister in Kent, placed there, I suppose, by the
Archbishop. When that severe Act was past, more by the Authority of a
Parliament, than by the Authority of the Word of God, it chanced, that my Lord
of Norfolk meeting with this his Chaplain, said, O! my Lawney, (knowing him of
old much to favor Priests Matrimony) whether may Priests now have Wives or no?
If it please your Grace, replied he, I cannot well tell whether Priests may
have Wives or no: But well I wot, and am sure of it, for all your Act, that
Wives will have Priests. Hearken, Masters, said the Duke, how this Knave
scorneth our Act, and makes it not worth a Fly. Well, I see by it that thou will never forget thy old Tricks. And so the Duke, and such Gentlemen as were
with him, went away merrily, laughing at Lawney's sudden and apt Answer. The
Reader will excuse this Digression.

CHAP. IX. Monasteries visited.
THis Year the Monasteries were visited by Cramwel, Monasteri^^ visited. The
ABp for their Dissolution.
Chief Visitor. Who appointed Leighton, Legh, Petre, London, his Deputies, with
Injunctions given them to be observed in their Visitation. Indeed the King now
had thoughts of dissolving them, as well as visiting them. Whose Ends herein
were, partly because he saw the Monks and Friars so untoward toward him, and
so bent to the Pope; and partly to enrich himself with the Spoils. Archbishop
Cranmer is said also to have counseled and pressed the King to it* but for
other Ends, viz. That out of the Revenues of these Monasteries, the King might
found more Bishoprics; and that Diocesses being reduced into less compass, the
Diocesans might the better discharge their Office, according to the Scripture
and Primitive Rules: And because the Archbishop saw how inconsistent these
Foundations were with the Reformation of Religion; Purgatory, Masses,
Pilgrimages, Worship of Saints and Images being effectual to their
Constitution, as the Bishop of Sarum has observed. Hist. R^^. P. ^. p. 189,
190.
And the Archbishop hoped that from these Ruins there would be new Foundations
in every Cathedral erected, to be Nurseries of Learning, for the use of the
whole Diocese. But however short our Archbishop fell of his Ends, desired and
hoped for by these Dissolutions, the King obtained his. For the vast Riches
that the Religious Houses brought in to the King, may be guessed by what was
found in one, namely, S. Swithins, Winchester. An account of the Treasures
whereof I having once observed from a Manuscript in the Benet Library, thought
not amiss here to lay before the Reader; which he may find in the Appendix. No.
XVI.


The Visitors Informations.
When these Visitors returned home from their Visitation, they came well stocked
with Informations of the loose, wicked and abominable Lives, and Irregularities
of the chief Members of these Houses of Religion, having by diligent
inquisition throughout all England collected them. These Enormities were read
publicly in the Parliament House, being brought in by the Visitors. When they
were first read, nothing was done with these unclean Abbots and Priors: But
within a while, says Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward, Second Sermon.
how bad soever the Rep^^ts of them were, some of them were made Bishops, and
others put into good Dignities in the Church: that so the King might save their
Pensions, which were otherwise to be paid them.

Now I will, at the conclusion of my Collections for this Year, set down the
Names of the Bishops this Year consecrated, both Diocesan and Suffragan:
Bishops Diocesan and Suffragan consecrated.
there having been an Act of Parliament made in the six and twentieth of the
King, (that is, the last Year) for furnishing the Diocesses with six and twenty
Suffragans, for the better aid and comfort of the Diocesans: The Se^s whereof
are all set down in the said Act. But I doubt whether there were ever so many
made. At least the mention of the Acts of the Consecration of some of the
Suffragans in the Province of Canterbury are omitted in the Register.

Suffragan Bps usual in the Realm.
Before this Act of Parliament enjoining the number of Suffragans, Suffragans
were not unusual in the Realm. Whom the Bishops Diocesans, either for their own
ease, or because of their necessary absence from their Diocesses in Ambassies
abroad, or Attendance upon the Court, or civil Affairs, procured to be
consecrated to reside in their steads. Thus to give some Instances of them, as
I have met with them. About the Year 1531, I find one Underwood, Suffragan in
Norwich, that degraded Bilney before his Martyrdom. Certain, bearing the Title
of Bishops of Sidon, assisted the Archbishops of Canterbury. One of these was
named Thomas Wellys, Prior of S. Gregory's by Canterbury. He, being Archbishop
Warham's Chaplain, was sent by him to Cardinal Wolsey, to expostulate with him
in his Lord's Name, for encroaching upon his Prerogative Court. There was
afterward one Christopher, that bore that Title, and assisted Archbishop
Cranmer about these Times in Ordinations; and another Thomas, entitled also of
Sidon, succeeded. Long before these, I find one William Bottlesham, Espicopus
Navatensis, Anno 1382, at the Convocation House in London, summoned against the
Wicklivites, Ex Regist. ABp Courtney.
that then showed themselves at Oxford. Robert King, Abbot of Oseney, while
Abbot, was consecrated titular Bishop, and called Episcopus Roannensis, a See
in the Province of the Archbishopric of Athens. This is he that resigned
Oseny, and Tame, under the name of Bishop of Reonen: Of which See the Bishop of
Sarum was at a stand. Hist. Re^. Coll. p. 148. Godwin's Catal.
He was translated from this imaginary Bishopric to be Bishop of Oxford, in
the Year 1541. One John Hatton had the Title of Episcopus Negropont: He was
Suffragan under the Archbishop of York. John Thornden, who was several times
Commissiary of Oxon, while Archbishop Warham was Chancellor of that
University, was styled Episcopus Syrinensis. And hereafter, Ath. Oxonien.
in the progress of this Book, we shall meet with a Bishop of Hippolitanum, who
assisted Archbishop Cranmer at his Ordinations. These were but Titulary
Bishops; and the use of them was, to supply the Diocesans absence, to
consecrate Churches and Churchyards, and to reconcile them, to assist at
Ordinations, and confer Orders, to confirm Children, and the like.

Sometimes these Suffragans had no Titles at all to any place, Bishops without
Title.
but were Bishops at large. Such an one, named Richard Martin, is met with in
an old Register at Canterbury, who was Guardian of the Gray-Fryars there. By
his last Will, made 1498, he gave a Library to the Church and Covent. He was
Parson of Ickham, and Vicar of Lyd in Kent; and writ himself in the said Will,
Sumner's Antiq. of Cant.
Bishop of the Universal Church: By which the Antiquarian supposed nothing else
was meant, but that he was a Bishop in Name, endued with Orders, but not with
Jurisdiction Episcopal, having no particular Charge to intend, but generally
officiating as Bishop in any part of the Christian Church. This I have writ,
that the Reader may not be put to a stand, when he shall, in these
Commentaries, meet with some of these Titular Bishops.

But proceed we now to the Bishops that were this Year Consecrated.

Diocesan Bishops.
April the 11 th, Nicholas Shaxton was consecrated Bishop of Sarum, Nic.
Shaxton.
in the King's Chapel of S. Stephen, by our Archbishop, John Bishop of
Lincoln and Christopher Sidoniens. assisting.

September. the 15 th, was the Act of Confirmation and Election of Edward Fox,
Elect of Hereford, Edward Fox. William Barlow.
and of William Barlow Prior of the Priory of Canons Regular of Bisham, of the
Order of S. Augustine Sarum, for the Bishopric of S. Asaph. The Consecration of
these two last are not inserted in the Register.

March the 18 th, George Brown.
the Act of Confirmation and Election of George Brown, D. D. Provincial of the
Order of Friars Augustine in the City of London, for the Archbishopric of
Dublin. Consecrated March the 19 th by the Archbishop at Lambeth, Nicholas
Bishop of Sarum, and John Bishop of Rochester assisting.

Of this last-mentioned Bishop, I shall take some further notice, A Memorial of
the good Services of ABp Brown in Ireland.

Life and Death of Geo. Brown, printed in Dublin.


having been the first Protestant Bishop in Ireland, as Cranmer was in England;
a great furtherer of the Reformation in that Land, being a stirring Man, and of
good Parts and Confidence. He was first taken notice of by Crumwel, Lord Privy
Seal, and by his sole means preferred to this Dignity in the Church of Ireland:
upon the observation that was taken of him, when he was Provincial of the
Augustine Order in England, advising all People to make their Application only
to Christ, and not to Saints. Whereby he was recommended unto K. Henry, who
much favored him. When the King's Supremacy was to be brought in, and
recognized in Ireland, which was the same Year wherein he was made Archbishop;
he was appointed one of the King's Commissioners, for the procuring the
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, to reject the Pope, and to own the King for
Supreme Head of the Church. In which Commission he acted with that diligence,
that it was to the hazard of his Life, such opposition was made to it in that
Realm. At which time, in an Assembly of the Clergy, George Dowdal Archbishop
of Ardmagh made a Speech to them, and laid a Curse upon those, whosoever they
were, that should own the King's Supremacy. Within five Years after this, this
Archbishop Brown caused all Superstitious Relics and Images to be removed out
of the two Cathedrals in Dublin, and out of the rest of the Churches in his
Diocese; and ordered the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, to
be set up in Frames above the Altar in Christ's-Church Dublin. In K. Edward VI.
his Reign, he received the English Common Prayer Book into that Realm, upon the
King's Proclamation for that purpose, after much opposition by Dowdal. And it
was read in Christ's-Church, Dublin, on Easter Day, 1551. He preached also a
Sermon in Christ's-Church, for having the Scripture in the Mother Tongue, and
against Image Worship. And for this his forwardness and conformity in Religion,
and the perverseness of the other Archbishop of Ardmagh, who had violently
resisted all good Proceedings, the Title of Primacy was taken from him, and
conferred upon the Archbishop of Dublin: And Dowdal was banished, or, as
others say, voluntarily left his Bishopric. And then Goodacre, sent from
England with Bale for the Sea of Ossory, succeeded. In Q. Mary's days, Dowdal
was restored: and, being a great Man in this Reign, expulsed Archbishop Brown
from his See, for being a married Man: Who two or three Years after was
succeeded by Hugh Corwin, (a Complier in all Reigns) and Brown soon after died.

Suffragan Bishops.
Tho. Mannyng.
The first of these standing in the Register of the Archbishop, was the
Suffragan of the Sea of Ipswich. The Bishop of Norwich, according to the
direction of the late Act, Regist. Cran.
(wherein the Bishop was to nominate two for Suffragan to the King, and the
King was to name one of them to the Archbishop, to receive Consecration)
humbly signified to the King, that he was destitute of the Aid of a Suffragan;
and so prayed him to appoint, either George, Abbot of the Monastery of S.
Mary's of Leyston, or Thomas Mannyng, Prior of the Monastery of S. Mary's of
Butley, to be his Suffragan; without mentioning for what place. And on the 7 th
of March, in the 27 th of his Reign, he sent to the Archbishop to make the
latter Suffragan of Gipwich. Who was accordingly consecrated by the
Archbishop, and invested in insigniis Episcopalibus; Nicholas Bishop of Sarum,
and John Bishop of Rochester, assisting. The Date not specified; but probably
on the same Day with the Consecration following, An. 1536.
there being the same Assistants.

The said Bishop of Norwich sent to the King, John Salisbury.
recommending to him to be Suffragan, Thomas de Castleacre, of the Cluniac
Order, and John Salisbury Prior of S. Faiths of Horsham, of the Order of S.
Benet, both Priors of Monasteries in Norwich Diocese. The King sent to the
Archbishop to consecrate John the Prior of S. Faiths, for Suffragan of
Thetford. Accordingly he consecrated him March the 19 th, Nicholas Bishop of
Sarum, and John Bishop of Rochester assisting.

CHAP. X. The Audience Court.
THE good Archbishop almost every Year met with new Opposition from the Popish
Clergy. An. 1536.
The late Act for abolishing the Pope's Authority, and some Acts before that,
for restraining of Applications to Rome, The ABp's Audience Court struck at.
served them now as a Color to strike at one of the Archbishop's Courts, viz.
that of the Audience, (a Court which the Archbishops used to hold in their own
Houses, where they received Causes, Complaints and Appeals; and had learned
Civilians living with them, that were Auditors of the said Causes, before the
Archbishop gave Sentence) pretending that he held it as the Pope's Legate:
Urging also the great Troubles and Inconveniences it caused, both to the Clergy
and the Laity; and that every Man must, by virtue of that Court, be forced up
to London, from the farthest part of the Land, for a slanderous Word, or a
Trifle. And that they thought it convenient, if it were the King's Pleasure to
continue that Court, that he would settle it upon some other, and not upon the
Archbishop, that so it might appear, the Original of that Court was from the
King, and not from the Pope. And lastly, that it would not be safe to
constitute the Archbishop the Pope's Legate, because it would infringe the
Power of the Vicar General. This was drawn up in way of Petition and Complaint,
either to the King or Parliament, by a Combination of some of the Convocation,
as I suspect, the Paper being writ by the Hand of the Register of the Lower
House of Convocation. The great Wheel we may be sure, that set a moving this
Device, was Winchester, his never-failing Adversary.

The King, notwithstanding, The Abp. defends it*
bad the Archbishop maintain his Court. And he answered all their Pleas
against it; and by way of Protestation affirmed, that he kept not his Court by
virtue of his Bull from Rome for Legate, and that none could suspect that he
did. And that he saw no Cause, but that he might keep that Court by virtue of
the late Act of Parliament, that gave Power to enjoy all things that were
before had from the Sea of Rome. And finally, he answered, that it was the
King's Will and Command that he should continue his Court. To which the
Convocation, or rather some part of it, made a Reply, that may be seen in the
Appendix. No. XVII.


But notwithstanding these Discouragements, (which were thrown in probably to
hinder his good Designs) the Archbishop vigorously prosecuted a Reformation at
this Convocation. The ABp. promoting a Reformation in the Convocation.
Where, assisted by Crumwel, the King's Vicar General, he earnestly labored
for the redress of several Abuses and Errors in the English Church. And that
not without good Success at length. For after much deliberation among the
Clergy there assembled, and much opposition too, he got a Book of diverse good
Articles to that purpose to be agreed upon and subscribed. An account of which
by and by shall follow.

CHAP. XI. Articles of Religion.
Articles published and recommended by the King.
NOW though I do not find the King went so far, as that it should be enjoined on
all the Clergy to own the Articles of this Book by their own Hands subscribed,
yet he published and recommended them to all his loving Subjects in general, to
accept and repute them to be agreeable to God's Laws, and proper for the
establishment of Peace and Concord: And further probably in prudence the King
thought not fit yet to go, considering the great Disputes and Arguments that
had happened in the Convocation hereupon. Now because this was one of the great
Services our pious Prelate contributed to the Church, and was one of the first
Steps made in the Reformation of the Doctrine and Worship, it will not be amiss
here, in order to the inlightning this History, to set down the Heads of this
Book, though it be done by others before me. And notwithstanding what the Noble
Author of the History of Henry VIII, Life Hen. VIII. p. 466.
says, he gathered by some Records, that this Book was devised by the King
himself, and recommended afterward to the Convocation by Crumwel, yet we have
reason to attribute a great share therein to the Archbishop.

The Original thereof.
They that are minded to see a Draught of these Articles from the Original, with
the Royal Assent prefixed to them, may have it in Dr. Fuller's Church History:
Which he tells us he transcribed out of the Acts of the Convocation. Book V. p.
213.
The Bishop of Sarum also met with an Original of them, in the Cotton Library,
wrote out fairly, as it seems for the King's own Use, and subscribed with all
the Hands of the Convocation thereunto. Addenda to the Collection, Number. 1.
He also has inserted the Transcript of them in the first part of his History
of the Reformation.

The Original sent into the North to show to the Rebels.
In the Rebellion in the North, which happened this Year 1536, chiefly raised by
Priests and Friars, many Copies of these Articles (for the Book was printed by
Barthelet) did Crumwel send by the King's Order, to the Duke of Norfolk, the
King's Lieutenant there, to disperse in those Parts, together with the Original
Copy it self, as it was signed by the Hands of the Convocation, amounting to
the number of 116 Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Archdeacons, and Proctors of the
Clergy. Which the said Duke had order to show unto the Clergy and others, as
occasion served; that they might understand it was a proper Act of the Church,
and no Innovation of the King, and a few of his Counselors, as they gave out.
And after he had made his use of this Original, he was required to reserve it
safe for the King. This choice Treasure, which the King himself required such
care to be taken of, Sir Robert Cotton afterward procured, at his no small
Expense, no doubt. It is very fairly written in Vellam; and at the bottom of
the first Page is written, Robertus Cotton Bruceus, by Sir Robert's own Hand,
signifying his Value of this Monument. It is still extant in that incomparable
Library in the Volume Cleopatra E. 5. And there I have seen it, and diligently
compared it. Excuse this Digression, and I now proceed to the Articles
themselves.

These Articles were of two sorts: some concerning Faith, The Contents of them.
and some concerning Ceremonies.

The former sort were digested under these five Titles following.

I. The Principal Articles of Faith. And they were these. Articles of Faith.
That all those things that be comprehended in the whole Body and Canon of the
Bible, and in the three Creeds, are true, and constantly to be believed. That
we take and hold the same for the most holy and infallible Words of God. That
the Articles of the Faith, contained in the Creeds, are necessary to be
believed for Man's Salvation. That the same words be kept, in which the
Articles of Faith are conceived. That all Opinions contrary to the Articles;
and which were condemned in the four first Councils, are to be utterly refused.

II. The Sacrament of Baptism. That it was instituted and ordained by Jesus
Christ as necessary to Everlasting Life. That by it all, as well Infants as
such as have the use of Reason, have Remission of Sins, and the Grace and
Favor of God offered them. That Infants, and Innocents must be Baptized,
because the Promise of Grace and Everlasting Life, pertains as well to them as
to those who have the use of Reason. And that therefore Baptized Infants shall
undoubtedly be saved. That they are to be Baptized, because of Original Sin,
which is remitted only by Baptism. That they that are once Baptized, must not
be Baptized again* That the Opinions of Anabaptists and Pelagians are to be
held for detestable Heresies. That those, who having the use of Reason, shall
come to Baptism, shall obtain the Remission of all their Sins, if they come
thereunto perfectly and truly repentant, confessing and believing all the
Articles of the Faith, and having firm Credence and Trust in the Promise of God
adjoined to the said Sacrament.

III. The Sacrament of Penance. That that Sacrament was instituted of Christ in
the New Testament, as a thing so necessary for Man's Salvation, that no Man
that after his Baptism is fallen again, and has committed deadly Sin, can
without the same be saved. That such Penitents shall without doubt attain
Remission of their Sins. That this Sacrament consists of Contrition,
Confession, and Amendment of Life. That Contrition consists, first, of
Acknowledgment of our Sins. Unto which the Penitent is brought by hearing and
considering the Will of God declared in his Laws, and feeling in his own
Conscience that God is angry, and this joined with Sorrow and Shame, and fear
of God's Displeasure. That, secondly, it consists of Faith, Trust and
Confidence in the Mercies and Goodness of God: whereby the Penitent must
conceive certain Hope, and repute himself justified, not for any Merit or Work
done by him, but by the only Merits of the Blood of Jesus Christ. That this
Faith is begotten and confirmed by the Application of Christ's Words and
Promises. That Confession to a Priest, the second part of Penance, is
necessary, where it may be had. That the Absolution given by the Priest, was
instituted of Christ, to apply the Promises of God's Grace to the Penitent. And
that the words of Absolution, pronounced by the Priest, are spoken by the
Authority given him by Christ. That Men must give no less Faith and Credence to
the Words of Absolution, pronounced by the Ministers of the Church, than they
would give unto the very Words and Voice of God himself. And that Men in no
wise contemn this Auricular Confession. As to the third part of Penance, viz.
Amendment of Life, That all are bound to bring forth the Fruits of Penance,
that is to say, Prayer, Fasting and Alms-deeds, and to make Restitution and
Satisfaction in Will and Deed to their Neighbor, and all other good Works, or
else they shall never be saved. That Works of Charity be necessary to
Salvation. That by Penance and such good Works we do not only obtain
Everlasting Life, but deserve Remission or Mitigation of these present Pains
and Affliction in this World. Mark here by the way, how the Doctrine of Merits
is propounded. Our Merits do not extend to Pardon and Everlasting Life, but
only to the removal or abatement of temporal Afflictions.

IV. The Sacrament of the Altar. That under the Form and Figure of Bread and
Wine is verily and substantially contained that very same Body and Blood, which
was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross. And that the
self-same Body and Blood of Christ is distributed unto, and received by all the
Communicants. That therefore this Sacrament is to be used with all due
reverence and honor. And that before any receive it, he ought religiously to
try and search his own Conscience.

V. Justification. That the word signifies Remission of Sins, and our
Acceptance or Reconciliation into the Grace and Favor of God. That Sinners
attain this Justification by Contrition and Faith joined with Charity. That
neither our Contrition and Faith, nor any Work proceeding thence, can merit or
deserve the said Justification. That the Mercy and Grace of the Father,
promised freely for Christ's Sake, and the Merit of his Blood and Passion, be
the only sufficient and worthy Causes thereof.

This was the Sum of the Articles concerning Faith. Those concerning Ceremonies
followed next: which were likewise comprised under five Titles.

Articles relating to Ceremonies.
I. Of Images. That they be representers of Virtue and good Example. That they
be stirrers of Men's Minds, and make them often to remember and lament their
Sins: especially the Images of Christ and our Lady. That it was meet they
should stand in the Churches, but be none otherwise esteemed. That the Bishops
and Preachers diligently teach the People according to this Doctrine, lest
there might fortune Idolatry to ensue. That they be taught also, that Censing,
Kneeling, and Offering to Images, be by no means to be done, (although the same
had entered by Devotion, and fallen to Custom) but only to God and in his
Honor, though it be done before the Images.

II. Of Honoring Saints. That they are to be honored, but not with that
Confidence and Honor, that is due only unto God, trusting to attain at their
Hands, that which must be had only of God. That most especially Christ is to be
lauded and praised in them, for their excellent Virtues, which he planted in
them; and for their good Example. And that they are to be taken, wherein they
may, to be the Advancers of our Prayers and Demands unto Christ.

III. Of Praying to Saints. That tho Grace and Remission of Sins be to be
obtained only of God, by the Mediation of Christ; yet it is very laudable to
pray to Saints in Heaven, to be Intercessors, and to pray for us and with us
unto God, after this manner: All Holy Angels and Saints in Heaven, pray for us
and with us unto the Father, that for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, we
may have Grace of him, and Remission of our Sins, with an earnest purpose (not
wanting ghostly Strength) to observe and keep his Holy Commandments, and never
to decline from the same again unto our lives end. That in this manner we may
pray to our Blessed Lady, Saint John Baptist, or any other Saint particularly:
So that it be done without any vain Superstition; as to think that any Saint is
more merciful, or will hear us sooner than Christ; or that any Saint does serve
for one thing more than another. That Holy Days are to be kept to God, in
memory of him and his Saints upon such Days as the Church has ordained: but
may be mitigated and moderated by the King, being Supreme Head.

IV. Of Rites and Ceremonies. As Vestments in God's Service, Sprinkling Holy
Water, Giving Holy Bread, Bearing Candles on Candlemass-day, Giving of Ashes on
Ash Wednesday, Bearing of Palms on Palm Sunday; Creeping to the Cross, and
kissing it, and offering unto Christ before the same on Good Friday; Setting up
the Sepulcher of Christ, Hallowing of the Font, and other-like Exorcisms and
Benedictions, and laudable Customs. That these are not to be contemned and cast
away, but continued, to put us in remembrance of Spiritual Things. But that
none of these Ceremonies have power to remit Sin.

V. Of Purgatory. That Christians are to pray for Souls departed, and to commit
them in their Prayers to God's Mercy, and cause others to pray for them in
Masses and Exequies; and to give Alms to others to pray for them, that they may
be relieved and helped of some part of their Pain. But because the Place where
they be, the Name thereof, and kinds of Pain there, is to us uncertain by
Scripture, therefore we remit this, with all other things, to Almighty God;
unto whose Mercies it is meet to commend them. That such Abuses be put away,
which under the Name of Purgatory have been advanced. As to make Men believe,
that through the Bishop of Rome's Pardons, Souls might clearly be delivered out
of Purgatory, and the Pains of it: or that Masses said at Scala Coeli, or
otherwise in any Place, or before any Image, might deliver them from all their
Pains, and send them straight to Heaven.

A Conjecture, that the Pen of the ABp was here.
These are the Contents of that memorable Book of Articles. There are Reasons
added now and then, to confirm the respective Tenets there laid down, and many
Quotations of Holy Scripture, which for brevity sake I have omitted. Which one
may conjecture to have been inserted by the Pen of the Archbishop: Who was the
great Introducer of this Practice, of proving or confuting Opinions in Religion
by the Word of God, instead of the ordinary Custom then used, of doing it by
Schoolmen and Popish Canons. We find indeed many Popish Errors here mixed with
Evangelical Truths. Which must either be attributed to the Defectiveness of our
Prelate's Knowledge as yet in True Religion, or being the Principles and
Opinions of the King, or both. Let not any be offended herewith, but let him
rather take notice, what a great deal of Gospel-Doctrine here came to light,
and not only so, but was owned and propounded by Authority to be believed and
practiced. The Sun of Truth was now but rising, and breaking through the thick
Mists of that Idolatry, Superstition, and Ignorance, that had so long prevailed
in this Nation, and the rest of the World, and was not yet advanced to its
Meridian Brightness.

CHAP. XII. Cranmer's Judgment about some Cases of Matrimony.
Two remarkable Books published.
IN this Year then came forth two remarkable Books: whereof both the King, and
the Archbishop and Bishops might be said to be joint Composers. In as much as
they seemed to be devised by the Archbishop, and some of the Bishops; and then
Revised, Noted, Corrected and Enlarged by the King.

I. The Book of Articles.
The one of these was the Book of Articles of Religion mentioned before. This
Book bore this Title, Articles devised by the King's Highness, to stable
Christian Quietness and Unity among the People, etc. With a Preface by the
King. Where the King says, he was constrained to put his own Pen to the Book,
and to conceive certain Articles. Which words, I leave to the Conjecture of the
Reader, whether by them he be inclined to think that the King were the first
Writer of them, or that being writ and composed by another, they were perused,
considered, corrected and augmented by his Pen.

II. A Book against the Pope, called the Bishop's Book.
The other Book that came out this Year, was occasioned by a Piece published by
Reginald Pole, entitled De Union Ecclesiastica. Which inveighing much against
the King for assuming the Supremacy, and extolling the Pope unmeasurably, he
employed the Archbishop, and some other Bishops, to compile a Treatise,
showing the Usurpations of Popes; and how late it was e're they took this
Superiority upon them, some hundred Years passing before they did it. And that
all Bishops were limited to their own Diocesses by one of the eight Councils,
to which every Pope did swear. And how the Papal Authority was first derived
from the Emperor, and not from Christ. For this there were good Arguments taken
from the Scriptures and the Fathers. The Book was signed by both the
Archbishops, Herbert's Life of K. Henry, p. 418.
and nineteen other Bishops. It was called the Bishops Book, because devised by
them.

The Lord Crumwel did use to consult with the Archbishop, Certain Cases of
Matrimony put to the ABp.
in all his Ecclesiastical Matters. And there happened now, while the
Archbishop was at Ford, a great Case of Marriage: Whom it concerned I cannot
tell, but the King was desirous to be resolved about it by the Archbishop, and
commanded Crumwel to send to him for his Judgment therein. The Case was
threefold.

I. Whether Marriage contracted or solemnized in Lawful Age per Verba de
presenti, and without carnal Copulation, be Matrimony before God or no?

II. Whether such Matrimony be consummate, or no? And,

III. What the Woman may thereupon demand by the Law Civil, after the death of
her Husband? This I suppose was a cause that lay before the King and his
Ecclesiastical Vicegerent, to make some determination of. And I suspect it
might relate to Katharine, his late divorced Queen.

The Archbishop, who was a very good Civilian, His Solution.
as well as a Divine, but that loved to be wary and modest in all his
Decisions, made these Answers.

That as to the first, he and his Authors were of Opinion, that Matrimony
contracted per Verba de presenti, was perfect Matrimony before God. 2. That
such Matrimony is not utterly consummated, as that term is commonly used among
the School-Divines and Lawyers, but by carnal Copulation. 3. As to the Woman's
Demands by the Law Civil, he therein professed his Ignorance. And he had no
learned Men with him there at Ford to consult with for their Judgments: only
Dr. Barbar, (a Civilian, that he always retained with him) who neither could
pronounce his Mind without his Books, and some learned Men to confer with upon
the Case; But he added, that he marvelled, that the Votes of the Civil Lawyer
should be required herein; seeing that all manner of Causes of Dower be judged
within this Realm by the Common Laws of the same. And that there were plenty of
well-learned Men in the Civil Law at London, that undoubtedly could certify the
King's Majesty of the Truth herein, as much as appertained unto that Law:
warily declining to make any positive Judgment in a Matter so ticklish. This
happened in the month of January.

And indeed in these Times there were great Irregularities about Marriage in
the Realm: many being incestuous and unlawful. Refuses to grant a Dispensation
for the Marriage of a Relation.
Which caused the Parliament, two or three Years past, viz, 1533. in one of
their Acts, to publish a Table of Degrees, wherein it was prohibited by God's
Law to marry. But the Act did not cure this Evil: many thought to bear out
themselves in their illegal Contracts, by getting Dispensations from the
Archbishop: which created him much trouble by his denying to grant them. There
was one Massy, a Courtier, who had contracted himself to his deceased Wife's
Niece. Which needing a Dispensation, the Party got the Lord Crumwel to write to
the Archbishop in his behalf: especially because it was thought to be none of
the Cases of Prohibition contained in the Act. But such was the Integrity of
the Archbishop, that he refused to do any thing he thought not allowable,
though it were upon the persuasion of the greatest Men, or the best Friends he
had. But he writ this civil Letter to the Lord Crumwel upon this occasion.

Cleopatra E. 5. His Letter thereupon.
MY very singular good Lord, in my most hearty-wise I commend me unto your
Lordship. And whereas your Lordship writes to me in the favor of this Bearer,
Massey, an old Servant to the King's Highness, that being contracted to his
Sister's Daughter of his late Wife deceased, he might enjoy the Benefit of a
Dispensation in that behalf; especially, considering it is none of the Causes
of Prohibition contained in the Statute: Surely, my Lord, I would gladly
accomplish your Request herein, if the Word of God would permit the same. And
where you require me, that if I think this License may not be granted by the
Law of God, then I should write unto you the Reasons and Authorities that move
me so to think; that upon Declaration unto the King's Highness, you may confer
thereupon with some other Learned Men, and so advertise me the King's farther
Resolution. For shortness of time, I shall show you one Reason, which is this.
By the Law of God many Persons be prohibited, which be not expressed, but be
understood, by like Prohibition in equal degree. As S. Ambrose says, that the
Niece is forbid by the Law of God, although it be not expressed in Leviticus,
that the Uncle shall not marry his Niece. But where the Nephew is forbid there,
that he shall not marry his Aunt, by the same is understood that the Niece
shall not be married unto her Uncle. Likewise as the Daughter is not there
plainly expressed, yet where the Son is forbid to marry his Mother, it is
understood that the Daughter may not be married to her Father; because they be
of like degree. Even so it is in this Case and many others. For where it is
there expressed, that the Nephew shall not marry his Unkle's Wife, it must
needs be understood that the Niece shall not be married unto the Aunt's
Husband, because that also is one equality of degree. And although I could
allege many Reasons and Authorities mo for this purpose; yet I trust this one
Reason shall satisfy all that be Learned, and of Judgment.

And as touching the Act of Parliament concerning the Degrees prohibited by
God's Law, Vid. Fox Acts, p. 960.
they be not so plainly set forth as I would they were. Wherein I somewhat
spoke my Mind at the making of the said Law, but it was not then accepted. I
required then, that there must be expressed Mother, and Mother-in-Law;
Daughter, and Daughter-in-Law; and so in further degrees directly upwards and
downwards, in Linea recta; also Sister and Sister-in-Law, Aunt and Aunt-in-Law,
Niece and Niece-in-Law. And this Limitation, in my Judgment, would have
contained all degrees prohibited by God's Law, expressed and not expressed: and
should have satisfied this Man, and such others which would marry their
Nieces-in-Law.

I have no News to send you from these Parts; but I much long to hear such News
as be concurrent with you. And therefore if you have any good News, I pray you
to send me some* Thus, my Lord, right heartily fare you well. At Ford, the 7 th
Day of September.

Your Lordship's own, Tho. Cantuarien.


About this Year as near as I can guess, He restrain the Number of Proctors.
the Archbishop made an Order concerning the Proctors of his Court of Arches.
The Numerousness and Irregularities of Proctors made these Civil Courts uneasy
to the People. Complaints were made of their Clamorousness, by reason of the
plenty of them, that neither Advocates nor Judges could be heard: of the
Injuries they did to Advocates, in retaining and concluding Causes oftentimes
without them: and of thrusting themselves into Causes without the knowledge or
will of the Parties, and such like. The Evils of which, long after endured,
were endeavored to be redrest by the Canons and Constitutions, made in the
beginning of the Reign of King James I. Our Archbishop conceived, that in
order to the Reformation of the Proctors, it were good to begin at first with a
restraint of the Numbers of them. Wherefore he decreed, That whereas the Number
of the Proctors in the Court of Arches was heretofore about Twenty, or four and
Twenty, and my Lord's Grace at liberty to add more; Thenceforth no more should
be admitted, till the Number were reduced to Ten: and then that Number never to
be increased. This liberty, which his Predecessors always had, he willingly
infringed himself of, out of no other intent, but for the benefit and ease of
the People, whom he saw were enticed to Contention by the crafty Insinuations
of this kind of Men, setting Neighbors together by the Ears for their own
Lucre. And therefore the fewer of them, the better. And this Number he thought
sufficient for the necessary Business of the Court.

But some looked upon this as a crafty Fetch, Which some complain of to the
Parliament.
and Plot of the Proctors of that Time, upon the good Nature and pious
Disposition of the Archbishop. That so all others being excluded from
officiating as Proctors, they might have all the Business of the Arches in
their own Hands. And hence might diverse Abuses come into that Court. And for
the confirmation of this Order of the Archbishop for the tying of his Hands,
they, who were Counselors to the Archbishop in this matter, got it confirmed
by the Chapter and Convent of Christ's-Church Canterbury. This giving Offense
to many, there were some who drew up a long Paper against this Order, and
presented it to the consideration of the Parliament; because it could be
redressed no other way, the Archbishop having put it out of his own Power to
do it. In this Paper they set forth, that the said Statute was prejudicial unto
the Commonwealth, because the Number of ten Proctors was not sufficient to
dispatch the Causes that came into that Court: and so there must be Delays and
prolix Suits, while these Proctors were attending other Causes in the
Archbishop's Court of Audience, and the Bishop of London's Court of
Consistory. Whereas before it had been seen by experience, that Twenty Proctors
could not suffice for the managery of the Causes in these Courts, without
Delays and Prorogations, from Day to Day. That Causes by this means could not
be diligently attended, when there were many Causes, and few Proctors to look
after them. And hereby many good Causes were like to perish for lack of good
looking after. That this had occasioned the Proctors to neglect a very good
Oath, called Iuramentum Calumpniae; which was the best Provision that could be
against unlawful Suits, and lengthning them out further than was necessary.
This Oath was, that the Parties, or the Proctors should swear, that they
believed their Cause was just, and that they should not use unlawful Delays,
whereby Justice might be deferred; that they should answer the Judge truly to
what he should demand of them; that nothing should be given or promised to the
Judges or any other Officer, besides the Fees allowed by Law, and that they
should not procure any false Witness. Again, this Paper urged for a good Number
of Proctors, that this would be a means, that the Judges could not so easily
keep them in subjection, and fear of them: whereby they had been hindered
sometimes in speaking freely before them in their Clients Causes. It was urged
also, that it was a great discouragement to young Men in studying the Law, when
there is so little prospect of Benefit thereby. Lastly, That it was contrary to
the Civil and Canon Law, that permits any Man to be Proctor for another, a few
excepted. But this Paper, notably enough written, may be read at large in the
Appendix. No. XVIII.
And so I leave the Reader to judge of the Expediency of this Order of the
Archbishop, by weighing the Archbishop's Reasons with these last mentioned.
Surely this his Act deserved commendation for his good Intentions thereby,
though some lesser Inconveniences attended, which no doubt he had also well
considered before he proceeded to do what he did.

The ABp divorseth Queen Ann.

Life of King Henry p. 446.


When Queen Ann, on May the 2 d, was sent to the Tower, by a sudden Jealousy of
the King her Husband: The next day, the Archbishop extremely troubled at it,
struck in with many good Words with the King on her behalf, in form of a Letter
of Consolation to him; yet wisely making no Apology for her, but acknowledging
how diverse of the Lords had told him of certain of her Faults, which, he said,
he was sorry to hear: And concluded, desiring that the King would however
continue his Love to the Gospel, lest it should be thought, that it was for her
sake only that he had favored it. Being in the Tower, there arose up new
Matter against Queen Ann, namely, concerning some lawful Impediment of her
Marriage with the King: and that was thought to be a Pre-Contract between her
and the Earl of Northumberland. Whereupon the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York were made Commissioners to examine this Matter. And she being before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, confessed certain just, true and lawful Impediments,
as the Act in the 26 of Hen. VIII expresses it; but not mentioning what they
were. So that by that Act the said Marriage is declared never to have been
good, nor consonant to the Laws. Yet the Earl of Northumberland being examined
upon Oath before both the Archbishops, denied it: Upon the Truth of which, he
received also the Blessed Sacrament. And the Lord Herbert saw an Original
Letter to Secretary Crumwel, to the same import. But her Confession of it so
far prevailed with the King, that he would be divorced from her; and with our
Archbishop, that he performed it by due Order and Process of Law. And an Act
passed, that the Marriage between the King and Queen Ann was null and void, and
the Issue illegitimate.

The Archbishop granted a License, A Licenc^ ^or a Chapel. Cran. Regist.
dated July the 24 th, with the full Consent of Richard Withipol, Vicar of
Walthamstow in Essex, to George Monoux Alderman of London, and Thomas his Son,
to have the Sacrament administered in his Chapel, or Oratory, in his House De
Moons, now a Farm near Higham-hill, in the said Parish of VValthamstow:
Indulging therein to the Wife of the said Thomas to be purified, or churched,
in the same Chapel. I the rather mention this, that it may serve to recall the
Memory of that pious and charitable Citizen and Draper, Sir Geo. Monoux; who
built the fair Steeple of that Parish Church, and allowed a Salary for ever for
ringing the great Bell at a certain Hour in the Night and Morning the Winter
half Year. He built also the North Isle of the said Church; in the
Glass-windows whereof is yet remaining his Coat of Arms. In the Chancel his
Body was interred, under a fair Altar-Monument yet standing. In the Churchyard
he founded an Hospital and Free School, and very liberally endowed it; though
now the Endowments are sadly diminished. He also made a Causeway over
Walthamstow-Marsh to Lockbridg, over the River Lee, for the convenience of
Travelers from those Parts to London, and left wherewith to continue and keep
it in Repair; but that also is lost, and the Ruins now only to be seen. But
enough of that.

The Germans conceived great hope of good to befall the Church by Cranmer's
Influence, and Presidency in England; and took their opportunities of
addressing to him. Bucer dedicates this Year a Book to the ABp.
This Year Martin Bucer published a large Book in Folio upon the Epistle to the
Romans, entitled, Metaphrasis and En^rratio; and dedicated it in a long
Epistle to the Archbishop. Wherein are sundry Expressions, which will show,
how well known abroad the Archbishop was already among the Protestants, and
what an excellent Bishop they looked upon him to be, and how fixed their Eyes
were upon him for doing great things toward a Reformation in England. For thus
he writ in this Epistle, Te omnes praedicant animo praeditum Archiepiscopo, and
tanti, sicque ad gloriam Christi comparati regni, Primate digno, etc. That all
Men proclaimed him endowed with a Mind worthy of an Archbishop and Primate of
so great a Kingdom, and so disposed to the Glory of Christ. That he had so
attained to this high Estate in Christ by his spiritual Wisdom, Holiness of
Life, and most ardent Zeal to render Christ's Glory more illustrious; that
gathering together the Humble, and taking pity upon the Sheepfold, being indeed
dispersed and scattered abroad, he always sought and saved that which was lost,
and brought back Christ's poor Sheep to his Fold, and the Pastures of
everlasting Life, when they had been before most miserably harassed by the
Servants of Superstition, and the Emissaries of the Roman Tyranny. And after,
speaking of the King's rooting out the Usurpation of the Pope* and his
pretended Jurisdiction, by taking to himself the Supremacy, the said Learned
Man excited Cranmer to a further Reformation, by telling him, How easy now it
would be for him, and the other Archbishops and Bishops, who were endued with
the Spirit and Zeal of Christ, from the remainders of the Ecclesiastical
Administration, to retain what might contribute to the true edifying of
Consciences, the saving Instruction of Youth, and to the just Discipline and
Polity of the whole Christian People. For when the Enemies were once removed
out of the way, there could not then happen among us any extraordinary great
Concussion of Religion, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, or any dashing one
against another, as among them in Germany of necessity came to pass: striving
so many Years, for the Church of Christ, against such obstinate Enemies.

Bishops Consecrated.
The Consecrations this Year were these.

Diocesan Bishops.
Rich. Sampson.
June the 10 th Richard Sampson, Doctor of Decrees, and Dean of the King's
Chapel, was elected and confirmed Bishop of Chichester, by Resignation of
Robert Sherburn, Cran. Regist.
who was now very old. No Consecration set down in the Register.

William Rugg.
June William Rugg, a Monk, was consecrated Bishop of Norwich. Godwin's Catal.
This is omitted also, if I mistake not, in the Register. Probably he was
consecrated with Sampson.

Rob. Warton.
July the 2 d, Robert Warton, Abbot of Bermondsey, was consecrated Bishop of S.
Asaph, Cran. Regist.
at Lambeth, by the Archbishop, John Bishop of Bangor, and William Bishop of
Norwich, assisting.

Suffragan Bishops.
October. 20. William More, B. D. consecrated Suffragan of Colchester, by John
Bishop of Rochester, by virtue of the Archbishop's Letters Commissional to
him, assisted by Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and Thomas Bishop of Sidon. This
More held the Monastery of Walden in Essex, an House of Benedictines, in
Commendam (where Audley-end now stands) and surrendered it to the King 1539.

CHAP. XIII. The Bishops Book.
An. 1537.
The Bishops Book by the ABp's means.
THE pious ABp thought it highly conducible to the Christian Growth of the
common People, in Knowledge and Religion, and to disintangle them from gross
Ignorance and Superstition, in which they had been nursled up by their Popish
Guides; that the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, and the
Grounds of Religion, should be explained soundly and orthodoxly, and
recommended unto their reading. Wherefore he consulting with the Lord Crumwel,
his constant Associate and Assistant in such Matters; and by his and other his
Friends, importuning the King, a Commission was issued out from him, in the
Year 1537. to the Archbishop, to Stokesly Bishop of London, Gardener of
Winchester, Sampson of Chichester, Repps of Norwich, Goodrick of Ely, Latimer
of Worcester, Shaxton of Salisbury, Fox of Hereford* Barlow of S. David's, and
other Bishops and Learned Divines, to meet together, and to devise an wholesome
and plain Exposition upon those Subjects, and to set forth a Truth of Religion
purged of Errors and Heresies. Accordingly they met at the Archbishop's House
at Lambeth. Their Course was, that after they had drawn up their Expositions
upon each Head, and agreed thereto, they all subscribed their Hands, declaring
their Consent and Approbation.

In the Disputations which happened among them in this Work, Winchester's
opposition.
Winchester, the Pope's chief Champion, with three or four other of the
Bishops, went about with all subtle Sophistry, to maintain all Idolatry, Heresy
and Superstition, written in the Canon Law, Fox MS. Life of Cranmer.
or used in the Church under the Pope's Tyranny. But at the last, whether
overpowered with Number, or convinced by the Word of God, and consent of
Ancient Authors, and the Primitive Church, they all agreed upon, and set their
Hands to a Godly Book of Religion: Which they finished by the end of July, and
staid for nothing but the Vicar-General's Order, whether to send it immediately
to him, or that the Bishop of Hereford should bring it with him, at his next
coming to the Court. But the Plague now raging in Lambeth* and People dying
even at the Palace-Doors, the Archbishop desired Crumwel, for the King's
License to the Bishops to depart for their own Safety, their Business being now
in effect drawn to a Conclusion. Soon after the Bishops and Divines parted, and
the Archbishop hastened to his House at Ford near Canterbury.

The Book was delivered by Crumwel to the King; The King makes Animadversion^
upon it.
which he at his leisure diligently perused, corrected and augmented. And then,
after five or six Months, assigned Crumwel to dispatch it unto the Archbishop,
that he might give his Judgment upon the King's Animadversions. A Pursevant
brought it to Ford. The Archbishop advisedly read and considered what the King
had writ; and disliking some things, made his own Annotations upon some of the
Royal Corrections: there especially, we may well imagine, where the King had
altered the Book in favor of some of the old Doctrines and Corruptions. And
when he sent it back again with those Annotations, he wrote these Lines to
Crumwel therewith, on the 25 th day of January.

MY very singular good Lord: Cleopatra ^. 5.
After most hearty Commendations unto your Lordship; these shall be to
advertise the same; That as concerning the Book lately devised by me, and other
Bishops of this Realm which you sent unto me, corrected by the King's Highness;
your Lordship shall receive the same again by this Bearer, the Pursevant, with
certain Annotations of mine own concerning the same. Wherein I trust the King's
Highness will pardon my Presumption, that I have been so scrupulous, and as it
were a picker of Quarrels to his Grace's Book, making a great Matter of every
little Fault, or rather where no Fault is at all. Which I do only for this
Intent; that because now the Book shall be set forth by his Grace's Censure and
Judgment, I would have nothing therein that Momus could reprehend. And I refer
all mine Annotations again to his Grace's most exact Judgment. And I have
ordered my Annotations so by Numbers, that his Grace may readily turn to every
place. And in the lower Margin of this Book, next to the Binding, he may find
the Numbers, which shall direct him to the Words, whereupon I make the
Annotations. And all those his Grace's Castigations, which I have made none
Annotations upon, I like them very well. And in diverse places I have made
Annotations; which places nevertheless I mislike not, as shall appear by the
same Annotations.

Published.
At length this Book came forth, printed by Barthelet, in the Year 1537, and was
commonly called the Bishops Book, because the Bishops were the Composers of it.
It was entitled, The godly and pious Institution of a Christian Man; and
consisted of a Declaration of the Lord's Prayer, and of the Ave Mary, the
Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the Seven Sacraments. It was Established by
Act of Parliament, having been signed by the two Archbishops, nineteen
Bishops, eight Archdeacons, and seventeen Doctors of Divinity and Law.

How esteemed.
The Opinion that the Favorers of the Gospel had of this Book in those Times,
may appear by what I find in a Manuscript of the Life of this Archbishop, by
an unknown Author, that wrote it soon after the said Archbishop's Death: A
godly Book of Religion, not much unlike the Book set forth by K. Edward VI.
except in two Points. Inter Foxii MSS.
The one was the real Pre^ence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament of the Altar.
Of the which Opinion the Archbishop was at that time, and the most part of the
other Bishops and learned Men. The other Error was of Praying, Kissing, and
Kneeling before Images: Which, says he, was added by the King, after the
Bishops had set their Hands to the contrary.

But this Book came forth again two Years after, viz. 1540. (unless my
Manuscript mistake this Year for 1543.) very much enlarged, Enlarged and
reprinted.
and reduced into another Form, and bearing another Name, A necessary Doctrine
and Erudition of any Christian Man. And because the King had put it forth by
his own Authority, it was called now The King's Book, as before it was called
The Bishops. But that none might be confounded in these Books, he may know that
there was, in the Year 1536, Ld. Herb. Hist. p. 418.
another Book also called The Bishops Book, upon the same reason that this was
so called, because the Archbishops and Bishops had the making thereof. It was
a Declaration against the Papal Supremacy, written upon occasion of Pole's Book
of Ecclesiastical Union, mentioned before. And in the Year 1533, there came
forth another Book in Latin called The King's Book, Ibid. p. 408.
entitled, The Difference between the Kingly and Ecclesiastical Power:
reported to be made, as Bale writes, by Fox the King's Almoner. Which was
translated into English, Bale's Cent.
and put forth by Henry Lord Stafford in King Edward's Days. The King affecting
to be thought Learned, affected also to have Books called by his Name; not that
he was always the Author of them, but that they came out by his Authority, and
had undergone his Corrections and Emendations.

But before we pass away from hence, Some Account of the foresaid Book.
it may be convenient to give the Reader a little taste of so famous a Treatise
as that Bishop's Book was in those Days. And I will do it, not in my own words,
but in the words of a very Learned and Eminent Man, the Answerer to Dr.
Martin's Book against Priests Marriage, not far from the beginning of Q Mary,
supposed to be Ponet Bishop of Winchester* then in Exile. Applying himself, in
his Preface, unto the Queen's Prelates, he told them; That in their Book
entitled, The Institution of a Christian Man, presented by their whole
Authorities, to the King of famous Memory, K. Henry VIII. In the Preface
thereof they affirmed to his Highness, with one assent, by all their Learnings,
that the said Treatise was in all Points concordant and agreeable to Holy
Scripture: yea, such Doctrine, that they would, and desired to have it taught
by all the Spiritual Pastors to all the King's loving Subjects, to be Doctrine
of Faith. And there entreating of the Sacrament of Orders, they desired to have
it taught, that we be in no subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and his Statutes,
but merely subject to the King's Laws, under his only Territory and
Jurisdiction. And that the Canons and Rules of the Church, were therefore
allowable in the Realm, because the Assent of the King and of the People
accepted the same. And that Priests and Bishops whatsoever, never had any
Authority by the Gospel in Matters Civil and Moral, but by the Grant and Gift
of Princes; and that it was always, and ever shall be, lawful unto Kings and
Princes, and to their Successors, with the Consent of their Parliaments, to
revoke and call again into their own Hands, or otherwise to restrain all their
Power and Jurisdiction given and permitted by their Authority, Assent or
Sufferance, etc. Without the which, if the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop
whatsoever, should take upon them any Authority or Jurisdiction in such Matters
as be Civil, No doubt, said they, that Bishop is not worthy to be called a
Bishop, but rather a Tyrant, and an Usurper of other Men's Rights, contrary to
the Laws of God; and is to be reputed a Subverter of the Kingdom of Christ.
Yea, besides these things, and many other, as he added, they put in our Creed,
or Belief, as an Article of Salvation or Damnation, that the Church of England
is as well to be named a Catholic and Apostolic Church, as Rome Church, or
any other Church where the Apostles were resident. And that they willed us to
believe in our Faith, that there is no difference in Superiority, Preeminence
or Authority, one over the other, but be all of equal Power and Dignity; and
that all Churches be free from the Subjection and Jurisdiction of the Church of
Rome. And that no Church is to be called Schismatical, as varying from the
Unity of the Church of Christ, if it persist in the Unity of Christ's Faith,
Hope and Charity, and Unity of Christ's Doctrine and Sacraments, agreeable to
the same Doctrine.

Defense of Priests Mar. p. 226.
And that it appertained to Christen Kings and Princes, in the discharge of
their Duty to God, to reform and reduce again the Laws to their old Limits and
pristine State, of their Power and Jurisdiction, which was given them by
Christ, and used in the Primitive Church. For it is, say they, out of all
doubt, that Christ's Faith was then most firm and pure, and the Scriptures of
God were then best understood, and Virtue did then most abound and excel. And
therefore the Customs and Ordinances then used and made, must needs be more
conform and agreeable unto the true Doctrine of Christ, and more conducing to
the edifying and benefit of the Church of Christ, than any Custom or Laws used
or made since that Time. This he collected out of their Exposition of the
Sacrament of Orders.

The said Learned Author observed, that this Doctrine was set forth by the
whole Authority of the Bishops in those Days, presented by the Subscription of
all their Names. And since the time of their presenting thereof, by the space
almost of twenty Years, (that is, to the middle of Queen Mary) never revoked,
but continually from time to time taught by this Book, and by such other
Declarations.

Names of the Composers.
And that one more Particular relating to this Book may be known, namely, who
the Bishops and other Divines were, that composed it, and that were
commissioned so to do, I shall record their Names, as they were found writ by
the Hand of Dr. Sam. Ward, in his own Book, now in the possession of N. B. a
Reverend Friend of mine; who has well deserved of this History.

Thomas Cant. Io. Land. Steph. Winton. Io. Exon. Io. Lincoln. Io. Bathon.
Roland. Coven. and Litch. Tho. Elien. Nic. Sarum. Io. Bang. Edward Heref. Hugo.
Wigorn. Io. Roffen. Ric. Cicestr. Guilielm. Norv. Guilielm. Menevens. Rob.
Assav. Rob. Landav. Edoard Ebor. Cuthb. Dunelm. Rob. Carliolen.

Richard. Wolman, Archidiac. Sudbur. Guil. Knight, Archid. Richmon. Io. Bell,
Archid. Gloc. Edmund. Bonner, Archid. Leicestr. John Skip, Archid. Dorset. Nic.
Hethe. Archid. Stafford. Cuthb. Marshal, Archid. Nottingham. Rich. Curren.
Archid. Oxon.

Gulielm. Cliff, Galfridus Downs, Robertus Oking, Radul. Bradford, Richardus
Smith, Simon Matthew, Ioannes Pryn, Guliel. Buckmaster, Guliel. May, Nic.
Wotton, Ric. Coxe, Ioannes Edmunds, Thomas Robertson, Ioannes Baker, Thomas
Barret, Ioannes Hase, Ioannes Tyson, Sacrae Theologiae, Juris Ecclesiastici and
Civilis Professores.

In the Year 1543. The same Book was printed again, amended much both in Sense
and Language: yet not having any step in the Progress of the Reformation, more
than the former, each Edition express positively the Corporal Presence in the
Sacrament. But in this is much added about Free Will, which it asserts, and
Good Works. In 1544, the same was printed again at London in Latin, entitled,
Pia and Catholica Christiani Hominis Institutio.

CHAP. XIV. The Archbishop visits his Diocese.
AS soon as this Business was over with the Archbishop and Bishops at Lambeth;
Goes down into his Diocese.
no Parliament sitting this Year, and a Plague being in London and Westminster,
he went down, as was said before, into his Diocese. But before he went, he
expressed a great desire to wait upon the King, being then, I suppose, at
Hampton Court, or Windsor; but he feared he should not be permitted, coming out
of the smoaky Air, as he wrote to the Lord Crumwel, in that time of Infection.
Yet he desired to know the King's Pleasure by him. He had a mind indeed to
leave some good Impressions upon the King's Mind in the behalf of the Book,
that he and the rest had taken such Pains about, and but newly made an end of.
But whether he saw the King now or no, he had his Commission, and took it down
with him. Which he advisedly did, the better to warrant and bear him out in
what he intended to do in his Diocese, which he purposed to visit.

This was a Year of Visitation. Gets a License to visit.
For there was a new Visitation now again appointed throughout all England; to
see how the People stood affected to the King, to discover Cheats and
Impostures, either in Images, Relics, or such like. The Archbishop also
thinking good now to visit his Diocese, procured the License of the
Vicegerent, Lord Crumwel, so to do. Because, I suppose, all other Visitations
were to cease, to give way to the King's Visitation. And to render his Power of
Visiting the more unquestionable, and void of scruple, he desired the
Vicegerent, that in drawing up of his Commission, his License to visit might
be put into it by Dr. Peter; who was then, if I mistake not, Master of the
Faculties to the said Vicegerent, and afterward Secretary of State. And
because he would not do any thing without the Counsel and Allowance of the
Vicegerent, he asked his Advice, how he should order in his Visitation such
Persons as had transgressed the King's Injunctions. Which came out the Year
before under Crumwel's Name: Whereof some were for the restraint of the Number
of Holy Days, a great cause of Superstition, and of the continuance of it. And
afterward other Injunctions came out: whereof the first was, that in all
Parishes, once every Sunday, for a quarter of a Year together, the Supremacy
should be taught, and the Laws to that intent read. These Injunctions were in
number Eleven, as they are set down in the Lord Herbert's History. Page 472.


The Vicar of Croydon under the ABp's Nose, The Vicar of Croydon.
had been guilty of certain Misdemeanors: Which, I suppose, were speaking or
preaching to the disparagement of the King's Supremacy, and in favor of the
Pope. Now before he went into the Country, and having as yet diverse Bishops
and Learned Men with him at Lambeth, he thought it advisable to call this Man
before them at this time. But before he would do it, he thought it best to
consult with Crumwel, and take his Advice, whether he should now do it, and
before these Bishops or not. So ticklish a thing then was it for the Bishops to
do any things of themselves without the privity and order of this great
Vicegerent. Cranmer was aware of it, and therefore required Direction from him
in every thing.

The ABp visits his Diocese.
But whatsoever was done with this Vicar, the Archbishop was soon down in his
Diocese; and having taken an Account of the People and Clergy, what Conformity
they bare to the King's Laws and Injunctions; he found them superstitiously set
upon the observation of their old Holy Days. Some whereof he punished, and
others he admonished, according to the degree of their Crimes. And he
discovered the chief Cause to lie in the Curates and Priests, who did animat^
the People to what they did: indeed their Interest and Gain was concerned. The
great inconvenience of these Holy Days lay partly in the numerousness of them:
so that the attendance upon them hindered dispatching, and doing Justice in
Westminster Hall in the Terms, and the gathering in Harvest in the Country:
partly in the Superstitions that these Holy Days maintained, in the idolatrous
Worship of supposed Saints: and partly in the Riot, Debauchery and Drunkenness,
that these Times were celebrated with among the common People; and lastly, the
Poverty it brought upon the meaner sort, being detained from going about their
ordinary Labors and Callings, to provide for themselves and Families.

What course he took for the preventing of Superstition.
For the prevention of these Superstitions for the Future, and to make the
People more obedient to the King's Laws, he gave out strict Orders to all
Parsons of Parishes, upon pain of Deprivation, that they should cause the
abrogated Holy Days not to be observed for the future; and to present to the
Archbishop all Persons in their respective Parishes, as should do contrary to
any of the King's Ordinances already set forth, or that should be hereafter by
his Authority, relating to the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Church. And this
course he conceived so good an Expedient, that he counseled the Lord
Vicegerent, that all Bishops in their several Diocesses might be commanded to
do the same, for the avoiding of Disobedience and Contention in the Realm. By
which means, he said, The Evil-Will of the People might be conveyed from the
King and his Council, upon the Ordinaries. And so the Love and Obedience of the
People better secured to their Sovereign. Such was his care of his Prince, to
preserve him in the Affections of his People, that he was willing to take upon
himself their Enmity, that it might not light upon the King. But Cranmer had
observed these Holy Days were kept by many, even in the Court under the King's
Eye; which he well knew was an Example and Encouragement to the whole Nation.
And therefore he signified to the Lord Crumwel, that they could never persuade
the People to cease from keeping them, when the King's own Household were an
Example unto the rest to break his own Ordinances. No. XIX.
See his Letter to Crumwel in the Appendix.

CHAP. XV. The Bible printed.
HE was now at Ford; and it was in the Month of August, His joy at the
publishing the English Bible.
when something fell out, that gave the good Archbishop as much Joy as ever
happened to him in all the time of his Prelacy. It was the printing of the Holy
Bible in the English Tongue in the great Volume. Which was now finished, by the
great Pains and Charges of Richard Grafton the Printer. Osiander, who knew the
Archbishop well, when he was the King's Ambassador in Germany, says of him,
that he was Sacrarum Literarum Studiossimum. Indeed he always had a great value
for the Scriptures, because they were the Word of God: and extraordinary
desirous he was, from the very first entrance upon his Bishopric, that the
People might have the liberty of reading it; and for that purpose, to have it
interpreted into the Vulgar Language. And so by Crumwel's means, he got leave
from the King, that it might be translated and printed. The care of the
Translation lay wholly upon him; assigning little Portions of this Holy Book to
diverse Bishops and Learned Men to do; and being dispatched, to be sent back to
him. And to his inexpressible Satisfaction, he saw the Work finished in this
Year, about July or August.

As soon as some of the Copies came to his Hand, Presents one by Crumwel to the
King.
one he sent to Crumwel, entreating him, that he would present it from him to
the King, (and no question he thought it the noblest Present that ever he made
him;) and withal to intercede with his Majesty, that the said Book might by his
Authority be both bought and used by all indifferently. Both which Crumwel did.
For which the Archbishop was full of Gladness and Gratitude; and wrote two
Letters to him soon after one another, wherein he thanked him most heartily,
telling him, How he had hereby made his Memory famous to Posterity within the
Realm, among all such as should hereafter be favorers of God's Word: and that
he should hear of this good Deed of his at the last Day. That for his part, it
was such a content to his Mind, that he could not have done him a greater
pleasure, if he had given him a thousand Pounds. And that such Knowledge would
ensue hereupon, that it should appear he had done excellent Service both to God
and the King. He also particularly spoke of the Bishop of Worcester, how highly
obliged he was sure he was to him for this. But I refer the Reader to his own
Letters, which follow.

MY very singular good Lord; Cleopatra E. 5. p. 329. Cransmer's Letters to
Crumwel.
In my most hearty wise I commend me unto your Lordship. And whereas I
understand, that your Lordship at my Request has not only exhibited the Bible
which I sent unto you, to the King's Majesty, but also has obtained of his
Grace, that the same shall be allowed by his Authority to be bought and read
within this Realm; My Lord, for this your Pains, taken in this behalf, I give
you my most hearty Thanks: Assuring your Lordship, for the Contentation of my
Mind, you have showed me more pleasure here, than if you had given me a
thousand Pounds; and I doubt not but that hereby such Fruit of good Knowledge
shall ensue, that it shall well appear hereafter, what high and excellent
Service you have done unto God and the King. Which shall so much redound to
your Honor, that besides God's Reward, you shall obtain perpetual Memory for
the same within this Realm. And as for me, you may reckon me your Bondsman for
the same. And I dare be bold to say, so may ye do my Lord of Worcester. Thus,
my Lord, right heartily fare ye well. At Ford, the xiii day of August.

Your own Bound-man ever, T. Cantuarien.


And in another Letter fifteen days after, he again renewed his Thanks.

Cleopatra E. 6. p. 292.
MY very singular and special good Lord, In my most hearty wise I commend me to
your Lordship. These shall be to give you most hearty Thanks, that any Heart
can think, and that in the Name of them, which favor God's Word, for your
diligence at this time, in procuring the King's Highness to set forth the said
God's Word, and his Gospel, by his Grace's Authority. For the which Act, not
only the King's Majesty, but also you shall have a perpetual Laud and Memory of
all them that be now, ^or hereafter shall be God's faithful People, and the
Favorers of his Word. And this Deed you shall hear of at the Great Day, when
all things shall be opened, and made manifest. For our Savior Christ says in
the said Gospel, that whosoever shrinketh from Him and his Word, and is abashed
to profess and set it forth before Men in this World, he will refuse him at
that Day: And contrary, whosoever constantly does profess Him and his Word, and
studieth to set that forward in this World, Christ will declare the same at the
Last Day before his Father and all his Angels, and take upon him the Defense of
those Men.


Some further Particulars concerning this Edition of the Bible.
Now because by these Letters of the Archbishop it appears how instrumental
Crumwel was, when the Bible was printed, to procure the setting it forth by the
King's Authority, I will here relate more at large what Countenance and
Assistance he gave to this pious Work all along, and those that were concerned
and employed in the doing of it.

The Bible, as Fox speaks, had been printed in the Year 1532, and reprinted
again three or four Years after. The Undertakers and Printers, were Grafton and
Whitchurch, who printed it at Hamburgh. The Corrector was John Rogers, a
Learned Divine, afterward a Canon of St. Paul's in King Edward's Time, and the
first Martyr in the next Reign. The Translator was William Tyndal, another
Learned Martyr, with the help of Miles Coverdale, after Bishop of Exeter. But
before all this second Edition was finished, Tyndal was taken and put to death,
for his Religion, in Flanders, in the Year 1536. And his Name then growing into
ignominy, as one burnt for an Heretic, they thought it might prejudice the
Book, if he should be named for the Translator thereof: and so they used a
feigned Name, calling it Thomas Matthews Bible; though Tyndal before his death
had finished all but the Apocrypha, which was translated by Rogers abovesaid,
who added also some Marginal Notes. In this Bible were certain Prologues, and a
special Table collected of the common Places in the Bible, and Texts of
Scripture for proving the same: And chiefly the common Places of the Lord's
Supper, the Marriage of Priests, and the Mass. Of which it was there said, that
it was not to be found in Scripture. This Bible giving the Clergy offense, was
gotten to be restrained. Some Years after came forth the Bible aforesaid,
wherein Cranmer had the great Hand; which, as I suppose, was nothing but the
former corrected, the Prologues and Table being left out.

When Grafton had finished this Work, The Printer's thanks and requests to
Crumwel.
and printed off fifteen hundred Bibles at his great Charge, amounting to five
hundred Pounds, (a round Sum in those days) the Ld. Crumwel desired to have six
of his Books. Which he forthwith sent by his Servant, a clear Man of all
suspicion of any Infection, coming that day out of Flanders, Grafton not
adventuring to come himself with the Books, because of the Infection at London
where he was. These Books therefore he sent, together with a Letter of Thanks,
for being so assistant in the publication; (which, as he writ in his Letter,
the Archbishop said, the Tidings of did him more good than the Gift of ten
thousand Pounds) and for procuring the King's License, which was thought fit to
be signified in the Title Page in red Letters, thus, Set forth by the King's
most gracious License. But several would not believe the King had licensed it:
and therefore he desired further of Crumwel, that he would get it licensed
under the Privy Seal, which would be a Defense for the present, and for the
future. But take the Letter as Grafton himself penned it.

MOST humbly beseeching your Lordship to understand, Gra^ton to Crumwel.
Cl^opatra E. 5.
that according to your Request, I have sent your Lordship six Bibles; which
gladly I would have brought my self, but because of the Sickness which
remains in the City: and therefore I have sent them by my Servant, which this
day came out of Flanders. Requiring your Lordship, if I may be so bold as to
desire you, to accept them as my simple Gift, given to you for those most godly
Pains; for which the heavenly Father is bound, even of his Justice to reward
you with the Everlasting Kingdom of God. For your Lordship's moving our most
gracious Prince to the Allowance and Licensing of such a Work, has wrought
such an Act worthy of Praise, as never was mentioned in any Chronicle in this
Realm: and, as my Lord of Canterbury said, the Tidings thereof did him more
good than the gift of 10000 l. yet certain there are which believe not, that it
pleased the King's Grace to license it to go forth. Wherefore if your
Lordship's Pleasure were such that we might have it Licensed under your Privy
Seal, it would be a Defense at this present, and in time to come, for all
Enemies and Adversaries of the same. And forasmuch as this Request is for the
maintenance of the Lord's Word, which is to maintain the Lord himself, I fear
not, but that your Lordship will be earnest therein. And I am assured that my
Lord of Canterbury, Worcester, and Salisbury, will give your Lordship such
Thanks, as in them lies. And sure ye may be, that the Heavenly Lord will
reward you for the Establishment of his Glorious Truth. And what your
Lordship's Pleasure is in this Request, if it may please your Lordship to
inform my Servant, I and all that love God heartily are bound to pray for your
Preservation all the days of our Life. At London the xxviii day of this present
Month of August, 1537.

Your Orator while he l^veth, Richard Grafton, Grocer.


The Printer apprehensive of another Edition.
And as this Printer had addressed to Crumwel for the Privy Seal, so he
apprehended now a further need of the Corroboration of Authority, upon another
Account. For some observing how exceeding acceptable the English Bible was to
the common People, were designing to print it in a less Volume and smaller
Letters: whereby it would come to pass, that Grafton would be undersold; and so
he and his Creditors would be undone: and besides, it was like to prove a very
ill Edition, and very Erroneous. Insomuch that Grafton affirmed, they would
commit as many Faults as there were Sentences in the Bible. And it must needs
be so, because then the Printers were generally Dutchmen within the Realm, that
could neither speak nor write true English: nor for Covetousness-sake would
they allow any Learned Men at all to oversee and correct what they printed, as
formerly it had been printed, but Paper, Letter, Ink and Correction would be
all naught. Therefore he desired one Favor more of the Lord Crumwel; Other
Requests of the Printer.
and that was, to obtain for him of the King, that none should print the Bible
for three Years but himself. And to move him, he said he was sure the Bishop of
Canterbury, and other his special Friends would not be unthankful to him. He
urged to him, that his whole Living lay upon this Point. And for the better and
quicker sale of his Books, he desired also, that by his Commandment in the
King's Name, every Curate might be obliged to have one; that they might learn
to know God, and to instruct their Parishioners; and that every Abbey should
have six, to be laid in several places of the Convent. He wished some
Commissions might be issued out to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishops of Sarum and Worcester; and they would readily cause this to be done in
their Diocesses. To which he earnestly added his own Arguments to provoke
Crumwel to yield to his request. This Letter may be found in the Appendix. No.
XX.


CHAP. XVI. Many Suffragan Bishops made.
IT was now forbidden by the Parliament, and in pursuance thereof, by the
Bishops in their several Diocesses, The Feast of S. Thomas, etc. forbid.
that the Feast of S. Thomas a Becket, the pretended Martyr, should be
celebrated any more; nor of S. Laurence, nor of diverse others, the Feasts of
the Twelve Apostles excepted, and of our Lady, S. Michael, August. Monks
Journal.
and Mary Magdalene. Also the Feast of the Holy Cross was forbid; and
commanded, that none should presume to keep those Feasts Holy; that is, they
should ring no Bells, nor adorn their Churches, nor go in Procession, nor do
other suchlike things as belonged to the Celebration of Festivals. So when S.
Thomas's Eve came, which had used constantly by the Archbishops of Canterbury,
and their Domestics to be celebrated by Fasting, Archbishop Cranmer took no
notice of that Eve, but eat Flesh, and supped in his Parlour with his Family.
Which created much Observation, it having never been seen before; the
Archbishop thinking it unworthy, that a Man of that Devotion to the Sea of
Rome, and disloyalty to his natural Prince, should b^ so religiously
commemorated.

Bishops Diocesan Consecrated.
March the 25 th, Robert Holgate, Master of the Order of Sempringham, was
consecrated Bishop of Landaff, Rob. Holgate Consecrated Bp.
in the Chapel of S. Mary in the Conventual Church of Friars Preachers of the
City of London, by John Bishop of Rochester, by virtue of Letters Commissional
from the Archbishop to him; John Bishop of Bangor, and Nicolas Bishop of
Sarum, assisting. This Holgate was either Abbot or Prior of S. Mary Watte, an
House of Gilbertines, which he held in Commendam, and surrendered in the Year
1539.

Suffragan Bishops.
June the 24 th* John Bird, John Bird*
S. Th. P. Provincial of the Order of Friars Carmelites of the City of London,
was consecrated Suffragan of the Sea of Penrith, in Landaff Diocese. And,

Lewis Thomas, formerly Abbot of the Monastery of Kynmer, Lewis Thoma^.
Suffragan Bishop of the Sea of Salop; both consecrated at Lambeth by the
Archbishop. The Assistant Bishops at this Consecration not mentioned in the
Register.

Of Bird, a word or two; Some account of Bird.
I find him in Norwich about the Year 1531. busy with Bilney before his Death.
He was a Person K. Henry made use of; for in the Year 1535, he, with Fox the
Almoner, and Bedel a Clark of the Council, were sent to Q. Katharine, divorsed
from the King, to forbear the Name of Queen. Which nevertheless she would not
do. Lord Herbert's Hist. Hen. 8.
He preached certain Sermons before the King against the Pope's Supremacy.
Bale, in his Exposition upon the Revelations, makes him to be one of the Ten
Horns that shall hate the Whore. Godwin asserts of him, that he was once Bishop
of Ossory. Bale in his Centuries, mentions not at all his being an Irish
Bishop; but naming his Preferments, first calls him Episcopus Penricensis: In
1539, made Bishop of Bangor; and removed to Chester 1541. He was married, and
therefore upon Q. Mary's access to the Crown, was deprived of his Bishopric;
but complied with the old Religion. I find him alive in the Year 1555, being
then at Fulham at Bishop Bonner's, Fox's Acts.
and there he lodged. Upon his coming, he brought his Present with him, a Dish
of Apples, and a Bottle of Wine. While he was here, he exhorted Mr. Hawks,
Convented for pretended Heresy before Bonner, to learn of his Elders, and to
bear with some things, and be taught by the Church, and not to go too far. In
that Queen's Reign he became Bonner's Suffragan, and Vicar of Dunmow in Essex.

Tho. Morley.
November the 4 th, Thomas Morley, formerly Abbot of Stanley in Sarum Diocese,
of the Cistertian Order, was consecrated in the Chapel of Lambeth, Suffragan
of the Sea of Marlborough, by the Archbishop, assisted by John Bishop of
Lincoln, and John Bishop of Rochester.

Rich. Yngworth.
December the first, the Archbishop, according to the Direction of the Act for
Suffragan Bishops, nominated to the King two Persons, out of which he might
elect a Suffragan for Dover, viz. Richard Yngworth Prior of the Priory of
Langley-Regis, and John Codenham, both Doctors in Divinity. December the 8 th,
The King answered Cranmer's Letter by his Privy Seal: wherein he appointed
Yngworth to be consecrated for his said Suffragan. And accordingly December the
9 th, John Bishop of London, by virtue of Commissional Letters from the
Archbishop, assisted by John Bishop of Rochester, and Robert Bishop of St.
Asaph, consecrated the said Yngworth. On the 10 th, the Archbishop issued out
his Commission to the said Suffragan, ordaining him his Suffragan by those
Presents, until he should think fit to withdraw his said Commission again.
Signifying, that what he was to do, was, within his Diocese and City of
Canterbury, and Jurisdiction of Calis, and the Marches thereof, to confirm
Children, to bless Altars, Chalices, Vestments, and other Ornaments of the
Church; to suspend Places and Churches, and to reconcile them; to consecrate
Churches and Altars new set up; to confer all the lesser Orders; to consecrate
Holy Oil of Chrism and Holy Unction; and to perform all other things belonging
to the Office of a Bishop. The Bishop's Letter to the King, desiring him to
appoint him a Suffragan, out of those two abovenamed; And the Archbishop's
Commissional Letters to Suffragan Yngworth, No. XXI. No. XXII.
may be seen in the Appendix. And he that is minded to read the Form of the
King's Mandate to the Archbishop for making a Suffragan, may find it in The
History of the Reformation. Vol. I. Collect. 51. Book. 2.


The Reason why the Archbishop all this while, that is, from the first making
the Act, in the Year 1534, to this Time, had nominated none for Suffragan to
this See till now, might be, because there seemed to be a Suffragan already,
even the same that had been in the time of Archbishop Warham, Ioh. Thornton
Suffragan. See Sumner's Hist. Cant. Append. p. 423. Rich. Thornden^
namely, John Thornton* Prior of Dover; who was one of the Witnesses appointed
by that Archbishop to certify what was found and seen at the opening of S.
Dunstan's Tomb. Richard Thornden seems to have succeeded Yngworth in this
Office some Years after; and was very dear to the Archbishop, having been by
him preferred to be Prebend of Canterbury; though he proved very false to him,
and was among those that made a treacherous Combination against him in the Year
1543. And in Q. Mary's Time became a great Persecutor.

December the 9 th, John Hodgkin, Professor of Divinity, John Hodgkin.
was consecrated at the same time, and by the same Bishops as above; but to
what See is not mentioned. The Bishop of London* together with this Hodgkin,
had nominated to the King Robert Struddel Professor of Divinity. Both he
recommended to the King by Letters, to be made Suffragans at large, without
mention of any See in his Diocese; but only expressing that his Diocese wanted
the comfort of Suffragans, that might bear a part in his Cure; and so mentioned
those two: adding, that the King might appoint them to some See within the
Province of Canterbury. Hodgkin, if I mistake not, was consecrated Suffragan of
Bedford: And was afterward one of those that assisted at the Consecration of
Archbishop Parker. He was a Black Friar. In the Year 1531, he, with Bird,
labored with Bilney at Norwich, a little before his Death, to bring him off
from the Doctrines for which he was condemned. Afterward Hodgkin coming nearer
under the Archbishop's Eye, by his means came to better knowledge in Religion,
and married a Wife; but in Queen Mary's Time put her away.

March 24. Henry Holbeach, Prior of the Cathedral Church of Wigorn, S. T. P. (
Hugh Bishop of Wigorn, Henry Holbeach.
having recommended him to the King for Suffragan Bishop of Bristow) was
accordingly consecrated in the Bishop of London's Chapel, in the said Bishop's
House, situate in Lambeth-Marsh, by the said Bishop, Hugh Bishop of Wigorn, and
Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, assisting.

CHAP. XVII. The Bible in English allowed. An. 1538.

THE next Year I find the careful Archbishop again at Canterbury, The ABp
reads upon the Hebrews.
looking after his Charge. And here he read Lectures upon the Epistle of S.
Paul to the Hebrews, half the Lent, in the Chapter House of the Monastery of
the Holy Trinity.

Now, viz. 1538. the Holy Bible was divulged, and exposed to common sale; and
appointed to be had in every Parish Church. A Declaration for reading the Bible.
And then, that the Sacred Book might be used with the more benefit, both of
the Clergy and Lay People, for this Reason a Declaration was issued out, to be
read openly by all Curates, upon the publishing of this Bible: showing the
godly Ends of his Majesty in permitting it to be in English: and directions how
they should read and hear it. Namely, to use it with Reverence and gre^^
Devotion: to conform their Lives unto it; and to encourage those that were
under them, Wives, Children and Servants, to live according to the Rules
thereof; that in doubtful Places, they should confer with the Learned for the
Sense, who should be appointed to preach and explain the same, and not to
contend and dispute about them in Alehouses and Taverns. They that are minded
to read this Declaration, No. XXIII.
may find it in the Appendix. This Bible was of so quick sale, that two Years
after it was printed again.

The Bible received and read with great Joy.
It was wonderful to see with what joy this Book of God was received, not only
among the Learneder sort, and those that were noted for Lovers of the
Reformation, but generally all England over, among all the Vulgar, and common
People; and with what greediness God's Word was read, and what resort to Places
where the reading of it was. Every body that could, bought the Book, or busily
read it, or got others to read it to them, if they could not themselves; and
diverse more elderly People learned to read on purpose. And even little Boys
flocked among the rest to hear Portions of the Holy Scripture read. Inter Foxii
MSS.
One William Maldon, happening in the Company of John Fox, in the beginning of
the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and Fox being very inquisitive after those that
suffered for Religion in the former Reigns, asked him, if he knew any that were
persecuted for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that he might add it to his Book of
Martyrs; He told him*, he knew one that was whipped by his own Father in K.
Henry's Reign for it. And when Fox was very inquisitive who he was, and what
was his Name, he confessed it was himself: and upon his desire he wrote out all
the Circumstances. Namely, That when the King had allowed the Bible to be set
forth to be read in all Churches, immediately several poor Men in the Town of
Chelmsford in Essex, where his Father lived and he was born, bought the
New Testament, and on Sundays fat reading of it in the Lower end of the Church:
many would flock about them to hear their reading; and he among the rest, being
then but fifteen Years old, came every Sunday to hear the glad and sweet
Tidings of the Gospel. But his Father observing it, once angrily fetched him
away, and would have him to say the Latin Mattins with him. Which grieved him
much. And as he returned at other times to hear the Scripture read, his Father
still would fetch him away. This put him upon the thoughts of learning to read
English, that so he might read the New Testament himself. Which when he had by
diligence effected, he and his Father's Apprentice bought the New Testament,
joining their Stocks together; and to conceal it, laid it under the Bed-straw,
and read it at convenient Times. One night, his Father being asleep, he and his
Mother chanced to discourse concerning the Crucifix, and kneeling down to it,
and knocking on the Breast then used, and holding up the Hands to it, when it
came by on Procession: This he told his Mother was plain Idolatry, and against
the Commandment of God, where he says, Thou shall not make any graven Image,
nor bow down to it, nor worship it. His Mother enraged at him for this, said,
Will thou not worship the Cross, which was about thee when thou were Christened,
and must be laid on thee when thou art dead? An. 1537.
In this heat the Mother and Son departed, and went to their Beds. The Sum of
this Evening's Conference she presently repeats to her Husband: which he
impatient to hear, and boiling in Fury against his Son, for denying worship to
be due to the Cross, arose up forthwith, and goes into his Son's Chamber, and
like a mad Zealot, taking him by the Hair of his Head with both his Hands,
pulled him out of the Bed, and whipped him unmercifully. And when the Young Man
bore this beating, as he related, with a kind of Joy, considering it was for
Christ's Sake, and shed not a tear; his Father, seeing that, was more enraged,
and ran down and fetched an Halter, and put it about his Neck, saying he would
hang him. At length, with much entreaty of the Mother and Brother, he left him
almost dead. I extract this out of the Original Relation of the Person himself,
wrote at Newington, near London, where he afterward dwelt. Which relation he
gave to John Fox.

This Year Nicolson, a very Learned Man, The ABp had a hand in Lambert's Death^
greatly acquainted with Tindal and Frith, and who by reason of trouble from
the Bishops formerly, for the better concealing of himself for time to come,
called himself Lambert, was adjudged to the Flames, and cruelly burnt. Wherein
our Archbishop and the Lord Crumwel unhappily had their hands; the one in
reading the Sentence against him De Haeretico comburendo, by the King's
Commandment: and the Archbishop first in having him before him in a judiciary
way, and afterward in disputing publicly against him in favor of the
Doctrine of the Corporal Presence. The first occasion of Lambert's Troubles was
this. At the hearing of a Sermon of Dr. Tailor (he who was afterward Bishop of
Lincoln, and a favourer of the Gospel) preached by him at S. Peter's Cornhil,
he came and presented him with Ten Reasons against Transubstantiation, written
by him. Dr. Tailor* by Dr. Barnes his means, who, though in other things he
favored a Reformation, and suffered Death upon the Six Articles; yet was hot
against Sacramentaries at this time, thinking the broaching that Doctrine might
throw in some Impediment to the progress of the Gospel; Dr. Tailor, I say, by
Barnes his Advice, carried these Reasons to the Archbishop. Who, upon this,
conventing Lambert before him, endeavored to reclaim him, by holding much
discourse with him. The News of this came to the Court. And by the instigation
of the Bishop of Winchester, the King resolved to dispute with him himself in a
very public and solemn manner: and that because he had appealed from the
Bishops to the King.

The Day being come, and the King present, with all his Bishops on the right
Hand, and his Nobles on the Left, The Bishops dispute against Lambert'^ ^e^son^.
accompanied with his Lawyers and other Attendants, on purpose to terrify him,
and to make an open Signification, that though he had cast off the Papal
Supremacy, yet he intended not to be a favourer of Heresy so called; first
commanded Richard Sampson Bishop of Chichester (Fox says it was Day Bishop of
Chichester, but in that he was mistaken, for he was not yet Bishop) to begin,
and give the Reason of the meeting. He appointed the Bishops now present to
answer Lambert's Ten Reasons, as Fox; or his Eight, as the Bishop of Chichester
in his Declaration mentioned. An. 1538.
The Archbishop answered the second, for the King himself had disputed against
the first. The Archbishop, according to his mild Temper, but withal according
to the false Opinion, which he then most confidently maintained, stiling him
Brother Lambert, desired the Matter might be decided indifferently between
them. And that if he convinced Lambert by Scripture, Lambert would be willing
to come over from his Opinion: But if Lambert on the other hand could by
Scripture convince him, he promised to embrace his Opinion. Then he fell upon
Lambert's Reason, which was taken out of the Acts of the Apostles, where Christ
appeared unto Paul by the way. Disputing from that place, that it was not
disagreeable to the Word of God, that the Body of Christ may be in two places
at once. Which being in Heaven, was seen the same time by S. Paul upon the
Earth. And, said the Archbishop, If it may be in two places, why by the like
Reason may it not be in many places? In what order and course the rest of the
Bishops disputed, or rather baited this poor Man, it is uncertain, only
Winchester had the sixth place, Tunstal of Durham next to him, and next
Stokesly Bishop of London. Richard Bishop of Chichester, who was reputed a Man
of great Learning, had his course, to whose turn it came to confute Lambert's
Sixth Reason, which was taken from that of S. Paul to the Romans, Rom* x.
Who has ascended up to Heaven, to bring Christ down from thence? His Argument
is preserved in the Cotton Library. Cleopatra E. 5. No. XXIV.
I refer the Reader to the Appendix, where he shall meet with it. Whereby may
be seen after what a haughty and indecent manner this meek Confessor of Christ
was dealt with* as though they designed rather to run him down, and brow-beat
him, than answer him.

CHAP. XVIII. The Archbishop's Judgment of the Eucharist.
Cranmer zealous for the Corporal Presence.
BUT to return to Cranmer, whose Opinion in the Point of the Sacrament we will
stay a little upon. He was now a strong ^tickler for the Carnal Presence, and
seemed greatly prejudiced to that Opinion. There was one Ioachim Vadianus, a
Learned Man of S. Gal in Helvetia, and an Acquaintance of the Archbishop's. He
had framed a Treatise, entitled, Aphorisms upon the Consideration of the
Eucharist, in six Books: Which were intended to prove no Corporal Presence.
This Book he presented to the Archbishop: but though he loved him as a Learned
Man, yet he declared himself much displeased with his Argument; and wrote to
him, That he wished he had employed his Study to better purpose, and that he
had begun his Correspondence with him in some better and more approved Subject:
Adding, That he would be neither Patron nor Approver of that Doctrine, until he
saw stronger Proofs for it. And so much did he dislike Oecolampadius and
Zuinglius their Opinion in this Matter, that he applied that Censure of S.
Hierom concerning Origin to them; That where they wrote well, no body writ
better; and where ill, no body worse. And he wished those Learned Men had gone
no further, than to confute Papistical Errors and Abuses, and had not sown
their Tares with their good Corn.

That which detained our Archbishop in this Error, His Reasons for it.
was the Veneration he had for the Ancient Doctors of the Church, whose
Writings, as he then thought, approved the Doctrine of this gross Presence;
judging that none could ever reconcile those Authors to the contrary Opinion.
Indeed he judged it the very Doctrine of the Fathers from the beginning of the
Church: And he reckoned that it must be a Truth, because otherwise it could not
consist with God's Goodness to his Spouse, to leave her in such blindness so
long. It seemed also that he built this his Error upon the words of Scripture,
taking the sense of This is my Body literally.

Vadian by this Book had intended to have brought Cranmer off from this
Opinion. And before him several Attempts had been made that way; but he
remained so rooted therein, that he seemed to be ever unmovable. He supposed
also, that the giving up this Doctrine would prove a great Impediment to the
Work of the Gospel, that now proceeded well in the Nation. He advised and
beseeched all, both Lutherans and Zuinglians, that the Churches of Christ would
lay aside their Controversies in that Matter, and agree and unite in a
Christian Concord together, that they might propagate one sound pure Doctrine,
consonant to the Discipline of the Primitive Church. And this would be the way
to convert even Turks themselves to the Obedience of the Gospel. But I
recommend the Reader to the Archbishop's own Letter to the said Vadianus;
wherein he may see how fast and firm he stuck to this Doctrine in these days.
He will find it in the Appendix. N. XXV.


Sanders, in his lying Book of the English Schism, would make his Reader
believe, Sanders Slanders of the Abp concerning his Opinion in the Sacrament.
that Cranmer was of this Opinion for another Reason, namely, because his
Master K. Henry thought so: and that he had so devoted himself to him, that he
in all things whatsoever believed, and did, in conformity to him: giving
Cranmer therefore the Nickname of Henricianus. But we must attribute that
Suggestion to the well-known venomous Pen of that Man, who cared not what he
writ, so he might but throw his Dirt upon the Reformation, and the Reformers.
The said Author with the same Malice would have it, that Cranmer was very
variable and inconstant, having been first for a Corporeal Presence, afterward
a Lutheran, and then a Calvinist: And that he thus changed his Opinion, as a
Sycophant and Flatterer, to comply with every Man's Humor that was uppermost.
That all the time of K. Henry, he remained of that King's Opinion, who was a
vehement Enemy to Luther; but when he was dead, he became wholly Lutheran, and
put forth a Catechism dedicated to K. Edward, and printed it, in which he
taught, that every Christian that received the Sacrament, either under the
Bread, or in the Bread, or with the Bread, certainly received into his Mouth
the very true Body and Blood of Christ. But that scarce a Month passed, when
the Wretch (that is his word) understood, that the Duke of Somerset, the King's
Governor, was a Calvinist, and not a Lutheran, What should he do? He printed
his Catechism again, changed the word; and of an Henrician and a Lutheran,
became a Calvinist.

When Cranmer changed his Opinion.
But to give a more true and respectful account of our Archbishop, as to his
continuance in this Opinion, and his change of it. Hitherto we have seen his
Opinion for a Corporal Presence. In the next Year, ( viz. 1539.) I find one
Adam Damplip of Calais, a Learned Preacher, convented before him, and several
other Bishops, for not holding the Real Presence. From which Opinion the
Archbishop, with the rest, did endeavor to bring him off: Though then he
marvelled much at the Answers that Damplip made, and confessed openly and
plainly, that the Scripture knew no such term as Transubstantiation. In the
Year 1541, he had one Barber, a Master of Arts of Oxford, brought before him
for denying the said Corporal Presence: the Archbishop disputed again
earnestly for that Doctrine against this Man, yet could not but admire at his
readiness in citing his Places out of S. Augustine, nor could tell how to
confute them, as Mr. Raphe Morice his Secretary related afterward to John Fox.
Acts and Mon. p. 1101.
And this Tenet he held to the very last Year of K. Henry, that is, to the Year
1546. When by more mature and calm deliberation, and considering the Point with
less prejudice, and the sense of the Fathers more closely; in conference with
Dr. Ridley, afterward Bishop of Rochester, and his Fellow-Martyr, he at last
quitted and freed himself from the Fetters of that unsound Doctrine; as appears
by the Epistle Dedicatory before his Book of the Sacrament in Latin, printed by
the Exiles at Embden. Which Epistle we may give credit to, being written (as is
thought) by Sir John Cheke, who well knew the Archbishop, and Matters relating
to him.

Latimer of the same Judgment.
After Archbishop Cranmer and Ridley had changed their Opinion, Latimer not
long after changed his in this Point. For as they all three died Martyrs at
Oxon, I am willing to join them together here. It was but seven Years before
his Burning that he relinquished that old Error, that is, about the Year 1547,
as he confessed to Dr. Weston in his Disputation. There is an Argument the
said Latimer made use of, to prove the deceit of the Blood of Hales; which
Argument supposes him then of this Opinion. It was pretended by the Priests,
that none could see this Blood, but those that were confessed and absolved by
the Priest, and so clean in Life; and their seeing of it, was a sign they were
so. But said Latimer in those Times, for the exposing of this Fraud; Fox, p.
1581.
Those Wretches that scourged Christ, and nailed him to his Cross, did see his
Blood with their bodily Eyes, and yet were not in clean Life. And we see the
self-same Blood in form of Wine, when we have consecrate, and may both see it,
feel it, and receive it to our Damnation, as touching bodily receiving. We
shall perhaps say more of the Archbishop's Opinion in the Eucharist, when we
come to speak of his Book relating to that Argument.

Diverse Priests marry Wives.
Diverse Priests now, as well Religious as Secular, had married themselves, after
the Example of the Archbishop, who kept his Wife secretly with him. But some
of these married Priests were so indiscreet, that they lived publicly and
openly with their Wives, though the Ecclesiastical Laws were in force against
such Marriages, nor had they any Allowances by the King and Realm in
Parliament; Only some had Dispensations (as it is said) from the Archbishop.
Therefore the King, pressed by some of the Papists about him, (who began now,
after Lambert's Death, to listen to them) set forth a Proclamation, November. 16.
for the stopping of such Matrimonies. Which ran in this Tenor.

That the King's Majesty understanding that a few in number of this his Realm,
being Priests, as well Religious as other, The King's Proclamation against
Priests Marriages.
had taken Wives, and married themselves, etc. His Highness in no wise minding,
that the generality of the Clergy of this his Realm should, with the Example of
such a few number of light Persons, proceed to Marriage without a common
Consent of his Highness, and his Realm; Did therefore straightly charge and
command, as well all and singular the said Priests, as have attempted
Marriages, that be openly known, as all such as would presumptuously proceed to
the same, that they, ne any of them, should minister any Sacrament, or other
Ministry Mystical: Ne have any Office* Dignity, Cure, Privilege, Profit or
Commodity, heretofore accustomed and belonging to the Clergy of this Realm; but
should be utterly, after such Marriages, expelled and deprived from the same;
and be had and reputed as Lay-persons to all intents and purposes. And that
such as should after this Proclamation, contrary to his Commandment, of their
presumptuous Mind, take Wives and be married, should run in his Grace's
Indignation, and suffer further Punishment and Imprisonment at his Grace's Will
and Pleasure. Dat. xvi. Novembris, Anno Regni sui xxx.

Wherein we may observe what a particular regard the King had for the
Archbishop in relation to his Wife, that the danger of the Proclamation might
not reach him, by limiting the Penalty, not to such as were married and kept
their Wives secretly, but to such as should marry hereafter, and such as kept
them openly. And we may observe further, that it seemed to be in the King's
Mind in due time, to tolerate Marriages to Priests by Act of Parliament, which
that Clause seems to import, that these Priests had married themselves without
a common Consent of his Highness and his Realm. Defense of Priests marriage, p.
198.
And Bishop Ponet, or whoever else was the Author of the Defense of Priests
Marriage, assures us, that the King intended to permit Priests to take Wives,
knowing how necessary it was to grant that Liberty; and he affirms, that it was
not unknown to diverse that heard him speak often of that Matter. But was hindered
by some jealous Counselors, that pretended, how ill the People would take it
had it been done by his Authority.

The Sect of Anabaptists did now begin to pester this Church; Anabaptists
and would openly dispute their Principles in Taverns and public places, and
some of them were taken up. Many also of their Books were brought in and
printed here also: which was the cause that the King now set out a severe
Proclamation against them and their Books. To which he joined the
Sacramentaries, as lately with the other come into the Land; Declaring, That he
abhorred and detested their Errors; and that those that were apprehended, he
would make Examples. Ordering, that they should be detected* and brought before
the King or his Council; and that all that were not, should in eight or ten
days depart the Kingdom. This Proclamation may be read in the Appendix. Number.
VIII. Where I have misplaced it.

A Commission again them. Cranm. Regist.
A Commission also was then given out to the Archbishop, to John Bishop of
Lincoln, Rich. Bishop of Chichester, and others, against this Sect. Which
Commission was signed at the bottom by Thomas Crumwel.

The waywardness of the Priests. Cl^opat. E. 6. p. 222.
It was observed, that the Parsons, Vicars and Curates did read confusedly the
Word of God, and the King's Injunctions, lately set forth, and commanded by
them to be read: humming and hauking thereat, that almost no Man could
understand the meaning of the Injunction. And they secretly suborned certain
spreaders of Rumors and false Tales in Corners, who interpreted the Injunctions
to a false sense. And because there was an Order, that all Christnings,
Marriages and Burials should be registered from time to time, and the Books
surely kept in the Parish Churches, they blew abroad, that the King intended to
make new Exactions at all Christnings, Weddings and Burials: adding, that
therein the King went about to take away the Liberties of the Realm, for which
they said, Thomas a Becket died. And they bad their Parishioners,
notwithstanding what they read, being compelled so to do, that they should do
as they did in Times past, to live as their Fathers; and that the old Fashion
is the best: and other crafty and seditious Parables they gave out among them.

Occasions the King to write to the Justices.
This forced the King to write his Letters to the Justices of Peace, to take up
such seditious Parsons, Vicars and Curates. And in these Letters is explained
the true Reason of Thomas a Becke^'s Contention with K. Henry II. As that he
contended, that none of the Clergy offending should be called to account, or
corrected, but in the Bishop's Courts only, and not by the Laws of the Realm:
and that no King should be Crowned but by the Archbishop of Canterbury only.

He visits the Diocese of H^reford.
The Church of Hereford being now become vacant by the Death of Fox, (an
excellent Instrument of the Reformation) the Archbishop committed the custody
of the Spiritualities to Hugh Coren Doctor of Canon Laws, and Prebendary of
that Church, and by him visited the Church and Diocese, and gave certain
Injunctions to the Parsons, Cranm. Regist.
Vicars, and other Curats there. These Injunctions, as I find them in Cranmer's
Register, were eight in number. Which I shall not here insert at large, because
they may be met with in the History of the Reformation. Par. I. Book III.
Collect. 12.
But in short, they enjoined the Observation of the King's Injunctions, given
by his Majesty's Commissaries in the Year 1536. They enjoined, that they should
have by the first of August, a whole Bible in Latin and English; or at least a
New Testament in the same Languages. That they should every day study one
Chapter of the Bible or Testament, conferring the Latin and English together;
and to begin at the beginning of the Book, and so continue to the End. That
they should not discourage any Laymen from reading the Bible, but encourage
them to it. And to read it for the Reformation of their Lives, and Knowledge of
their Duty; and not to be bold and presumptuous in judging of things before
they have perfect Knowledge. That they should, both in their Preachings and
Confessions, and in other their Doings, excite their Parishioners unto such
Works as are commanded by God expressly: Adding, that for this God should demand
of them a strict Reckoning. And to teach them, that other Works which they do
of their own Devotion, are not to be so highly esteemed as the other. And that
for the not doing them, God will not ask any Account. That no Friar have any
Cure or Service in their Churches, unless he were dispensed withal and licensed
by the Ordinary. That they admit no young Person to the Sacrament, who never
received it before, unless such Person openly in the Church, after Mass upon a
Holyday, say the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments. That they
twice a Quarter declare the Bands of Matrimony, and the danger of using their
Bodies, but with such Persons as they might by the Law of God; and that no
privy Contracts be made, as they would avoid the extreme Peril of the Laws of
the Realm.

No Diocesan Bishop Consecrated this Year.

Bishops Suffragans.
Robert Bishop of S. Asaph recommended to the King John Bradley, Bishops
consecrated.
Abbot of the Monastery of Milton, of the order of S. Benedict, or William
Pelles, both Batchellors of Divinity, to the Dignity of Suffragan within the
Diocese [Province rather] of Canterbury, Cranm. Registi
mentioning no particular See. The Bishop of Bath and Wells also recommended
two to the King, out of which to nominate a Suffragan to some See within the
Province of Canterbury, viz. William Finch, late Prior of Bremar, and Richard
Walshe, Prior of the Hospital of S. John Baptist of Bridgewater.

April the 7 th, William F^nch*
William Finch was nominated by the King to the Archbishop to be Consecrated
for Suffragan of Taunton; and then consecrated in the Chapel of S. Mary's in
the Conventual Church of the Friars Preachers, London, by John Bishop of
Rochester, by virtue of Letters Commissional from the Archbishop, Robert
Bishop of S. Asaph, and William Suffragan of Colchester assisting. And,

March the 23. John Bradly*
John Bradley was consecrated Suffragan of Shaftsbury, in the Chancel of the
Parish Church of S. John Baptist in Southampton, by John Bishop of Bangor, by
the Letters Commissional of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, John Ipolitanen*
and Thomas Suffragan of Marleborough, assisting.

CHAP. XIX. The Act of Six Articles.
THIS Year, October the 6 th, I meet with a Commission, The ABp makes Nic.
Wotton Commissary of his Faculties. Cranm. Regist.
ad Facultates, granted from the Archbishop to a famous Man, Nicolas Wotton,
LL. D. a Man of great Learning, and made use of by the King afterward in
diverse Embassies, and a Privy-Counsellor to King Henry, An. 1539.
and his three Children successively Princes of the Realm, and Dean of
Canterbury and York. This Commission was in pursuance of a late Act of
Parliament, to this Tenor, That in whatsoever Cases, not prohibited by Divine
Right, in which the Bishop of Rome, or Roman See, heretofore accustomed to
Dispense, and also in all other Cases in which the Bishop or See of Rome
accustomed not to dispense, if so be they were not forbid by Divine Right; in
these Cases the Archbishop had Power granted him to Dispense. In this Office
he constituted Wotton his Commissary or Deputy, for the Term of his natural
Life. He succeeded Edmund Boner, Master of the Archbishop's Faculties, Ath.
Oxon. p. 124.
now preferred to the Bishopric of Hereford. So that Cranmer took notice of
the Merits of this Man, who was so much made use of afterward in the Church
and State; and was of that great Esteem and Reputation, that he was thought on,
in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign for ABp of Canterbury. In the Year
1528. he was Doctor of Laws, and the Bishop of London's Official. In the Year
1540, he was Resident for the King in the Duke of Cleve's Court; and had been
employed in the Match between the King and the Lady Ann of that House the Year
before; and perhaps this might be the first time he was sent abroad in the
King's Business.

An. 1539.
In the Year 1539, the King took occasion to be displeased with the Archbishop
and the other Bishops of the new Learning, as they then termed them, The King
offended with the ABp and some other Bishops.
because they could not be brought to give their Consent in the Parliament,
that the King should have all the Monasteries suppressed to his own sole use.
They were willing he should have all the Lands as his Ancestors gave to any of
them; but the Residue they would have had bestowed upon Hospitals, Life of
Cranm. inter Foxii MSS.
Grammar-Schools for bringing up of Youth in Virtue and good Learning, with
other things profitable in the Commonwealth. The King was hereunto stirred, by
the crafty Insinuations of the Bishop of Winchester, and other old dissembling
Papists. And as an effect of this Displeasure, as it was thought, in the
Parliament this Year, he made the terrible bloody Act of the Six Articles:
Whereby none were suffered to speak a word against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, upon pain of being burnt to Death as an Heretic, and to
forfeit all his Lands and Goods, as in case of Treason. And moreover, it was
made Felony, and forfeiture of Lands and Goods, to defend the Communion in both
kinds, Marriage in a Priest, or in any Man or Woman that had vowed Chastity: or
to say any thing against the necessity of Private Masses and Auricular
Confession. Which Articles were plainly enough designed against any that should
dare to open their Mouths against these Romish Errors, and especially to impose
Silence, and that on pain of Death, upon many honest Preachers that were now
risen up, and used to speak freely against these Abuses; and as a good means to
keep the poor People still securely in their old Ignorance and Superstition.

But before this Act passed, mavelous great struggling there was on both
Parts, The six Articles opposed by the ABp.
for and against it. But the side of the Favorers of the Gospel at this time
was the weaker, the King, now enclining more to the other Party, for the reason
abovesaid, and for other Causes: Wherein I refer the Reader to the Conjectures
of the Lord Herbert. The Bishops disputed long in the House, some for it, and
some against it. Life of K. Henry p. 512.
The Archbishop disputed earnestly three days against it, using diverse
Arguments to dissuade passing the Act. Which were so remarkable for the
Learning and Weight of them, that the King required a Copy of them. And though
he was resolved not to alter his purpose of having this Act made, yet he was
not offended with the Archbishops freedom, as knowing the Sincerity of the
Man. Even those in the House that dissented from him, were greatly taken with
the Gravity, Eloquence, and Learning he then showed, and particularly the Dukes
of Norfolk and Suffolk. Who told him so at his Table soon after: being sent by
the King to him, to comfort him under his dejection for this Act, with Crumwel,
and many other Lords. The Papist Writers say he opposed it, because himself was
a Married Man, and so it would touch him close. But it is plain, that there
were other of these Six Articles which he utterly disliked. And especially he
abhorred the rigorous penalty of the Act. But hereupon he privately sent away
his Wife into Germany among her Friends. On this side also were, beside the
Archbishop, the Bishops of Ely, Sarum, Worcester, Rochester, and St. David's:
York, Durham, Winchester, and Carlisle went vigorously the other way. Against
the former the King himself argued, with his Learning, out of the Scriptures;
and would by all means prove these Articles thence. The Parliament Men said
little against this Bill, but seemed all unanimous for it: Neither did the Lord
Chancellor Audley, no, nor the Lord Privy Seal, Crumwel, speak against it: the
Reason being, no question, because they saw the King so resolved upon it. Nay,
it came to be a flying Report, that the Archbishop of Canterbury himself, and
all the Bishops, except Sarum, consented. But this is not likely, that Cranmer,
who had so openly and zealously opposed it, should be so soon changed, and
brought to comply with it. Nay, at the very same time it passed, he staid and
protested against it, though the King desired him to go out, since he could not
consent to it. Worcester also, as well as Sarum, was committed to Prison: and
he, as well as the other, resigned up his Bishopric upon the Act.

In the foresaid Disputation in the Parliament House, The Argument^ the ABp
made use of at this time, lost.
the Archbishop behaved himself with such humble modesty, and obedience in
word toward his Prince; protesting the Cause not to be his, but God's; that
neither his Enterprise was misliked of the King, and his Allegations and
Reasons were so strong, that they could not be refuted. Great pity it is, that
these Arguments of the Archbishop are lost; which I suppose they are
irrecoverably, because Fox that lived so near those Times, and so elaborate a
Searcher after such Papers, could not meet with them; and all that he could do,
was to wish that they were extant to be seen and read. However I will make my
Conjecture here, that I am apt to think, that one of the main Matters insisted
on by him at this time, was against the cruel Penalty annexed to these
Articles. For I find in one of the Archbishop's Manuscript Volumes, now in
Benet-College Library, there is in this very Year, a Discourse in Latin upon
this Subject, Number in haereticos jure Magistratui gravius animadvertere liceat:
Decisio Vrbani Rhegii, Interpret Iacobo Gisleno. Anno 1539. Which Book I
suppose he might at this juncture have read over, and made use of.

The King's Message to the ABp by the Lords.
The Dukes and Lords of Parliament, that as above was said, came over to Lambeth
to visit and dine with him, by the King's Command, used words to him to this
Tenor; The King's Pleasure is, that we should in his behalf cherish and comfort
you, as one, that for your travail in the late Parliament, declared your self
both greatly Learned, and also Discreet and Wise: And therefore, my Lord, be
not discouraged for any thing that past there contrary to your Allegations. The
Archbishop replied, In the first place, my Lords, I heartily thank the King's
Highness for his singular good Affection toward me, and you all, for your
pains. And I hope in God, that hereafter my Allegations and Authorities shall
take place, to the Glory of God, and Commodity of the Realm. Every of the Lords
brought forth his Sentence in commendation of him, to show what good will both
the King and they bare to him. One of them entered into a Comparison between the
said Archbishop and Cardinal Wolsey, preferring the Archbishop before him for
his mild and gentle Nature; whereas he said, the Cardinal was a stubborn and
churlish Prelate, that could never abide any Nobleman. The Lord Crumwel, MS.
Life of Cranmer, in C.C.C.C.
as Cranmer's Secretary relates, who himself heard the words, You, my Lord,
said he, were born in an happy Hour I suppose; for do or say what you will, the
King will always take it well at your Hands. And I must needs confess, that in
some things I have complained of you to his Majesty; but all in vain, for he
will never give credit against you, whatsoever is laid to your Charge: But let
me, or any other of the Council be complained of, his Grace will most seriously
chide, and fall out with us: And therefore you are most happy, if you can keep
you in this State.

A Book of Ceremonies labored to be brought in.
The Roman Zealots having obtained this Act of the Six Articles, desisted not,
but seconded their Blow by a Book of Ceremonies to be used by the Church of
England, so entitled; all running after the old Popish strain. It proceeded
all along in favor of the Roman Church's superstitious Ceremonies,
endeavoring to show the good signification of them. The Book first begins with
an Index of the Points touched therein; viz. Churches and Churchyards, the
hallowing and reconcileing them. The Ceremonies about the Sacrament of Baptism.
Ordering of the Ministers of the Church in general. Divine Service to be sung
and said in the Church. Mattins, Prime and other Hours. Ceremonies used in the
Mass. Sundays, with other Feasts. Bells. Vesture and Tonsure of the Ministers
of the Church, and what Service they be bound unto. Bearing Candles upon
Candlemass-day. Fasting Days. The giving of Ashes. The covering of the Cross
and Images in Lent. Bearing of Palms. The Service of Wednesday, Thursday and
Friday before Easter. The hallowing of Oil and Chrism. The washing of the
Altars. The hallowing of the Font upon Saturday in the Easter-Even. The
Ceremonies of the Resurrection in Easter-Morning. General and other particular
Processions. Benedictions of Bells or Priests. Holy Water, and holy Bread. A
general Doctrine to what intent Ceremonies be ordained, and of what value they
be. The Book it self is too long to be here inserted; but such as have the
Curiosity, Cleopatra E. ^. p. 259.
may find it in the Cotton Library, and may observe what Pains was taken to
smooth and varnish over the old Supperstions. I do not find this Book mentioned
by any of our Historians. The Bishop of Winchester, with his own Pen, has an
Annotation in the Margin of one place in the Book. And I strongly suspect he
was more than the Revisor of it; and that it was drawn up by him and his Party,
and strongly pushed on to be owned as the Act of the Clergy. A Convocation.
For this Year there was a Convocation. The King had sent his Letters, written
March the 12 th, in the 30 th Year of his Reign, viz. 1538. to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, for summoning a Convocation, to meet together at St. Paul's the
second day of May. But this Assembly, by the King's Letters to him, was
prorogued till November the 4 th. At this Convocation, I suppose, these
Articles were invented and propounded to the House. All this long Book, in
behalf of the Ceremonies, did our laborious Metropolitan put himself to the
pains of answering, and thereby hindered the Reception of it. For concerning
this, I do interpret that Passage of Fox, viz. That the Archbishop confuted
eighty eight Articles devised by a Convocation, and which were labored to be
received, but were not. But to return to the six Articles.

Great triumphing now there was on the Papists Side, The Papists rejoice.
as appears by a Letter wrote from some Roman Catholic Member of the House of
Lords to his Friend. Which may be read in the Appendix. No. XXVI.
But after some time, the King perceiving that the said Archbishop and Bishops
did this thing, not of Malice or Stubbornness, but out of a zeal they had to
God's Glory and the Commonwealth, reformed in part the said Six Articles, and
somewhat blunted the Edg of them.

March 20. Two Commissions were sent to the Archbishop to take the Surrender
of two Houses of Religious Persons; namely, Two Priories surrendered to the ABp.
that of Christ's-Church Canterbury, and that of Rochester.

Toward the latter end of this Year, The ABp and Crumwel labor with the King
about the new Bishoprics.
several new Bishoprics were founded out of old Monasteries; and several
Deaneries and Colleges of Prebends out of diverse Priories belonging to
Cathedral Churches. Herein as Crumwel, so Cranmer had a great Hand. Who
labored with the King, that in these New Foundations there should be Readers
of Divinity, Greek and Hebrew, and Students trained up in Religion and
Learning. From whence, as a Nursery, the Bishops should supply their Diocesses
with honest and able Ministers. And so every Bishop should have a College of
Clergymen under his Eye, to be preferred according to their Merits. For it was
our Archbishops regret, that the Prebendaries were bestowed as they were. This
Complaint Bishop Burnet tells us he saw in a long Letter of Cranmer's own hand.
Hist. Ref. P. I. p. 301.


Bishops Confirmed.
In Archbishops Cranmer's Register I find these Bishops Confirmed, Bishops
this Year.
their Consecrations being omitted.

August the 11 th, John Bell, LL. D. brought up in Baliol College, and
Archdeacon of Gloucester, An. 1540.
was Confirmed Bishop of Worcester, upon the Resignation of Bishop Latimer, in
the Chapel of Lambeth. He is styled in the Register, John Bell.
the King's Chaplain and Councellor.

John Skyp.
November the John Skyp, D. D. Archdeacon of Dorset, and once Chaplain to
Queen Ann Bole^, was Confirmed Bishop of Hereford. The King's Letter to the
Archbishop to consecrate him bears date November 8.

CHAP. XX. The Archbishop in Commission.
An. 1540.
THE next Year, viz. 1540. The Archbishop lost his great Friend and Assistant
in carrying on the Reformation, I mean the Lord Crumwel. The ABp's Enemies
accuse him.
And when he was, by Popish Craft and Malice, taken off, their next Work was to
sacrifice Cranmer. And many were the Accusations that were put up against him:
and Trial was made many ways to bring him to his Death, or at least to bring
him in disgrace with the King.

His Honesty and Courage in discharge of a Commission,
And first they thought to compass their Ends against him by occasion of a
Commission now issued out from the King to a select Number of Bishops, whereof
the Archbishop was one, (which Commission was confirmed by Act of Parliament)
for inspecting into Matters of Religion, and explaining some of the chief
Doctrines of it. These Commissioners had drawn up a set of Articles, favoring
the old Popish Superstitions. And meeting together at Lambeth they produced
them, and vehemently urged that they should be established, and that the
Archbishop would yield to the Allowance of them; especially seeing there was a
signification, that it was the King's Will and Pleasure that the Articles
should run in that Tenor. But they could not win the Archbishop neither by
Fear nor Flattery; No, though the Lord Crumwel at this very time lay in the
Tower. There was not one Commissioner now on his part, but all shrank away, and
complied with the Time: and even those he most trusted to, viz. Bishop Hethe of
Rochester, and Bishop Skip of Hereford. The Archbishop as he disliked the Book
already drawn up by them, so he presented another Book, wherein were diverse
Amendments of theirs. After much arguing and disputing, nor could the
Archbishop be brought off, Hethe, and Skip, with a Friend or two more, walked
down with him into his Garden at Lambeth, and there used all the Persuasion
they could; urging to him, that the King was resolved to have i^ so, and the
Danger therefore of opposing it. But he honestly persisted in his constancy:
telling them, That there was but one Truth in the Articles to be concluded
upon, which if they hid from his Majesty, by consenting unto a contrary
Doctrine, his Highness would in process of Time perceive the Truth, and see how
colorably they had dealt with him. And he knew, he said, his Grace's Nature so
well, that he would never after credit and trust them. And they being both his
Friends, he bad them beware in time, and discharge their Consciences in
maintenance of the Truth. But though nothing of all this could stir them, yet
what he said, sufficiently confirmed the Archbishop to persist in his
Resolution.

The Archbishop standing thus alone, went himself to the King, And his Success
therein.
and so wrought with him, that his Majesty joined with him against all the rest
of them; and the Book of Articles past on his side. When indeed this stifness
of Canterbury was the very thing his Enemies desired; thinking that for this
Opposition, the King would certainly have thrown him into the Tower; and many
Wagers were laid in London about it. So that this ended in two good Issues;
that the Archbishop's Enemies were clothed with Shame and Disappointment, and
a very good Book, chiefly of the Archbishop's composing, came forth for the
Instruction of the People, known by the Name of A necessary Erudition of any
Christian Man. A particular Account whereof may be read in the History of the
Reformation. Hist. Ref. P. I. p. 286.
This vexed Winchester to the Heart, that his Plot took no better Effect: but
he put it up, till he should find other Opportunities to attack him, which
after happened, as we shall see in the sequel of this Story.

But this Matter deserves to be a little more particularly treated of:
Questions of Religion to be discussed by Divines, by the King's Command.
The King had, as was said before, appointed several of the Eminent Divines of
his Realm, to deliberate about sundry Points of Religion then in Controversy,
and to give in their Sentences distinctly. And that in regard of the Germans,
who the last Year had sent over in Writing, the Judgment of their Divines
respecting some Articles of Religion; and had offered his Majesty to appoint
some of their Divines to meet some others of the King's, in any Place he should
assign; or to come over into England to confe^ together. And also in regard of
a more exact review of the Institution of a Christian Man, put forth about two
or three Years before, and now intended to be published again, as a more
perfect Piece of Religious Instruction for the People. The King therefore,
being minded thoroughly to sift diverse Points of Religion, then started and much
controverted, commanded a particular number of Bishops, and other his Learned
Chaplains and Dignitaries, to compare the Rites and Ceremonies, and Tenets of
the present Church, by the Scriptures, and by the most Ancient Writers; and to
see how far the Scripture, or good Antiquity did allow of the same. And this I
suppose he did by the instigation of Archbishop Cranmer.

The Names of the Commissioners were these; The Names of the Commi^sioners.
Cranmer ABp of Canterbury, Lee ABp of York, Boner Bishop of London, Tunstal
Bishop of Durham, Barlow Bishop of S. David's, Aldrich Bishop of Carlisle, Skyp
Bishop of Hereford, Hethe Bishop of Rochester, Thirleby Bishop Elect of
Westminster; Doctors, Cox, Robinson, Day, Oglethorp, Redman, Edgeworth,
Symonds, Tresham, Leyghton, Curwen, Crayford. Where we may wonder, not to see
the Name of the Bishop of Winton: But if we consider the Reason the King gave
why he left him out of the Number of his Executors, viz. because (as he told
several Noblemen then about him) that Bishop was a turbulent wilful Man; and
if he were joined with them, they should have no quiet in their Consultations:
The same Reason we may conclude moved the King now in these Deliberations about
Religion to lay him aside. These Persons were generally learned and moderate
Men, and such as we may conjecture the Archbishop had the Nomination of to the
King. However, we may be sure, Winchester was not idle at this time.

Seventeen Questions upon the Sacrament.
And first the Doctrine of the Sacraments was examined, by propounding seventeen
distinct Questions drawn up, as I have reason to conclude, by the Archbishop,
on which the Divines were to consult. But each one was to set down in Writing
his Sense of every of these Questions singly and succinctly. These Questions
are the same with those in the History of the Reformation. Part I. Collect.
xxi. p. 201.
The Right Reverend Author has set down there the several Answers that those
Bishops and Divines, that he met with in Bishop Stillingfleet's Manuscript,
made to each Question; which I shall not now repeat after him. But I find in a
Cotton Book a few Pages that deserve (according to my poor Judgment) to be
transcribed, Cleopatra E. 5. p. 36.
of something which is not in that History, being the Answers of other Bishops
and Divines in the same Commission. The first is Nameless; but for some Reasons
I believe him to be the Bishop of Durham. Each Page consists of three
Columes; the middle Colume contains the Questions. On one side-Colume is writ
his Answer to each Question; on the other side-Colume are the King's Notes upon
the Answer, wrote by his own Hand: N^. XXVII.
I refer the Reader to the Appendix for this. There follow in the Cotton Book,
Solutions of each of these Questions by another, omitted by the Bishop of Sarum
in his History. He is nameless also, but appears to have been some popishly
affected Bishop, but yet one that conversed much with the Archbishop, the
Bishop of S. David's, and Dr. Cox, and was, I suppose, Thirleby Elect of
Westminster: For in many places in the Margin of his Paper, are set the Names
of those Men; for what purpose I do not know, unless to signify their Judgments
as agreeable with his; though in these very places sometimes their Minds and
his differ. This Man's Answer also was perused by the King, who sometimes writ
his own Objections in the Margin. No. XXVIII.
This also I have cast into the Appendix.

The ABp's Judgment upon these Questions.
In the conclusion of this famous Consultation upon these seventeen Articles
concerning the Sacraments (their Resolutions being drawn up in Writing under
their own hands.) The Archbishop having these Discourses given into his hand,
for the King's Use, drew up a Summary of each Man's Judgment: Which together
with his own, he caused to be written fairly out by his Secretary, and so
presented to the King. Vol. I. Book 3. Collect. XXI.
The Bishop of Sarum has saved me the trouble of writing them out in this
Work, having presented them already to the World in his History, Cleopatra E. 5.
from another Manuscript than the Cotton Book which I make use of, which is a
true Original. The Archbishop's Summary may be found among the Collections in
the said History, against the word Aggrement in the Margin, and the
Archbishop's own Judgment against his Name in the Margin. At the conclusion of
his Paper, which he sent to the King, he subscribed thus, most warily and
modestly, with his own Hand, T. Cantuarien. This is mine Opinion and Sentence
at this present; which nevertheless I do not temerariously define, but refer
the Judgment thereof unto your Majesty.

Besides these 17 Questions, The Judgments of other Learned Men concerning
other Points.
there are in this choice Cottonian Manuscript, diverse others propounded to
another Combination of Bishops and Divines, perhaps about this time, or rather,
I conceive, three Years before, with their Answers under their Hands thereunto,
being called together in order to the composing the Book called The
Institution. As, concerning Confirmation; Whether this Sacrament be a Sacrament
of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, or not? What is the outward Sign,
and invisible Grace, that is conferred in the same? What Promises be made, that
the said Graces shall be received by this Sacrament? The Bishop of Sarum has
printed among his Collections, the Resolutions of the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Bishop of London to these Queries; having taken them out of this Manuscript
Volume which I use. But there be here the Opinions of many more, both Bishops
and other Dignitaries of the Church: As namely the Archbishop of York, the
Bishops of Ely, Rochester, Lincoln, Bangor, and Sarum. Then follows the Opinion
of the Bishop of London, and next of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Then come
the Judgments of Dr. Wotton Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Barber Archdeacon of
Cleveland, and Warden of All Souls Oxon, and one of the Convocation in 1562.
Dr. Bell a Civilian, employed in the King's Business against Queen Katharine,
Archdeacon of Gloucester, and soon after Bishop of Worcester; Dr. Wolman Dean
of Wells, Dr. Marshall Archdeacon of Nottingham, Dr. Cliff Treasurer of the
Church of York, Dr. Edmunds, the same, I suppose, that was Master of
Peter-house, Cambridg; Dr. Downs Chancellor of the Church of York; Dr.
Marmaduke, the same probably that was called Marmaduke VValdeby; Dr. Robinson,
for Robertson, I suppose, Archdeacon of Leicester; Dr. Smith, he probably that
was Professor of Divinity in Oxon; Dr. Buckmaster, and another nameless.

And as these Learned Men treated of this Point of Confirmation, so by the
various Heads and Discourses I meet with here, they all gave their Judgments of
diverse other chief Points of Religion; as De Fide, De Salvatione, De
Matrimonio, De Poenitentia, De Sacramentorum usu, and De auriculari
Confessione. Where is a Letter of the King's own writing, in answer to somewhat
the Bishop of Durham had writ upon that Argument. This Royal Letter the Bishop
of Sarum has printed in his History. Of Priests Marriage; Part I. Addend^ to
the Collect. No. XI.
whereof the King wrote a short Discourse. Of Pilgrimages; Of Purgatory; of
this there is a Discourse wrote by Latimer. And after follows another by the
King. Latimer's Discourse is animadverted upon by the King's Pen in the Margin;
De utraque specie. Three or four large Discourses thereupon, in favor of
Receiving in one Kind: One whereof was part of the King's Answer to the German
Ambassadors, that were sent hither about a Treaty, in the Years 1538, and
1539. The Second is part of an Apology, by an English Divine, to those German
Protestants, for Communion in one Kind, and for private Mass. And this latter
probably is the Bishop of Durham's, because the Correction of the Paper,
(transcribed as it seems by his Secretary) here and there is his own Hand.

So that some of these Discourses were, I make no doubt, drawn up by the
Divines for the King's Use, in order to his Answer to the Writing, which the
German Agents the last Year had composed, before their Voyage home. But these
Papers, some English and some Latin, are so large, that they would too much
swell this Volume, and entangle the Thread of the Discourse, if I should here
insert them: And therefore I must omit them, and proceed to other matters.

An Act to prevent Divorces.
In this thirty second Year of the King, by a seasonable Law, a stop was put to
an Evil that now mightily prevailed: Namely, the frequency of Divorces. For it
was ordinary to annul Marriages, and divide Man and Wife from each other, who
it may be had lived long together, and had Children in Wedlock: When upon any
disgust of Man or Wife, they would withdraw from one another; and so in effect
make their Children Bastards, upon pretense of some Pre-contract or Affinity:
Which by the Pope's Law required a Divorce. The King himself took particular
care of this Act, and there were two rough Draughts of it, which I have seen in
the Cotton Library: both which he himself revised diligently, and corrected
with his own Pen. These Divorces the Archbishop highly disliked; and might
probably have laid before the King the great Inconveniences, as well as
Scandal, thereof. It troubled him to see how common these Divorces were grown
in Germany, and After-Marriages, and Bigamy. There is a Letter of his to
Osiander, the German Divine, concerning Matrimony: In what Year written
appears not; unless perhaps in this Year, or the following, now that the King
was employing his Thoughts about redress of this Business. The ABp to Osiander,
concerning the Germans abuse of Matrimony.
The sum of the Letter, is to desire Osiander to supply him with an Answer to
some things, that seemed to reflect a Fault upon those in Germany that
professed the Gospel; and that was, that they allowed such as were divorsed to
marry again, both Parties divorsed being alive: and that they suffered, without
any Divorce, a Man to have more Wives than one. And Osiander had acknowledged
as much expressly to Cranmer, in a Letter, seeming to complain of it, and
added, that Philip Melancthon himself was present at one of these Marriages of
a second Wife, the first being alive.

Indeed if any thing were done among those Protestants, that seemed not just
and fair, to be sure Cranmer should presently be twitted in the Teeth for it.
And then he was fain to make the best Answers he could, either out of their
Books, or out of his own Invention. And he was always asked about the Affairs
in those Parts. And sometimes he was forced to confess some things, and be
ready to blush at them, (such a concern had he for Germany) as concerning their
Allowance of Usury, and of Concubines to their Noblemen: as he wrote to the
said German. But I will not longer detain the Reader from perusing the
excellent Learned Letter of the Archbishop, No. XXIX.
which he may find in the Appendix, concerning this Subject.

CHAP. XXI. The largest Bible printed.
THE largest English Bible coming forth in Print this Year, Some account of
printing the English Bible.
wherein our Archbishop out of his Zeal to God's Glory had so great an
influence, I shall here take occasion to give some account of the Translation
of, as well as I can, there having been no exact Story thereof any where given,
as I know of.

The first time the Holy Scripture was printed in English, New Testament
printed in 1526.
(for written Copies thereof, of Wickliffs Translation, there were long before,
and many) was about the Year 1526. And that was only the New Testament
translated by Tindal, assisted by Joy and Constantine, and printed in some
Foreign Parts, I suppose at Hamburgh or Antwerp. For in this Year I find, that
Cardinal Wolsey and the Bishops consulted together for the prohibiting the New
Testament of Tindal's Translation to be read. And Tonstal Bishop of London*
issued out his Commission to his Archdeacons for calling in the New Testament.
And burnt. Fox's Acts p. 929.
This Year also Tonstal and Sir Thomas More bought up almost the whole
Impression, and burnt them at Paul's Cross. I think it was this first Edition,
that Garret, alias Garrerd, Curate of Hony-Lane, afterward burnt for Heresy,
dispersed in London and Oxford.

Soon after Tindal revised his Translation of the New Testament, Reprinted
about 1530.
and corrected it, and caused it again to be printed about the Year 1530. Inter
Foxii MSS.
The Books finished were privily sent over to Tindal's Brother, John Tindal,
and Thomas Patmore Merchants, and another young Man; who received them and
dispersed them. For which having been taken up by the Bishop of London, they
were adjudged in the Star Chamber, Sir Thomas More being then Lord Chancellor,
to ride with their Faces to the Horse Tail, having Papers on their Heads, and
the New Testaments and other Books (which they dispersed) to be fastened thick
about them, pinned or tacked to their Gowns or Clokes, and at the Standard in
Cheap themselves to throw them into a Fire made for that purpose: Burnt again.
and then to be fined at the King's Pleasure. Which Penance they observed. The
Fine set upon them was heavy enough, viz. eighteen thousand eight hundred and
forty Pounds and ten Pence: as was extant to be seen in the Records of the
Star Chamber.

Anno 1531. The Bishops came into the Star Chamber, The Scripture prohibited,
in a Meeting at the Star Chamber.
and communing with the King's Counsel, and alleging that this Testament was
not truly translated, and that in it were Prologues and Prefaces of Heresy and
Raillery against Bishops; upon this Complaint the Testament, and other such
like Books were prohibited. But the King gave Commandment to the Bishops at the
same time, that they calling to them the best Learned out of the Universities,
should cause a New Translation to be made; so that the People might not be
ignorant in the Law of God. But the Bishops did nothing in obedience to this
Commandment.

The same Year, viz. 1531. in the Month of May, New Testaments burnt the third
Time.
Stokesly Bishop of London, (as Tonstal, his Predecessor, had done four or five
Years before) caused all the New Testaments of Tindal, and many other Books
which he had bought up, to be brought to Paul's Churchyard* Fox. p. 937.
and there openly burnt.

The whole Bible printed 1537.
In the Year 1537. The Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments, called
Matthews Bible, of Tindal's and Roger's Translation, was printed by Grafton and
Whitchurch at Hamburgh, to the number of fifteen hundred Copies. Which Book
obtained then so much Favor of the King, by Crumwel's and Canterbury's Means,
that the King enjoined it to be had by all Curates, and set up in all
Parish-Churches throughout the Realm. Matthews, that is, Roger's Bible.
It was done by one John Rogers, who flourished a great while in Germany, and
was Superintendent of a Church there; being afterward a Prebend of S. Paul's,
and the first Martyr in Queen Mary's Days. He is said, by my Author, to have
translated the Bible into English from Genesis to the end of the Revelations,
making use of the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, German, and English [that is Tyndal's]
Copies. He added Prefaces, and Notes out of Luther: and dedicated the whole
Book to King Henry, under the Name of Thomas Matthews, Balaei Centur.
by an Epistle prefixed; minding to conceal his own Name. Graston, and the rest
of the Merchants concerned in the Work, thinking that they had not Stock enough
to supply all the Nation, and this Book being of a Volume not large enough, and
considering the Prologues and Marginal Notes gave offense to some, and being
put on by those that favored the Gospel, that as many as possible could be,
might be printed, for the dispersing the Knowledge of Christ and his Truth; they
resolved to imprint it again, which they intended should be of a larger Volum^
than any before: and therefore it was called, when it came forth, The Bible in
the largest Volume. They intended also, in order to this Edition, to have the
former Translation revised, and to omit several Prologues and Annotations. And
Miles Coverdale was the Man now, that compared the Translation with the Hebrew,
and mended it in diverse places, and was the chief Overseer of the Work. But
though they left out Matthews's, that is Roger's Notes, yet they resolved to
make Hands and Marks on the sides of the Book: which meant, that they would
have particular notice to be taken of those Places, being such Texts as did
more especially strike at the Errors and Abuses of the Romish Church.

About 1538. the Bible printing again in Paris.
Grafton resolved to print this Bible in Paris, if he could obtain leave, there
being better Paper and cheaper to be had in France, and more dextrous Workmen.
For this purpose the Lord Crumwel, who stood by him in this Enterprise,
procured Letters of the King, as Fox relates, to Francis the French King, which
were conveyed to Boner then Ambassador at that Court, for him to present them
to that King. The Contents of which Letters of King Henry were to this effect,
For a Subject of his to imprint the Bible in English in his Dominion, both in
regard of his Paper and Workmen. The King at the same time wrote to his said
Ambassador to aid and assist the Undertakers of this good Work in all their
reasonable Suits. Boner did not only present this Letter to Francis, and
obtained with good Words the License desired, but he showed great Friendship to
the Merchants and Printers, and so encouraged them, that the Work went on with
good Speed and Success. And to show, how well affected he was now to the Holy
Bible, he caused the English there in Paris to print the New Testament in
English and Latin, Fox* p. 1086.
and took off a great many of them himself, and distributed them to his
Friends. But the Principle, that moved Boner in all this, was, that he might
the better curry Favor with Crumwel, and recommend himself to him, who being
the great Favorite now with the King, was the fittest Instrument for his Rise.
The Letters Patents that Boner procured of the French King for the printing
this Bible, may be seen in the Appendix. No. XXX.
Wherein indeed I do not find any specification of King Henry's Letters to
Francis, but only mention made that he had sufficient Testimony, that the said
Henry had allowed them to print the Bible as well in Latin as English, and
being finished, to bring the Impression safely over.

But notwithstanding this Royal License, The Printers fall into the Inquisition.
such was the overswaying Authority of the Inquisition in Paris, that the
Printers were had up into the said Inquisition. For in the Year 1538, there was
an Instrument dated December the 17 th, coming from Henry Garvais, S. Th. D.
Prior of the Convent of the Friars-Preachers, Paris, and Vicar General of the
Venerable Father, Friar Matthew Ory, of the same Order, and D. D.
Inquisitor-General of Heretical Pravity in the whole Kingdom of France, by
Apostolical and Regal Authority especially Deputed: Setting forth, Cleopatra E.
^*
That since from the Translation of the Sacred Scriptures, as well of the Old
Testament as New, into the Mother Tongue, which comes to the Hands of the
simple, it is found in these last Days, that some have taken occasion of Error
in the Faith; and that it is provided by Edicts of the Supreme Court of
Parliament, that none should print the Old and New Testament in his
Mother Tongue, or sell it being printed; and that it was known to him, that one
Francis Regnault, a Bookseller of the City of Paris in those Days, did print
the Bible in the Vulgar Britannick, or English Language; by reason of which,
Scandals and Errors might arise in the Church: Therefore he gave out his Order
to all Priests, Vicars, Curates, etc. to cite the said F. Reginault, and all
other that it might concern, to answer, etc. And to inhibit them under
Canonical Pains, to imprint the said Bible, nor to make away, or conceal, from
him or his Possession, the Sheets that are already printed, unless they were
seen by him, and otherwise appointed. Dated at Paris, under the Seal used in
such cases, and the Sign Manual of the Notary Public, or sworn Scribe of the
said Holy Inquisition.

Le Tellier.


But before this happened, The Bible printed with French Presses in London*
they were gone through even to the last part of the Work. And then great
Troubles arose: The Printer was sent for by the Inquisitors, and charged with
certain Articles of Heresy: And the Englishmen likewise that were at the Cost
and Charges hereof, and the Corrector Coverdale. Therefore finding it not safe
to tarry any longer, they fled away as fast as they could, leaving behind them
all their Bibles, the Impression consisting of five and twenty hundred in
Number; which were seized. And if you would know what was done with them, the
Lieutenant-Criminal caused them to be burnt in M^^bert-place, as heretical
Books. Only a few escaped, The English Bible burnt the fourth time.
the Lieutenant selling them for Waste-paper to a Haberdasher, being about four
dry-Fats full. But however not long after, the English that were concerned in
this Work, by the Encouragement of Crumwel, went back to Paris again, and got
the Presses, Letters, and Printing-Servants, and brought them over to London.
And so became Printers themselves, which before they never intended. And so at
length in this Year 1540, they successfully printed off the Bible of the
largest Volume: and after that there were sundry other Impressions also.

The largest Bible published in the Year 1540.
To this Impression of the Bible, that came forth in these troublesome Times,
and through extraordinary Opposition, the King gave Countenance, commanding the
buying and setting it up. For as it had been printed about three Years before;
and Crumwel, the King's Vicar General, in his Injunctions in the King's Name,
had ordered all Incumbents of Livings to provide one, and to set it up
publicly in their Churches: So this Year the King, by his Proclamation in the
Month of May, did again command, that this Bible of the largest Volume should
be provided by the Curates and Parishioners of every Parish, and set up in
their Churches. For as yet, notwithstanding the first Injunctions, many
Parishes in the Realm were destitute of them: Whether it were by reason of the
unwillingness of the Priests to have the English Bible, or the People to be any
ways acquainted with it, for fear it should make them Heretics, as their
Curats told them. He stinted also the Time, namely, that it should be every
where provided before All Saints Day next coming, and that upon a Penalty of
forty Shillings a Month, after the said Feast, that they should be without it.
The said Proclamation also set the Price, at ten Shillings a Book unbound; and
well Bound and Clasped, not above twelve Shillings. And charged all Ordinaries
to take care for the seeing this Command of the King the better executed.

Boner's Admonitions for reading the Bible.
And upon this, Boner, being now newly Bishop of London, set up six Bibles in
certain convenient Places of S. Paul's Church; together with an Admonition to
the Readers, fastened upon the Pillars to which the Bibles were chained, to this
Tenor; That whosoever came there to read, should prepare himself to be edified
and made the better thereby. That he should join thereunto his readiness to
obey the King's Injunctions made in that behalf. That he bring with him
Discretion, honest Intent, Charity, Reverence, and quiet Behavior. That there
should no such Number meet together there, as to make a Multitude. That no
Exposition be made thereupon, but what is declared in the Book it self. That it
be not read with Noise in time of Divine Service: Or that any Disputation or
Contention be used at it.

The Bible suprest again, An. 154^.
But it was not much above two Years after, that the Popish Bishops obtained of
the King the suppression of the Bible again. For after they had taken off the
Lord Crumwel, they made great complaint to the King (their old Complaint) of
the Translation, and of the Prefaces: Whereas indeed and in truth, it was the
Text it self, rather than the Prefaces or Translation that disturbed them.
Whereupon it was forbid again to be sold, the Bishops promising the King to
amend and correct it, but never performed it. And Grafton was now, so long
after, summoned and charged with printing Matthews's Bible. Which he, being
timorous, made Excuses for. Then he was examined about the great Bible, and
what the Notes were he int^nded to set thereto. He replied, that he added none
to his Bible, when he perceived the King and the Clergy not willing to have
any. Yet Grafton was sent to the Fleet, and there remained six Weeks; and
before he came out, was bound in three hundred Pounds, that he should neither
sell nor imprint any more Bibles, till the King and the Clergy should agree
upon a Translation. And they procured an Order from the King, that the fals^
Translation of Tindal, as they called it, should not be uttered, either by
Printer or Bookseller; and no other Books to be retained, that spoke against
the Sacrament of the Altar: No Annotations or Preambles to be in Bibles or New
Testaments in English, (that so they might keep Scripture still as obscure as
they could): Nor the Bible to be read in the Church, and nothing to be taught
contrary to the King's Instructions. And from henceforth the Bible was stopped
during the remainder of King Henry's Reign.

But however for some certain Ends, K. Henry's judgment for the use of the
Bible.
the King restrained now and then the use of the Scriptures, to comply with the
importunate Suits of the Popish Bishops; yet his Judgment always was for the
free use of them among his Subjects, and (in order to) that for the translating
and printing them. For proof of which, I will recite the words of the
Translator of Erasmus's Paraphrase upon S. Luke, in his Preface thereunto; viz.
Nic. Vdal, a Man of Eminency in those Days, a Canon of Windsor, and a Servant
unto Q. Katharine* the King's last Wife; His most Excellent Majesty, from the
first day that he wore the Imperial Crown of this Realm, foresaw that to the
executing the Premises, [ viz. to destroy counterfeit Religions, and to root
up all Idolatry done to dead Images] it was necessary, that his People should
be reduced to the sincerity of Christ's Religion by knowing of God's Word. He
considered, that requisite it was his Subjects were nur^led in Christ by
reading the Scriptures, whose Knowledge should easily induce them to the clear
espying of all the Slights of the Romish Juggling. And therefore as soon as
might be, his Highness, by most wholesome and godly Laws, provided that it might
be lawful for all his most faithful loving Subjects to read the Word of God,
and the Rules of Christ's Discipline, which they professed. He provided, that
the Holy Bible should be set forth in our own Vulgar Language, to the end that
England might the better attain to the Sincerity of Christ's Doctrine, which
they might draw out of the clear Fountain and Spring of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXII. The Archbishop retired.
The ABp keeps himself more retired.
OUR Archbishop, after the unhappy Death of the Lord Crumwel, so excellent an
Instrument in correcting the Abuses of Religion, out of sorrow and care of
himself, betook himself to more Retirement, and greater Privacy. For in and
after this Year 1540, I find nothing in his Register, but the Acts of
Confirmations, and Elections, and Consecrations of Bishops, as Bishoprics fell
vacant: the Archbishop very seldom Consecrating any himself, but
commissionating others by his Letters to Confirm and Consecrate. And nothing to
be found a great way on in the Register concerning giving Ordinances and
Injunctions to the Diocese or Province. And no wonder, for there was now no
Vicegerent in Ecclesiasticals, to be ready to hearken to the Archbishop's
Directions and Counsels for reforming Abuses, and to see them executed in the
Church. And his own Sorrows, and the Troubles he met with in these Times from
his Enemies, made him judge it convenient for him now more warily to conceal
himself till better Days.

The ABp issues out his Commission for the Consecrating of Boner.
But before the Death of Crumwel, when Boner, Bishop Elect of London, was to be
consecrated, the Archbishop probably not liking him, and seeing through him,
whatever his Pretenses were; and therefore declining to have any hand in his
Preferment; sent his Commission in April to Stephen Bishop of Winchester,
Richard Bishop of Chichester, Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and John Bishop of
Hertford, [i. e. Hereford] to consecrate him. Which it is said in the Register
they did accordingly, per Sacri chrismatis unctionem, and manuum suarum
impositionem. In this Consecration, the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury
insisted, it seems, upon an ancient Privilege of their Church, which I do not
find in this Register they had at other Consecrations done; namely, that the
Consecration should be celebrated at the Church of Canterbury, and at no other
Church or Oratory, without their Allowance. And so in a formal Instrument, they
gave their License and Consent, directed to the Archbishop, to proceed to the
Consecration elsewhere. Cranm. Regist.
The Letter is from Thomas the Prior, and the Chapter of Canterbury; and it ran
thus.

Licet antiquitus fuerit salubriter ordinatum, hactenusque in and per totam
vestram Provinciam Cantuar' inconcusse observatum, quod quilibet Suffragan^us
Ecclesiae vestrae Metropoliticae Christi Cantuar' memoratae in Ecclesia vestra
Metropolit' Cantuar' and non alibi, pntialiter consecrari and benedici debeat,
etc. Yet they gave their Consent, that he might be Consecrated in any other
Oratory: But yet so, that neither they, nor the Church, received any Prejudice,
and reserving to themselves a decent Cope, as every Suffragan of the Church of
Canterbury, according as his Profession was, ought to give to the same Church
by Right and ancient Custom; and the Rights, Liberties, Privileges, and other
Customs of the said Church always, and in all things, being safe. The renewing
of this their old pretended Privilege looked like some check to the
Archbishop, and as though they required of him a sort of dependence on them
now more than before; and it showed some secret Ill Will toward him, which
brake out more openly not long after, as we shall show in the Process of our
Story.

In the Register is also recorded Boner's Oath of Fidelity to the King against
the Bishop of Rome: Which I will add here, Boner's Oath of Fidelity.
that Men may see with what little Affection to the Pope this Man was let into
the Bishopric, which he afterward made so much use of for him and his
Usurpations; though thereby he stands upon Record for ever for Perjury. But the
Oath was this: Ye shall never consent nor agree, that the Bishop of Rome shall
practice, exercise, or have any manner of Authority, Jurisdiction or Power,
within this Realm, or any other the King's Dominions, but that ye shall resist
the same at all times to the uttermost of your Power: And that from henceforth
ye shall accept, repute, and take the King's Majesty to be the only Supreme
Head in Earth of the Church of England, etc. So help you God, and all Saints,
and the Holy Evangelists.

Signed thus, In fidem praemissorum Ego Edm. Boner Elect. and Confirmat.
Londoniens. huic praesenti chart a subscripsi.


By the Archbishop's Letters, The ABp makes a Commissary in Calais.
bearing date May 20. he made Robert Harvey B. LL. his Commissary in Calais,
and in all the other Neighboring Places in France, being his Diocese. A Man
surely wherein the good Archbishop was mistaken, or else he would never have
ventured to set such a Substitute, of such bigoted cruel Principles, in that
place. This Harvey condemned a poor laboring Man of Calais, who said, Fox p.
1120.
he would never believe that any Priest could make the Lord's Body at his
pleasure. Whereupon he was accused before the Commissary, who roundly condemned
him to be burnt, inveighing against him, and saying, He was an Heretic, and
should die a vile Death. The poor Man said, He should die a viler shortly. And
so it came to pass; for half a Year after, he was hanged, drawn and quartered
for Treason.

He seemed to have succeeded in the room of a Man of better Principles, Butler a
better Commissary.
called Sir John Butler: Who was deprived of his Commissariship by some
Bishops, Commissioners from the King for the examining several Persons suspect
of Religion in Calais. The Council there had, about the Year 1539, complained
of him as a maintainer of Damplip, a learned and pious Preacher there. So he
was sent for into England, and charged to favor Damplip, because he preached
so long there, and was not restrained nor punished by him: He answered warily
and prudently, that the Lord Lisle, Lord Deputy, and his Council, entertained
and friendly used him, and countenanced him by hearing him preach; so that he
could not do otherwise than he did. After long attendance upon the King's
Commissioners, he was discharged, and returned home, but discharged also of his
Commissary's place too.

And having been an Officer of the Archbishop's, I will add a word or two more
concerning him. About the Year 1536, he was apprehended in Calais, and bound by
Sureties not to pass the Gates of that Town, His Troubles.
upon the Accusation of two Soldiers, that he should have said in contempt of
the Corporal Presence, That if the Sacrament of the Altar be Flesh, Blood and
Bone, then there is good Aqua vitae at John Spicer's: Where probably was very
bad. This Butler, and one Smith, were soon after brought by Pursevants into
England; and there brought before the Privy Council in the Star Chamber, for
Sedition and Heresy, (which were Charges ordinarily laid against the Professors
of the Gospel in those Times) and thence sent to the Fleet: and brought soon
after to Bath-place, there sitting Clark Bishop of Bath, Sampson Bishop of
Chichester, and Reps Bishop of Norwich, the King's Commissioners.

And no wonder he met with these Troubles: For he had raised up the hatred of
the Friars of Calais against him, The occasion thereof, the Discovery of a
Religious Cheat.
by being a Discoverer and Destroyer of one of their gross Religious Cheats.
There had been great talk of a Miracle in S. Nicolas Church, for the conviction
of Men, that the Wafer after Consecration was indeed turned into the Body,
Flesh and Bones of Christ. For in a Tomb in that Church, representing the
Sepulcher, there were lying upon a Marble Stone three Hosts sprinkled with
Blood, and a Bone representing some Miracle. This Miracle was in writing, with
a Pope's Bull of Pardon annexed, to those, I suppose, that should visit that
Church. There was also a Picture of the Resurrection, bearing some relation to
this Miracle. This Picture and Story Damplip freely spoke against in one of his
Sermons, saying, that it was but an Illusion of the French before Calais was
English. Upon this Sermon, (the King also having ordered the taking away all
superstitious Shrines) there came a Commission to the Lord Deputy of Calais, to
this Sir John Butler, the Archbishop's Commissary, and one or two more, that
they should search, whether this were true; and if they found it not so, that
immediately the Shrine should be plucked down; and so it was. For breaking up a
Stone in the corner of the Tomb, instead of the three Hosts, the Blood and the
Bone, they found souldered in the Cross of Marble lying under the Sepulcher,
three plain white Counters, which they had painted like unto Hosts, and a Bone,
that is in the tip of a Sheep's Tail. This Damplip showed the next Day, being
Sunday, unto the People; and after that, they were sent to the King by the Lord
Deputy. But this so angered the Friars and their Creatures, that it cost Damplip
his Life, and Commissary Butler much trouble, and the loss of his Office.

After Harvey, Hugh Glazier B. D. and Canon of Christ's-Church, Canterbury,
Glazier Commissary in Calais.
succeeded in the Office of Commissary to the Archbishop for Calais. He was
once a Friar, but afterward favored the Reformation. He was put up to preach
at Paul's Cross the first Lent after King Edward came to the Crown: and then
asserted the observation of Lent to be but of human Institution. ABp's Judgment
of Admission of Scholars into the School belonging to the Cathedral.


This Year the Cathedral Church of Canterbury was altered from Monks to Secular
Men of the Clergy, viz. Prebendaries, or Canons, Petticanons, Choristers and
Scholars. At this Erection were present Thomas Cranmer Archbishop, the Lord
Rich Chancellor of the Court of the Augmentation of the Revenues of the Crown;
Sir Christopher Hales Knight, the King's Attorney, Sir Anthony Sentleger
Knight, with diverse other Commissioners. Foxii MSS.
And nominating and electing such convenient and fit Persons, as should serve
for the Furniture of the said Cathedral Church according to the new Foundation,
it came to pass, that when they should elect the Children of the
Grammar School, there were of the Commissioners more than one or two, who would
have none admitted, but Sons, or younger Brethren, of Gentlemen. As for other
Husband-mens Children, they were more meet they said for the Plough, and to be
Artificers, than to occupy the place of the Learned sort. So that they wished
none else to be put to School, but only Gentlemen's Children. Whereunto the most
Reverend Father the Archbishop, being of a contrary Mind, said, That he
thought it not indifferent so to order the matter. For, said he, poor Men's
Children are many times endued with more singular Gifts of Nature, which are
also the Gifts of God, as with Eloquence, Memory, apt Pronunciation, Sobriety,
and such like; and also commonly more apt to apply their Study, than is the
Gentleman's Son delicately Educated. Hereunto it was on the other part replied,
That it was meet for the Ploughman's Son to go to Plough, and the Artificer's
Son to apply the Trade of his Parents Vocation; and the Gentleman's Children
are meet to have the knowledge of Government and Rule in the Commonwealth. For
we have, said they, as much need of Ploughmen, as any other State. And all
sorts of Men may not go to School. I grant, replied the Archbishop, much of
your meaning herein, as needful in a Commonwealth: But yet utterly to exclude
the Ploughman's Son, and the Poor Man's Son from the benefit of Learning, as
though they were unworthy to have the Gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon
them, as well as upon others, is as much to say, as that Almighty God should
not be at liberty to bestow his great Gifts of Grace upon any Person, nor no
where else, but as we and other Men shall appoint them to be employed,
according to our Fancy, and not according to his most godly Will and Pleasure:
Who gives his Gifts both of Learning, and other Perfections in all Sciences,
unto all Kinds and States of People indifferently. Even so does he many times
withdraw from them and their Posterity again those beneficial Gifts, if they be
not thankful. If we should shut up into a strait Corner the bountiful Grace of
the Holy Ghost, and thereupon attempt to build our Fancies, we should make as
perfect a Work thereof, as those that took upon them to build the Tower of
Babel. For God would so provide, that the Offspring of our best-born Children
should peradventure become most unapt to learn, and very Dolts, as I my self
have seen no small number of them very dull, and without all manner of
Capacity. And to say the truth, I take it, that none of us all here being
Gentlemen born (as I think) but had our beginning that way, from a low and base
Parentage. And through the benefit of Learning, and other Civil Knowledge, for
the most part all Gentlemen ascend to their Estate. Then it was again answered,
That the most part of the Nobility came up by Feats of Arms, and Martial Acts.
As though, said the Archbishop, that the noble Captain was always unfurnished
of good Learning and Knowledge to persuade and dissuade his Army Rhetorically.
Who rather that way is brought unto Authority, than else his manly Looks. To
conclude, the poor Man's Son, by painstaking, will for the most part be
learned, when the Gentleman's Son will not take the pains to get it. And we are
taught by the Scriptures, that Almighty God raises up from the Dunghill, and
sets him in high Authority. And whenever it pleases him of his Divine
Providence, he deposes Princes unto a right humble and poor Estate. Wherefore
if the Gentleman's Son be apt to Learning, let him be admitted; if not apt, let
the poor Man's Child that is apt enter his Room. With words to the like effect.
Such a seasonable Patron of poor Men was the Archbishop.

Bishops consecrated.
April the 4 th, Edmond Boner LL. D. Bishop of Hereford, consecrated Bishop of
London, Edm. Bone^. Nic. Hethe.
and Nicolas Hethe, consecrated Bishop of Rochester, in a Chapel in S. Paul's,
on the North side of the Nave, by Stephen Bishop of Winton, Cranm. Regist.
assisted by Richard Bishop of Chichester, Robert Bishop of S. Asaph, and John
Bishop of Hereford; by virtue of Commissional Letters from the Archbishop.

Tho. Thirlby.
December the 29 th, Thomas Thirlby, consecrated the first Bishop of
Westminster in S. Saviors Chapel, near the Sepulcher of Henry VIII. in the
Church of Westminster, by the Bishop of London; assisted by Nicolas Bishop of
Rochester, and John Suffragan of Bedford, by Letters Commissional from the
Archbishop.

Some account of Thirlby's Rise.
Dr. Butts, the King's Physician, first moved him to take Dr. Thirlby into his
Service; for that the said Thirleby was accounted a favourer of all such as
favored sincere Religion. The Archbishop soon became acquainted with him, and
liked his Learning, and his Qualities so well, that he became his good Lord
toward the King's Majesty, and commended him to him, to be a Man worthy to
serve a Prince, for such singular Qualities as were in him. And indeed the King
soon employed him in Embassies in France and elsewhere: So that he grew in the
King's Favor by the means of the Archbishop; who had a very extraordinary
Love for him, and thought nothing too much to give him, or to do for him. And
we may conclude it was by his means, that after the dissolution of the
Bishopric of Westminster, he was preferred to Norwich, in the Year 1550. He
complied with King Edward's Proceedings all his Reign; and so he did with Queen
Mary's during hers, being then translated to Ely. And was then made use of to
be one of the Bishops, ( Boner being the other) that were sent to Oxon, to
degrade the Archbishop, which he did with Tears. If this Bishop did not, to
his uttermost endeavor, practice to save the Archbishop's Life, In a Letter
to Day the Printer, An. 1565.
he not only did him much wrong, but also abused his singular Benevolence with
overmuch Ingratitude. I use the words of Morice the Archbishop's Secretary,
as though he suspected he did not.

CHAP. XXIII. An. 1541.
All Souls College visited.
THE following Year, the College of All Souls, Oxon, The ABp visits All-So^ls
College.
underwent the Archbishop's Visitation, by virtue of a Commission, May 12. to
John Cocks, the Archbishop's Vicar General in Spirituals, John Rokesby LL. D
of the Arches, Walter Wright LL. D. Public Notary, and John Warner M. D.
Warden of the College. This Visitation was occasioned upon a Complaint of the
very ill and loose Behavior of the Members of that House. ABp Cranm. Registi
The College grew scandalous for their Factions, Dissentions, and Combinations
one against another; for their Compotations, Ingurgitations, Surfeitings,
Drunkennesses, enormous and excessive Comessations. They kept Boys in the
College, under pretense of poor Scholars. They entered not into Orders, and
became not Priests after they were Masters of Art: Nor observed their Times of
Disputations. Their Habit and Apparel was gaudy. And other things there were
among them contrary to the Statutes of the College. This Visitation was
prorogued, and all the Visitors were reduced to one, viz. Dr. Wright. And in
concusion, the Archbishop gave them a Set of Injunctions, Declarations and
Interpretations of their Statutes, to the number of Four and twenty. One was
for the better frequenting Chapel, and singing the Service. Another for the
Residence of the Warden, not to be absent above sixty Days in a Year. The rest
were, to observe, at the Dean's Command, the solemn Times of Disputation. That
such Bachelors of Arts that were Fellows, should take their Degrees of Masters
of Arts, when they were standing for it. That several of them, being Masters of
Arts, should take Priests Orders. That the Master and the rest, Fellows and
Scholars, should wear long Gowns to their Heels, plain Shirts, and not gathered
about the Neck and Arms, and adorned with Silk; and the rest should wear decent
Garments. Concerning keeping Boys, beside such as were Servants; that if any of
the Fellows, Scholars, or Servants of the College, shall keep any poor
Scholars, Boy, or Youth, to lodge with him in his Chamber, or within the
College, to nourish him with the Fragments of the College, after such a Day,
that he be then admonished by the Warden, or Sub-warden, etc. and such Boys to
be expelled the College.

But it seems this Visitation did not effect the good Ends intended by it:
Visits it a second Time.
For not long after another Commission for the Visitation of this College, was
given by the Archbishop to John Barbar LL. D. Official of his Court of
Canterbury.

In the Month of October, The AB^ give^ order about Shrines.
there issued out the King's Letters to our Archbishop for taking away
superstitious Shrines. Which I suppose the Archbishop himself procured, having
complained to the King, how little effect former Orders from his Majesty had
taken, (and particularly in his own Church) for the Images and Bones of
supposed Saints; with all the Monuments of their pretended Miracles, to be
taken away and defaced: and how his Injunctions were illuded, which commanded,
that there should be no Offerings nor setting up Candles to them in any Church,
and specially in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury; which once before had been
scoured of these Superstitions, when Thomas a Becket's Tomb, and the the Riches
thereof were taken away. The King in this Letter commanded him to cause due
search to be made in his Cathedral Church for Shrines, and coverings of
Shrines, and^. and to take them away, that there remain no memory thereof; and
to command all the Curats and Incumbents of Livings to do the like.

The King's Letters were as follow.

By the KING.
The King to the ABp for searching after Shrines.
MOST Reverend Father in God, right Trusty, and right entirely Well-beloved, We
greet you well: Letting you wit, that whereas heretofore, upon the Zeal and
Remembrance which we had to our bounden Duty toward Almighty God, perceiving
sundry Superstitions and Abuses to be used and embraced by our People, ABp
Cranm. Regist.
whereby they grievously offended Him and his Word; We did not only cause the
Images and Bones of such as they resorted and offered unto, with the Ornaments
of the same; and all such Writings and Monuments of fained Miracles, wherewith
they were illuded, to be taken away in all places of our Realm; but also by our
Injunctions commanded, that no Offering, or setting of Lights or Candles,
should be suffered in any Church, but only to the Blessed Sacramen^ of the
Altar: It is lately come to our knowledge, that this our good Intent and Purpose
notwithstanding, the Shrines, Coverings of Shrines, and Monuments of those
things, do yet remain in sundry places of our Realm, much to the slander of our
Doings, and to the great Displeasure of Almighty God, the same being means to
allure our Subjects to their former Hypocrisies and Superstition; and also that
our Injunctions be not kept, as appertains. Fro [for] the due and speedy
reformation whereof, we have thought meet by these our Letters, expressly to
Will and Command you, that incontinently upon the Receipt hereof, you shall not
only cause due search to be made in your Cathedral Church for those things; and
if any Shrine, Covering of Shrine, Table, Monument of Miracles, or other
Pilgrimage, do there continue, to cause it to be taken away, so as there remain
no memory of it: But also that you shall take order with all the Curats, and
others, having Charge within your Diocese, to do the Semblable. And to see that
Our Injunctions be duly kept, as appertains, without failing, as we trust
you, and as you woll answer to the contrary. Yeven [under] our Signet, at our
Town of Hull, the iiii day of October, in the xxxiiii Year of our Reign.


This was dated from Hull, for the King was now in his Progress toward
Scotland, to meet the Scots King according to appointment; though he met him
not.

Whereupon the Archbishop, by his Letter dated from Lambeth, Oct. 15. to
Richard Lyel LL. D. Dean of the Deaneries of Shoreham, Croyden, Bocking,
Risburgh, Terring and Pageham, enjoined him to take care to execute the King's
Will: To cite before him with all speed, all and singular the Ministers of the
Collegiate Churches; The ABp's Orders accordingly to his Dean, his Archdeacon
and Commissary.
and Rectors, Vicars and Priests of the Parish-Churches within the Deaneries
aforesaid; and then to declare to them the Contents of the King's Letters, and
to command them to observe exactly the King's Injunctions. The like Letters he
also sent to Edmond Cranmer Archdeacon of Canterbury. An Answer to which the
said Edmond wrote to the Archbishop, dated Oct. 29. signifying his doing
according to the Archbishop's Commandment. The like were written to Hugh
Glazier, the Archbishop's Commissary General in the Town of Calais, and the
Marches of the same. Who sent his Answer to the Archbishop, Nov. 24. from the
Town of Calais.

I am apt to think that these Letters of the King were Circulary, and sent with
the same Command to all the Bishops to see executed in their several Diocesses;
though the Effect of them was, according as the Bishops themselves stood
affected.

This Year an exchange was made by the Abp of the Manor of Bishopsb^rn for
Bekesburn, The ABp lays Bekesburn to the Sea.
with Sir John Gage, Comptroller of the King's Household. Bekesburn, anciently
called Livingsb^rn, was healthfully and conveniently seated, lying an easy
distance from Canterbury, whenever the Archbishops were minded to be
retired. This place ABp Parker took a great delight in, and intended greatly to
enlarge by Buildings; but died before he began his Purpose. ABp Cranmer made
considerable Buildings here, and probably would have done more, had he
continued in his Prelacy. In the Year 1552, he finished the Gate House now
standing; as appears from the North and South sides thereof, wherein are two
Stones set in the Brick-work, with the Letters of his Name T. C. and Coat of
Arms, and Motto, Nosce Teipsum, and Deum; together with the Date, 1552. This
Manor now returned to the Church again; from whence it had been for some time
severed; only the Owners changed. For whereas, before the Dissolution of the
Monasteries, it belonged to the Priors of Christ-Church, Canterbury; now it
came to the Archbishops. This Manor was not given to Christ-Church till after
the Year 1400. Thomas Goldstone, a Prior of that Church, and a great Builder,
built the Mannor-house for a Mansion for the Priors, and a Chapel annexed, and
a new Hall adjoining to the Dormitory, and diverse other Edifices there; Angl.
Sacra, Vol. 1. p. 148.
as we learn from the History of the Priors of Canterbury lately published. To
which we may add a Record in that Church, to direct us in the Computation of
the Time: Viz. Anno Dom. 1508. In vigiliis S. Marci Capella dedicatur in
Manerio de Lyvyngsborn, Records of Chr. Chapter Cant.
procurante Thoma Goldston. At the Dissolution this was alienated and given to
Gage; and from him it came to Archbishop Cranmer and his Successors. And the
Bargain was confirmed by Act of Parliament, Anno Henr. 34.

The Archbishop, Learned Preachers preferred by the ABp.
as he had opportunity, preferred Learned and Pious Men in his Diocese, in the
Benefices of his Church; and such who freely preached against the Pope, and his
Superstitions, against Images, and the Worship of them. The chief of these were
Nic. Ridley (afterward Bishop of London) whom he made Vicar of Herne, and
Prebend of Canterbury; and John Scory (afterward Bishop of Chichester) whom he
made one of the six Preachers; Michael Drum, and Lancelot Ridley, worthy Men,
were two more of the Six. These he preferred, and diverse others about through
his Diocese, that set the Abuses of Popery open before the Peoples Eyes in
their Sermons. This so angered the Men of the old Religion, and particularly
some of his own Church in Canterbury, that they detected them to the
Archbishop, by articling against them for their Doctrine. This they did this
Year, when the Archbishop visited his Church. And about two Years after they
did so again, as shall be taken notice of in due Season.

The ABp makes some recant.
About this time it was, that Serles and Shether, two of the Six Preachers of
Canterbury, were by the Archbishop's Censure put to Recantation for some
unsound Passages they had preached. Which made them such Enemies to the
Archbishop, and such Contrivers of his Ruin, by devising and drawing up a
great number of Articles against him, if they could have accomplished their
Design, as shall be seen hereafter under the Year 1543. It was observed of
Shether at this time, that after the pronouncing his Recantation, or
Declaration, he added these words, Good Christians, I take God to record, that
I never preached any thing to you in my Life but the Truth. And so in short
gave himself the Lie, and overthrew all the Recantation he had made before.

A Convocation.

Their Business. Fuller's Chapter Hist. from the Records of Canterbury.


The latter end of the Year there was a Convocation: Wherein one of the Matters
before them was concerning the procuring a true Translation of the New
Testament. Which was indeed intended, not so much to do such a good Work, as to
hinder it. For having decried the present Translation, on purpose to make it
unlawful for any to use it, they pretended to set themselves about a new One.
But it was merely to delay and put off the People from the common use of the
Scripture: As appeared plainly enough, in that the Bishops themselves undertook
it. And so having it in their own Hands, they might make what delays they
pleased. For in the third Session, a Proposition was made for the Translation,
and an Assignation to each Bishop of his Task. As Matthew to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Mark to the Bishop of Lincoln, Luke to Winton, John to Ely: and so
of the rest. But the Archbishop saw through all this. And therefore, in a
Sessions that followed after, told the House from the King, to whom I suppose
he had discovered this Intrigue, that the Translation should be left to the
Learned of both Universities. This was a Surprise to the Bishops, who all,
except Ely and S. David's, protested against it, and began to undervalue the
Sufficiency of the Universities, as much decayed of late; and that they were
but young Men: and that the greatest Learning lay in the Convocation-men. But
the Archbishop roundly said, that he would stick by his Master's Will and
Pleasure; and that the Universities should examine the Translation.

Bishops Consecrated.
May 29, being Sunday, William Knight.
William Knight was Consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wells by Nicolas Bishop of
Rochester, by Virtue of the Archbishop's Letters to him, assisted by Richard
Suffragan of Dover, and John Suffragan of Bedford, in the Chapel of the said
Bishop of Bath's House, situate in the Minories without Aldgate.

September the 25 th, John Wakeman, late Abbot of Teuksbury, John Wak^man.
was Consecrated the first Bishop of Gloucester, by the Archbishop, Edmond
Bishop of London, and Thomas Bishop of Westminster assisting.

John Chamber B. D. was Consecrated first Bishop of Peterburgh, John Chamber.
October. 23. in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh, in the Presbytery there, by
John Bishop of Lincoln, Thomas Bishop of Ely, and William Bishop of Norwich, by
Commission from the Archbishop.

February the 19 th, Arthur Bulkeley, Arthur Bulkeley.
in the Chapel of John Incent LL. D. Dean of St. Paul's, by John Bishop of
Sarum, by virtue of Letters Commissional from the Archbishop, William Bishop
of St. David's and John Bishop of Gloucester assisting.

Robert King, another Abbot, and Titular Bishop Reonen, Robert King.
Suffragan to the Bishop of Lincoln, was this Year Consecrated Bishop of
Oxford. The Date, or his Consecrators I cannot assign, the Act being omitted in
the Archbishop's Register. He was first a Monk of Rewly, a Priory without
Oxford, of the Cistertian Order. Then Abbot of Bruerne in Oxfordshire. After,
Abbot of Them, of which he was also called Bishop: and lastly of Oseney. Both
which he surrendered to the King at the dissolution of Monasteries. This Man,
when Suffragan, preached at S. Mary's in Stamford, where he most fiercely
inveighed against such as used the New Testament. In Q. Mary's Reign he was a
persecutor of the Protestants, and died, 1557.

CHAP. XXIV. The King's Book revised.
THE Archbishop was this Year, among other things, An. 1542.
employed in the King's Book, as it now was called, that is, The Erudition of
any Christian Man, spoken of before. The King's Book revised by the ABp.
For the King was minded now to have it well reviewed, and if there were any
Errors, and less proper Expressions, to have them corrected and amended. And so
to have it recommended unto the People as a complete Book of Christian
Principles, in the stead of the Scripture; which upon pretense of their abuse
of, the King would not allow longer to be read. Accordingly a Correction was
made throughout the Book: and the correct Copy sent to Cranmer to peruse. Which
he did, and added his own Annotations upon various Passages in it at good
length. And had it not been too long, I had transcribed it wholly out of a
Volume in the Benet-College Library. But for a taste take this that follows. In
the Title, under his own Hand, was this written, Animadversions upon the King's
Book.

Upon the Chapter of Original Sin.
Mis^^llan^^ D. inter MSS. C.C.C.C.
For the first Offense of our Father Adam.] No Man shall be damned for the
Offenses of Adam, but for his own proper Offenses, either Actual, or Original.
Which Original Sin every Man has of his own, and is born in it, although it
came from Adam.

The principal means ( viz. God's Favor) whereby all Sinners attain their
Iustification]. This Sentence imports, that the Favor and Love of the Father
of Heaven toward us, is the Means whereby we come to his Favor and Love. And
so should one thing be the Means to it self. And it is not the use of Scripture
to call any other the Means and Mediator for us, but only Jesus Christ, by whom
our access is to the Father.

Having assured Hope and Confidence in Christ's Mercy, willing to enter into
his perfect Faith.] He that has assured Hope and Confidence in Christ's Mercy,
has already entered into a perfect Faith, and not only has a Will to enter
into it. For perfect Faith is nothing else but assured Hope and Confidence in
Christ's Mercy.

Upon the Explication of the Tenth Commandment.
Without due Recompense.] This Addition agrees not well with the Coveting of
another Man's Wife, wherein is no Recompensation. And in the other things,
although Recompensation be made, yet the Commandment nevertheless is transgrest
and broken.

Upon another Chapter concerning Obedience to the Civil Power.
By his Ordinate Power.] This word Ordinate Power obscureth the Sentence in the
understanding of them that be simple and unlearned: and among the Learned it
gendreth Contention and Disputation, rather than it any thing edifieth.
Therefore methinketh it better, and more plain as it is in the print, or else
to say, By his Ordinance. For the Scripture speaks simply and plainly,
Potestati ejus quis resistit?

By these few Passages, which I have carefully taken out of the Archbishop's
own Book, may be seen of what a Critical and Exact Judgment he was.

Diverse Discourses of the ABp.
But besides these Adversaria in these Papers of the Archbishop's Annotations,
there be diverse large Discourses of his, upon several Heads of Religion, drawn
up, as I conceive, upon the King's Command, to be inserted into his Book above
mentioned. I have extracted some of these Discourses; as upon Faith,
Justification, and Forgiveness of Injuries: Wherein may be seen his sound
Opinion in those great Doctrines of Christian Religion. I took also out of the
same Volume, some Specimen of three other Discourses of his. One with this
Title, writ by his own Hand, De Consolatione Christianorum contra metum mortis.
Ex Doctoribus Ecclesiasticis. Compiled, I guess, as well for his own use, being
not inapprehensive of his ticklish Station and Danger, from so many and
implacable Enemies which he had, as to be inserted in the aforesaid Book. The
others were two Exhortations, to take the Pains of Sickness well, and Adversity
patiently: the one taken out of Cyprian, the other out of S. Augustine, Lib. De
visitatione infirmorum. The Specimen of them are in the Appendix; as also the
Discourses of Faith, No. XXXI. No. XXXII.
Justification, and Forgiveness of Injuries.

This Year Boner Bishop of London set forth Injunctions for the Clergy of his
Diocese, The goodly Primer.
containing Directions for their Preaching and Conversation; together with a
Catalogue of certain Books prohibited: Which the Curats were to enquire after
in their respective Parishes, and to inform their Ordinaries of them, and of
those in whose possessions they found them. Among these Books were the English
Testament of Tindal, and diverse other Pieces of the said godly and learned Man;
some Prefaces and Marginal Glosses of Thomas Matthews in his English Bible. A
Book of Friar Barnes. The Supplication of Beggars. The Practice of Prelates.
The Revelation of Antichrist. The Church of John Rastal. The Disputation
between the Father and the Son. The Preface made in the English Primers by
Marshal. This Marshal was he, I suppose, whose Christian Name was Cutbert, and
was D. D. and Archdeacon of Nottingham, and died about 1549. At this Book I
will stop a little, being a Book of Eminency and Remark in those Times; and
that has such a strain of Truth and serious Piety in it, that it seems very
probable, that the Archbishop had a considerable hand it, and procured the
Publication of it, Cum privilegio Regali. It was styled A Goodly Primer, or
Book of Prayers, and called The King's Primer. I speak of the second Edition,
which was about the Year 1535. It began with an Admonition to the Reader,
containing very sharp and severe Reflections upon the Popish Devotions, and
praying to Saints. And toward the conclusion, the Writer professes, That this
his Admonition proceeded neither of blind Zele, or Affection, neither of Will
or Purpose to offend or displease any Man, much less than to displease any
Saint in Heven; and in no wise than our blessed Lady, but evin of very pure
Love to the Honor of God, and Health of Men's Souls.

Then follows a pious Exposition of the Ten Commandments; and the Creed. Then
is a general Confession of Sin. Which goes according to the Commandments, after
this manner: 1. I have not set my whole Belief, Confidence, Trust and Hope in
thee, etc. 2. I have divided thy Worship and Honor from Thee, and given it to
thy Creatures, and to dead things, imagined of my own fond Fantasy; I mean, in
the misusing of Images. 3. I have abased thy Name, etc. 4. In the Sabbath Day I
have not given my self to hearing, reading and learning the Holy Scriptures,
etc. Then comes an Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer, and the Salutation. Some
short Prayers. Some Graces before and after Meat; most of which are Graces
still retained in our English Primers, after the Catechism. And the Method of
the Book is the same with our Childrens Primer now in use. In this Edition
there was a Litany added, with a Preface before it, directly against praying to
Saints, and showing the difference of the Case, between presenting our
Petitions to God, and presenting a Petition to an Earthly King: that though
this latter cannot be done without the mediation of some Servant of the King,
yet the former may be done immediately to God, in the Name of Christ. Besides,
he said, there were many doubtful Saints: that many Saints canonized by the
Bishop of Rome, whether they were Saints or no, he committed to the secret
Judgment of God. By this taste of the Preface, you easily see, why Bishop Boner
placed it among the prohibited Books, to be diligently searched for. The Litany
the Author added, for the sake of many People, that thought there could be no
right Prayers without they were in the old form of Processions, which were by
way of Litany, or Supplication to Angels and Saints. And so he writ in this
Preface, that it was for the Contentation of such weak Minds, and somewhat to
bear their Infirmities, that he had at this his second Edition of the Primer,
caused the Litany to be printed. In this Litany all doubtful Saints are left
out, and he addresseth only to the Holy Angels S. Michael; S. Raphael, etc. to
pray for us; And the Blessed Apostles, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Andrew, etc. The
Prayer for the King, names K. Henry VIII, and his gracious Son Prince Edward.
In the Calendar Thomas a Becket's Days are still retained in red Letters. But I
suppose that was done of course by the Printer, using the old Calendar. In the
same Book is a large and pious Paraphrase on Psalm LI. A Dialogue between the
Father and the Son. Meditations on Christ's Passion; and many other things.

The ABp instrumental to the Reformation in Scotland.
By somewhat that happened this Year, the Archbishop proved very instrumental
in promoting the Reformation of corrupt Religion in the Neighboring Nation of
Scotland: which this Year had received a great Overthrow by the English Army;
and great Numbers of Scottish Noblemen and Gentlemen were taken Prisoners, and
brought up to London, and after disposed of in the Houses of the English
Nobility and Gentry, under an easy Restraint. The Earl of Cassillis was sent to
Lambeth; Hist. Reform. Vol. 1. p. 320.
where the good Archbishop showed him all Respects, in providing him with
Necessaries and Conveniences, but especially in taking care of his Soul. He
detected to him the great Errors of Popery, and the Reasons of those
Regulations that had been lately made in Religion in England. And so successful
was the Archbishop herein, that the Earl went home much enlightened in true
Religion; which that Nation then had a great aversion to, for they highly
misliked the Courses King Henry took. Which Prejudices the King understanding,
endeavored to take off, by sending Barlow Bishop of S. David's to Scotland,
with the Book of The Institution of a Christian Man. Which nevertheless made no
great Impression upon that People. But this that happened to the Scottish
Nobility, that were now taken Prisoners, and especially this Guest of the
Archbishop, becoming better inclined to Religion by the Knowledge they received
while they remained here, had a happier Effect, and brought on the Reformation
that after happened in that Kingdom.

The Parliament being summoned in January, An Act procured by the ABp.
in order to the King's making War with France, (whither he intended to go in
Person) the Archbishop resolved to try this Occasion to do some good Service
again for Religion, which had of late received a great stop. His Endeavor now
was to moderate the severe Acts about Religion, and to get some Liberty for the
Peoples reading of the Scripture. Hist. Refor. Vol. 1. p. 321.
Cranmer first made the Motion, and four Bishops, viz. Worcester, Hereford,
Chichester and Rochester, seconded him. But Winchester opposed the
Archbishop's Motion with all earnestness. And the Faction combined with so
much Violence, that these Bishops and all other fell off from the Archbishop;
and two of them endeavored to persuade the Archbishop to desist at present,
and to stay for a better Opportunity. But he refused, and followed his Stroke
with as much vigor as he could; and in fine, by his persuasion with the King
and the Lords, a Bill past. And the King was the rather inclined thereunto,
because he being now to go abroad upon a weighty Expedition, thought convenient
to leave his Subjects at home as easy as might be. So with much struggling, an
Act was past, entitled, An Act for the Advancement of True Religion, and the
Abolishment of the contrary. In this Act, as Tindal's Translation of the
Scriptures was forbidden to be kept or used, so other Bibles were allowed to
some Persons, excepting the Annotations and Preambles, which were to be cut or
dashed out. And the King's former Proclamations and Injunctions with the
Primers, and other Books printed in English, for the Instruction of the People
before the Year 1540, were still to be in force, which it seems before were
not. And that every Nobleman and Gentleman, might have the Bible read in their
Houses: and that Noble Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and Merchants might read it
themselves. But no Men or Women under those Degrees. That every Person might
read and teach in their Houses, the Book set out in the Year 1540, (which was,
The necessary Erudition of a Christian Man) with the Psalter, Primer, Pater
noster, Ave, and Creed in English. But when Winchester and his Party saw that
they could not hinder the Bill from passing, they clogged it with Provisoes,
that it came short of what the Archbishop intended it; as that the People of
all sorts and conditions universally might not read the Scriptures, but only
some few of the higher Rank. And that no Book should be printed about Religion
without the King's Allowance. And that the Act of the Six Articles should be in
the same Force it was before.

A Bishop Consecrated.
Paul Bush.
June the 25 th, being Sunday, Paul Bush, Provincial of the Bonhommes, was
consecrated the first Bishop of Bristol, by Nicolas Bishop of Rochester,
assisted by Thomas Bishop of Westminster, and John Suffragan of Bedford. This
Consecration was celebrated in the Parish Church of Hampton in the Diocese of
Westminster.

CHAP. XXV. Presentiments at a Visitation.
An. 1543.
BY the Act abovementioned, the generality of the People were restrained from
reading the Holy Scriptures. The King's Book published by Authority.
But in lieu of it was set forth by the King and his Clergy, in the Year 1543,
a Doctrine for all his Subjects to use and follow; which was the Book
abovesaid: and all Books that were contrary to it, were by Authority of
Parliament condemned. It was printed in London by Thomas Barthelet. This Book
the Archbishop enjoined to be made public in his Diocese, (as I suppose it
was in all other Diocesses throughout the Kingdom) and allowed no preaching or
arguing against it. And when one Mr. Joseph, once a Friar in Canterbury, now a
learned and earnest Preacher, (and who was afterward preferred to Bow-Church in
London) had attempted to preach against some things in the Book, the
Archbishop checked and forbad him: For indeed there were some Points therein,
which the Archbishop himself did not approve of, foisted into it by
Winchester's Means and Interest at that time with the King. Which Bishop,
politickly as well as flatteringly, called it The King's Book, a Title which
the Archbishop did not much like; for he knew well enough Winchester's Hand
was in it. And so he told him plainly in K. Edward's Time, when he might speak
his Mind; telling him in relation thereunto, That he had seduced the King. But
because of the Authority of the Parliament ratifying the Book, and the many
good and useful Things that were in it, the Archbishop introduced and
countenanced it in his Diocese, and would not allow open preaching against it.

A Visitation at Canterbury.
The Archbishop, about the Month of September, held a Visitation in Canterbury:
chiefly because of the Jangling of the Preachers, and the diverse Doctrines
vented among them, according as their Fancies, Interests or Judgments led them.
The Visitation proceeded upon the King's Injunctions and other late Ordinances.
And here I shall set down before the Reader some of the Presentiments, as I take
them from an Original in a Volume that belonged to this Archbishop. Intit.
Accusatio Cranmer, inter MSS. C.C.C.C.
Wherein notice may be taken, what ignorance was then in some of the Priests;
what bandying against one another, and what good Progress the Gospel did begin
to make, and what good Numbers of Priests and Laymen there were, that savoured
of the Gospel-Doctrine.

Presentiments.
Sir Humphrey Chirden, Parson of S. Elphins, on a Sunday in Lent, said, If Judas
had gone to God and confessed his Fault, saying Peccavi, as he went unto the
Priests, he had not been damned. An. 1543.
This Passage was plain enough levelled against confessing to a Priest. But
this was presentable, because against the Six Articles.

One Lancaster, the Parson of Pluckley, was presented, because that when one
Giles said, That he blessed himself daily and nightly, saying, In nomine
Patris, and Filii and Sp. Sancti; and then said, In the Honor of God and our
Lady, and all the company of Heaven, and for all Christen Souls, that God would
have prayed for, a Paternoster, an Ave, and a Creed; the said Parson said to
him, That if he knew it of Truth, that the said Giles used the same form of
Prayer, he would not accompany him, nor once drink with him.

Vincent Ingeam, a (Justice of Peace I suppose) commanded, on Easter Monday,
33o of the King, that no Man should read, or hear the Bible read, upon pain of
Imprisonment: and cast two into Prison, the one for speaking against him
therein, and the other for showing him the King's Injunctions concerning the
same. He repugned against the Doings of the Commissary, for taking down the
Image of S. John, by the King's Commandment. Where I find, among other
witnesses to this, one Daniel Cranmer, a Relation doubtless of the Archbishop.

Sir Thomas, Curate of Sholden, and Thomas Sawier set up again four Images,
which by the King's Commandment were taken down, for Abuses by Pilgrimages and
Offerings: viz. S. Nicolas, S. Stephen, S. Laurence, and our Lady.

Another accused for forsaking his own Parish Church at the time of Easter, two
Years together, [not liking his Parish Priest for his affection to the Gospel]
and for going to Walsingham [in Pilgrimage*] and that he would at no time show
to the Vicar a lawful Certificate, that he had received the Blessed Sacrament
at the time commonly accustomed, as a Christen Man ought to do. And obstinately
refused to learn his Pater Noster, Ave, Credo, and Ten Commandments in English,
according to the King's Injunctions.

Sir Edward Sponer, Vicar of Boughton, had not declared to his Parishioners the
right use of Ceremonies, neither showed the difference between them, and Works
commanded by God, as he is commanded by the King's Proclamation. He had not
preached against the Bishop of Rome his usurped Power, and set forth the King's
Supremacy, as he is bound by the King's Injunctions, and other his Proceedings.
He has not preached his Quarters Sermons, neither at Boughton, nor at his
Benefice in the Mersh. He never declared, that the Even of such Saints, whose
Days be abrogated, be no Fasting-days.

The Archdeacon of Canterbury (that was Edmund the Archbishop's Brother) the
morrow after the Ascension was three Years, took out of the Church of S.
Andrews in Canterbury, three lamp Tapers brenning before the Sacrament, and a
Coat from a Rood, and did violently break the Arms and Legs of the Rood.

Sir William Kemp, Vicar of Northgate, had not read the Bible since Pentecost,
as he was commanded by the Ordinary. He does not declare to his Parishioners
the right use of Holy Water, Holy Bread, bearing of Candles upon Candlemassday,
giving of Ashes, bearing of Palms, creeping to the Cross. For lack whereof the
most part of the said Parish be as ignorant in such things, as ever they were.
And many of them do abuse Holy Water, insomuch that against Tempests of Thunder
and Lightning, many run to the Church for Holy Water to cast about their
Houses, to drive away Evil Spirits and Devils, notwithstanding the King's
Proclamations in the same. He has not read to them the King's Injunctions, as
he ought to do, by reason whereof his Parish be blind and ignorant in them.

Bartholomew Joy confessed to his Curate in general, saying, I am a Sinner. And
when the Vicar asked him, wherein he had sinned, he answered, that he had
confessed himself to the Lord already, and that he would make none other
Confession at that time; and so departed.

John Tofts, Christopher Levenysh, Bartholomew Joy, in the 30 th of the King,
pulled down all the Pictures in the Church of Northgate in Canterbury, except
only the Rood, Mary and John, the Twelve Apostles, the Picture of our Lady and
S. John Baptist. And in the thirty fourth of the King, Tofts pulled down the
Picture of our Lady, and had her and the Tabernacle home to his House, and
there did hew her all to Pieces. And at another time, the same Tofts openly,
with a loud Voice, read the Bible in English in the Church to his Wife,
Sterkies Wife, George Tofts Wife, to the Midwife of the same Parish, and to as
many others as then were present.

Ioanna Meriwether of S. Mildreds Parish, for displeasure that she bare toward
a young Maid, named Elizabeth Celsay, and her Mother, made a Fire upon the Dung
of the said Elizabeth; and took a holy Candle, and dropped upon the said Dung.
And she told unto her Neighbors, that the said Enchantment would make the Cule
of the said Maid to divide into two parts.

Rafe, the Bell-ringer of Christ-Church, at the Burial of Dr. Champion, [the
Archbishop's Chaplain] after the Priest had censed his Grave, and a Boy was
bearing away the Censers and the Coals, called after the Boy, and took the
Censers, and poured the hot Coals upon him in his Grave, to the great slander
of the said Dr. Champion, as though he had been an Heretic, worthy burning.
Also he said, the King was content that all Images should be honored as they
were wont to be.

Coxson, Petty Canon of Christ-Church, made his Testament, by the advice of Mr.
Parkhurst, Mr. Sandwich and Mr. Mills, Canons of the said Church; and gave and
bequeathed to every Vicar of Christ-Church twenty Pence, that had a pair of
Beads, and would say our Lady Psalter for his Soul departed. And this was
executed according to the Will.

The Parson of Alyngton never preached in the Church of Alyngton, nor declared
against the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, nor set forth the King's
Supremacy according to the King's Proclamations, Letters and Injunctions. He
has been a great setter forth in his Parish of the Maid of Kent, Pilgrimages,
fained Relics, and other such Superstitions; and yet never recanted, and
reproved the same, according to the King's Majesty's Injunctions. He has not
declared to his Parishioners, that the Eves of such Holy Days as be abrogate,
be no Fasting-days, according to the King's Injunctions. So upon the Sundays,
Candlemass-day, Ash Wednesday, Palm Sunday, and Good Friday, he has not
declared the true use of the Ceremonies, used those Days according to the
King's Proclamation.

The Curate of Stodmersh did dissuade Men from eating of Whitemeats the last
Lent, and rebuked them that did eat White-meats. About Alhallontide was
twelvemonth he preached in S. Dunstan's Church beside Canterbury, that Men
should love God, and fear God, but not to trust him too much.

Turnor, in the time of his being at Chartham, did cast no Holy Water, neither
before the Sacrament, nor upon any Altar in the Church, (except the high
Altar.) Nor also before the Crucifix in the Rood-loft, according to the
laudible Ceremony. He christened three Children upon one day, and did not anoint
them with Holy Oil, neither upon Back nor Belly. He neither incensed the
Crucifix in the Rood-loft, nor any Altar in the Church, except the high Altar:
Nor distributed any Holy Candles among his Parishioners, as has been
accustomed.

Sir James Newnam and one Lawrence, took down an Image of our Lady; to the
which was no Offering, except Candles at the Purification of Women: nor any
Miracles noted to be done there by the said Image.

Scory, one of the six Preachers, said, that much Superstitions were used in
the Church, as making of Crosses upon Palm Sunday, setting of them up, and
Blessing them with the Holy Candles; Ringing of Bells in the Thunder. For think
you, said he, that the Devil will be afraid, or flee away at Cross-making,
hurling of Holy Water, ringing of Bells, and such other Ceremonies; when he was
not afraid to take Christ himself, and cast him on his Back, and set him on a
Pinnacle? Those things that be good of themselves, may not utterly be put away,
although they be abused. For then the Holy Sacrament of the Altar should be set
aside, which is daily bought and sold.

Serles, one of the six Preachers, in a Sermon said, If the Preacher preach
Error and erroneous Doctrine, the simple Man, though he receive it and believe
it, it does not infect nor corrupt him. And this he repeated twice. He said
also, that Moses sent Letters from Hell, to teach the State thereof, and how
Men should live. And another likewise out of Heaven. Item, they say, (said he)
that only Faith justifies, and that it makes no matter how we do live: Christ
died for us, and by his Blood has washed all our Sins away; therefore what
needs us to fast or pray?

Sandwich a Canon of Christ's-Church, said in his Sermon in the Year 1542.
Whereas a good Christian or Evil, preached unto you truly the Word of God, as I
report me to the Conscience of you all; yet some that have evil Ears, did Evil
report of me. But if their Ears were cut off, as Malchus's was, and set up
where every Man might wonder at them, I think therein a Man should not wish
much against Charity. At another time, in the Year 1543. he said in his Sermon,
Some, if they are given to Goodness, to follow the Decrees of Holy Church, to
kneel before the Blessed Sacrament, they will counsel them from the same, and
say, Deus in manufactis Templis non habitat. They will have none of the Holy
Doctors. They will not have S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Gregory,
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, etc. Since the time we have been given to new
Fangles, the Spirit of new Fangle has brought in the Spirit of Error. But what
Remedy then, said he, to obtain the Spirit of Truth again? Of that, said he, I
spoke the last time that I preached, and showed you that we must return where
we went out. We must return to our Dog, to our Conscience again; and that will
certify us where is the Truth.

Shether, one of the six Preachers, said, That there was one strait Way to the
Truth, in which we and all Men have gone a long time; saving a few now of late,
not being content to follow that Trade, have wandered in diverse Pathways to seek
a nearer way to the Truth. But they are like unto one, that being clean lost,
was fain to ask which way he might go to the end of his Journey? And to such it
was answered, You be clean out of the Way, and there is none other means for
you, but even to turn back again, and to begin your Journey again where you
left. Nothing at all, as the Informer adds, admonishing the People of the Way,
which Men had lost, by defending and retaining the Usurpations of Rome: Nor no
mention, that the King's Majesty has reformed the Abuses of Superstitious
Religion. But even as one, that would have all things honestly reformed, to
revert again into their Superstition, for the maintenance of all Blindness and
Error, commanded every Man to turn back, and to begin where they left.

Dr. Willowby the Vicar of Chilham, keeps still in his Church a certain
Shrine gilt, named S. Austin's Shrine: Which Shrine was conveyed from S.
Austin's of Canterbury, unto the Parish Church of Chilham, at the suppression
of the Monastery of S. Austin's. Item, a Rood there, which had Shoes of Silver,
being a Monument of Pilgrimage, or Offering, stands yet still, being only
spoiled of the Monument. He said, Images had Power of God to help sick People,
vowing unto them, the Communication then being of our Lady of Cutupstreet,
between the said Vicar and own Dawson of Chartham, a Miller. Memorandum, that
Potter's Wife was banished out of Feversham, for her suspect lying with Dr.
Willowby, and also was compelled to forsake Chilham for the same, about two or
three Years past; and yet she remains in the Company of the said Doctor.

Serles, mentioned before, in a Sermon made in the Chapter House of
Christ's-Church, An. 1543, said, Some that occupy this place of Preaching, say
no Mattins, Mass nor Even-song once in a Quarter. They be never seen confessed,
nor to occupy Porteous, nor Mass Book. These use no Vocal Prayer: Beware of
their Doctrine. In the Church of Leneham in the Day of Assumption, he said,
That as the Moon is in the Full at fourteen Days, even so Mary was conceived
fully with Christ, when she was fourteen Years old. Item, he said, That if one
had looked in Mary, when she was full conceived with Christ, he should have
perceived him in his Mother's Womb, with a Bush of Thorns on his Back: For he
was Crucified, Crowned, and pricked with Thorns. That Mary bare Christ poorly;
for she had no Fire, but begged a Coal of one, and a Stick of another to warm
her Child. He preached, that Mary nourished her Son with Milk, but not with
material Milk, but with Milk that came from Heaven: For no Woman else can
nourish her Child with material Milk, than she that is conceived by knowledge of
Man. [And no question this Heavenly Milk came along the milky Way.] That all
the whole Faith of the World remained in Mary only for the space of three Days
and three Nights. That Faith was dead in the Apostles, and in all the World,
from the Death of Christ till his Resurrection, and remained in the Virgin Mary
whole and only. That the Sorrows that she had, were greater and more painful
than Christ's, but for Death only. That Christ descended into Hell, and rose
the third Day and ascended into Heaven, and many more with him; saying thus,
Multa corpora ascenderunt cum Christo, ut perhiberent testimonium. In Ashford
he preached, that Prayer was not acceptable with God, but in the Church only,
and no where else; alleging this Text, Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur.
Then and there he said also, You Fellows of the new Trick, that go up and down
with your Testaments in your Hands, I pray you what Profit take you by them?
[this last Passage relating to the Testament, was interlined by Cranmer
himself]. As Adam was expulsed out of Paradise for meddling with a Tree of
Knowledge, even so be we for meddling with the Scripture of Christ. He said,
There were some that said, that part of the Ave Maria was made to a Strumpet.
That Christ in the Gospel confounded Mary Magdalene with two Parables, likening
her to an Alestake, and to a poor Woman whom an Emperor had married, and in his
presence did lie with a leprous Lazar-man. Anno 1542, Preaching in
Kennyngton-Church on Good Friday, he said, That as a Man was creeping to the
Cross upon a Good Friday, the Image loosed it self off the Cross, and met the
Man before he came to the Cross, and kissed him. At the Funeral of Mr. Boys, he
preached, That by the receiving of the Sacraments and Penance, all a Man's
deadly Sins were forgiven clearly, but the venial Sins remained; and for them
they that died should be punished, except they were relieved by Masses and
Dirges after their Death. [This that follows is Cranm^r's hand,] He preaches
no Sermon, but one part of it is an Invective against the other Preachers of
Christ's Church.

Shether preached at Sandwich in the Year 1542, That Baptism takes away but
only Original Sin. At another time there, That every Man, since the Passion of
Christ, has us much Liberty and Free Will, as ever Adam had in Paradise before
his Fall. That the new Preachers, with the liberty of the Gospel, have caused
our Livings to be worse than the Turks. That Zacharias, and Elizabeth his Wife,
kept all the Commandments of God* and that it was a light thing for every Man
to keep them, if he would. That Christ and Baptism did nothing else but wash
away Original Sin* and that if any Man after Baptism did fall, he must purchase
Remission of his Sins by Penance, as Mary Magdalene did. That a certain King
was sick of a Leprosy, and had a Vision to go to Jordan to be washed, and
should be whole. And as he was in his good Intent going, h^ thought that he had
as good and sweet Water in his own Country, as that was; and so returned back
and washed himself therein, but nothing at all he thereby mended: And then he
went to Jordan, and so was made whole. He compared Man's Conscience to a Dog.
Beware of these false Preachers, which preach to you new Fangles. Will you know
how to discern a true Preacher from a False? You have a Dog, which is your
Conscience: Whenever you shall come to any Sermon, ask your Dog, What he
says unto it? If he say, it be good, then follow it: but if your Dog bark
against it, and say it is naught, then beware and follow it not. Adding these
words, If you will ask your Conscience, What she thinks of such new Fangles as
are brought into the Church of God, she will say, that they be naught. He also
preached, that Men nowadays say, that Holy Water signifies of Christ Blood.
O! these are very glorious words. But it is not fit, good Christians, that such
new Fangles and Fantasies of Men should be brought into the Church of God.
Item, In all his Sermons he commonly uses to make Invectives against the other
Preachers of this Cathedral Church; making the People believe, that the
Preachers of the Church, preach nothing but a carnal Liberty, new Fangles, new
Auricular Confession, Prayers, Fasting, and all good Works. This last is added
by Cranmer's Hand, as are also several other Passages above, according as he
himself took the Examination.

And as the Gospellers thus articled against the Papists, so the Papists were
as hot in drawing up Articles against the Gospellers.

Scory, beforementioned, was accused, that he preached in a Sermon at S.
Elphies, on Ascension-day 1541. That there was none in Heaven but Christ only;
[meaning, I suppose, as Mediators there with God, in opposition to the
Intercession of Saints]. Then follows, writ by Cranmer's hand, these words;
The Witnesses against him, were Bradkirk Priest, Shether, Marden, Colman;
Adding, These four be Witnesses against all the Articles of Ridley and Scory,
in the first Detection made to me two Years past. Then follow more Accusations
of Scory. He preached in August ^ast, in the Chapter House of Christ's-Church,
That no Man may pray in any wise in Latin, or other Tongue* except he
understand what he prays. And that Priests and Clarks do offend, taking any
Money or Reward for saying Dirige and Mass. He said* that some Preachers
brought in their Sermons Gesta Romanorum, persuading to the People, that it was
the Gospel or the Bible. Another time, Anno 1541* he preached in Lent in
Christ's-Church, Canterbury* That only Faith justifies; and he that does deny,
that only Faith does justify, would deny, if he durst be so bold, that Christ
does justify. He preached at Christ's-Church another time, That the Supper of
the Lord, which is Sacrificium and Hostia, is not Hostia pro peccatis, but
Hostia L^^dis. He preached at Faversham, Anno 1542* in the Feast of Dedication*
That the Dedication of material Churches was instituted for the Bishop Profits;
and that he could not see by Scripture, that they might use any such Fashions
for that purpose, as for Conjuration. And then they must conjure the Devil out
of the Ground, or out of the Lime and Stones. And if so, then it were as
necessary for every Man's House to be consecrate or dedicate. Admit, quoth he,
that the Dedication of the same were lawful, yet the Bishops should always
preach, (for that is their Office); and other Men might and may consecrate them
as well as they.

Item, This sumptuous adorning of Churches, is against the old Fashion of the
Primitive Church. They had no such Copes, nor Chalices, nor other Jewels, nor
Gildings, nor Paintings of Images, as we now have. And therefore if I were
Curate, I would sell all such things, or lay them to pledge to help the Poor.

At Christmas last there was a general Procession by the King's Majesty, and
Mr. Scory preached these words: Every Country has a Custom to choose a Patron.
As England has chosen S. George; Scotland, S. Andrew, etc. thinking, rather by
intercession of Saints to obtain the Victory of their Enemies. But, good
People, quoth he, forasmuch as Saints be circumscript, it is not possible for
the Saint that is in the North, to hear the Prayer that is made in the South;
nor that Saint that is in the South, to hear the Prayer that is made in the
North. But this last Passage of the Christmas Sermon has a Cross struck
through it.

Ridley, the Prebendary, was charged, Sept. 22. 1543, that he preached at S.
Stephens, in the Rogation Week, Anno Reg. 32. that Auricular Confession was but
a mere positive Law, and ordained as a godly Means for the Sinner to come to
the Priest for Counsel; but he could not find it in Scripture. And that there
was no meeter Terms to be given to the Ceremonies of the Church, than to call
them Beggarly Ceremonies. That Te Deum has been sung commonly in English at
Herne, where the said Mr. Doctor is Vicar.

Brooks, one of the six Preachers, was accused for preaching, That all Masters
and Mistresses were bound to eat Eggs, Butter and Cheese in Lent, to give
Example to their Households to do the same. [This the Papists thought a breaking
of Lent, to allow this eating of White-meats, whereas Fish only ought to be
eaten.] And he thought, that the Ceremonies of the Church were but Beggarly
Ceremonies, and that was the meetest Term he could give them.

Thomas Carden, Vicar of Lime, in a Lenten-Sermon, Anno 1543, said, He supposed
S. Katharine was rather a Devil in Hell, than a Saint in Heaven. And that the
People said naught, and that this term was naught to say, That they should
receive their Maker at Easter; but they should say, we shall receive our
Housel. He preached, That the Water in the Font is no better than other Water
is.

Drum, one of the six Preachers, in the Year 1543, preached in a Sermon made in
Christ's-Church, that we may not pray in an Unknown Tongue; for if we do, we do
but mock with God, and of God we be mocked. As if a Man do come to a Lord, and
babble to him words he knows not, the Lord will but mock him, and account him
for a Fool. So thy Prayer, Man, not understood, is but babbling; and for that
before God thou art but a Fool. Your Psalmody and Song in the Church is so
taken with God, if that you, which do occupy your selves therein, do not
understand it. And thou, that so babblest, do break the Command of God: For
it is written, Non accipies nomen Dei in vanum. And you do call on God vainly,
when you do call upon him in a Tongue that you understand not. Wherefore to
such as know not the Latin, it must be needful to pray in the Mother Tongue.
Item, That the Material Church is a thing made and ordained to content the
Affections of Men, and is not the thing that pleases God, nor that God
requires; but is a thing that God does tolerate for the weakness of Men. For as
the Father contenteth his Child with an Apple, or a Hobbyhorse; not because
these things do delight the Father, but because the Child, ruled by Affections,
is more desirous of these things than the Father is rejoiced in the Deed: So
Almighty God, condescending to the Infirmities of Man, and his weakness, does
tolerate material Churches, gorgeously built, and richly decked; not because he
requires, or is pleased with such things. This Drum was one of the Cambridg
Men, that Cardinal Wolsey transplanted into his College at Oxon, and who
suffered Imprisonment there some time after with Cox and Frith, and diverse
others of the same College for Matters of Religion. But however Drum afterward
fell away into Papistry.

Lancaster, Parson of Pluckley, uses not in the Church Porch any Hally Water,
according to the laudable Custom of the Church. A great part of his Parish
uses not to receive Hally Bread. Going on Procession, he uses not to rehearse
Sancta Maria, nor any other Saints Names.

The Curate of Much Mongam, going on Procession, refuses, and will in no wise
sing, nor say, the Litany in such manner as all other Curates do.

Reflections upon the former Presentiments.
All these Collections I have made out of the Original of this Visitation of the
Archbishop. Wherein may be seen the particular Matters in these Times vented
and tossed about in the Pulpits; the trifling way of Popish Preaching,
consisting in ridiculous lying Fables and Stories, as is used still in the
Popish Countries; and with how much more Solidity, Truth and Reason the Sermons
of those, who favored the Gospel, were replenished. We may observe here also,
how diligent our Archbishop was in his care of his Diocese, and the pains he
took to come to a perfect Detection of his Clergy, in order to their
Regulation, and diverse other things, which an ingenious Reader will take notice
of.

The Prebendaries and Preachers admonished by the ABp.
The Archbishop had all the Prebendaries and Preachers before him in his
Consistory, at Croydon, on Trinity-Sunday was twelve Month; where he argued
with them, instructed, rebuked, exhorted them, according as he saw needful for
ever Man, with relation unto the Articles abovesaid. He told Serles, who had
preached in favor of Images in Churches, as Representatives of Saints, and not
Idols, That Imago and Idolum was one thing; but the one was the Latin, the
other the Greek. To which Gardener, a Prebend of the Church, replied, That he
did not think, that an Image and an Idol was one, but that an Image, not abused
with Honor, is an Image, and not an Idol. This saying of the Archbishop did so
gaul them, that they took occasion after, in their Sermons, to confute it. And
they lyingly reported in Canterbury, that the ABp should say, He would be even
with Gardener, or that Gardener should repent his reasoning with him. Whereas
all that Cranmer said, was, that the Communication that Gardener had that Day,
should be repeated again at his Grace's coming to Canterbury. The same day the
Archbishop told them, that he had set in their Church six Preachers, three of
the old Learning, and three of the New. Now Gardener told him, he thought that
would not be for the most quietness in Preachers. The Archbishop replied, that
he had showed the King's Grace what he had done in that Matter, and that the
King's Pleasure was, that it should be so. He then also gave them Warning, that
none should inveigh against others in their Sermons.

CHAP. XXVI. A black Cloud over the Archbishop.
SOon after this, The Prebendaries Plot against the ABp.
a great and black Cloud hung over our Archbishop's Head, that threatened to
break upon him in Thunder and Lightning. The Prebendaries and others of the
Church of Canterbury for the most part were addicted to the Pope and the old
Superstitions. Which the Archbishop endeavoring to abolish, and to bring in
truer knowledge of Religion among them, caused them to do what they could to
oppose him. And indeed they usually carried themselves disobligingly enough to
him. Which made him say to one of them, viz. Gardener, alias Sandwich, You and
your Company hold me short, but I will hold you as short. They seemed now to
have a fair Advantage against him, upon account of the Statute of the Six
Articles: which the King at this time stood much upon the execution of; and did
give out, that he required Justices and others, his Officers, in their several
Places, to give notice of all Disobedience against it. The Bishop of Winchester
also was now in great Favor with the King, a constant Adversary to Canterbury,
and implacably set against the New Learning, as it was then called. He thought
to take this opportunity to deal so effectually with the King, as to get the
Gospel destroyed, and all that adhered to it. And moreover, about this time was
given out a saying ordinarily, That the Bishop of Winchester had bent his Bow
to shoot at some of the head Deer: Meaning, as the Issue made manifest, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Queen Katharine Par, and others of the Court.

And to carry on his Purpose, he being a Privy-Counsellor himself, Winchester
the chief Manager.
had an understanding with some of the Council, who were of his Mind, and ready
to second these his Ends: as among the rest was Baker, the Chancellor of the
Court of Augmentations. These were his Confidents at home. Abroad, to be his
Soliciter, and his great Agitator, he had a very fit Man for his purpose, one
Dr. London, Warden of New-College Oxon, Prebend of Shipton in the Church of
Sarum, Canon of Windsor, and Dean of Osenay, a very busy Zealot. Who was in his
Time the great Contriver and Practiser of Mischief against good Men, that could
not comply with Papal Superstitions. He was one of the three, that some Years
before now prosecuted most rigorously the good Students in the Cardinal's
College, when by Imprisonment and hard Usage several of them died. But this Man
was met with: not long after this, suffering public shame for Perjury, and
died in a Jail. At one and the same time Winchester, with this his trusty
Partner, London, was driving on two Games together: The one was to bring into
trouble several of the King's own Court, that were Favorers of the Gospel; not
liking that such should be so near the King: and the other was to overthrow the
good Archbishop, and his Friends in his Diocese of Canterbury, and to
extinguish that Light of the Gospel that began notably to shine there.

Winchester designs the Death of diverse of the Court.
For the compassing the first, they procured among them a special Sessions to be
held at Windsor: Wherein they not only, upon the Six Articles, condemned four
poor honest Men, viz. Persons, Filmer, Testwood and Marbeck, whereof the three
former were burnt to Death; but they drew up a bundle of Indictments against a
very great many, Fox.
and some of Eminency about the King, as Cardin and Hobby, Knights, of the
King's Privy-Chamber; with the Ladies, Harman and Welden, Snowbal and his Wife,
and a great many more of the King's true and peaceable Subjects. One Ockham,
that served for Clark of the Peace at that time, had these Indictments ready,
to carry them to the chief Patron of these Plots, the Bishop of Winchester. But
this Design, notwithstanding the Privacy and crafty Contrivance of it, took not
effect; but he rather brought himself into Disgrace thereby. For one Fulk,
belonging unto the Queen, being at Sessions at Windsor at that time, and
observing what was done, hastily rode to Court, and discovered to the Persons
concerned what was hatching against them, letting them know, that Ockham was
coming with his Indictments to the Bishop of Winchester: who as soon as he had
received them, would without doubt have laid them before the King and his
Council. But by this seasonable Notice they waylaid Ockham, and Cardin and
others seized him, and all his Papers, as soon as he came to Court, before he
got to Winchester. These Papers were perused by some of the Privy Council; and
seeing what large numbers, it may be, of themselves and of their Friends, as
well as others, were indicted, and designed for Death, they thought fit to
acquaint the King with it. And he, not liking such bloody Doings, gave them all
a Pardon: And observing how Winchester was the great Agen^ in all this, never
liked him after.

But Winchester and London had other Irons in the Fire against the Archbishop
and his Friends at and about Canterbury: And of the ABp and his Friends.
and particularly Dr. Ridley a Prebendary, Scory, Lancelot Ridley, and Drum,
three of the Preachers. And to bring Mischief upon these, by the instigation of
Winchester and practice of London, several of the Prebendaries, and some of the
Six Preachers, combine in a Resolution to draw up Accusations, both against the
Archbishop and against his Friends. But neither did this Winchester's second
Plot succeed, but rather drew Shame upon himself, and those that assisted in it.

The Papers relating to ABp Cranmer's Accusation.
There is a Volume in the Benet College Library, entitled, Accusatio Cranmeri:
wherein are contained the rough Papers of the Examinations, that were taken of
these Accusers of the Archbishop; the Interrogatories put to them; their
Confessions and Submissions to the Archbishop. Upon which Papers this was writ
by the hand of Archbishop Parker, in whose possession they afterward came,
viz.

Memorandum, That King Henry, being diverse times by Bishop Gardener, informed
against Bishop Cranmer, and the said Gardener having his Instructions of one
Dr. London, a stout and filthy Prebendary of Windsor, who there convicted [of
Perjury] did wear a Paper openly, and rode through the Town with his Face
toward the Horse-tail; and also had Information of Mr. Moyles, Mr. Baker, and
of some others promoted by the said Cranmer; (Whose Tales he uttered to the
King) perceiving the Malice, trusted the said Cranmer with the Examination of
these Matters; which he did of diverse Persons, as by this does appear.

Hence I have carefully extracted some Particulars, The Contents thereof.
that I may give a particular Account of this exquisite Piece of Malice; which
aimed at nothing less than this good Man's Life, and that they might make him
tread the same Path with his Friend Crumwel two or three Years before, as a
Reward of his endeavors in setting forward a Reformation in the Church.

But first I will set down the Names of the Prebendaries and Preachers of the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, The Canons and Preachers of Canterbury.
because we shall have occasion often to mention diverse of them.

Canons of Canterbury, Anno 1543.
Richard Thornden Suffragan of Dover, Arthur Sentleger, Richard Parkhurst
Parson of Leneham, Nicolas Ridley, John Meines, Hugh Glazier, William Hunt,
William Gardener, John Milles, John Daniel, Robert Goldson, John Baptist.

The Six Preachers.
Robert Serles Vicar of Charing, Michael Drum, Lancelot Ridley, John S^ory,
Edmund Shether, Thomas Brook.

Many of these he had himself preferred, and was a special good Lord unto. And
yet such was the ingratitude of several of them, that they voluntarily yielded
to be made Tools to carry on this wicked Machination against him. The Names of
the chief Actors were Thornden, who lived in the Archbishop's Family, and eat
at his Table, and with whom he used to converse most familiarly: Gardener, whom
Cranmer had taken as his own Child* and he had resigned up himself to him with
Heart, Body and Service, as he once solemnly professed to the Archbishop:
Sentleger, Milles, Parkhurst, Serles and Shether; and one Dr. Willoughby,
beneficed in Kent, and the King's Chaplain.

Their first Attempt which they made was, Cranmer's Chaplains complained of at
the Sessions.
to prefer Bills of Accusation against the Archbishop's Chaplains and
Preachers, viz. The two Ridleyes, Scory, Turner, Bland, Drum, Lancaster and
others; and slantingly through their Sides, striking at the Archbishop
himself. This they did to the Justices at their Sessions, upon the Statute of
the Six Articles. And that by the suggestion of London; who thought it
convenient that the Articles should first be carried to the Sessions, and from
thence returned to the Council Board. Willoughby, being the King's Chaplain,
and a Man of some Quality, was prevailed with to present the Articles to the
Justices, and to make them willing to meddle in this Affair, which otherwise
they had no great Stomach to do, fearing they might draw the King's displeasure
upon themselves. Willoughby, by the direction of London, told Moyle and
Thwaits, and the other their Fellow-Justices, That they should be shent for
suffering such Preaching and Contention, without doing any thing therein to
stop it. And this was that they drove at; that after these Articles were
preferred from the Justices up to Court, and seen and read by the King and
Council, a Commission should then be obtained: and such put into the
Commission, as might effectually take order with the Preachers. And these three
Prebendaries, Parkhurst, Gardener and Mills, they labored especially to be put
in Commissioners; and that the Archbishop himself should be left out: For so
London had promised.

They prepare the Articles, and prefer them.
Their next Care was to prepare the Articles. Gardener and Serles are
extraordinary diligent in this Work, and had been gathering Matter a good space
before. The Writings were finished at Justice Moyle's House. And Willoughby
seems to be the Man that offered the Bill in Court. They dealt earnestly with
Baro, Clark of the Peace, to draw up the Indictment against the good Men
complained of in their Bill of Articles, (the chief whereof were John Bland,
and Richard Turner) but he denied it. And when the Jury, that were to be sworn,
came, they took them not orderly as they stood in the Panel, but overleaped
some of them, and left them unsworn, that they might be sure to have such Men
as would do their Business. After they had proceeded thus far, their next Care
was to get their Articles sent up to the Court, and laid before the King and
Council.

They Article against the ABp himself.
And to these foresaid Articles, they drew up another Book against the
Archbishop himself* the matter being first plotted between Dr. London and
Serles, a discontented Man, lately imprisoned. And this created them a new
Diligence, and diverse Journeys from Kent to London to take their Instructions,
and from London to Kent, to get their Informations. And there was at last a
parcel of Articles (Trifles for the most part) raked out of the Dunghill, picked
up any where, and from any Person without Proof. For they had nothing to show
for the truth of them, but Hearsay and Report, and scarcely that. Serles
inveighles Dr. Willoughby into this Business, and brings him into acquaintance
with Dr. London. In whose House the Articles are first read, to whom it was
propounded to present them. But when Searles had said, that the things
mentioned in the Articles were such as were openly spoken, Willoughby replied,
Though he heard such things, he was not sure they were true; and there was no
Record to affirm them true, no Witnesses Hands being subscribed. And so made a
great boggle at presenting them, and put Serles upon that Work. But London
urged Willoughby to carry them to the Council, telling him, that it would be a
Matter of great Danger for him, being so near the King, if he should not give
information of such ill things in that Country where he lived; especially
knowing the King's Pleasure, that such Matters should not be concealed, but
that complaint should be made of them to Him and his Council. And he bad him
not fear; for that he himself had made such a Spectacle Little thinking what a
Spectacle he was soon after to make there, when he was carried on Horseback
through the Town, with a Paper upon his head, declaring his Perjury, and his
Face to the Horse's Tail.
at Windsor in bringing to light abominable Heresies, (meaning in causing those
three poor Men to be burnt, and indicting so many more their Maintainers)
whereat the King, he said, was astonished, and angry, both with the Doers and
Bearers. And therefore if he should now shrink, he should show himself to be no
true Subject. Upon these words, which created some fear in Willoughby, if he
should decline what London put him on to do, he was content to present them.

Thus having gotten a Person ready for this part of the Drudgery, to prefer the
Complaints against the Archbishop, London writ them over again, and added
other new Articles, as he pleased. London's Practices.
Which Serles himself liked not: But London said, he meant, by putting in some
things, to bring the Matter before the Justices, and certain of the
Spirituality for his purpose. Matters, many of them, of mere untruth, and not
so much as the pretense of a Rumor for. But he told Willoughby and Serles, that
it should never be known to be their doings. And so Willoughby took the old
Copy with him into Kent, to get it recorded, and signed with Hands. And London
sent a Copy to the Bishop of Winchester. Willoughby being now at Canterbury
about this Business, requiring the Prebendaries to sign the Articles, they all
refused. Up rode Willoughby to London again, and acquaints Dr. London therewith
with a heavy heart. Then he began another practice, to tamper with the
Justices, bidding Willoughby let them know, that the King would be angry with
them for taking no more notice of the Disorders in Kent. London went also
himself to Moyles Lodging, a Leading Justice then in Kent, and talked with him,
exhorting him to forward this Work against the Archbishop; telling him, That
he himself had taken up my Lord of Canterbury before the Council; meaning
thereby to signify to him, that he needed not to fear him so much as he seemed
to do, or his Interest at the Court. Upon this Moyle sent to several other
Gentlemen and Justices to search out for any Priests that wanted a Crown, [as a
Reward for their Information] who should enquire about the Country for what
things were rumoured against the Archbishop. And so as many Rumors and Bruits
as were brought, were presently turned into Articles. But Moyle warily sent all
the Reports that came to his hand to the Archbishop, not so much out of
good will to him, as that he might pretend to discharge his Duty in giving
Information to the Diocesan of Abuses in his Diocese: thereby also reckoning to
avert the Displeasure of the Archbishop from himself. But this London liked
not of, and told him he would mar all.

At length Serles and Willoughby had got together a mass of Accusations;
whether true or false mattered not, A great Mass of Articles against the ABp
procured.
but a great heap they made. For these two were the chief Collectors of
Articles, both at Canterbury, and other Places in Kent: London having advised
them to get as much Matter as could be devised; for it would be the goodliest
Deed, as he said, and the most bounden Act to the King that ever they did.
These Reports were digested into two or three Books. Serles brought up some of
the Articles roughly drawn to London; and London transcribed them, and brought
them to the Bishop of Winchester: and there they were copied out by German
Gardener, his Secretary, another busy Man.

The chief Instruments. GARDENER.
Gardener, the Prebendary, by this time had gotten a Book of Articles, signed
by the rest of the Prebendaries, and Willoughby brought them up: some of the
Prebendaries coming up too, being about to be the Presenters of the Book
themselves. Winchester, and Baker, Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations,
gave the said Prebendaries encouragement to proceed in what they went about.
And busy London to make the Articles the better entertained, when they should
be presented to the Council, had officiously shown the Copy of them to several
of the said Council beforehand.

SERLES.
I must here give this further note concerning Serles: that he was so zealous a
Man, that he had the Year before put up to the Council Articles against the
Preachers of the Gospel. But they were such, that the Council thought not fit
the King should see them. Which he complained of; and it seems at his return
was clapped up in Prison for his pains, for some either malicious Insinuations,
or irregular Practices herein.

SHETHER.
Shether was another of the Gang, and one of the forwardest in this invidious
Business against the innocent Archbishop. He was one of those that came up to
London to present the Bill. It may be guessed what a hotheaded Man he was, by
a passage we meet with concerning him, Fasti Oxon. p. 686.
when he was Proctor at Oxford in the Year 1535. In which Year he made such a
Combustion betwixt the University and the Townsmen, that they being enraged
against him, he went in danger of his Life. So that he and his Company were
fain to go armed when they went abroad. And when he was out of his Proctorship,
the University allowed him to defend himself from the Townsmen at the
University Charge, if he should be set upon by them. This Shether brought up
also his Collections to one Ford his Brother-in-Law, to write them out: which
amounted to a great Book of two days Labor. For they were resolved to have
enough; and to make out in Bulk, what was wanting in Truth.

The Bishop of Winchester's Discourse with a Prebendary of Canterbury.
Take an hint or two here of Gardener Bishop of Winchester, the secret Machine
in all this ungrateful Work. Coming once from the Council, that then was beyond
the Sea at Calais, about the time of the Breach with France, he after hearing
Mass at the Cathedral Church at Canterbury, took his Namesake Gardener, the
Prebendary, by the Hand, and asked him how he did, and how they did in
Canterbury? meaning in relation to Religion professed in the City. And when
Gardener answered, But meetly; he enquired, How they did within the House among
themselves, with relation to the Churchmen belonging to it? He told him, That
they did not agree all in Preaching. So do I hear, said Winchester. Then he
asked, wherein they did not agree? Gardener then repeated somewhat of Ridley's
and Scory's Sermons: and this among other things, That Prayer ought to be made
in a Tongue known, and not in a Tongue unknown; for so it were but babbling.
Winchester then said, He missed. For the Germans themselves are now against
that saying. Well, said he, this is not well. My Lord of Canterbury will look
after this, I doubt not, or else such Preaching will grow unto an evil
Inconvenience: I know well he will see Remedy for it. Well, how do you do with
them? Gardener replied, My Lord, Hardly: I am much marked in my Sermons. And I
cannot tell whether I be taken, or no. I pray your good Lordship of your
Counsel, what were best for me to do. I had rather leave Preaching betimes,
than to be taken in my Sermons. Then said Winchester, Do thus: Write your
Sermons into a Book, every word, as you will preach it; and when you go into
the Pulpit, deliver your Book unto the chiefest Man there, that can read, and
let him take heed of your Book while you do preach, and say no more, but that
you have written and studied for; And I warrant you, you shall do well enough.
And when you do hear any Man preach any otherwise then well, hold you
contented, and meddle not; so shall you do best. Then he past forth his time in
Communication concerning the Ordinances of their Choir, their Statutes, their
Masses, and Hours of them. And at the last sent for Ridley the Prebendary, and
had some conference with him: but what, it is uncertain.

The bulky Articles being at last hammered out and made ready, Willoughby and
London wait at the Council Chamger.
London now required Willoughby to deliver them to the Council; which he would
fain have shrunk from. He then charged him upon his Allegiance to go with him
to the Council-Chamber-Door, meaning to have him into the Council. Having
gotten him there, he went in, and informed some of the Privy Council, (and
Friends, I suppose, to the Matter) that Dr. Willoughby was without, desiring he
might be called in. Willoughby was before instructed by London to use words to
the Council to this Tenor, when he should deliver his Articles: viz. That the
King and they had been at great Charges, and taken great Pains to set a good
and godly Way among them, [meaning the Statute of the Six Articles.] And for
all that they had with them in Kent the most enormous Heresies. And because he
heard, that it was the King's Will and Pleasure, that every Man, on pain of his
Allegiance, should bring in what he knew, or else if he knew and did conceal
it, it should be his damage; therefore in discharge of his Duty, he came to
tender that Bill of Articles. But this Speech was not delivered that Day, the
Council not being at leisure. And lest some People, knowing the pragmatical
temper of London, might be jealous what he did at the Court, and suspect it was
for no Good to the Professors of the Gospel, it was studiously given out, that
he was there for some Promotion from the King.

The next day the sedulous Man carried Willoughby to the Lord Privy Seal, [Lord
Russel, if I mistake not] with his Articles; Willoughby brought to the Lord
Privy Seal, and to Wi^chester.
but neither would my Lord-Privy-Seal see them, having no leisure, as he
pretended: I suppose, because he liked them not, and loved my Lord of
Canterbury. The Day after London carried him to the Bishop of Winchester. Into
whom he went and tarried an Hour, carrying in the Copy of the Articles. In
which time, no question, the Bishop and his trusty Substitute contrived for the
managing of the Matter. Soon after Willoughby being with Winchester, and
desiring him, That he might not be put to present the Articles, not being able
to testify to the Truth of them, Winchester bade him Fear not to do his Duty:
and that if the Matter were not to be abidden by, the Doers should bear the
blame, and not the Presenter. And that it was all our Duties to stand in such
things as were contrary to the King's Injunctions. But notwithstanding
Willoughby got himself excused, and delivered them not; but the Prebendaries
soon after Easter did.

The Contents of the Articles against the ABp.
The Articles are not specified in the Papers I use; but by the Interrogatories
and other Passages, it appears that some of them were these that follow: That
he rebuked Serles for that he preached, that Images might be permitted in the
Church, as Representatives of Saints, and not be Idols. Item, That the
Archbishop spoke openly before all the Prebendaries and Preachers in
Consistory, that the King's Pleasure was to have the Six Preachers consist of
three of the New Learning, and three of the Old. Item, That Serles and Shether
underwent Censure laid upon them by the Archbishop for somewhat they had
preached, when the Honesty of their Audience offered themselves to testify,
that they were falsely accused, and that that which was laid against them was
not true: and although they were a great Number, yet they could not be
admitted. That they were Innocent Preachers, and being Innocent, were
condemned, the one to Prison, and the other to read a Declaration of false
surmised Articles. Item, That those that would speak against evil Opinions,
dared not; for if they did, they were complained of, and called Seditious
Persons, stirring the People to Commotion: and complaining to their Ordinary,
they got nothing but displeasure; and the evil Preachers had much more Favor
and Boldness. Item, That there were two Images of Christ, and two of our Lady,
that were taken down; whereunto was neither Oblation, nor any Lights standing
before them.

More Articles against his Commissary.
Other Articles, which were of Serles his own collecting, as appears by the
Interrogatories, that Cranmer under his own hand had prepared to put to him,
were such as these, and were chiefly against the Archbishop's Commissary. That
there were a great number of evil Preachers in Canterbury Diocese. That the
Archbishop's Commissary [Dr. Leigh] in his Visitation, commanded, that the
Wax-Candles, blessed upon Candlemass-day, should not be delivered unto the
People. That Holy Water should not be born, nor cast into Men's Houses. That in
some Churches, by the Commissaries command, all the Images were pulled down,
and hewed with Axes. That the Commissary was most conversant with Abjured
Persons, and other suspect of Heresy, aiding, maintaining, and succouring them.
That Ioanna Bochier was delivered by the Favor of the Commissary. [Whereas
indeed she was by the King's Pardon. This is she that was afterward burnt for
Arianism in King Edward's Days]. That one Giles came to Canterbury, in a
Courtier's Coat, and a Beard, being a Priest, and there lodged ten Days. And
one Hardes, a Justice, complained of him to the Commissary, but the Commissary
did nothing. [Whereas in truth he was not a Priest, but a Layman.] That a
Tailor in Canterbury did openly read and expound the Scripture in his own
House: and open resort thither was suffered by the Commissary. That the Master
of S. John's in Canterbury at his Death refused to receive, and despised the
Blessed Sacrament: and yet by the Sufferance of the Commissary, was both buried
like a true Christian, and also was of very many praised for a good and holy
Man. That Mr. Bland in communication with Mr. Sponer, Vicar of Boughton, denied
Auricular Confession to be requisite, and delivered his Opinion to the said
Sponer in Writing. Which the Commissary hearing, desired Sponer to let him see
the Writing, swearing that he would not keep it from him: But when he had the
Bill, he put it into his Purse. That the Commissary resigned a Benefice to the
said Bland, binding Bland, and his Successor, by a Writing made under the Hand
of my Lord of Canterbury, and the Chapter, to pay unto him, and his Assigns, a
great part of the clear yearly Value for many Years. This was the Sum of
Serles's Articles: but most of them were found to be frivolous and false.

Articles yet more against our Archbishop were, More still.
That he held a constant correspondence with Germany, sending Letters thither,
and receiving Letters thence. That he gave out a great many Exhibitions in
Germany, and had many Pensioners there. (In relation to which, there seemed to
be a design carrying on, that the Bishop of Winchester should seize some of
these Letters of the Archbishop. For Gardener told him whose Hands they past
through, namely one Fuller of Canterbury, and that if the said Bishop would
send for him, and command him upon his Allegiance, he should know more. Or at
least, that he might make use of Fuller for a Witness to serve to prove this
Article.) Moreover, they put in their Articles, That his Grace's Sister was a
Milner's Wife, and that She and her Husband lived nine or ten Years together in
Canterbury. And then that She married to one Mr. Bingham, her former Husband
being yet alive: and that Mr. Commissary married her Daughter. And though he
were thus a married Priest, yet he was joined with Mr. Dean [ Wotton] to be one
of the Proctors of the Clergy in the Convocation-house: and not of their
Election, but that it was obtained by the Interest of his Affinity.

The chief Witnesses and Persons concerned as Vouchers and Informers, were,
Roper, Balthazar a Surgeon, Heywood, Moor, The Witnesses.
Beckinsal, German Gardener.

At length, after much ado, some of the Prebendaries, The Prebendaries deliver
the Articles.
in the Name of the Church of Canterbury, delivered into the Council not long
after Easter, the Articles swelled to a good Quantity of Paper. And so they
came at last into the King's Hand. Having received them, he bade Baker the
Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation, a Kentish Man, being one of the
Privy Council, and a Privado in this Matter, to send to Canterbury for some to
prove the Articles. The said Chancellor orders the Dean, ignorant of the
Matter, to send to Shether and Serles to come up as secretly as might be to
London. Being come up, Shether repairs to the Dean: Who ^ad him with Gardener
and Parkhurst, to go to the Chancellor who sent for them. Being come before
him, he said to them, That the King had a Book against the Archbishop
delivered to him; which he had himself perused. And because that he perceived,
that they could say somewhat, wishing also for Serles, (who was not yet come)
he told them the King willed them to say what they knew; fearing no Person, but
to dread only one God and one King. Whereupon they took the Book, and drew out
such Articles as they could witness of. He bad them return to Canterbury, and
provide the Witnesses there; and that Shether the youngest should come back
again, after he had perfected the Book in the Day and Year, and to bring it
with him. From him they applied again to the Bishop of Winchester, the great
Wheel, and showed him what Baker had said to them.

CHAP. XXVII. The King the Archbishop's Friend in this Danger.
The King himself discovers all to the ABp.
THE King well perceiving the Malice of the Men, and a Plot contrived against an
honest and innocent Man, strengthened with the Favor and Aid of Winchester, and
several of the Counselors, and the imminent danger the Archbishop was in,
except he himself did interpose, it pleased God to turn the King's Heart to
him. So he put the Book of Articles in his Sleeve; and passing one Evening in
his Barge by Lambeth-Bridg, the Archbishop standing at the Stairs to do his
Duty to his Majesty; he called him into the Barge to him; and accosting him
with these words, O my Chaplain, now I know who is the greatest Heretic in
Kent, communicated to him these Matters, showing him the Book of Articles
against him and his Chaplains, and bad him peruse it. This both surprised, and
troubled the Archbishop not a little: that those of his own Church, and
Justices of the Peace whom he had obliged, should deal so treacherously with
him. He kneeled down to the King, and well-knowing how false the Articles were,
The ABp desires a Commission.
desired him to grant a Commission to whomsoever it pleased him, to try the
Truth of these Accusations, so as from the highest to the lowest they might be
well punished, if they had done otherwise than became them. The King told him
He would grant a Commission, and that such Affiance and Confidence he had in
his Fidelity, that he should be the chief Commissioner himself, to whom he
would wholly commit the Examination, with two or three more such as he should
choose. When the Archbishop replied, That it would not seem indifferent to make
him a Commissioner, who was a Party accused; the King told him, That he was
sure he would not halt with him, although he were driven to accuse himself, but
would speak the Truth of himself, if he had offended. The King added, That he
knew partly how the Matter came about, [namely, by Winchester's subtle means]
and that if he handled the Matter wisely, he should find a pretty Conspiracy
against him. The King named but one, viz. Dr. Belhouse, to be in the
Commission; and the Archbishop named Dr. John Cocks his Vicar General, and
Anthony Hussy his Register. The Commissi^n was made out of hand, and he was
commanded to go himself into Kent upon it: And the King commanded the
Commissioners particularly, that it should be sifted out, who was the first
Occasion of this Accusation. Presently every one that had meddled in this
Detection, shrunk away, and gave over their hold.

The Archbishop came to Feversham himself, and there, as it seems, The ABp in
Commission expostulates with his Accusers.
sat upon the Commission, and drew up some Interrogatories with his own Hand
for some of these Informers; and having summoned these Accusers before him,
argued and expostulated meekly, and sometimes earnestly with them; chiefly
insisting upon their Ingratitude and Disingenuity with him. He asked Sentleger,
if he were at Home on Palm Sunday? (that was the Day, when the Prebendaries
signed the Articles) Sentleger saying, He was then at his Benefice, the
Archbishop declared the Procession done that Day, as he called it; and said,
Whether he and the rest were present that Day, they were all knit in a Bond
among them, which he would break: adding, in a passionate way of Expression; O,
Mr. Sentleger, I had in you and Mr. Parkhurst, a good Judgment, and especially
in you; but ye will not leave your old Mumpsimus. To which Sentleger boldly
replied, That he trusted they used no Mumpsimus's, but those that were
consonant to the Laws of God and the Prince. And with Shether, one of the
busiest Enemies the Archbishop had in this Affair, the Archbishop so fatherly
discoursed and argued, that Shether could not forbear weeping. He and Serles,
two of the chief Agents, were committed to Custody.

But Shether presently dispatcheth his Servant to the Bishop of Winchester,
declaring how he and Serles were in Durance, Shether in Prison sends to
Winchester.
and recommended their Case to him. Winchester went into the Council Chamger,
probably to try his Interest with the Council to get them released. But it
seems he soon perceived how the King stood affected, and so there was nothing
yet to be done: And therefore he told the Servant, he could give him no Answer
as yet. A Day or two after, at the Servant's departing, he told him, That his
Master was a Child for weeping to the Archbishop, when he should have
answered; and that he should not weep for shame, but answer like a Man; and
that he should take a good Heart, for he should have Friends. That he would not
forget him: but he must know of the Council first what to do; and so desired
the Servant to have him recommended to the Prebendaries all in general; bidding
him tell them, That my Ld of Canterbury could not kill them, and that therefore
they should bear their Sufferings; for all he did was against himself, and that
he should see what would come of it. Ford, a Brother-in-law of Shether's, and a
Party, told the Servant, That he should tell his Brother, that he should never
recant; for if he did, he would never be his Friend while he lived, nor none
should that he could let; and that my Lord of Winchester should be his Friend.

But to return to the Archbishop's Examination of them. Their Reason^ which
they pretended for what they did.
When he asked them what the reason was of these their doings; they pretended
one one thing, and another another. Gardener said, that which moved him was,
Because he observed such Jarrings among them, and so much Unquietness about
Matters of Religion; and that he thought it was by the Archbishop's
Sufferance: Which the Archbishop convinced him was false. Shether pretended
that Baker, the Chancellor of the Augmentations, had willed him to mark the
chief Fautors of new Opinions. Willoughby desired Dr. Thornton, who was very
great with the Archbishop, but secretly false to him, that he would let his
Lordship know, that he never put up Article against any Man in his Life; for
that he was charged to have put up, or ready to have put up, the Articles.
Thornton bad him stick to it, and not be afraid; for, says he, I have spoken
my Mind to the Council therein, as I am bound, and so be you, being the King's
Chaplain.

Cocks and Hussy Commissioners, and his Officers false.
But the Archbishop left the further discovery of this Mischief to the
diligence of Cocks and Hussy his Officers: this was about August. They sat
six Weeks, says my Manuscript; but being secret Favorers of the Papists,
handled the Matter so, that nothing would be disclosed and espied, but every
thing colourably was hid. The Archbishop secretly observed this; but Morice
his Secretary wrote to Dr. Butts the King's Physicians, and Sir Anthony Denny
of his Bedchamber, That if the King sent not some others to assist the
Archbishop, than those that were with him, it was not possible any thing
should come to light; wishing that Dr. Legh, or some such other stout Man, that
had been exercised in the King's Ecclesiastical Affairs in his Visitation,
might be sent to him. And Dr. Legh was soon dispatched with Instructions from
the King into Kent, with the King's Ring, which he delivered to the Archbishop
on Alhollow-Even. And with Dr. Legh, Dr. Rowland Tailor another Civilian, a
bold and stirring Man, was joined; who afterward was burnt for his constancy
in Religion.

New Commissioners sent down.
These new Commissioners startled the Delinquents; and they began to be very
uneasy, and full of Anger, as well as Fear. One cried, Thank my Lord's Grace;
that is a way to have Quietness in Kent, to have Dr. Legh there. Of Dr. Tailor
they said, he was a Man of an evil Judgment, and notified for, and brought up
in the same. And another, reflecting upon these Men, said, I would all
Ambitious Knaves were hanged; I would all maintainers of new Opinions were
hanged; I would all Knaves that break Orders were hanged; I would all Knaves
that are against the Commonwealth were hanged.

The Register false.
Hussy the Register, who had the Examinations of these Men, had private
Conferences with them; and let Serles and Sandwich (alias Gardener) have the
Copies of their Accusations, before they were to be called before Legh, that
they might the better know what Answers to make.

The Delinquents Chambers and Chests searched.
But to proceed, to see what Course Dr. Legh took. Immediately upon his coming,
according to the King's Advice, he gave Commission to about nine or ten of the
Archbishop's Officers and Gentlemen, such as were tried Men of Wit and
Audacity, to go and search the Purses, Chests and Houses of certain
Prebendaries and Gentlemen, viz. such as were deemed or suspected to be of this
Confederacy, within the Cathedral Church and without; and what Letters and
Writings they could find with them, to bring to the Archbishop and him.

They all went about their Work in the same Hour; and within four Hours after,
the whole Conspiracy was discovered, by finding of Letters, some from the
Bishop of Winchester, some from Dr. London at Oxon, and from Justices of the
Shire. In the Chambers and Chests of some Gentlemen of the County, were found
Letters serving to that purpose. And among the rest there came to the
Archbishop's Hand two Letters, one of Thornton, and the other of Dr. Barber;
The Treachery of Thornton and Barber.
whom the ABp retained with him in Household, for expedition of Matters in Suit
before him, being his Officer, and as a Counselor to him in the Law when need
required: Both promoted by him; Thornton, who was Suffragan of Dover, he made
Prebendary of his Church, and whom he always set at his own Mess. The
Archbishop taking them apart, showed them their Letters, and upbraided them
with their Falseness and Ingratitude. They fell down on their Knees to the
Archbishop, and with many Tears begged his Pardon, acknowledging that they had
been a Year ago tempted to do what they had done.

The Archbishop before them casting up his Hands to Heaven, The ABp's
Discourse to them.
applied himself to God, thanking him that he had, in the midst of so many
Enemies and false Friends, vouchsafed him one great Friend and Master, meaning
the King, without whose Protection, as he said, he were not able to stand
upright one Day. He prayed God to make them good Men, and bad them ask God
forgiveness, seeing he had never deserved such usage at their Hands. He added,
that now he perceived there was no Fidelity nor Truth among Men; and that he
was brought to that Point, that he feared his left Hand would accuse his Right:
But that he needed not to marvel at it, seeing Christ prophesied of such a
World to come in the latter Days. Mark XIII.12. The Brother shall betray the
Brother to death, and the Father the Son: and Children shall rise up against
their Parents, etc.
He prayed God of his Mercy to finish that Time shortly: and so dismissed them
with gentle and comfortable words. And it was observed, that there never after
appeared, neither in his Countenance nor his Words, any remembrance thereof.
But he thought fit no more to trust them; and so discharged them of his
Service. And so he did one Mr. Talbot, another false Man, which was also of his
Counsel and Chamber. But Dr. London took occasion hence to say, That they could
tell a shrewd Tale, if they were examined; and that it was not for naught they
were put out of Service, as tho the reason were, that they should no more have
opportunity of knowing any of the Archbishop's Doings or Sayings.

All the foresaid seized Papers and Writings, were put into a Chest, The
Conspirators are imprisoned.
and brought up to Lambeth, the King being minded to peruse them, and to punish
the Principals. In fine, diverse of the chief of the Knot were committed to
Prison, where they remained till the next Year, some more closely confined than
others; all during the Archbishop's Pleasure. All that the Archbishop
required of them, was Repentance and Recantation, and an ingenuous confession
of their Faults and Falseness to him. Abiding for some time under Affliction,
their Spirits began to mollify; and then, by supplicatory Letters to the
Archbishop, they begged his Pardon, made their Confessions, and desired their
Liberty.

About which time a Parliament was at hand. Then great labor was made by their
Friends for a General Pardon from the King, procuring him a Subsidy, Their
Release.
the easier to obtain it. Which indeed followed, and wiped away all Punishment
and Correction for their Fault. But without the King's Indulgence, they were
like suddenly to have had their Liberty by the Archbishop's Intercession for
them, being a Man that delighted not in revenge.

The Confessions and Letters.
In the beforementioned Manuscript Volume, belonging to Benet-College, whence I
have extracted most of these Relations, are remaining the Interrogatories
prepared for Dr. London, wrote by the Archbishop's own Hand, together with the
humble Confessions and Letters of Willoughby, Gardener, Serles, Milles,
Sentleger, and others concerned. No. XXXIII.
Some of which I have transcribed into the Appendix. Gardiner's Expressions
seemed so penitent, stiling the Archbishop his Father, that it made such an
Impression upon the Archbishop's Heart, that when he saw him next, he told
him, Ye call me Father, in good Faith I will be a Father to you indeed. Yet
this very Man, so ungrateful he was, that soon after this kind Reconciliation
of the Archbishop to him, and (as it seems) his deliverance out of Prison, he
and the rest had fresh Communications together again: Insomuch that the
Archbishop was fain to enter upon a new trouble with them, putting them under
Restraint again, and interrogating them concerning their late Communication.
Unless this Letter of Gardener writ unto his Grace, may admit of a more
favorable Interpretation.

MOST honorable Father; Unadvisedly, as God shall save me, I have offended
your Grace; and I think not the contrary, but that some back Friend has done
me more hurt and hindrance, than I have at your Grace's Hands deserved. For I
know well in mine own Conscience, I have nothing so highly offended, as I do
perceive that your Grace is informed of me. In good Faith I speak it of my
Conscience, and before God, I would I were under Ground. For now have I lost
that, which I never thought to lose again: Yea that of which had I was as glad
as ever I was of Benefit received in this World, as knows my Savior Christ
Jesus: Who preserve your Grace.

Yours, Will. Gardener.


The Ends of the Conspirators.
But while these things were transacted at Canterbury, on the Archbishop's
behalf, against these false Accusers, Dr. London, one of the great
Incendiaries, was censured at Windsor. For he, and one Symons a Lawyer, and
Ockham, that laid Traps for others, were caught at length themselves. They
were Men that busied themselves in framing Indictments, upon the six Articles,
against great Numbers of those that favored or professed the Gospel, and in
sending them to Court to Winchester; who was to prefer the Complaints to the
Council. The King being more and more informed of their base Conspiracies, and
disliking their bloody Dispositions, commanded the Council should search into
the Matters. And so London and his Fellows being examined before the said
Council, were in the end found to be perjured, in denying, upon their Oaths,
what they had indeed done, and was proved manifestly to their Faces. Hereupon
they were adjudged perjured Persons, and appointed to ride through Windsor,
Reading and Newbery, where they had done most Mischief, with their Faces
toward the Horse-Tail, and a Paper upon their Heads, declaring their Crime;
and to stand upon the Pillory in each of those Towns. And that Punishment they
underwent, and then were sent to the Fleet. London not long after died there,
probably out of Shame and Sorrow: This was the End of one of these
Conspirators. German Gardener was a Year after hanged, drawn and quartered, as
a Traitor, for denying the King's Supremacy. And the Bishop of Winchester after
this, never had Favor or Regard of the King more. And Heywood, another of the
Crew of the Informers and Witnesses, was condemned for Treason with Gardener;
but making a Recantation, his Life was spared.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Archbishop falls into more Troubles.
AFter this, the Archbishop received two terrible Shocks more, if I am right
in the placing them, as I think I am, though I leave Fox to follow Morice, the
Archbishop's Secretary, in his Manuscript Declaration of the said Archbishop.
The former was a Complaint that was made openly against him in Parliament; and
the latter, when the Lords of the Privy Council accused him unto the King, and
required that he should be sent to the Tower.

Sir John Gostwick, a Knight for Bedforshire, The ABp accused before
theParliament. MS. Declaration of ABp Cranmer.
a Man of great Service in his Time, but Papistical, stood up in the House, and
laid to his Charge his Sermons and Lectures, both at Sandwich and Canterbury,
containing, as he said, manifest Heresy against the Sacrament of the Altar.
Though it was much they should accuse him in that Point, seeing he then held a
Corporal Presence; but it displeased them that it was after the Lutheran way,
rather than after theirs of Transubstantiation. But the King perceived easily
this proceeded of Malice, for that he was a Stranger in Kent, and had neither
heard the Archbishop preach nor read there. Knowing thereby that he was set
on, and made an Instrument to serve other Men's Purposes; the King marvellously
stormed at the Matter, calling Gostwick openly, Varlet, and said, That he had
played a villainous part, to abuse in open Parliament the Primate of the Realm,
especially being in Favor with his Prince as he was. What will they do with
him, said he, if I were gone? Whereupon the King sent word unto Gostwick, by
one of his Privy-Chamber, after this sort; Tell the Varlet Gostwick, That if he
do not acknowledge his Fault unto my Lord of Canterbury, and so reconcile
himself toward him, that he may become his good Lord, I will soon both make
him a poor Gostwick, and otherwise punish him to the Example of others. He
wondered (he said) he could hear my Lord of Canterbury preaching out of Kent.
And that if he had been a Kentish-Man, he might have had some more shadow to
put up an Accusation against him. Now Gostwick, hearing of this grievous
Threat, came with all possible speed unto Lambeth, and there submitted himself
in such sorrowful case, that my Lord out of hand not only forgave all his
Offenses, but also went directly unto the King for the obtaining of the King's
Favor; which he obtained very hardly, and upon condition, that the King might
hear no more of his meddling that way. This happened, I suppose, in the
Parliament that began in January, The Palace of Canterbury burnt.
and continued till March 29. 1544. The Archbishop's Palace at Canterbury was
this Year burnt, and therein his Brother-in-Law, and other Men, according to
Stow.

I find no Bishops Consecrated in this Year.

An. 1544.
At length the Confederacy of the Papists in the Privy Council (whereof I
suspect the Duke of Norfolk to be one, The Council accuse the ABp.
a great Friend of Winchester's, by whose Instigation this Design was set on
Foot) came and accused him most grievously unto the King; That he, with his
Learned Men, had so infected the whole Realm with their unsavory Doctrine,
that three parts of the Land were become abominable Heretics. And that it
might prove dangerous to the King, being like to produce such Commotions and
Uproars, as were sprung up in Germany. And therefore they desired, that the
Archbishop might be committed unto the Tower, until he might be examined. The
King was very strait in granting this. They told him, That the Archbishop
being one of the Privy Council, no Man dared to object Matter against him,
unless he were first committed to durance. Which being done, Men would be bold
to tell the Truth, and say their Consciences. Upon this P^rswasion of theirs,
the King granted unto them, that they should call him the next Day before them,
and, as they saw cause, so to commit him to the Tower.

The King sends privately for the ABp.
At Midnight, about Eleven of the Clock, before the Day he should appear before
the Council, the King sent Mr. Denny to my Lord at Lambeth, willing him
incontinently to come over to Westminster to him. The Archbishop was in Bed,
but rose straitway and repaired to the King, whom he found in the Gallery at
White Hall. Being come, the King declared unto him what he had done, in giving
Liberty to the Council to commit him to Prison: for that they bare him in hand,
that he and his learned Men had sown such Doctrine in the Realm, that all Men
almost were infected with Heresy; and that no Man durst bring Matter against
him, being at Liberty, and one of the Council. And therefore I have granted to
their Request, said the King; but whether I have done well or no, what say you,
my Lord? The Archbishop first humbly thanked the King, that it had pleased him
to give him that warning beforehand. And that he was very well content to be
committed to the Tower for the trial of his Doctrine, so that he might be
indifferently heard; as he doubted not but that his Majesty would see him so to
be used. Whereat the King cried out, O Lord God, what fond Simplicity have you,
so to permit your self to be imprisoned, that every Enemy of yours may take
Advantage against you? Do not you know, that when they have you once in Prison,
An. 1544.
three or four false Knaves will soon be procured to witness against you, and
condemn you; which else, now being at Liberty, dare not once open their Lips,
or appear before your Face? No, not so, my Lord, (said the King) I have better
regard unto you, than to permit your Enemies so to overthrow you. And therefore
I will have you to Morrow come to the Council, which no doubt will send for
you. And when they break this Matter unto you, require them, that being one of
them, you may have so much Favor, as they would have themselves; that is, to
have your Accusers brought before you. And if they stand with you, without
regard of your Allegations, and will in no Condition condescend unto your
Request, but will needs commit you to the Tower, then appeal you from them to
our Person, and give to them this my Ring; (which he then delivered unto the
Archbishop) by the which (said the King) they shall well understand, that I
have taken your Cause into my Hand from them. Which Ring they well know, that I
use it for no other Purpose, but to call Matters from the Council into mine own
Hands, to be ordered and determined. And with this good Advice Cranmer, after
most humble Thanks, departed from the King's Majesty.

The next Morning, according to the King's Monition, Comes before the Council.
and his own Expectation, the Council sent for him by Eight of the Clock in the
Morning. And when he came to the Council-Chamber-Door, he was not permitted to
enter into the Council Chamger, but stood without among Serving-men and
Lacquies above three quarters of an hour; many Counselors and others going in
and out. The Matter seemed strange unto his Secretary, who then attended upon
him; which made him slip away to Dr. Butts, to whom he related the manner of
the thing. Who by and by came, and kept my Lord Company. And yet e're he was
called into the Council, Dr. Butts went to the King, and told him, that he had
seen a strange Sight. What is that, said the King? Marry, said he, my Lord of
Canterbury is become a Lacquey, or a Serving-man: For to my knowledge, he has
stood among them this hour almost at the Council-Chamber-Door. Have they served
my Lord so? It is well enough, said the King, I shall talk with them by and by.
Anon Cranmer was called into the Council, there it was declared unto him, That
a great Complaint was made of him, both to the King and to them, That he, and
others by his Permission, had infected the whole Realm with Heresy: And
therefore it was the King's Pleasure that they should commit him to the Tower,
and there for his Trial, to be examined. Cranmer required, as is before
declared, with many, both Reasons and Persuasions, that he might have his
Accusers come there before them, before they used any further Extremity against
him. In fine, there was no Entreaty could serve, but that he must needs depart
to the Tower. I am sorry, my Lords, said Cranmer, that you drive me unto this
Exigent, to appeal from you to the King's Majesty; who by this Token has
resumed this Matter into his own Hand, and discharges you thereof. And so
delivered the King's Ring unto them. By and by the Lord Russel swore a great
Oath, and said, Did not I tell you, my Lords, what would come of this Matter? I
know, right well, that the King would never permit my Lord of Canterbury to
have such a Blemish, as to be imprisoned, unless it were for High Treason. And
so as the manner was, when they had once received that Ring, they left off
their Matter, and went all unto the King's Person, both with his Token, and the
Cause.

The King rebukes the Council for Cranmer.
When they came unto his Highness, the King said unto them; Ah, my Lords, I
thought that I had had a discreet and wise Council, but now I perceive that I
am deceived. How have you handled here my Lord of Canterbury? What make ye of
him? A Slave? Shutting him out of the Council Chamger among Servingmen. Would
ye be so handled your selves? And after such taunting words as these spoken,
the King added, I would you should well understand, that I account my Lord of
Canterbury as faithful a Man toward me, as ever was Prelate in this Realm, and
one to whom I am many ways beholden, by the Faith I owe unto God, and so laid
his Hand upon his Breast. And therefore who loves me, said he, will upon that
Account regard him. And with these words all, and especially my Lord of
Norfolk, answered and said, We meant no manner of Hurt unto my Lord of
Canterbury, that we requested to have him in Durance. Which we only did,
because he might, after his Trial, be set at Liberty to his greater Glory.
Well, said the King, I pray you use not my Friends so. I perceive now well
enough, how the World goes among you. There remains Malice among you one to
another; let it be avoided out of hand, I would advise you. And so the King
departed, and the Lords shook Hands every Man with the Archbishop. Against
whom never more after durst any Man spurn, during King Henry's Life. And
because the King would have Love always nourished between the Lords of the
Council and the Archbishop, he would send them diverse times to Dinner with
him. And so he did after this Reconciliation.

The King changes the ABp's Arms.
Thus did the King interpose himself diverse times between his Archbishop, and
his irreconcilable Enemies the Papists: and observing, by these Essays against
him, under what Perils he was like to come hereafter for his Religion, about
this Time it was, as I conjecture, that the King changed his Coat of Arms. For
unto the Year 1543, he bore his Paternal Coat, of Three Cranes Sable, as I find
by a Date set under his Arms, yet remaining in a Window in Lambeth-House. For
it is to be noted, That the King perceiving how much ado Cranmer would have in
the Defense of his Religion, altered the Three Cranes, which were parcel of his
Ancestors Arms, into Three Pelicans, declaring unto him, That those Birds
should signify unto him, that he ought to be ready, as the Pelican is, to shed
his Blood for his young Ones, brought up in the Faith of Christ. For, said the
King, you are like to be tasted, if you stand to your Tackling at length. As in
very deed many and sundry times he was shouldered at, both in this King's
Reign, as you have heard, and under the two succeding Princes.

CHAP. XXIX. Occasional Prayers and Suffrages.
OCcasional Prayers and Suffrages, to be used throughout all Churches, began
now to be more usual than formerly. For these common Devotions were twice this
Year appointed by Authority, as they had been once the last; which I look upon
the Archbishop to be the great Instrument in procuring: That he might by this
means, by little and little, bring into use Prayer in the English Tongue, which
he so much desired: and that the People, by understanding part of their
Prayers, might be the more desirous to have their whole Service rendered
intelligible; whereby God might be served with the more Seriousness and true
Devotion.

The last Year there was a plentiful Crop upon the Ground: Prayers to be made
against immoderate Rain.
But when the Time of Harvest drew near, there happened a great Plague of Rain.
So in August Letters were issued out from the King to the Archbishop, that he
should appoint cert^in Prayers to be used for the ceasing of the Wet-weather;
and to write to the rest of the Province to do the like. But hear the King's
Letter.

MOST Reverend Father in God, right Trusty, Cranm. Regist.
and right entirely Beloved, We greet you well. And forasmuch as there has
been now a late, and still continues, much Rain, and other unseasonable
Weather, whereby is like to ensue great Hurt and Damage to the Corn and Fruits
now ripe upon the Ground, unless it shall please God, of his infinite Goodness,
to stretch forth his holy Hand over us: Considering, by sundry Examples
heretofore, that God at the Contemplation of earnest and devout Prayers,
oftentimes extended his Mercy and Grace; and has also assuredly promised, that
whenever we call upon him for Things meet for us, he will grant unto us the
same: We, having the Governance and Charge of his People committed unto Us,
have thought good to cause the same to be exhorted by You, and other the
Prelates of this our Realm, with an earnest repentant Heart for their
Iniquities, to call unto God for Mercy; and with devout and humble Prayer and
Supplication, every Person, both by himself apart, and also by Common Prayer,
to beseech him to send unto us such seasonable and temperate Weather, to have
in those Fruits, and Corn on the Ground, which hitherto he has caused so
plenteously to grow.

For the which purpose we require you, and nevertheless command you, to send
unto all your Brethren, the Bishops within your Province, to cause such general
Rogations and Processions to be made incontinently within their Diocesses, as
in case like heretofore has been accustomed in this behalf accordingly.

Yevon under our Signet, at our Manor of the Moor, the 20 th Day of August, the
XXXV Year of our Reign.

The Archbishop accordingly sent his Order, dated August 23. 1543. to Edmond
Bishop of London, that there might be Prayers and Supplications in his Diocese
every Fourth and Sixth Days of the Week. And the like Order was dispatched to
all the other Bishops in his Province; By their Prayers, as was accustomed, to
implore God's Mercy to avert his Wrath, that the People had justly deserved.
And not to cease their Prayers and Suffrages till further Order from him.

English Suffrages commanded to be used.
It is not so evident, that these Prayers were in the English Tongue. But in the
Year following, viz. 1544. there were, without Controversy, certain Suffrages
drawn up in our Mother Tongue by the Archbishop's means; which he intended to
be universally observed every where. Upon the Archbishop's pious Motions, as
it seems, the King issued out his Letters to him, dated in June, for the
publication of these Prayers in English, to be from thenceforth continually
used in the Church; together with setting forth the King's Injunctions, by
Preaching and good Exhortation, that the People, who before did but slackly
observe their Devotions, for want of understanding the Divine Service, might
henceforth more frequently and more fervently resort to religious Worship.

I shall not here set down the King's Letter, as I transcribed it out of
Archbishop Cranmer's Register, The Contents of the King's Letter to that
intent. Cranm. Regist. Fol. 48.
because Bishop Burnet has printed it already in his first Volume, among the
Collections, page 264. It runs in such a pious strain, as tho none but the
Archbishop had been the Suggestor thereof. That since at that time Christendom
was plagued with Wars, Hatred and Dissensions, and in no Place was Peace and
Agreement: and since it was out of the Power of Man to redress these Miseries,
God alone being able to restore Peace, and unite Men's Hearts; Therefore the
King was resolved to have general Processions used in all Churches, with all
Reverence and Devotion of the People. And because the not understanding the
Prayers and Suffrages formerly used, caused that the People came but slackly to
the Processions; therefore the King now had published certain Prayers in our
Native Tongue. Which he, with his present Letter, had sent to the Archbishop,
for the special Trust and Confidence he had of his Godly Mind, and the earnest
desire that was in him for the setting forth of God's Glory, and the true
worshipping of his Name. And that these Prayers should not be observed for a
Month or two, as his other Injunctions had been, but that they, together with
the Injunctions, should be earnestly set forth by Preaching, good Exhortation,
and otherwise; in such sort as they might feel the Godly Taste thereof, and
godly and joyously with Thanks receive, embrace, and frequent the same.
Commanding the Archbishop, that he should not only cause the same Suffrages to
be used in his own Diocese, but signify the King's Pleasure in this regard to
all other Bishops of his Province. And that he should have a special respect
hereunto; and make report, if any did not with good dexterity accomplish the
same. It was given under the King's Signet, at his Manor of S. James's, June
11. in the 36 th of his Reign. I have not met with these Suffrages; which if I
had, I should have been inclined to publish them here; and the rather, because
I believe they were of Cranmer's own composing.

According to this Letter, the Archbishop dispersed his Letters to Edmund
Bishop of London, and the other Bishops, with a Copy of the Suffrages to be
used: urging withal, the observation of all the King's Injunctions heretofore
promulgated, for the confirming and establishing of Sacred Religion.

About August this Year, A Procession for the King's Expedition.
the King was upon going himself in Person to invade France, against which
Nation he was now in Hostility; and had prepared a mighty Army by Land and Sea
for that purpose. Now the Archbishop was again called upon by the
Privy-Counsellors, to appoint Processions in the English Tongue through the
Realm, for the King's good Success in this great Expedition. The Councils
Letter ran in this Tenor.

AFTER our right-hearty Commendations to your good Lordship: These shall be to
signify to the same, The Councils Letter to the ABp.

Reg. Cranm.


That the King's Highness having so provided for the Safety of his Grace's
Realm, as the great Malice of his Enemies shall, by the Grace of God, take
small effect: For the repulsing of which, his Highness has in a readiness to
set abroad, at the furthest on Wednesday next, such a puissant Navy, as has
not been seen assembled in the remembrance of Man: Considering nevertheless,
that all Victories and good Successes come only at the Direction and
Appointment of God, following herein that Trade of such a Christian Prince, as
he is, has devised to have Processions throughout the Realm, in such sort as
in like Cases has heretofore laudably been accustomed. Requiring your Lordship
therefore, to take Order incontinently, that from henceforth, through your
Province, the said Processions be kept continually upon the accustomed Days,
and none otherwise; and sung or said, as the number of the Quoire shall serve
for the same, in the English Tongue; to the intent, that there may be an
Uniformity in every Place. Whereby it may please God at all times to prosper
his Majesty in all his Affairs: And the rather, to have regard at this time
unto the Uprightness of his Grace's Quarrel, and to send his Highness
victorious Success of the same. And thus we bid your Lordship most heartily
well to fare. From Petworth, the 10 th Day of August.

Your Lordship's assured loving Friends, W. Essex, St. Wynton, Ant. Brown.
Will. Paget.


The Copy of this Letter the Archbishop dispatched to the Bishop of London;
and in a Letter of his own, he first stirred him up to take care of making due
Provisions for the religious Performance of these Prayers in his Diocese, upon
consideration of the King's great Wars by Land and Sea, and his Wars in France,
in Scotland, and in the Parts about Bulloign. Then he enjoined him, and all the
Bishops in his Province, every Fourth and Sixth Day, to retire to Prayer and
Supplication to God; and that the People should, as he wrote, Concinna
modulatione and una voce cunctipotentem Deum Sabbath, omnis Victoriae
largitorem unicum, sancte and pie, non labiis sed cord puro adorent: In
becoming Harmony, and with one Voice, holily and piously, not with the Lips,
but with a pure Heart, adore the Almighty God of Sabbath, the only giver of all
Victory.

Popery prevails.
And in these smaller Matters our Archbishop was fain now to be contented to
busy himself, since about this Juncture Winton or his Party had the Ascendent,
and did all at Court. Concerning these latter Times of King Henry, when the
Popish Bishops carried all before them again; and the Acts of Parliament that
were made, whereby the Bishops were empowred to call Sessions as often as they
would, to try those that gave not due Obedience to the Superstitions of the
Church, Image of both Churches.
and that upon pain of Treason: Thus John Bale complains, whose Words may give
us some light into the sad Condition of these Times. Still remains there
Soul-Masses, of all Abominations the principal; their prodigious Sacrifices,
their Censings of Idols, their boyish Processions, their uncommanded
Worshippings, and their Confessions in the Ear, of all Traitery the Fountain;
with many other strange Observations, which the Scripture of God knows not.
Nothing is brought as yet to Christ's clear Institution, and sincere Ordinance,
but all remains still as the Antichrists left it. Nothing is tried by God's
Word, but by the ancient Authority of Fathers. Now passes all under their
Title. Though the old Bishops of Rome were of late Years proved Antichrists,
and their Names razed out of our Books; yet must they thus properly, for old
Acquaintance, be called still Our Fathers. If it were naught before, I think it
is now much worse; for now are they become laudable Ceremonies, whereas
before-time they were but Ceremonies alone. Now are they become necessary
Rites, godly Constitutions, seemly Vsages, and civil Ordinances, whereas before
they had no such Names. And he that disobeyeth them, shall not only be judged a
Felon, and worthy to be hanged, by their new-forged Laws, but also condemned
for a Traitor against the King, though he never in his Life hindered, but rather
to his Power has forwarded the Commonwealth. To put this with suchlike in
Execution, the Bishops have Authority, every Month in the Year if they list, to
call a Session, to Hang and Burn at their pleasure. And this is ratified and
confirmed by Act of Parliament, to stand the more in Effect.

Gardener Bishop of Winchester, had by his Policy and Interest, brought things
thus backward again, Gardener and the Bishops now carry all.
and exalted the Power of the Bishops, that of late Years had been much
eclipsed. And so he plainly told one Seton, a Man of Eminency in these Times,
both for Piety and Learning in London; who met with Troubles there, about the
Year 1541, for a Sermon preached at S. Anthonies, against Justification by
Works. This Seton being now it seems fallen into new Troubles, and brought
before the aforesaid Bishop; when he was able no longer to withstand the
manifest Truth, said to him, Mr. Seton, we know ye are Learned, and plenteously
endued with Knowledge in the Scriptures, yet think not that ye shall overcome
us. No, no, set your Heart at rest, and look never to have it said, that ye
have overcome the Bishops. For it shall not be so.

Robert Holgate Bishop of Landaff, Bp of Landaff removed to York.
was this Year preferred to the Sea of York. His Confirmation is mentioned in
the Archbishop of Canterbury's Register: Wherein is set down an Oath which he
then took, of Renunciation of the Pope, and Acknowledgment of the King's
Supremacy, very full and large. Afterward I find the same Oath administered to
Kitchen Elect of Landaff, and Ridley Elect of Rochester, and Farrar of S.
David's. But I think it not unworthy to be here set down as I find it, seeming
to be a new Form drawn up, to be henceforth taken by all Bishops. And this
Archbishop of York the first that took it.

I Robert Archbishop of York Elect, The ABp's Oath. Cranm. Regist.
having now the Vail of Darkness of the Usurped Power, Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, clearly taken away from mine Eyes,
do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that neither the Sea, nor the
Bishop of Rome, nor any Foreign Potestate has, nor ought to have, any
Jurisdiction, Power or Authority within this Realm, neither by God's Law, nor
by any just Law or Means. And though by Sufferance and Abusions in Time past,
they aforesaid have usurped and vindicated a feigned and unlawful Power and
Jurisdiction within this Realm, which has been supported till few Years past;
Therefore because it might be deemed, and thought thereby, that I took or take
it for Just and Good, I therefore do now clearly and frankly renounce, forsake,
refuse and relinquish that pretended Authority, Power and Jurisdiction, both of
the Sea and Bishop of Rome, and of all other Foreign Powers: And that I shall
never consent or agree, that the foresaid See or Bp of Rome, or any of their
Successors, shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of Authority,
Jurisdiction or Power within this Realm, or any other the King's Realms or
Dominions; nor any Foreign Potestate, of what State, Degree, or Condition he
be; but that I shall resist the same to the uttermost of my Power; and that I
shall bear Faith, Troth, and true Allegiance to the King's Majesty, and to his
Heirs and Successors declared, or hereafter to be declared, by the Authority of
the Act, made in the Sessions of his Parliament holden at Westminster, the 14
th day of January, in the 35 th Year, and in the Act made in the 28 th Year of
the King's Majesty's Reign. And that I shall accept, repute, and take the
King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, when they, or any of them shall enjoy
his Place, to be the only Supreme Head in Earth, under God, of the Church of
England and Ireland, and all other his Highness Dominions. And that with my
Body, Cunning, Wit, and uttermost of my Power, without Guile, Fraud, or other
undue Means, I shall observe, keep, maintain and defend all the King's
Majesty's Styles, Titles and Rights, with the whole Effects and Contents of the
Acts provided for the same, and all other Acts and Statutes made and to be made
within the Realm, in and for that purpose, and the Derogation, Extirpation and
Extinguishment of the usurped and pretended Authority, Power and Jurisdiction
of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, and all other Foreign Potestates as before. And
also as well his Statute made in the said 28 th Year, as his Statute made in
the Parliament holden in the 35 th Year of the King's Majesty's Reign, for
Establishment and Declaration of his Highness Succession, and all Acts and
Statutes made and to be made in Confirmation and Corroboration of the King's
Majesty's Power and Supremacy in Earth, of his Church of England and of
Ireland, and all other his Grace's Dominions. I shall also defend and maintain,
with my Body and Goods, with all my Wit and Power. And thus I shall do against
all manner of Persons, of what State, Dignity, Degree or Condition soever they
be; and in no wise do nor attempt, nor to my Power suffer, or know to be done
or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things privily or apertly,
to the let, hindrance, damage or derogation of any of the said Statutes, or any
part thereof, by any manner of Means, or for or by any manner of Pretense. And
in case any Oath has been made by me to any Person or Persons, in Maintenance,
Defense or Favor of the Bishop of Rome, or his Authority, Jurisdiction or
Power, or against any the Statutes aforesaid, I repute the same as vain and
adnichilate. I shall wholly observe and keep this Oath. So help me God, and all
Saints, and the Holy Evangeles.

And then after this Oath, followed the Prayers before the Benediction of the
Pall, and the Ceremonies of delivering it.

CHAP. XXX. The Archbishop Reformeth the Canon Law.
An. 1545.
OUR Archbishop seeing the great Evil and Inconvenience of Canons and Papal
Laws which were still in Force, The ABp sets upon reforming the Canon Law.
and studied much in the Kingdom, had in his Mind now a good while to get them
suppressed, or to reduce them into a narrower Compass, and to cull out of them
a set of just and wholesome Laws, that should serve for the Government of the
Ecclesiastical State. And indeed there was great need of some Reformation of
these Laws: For most of them extolled the Pope unmeasurably, and made his Power
to be above that of Emperors and Kings. Some of them were, That he that
acknowledged not himself to be under the Bishop of Rome, and that the Pope is
ordained of God to have the Primacy over the World, is an Heretic. That
Princes Laws, if they be against the Canons and Decrees of the Bishop of Rome,
be of no Force. That all the Decrees of the Bishop of Rome ought to be kept
perpetually, as God's Word spoken by the Mouth of Peter. That all Kings,
Bishops and Noblemen, that believe or suffer the Bishop of Rome's Decrees in
any thing to be violated, are accursed. That the Sea of Rome has neither Spot
nor Wrinkle. And abundance of the like, which the Archbishop himself drew out
of the Canon Laws, Part I. among the Collections, p. 257.
and are set down by the Bishop of Sarum in his History.

Therefore by the Archbishop's Motion and Advice, the King had an Act past the
last Year, viz. 1544. An. 1545.
That his Majesty should have Authority, during his Life, to name thirty two
Persons; An Act concerning it.
that is to say, sixteen Spiritual, and sixteen Temporal, to examine all
Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal, and to draw up
such Laws Ecclesiastical, as should be thought by the King and them convenient
to be used in all Spiritual Courts. According to this Act, tho it seems this
Nomination happened some time before the making of the same, the King nominated
several Persons to study, and prepare a Scheme of good Laws for the Church. Who
brought their Business to a Conclusion, and so it rested for a time. The
Archbishop being now to go down into Kent, to meet some Commissioners at
Sittingborn, went to Hampton Court to take his leave of the King. There he put
him in mind of these Ecclesiastical Laws, and urged him to ratify them. So the
King bad him dispatch to him the Names of the Persons, (which had been chiefly
left to Cranmer's Election) and the Book they had made. This care he, going out
of Town, left with Heth Bishop of Rochester.

So that these Laws, by the great Pains of the Archbishop, The Progress made
by the ABp in this Work.
and some Learned Men about him, were brought to that good Perfection, that
they wanted nothing but the Confirmation of the King. And there was a Letter
drawn up ready for that purpose for the King to sign. It was directed to all
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Clerks, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons,
Knights and Gentlemen, and all others of whatsoever Degree, his Subjects and
Liege-men: Giving them to understand, That in the room of the corrupt Laws,
Decrees and Statutes that proceeded from the Bishops of Rome, which were all
abolished, he had put forth by his Authority another Set of Ecclesiastical
Laws, which he required to be observed, under pain of his Indignation. No.
XXXIV.
The Copy of this Letter may be read in the Appendix. But whatsoever the Matter
was, whether it were the King's other Business, or the secret Oppositions of
Bishop Gardener, and the Papists, this Letter was not signed by the King.

I have seen the Digest of these Ecclesiastical Laws in a Manuscript in Folio,
fairly written out by the Archbishop's Secretary, The MSS. of these Laws.
Inter Fox. MSS.
with the Title to each Chapter prefixed, and the Index of the Chapters at the
beginning, both of the Archbishop's own Hand. In many places there be his own
Corrections and Additions, and sometimes a Cross by him struck through diverse
Lines. And so he proceeded a good way in the Book. And where the Archbishop
left off, Peter Martyr went on, by his Order, to revise the rest in the Method
he had begun. And in the Title, De Praescriptionibus, the greatest part of the
seventh Chapter is Martyr's own writing, viz. beginning at this word Rumpitur,
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast. Land. 1640.
which is in Page 248. of the printed Book, Lin. 23. and so to the end of the
Chapter. So that this Manuscript I conjecture was the first Draught of these
Laws, prepared in the Reign of King Henry, and revised in the Reign of King
Edward his Successor, when P. Martyr was appointed by that King's Letters to be
one of those that were to be employed in this Work; who was much at this Time
with the Archbishop. In this Draught were several Chapters afterward added,
partly by Cranmer, and partly by Martyr. There was yet a latter, and more
perfect Draught of these Laws, as they were completed and finished in King
Edward's Reign. This Draught fell into the Possession of Archbishop Parker.
From whence he published the Book in the Year 1571, intituling it, Reformatio
Legum Ecclesiasticarum, etc. Which was printed again in the Year 1640. Both
these Manuscript Draughts were diligently compared together by John Fox; and
the main Difference seemed to consist, in putting the latter into a new Method,
and placing the Titles differently.

The ABp labors in this Work under K. Edward.
For in this Matter Cranmer was much busied in King Edward's Reign also, being
greatly desirous to bring that good Work to perfection. For he thought it
greatly inconvenient, when the Pope's Power was abrogated, that his Laws should
remain in Force; holding it highly necessary, that the Nation might have a Body
of wholesome Laws, for the good Administration of Justice in the Spiritual
Courts. Wherefore he procured in the fifth Year of that King, Letters
Commissional to him, and seven more, diligently to set about the perusal of the
old Church-Laws; and then to compile such a Body of Laws, as should seem, in
their Judgments, most expedient to be practiced in the Ecclesiastical Courts
and Jurisdictions: These seven were, Thomas Goodrick Bishop of Ely, Richard Cox
the King's Almoner, Peter Martyr, William May, Rowland Taylour, John Lucas and
Richard Goodrick. But the Matter was in effect wholly entrusted by the King to
the Archbishop, who associated to himself in the active part of this Work,
Taylour, Martyr and Haddon. The Method they observed in managing this Affair,
was, that after they had finished a Title, and drawn it up, it was then sent to
Dr. Haddon, who was a Civilian, and an accurate Latinist, to peruse: And if any
thing was less elegantly expressed, to correct it. So I find at the Title De
Decimis, these words writ by Cranmer; This is finished by us, but must be
over-seen again by Dr. Haddon. Thus for instance, I observe these Corrections
by Haddon's Pen, in the Chapter entitled, De Commodis quae perveniunt a Sacris
ritibus; instead of Gratiarum actionis mulierum a partu, he corrected it,
Levatarum puerperarum: And in another place, Cuicunque hoc Praerogativum est,
instead of hoc Praerogativum, he put, Hoc peculiare jus tribuitur, quod
Praerogativum vocant. But his Corrections are very few, and but of words less
proper: The Work and Words were mainly Cranmer's own. But all this great and
long Labor of the Archbishop came to no effect, by reason of the King's
untimely Death, and it may be, the secret opposition of Papists.

The ABp employed in mending Books of Service.
At the same time that he being at Hampton Court, dealt with the King concerning
the Reformation of the Canon-Laws, he also gave him an Account of a Business
his Majesty had employed him in, and with him also Heth and Day Bps of
Worcester and Chichester, and some other of his Chaplains, and Learned Men;
whom he had of late appointed with the Archbishop to peruse certain Books of
Service, delivered by the King to them, wherein there were many Superstitions
fit to be amended. Which the Archbishop, in the Name of the rest, at this time
acquainted the King with: As namely, the Vigil, and ringing of Bells all the
Night long upon Alhallow-Night; and the covering of Images in the Church in the
time of Lent, with the lifting the Vail that covers the Cross on Palm Sunday,
and kneeling to the Cross at the same time. He moved the King in his own Name,
and the Name of the rest, that these things might be abolished, and the
Superstitions, and other Enormities and Abuses of the same. And that because
all other Vigils, which in the beginning of the Church were godly used; yet for
the manifold Superstitions and Abuses, which did after grow by means of the
same, were many Years past taken away throughout Christendom, and there
remained nothing, but the Name of the Vigil in the Calendar, saving only upon
Alhallow-Day at Night, he moved that it might be observed no more. And because
creeping to the Cross was a greater Abuse than any of the other, (for there the
People said, Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine: And the Ordinal says, Procedant
Clerici ad Crucem adorandum nudis pedibus: and it follows in the said
Ordinal, Ponatur Crux ante aliquod Altar, ubi a Populo adoretur: Which by the
Bishop's Book, entitled, A necessary Instruction, is against the second
Commandment) therefore he desired of the King, that the creeping to the Cross
might also cease hereafter.

These superstitious Usages were allowed in the Articles of Religion, put forth
Anno 1536. The King consults with the ABp for the Redress of certain
Superstions.
Cranmer then not having Interest enough to procure the laying them aside, or
thinking it then not a fitting season to attempt it, as being in vain to oppose
what the King himself at that time approved of. But now the King listened to the
Archbishop, and bad him confer with the Bishop of Worcester, and send to him
their Thoughts, what course they would advise him to take for Redress. The
Archbishop accordingly consulted with the said Bishop, who then went along
with Cranmer in the Reformation. The Effect of which was, as the Archbishop
wrote to the King soon after from Bekesbourn, That his Majesty should send his
Letters to both the Archbishops to reform these Superstitions; and they to
send in the King's Name to all the Prelates within their respective Provinces
to the same purpose. The Archbishop withal sent to the King the Minutes of a
Letter to be sent to him, the said Archbishop, to that intent. He also advised
the King, that at the same time that this Alteration was commanded to be made,
he should set forth some Doctrine which should declare the Cause of the
abolishing these Usages, for the Satisfaction of the Consciences of the People.
For he knew well, as he wrote, that the People would think the Honor of Christ
was taken away, when this honoring of the Cross was taken away: And therefore
that they should need some good Instruction herein. He nominated the Bishops of
Worcester and Chichester, and some other his Graces Chaplains for the preparing
this: And this, he said, would make the People obey him without murmuring; nay,
be thankful to him for showing them the Truth: And it would be a Satisfaction
to other Nations, when they should see the King do nothing but by the Authority
of God's Word, and for the setting forth of God's Honor, Hist. Ref. Vol. II.
Collect. p. 236.
and not the diminishing thereof. This Letter of the Archbishop to the King is
extant in the Paper-Office, whence the Bishop of Sarum extracted a Copy.

These things were agitated in the Bishop of VVinchester's Absence, whom the
King had sent Ambassador this Year with the Bishop of Westminster to Charles
the Emperor, about the Mediation of a Peace between England and France. The
opportunity of Winchester's Absence taken.
The Archbishop took this occasion to move the King in these good Purposes for
a further Reformation of Abuses in Religion; toward the which the King
appeared to be in so good a Mind, Winchester being absent, who, if he had been
at Home, would undoubtedly have done his Endeavor to put a Check to these
Attempts. But it must be attributed to his being Abroad, that the King gave an
Ear to the Archbishop, and appointed a Set of more moderate Bishops and Divines
to prepare Matter for his Allowance and Ratification. But Winchester, tho at a
distance, had Information of these Designs by his Intelligencers; and by making
the King believe, that if he suffered any Innovations in Religion to proceed,
the Emperor would withdraw his Mediation for a League: by these crafty Means of
this Man, these good Motions proceeded no further.

The ABp prevails with the King in two great Points.
So that there were two Abuses in Religion, which our Archbishop by Time and
seasonable Inculcation, brought the King off from. He had a very great Esteem
for Images in Churches, and for the Worship used to the Cross. And many
Disputations and Discourses happened between the King and the Archbishop
concerning them. Once at the King's Palace at Newhal in Essex, Canterbury and
Winchester being alone with the King, a Talk happened about Images, and the
Arguments that were used for abolishing them were considered. The Archbishop,
who built all his Arguments upon the Word of God, produced the second
Commandment, and thence he raised his Argument. But the King discussed it as a
Commandment relating only to the Jews, and not to us; as Winchester relates in
one of his Letters to the Duke of Somerset; adding, (because the reasoning was
so much to his own Mind) That the King so discussed it, that all the Clerks in
Christendom could not amend it. And when at another time, one had used
Arguments against the Image of the Trinity, whether Cranmer, or some else I
know not, Winchester heard the King answer them too: So possessed was the King
once with an Opinion of retaining them; and yet at length, by the Archbishop's
wise and moderate Carriage and Speeches, the King was brought to another
Opinion, and to give his Orders for the abolishing of a great many of them;
namely of such as had been abused. But when he had done this, he would not
forgo the other, but commanded Kneeling and Creeping to the Cross. And gross
was the Superstition that was committed in this blind Devotion; which the King,
by the Archbishop's means being at length sensible of, was prevailed with,
that this also should no more be used, as you heard before.

There was one thing more this careful Archbishop recommended to the King this
Year. Seeks to redress Alienation of the Revenues of the Cathedral.
He was troubled for his Cathedral Church of Canterbury, observing how the
Revenues of it were diminished, and made away daily by the Prebendaries
thereof, to satisfy the insatiable Greediness of the Laity, and it may be their
own too. And the Courtiers and others were hard to be withstood, when they were
minded to rake from the Church. The Practice was, that when any were minded to
get a Portion of Land from the Church, they would first engage the King
therein, and so the Church was to make it over to him. An^ then by Gift, or for
some trifling Consideration, as a Sale, it was conveyed to them from the King.
Nay, sometimes they would use the King's Name, without his knowledge.

Cranmer had the Honesty and the Courage to make Complaint of this Abuse and
Injury done to the Revenues of the Cathedral. That those of the Church, to
their Disquietment, and also great Charges, did alienate their Lands daily, as
it was said, by the King's Commandment: But he was sure, he said, that others
had gotten the best Lands, and not his Majesty. Therefore he sued, that when
his Majesty was minded to have any of their Lands, that they might have some
Letters from him to declare his Pleasure, without the which they were sworn to
make no Alienation: and that the same Alienations might not be made at other
Men's Pleasures, but only to his Majesty's Use. By which Means it is likely, the
Prebendaries had more quiet Possession of their Lands for the time to come.

By this Time the Archbishop had compassed two very good Things, Scripture and
Sermons more common by the ABp's means.
in order to the furthering the Common People in Knowledge and True Religion.
The one was, that he brought in among the Laity a more common use of the
Scriptures; and the other, that Sermons were more frequently preached than had
been before. But both these, to the Grief of the Archbishop, were sadly
abused: For now the Contending of Preachers in their Pulpits, one against
another, grew more and more, and became most scandalous. So that few preached
the Word of God truly and sincerely, but ran almost wholly upon Matters
controverted; and in that railing manner, that their Expressions were very
provoking. So that this came to the sowing of Discord among the People, instead
of promoting Love, Unity, and solid Religion. The Laity on the other hand, some
of them railed much on the Bishops, and spoke contemptibly of the Priests, and
taunted the Preachers. The Scriptures were much read, but the Effect of it
appeared too much in their making use of it only for Jangling and Disputation
upon Points of Religion, and to taunt at the Ignorance or Error of Priests.
Others on the other hand, to be even with the Gospellers, made it their
Business to derogate from the Scripture, to deal with it irreverently, and to
rhyme and sing, and make sport with it in Alehouses and Taverns. These things
came to King Henry's Ears, Vid. Herb. Hist. P. 600.
which made him very earnestly blame both the Laity and Spirituality for it, in
a Speech which he made at the Dissolution of his Parliament this Year.

A Bishop Confirmed.
Anthony Kitchen, alias Dunstan, D.D. Anth. Kitchen.
was Elected and Confirmed Bishop of Landaff, May 2. The ABp sent his
Commissional Letters, dated the same Day, to Thomas Bishop of Westminster for
his Consecration: But the Consecration is not entered in the Register. His Oath
to the King began thus: I Anthony Kitchen, Elect Bishop of Landaff, having now
the Vale of Darkness of the Usurped Power, Authority and Jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, clearly taken away from mine Eyes, do utterly testify
and declare in my Heart, that neither the Sea, nor the Bishop of Rome, nor any
Foreign Potestate has, or ought to have, etc. as before.

An. 1546.
Another Proclamation was set out the next Year, (which was the last issued out
under this King) prohibiting again Tindal's and Coverdale's English New
Testament, A Proclamation against the English Testament.
or any other than what was permitted by Parliament; and also the English Books
of Wickliff, Frith, etc. the King being vexed with the Contests and Clamours of
the People one against another, while they disputed so much of what they read,
and practiced so little.

He interprets a Statute of his Church.
A small matter oftentimes creates great Brablings and Contentions in
Fraternities. Such a small thing now occurred in the Archbishop's Church. Two
of the Prebends were minded to change Houses; but the rest it seems made some
Opposition, as reckoning it contrary to a certain Statute of that Church. The
Archbishop hearing hereof, seasonably interposed, and interpreted their
Statute for them. The Preachers also of this Church, seem not to have been
fairly dealt with by the Prebends, both as to their Lodgings and Benefits. But
at a late Chapter they had obtained an Order in their behalf. This the
Archbishop now, who favored Preaching, reminded them speedily to make good.
Concerning both these Affairs, he wrote this Letter to them, for the preserving
Quietness, Peace and good Order in his Church.

Ex Regist. Eccles. Christ. Cant.
AFter my hearty Commendations: Whereas I am informed, that you be in doubt
whether any Prebendary of that my Church, may exchange his House or Garden with
another Prebend of the same Church-Living, and that you be moved by this
Statute so to think, which here follows; Statuimus ut Canonicus de novo
Electus, and demissus in demortui, aut resignantis, aut quovismodo cedentis
aedes succedat. These be to signify unto you, that neither this Statute, nor
any other Reason that I know, makes any thing against the Exchange between two
Prebends Living, but that they may change House, Orchard or Garden during their
Life, this Statute or any other Reason contrary notwithstanding. And whereas
you have appointed your Preachers at your last Chapter, their Chambers and
Commodities, I require you that they may be indelayedly admitted thereunto,
according to that your Order. Thus fare you well. From my Manor of Croyden,
the 12 th of December, 1546.

Th. Cantuariens.
To my loving Friends, the Vice-dean and Prebendaries of my Church in
Canterbury.

This was the last Year of King Henry. And the two last things the Archbishop
was concerned in by the King, were these. The King commanded him to pen a Form,
The ABp by the King's Command pens a Form for a Communion.
for the Alteration of the Mass into a Communion. For a Peace being concluded
between Henry and the French King, while that King's Ambassador, Dr. Annebault
was here, a notable Treaty was in hand by both Kings, for the promoting that
good Piece of Reformation in the Churches of both Kingdoms, of abolishing the
Mass. The Kings seemed to be firmly resolved thereon, intending to exhort the
Emperor to do the same. The Work our King committed to the Archbishop, who no
question undertook it very gladly. But the Death of the King prevented this
taking Effect.

The last Office the Archbishop did for the King his Master, His last Office
to the King.
was to visit him in his last Sickness, whom of all his Bishops and Chaplains
he chose to have with him at that needful Hour, to receive his last Comfort and
Counsel. But the King was void of Speech when he came, though not of Sense and
Apprehension. For when the King took him by the Hand, the Archbishop speaking
comfortably to him, desired him to give him some Token, that he put his Trust
in God through Jesus Christ, according as he had advised him; and thereat the
King presently wrung hard the Archbishop's Hand, and soon after departed, viz.
January the 28 th.

The End of the First Book.
MEMORIALS OF Archbishop CRANMER. BOOK II.
CHAPTER I. He Crowns King Edward.
OUR Archbishop having lost his old Master, Conceives great Hopes of K. Edward.
was not so sorrowful, but the Hopefulness of the new One did as much revive
and solace him; because he concluded, that the Matters requisite for the
Reformation of the Church, were like now to go on more roundly, and with less
Impediment.

One of the very first Things that was done in young King Edward the Sixth's
Reign, in relation to the Church, was, that the Bishops, The ABp takes a
Commission to execute his Office.
who had the Care of Ecclesiastical Matters, and the Souls of Men, should be
made to depend entirely upon the King and his Council, and to be subject to
suspension from their Office, and to have their whole Episcopal Power taken
from them at his Pleasure, which might serve as a Bridle in case they should
oppose the Proceedings of a Reformation. In this I suppose the Archbishop had
his Hand: For it was his Judgment, that the Exercise of all Episcopal
Jurisdiction depended upon the Prince: And that as he gave it, so he might
restrain it at his Pleasure. And therefore he began this Matter with himself,
Petitioning, That as he had exercised the Authority of an Archbishop during
the Reign of the former King; so that Authority ending with his Life, it would
please the present King Edward, to commit unto him that Power again. For it
seemed, that he would not act as Archbishop, till he had a new Commission from
the new King for so doing. And that this was his Judgment, appeared in the
first words of that Commission granted to him; In the composing of which I make
no question he had his Hand. Quandoquidem omnis juris dicendi autoritas, Cranm.
Regist.
atque etiam jurisdictio omnimoda, tam illa quae Ecclesiastica dicitur, quam
Secularis, a Regia potestate, velut a supremo capite, ac omnium Magistratuum
infra Regnum nostrum font and scaturigine, primitus emanaverit, etc. That is,
Since all Authority of exercising Jurisdiction, and also all kind of
Jurisdiction, as well that which is called Ecclesiastical, as Secular,
originally has flowed from the King's Power, as from the Supreme Head, and the
Fountain and Source of all Magistracy within our Kingdom: We therefore in this
part yielding to your humble Supplications, and consulting for the Good of our
Subjects, have determined to commit our Place to you, under the Manner and Form
hereunder described. And the King then licenseth him to ordain within his
Diocese, and to promote and present to Ecclesiastical Benefices; and to
institute and invest; and if occasion required, to deprive; to prove
Testaments, and the rest of the Business of his Courts. And so all the rest of
his Offices were reckoned. This was dated Feb. 7. 1546. But yet all these
things were committed to him, with a Power of Revocation of the Exercise of
this Authority reserved in the King, and durante beneplacito. Thus a formal
Commission was made to him; I do not transcribe it, Hist. Re^. P. II. Coll. p.
90.
because the Bishop of Sarum has saved me that Pains. And hence I find, that
the Archbishop in some of his Writings is styled, The Commissary of our dread
Sovereign Lord King Edward.

K. Edward crowned by the ABp.
One of the first Exercises of his Episcopal Power, was the Coronation of young
King Edward. Which was celebrated February the 20 th, at the Abbey of
Westminster, the Archbishop assisting now at his Coronation, as he had done
about nine Years before at his Christening, C.C.C.C. Library. Miscellan. B.
when he stood his Godfather. The Form and Solemnity of it, and wherein the
Archbishop bore so great a part, was in this manner, as I collect and
transcribe out of a Manuscript in Benet College.

The manner of the Coronation.
First, There was a goodly Stage richly hanged with Cloth of Gold and Cloth of
Arras; and the Steps from the Choire contained two and twenty Steps of height;
and down to the high Altar but fifteen Steps, goodly carpetted, where the
King's Grace should tread with his Nobles.

Secondly, The high Altar richly garnished with diverse and costly Jewels and
Ornaments of much Estimation and Value. And also the Tombs on each side the
high Altar, richly hanged with fine Gold Arras.

Thirdly, In the midst of the Stage was a goodly thing made of seven steps of
height, all round, where the King's Majesty's Chair Royal stood; and he sat
therein, after he was crowned, all the Mass-while.

Fourthly, At nine of the Clock all Westminster Choire was in their Copes, and
three goodly Crosses before them: and after them other three goodly rich
Crosses, and the King's Chapel with his Children, following all in Scarlet,
with Surplices and Copes on their Backs. And after them ten Bishops in Scarlet
with their Rochets, and rich Copes on their Backs, and their Mitres on their
Heads, did set forth at the West Door of Westminster toward the King's Palace,
there to receive his Grace; and my Lord of Canterbury with his Cross before him
alone, and his Mitre on his Head. And so past forth in order, as before is
said. And within a certain space after were certain blew Cloths laid abroad in
the Church-floor against the King's coming, and so all the Palace, even to York
place.

Then is described the setting forward to Westminster Church to his Coronation,
Unction and Confirmation.

After all the Lords in order had kneeled down and kissed his Grace's right
Foot, and after held their Hands between his Grace's Hands, and kissed his
Grace's left Cheek, and so did their Homage; Then began a Mass of the Holy
Ghost by my Lord of Canterbury, with good singing in the Choire, and Organs
playing. There at Offering time his Grace offered to the Altar a Pound of Gold,
a Loaf of Bread, and a Chalice of Wine.

Then after the Levation of the Mass, there was read by my Lord Chancellor, in
presence of all the Nobles, a General Pardon granted by King Henry the Eighth,
Father to our Liege Lord the King, that all shall be pardoned that have
offended before the 28 th day of January last past.

When the King's Majesty, with his Nobles, came to the Place of the Coronation,
within a while after, his Grace was removed into a Chair of Crimson Velvet, and
born in the Chair between two Noblemen, unto the North-side of the Stage, and
showed to the People; and these words spoken to the People by my Lord of
Canterbury, in this manner, saying: Sirs, here I present unto you K. Edward,
the rightful Inheritor to the Crown of this Realm. Wherefore all ye, that be
come this Day to do your Homage, Service, and bounden Duty, Be ye willing to do
the same? To the which all the People cried with a loud Voice, and said, Yea,
Yea, Yea; and cried, King Edward; and prayed, God save King Edward. And so to
the South Side in like manner, and to the East Side, and to the West Side.

After this, his Grace was born again to the high Altar in his Chair, and there
sat bare-headed: And all his Nobles and Peers of the Realm were about his
Grace, and my Lord of Canterbury Principal. And there made certain Prayers and
Godly Psalms over his Grace; and the Choire answered with goodly Singing, the
Organs playing, and Trumpets blowing.

Then after a certain Unction, Blessing, and Signing of his Grace, he was born
into a Place by the high Altar, where the Kings use always to kneel at the
Levation of the Parliament-Mass. And there his Grace was made ready of new
Garments; and after a certain space brought forth between two Noblemen, and
sat before the High Altar bare-headed. Then after a while his Grace was
anointed in the Breast, his Soles of his Feet, his Elbows, his Wrists of his
Hands, and his Crown of his Head, with virtuous Prayer said by the Bishop of
Canterbury, and sung by the Choire.

Then anon after this, a goodly fair Cloth of red Tinsel Gold was hung over his
Head: And my Lord of Canterbury kneeling on his Knees, and his Grace lying
prostrate before the Altar, anointed his Back.

Then after this, my Lord of Canterbury arose and stood up, and the fair Cloth
taken away. Then my Lord Protector, Duke of Somerset, held the Crown in his
Hand a certain space; and immediately after began Te Deum, with the Organs
going, the Choire singing, and the Trumpets playing in the Battlements of the
Church. Then immediately after that, was the Crown set on the King's Majesty's
Head by them two, [ viz. Somerset, and the Archbishop of Canterbury]. And
after that another Crown; and so his Grace was crowned with three Crowns.

The Relation breaks off here abruptly. But what is wanting, may be supplied by
the Order of the Coronation, Hist. Ref. Vol. 11 Collect. p. 93.
as Bishop Burnet has taken it out of the Council-Book, and given it us in his
History.

The ABp's Speech at the Coronation. Foxes and Firebrands, Part 2.
At this Coronation there was no Sermon as I can find, but that was supplied by
an excellent Speech which was made by the Archbishop. It was found among the
inestimable Collections of Archbishop Usher; and though published of late
Years, yet I cannot but insert it here, tending so much to illustrate the
Memory of this great and good Archbishop.

MOST Dread and Royal Sovereign: The Promises your Highness has made here, at
your Coronation, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, are not to be taken in
the Bishop of Rome's Sense, when you commit any thing distastful to that See,
to hit your Majesty in the Teeth, as Pope Paul the Third, late Bishop of Rome,
sent to your Royal Father, saying, Did thou not promise, at our permission of
thy Coronation, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, and do thou run to
Heresy? For the Breach of this thy Promise, know thou not, that it is in our
Power to dispose of thy Sword and Scepter to whom we please? We, your Majesty's
Clergy, do humbly conceive, that this Promise reaches not at your Highness
Sword, Spiritual or Temporal, or in the least at your Highness swaying the
Scepter of this your Dominion, as you and your Predecessors have had them from
God. Neither could your Ancestors lawfully resign up their Crowns to the Bishop
of Rome or his Legates, according to their ancient Oaths then taken upon that
Ceremony.

The Bishops of Canterbury for the most part have crowned your Predecessors,
and anointed them Kings of this Land: Yet it was not in their Power to receive
or reject them, neither did it give them Authority to prescribe them Conditions
to take or to leave their Crowns, although the Bishops of Rome would encroach
upon your Predecessors by their Act and Oil, that in the end they might possess
those Bishops with an Interest to dispose of their Crowns at their Pleasure.
But the wiser sort will look to their Claws and clip them.

The solemn Rites of Coronation have their Ends and Utility; yet neither direct
Force or Necessity: They be good Admonitions to put Kings in mind of their Duty
to God, but no encreasement of their Dignity: For they be God's Anointed; not
in respect of the Oil which the Bishop uses, but in consideration of their
Power, which is Ordained; Of the Sword, which is Authorized; Of their Persons,
which are elected of God, and endued with the Gifts of his Spirit, for the
better ruling and guiding of his People.

The Oil, if added, is but a Ceremony: If it be wanting, that King is yet a
perfect Monarch notwithstanding, and God's Anoined, as well as if he was
inoiled. Now for the Person or Bishop that does anoint a King, it is proper to
be done by the chiefest. But if they cannot, or will not, any Bishop may
perform this Ceremony.

To condition with Monarchs upon these Ceremonies, the Bishop of Rome (or other
Bishops owning his Supremacy) has no Authority: but he may faithfully declare
what God requires at the Hands of Kings and Rulers, that is, Religion and
Virtue. Therefore not from the Bishop of Rome, but as a Messenger from my
Savior Jesus Christ, I shall most humbly admonish your Royal Majesty what
Things your Highness is to perform.

Your Majesty is God's Vicegerent, and Christ's Vicar within your own
Dominions, and to see, with your Predecessor Josias, God truly worshipped, and
Idolatry destroyed; the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome banished from your
Subjects, and Images removed. These Acts be Signs of a second Josias, who
reformed the Church of God in his Days. You are to reward Virtue, to revenge
Sin, to justify the Innocent, to relieve the Poor, to procure Peace, to repress
Violence, and to execute Justice throughout your Realms. For Precedents on
those Kings who performed not these Things, the Old Law shows how the Lord
revenged his Quarrel; and on those Kings who fulfilled these things, he poured
forth his Blessings in abundance. For Example, it is written of Josiah, in the
Book of the Kings, thus; Like unto him there was no King, that turned to the
Lord with all his Heart, according to all the Law of Moses; neither after him
arose there any like him. This was to that Prince a perpetual Fame of Dignity,
to remain to the End of Days.

Being bound by my Function to lay these Things before your Royal Highness; the
one as a Reward, if you fulfill; the other as a Judgment from God, if you
neglect them: Yet I openly declare, before the living God, and before these
Nobles of the Land, that I have no Commission to denounce your Majesty
deprived, if your Highness miss in part, or in whole, of these Performances:
Much less to draw up Indentures between God and your Majesty, or to say you
forfeit your Crown with a Clause for the Bishop of Rome, as have been done by
your Majesty's Predecessors, King John, and his Son Henry of this Land. The
Almighty God of his Mercy, let the Light of his Countenance shine upon your
Majesty, grant you a prosperous and happy Reign, defend you and save you: and
let your Subjects say, Amen.

God save the King.
I find no Bishop Consecrated this Year.

An. 1547.
CHAP. II. A Royal Visitation.
A Royal Visitation on foot.
BY these and other pious Instigations of the Archbishop, who was of high
esteem with the King, he began early to think of the Church, and to take care
about rectifying the Disorders of its Members. For about April there was a
Royal Visitation resolved upon all England over, for the better Reformation of
Religion. And accordingly in the beginning of May, Letters were issued out from
the King to the Archbishops, that they and all their Fellow-Bishops, should
forbear their Visitations, as was usually done in all Royal and Archiepiscopal
Visitations. And it was enjoined, that no Ministers should preach in any
Churches but in their own.

Titus B. 2.
In a Volume in the Cotton Library, there be extant the King's Letters to Robert
Archbishop of York, relating to this Visitation; signed by our Archbishop,
the Duke of Somerset the Protector, and his Brother Sir Thomas Seymour, the
Lord Russel, Favorers of the Reformation; the Lord St. John's, Petres the
Secretary, who went along with it; Gage Controuler of the Household, and Baker
Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, back-Friends to it. Hist. Ref. Vol.
II. Collect. p. 103.
I do not set down the Letter it self, because the Bishop of Sarum has already
published it in his History.

Very worthy sober and learned Men were appointed for Visitors, both of the
Laity and Clergy. And there was a Book of Injunctions prepared, whereby the
King's Visitors were to govern their Visitation. The Original of which Book of
Injunctions is extant in Benet-College Library: There I have seen them, being
signed by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of Somerset, Sir Thomas
Seymour, and diverse others of the Privy Council; but no Bishop save Cranmer
only; he being, I suppose, the only Bishop then a Privy-Counsellor; and now
often appearing in the Council for the better forwarding of Religion. These
Injunctions are printed in Bishop Sparrow's Collection, Vol. 11. p. 28.
and briefly epitomized in the History of the Reformation.

The Visitors.
The Persons nominated for this present Employment were these, as I find them
set down in a Manuscript, formerly belonging to Archbishop Parker, Vol. intit.
Syuodalia.
but now in the Benet-College Library: Where you may observe the Visitors were
divided into six Sets, and to each Set were apportioned particular Counties,
and a Preacher and a Register, in this exact Method following.

Visitors. Added by ABp Parker. Counties visited. Dean of Westminster. Boston.
York. Sir John Herseley Knight. Durysme. Nicholas Ridley, Preacher. Carlyll. Edward
Plankney, Register. Chester. Sir Anthony Coke, Knight. Westminster. Sir John
Godsalve, Knight. He belonged to the Office of the Signet, and was Protonotary.
Dr. Christopher Nevison. The Elder. London. John Gosnold. A Lawyer. Dr.
Madewe, Preacher. Norwich. Peter Lylly, Register. Ely. Sir John Hales, Knight.
Rochester. Sir John Mason, Knight. Sir Anthony Cope, Knight. Canterbury. Dr. Cave. A
Lawyer. Mr. Briggs, Preacher. Once of Pembroke. Chichester. Rafe Morice,
Register. Winchester. Dean of Paul's. Dr. May. Sarisbury. Dean of Exeter. Dr.
Hains. Exeter. Sir Walter Buckler, Knight. Bath. Mr. Cotisford, Preacher. Bristow.
John Redman, Register. Of Haslingfeld. Gloucester. Dean of Lincoln. Dr. Tailor.
Peterburgh. Dr. Rowland Tailor. Lincoln. Mr. John Joseph. Once of Canterbury,
Oxford. a Friar. Coventry. John Old, Register. Litchfeld. Mr. Morison. Once
Husband to the Earl of Rutland's Wife. Worcester. Hereford. Mr. Syddel.
Landaff. Mr. Ferrowr, Preacher. After L. Bishop of S. David's. S. David's. George
Constantine, Register. Bangor. Hue Rawlins, Preacher in the Welsh Tongue. S.
Ass.

Where we may observe, that in every Company of Visitors was joined one
Preacher, or more; whose Business, in the respective Circuits, was to preach to
the People, to dehort them from the superstitious use of Beads and suchlike
Things, and to learn them to worship God truly in Heart and Mind, and to obey
the Prince.

The Method which these Commissioners used in their Visitation, The Method of
this Visitation.
as we collect from what was done at S. Paul's, London, was this. They summoned
the Bishop, and the Members of each Cathedral; and first swear them to renounce
the Bishop of Rome, and to the King's Supremacy: and then that they should
present all things in their Church and Diocese, needful to be reformed. Then
certain Interrogatories and Articles of Enquiry were read to them by the
Register. To perform which, an Oath was administered to them. After that, the
printed Injunctions, and others not printed, with the Book of Homilies, were
delivered, both to the Bishop for his Church, and the Archdeacons for their
respective Arch-deaconries; strictly injoining them to see them speedily
executed, reserving other new Injunctions to be ministered afterward, as they
should see cause. Their next Work was to examine the Canons and Priests by
virtue of their Oaths which they had taken, concerning their Lives and
Doctrines. What was discovered in other Places concerning the Vices of the
Clergy, we may conlude from what was found among the Dignitaries of St. Paul's.
Fox.
For when the Canons and Priests belonging to this Church were examined, one of
them, named Painter, openly confessed, that he had often carnally used a
certain Married-man's Wife, whom he would not name: And diverse others, both of
the Canons and Priests, confessed the same of themselves.

There be remaining, in the Archives of the Church of Canterbury, the
Injunctions of the King's Visitors to the Dean and Chapter there, bearing date
Sept. 22. An. 1 Edw. VI. subscribed by the Visitors Hands. Which Injunctions do
all relate to the particular Statutes of the Church, and are of no other moment.

The Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase.
There was now a Book of Homilies prepared for present use, to be read in all
Churches, for the Instruction of the People: and Erasmus's Paraphrase upon the
New Testament in English, was to be set up in all Churches, for the better
instruction of Priests in the Sense and Knowledge of the Scriptures. And both
these Books, by the King's Injunctions aforementioned, were commanded to be
taught and learned.

CHAP. III. Homilies, and Erasmus's Paraphrase.
Archbishop Cranmer found it highly convenient to find out some Means for the
Instruction of the People in true Religion, The ABp to Winchester concerning
the Homilies.
till the Church could be better supplied with learned Priests and Ministers.
For which purpose he resolved upon having some good Homilies or Sermons,
composed, to be read to the People; which should in a plain manner teach the
Grounds and Foundation of true Religion, and deliver the People from popular
Errors and Superstitions. When this was going in hand with, the Archbishop
sent his Letters to the Bishop of Winchester, to try if he could bring him to
be willing to join in this Business; showing him, that it was no more than what
was intended by the former King, and a Convocation in the Year 1542, wherein
himself was a Member, to make such a stay of Errors, as were then by ignorant
Preachers spread among the People. But this Bishop was not for Cranmer's Turn;
in his Answer signifying to him, That since that Convocation the King, his old
Master's Mind changed, and that God had afterward given him the Gift of
Pacification, (as he worded it) meaning, that the King made a stop in his once
intended Reformation. He added, That there was a Convocation that extinguished
those Devices, and this was still in force: And therefore, that now nothing
more ought to be done in Church Matters. And a Copy of this Letter he sent to
the Lord Protector, trying to persuade him also to be of his Mind.

The Archbishop answered these Letters of Winchester: Wherein he again
required these Homilies to be made, by virtue of that Convocation five Years
before; and desired Winchester to weigh things. But he replied, It was true,
they communed then of such things, See his Letters to the Protector, in Fox.
but they took not effect at that time; nor needed they to be put in execution
now. And that in his Judgment it could not be done without a new Authority and
Command from the King's Majesty. Then he used his Politics, urging, That it
was not safe to make new Stirs in Religion: That the Lord Protector did well in
putting out a Proclamation to stop vain Rumors; and he thought it not best to
enterprise any thing to tempt the People with occasion of Tales, whereby to
break the Proclamation. And as in a natural Body, he said, Rest without Trouble
did confirm and strengthen; so it was in a Commonwealth, Trouble travaileth,
and brings things to looseness. Then he suggested the Danger the Archbishop
might involve himself in, by making Alterations. That he was not certain of his
Life, when the old Order was broken, and a new brought in by Homilies; that he
should continue to see the new Device executed. For it was not done in a Day;
He wished there were nothing else to do now. He suggested, that a new Order
engendered a new Cause of Punishment against them that offend; and Punishments
were not pleasant to them that have the Execution. And yet they must be, for
nothing may be contemned. There were two Letters Winchester sent to the
Archbishop, in answer to as many from the Archbishop: In which he labored to
persuade the Archbishop, not to innovate any thing in Religion during the
King's Minority; and particularly to forbear making Homilies, and refusing for
himself to meddle therein. An imperfect part of one of these Letters I have
laid in the Appendix, as I transcribed it from the Original. No. XXXV.


So when it was perceived that Winchester would not be brought to comply, and
join in with the Archbishop and the rest, they went about the composing the
Homilies themselves. Cranmer had a great hand in them: The ABp. etc. compose
Homilies.
And that Homily of Salvation particularly seems to be of his own doing. This,
while he was in composing it, was shown to Winchester by the Archbishop; to
which he made this Objection. That he would yield to him in this Homily, if
they could show him any old Writer, that wrote how Faith excluded Charity in
the Office of Justification; and that it was against Scripture. Upon this
Canterbury began to argue with him, and to show him how Faith excluded Charity
in the Point of Justifying. And Winchester denied his Arguments. And in fine,
such was his Sophistication, that the Archbishop at last told him; He liked
nothing unless he did it himself: and that he disliked the Homily for that
Reason, because he was not a Counselor.

The Council had now put this Bishop in the Fleet, for his Refractoriness to
the King's Proceedings; Winchester in the Fleet.
where, if his Complaint to the Lord Protector were true, he was somewhat
straightly handled: For he was allowed no Friend or Servant, no Chaplain, Barber,
Tailor, nor Physician. A sign he gave them high Provocation. While he was here,
the Archbishop sent for him once or twice to discourse with him, and to try to
bring him to comply with their Proceedings in reforming Religion. He dealt very
gently with him, and told him; That he was a Man, in his Opinion, meet to be
called to the Council again: but withal told him, that he stood too much in
Obstinacy; that it was perverse Frowardness, and not any Zeal for the Truth.
And labored to bring him to allow the Book, which was now finished, and the
Paraphrase of Erasmus.

The former he could not allow of, because of the Doctrine therein by Cranmer
asserted, The Bp of Winchester's Censure o^ the Homily of Salvation,
of Justification by Faith without Works. Which Cranmer took pains to persuade
him about; telling him, his Intent was hereby, only to set out the Freedom of
God's Mercy. But Winchester challenged him to show Scripture for it, or any one
ancient Writer, That Faith in justifying excludes Charity. This Winchester
afterward declared at large to the Lord Protector; and added, That the
Archbishop in that Homily of Salvation, had taken such a Matter in hand, and
so handled it, as, if he were his extreme Enemy, he would have wished him to
have taken that Piece in hand, and so to have handled it as he did. He
represented one of the Archbishop's Arguments for Faith excluding Charity to
be thus, out of that Homily; We be justified by Faith without all Works of the
Law: Charity is a Work of the Law: Ergo, We are justified without Charity. But
I warn the Reader to consult the Homily it self, before he pass his Judgment
upon Cranmer's Argument, as it is here represented by one that was none of his
Friend. In fine, he said, There were as many Faults in that Homily of
Salvation, as he had been Weeks in Prison, and that was seven, besides the
Matter, viz. making a Trouble without Necessity.

And of the ABp for it.
In short, he charged the Archbishop for troubling the World with such a
needless Speculation as this is; because, he said, that in Baptism we are
justified, being Infants, before we can talk of the Justification we strive
for. For all Men receive their Justification in their Infancy in Baptism. And
if they fall after Baptism, they must arise again by the Sacrament of Penance.
And so this Doctrine, he said, was to be sent to the Universities; where it is
meet to be talked and disputed of, and not fit for Homilies. And to disparage
further the Archbishop's Judgment, he told the Protector, That if my Lord of
Canterbury would needs travail in this Matter, he should never persuade that
Faith excluded Charity in Justification, unless he borrowed Prisons of the
Protector; and then he might percase have some to agree to it: As poor Men
kneel at Rome when the Bishop of Rome goes by, or else are knocked on the Head
with a Halbard. And then he made some scoffing mention of the Strength of God's
Spirit in the Archbishop, and his Learning in his Laws, so as to be able to
overthrow with his Breath all Untruths, and establish Truths. I make no
Reflection upon all this unseemly Language of this Bishop, but leave it to the
Reader to judge hereby of the Learning and Spirit that was in him. And could we
have retrieved the Archbishop's own Arguments and Replies to these Barkings of
Winchester, they would have left to the World a full Vindication of Cranmer and
his Doctrine.

As to Erasmus's Paraphrase, the said Bishop pretended, Winchester's Censure of
Erasmus's Paraphrase.
He found diverse things in it to condemn the Work: and that he agreed with them
that said, Erasmus laid the Eggs, and Luther hatched them: and that of all the
monstrous Opinions that have risen, evil Men had a wondrous Occasion ministered
to them from that Book. He also wrote to the Protector the particular
Objections he made against it. He said, He might term it in one word
Abomination, both for the Malice and Untruth of much Matter out of Erasmus's
Pen: and also for the arrogant Ignorance of the Translator of it; considering
that Book was authorized by the King, and a Charge laid upon the Realm of
twenty thousand Pounds, by enjoining every Parish to buy one: Whereof he had
made an Estimate by the probable number of Buyers, and the Price of the Book.
He charged the Translator with Ignorance, both in Latin and English; a Man (he
said) far unmeet to meddle with such a Matter, and not without Malice on his
part.

Finally, The Matter he had to show in both the Books, was in some part
dangerous; and the Concealment thereof a great Fault, if he did not utter it.
And that he pretended, made him some-while ago write to the Council, declaring
his Mind in relation thereunto. For which he was sent to the Fleet.

The true Occasion whereof, as I take it from his own Letter, His Account of
his Commitment.

Inter Foxil MSS.


written with his own Hand, which I have before me, was this* Upon the
Departure of the Lord Protector against the Scots, the King's Visitors began
their Visitation. Then as soon as the Bishop heard of the Visitation, and the
Books of Homilies and Injunctions were come to his hands, he wrote to the
Council, trusting, upon such earnest Advertisements as he made, they would
incontinently have sent for him; and upon knowledge of so evident Matter as he
thought he had to show, would have staid till the Protector's Return. He saw
(as he said) a Determination to do all things suddenly at one time. Whereunto,
though the Protector had agreed, yet of his Wisdom, as the Bishop conjectured,
he had rather these Matters should have tarried till his Return, had he not
been pressed on both Sides, (an Expression which the Protector in a Letter to
him had used). He reckoned, that if he could have staid this Matter in his
Absence, though by bringing himself into extreme Danger, besides his Duty to
God and the King, he should have done the Protector a Pleasure, of whom he had
this Opinion, that willingly and wittingly, he would neither break the Act of
Parliament, nor command Books to be bought by Authority, that contained such
Doctrine as those Books did. Thus he had, he said, remembrance of his Grace in
these his Letters to the Council; but he chiefly made not his Grace, but God
his Foundation, with the Preservation of the late deceased King's Honor, and
the Surety of the King then being. His Writing, he confessed, was vehement; but
he would have none offended with it, for he wrote it with a whole Heart; and if
he could have written it with the Blood of his Heart, he would have done it, to
have staid the thing till it had been more maturely digested. He touched lively
one Point in his Letter to the Council, and considered whether the King might
command against a Common Law, or an Act of Parliament; and showed the Danger of
it in the late Lord Cardinal, and the Lord Typtoft before him, who was Executed
on Tower Hill, for acting against the Laws of the Land, though it were by the
King's Commission; and by other Precedents.

Not long after these Letters of the Bishop to the Council, they sent for him.
When he came before them, he came furnished with his Trinkets, his Sleeves and
Bosom trussed full of Books, to furnish his former Allegations. He was heard
very well, and gently. Then he showed Matter that he thought would have moved
them: For there he showed the two contrary Books, [meaning the Homilies, and
Erasmus's Paraphrase]. But the Council told him, they were not moved: and
added, That their Consciences agreed not with his; using many good Words to
bring him to Conformity. After he had been aside from them, and was returned
again, they entered a precise Order with him, either to receive the Injunctions,
or to refuse. In which Case they told him, that the Protector was privy to what
was done there. The Bishop answered, That he would receive them as far as God's
Law and the King's would bind him. And because he saw they drew to such
Preciseness, he told them, there were three Weeks of Delay to the coming of the
Visitors to him. In the mean time he offered to go to Oxford, to abide the
Discussion there. That Offer was not allowed. He desired to go to his House at
London, and have Learned Men speak with him there. That was not accepted. He
entered then the Allegation of the Gospel, of the Servant that said, he would
not do a thing, and yet did it: And so the Bishop said, it might be, that
although he then said Nay, as his Conscience served him, yet he might change,
and was a Man that might be tempted. But as his Conscience was then, he
thought, that God's Laws and the King's let him. Then they asked him, if he
had spoken to any Man of what he found in the Books. To which he answered
truly, [acknowledging he had]. But told the Lords, that he thought it hard,
unless there were a greater Matter than this, to send him to Prison for
declaring his Mind beforehand, what he minded to do, before it had been by him
done; who had all the mean time to repent himself.

In the End the Council committed him to the Fleet. Of his Behavior under this
Censure, he has these words; That he had well digested it; and so all might be
well, he cared not what became of his Body. That he departed as quietly from
them as ever Man did, and had endured with as little grudg. He had learned this
Lesson in the World, never to look backward, as S. Paul says, ne remember that
is past. That he would never grudg or complain of any thing for himself.

To the Lord Protector, to whom he wrote all this Account of himself, turning
his Discourse, he said, That he thought it very weighty, to have these Books
recommended to the Realm in the King's Name by his (the Protector) Direction,
since the King himself knew nothing of them, and therefore nothing could be
ascribed to him: And his Grace had been so occupied, as all Men knew, that he
had no leisure to peruse them. And yet of such sort were the Books according to
the Account he had before written; and that if no Man had advertised the
Council, as he had, it was because they had not read them as he had done.

In Vindication of the Learned Author of the Paraphrase, Erasmus vindicated.
so bedashed by Winchester, I will here use the words of him that writ the
Epistle Dedicatory before the translated Paraphrase on the Acts. I cannot but
judge, that whosoever are prompt and hasty Condemners of Erasmus, or eager
Adversaries unto his Doctrine, do, under the Name and Color of Erasmus, rather
utter their Stomach and Hatred against God's Word, and the Grace of the Gospel,
which Erasmus for his part most diligently and most simply labors to bring
to light. And to such as said, that his Doctrine was scarcely sincere, and that
he did somewhat err, he answered, That Erasmus, forasmuch as he was a Man, and
so esteemed himself, would that his Works should none otherwise be read or
accepted, than the Writings of other mortal Men. And that after his Judgment, a
little Trip among so many notable good Works for the interpretation of
Scripture, and for the help of the Simple, should rather be born withal, than
so many good Things to be either rejected, or kept away from the hungry
Christian Reader. It is a cold Charity that can bear with nothing; and an eager
Malice it is, that for a Trifle, or a Matter of nothing, would have the
Ignorant to lack so much good edifying, as may be taken of Erasmus.

Mention was made a little above, Winchester's Letter to Somerset concerning
these things.
of the Bishop of Winchester's Objections aganst the Paraphrase of Erasmus,
sent by him in a Letter to the Lord Protector. This Paper I have met with in
Sir John Cotton's Library; and being somewhat long, I have put it into the
Appendix: Wherein may be seen at large the Bishop's Quarrels, No. XXXVI.
both against the Paraphrase and the Homilies; laboring here to show, that the
Book of Homilies and Erasmus's Paraphrase, did contradict each other, and
therefore could not both be received; and that there were Errors in each, and
so neither ought to be admitted. Moreover, he urged the Danger of making
Alterations in Religion contrary to the Laws then in Force; designing thereby,
if he could over-perswade the Protector, to enervate the King's late
Injunctions. For the Papists, whose chief Instrument was Winchester, saw it
was time now to bestir themselves to overthrow these Proceedings that were in
hand, if it were possible.

When this Affair happened between the Council and the Bishop, The ABp appoints
a Thanksgiving for a Victory.
for which they cast him into the Fleet, Somerset the Protector was absent in
an Expedition against the Scots: By whose Conduct, in the Month of September,
God blessed the King with a very glorious Victory, in a Battle fought near
Musselburrough. Which redounded much to the Protector's Honor, wherein was
more Danger than he looked for, which gave him the greater occasion to show his
Valor: For there were but few lost on the English-side; but fifteen thousand
Scots reckoned to be slain, and two thousand taken Prisoners. For this Victory
a Public Thanksgiving was thought fit to be Celebrated. And the Archbishop
required of the Bishop of London, to procure a Sermon at S. Paul's, before the
Mayor and Aldermen, and immediately after a Procession in English, and Te Deum.
The Archbishop's Letter (which will show what the Court thought of that good
Success) was as follows.

AFter our right hearty Commendations: Whereas it has pleased Almighty God to
send the King's Majesty such Victory against the Scots, The ABp to the Bp of
London. Cranm. ^egist.
as was almost above the Expectation of Man, and such as has not been heard of
in any part of Christendom this many Years: In which Victory above the Number
of 15000 Scots be slain, 2000 taken Prisoners; and among them many Noblemen,
and others of good Reputation; all their Ordnance and Baggage of their Camp
also won from them. The King's Majesty, with Advice of his Highness
Privy Council, presently attending upon his Majesty's most Royal Person,
well-knowing this, as all other Goodness, to be Gifts of God, has and so does
account it. And therefore rendereth unto him the only Glory and Praise for the
same: And so has willed me, not only in his Majesty's Cathedral Church, and
other Churches of my Diocese, to give Thanks to Almighty God, but also to
require, in his Name, all other Bishops in the Province of Canterbury to do, or
cause to be done, semblably in their Course. Which his Majesty's Pleasure I
have thought good to signify unto you: Requiring you, not only to cause a
Sermon to be made in your Cathedral Church, the next Holy Day after receipt
hereof, declaring the Goodness of God, and exhorting the People to Faith and
amendment of Life; and to give Thanks to God for this Victory; but also at the
same time, immediately after the Sermon, and in presence of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and other the Citizens of London, to cause the Procession in English,
and Te Deum, to be openly and devoutly sung. And that you do also cause the
like Order to be given in every Parish Church in your Diocese, upon some
Holy Day, when the Parishioners shall be there present, with as much speed as
you may; not failing, as you tender his Majesty's Pleasure. Thus fare you
heartily well. From Oatlands, the 18 th Day of December It should be Sept. I
suppose.
, the Year of our Lord God, 1547.

Your loving Friend, Tho. Cantuarien.
The Counselors Pleasure is, you shall see this executed on Tuesday next, in
St. Paul's in London. This be given in haste.




CHAP. IV. A Convocation.
THE Parliament now sat: A Convocation in the first Year of the King.

C.C.C.C. Library. Vol. intit. Synodalia.


And a Convocation was held November the 5 th. Some Account of what was done
here, I will in this place set down, as I extracted it out of the Notes of some
Member, as I conceive, then present at it.

Session 1. Nov. 5.
John Tailor Dean of Lincoln, chosen Prolocutor by universal Consent.

Sess. 2. Nov. 18.
This Day the Prolocutor was presented to the Archbishop and Bishops in the
Upper House.

Sess. 3. Nov. 22.
It was then agreed, that the Prolocutor, in the Name of the whole House,
should carry some Petitions unto the most Reverend Father in God the
Archbishop, viz.

I. That Provision be made, that the Ecclesiastical Law may be examined, and
promulged, according to that Statute of Parliament in the 35 th Year of Henry
VIII.

II. That for certain urgent Causes, the Convocation of this Clergy may be
taken and chosen into the Lower House of Parliament, as anciently it was wont
to be.

III. That the Works of the Bishops and Others, who by the Command of the
Convocation, have labored in examining, reforming and publishing the Divine
Service, may be produced, and laid before the Examination of this House.

IV. That the Rigor of the Statute of paying the King the First Fruits, may be
somewhat moderated in certain urgent Clauses, and may be reformed, if possible.

The fourth Session is omitted in the Manuscript, the Writer probably being
then absent.

Sess. 5. Nov. ult.
This Day Mr. Prolocutor exhibited, and caused to be read publicly, a Form of
a certain Ordinance, delivered by the most Reverend the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for the receiving of the Body of our Lord under both Kinds, viz. of
Bread and Wine. To which he himself subscribed, and some others, viz. Mr.
Prolocutor, Mr. Cranmer Archdeacon of Canterbury, Mr. May, Mr. Ienyngs, Mr.
Williams, Wilson, Carleton, etc.

Sess. 6. December. 2.
This Session, all this whole Session, in Number Sixty-four, by their Mouths
did approve the Proposition made the last Session, of taking the Lord's Body in
both Kinds, nullo reclamante.

The same Day with Consent were chosen, Mr. Dr. Draycot, Bellasis, Dakyns,
Ieffrey, Elize ap Rice, Oking, Pool, and Ap Harry, to draw up a Form of a
Statute for paying Tithes in Cities, etc.

This was a thing the Clergy now were very intent upon. For I find in the
Archbishop's Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws, there is a Law made for
paying Tithes in Cities, as was done in London.

Sess. 7. December. 9.
By common Consent were nominated and assigned Mr. Rowland Merick, John ap
Harry, John Williams, and Elizeus Price, DD.LL. to obtain the following
Effects, viz. That the Petition made to have this House adjoined to the Lower
House of Parliament, may be granted. Item, That a Mitigation of the sore
Penalty expressed in the Statutes against the Recusants, for non-payment of the
perpetual Tenths, may be also obtained.

And the same Day were likewise appointed, Mr. Dean of Winchester, and Mr. Dr.
Draycot, to accompany Mr. Prolocutor to my Lord of Canterbury, to know a
determinate Answer, what Indemnity and Impunity this House shall have to treat
of Matters of Religion, in Cases forbidden by the Statutes of this Realm to
treat in.

Sess. 8. Dec. 17.
This Day was exhibited a certain Proposition under these words, viz. That all
such Canons, Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Usages and Customs, heretofore made, had
or used, that forbid any Person to contract Matrimony, or condemn Matrimony
already contracted by any Person, for any Vow or Promise of Priesthood,
Chastity or Widowhood, shall from henceforth cease, be utterly void, and of
none Effect. To which Proposition many subscribed, partly in the Affirmative,
partly in the Negative.

In the Affirmative, 53 Voices. In the Negative, 22 Voices.

And here I will insert a few words, which I take out of a Book writ very near
this Time, and by one who was well acquainted with the Affairs of this
Convocation. Defense of Priests Marriage, p. 268.
The Affirmants, says he, of this Proposition were almost treble so many as
were the Negants. Amongst which Affirmants, diverse were then unmarried, and
never afterward did take the Liberty of Marriage; as Dr. Tailor the Bishop,
Dr. Benson, Dr. Redman, Dr. Hugh Weston, Mr. Wotton, etc. Of them that denied
it, notwithstanding their Subscriptions to the contrary, as few as they were,
yet some of them took upon them the Liberty of Marriage not long after, as Dr.
Oken, Mr. Ray^er, Mr. Wilson, etc.

This Subscription following was made by the Hand of John Redman, Dr. Redman's
Judgment of Priests Marriage.
S. T. P. in this very Convocation, who, being absent this Session, (for his
Name is not among the 53) was desired to declare his own Sense in this Point,
under his own Hand, being so Learned a Man, and in such great Credit
universally, for his Ability in deciding Questions of Conscience.

I think that although the Word of God do exhort and counsel Priests to live in
Chastity, out of the Cumber of the Flesh and the World, that thereby they may
the more wholly attend to their Calling: Yet the Band of containing from
Marriage, does only lie upon Priests of this Realm, by reason of Canons and
Constitutions of the Church, and not by any Precept of God's Word; as in that
they should be bound by reason of any Vow, which, in as far as my Conscience
is, Priests in this Church of England do not make: I think that it stands
well with God's Word, that a Man which has been, or is but once married, being
otherwise accordingly qualified, may be made a Priest. And I think that
forasmuch as Canons and Rules made in this behalf, be neither universal nor
everlasting, but upon Consideration may be altered and changed: Therefore the
King's Majesty, and the higher Powers of the Church, may, upon such Reasons as
shall move them, take away the Clog of perpetual Continency from the Priests;
and grant, that it may be lawful to such as cannot, or will not contain, to
marry one Wife. And if she die, then the said Priest to marry no more,
remaining still in his Ministration.

Some larger Account of this memorable Convocation, especially as to some of
these Matters then under their Hands, may be read in Bishop Stillingfleet's
Irenicum, Irenic. p. 387.
published by him from a Manuscript Volume once belonging to Archbishop
Cranmer.

In this Convocation the Archbishop bore the great Sway; The ABp's Influence
on the Parliament.
and what things were agitated herein, were chiefly by his Motion and
Direction: Some whereof were turned into Laws by the Parliament, that was now
sitting, through his Activeness and Influence. As particularly that Repeal of
the Statute of the Six Articles, and of some other severe Laws, decreeing
diverse things Treason and Felony, made in the former King's Reign. For when the
Archbishop in the Convocation had made a Speech to the Clergy, exhorting them
to give themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and to consider what Things
in the Church needed Reformation, that so the Church might be discharged of all
Popish Trash, not yet thrown out; Some told him, that as long as the Six
Articles remained, it was not safe for them to deliver their Opinions: This he
reported to the Council. Hist. R^s. Vol. 1. p. 40.
Upon which they ordered this Act of Repeal.

By his means also another great thing, moved in the Convocation, The Communion
in both Kinds established.
was now ratified, and made a Law by this Parliament: which was, for the
Administration of the Communion under both Kinds throughout the Kingdom of
England and Ireland. And upon this the King appointed certain Grave and Learned
Bishops, and others, Fox.
to assemble at Windsor-Castle, there to treat and confer together; and to
conclude upon and set forth, one perfect and uniform Order of Communion,
according to the Rules of Scripture, and the Use of the Primitive Church. And
this being framed, it was enjoined to be used throughout the Realm, by a
Proclamation, and all required to receive it with due Reverence.

The ABp's Queries concerning the Mass.
I meet with a Writing of the Archbishop without Date, consisting of Queries
concerning the Mass, in order to the abolishing it, and changing it into a
Communion. Which I know not where so well to place as here, now the Convocation
was employed upon this Matter: For it seems to have been drawn up by the
Archbishop, on purpose to be laid before the Consideration of this House. The
Queries were these.

What or wherein John, Fasting, giving Alms, being Baptized, or receiving the
Sacrament of the Altar in England, does profit and avail Thomas dwelling in
Italy, and not knowing what John in England does?

Whether it profit them that be in Heaven, and wherein?

Whether it lies in the Faster, Giver of Alms, Receiver of the Sacrament, him
that is Baptized, to defraud any Member of Christ's Body of the Benefit of
Fasting, Alms-Deeds, Baptism, or Receiving of the Sacrament; and to apply the
same Benefit to one Person more than to another?

What thing is the Presentation of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Mass,
which you call the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ? And wherein stands it in
Act, Gesture or Word; and in what Act, Gesture or Word?

Is there any Rite or Prayer, and expressed in the Scripture, which Christ used
or commanded at the first Institution of the Mass, which we be now bound to
use; and what the same be?

Whether in the Primitive Church there were any Priests that lived by saying of
Mass, Mattens and Even-song, and praying for Souls, only? And where any such
State of Priesthood be allowed in the Scriptures, or be meet to be allowed now?

For what Cause were it not expedient nor convenient, to have the whole Mass in
the English Tongue?

Wherein consists the Mass by Christ's Institution?

What Time the accustomed Order began first in the Church, that the Priests
alone should receive the Sacrament?

Whether it be convenient that the same Custom continue still within this Realm?

Whether it be convenient that Masses Satisfactory should continue; that is to
say, Priests hired to sing for Souls departed?

Whether the Gospel ought to be taught at the Time of the Mass, to the
understanding of the People being present?

Whether in the Mass it were convenient to use such Speech as the People may
understand?

The ABp assists at the Funeral of the French King.
To proceed to some other Things, wherein our Archbishop was this Year
concerned. In June the Church of S. Paul's was hanged with Black, and a
sumptuous Hearse set up in the Choire, and a Dirige there sung for the French
King, who deceased the March precedent. And on the next Day the Archbishop,
assisted with eight Bishops more, all in rich Mitres, and their other
Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem; Stow.
and the Bishop of Rochester preached a Funeral Sermon.

A nice Matter was now put by the Council to the Archbishop, The Marquess of
Northampton's Divorce committed to the ABp.
having some other Bishops and Learned Men joined with him, to the Number of
Ten. The Case was, Whether a Man divorced from his Wife for her Adultery, might
not lawfully marry again? This was propounded upon the Account of a great Man
in those Times, namely, the Brother of Queen Katherine Par, Marquess of
Northampton; who had gotten a Divorce from his Wife, the Daughter of Bourchier
Earl of Essex, for Adultery. The Canon Law would not allow marrying again upon
a Divorce, making Divorce to be only a Separation from Bed and Board, and not a
Dissolving the Knot of Marriage. This was a great Question depending among the
Civilians. And it being committed to the Determination of our Archbishop, and
some other Delegates, (tho the Marquess staid not for their Resolution, but in
this Interval married Elizabeth Daughter of the Lord Brook) he searched so
diligently into the Scriptures first, and then into the Opinions of Fathers and
Doctors, that his Collections swelled into a Volume, Bp of Wigorn.
yet remaining in the Hands of a Learned Bishop of this Realm: The Sum whereof
is digested by the Bishop of Sa^^m. Cranmer seemed to allow of Marriage in the
Innocent Person. Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. p. 56.


He was a Means also to the Council of forbidding Processions: Processions
forbid by his means.
Wherein the People carried Candles on Candlemass-day, Ashes on Ash Wednesday,
Palms on Palm Sunday; because he saw they were used so much to Superstition,
and looked like Festivals to the Heathen Gods. So that this Year on
Candlemass-day, the old Custom of bearing Candles in the Church, and on
Ash Wednesday following, giving Ashes in the Church, Stow.
was left off through the whole City of London.

He was a Member of a Committee this Winter, Examines the Offices of the Church.
appointed to examine all the Offices of the Church, and to consider where they
needed Reformation, and accordingly to reform them. Of this Commission were
most of the Bishops, and several others of the most Learned Divines in the
Nation. And a new Office for the Communion was by them prepared, and by
Authority set forth, as was observed before; and received all over England.

CHAP. V. The Archbishop's Catechism.
THIS Year the Archbishop put forth a very useful Catechism, The ABp puts
forth a Catechism.
entitled, A short Instruction to Christian Religion, for the singular Profit
of Children and young People. This Catechism went not by way of Question and
Answer, but contained an easy Exposition of the Ten Commandments, the Creed,
the Lord's Prayer, and the two Sacraments. The first and second Commandments
were put together as one, and the whole recital of the Second omitted,
according to the use in those Times. But that Commandment is explained under
the first. The Substance of this Book is grave, serious and sound Doctrine. It
is said in the Title Page, to be overseen and corrected by the Archbishop.
Indeed it was a Catechism wrote originally in the German Language, for the use
of the younger Sort in Norinberg; Translated into Latin by Iustus Jonas,
Junior, who now was entertained by the Archbishop in his Family; and thence
turned into our Vulgar Tongue by the said Archbishop, or his special Order.
But it is certain, so great a Hand he had therein, that in the Archbishop's
first Book of the Sacrament, he said, that it was translated by himself, and
set forth. Bishop Gardener in his Book against the Archbishop, takes advantage
of two things in this Catechism against him, as though he himself, when he put
it forth, was of the Opinion of the Corporal Presence. The one was a Picture
that stood before the Book, where was an Altar with Candles lighted, and the
Priest apparelled after the old Sort, putting the Wafer into the Communicant's
Mouth. The other is an Expression or two used somewhere in the Book, That with
our bodily Mouths we receive the Body and Blood of Christ: And, that in the
Sacrament we receive truly the Body and Blood of Christ. And, this we must
believe, if we will be counted Christen Men. But to both, Cranmer in his next
Book against Gardener made answer, That as for the Picture, it was that was set
before the Dutch Edition of the Book, and so none of his doing; but that he
afterward caused the Popish Picture to be altered into a Picture representing
Christ eating his last Supper with his Disciples. As for the Expressions, he
said, he taught, that we in the Sacrament do receive the Body and Blood of
Christ spiritually; and, that the words Really and Substantially were not used,
but Truly. And in his Answer to Dr. Richard Smith's Preface, wrote against the
said Archbishop, who it seems had twitted him also with this Catechism, he
spoke largely of these his Expressions in his own Vindication.

And a Book against Unwritten Verities.
There was another Book of the Archbishop's against Unwritten Verities, which I
do by Conjecture place here, as put forth under this Year, or near this Time.
Which I suppose Dr. Smith nibbled at in his Book of Traditions, which this Year
he recanted. The Book was in Latin, and consisted only of Allegations out of
the Bible and Ancient Writers. In Queen Mary's Days the Book was again
published by an English Exile, naming himself E. P. The Title it now bore was,
A Confutation of Unwritten Verities, by diverse Authorities, diligently and
truly gathered out of the Holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers; By Tho. Cranmer,
late Archbishop, and burned at Oxford, for the Defense of the true Doctrine of
our Savior. Translated and set forth by E. P. Before it, is a Preface of the
Translator to his Countrymen and Brethren in England. In it he lamented the
woeful State of Things in England, by the Restoring of Popery, and the
Persecution of Protestants there; and showed what a kind of Man the chief
Bishop then in England, viz. Cardinal Pool, was, who in the last King's Reign
went from Prince to Prince, to excite them to make War against his own Prince
and Country.

This Treatise is but a bare Collection of places of Holy Scripture, and
Ancient Fathers, to prove, That the Canon of the Bible is a true, and sound,
and perfect Doctrine, containing all Things necessary to Salvation: That
neither the Writing of the Old Fathers, without the Word of God, nor General
Councils, nor the Oracles of Angels, nor Apparitions from the Dead, nor
Customs, can be sufficient in Religion to establish Doctrine, or maintain new
Articles of Faith. Then Reasons are given against Unwritten Verities, and the
places of Holy Scripture, and other Writers, which the Papists bring to
maintain Unwritten Verities, are answered. At last the Objections of the
Papists are confuted, in a concluding Chapter. Which last part was not writ by
the Archbishop, but by the Translator. For relating here the Story of the Holy
Maid of Kent, he says, she was examined by Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury. And at last he says, I have plainly and fully answered to all that
I remember the Papists do, or can allege by Writing, Preaching, or Reasoning,
for the Defense of their Unwritten Verities; on which they build so many
detestable Idolatries and Heresies. But yet if any be able to answer so plainly
and truly to the Scriptures, Authorities, and Reasons rehearsed by me, as I
have done to theirs, and to prove their Doctrines by as plain Testimonies and
Reasons as I have done mine, I shall not only acknowledge my Ignorance and
Error, but I shall gladly return into England, recant my Heresies, etc. Hence
it is plain, that the Conclusion of the Book, as well as the Preface, was writ
by the Translator.

I will add one Passage taken out of this Book, about the middle, whereby it
may be seen what a Clergy was now in England: Having quoted the Canons of the
Apostles, Ca^. 3.
Let not a Bishop or Deacon put away his Wife, etc. He makes a heavy complaint
against the frequent practice of beastly Sins in the Priests, Adultery, Sodomy,
etc. and that they never were punished. And in my Memory, (as he proceeds)
which is above thirty Years, and also by the Information of others, that be
twenty Years elder than I, I could never learn that one Priest was punished.

This is some Account of the Care he took for the Church in general, as
Metropolitan. His Care of Canterbury.
But he had a particular Care of his own Diocese, now his Power was not
checked, as it was in the former Reign, especially of the City of Canterbury;
which had been formerly the backwardest in Religion of any other Place of his
Diocese. He supplied this City with store of excellent Learned Preachers,
Turner, the two Ridleys, Becon, Besely, and John Joseph, who this Year went
along with the King's Visitors, as one of their Preachers. These converted not
a few to sincere Religion; as may appear by those Numbers of Canterbury, that
in Queen Mary's Reign suffered the Torment of Fire for their Profession of the
Gospel. But in that Reign all the Preachers fled, so that there was scarce one
remaining in the City: Which was looked upon as a particular Sign of God's
Displeasure against that Place, because the Professors there, and others,
reformed not themselves, according to those Opportunities of Grace, which God
had put into their Hands. And so I find in a Letter to them, wrote by some
eminent Person in Prison in Queen Mary's Reign. Alas! how few faithful Servants
has the Lord of Life in these troublesome Days within Canterbury, Fox's MSS.
to whom above all other People, in comparison of multitude, he has sent most
plenteously his Word, in the Mouths of most excellent Preachers. But even as
the People were Negligent, Hard-hearted, nothing willing to take the lively
Word unto their Defense, against the World, the Devil and the Flesh -- Even so
has he permitted the same Preachers to be dispersed, that not one of them
should be a comfortable Example to such an unkind People.

CHAP. VI. The Archbishop's Care of the University.
The ABp's Influence upon the University.
THE Archbishop was a great Patron of all solid Learning, being a very Learned
Man himself. And knowing very well how much the Libertas Philosophandi, and the
Knowledge of Tongues, and the other Parts of Humane Learning tended to the
preparing Men's Minds for the reception of True Religion, and for the detecting
of the gross Errors and Frauds of Popery, which could subsist only in the thick
Darkness of Ignorance; these things made him always cast a favorable Aspect
upon the Universities, and especially that of Cambridg, whereof he himself was
once a Member. Which the Governors, and the rest of the Gremials, very well
knew, and therefore did frequently apply to him, as often as they had need of
the Favor of the Court or Parliament. Roger Ascham, Fellow of S. John's
College, and one of the floridest Wits of this University, and who succeeded
Sir John Cheke in reading the Greek Lecture, said of him in a Letter he sent
him, (wherein he styled him Literarum Decus and Ornamentum); That he was the
Man who was accustomed to express great Joy at the good Progress of Learning,
such was his singular good will toward it; and when it went otherwise than
well with it, he alone could apply a Remedy; such was his Sway and Authority.
And so much was he the known Mecaenas of Learning, that according to the
public Encouragement or Prejudice it received, so the Vulgar accounted the
Praise or Dispraise thereof to redound upon Cranmer. So that if Learning were
Discountenanced, it was esteemed to cast some Disparagement upon him; if it
flourished, it was a sign that Cranmer prevailed at Court. For to that purpose
do those words of the said Ascham to the Archbishop in another Letter seem to
tend. Nulla hoc tempore literis vel insperata clades, vel expectata commoditas
accidere potest, cujus tu non aut author, ad magnam commendationem, aut
particeps ad aliquam reprehensionem, Some of St. John's College apply to him
upon the apprehension of a Danger.
voce ac sermon omnium jactatus eris.

In this Year 1547, and in the Month of October, there fell out an Accident in
S. John's College in Cambridg, which made those of that College that favored
Learning and Religion, (as that House was the chief Nursery thereof in that
University) judge it highly necessary to apply themselves to the Archbishop, to
divert a Storm from them. The Case was this; A French Lad of this College,
Cizer to one Mr. Stafford there, had one Night, in hatred to the Mass, secretly
cut the String, whereby the Pix hung above the Altar in the Chapel. The like
to which was indeed done in other Places of the Nation by some zealous Persons,
who began this Year, without any Warrant, to pull down Crucifixes and Images
out of the Churches. As was particularly done in S. Martins Ironmonger-lane,
London. This Affront to the Popish Service made a great Noise in the College:
And the sober Party among them feared the ill Effect it might have upon the
whole College, either to its Disparagement or Prejudice, when the News of it
should come to Court; especially by the means of such who stomached much the
Decay and Downfall of Superstition, and endeavored what in them lay to obscure
and eclipse the rising Light of the Gospel. Therefore after the Matter had been
taken into Examination by themselves, quietly and without Tumult, they thought
fit, by Consent, to acquaint the Archbishop with it in a Letter; which one of
their Members, Thomas Lever, a Learned and grave Man, carried; who likewise
should inform him of all Circumstances: and so committed both the Cause and
Person to his Grace's Judgment and Censure. But withal letting him know, that
the Youth was well Learned, and before this had carried himself quietly and
modestly; and that Mr. Stafford, who was a great Student, could not tell how to
be without him: But however, such was his Prudence, that he was willing to
leave his Scholar and his Fault to the Archbishop's Discretion. By which
Message they warily avoided the Odium of this Action, as though they had
countenanced any violent or illegal Methods for the removal of Superstition,
before it were done by Public Authority; and likewise rescued their Scholar
from Expulsion, or too rigorous Punishment, which some in the College would
have been apt to inflict upon him, had not the Matter been thus prudently
removed from them.

Let me here insert another Matter that happened the Year after in the same
College; Offended with some of this College, and why.
whereat diverse took Occasion so to represent it to our Archbishop, as to
create in him, as much as they could, an ill Opinion of the better sort of the
Members thereof. About November or December, in the Year 1548, some of the
College got this Question to be disputed in the Chapel concerning the Mass,
Ipsane Coena Dominica fuerit, necne? It was handled with great Learning by two
Learned Fellows of the House, Thomas Lever and Roger Hutchinson. The Noise of
this soon spread in the University; and many were much displeased at it. At
last Ascham being a very fit Person to undertake it, was prevailed with by the
rest, to bring this Question out of the private Walls of the College, into the
public Schools: yet as was pretended, with this mind and meaning, not
dogmatically to assert any thing, but modestly and freely to learn from Learned
Men, what could be fetched out of the Holy Scriptures to defend the Mass, which
had taken up, not only the chiefest Place in Religion, and Men's Consciences,
but took away in effect all the Use and Benefit of the faithful Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments from Christians. This Business they set about with
Quietness, they conferred their common Studies together, propounded to
themselves the Canonical Scriptures, by the Authority whereof they wished the
whole might be decided: They took also along with them, concerning this Matter,
the Ancient Canons of the Early Church, the Councils of Fathers, the Decrees of
Popes, the Judgments of Doctors, the great Plenty of Questionists, all the
Modern Authors, both German and Roman. But this Design of theirs was not only
the Subject of Talk in the University, but noted in the public Sermons; and
such Labor there was among some in opposition to it, that Dr. Madew, then
Vice Chancellor, was prevailed with by his Letters to forbid the Disputation.
They obeyed, but took it hardly, that they might not as well dispute in favor
of the Question, as others might preach as much as they would against it. But
it ended not here; for their Adversaries industriously carried the Report
hereof to our Prelate, and did so blacken the Business by their Slanders, and
loud and tragical Clamours, that he became somewhat offended with the
Undertakers. These on the other hand, no question, applied themselves to him
with their just Defense: and not only to him, but to others, and particularly
to Mr. Cecyl, one formerly their Colleague, who was now Master of Requests to
the Protector, letting him know the whole Matter; that he might upon occasion
represent the Cause the more favorably to the Archbishop. And Ascham himself
was their Scribe; whose Epistle, penned in a handsome Latin Style, being not
extant among his printed Epistles, and being subservient to the History of the
University in those Times, I have thought worthy to be inserted among the
Originals. No. XXXVII.
In this Letter he charged the other Party as well with Malice as Ignorance:
For this their Question was very agreeable to Thomas Aquinas, who proved that
the Mass exceeded the Lord's Supper in many Prerogatives, and much differed
from it by many Notes; as, Women, Children, Bastards, maimed Persons, were not
allowed to partake of the Mass, but they were received to the Holy Supper. So
that should any say, (as he proceeds in his Letter) that the Mass and the
Supper were the same, they might exclaim against them much more. Their
Adversaries had charged them with being too rash, in not staying for what
Reformation the State should make: But he said, that all Cambridg wanted rather
Spurs to put them forward, than a Bridle to keep them back. But though their
Dispute were prohibited, yet their Studies upon the same Argument had in a
manner increased; having now written a just Treatise of the Mass, which they
intended shortly to present to the Protector; and waited only for Cecyl's and
Cheke's Advice therein. But I must beg Pardon of the Reader for this Excursion.

The ill Condition and low Estate of the University.
And as I have given an Instance or two of the private Address of a particular
College to him in a particular Case, so I will subjoin another more public of
the University in general. In the Year abovesaid, being the first Year of the
King, the University labored under the Fears of the Encroachments of the Town
upon their Privileges, and likewise under great Suspicions of being spoiled of
its Revenues, or at least of having them much diminished; she having observed
how those of her Sister, the Church, were daily invaded by secular Hands. These
Fears put Cambridg now in a decaying State, and the Studies of good Literature
began to be but little minded. Add also hereunto, that Ecclesiastical
Preferments, which formerly were the peculiarRewards of Academicks, were now
ordinarily enjoyed by mere unlearned Laymen. Hist. Ref. Part II. p. 8.
So the Earl of Hartford held a Deanery, a Treasureship of a Cathedral Church,
and four of the best Prebends; and his Son three hundred Pounds a Year out of a
Bishopric. And Learned Men were seldom taken notice of, or had Honors
conferred on them; and if they obtained any Rewards, they were but small. Nor
were Scholars now in any Repute or Value: So that neither Poor nor Rich abode
long at their Studies in the University, to attain to any considerable Degrees
of Learning. The Poor could not, because the Encouragements there were scarce
capable to maintain them; and the richer Sort would not, choosing rather to
follow some other Course, because of the obscure and neglected Condition
Learning then lay under. The Grammar Schools also became disused, Parents
choosing any other Calling for their Children, rather than to bring them up to
Letters: As Roger Ascham, a Man that well knew the State of the University,
complains in a Letter to the Marquess of Northampton. This was the Cause that
the said Ascham pensively thus writ unto our Archbishop not long after. That
the University was then in so depressed and drooping a Condition, that very few
had hope of coming thither at all, and fewer had any Comfort to make long
tarrying when they were there: And that Abroad it retained not so much as the
Shadow of its Ancient Dignity.

At this low Ebb the University now was, An Address of the University to the
ABp.
when King Edward the Sixth came to the Scepter. But there being a Parliament
this Year in the Month of November, the chief Officers thereof thought it
advisable however to prevent it, if they could, from sinking lower, and to
keep at least what they had, by getting their Ancient Privileges confirmed by
that Parliament. And for this purpose they writ their earnest Letters to the
Archbishop: John Madew their Vice Chancellor, the Bearer, urging to him, Not
only, The Sum thereof.
that it was a thing usual at the beginning of Princes Reigns, to show that
Favor to the University to have their Privileges renewed by Parliament; but
chiefly, that the Favor his Grace should do to it, would be a true piece of
Service to the Religion which he had such a tender Care of. That every one knew
how much it concerned the Commonwealth, that Account should be made of
Learning; but how much it concerned the pure Religion, (as they styled that of
the Reformation) he alone did consider above all others. That he knew, how that
about five hundred Years past or more, the knowledge of Letters, by the Fault of
Kings, who ought to have cherished it, began to withdraw it self from Men, and
to hide it self in Darkness. In which dark Times, so involved in Ignorance,
that notable wild Boar out of the Wood spoiled the Vineyard of Christ above
measure: Not only treading down the Kings of the Earth, and conferring upon
himself the Empire of the World, but so invaded and broke into the Holy Seat
and Temple of Conscience, that now there were scarce any Manners of Men, any
Course of Life, any Rite of Ceremonies, any Sacrament of the Church, any
Footstep of Christ, which were not either laid waste by his Thunder, or defiled
by his Breath: Or, to speak in milder, but more significant terms with S. Paul,
which were not most foully corrupted and adulterated by the Wisdom of humane
Will Worship. That it was this Night of Discipline, and want of Knowledge, which
robbed us of God's Word, and advanced the Empire of Man's Doctrine to that
Arbitrary Height, that instead of the true Worship of God, the right using of
things Divine, a holy and pure Course of Life; Hypocrisy, Idolatry and Adultery
were most cunningly conveyed and brought in. That they did the more willingly
mention this Pest of Ignorance, conceiving great Hope that the Honor of
Learning would be restored anew, now when all things tended in a wonderful
manner to the illustrating of true Religion, which good Learning did
necessarily accompany. And that since God had now raised him up on purpose for
the restoring of the Gospel, and had so long reserved him for that End, they
doubted not but he would give all his Pains and Authority to preserve the
Welfare of Learning. And that somewhat for this Reason, because at that time
there could happen no Calamity or Advantage thereunto, but every Man would be
apt either to charge him with the Blame of the one, or attribute to him the
Praise of the other. This eloquent Letter indicted by the Pen of Ascham, then
the University-Orator, having some remarkable Passages of the State of the
University at that Time, and of the great Sway the Archbishop then carried in
the Public, and the mavelous Good Will he was esteemed to bear toward
Learning, No. XXXVIII.
I have therefore placed in the Appendix, tho printed before.

The Success of the University's Address to him and others.
This Favor of having their Privileges confirmed, sued for in the forementioned
Letter, the University then got, partly by the Means of their cordial Patron
the Archbishop, and partly by the Intercession and Friendship of Queen
Katherine Par, a great Favourer of Learning and pure Religion, of Wriothesly
Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Warwick, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of
Arundel, and Sir William Paget; to all whom at that time they addressed their
Letters: whether it were out of fear of the difficulty of getting the thing
done, or to take this Opportunity to obtain the Countenance of the great Men of
the Court.

Another Address to him against the Townsmen.
Some time after, upon another Occasion, the Heads of the University made
another Application to their Patron the Archbishop; which was, to befriend
them at Court against the Townsmen their old Enemies, who were now wresting
from them one of their Ancient undoubted Privileges; namely, the use of the
Prisons of the Toll-booth and Castle. The Occasion was this; In the time of
Sturbridg-Fair, the Proctors, upon great Complaints made to them, going their
Rounds one Night, had taken certain evil Persons in Houses of Sin, and had
brought them to the Toll-booth, in order to the commitment of them there. But
having sent to the Mayor for the Keys, he absolutely refused to part with them.
So they were fain to carry their Prisoners to the Castle, where they left them
in Custody. But the Mayor's Son, after an Hour or two, let them all out to
return, if they pleased, to their former Lewdness; to the Breach of Law, and
Affront of the Magistrate. Upon this the University sent their Letters to the
Archbishop, making certain of their grave Members the Bearers, to relate the
Matter more fully; earnestly requiring that such Insolence might be punished:
and that the King and his Council would make such Men feel what it was to
violate Laws, and to cherish Impunity, and to break their Oaths, which they had
taken to maintain the University-Privileges. They urged to him, how serviceable
and ready their University had been to him in his pious Labors and Counsels,
in establishing the true Doctrine in the Church; and what fit and worthy Men
they had sent him for his Assistance in that good Work. In like manner they
required and expected of him, that their Dignity might be maintained and
preserved by his Aid and Authority. That the University was then but in a low
Condition, and that Abroad it scarcely retained the Shadow of its former Glory.
But if at Home, and within it Self, the Bonds and Sinews of its Safety should
thus be cut, as not to have a Power to restrain Vice by Imprisonment, what
could the Kingdom, Religion, and the King's Majesty hope for any more from that
University? They inculcated, how Learning, and the true Religion rise and fall
together; and that if it went otherwise than well with the one, the other would
feel the Smart of it. And truly (say they) no remarkable Damage can light upon
the Studies of Learning, which by the same Motion draws not along with it the
true Religion into the same Catastrophe. And these Considerations they made use
of, to excite his Grace to assist them in vindicating their Privileges, and in
having that gross Infringement of them punished. Upon the same Occasion they
wrote their Letters also to Sir William Paget, a great Friend of theirs, and
eminent Patron of good Learning. What the Issue of these Applications was, I
find not, but may conclude, they received a Success proportionable to the good
Will and Authority of those to whom they were made.

And as the whole Body of the University knew what Favor our Prelate bore to
it, Roger Ascham's Application to him for a Dispensation for eating Flesh.
so every single ingenious Member confided in him, and applied to him in their
Needs. Roger Ascham, the University Orator, whom I had occasion to mention
before, was a Man of a weak Constitution, and had contracted more frailty, by
reason of a long Ague that then hung about him, and his Complexion became
Melancholy by the Relicts of that stubborn Distemper. He had also in his Nature
a great averseness to the Fish-diet. Upon these Reasons he addressed his
Letters to the ABp with an humble Suit, very handsomely penned, that he might be
dispensed with as to abstinence from Flesh-meats, Lent and Fish-days, being
then strictly observed in the Colleges. And this License he desired might be,
not only Temporary, but perpetual, as long as he lived; which was somewhat
extraordinary. But to incline the Archbishop to yield to his Suit, he told
him, That it was not to pamper his Flesh, nor out of an affectation of doing
that which was unusual, or against common Custom, but only for the preserving
his Health, and that he might the more freely pursue his Studies. He added,
That the Air of Cambridg was naturally Cold and Moist, and so the Fish-diet the
more unwholesome. He desired therefore, That by his Authority he might no longer
be tied by that Tradition, which forbad the Use of certain Meats at certain
Times. He said, That those who granted this Liberty to none but such as
labored under a desperate Disease, did like them who never repaired their
Houses, but when they were just ready to fall down by Age. Thrifty
Housekeepers did otherwise: So did skilful Physicians, who did not use to
prescribe their Physic when it was too late, but always put a stop to
Beginnings. That they who never would impart the using of this Liberty (of
eating Flesh) to any, but when all Health was despaired of, knew not what good
a prudent Foresight did in all Commonwealths, and did too insolently abuse a
good Thing bestowed upon us by God, when little or no use at all could be made
of it. Nay, that such a Good was no Good at all, being External, but in that
respect only, as there might some use be made of it. That we ought not
therefore unprofitably to abuse Food to Diseases that are desperate, but to
accommodate it to the preservation of Health. And so did S. Paul command,
Therefore I exhort you to take some Food, for this is for your Health. Then he
subjoins a Passage of Herodotus in his Euterpe, concerning the Egyptian
Priests, from whom issued originally all kinds of Learning and Arts, and who
were always conversant in Learned Studies. These, says that Author,
religiously tied themselves, ever to abstain from all eating of Flesh. No doubt
for this only Cause, says Ascham, Ne ignea vis ingenii atque praestantia, ullo
frigido succo, quem esus piscium ingeneraret, extingueretur. That the Wits of
Men, that have a noble fiery Quality in them, might not be quenched by some
cold Juice, which the eating of Fish might engender. And that it was somewhat
unjust, he adds, that when so many kinds of Superstition flowed in such a
plentiful measure from the Egyptians, as might easily be proved, and thence
derived themselves, first to the Greeks, then to the Romans, and afterward to
our Times, through that Sink of Popery, that that single worthy Counsel and
Remedy of those most Learned Men, enjoined for the enlarging and spreading of
Learning, should be debarred us to follow; and that by such as were either
unlearned themselves, or superstitious Men: Whereby the best Wits received so
great Prejudice and Damage. That none knew better than his Lordship whence
this Custom arose, by whom cherished, and by what kind of Men brought down to
us. And, lastly, how unwholesome and unfit all eating of Flesh was in the
Springtime. And that he might obtain this Favor, he would use it without
giving Offense, or making any common Speech of it, with Quietness and Silence,
with Abstinence and Thanksgiving.

Favorably granted by the ABp.
This Letter he got his Friend Poinet, the Archbishop's Chaplain, (the same I
suppose who after was Bishop of Winchester) to put into his Grace's Hand, and
to further his Request what he could. The Issue whereof was to his Heart's
desire: For though the Archbishop knew him not, nor was easily drawn to
dispense with the Church's Ancient Discipline and Rites; yet he received his
Suit with all Humanity; and such he found to be the Modesty and Ingenuity of
the Man, and what he requested to be grounded upon such reasonable and just
Causes, that he readily yielded to it. And whether he thought it out of his
Power to grant a License of that Latitude, to discharge a Person for all Time
to come, from the Obligation of keeping Lent, or to avert the Censure he might
incur if he should have done it by his own Authority, or reckoning it a Matter
of Law rather than Religion, he put himself to the trouble of procuring the
King's License under the Privy Seal for this Man: And when he had done that,
considering an Academick's Poverty, he released him of the whole Charges of
taking it out, paying all the Fees himself: and so conveyed it to him by Dr.
Tailor the Master of his College.

And indeed the Archbishop's Opinion concerning Lent, The ABp's Opinion
concerning Lent.
made way for his more ready yielding to Ascham's Request: For he held the
keeping of Lent, as founded in a Positive Law, rather than as a Religious Duty,
and thought it necessary that so the People should be taught and instructed. As
appears by his Articles of Visitation in the second Year of King Edward: One
whereof ran thus, That enquiry should be made, whether the Curats had declared,
and to their Wit and Power had persuaded the People, that the manner and kind
of Fasting in Lent, and other Days in the Year, was but a mere positive Law:
And that therefore all Persons having just Cause of Sickness, or other
Necessity, or being licensed by the King's Majesty, may moderately eat all kind
of Meat, without grudg or scruple of Conscience.

The same Ascham knowing well how the Archbishop's Mind stood affected to
Cambridg, his old Nurse, Ascham acquaints him with the present State of the
University, as to their Studies.

Epistol. libro 2.


and how well he wished it for the sake of Religion, acquainted him with the
State of the University about the beginning of King Edward's Reign, and the
Course of the Studies that were then used. That there were very many began to
affect the Study of Divinity. [A new Study, it seems then; the Pope's Laws and
the Schoolmen having before employed the Heads of almost all]. That the
Doctrines of Original Sin and Predestination were much canvased. But many went
rather according to Pighius, highly applauding him, than according to S.
Augustine, though he exceeded all others that either went before or followed
after him, for the excellency of his Wit and Learning, and the greatness of his
Industry and Opportunities. That others among them made the reading of God's
Word their daily Exercise. And for the helping their Understandings in the
sense of it, they made use of, and adhered to the Judgment of S. Augustine
chiefly; and studied hard the Tongues. The Knowledge of Languages began to be
affected. And such as studied them were reckoned the best Masters; as
qualifying them best for teaching of others, or understanding themselves. That
for Oratory, they plied Plato and Aristotle; from whose Fountains among the
Greeks, Loquens illa prudentia (as he styled Oratory) that speaking Prudence
might be fetched. And to these among the Latins they added Cicero. They
conversed also in Herodotus, Thucidid^s and Xenophon, the three Lights of
Chronology, Truth, and Greek Eloquence; and which brought a great Luster to
their other Studies. The Greek Poets, which they took delight in, were Homer,
Sophocles and Euripides, the one the Fountain, the two others the Streams, of
all Eloquence and Learned Poetry. Which they were of Opinion, did more largely
water their other Studies, than Terence or Virgil; which in some former Years
were chiefly read. Thus was the Method of University-Studies altered (so much
for the better,) from reading the Schoolmen, and Metaphysical Niceties, the
Pope's Canons and Decretals, to converse in politer and more manly Learning,
which tended so much to solid Knowledge, and preparation of Men's Minds to the
Entertainment of the Gospel.

Sir John Cheke, the ABp's dear Friend, the prime Instrument of politer Studies
there.
The great setter on foot of this ingenuous Learning in the University, was Sir
John Cheke of S. John's College, now preferred to be the King's Tutor, a Person
for whom the Archbishop had a very tender Love, and affectionate Kindness. For
so Ascham writ to him in his former Letter, That many had addicted themselves
to this course of Study, by the Aid and Conduct, Example and Counsel of that
excellent Man. And that they bore the better his going from them to the Court,
who had brought them on in so good a Course; because they knew their Disprofit
was abundantly recompensed by the Profit and Safety that would accrue to the
whole Commonwealth by him. Applying that of Plato to him, Plurimum Reip.
interesse, ut unus aliquis existat semper praestans excellensque Vir, ad cujus
virtutis imitationem, caeteri voluntate, industria, studio, and spe erecti,
totos sese effingant and accommodent.

The Impediments of the Universities flourishing state laid before him.
Afterward he acquainted the most Reverend Person, to whom he wrote, with those
things which proved great Hindrances to the flourishing Estate of the
University; that by his Counsel and Authority, if possible, they might be
redressed. And they were two. The one was, That they wanted elderly Men, very
few such remaining among them, by whose Example the younger Sort might be
excited to study, and by whose Authority the Manners of the rest might be
rightly formed and fashioned. The other Impediment was occasioned by such as
were admitted: Who were for the most part only the Sons of Rich Men, and such
as never intended to pursue their Studies to that degree, as to arrive at any
eminent Proficiency and Perfection in Learning, but only the better to qualify
themselves for some Places in the State, by a slighter and more superficial
Knowledge. The Injury accruing thence to the University was double; both because
by this means, all hope of ripe and completed Learning was immaturely cut off
in the very Bud; and also all the Expectations of the poorer sort, whose whole
Time was spent in good Studies, was eluded by these Drones, occupying those
Places and Preferments, which more properly belonged unto them. For Parts,
Learning, Poverty and Election, were of no strength at Home, where Favor and
Countenance, and the Letters of Noblemen, and suchlike extraordinary and
illegal Courses from Abroad, bore all the Sway.

CHAP. VII. Dr. Smith and others recant.
AND now before I conclude this Year, let me pass from more public Matters,
and present the Reader with two or three Passages, wherein the Archbishop had
to do with private Men.

May the 15 th, Richard Smith D. D. Master of Whittington College, Dr. Smith
recants at Paul's Cross.
and Reader of Divinity in Oxford, a hot turbulent Man, made his Recantation at
Paul's Cross, convinced and moved thereunto by the Pains of the Archbishop.
What his Errors were, that he had publicly vented in the University, and in
his Writings, may be known by the words of his Recantation, which were these:

I do confess and acknowledge, that the Authority, as well of the Bishop of
Rome, whose Authority is justly and lawfully abolished in this Realm, as of
other Bishops, and others called the Ministers of the Church, consists in the
Dispensation and Ministration of God's Word, and not in making Laws, Ordinances
and Decrees over the People, besides God's Word, without the Consent and
Authority of the Prince and People. I say and affirm, that within this Realm of
England, and other the King's Dominions, there is no Law, Decree, Ordinance, or
Constitution Ecclesiastical, in force, and available by any Man's Authority,
but only by the King's Majesty's Authority, or of his Parliament.

This Man had wrote two Books in favor of Popish Doctrine; His Books.
and those he also now disclaimed, viz. A Book of Traditions, and another of
the Sacrifice of the Mass. In the former of which he maintained, That Christ
and his Apostles taught and left to the Church many things without writing;
which he asserted were steadfastly to be believed, and obediently fulfilled,
under pain of Damnation. In the other Book he maintained, That Christ was not a
Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck, when he offered himself upon the Cross
for our Sins, but after the Order of Aaron: and that when Christ did offer his
Body to his Father, after the Order of Melchizedek, to appease his Wrath, it
was to be understood not of the Sacrifice of the Cross, but of the Sacrifice
that he made at his Maundy, in form of Bread and Wine. In which Book were other
Errors. He that is minded to see his Recantation of these his Books, may have
it in the Appendix, No. XXXIX.
as I transcribed it out of an old Book made by Becon, entitled, Reports of
certain Men. This Recantation he not long after made at Oxon, viz. in August
following: Where he also protested openly, That he would abide in the sincere
and pure Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, all humane trifling Traditions set apart,
even unto Death, though it should cost him his Life. And this Recantation he
also printed, for further Satisfaction to the World.

Bishop Gardener, who was now at Winchester, Gardener offended with this
Recantation.
was very uneasy at the News of this Recantation, which some took care to bring
down to him. He signified to the Protector, That Smith was a Man with whom he
had no Familiarity, nor cared for his Acquaintance. That he had not seen him in
three Years, nor talked with him in Seven. He was greatly displeased with the
first words of his Recantation, Psalm. 116.11.
(which yet were but the words of Scripture) Omnis Homo mendax: Making all the
Doctors in the Church (as he inferred) to be Liars with himself: How it argued
his Pride; for he that sought for such Company in Lying, had small Humility;
and that he would hide himself by that Number: that his depraving of Man's
Nature in that sort, was not the setting out of the Authority of Scripture. He
said, he neither liked his Tractation, nor yet his Retractation. That he was
mad to say in his Book of Unwritten Verities, that Bishops in this Realm could
make Laws, wherein, he said, he lied loudly. About this time Chadsey, Other
University-Men recant.
Standish, Young, Oglethorp, and diverse others recanted (whose Recantations Fox
had by him to show) as well as Smith, whom we have now before us.

Smith affronts ^he ABp.
After this Recantation he carried not himself according to it; but favored the
Old Errors: And in the Year 1549, offered some Affront unto Archbishop
Cranmer, opposing him in the Doctrine of the Lawfulness of Priests Marriage,
and endeavored to make a Rout in Oxford, to the endangering P. Martyr's Life:
and printed a Book the same Year against him, De Votis Monasticis. Whereupon
incurring, as he apprehended, some Danger, he fled into Scotland. But weary of
being there, and willing to have his Peace made in England, he wrote two
Letters to the Archbishop from thence; professing that he would out of hand,
by open Writing in the Latin Tongue, revoke all that erroneous Doctrine, which
he had before taught and published, and set forth the pure Doctrine of Christ.
And for a Proof hereof, he would straight after his return into England, set
forth a Book in Latin, in defense of the most lawful Marriage of Priests. In
the Year 1550, he wrote certain Treatises against P. Martyr, printed at Lovain.
And the same Year came out his Book against the Archbishop's Treatise of the
Sacrament.

His Inconstancy.
This Man was of a most inconstant, as well as turbulent Spirit. For in the
Reign of Queen Mary he turned to the Religion then professed; and was great
with Bishop Boner in those Times, but greatly despised for his Fickleness. He
once attempted to discourse with Hawks in Boner's House in London; Hawks threw
in his Dish his Recantation. To which when he said, it was no Recantation, but
a Declaration; the other gave him this Rub, To be short I will know, whether
you will Recant any more, ere ever I talk with you, or believe you? and so
departed from him. We shall hear of him again in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
when he again complied, and submitted himself to Archbishop Parker. And last
of all returned to his old Opinions, and fled to Lovain.

The ABp's admonition to the Vicar of St^pney.
Pass we from this Man to another of the same Strain, with whom the Archbishop
had to do. As the Popish Clergy in the former King's Reign had made all the
rudest and eagerest Opposition they dared, against the Steps that were then
made toward a Reformation, so they ceased not to do in this King's; nay and
more, hoping to shelter themselves under a milder Government. One Instance of
this appeared in what was done by the Quondam Abbot of Tower Hill, Foxii MSS.
London: Who for some Recompense of the loss of his Abbey, was made Vicar of
Stepney-Church; succeeding I suppose Mr. Hierom, burnt to death in the Year
1540, with Dr. Barnes and Garret. He being a bold Man, and addicted to the old
Superstition, would commonly disturb the Preachers in his Church, when he liked
not their Doctrine, by causing the Bells to be rung when they were at the
Sermon; and sometimes beginning to sing in the Choir before the Sermon were
half done; and sometimes by challenging the Preacher in the Pulpit: For he was
a strong, stout, Popish Prelat. Whom therefore the Godly-disposed of the Parish
were weary of, and especially some of the eminentest Men at Lim^hurst, whose
Names were Driver, Ive, Poynter, March and others. But they durst not meddle
with him, until one Underhill, of the Band of Gentlemen-Pensioners, of a good
Family, and well respected at Court, came to live at Limehurst. He being the
King's Servant, took upon him to reprehend this Abbot for these and suchlike
his Doings: and by his Authority carried him unto Croyden to the Archbishop
there, the Persons abovenamed going along as Witnesses. In fine, the mild
Archbishop sent him away with a gentle Rebuke, and bad him to do no more so.
This Lenity offended Underhill, who said, My Lord, methinks you are too gentle
unto so stout a Papist. To which Cranmer replied, Well, we have no Law to
punish them by. No Law, my Lord, said the other? If I had your Authority, I
would be so bold to unvicar him, or minister some sharp Punishment upon him,
and such other. If ever it come to their Turn, they will show you no such
Favor. Well, (said the good Archbishop) if God so provide, we must abide it.
Surely (replied the other again) God will never con you Thanks for this, but
rather take the Sword from such as will not use it upon his Enemies. And so
they parted. And this indeed was the constant Behavior of the Archbishop
toward Papists, and such as were his Enemies. For which he was now, and at
other times, taxed by Men of hotter Spirits: but his Opinion was, that Clemency
and Goodness, as it was more agreeable to the Gospel, which he labored to
adorn, so was more likely to obtain the Ends he desired, than Rigor and
Austerity.

The Archbishop did one thing more this Year of good Conducement to the
promoting true Religion, and exposing False: The ABp Licenseth an eminent
Preacher.
and that was in countenancing and licensing an earnest Preacher in the
South-West Parts, named Thomas Hancock, a Master of Arts, whose Mouth had been
stopped by a strict Inhibition from Preaching in the former King's Reign. The
Archbishop saw well what a useful Man he had been in those parts of England
where he frequented, having been a very diligent Preacher of the Gospel, and
Declaimer against Papal Abuses, in the Diocesses of two bigoted Bishops,
Gardener of Winchester, and Capon of Sarum. In this first Year of the King,
many zealous Preachers of the Gospel, without staying for public Orders from
Above, earnestly set forth the Evangelical Doctrine, in confutation of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, and such
like. And of the Laity there were great numbers every where, especially in
populous Towns, of such as did now more openly show their Heads, and their good
Inclinations to the New Learning, as it was then called. In Southampton of the
Diocese of Winchester; in Salisbury, Pool and Dorset, of the Diocese of Sarum,
did this Hancock chiefly converse, and officiate in the latter end of K. Henry.
When he was suspended a Celebratione Divinorum, by Dr. Raynold, Foxil MSS.
Commissary under Dr. Steward, then Chancellor to Bp Gardener, upon pretense of
the Breach of the Act of Six Articles; because he had taught, out of the Ninth
to the Hebrews, That our Savior Christ entered once into the Holy Place, by the
which he obtained unto us everlasting Redemption. That he once suffered, and
that his Body was once offered, to take away the Sins of many People. And that
one only Oblation sufficed for the Sins of the whole World. And though all this
was but mere Scripture, yet they found it to contradict their Notions, and
therefore they thought convenient to suspend him. But as these Bishops did what
they could to stifle all Preaching of God's Word, so the Archbishop's
Principle was to encourage and send forth Preachers. So Hancock,
notwithstanding his former Suspension, obtained a License from our Archbishop
to preach.

Now to follow this Preacher a little after his License obtained. At
Christ-Church Twinham, Who preaches against the Errors and Superstitions of
the Church. Foxii MSS.
in the County of Southampton, where he was born, (as I take it from his own
Narration) he preached out of the Sixteenth Chapter of S. John, The Holy Ghost
shall reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, etc. because I go to the
Father. The Priest being then at Mass, Hancock declared unto the People, That
that the Priest held over his Head, they did see with their bodily Eyes; but
our Savior Christ does here say plainly, that we shall see him no more. Then
you, says he, that do kneel unto it, pray unto it, and honor it as God, do
make an Idol of it, and your selves do commit most horrible Idolatry. Whereat
the Vicar, Mr. Smith, sitting in his Chair, in the face of the Pulpit, spoke
these words; Mr. Hancock, you have done well until now; and now have you played
an ill Cow's part, which when she has given a good Mess of Milk, overthrows
all with her Foot, and so all is lost. And with these words he got him out of
the Church.

Also in this first Year of the King, the same Person preached in S. Thomas
Church at Salisbury, Is bound to answer for his Sermon at the Assizes.
Dr. Oking Chancellor to Bishop Capon, and Dr. Steward Chancellor to Bishop
Gardener, being present, with diverse others of the Clergy and Laity. His place
was, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
out. Whence he inveighed against the Superstitious Ceremonies, Holy Bread, Holy
Water, Images, Copes, Vestments, etc. And at last against the Idol of the
Altar, proving it to be an Idol, and no God, by the First of S. John's Gospel,
No Man has seen God at any time; with other places of the Old Testament. But
that the Priest held over his Head, they did see, kneeled before it, honored
it; and so made an Idol of it: And therefore they were most horrible Idolaters.
Whereat the Doctors, and certain of the Clergy, went out of the Church. Hancock
seeing them departing, charged them, They were not of God, because they refused
to hear the Word of God. But when the Sermon was ended, Thomas Chaffen the
Mayor, set on, as is likely, by some of the Clergy, came to him, laying to his
Charge the Breach of a Proclamation, lately set forth by the Lord Protector,
That no Nicknames should be given unto the Sacrament, as Round-Robin, or Jack
in the Box. Whereto he replied, That it was no Sacrament, but an Idol, as they
used it. But for all this Excuse, the Mayor had committed him to Jail, had not
Six honest Men been bound for his Appearance the next Assizes, to make his
Answer: As Dr. Ieffery, about this time had committed two to Prison for the
like Cause.

So that now if we look back upon this first Year of the King, How far the
Reformation had proceeded.
we may perceive, how busy and diligent our Archbishop was in redressing
Abuses, and restoring the Church to its true State of Christian Piety and
Devotion; by procuring a Royal Visitation over England, for inspection into the
Manners and Abilities of the Clergy, and for taking away of Superstitions; by
getting a Book of plain Homilies to teach the common People, (in the composing
whereof he himself had a very great hand) and Erasmus his Paraphrase in English
upon the New Testament, for the better furnishing the Clergy and others with a
sound and sober understanding of the Scriptures; and by encouraging Preachers,
and suchlike means. So that if you would particularly know in what forwardness
the ABp had already put Religion, taking in his Endeavors in the last King's
Reign hitherto, I recommend to your reading his Homily or Sermon Of Good Works:
Part 3.
Showing out of what abundance of Superstitions the Church was now emerged.
Briefly, to pass over the Ungodly and Counterfeit Religion, [he means, of Monks
and Friars] let us rehearse some other kinds of Papistical Superstitions and
Abuses, as of Beads, of Lady-Psalters and Rosaries, of fifteen O's, of S.
Bernard's Verses, of S. Agathe's Letters, of Purgatory, of Masses Satisfactory,
of Stations and Jubilees, of fained Relics, or hallowed Beads, Bells, Bread,
Water, Psalms, Candles, Fire, and such other. Of superstitious Fastings, of
Fraternities or Brotherhoods, of Pardons, with suchlike Merchandise: Which
were so esteemed or abused, to the great Prejudice of God's Glory and
Commandments, that they were made most high and most holy Things; whereby to
obtain to the everlasting Life, or Remission of Sins. Yea also vain Inventions,
unfruitful Ceremonies, and ungodly Laws, Decrees and Conceits of Rome; wherein
such were advanced, that nothing was thought comparable in Authority, Wisdom,
Learning and Godliness unto them. So that the Laws of Rome, as they said, were
to be received of all Men, as the four Evangelists: To the which all the Laws
of Princes must give place. And the Laws of God also partly were left off, and
less esteemed, that the said Laws, Decrees and Councils, with their Traditions
and Ceremonies, might be more duly kept, and had in greater Reverence. Thus
were the People, through Ignorance, so blinded with the godly Show and
Appearance of those things, that they thought the keeping of them to be more
Holiness, more perfect Service and honoring of God, and more pleasing to God,
than the keeping of God's Commandments. Such have been the corrupt Inclinations
of Man, ever superstitiously given, to make new honoring of God of his own
Head; and then to have more Affection and Devotion to keep that, than to search
out God's Holy Commandments, and to keep them. And furthermore, to take God's
Commandments for Man's Commandments, and Man's Commandments, for God's
Commandments, yea, and for the highest and most perfect and holiest of all
God's Commandments. And so was all confused, that scant well-learned Men, and
but a small number of them, knew, or at the least would know, and durst affirm
the Truth, to separate or sever God's Commandments from the Commandments of
Men. Whereupon did grow such Error, Superstition and Idolatry, vain Religion,
overthwart Judgment, great Contention, with all ungodly Living.

A Bishop Consecrated.
Ridley consecrated Bp. Cran. Reg. p. 321.
September the 5 th, being Sunday, Nicolas Ridley, D. D. Prebend of Canterbury,
was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, by Henry Bishop of Lincoln, assisted by
John Suffragan of Bedford, and Thomas Suffragan of Sidon, in the Chapel
belonging to the House of May, Dean of S. Paul's. He was Consecrated according
to the old Custom of the Church, by the Unction of holy Chrism, as well as
Imposition of Hands. Present among others, John Whytwel the Archbishop's
Almoner, Rich. Tailor M. A. Nic. Bullingham, Gregory Tod, and Tho. Bernard, his
Chaplains.

CHAP. VIII. The Church's Goods embezelled. New Opinions broached.
AS the Reformation of Abuses in Religion went forward under such a King,
Churches profaned.
and such an Archbishop, so there wanted not for Evils accompanying it, as
there do commonly the best Things; the Profaneness of some, and the
Covetousness of others, giving occasion thereunto. Sacred Places set apart for
Divine Worship, were now greatly profaned; and so probably had been before by
ill Custom: For in many Churches, Cathedral as well as other, and especially in
London, many Frays, Quarrels, Riots, Blood-sheddings were committed. They used
also commonly to bring Horses and Mules into and through Churches, and shooting
off Hand-guns: Making the same which were properly appointed to God's Service
and Common Prayer, like a Stable or Common Inn, or rather a Den or Sink of all
Unchristiness; as it was expressed in a Proclamation which the King set forth
about this Time, Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
as I suppose, (for I am left to conjecture for the Date) by reason of the
Insolency of great Numbers using the said evil Demeanours, and daily more and
more increasing: Therein forbidding any such Quarrelling, Shooting, or bringing
Horses and Mules into or through the Churches, or by any other Means
irreverently to use the Churches, upon pain of his Majesty's Indignation and
Imprisonment. For it was not thought fit, that when Divine Worship was now
reforming, the Places for the said Worship should remain unreformed.

Beside the profanation of Churches, there prevailed now another Evil, relating
also to Churches, viz. That the Utensils and Ornaments of these Sacred Places,
were spoiled, embezelled, Church Ornaments embezelled.
and made away, partly by the Churchwardens, and partly by other Parishioners.
Whether the Cause were, that they would do that themselves, which they imagined
would e're long be done by others, viz. robbing the Churches. Which, it may be,
those that bore an Ill Will to the Reformation might give out, to render it the
more odious. But certain it is, that it now became more or less practiced all
the Nation over, to sell or take away Chalices, Crosses of Silver, Bells, and
other Ornaments. For the stopping of this, in the Month of April, the
Protector, and the Lords of the Council, writ to our Archbishop this Letter,
upon the Information and Complaint, as it is likely, of the said Archbishop
himself, in whose Diocese especially this Sacrilege prevailed.

AFter our right hearty Commendations. The Council's Letter to the ABp
thereupon. Cran. Regist.
Whereas we are informed, that the Churchwardens and Parochians of diverse
Parishes do alienate and sell away their Chalices, Crosses of Silver, Bells,
and other Ornaments of the Church: Which were not given for that purpose to be
alienated at their pleasure; but either to be used to the Intent they were at
first given, or to some other necessary and convenient Service of the Church.
Therefore this is to will and require you immediately, upon the sight hereof,
to give strait Charge and Commandment, on the King's Majesty's behalf, to every
Parish Church within your Diocese, that they do in no wise sell, give, or
otherwise alienate any Bells, or other Ornaments, or Jewels, belonging unto
their Parish Church, upon pain of his highest Displeasure, as they will answer
to the contrary at their Peril. Thus fare you well. From Westminster, the last
day of April 1548.

Your loving Friends, E. Somerset Tho. Cheyney. Will. Seint-Iohn. Will. Paget.
I. Russell. Tho. Smith. Will. Herbert. H. Arundel. A. Denny. Ioh. Baker.
.


It is not an improbable Conjecture, that the Archbishop procured this Letter,
to arm Churchwardens with an Answer to such greedy Courtiers and Gentlemen, as
used often to resort to them; and in their own, or the Council's Name, required
these Goods of their Churches to be yielded up to them; and threatened them if
they did not.

The next Month the Council sent the Archbishop a Form of Prayer, to be used
by himself and those of his Diocese. A Form of Prayer sent to the ABp.
Wherein God was implored to grant the Nation Peace and Victory over her
Enemies: For now all things round about appeared in a Posture of War; and
Preparation of Arms were making: Which caused the King also to raise Forces.
And for a Blessing upon them, the Privy Council sent to the Archbishop,
together with the Form, an Order for the speedy using of it. The Tenor of the
Letter follows.

AFter our hearty Commendations to your good Lordship. Hearing tell of great
Preparations made of Foreign Princes, and otherwise, being enforced for the
Procurement and Continuance of Peace, With the Council's Letter. Cran. Regist.
to make Preparation of War: Forasmuch as all Power and Aid valuable comes of
God; the which he grants, as he has promised by his Holy Word, by nothing so
much as by hearty Prayers of good Men: The which is also of more Efficacy, made
of an whole Congregation together, gathered in his Holy Name: Therefore this is
to will and require you, to give Advertisement and Commandments to all the
Curats in your Diocese, That every Sunday and Holy Day, in their Common Prayer,
they make devout and hearty Intercessions to Almighty God for Victory and
Peace. And to the Intent, that you should not be in Doubts what sort and manner
thereof we do like, we have sent unto you one: Which we would that you and they
should follow, and read it instead of one of the Collects of the King's
Majesty's Procession. Thus we pray you not to fail to do with all speed, and
bid you farewell. From Westminster, the 6 th of May, 1548.

Your loving Friends, E. Somerset. R. Rich, Canc. W. Seint-Iohn. I. Russel. Th.
Cheyney.


New Opinions Broached.
Now that the Liberty of the Gospel began to be allowed, diverse false Opinions
and unsound Doctrines began to be vented with it; of which public Cognizance
began now to be taken. As that the Elect sinned not, and that they could not
sin. That they that be Regenerate, never fall away from godly Love. That the
Elect have a right to take so much of the Things of the World, as may supply
their Necessities. And there were some that openly preached these Doctrines,
and set forth and published Books to the same Tenor.

Several of these Heretics, in the Month of April, were convented before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Cranm. Regist.
Sir Thomas Smith; Richard Cox, Hugh Latimer, Doctors of Divinity; William May,
Dean of St. Paul's; William Cook, Richard Lyel, Doctors of Law, and others the
King's Commissioners. Then did one John Champneys, of Stratford on the Bow,
abjure. He taught, and wrote, and defended; 1. That a Man after he is
Regenerate in Christ, cannot sin. 2. That the outward Man might sin, but the
inward Man could not. 3. That the Gospel has been so much persecuted and hated
ever since the Apostles Times, that no Man might be suffered openly to follow
it. 4. That godly Love falls never away from them which be regenerate in
Christ. Wherefore they cannot do contrary to the Commandments of Christ. 5.
That that was the most principal of our marked Men's Doctrine, that make the
People believe that there was no such Spirit given unto Men whereby they should
remain Righteous, and always in Christ. Which is [as he wrote and asserted] a
most devilish Error. 6. That God does permit to all his Elect People their
bodily Necessities of all earthly Things.

All these he revoked: Granting or confessing now, 1. That a Man, after he is
regenerate in Christ, may sin, being destitute of his Spirit. 2. That the inner
Man does sin, Champneys revokes six Articles.
when the outward Man sins actually with the consent of the Mind. 3. That
diverse times, sithence the Apostles Times, to follow the Doctrine of Christ
has been suffered openly. 4. That godly Love falls from them, that be
regenerate in Christ, being destitute of the Spirit: and that then they may do
contrary to the Commands of Christ. 5. That it is no erroneous Doctrine, which
he affirmed in his Book to be a devilish Error, and our marked Men's Doctrine,
viz. To make the People believe, that there was no such Spirit given unto Man,
whereby he should remain Righteous always in Christ. But I confess, [saith the
Abjurer] that a Man having the Spirit, may afterward fall, and not be
Righteous. 6. That God does not permit to all his Elect People their bodily
Necessities of all worldly things to be taken, but by a Law and Order approved
by the Civil Policy. To which by me now spoken I mean, ne understand any other
Sense than has been here opened; to use again his very words in his
Abjuration. And so touching the Holy Gospel with his Hand, before the King's
Commissioners, he abjured, promising, That he should never hold, teach or
believe the said Errors, or damned Opinions above rehearsed. And so subscribed
his Name.

Then the Archbishop in his own Name, And abjure^.
and in the Name of the other Commissioners, gave him his Oath. 1. That he
should not by any means hereafter teach or preach to the People, nor set forth
any kind of Books, in print or otherwise, nor cause to be printed or set forth
any such Books, that should contain any manner of Doctrine, without a special
License thereunto of the King's Majesty, or some of his Grace's Privy Council
first had and obtained. 2. That the said Champneys, with all speed convenient,
and with all his diligence, procure as many of his Books, as are passed forth
in his Name, to be called in again, and utterly destroyed, as much as in him
should lie. 3. That he should the Sunday following attend at Paul's Cross upon
the Preacher, all the time of the Sermon, and there penitently stand before the
Preacher with a Faggot on his Shoulder. And then he had two Sureties bound in
five hundred Pounds, that he should perform his Penance. This was done April 27.

There were other Heresies also now vented abroad, Other Heresies vented.
as the denial of the Trinity, and of the Deity of the Holy Ghost: And the
Assertion, That Jesus Christ was a mere Man, and not true God, because he had
the Accidents of Humane Nature; such as hungring and thirsting, and being
visible: And that the Benefit Men receive by Jesus Christ, was the bringing
them to the true Knowledge of God. There was one John Assheton a Priest, that
preached these Doctrines: Who on the 28 th of December was summoned to Lambeth,
to appear there before the Archbishop. Cranm. Regist.
Where John Whitwel the Archbishop's Almoner, and Thomas Langley, both
Priests, and his Grace's Chaplains, exhibited a Schedule of diverse Heresies and
damned Opinions against the said Assheton. Which are recited in the Abjuration
which he made. The Tenor whereof is as follows.

In the Name of God, Amen. Before you, most Learned Father in God, Thomas
Archbishop, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, Commissary of our most
dread Sovereign Lord, and excellent Prince, Assheton's Recantation.
Edward VI, by the Grace of God, etc. I John Assheton Priest, of my pure Heart,
Free Will, voluntary and sincere Knowledge, confess and openly recognize, that
in Times past, I thought, believed, said, heard and affirmed these Errors,
Heresies, and damnable Opinions following; that is to say, 1. That the Trinity
of Persons was established by the Confession of Athanasius, declared by a
Psalm, Quicunque vult, etc. And that the Holy Ghost is not God, but only a
certain Power of the Father. 2. That Jesus Christ, that was conceived of the
Virgin Mary, was a holy Prophet, and especially beloved of God the Father; but
that he was not the true and living God: Forasmuch as he was seen, and lived,
hungered and thirsted. 3. That this only is the Fruit of Jesus Christ's Passion;
that whereas we were strangers from God, and had no knowledge of his Testament,
it pleased God by Christ, to bring us to the acknowledging of his holy Power by
the Testament.

Wherefore I the said John Assheton, detesting and abhorring all and every my
said Errors, Heresies, and damned Opinions, willingly, and with all my Power,
affecting hereafter firmly to believe in the true and perfect Faith of Christ,
and his Holy Church, purposing to follow the true and sincere Doctrine of holy
Church with a pure and free Heart, voluntarily mind, will, and intend utterly
to forsake, relinquish, renounce and despise the said detestable Errors,
Heresies, and abominable Opinions: Granting and confessing now, 1. That the
blessed Trinity consists in Three distinct Persons, and one Godhead; as God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, coequal in Power and Might. 2.
That Jesus Christ is both God and Man, after his holy Nature, eternally
begotten of his Father, of his own Substance; and in his Humanity was conceived
by the Holy Ghost incarnate, and for our Redemption, being very God, became
Man. 3. That by the Death of Jesus Christ we be not only made Partakers of the
Testament, and so disposed to the Knowledge of his godly Will and Power, but
also that we have full Redemption and Remission of our Sins in his Blood. Then
he subscribed his Hand to this Confession before the Archbishop, exhibiting it
for his Act; and lifting up his Hand, beseeched his Grace to deal mercifully
and graciously with him; and touching the Gospel, gave his Faith that he would
faithfully and humbly obey the Commands of the Holy Mother Church, and
whatsoever Penance the said most Reverend Father should lay upon him.

Other Errors still.
To these erroneous Doctrines we must add others, that now also spread
themselves: As that Christ took not Flesh of the Virgin; That the Baptism of
Infants was not profitable. Of which Error one Michael Thombe of London,
Butcher, recanted the Year following, viz. 1549, May 11. having been then
convented before the Archbishop at Lambeth.

I Michael Thombe of London, Bocher, of my pure Heart and free Will,
voluntarily and sincerely acknowledge and confess, and openly recognize, that in
times past, I thought, believed, said, heard and affirmed, these Errors and
Heresies, and damnable Opinions following: that is to say, That Christ took no
Flesh of our Lady; and that the Baptism of Infants is not profitable, because
it goes before Faith. Wherefore I, the said Michael Thombe, detesting and
abhorring all and every such my said Errors, Heresies, and damned Opinions; and
with all my Power affecting hereafter firmly to believe in the true and perfect
Faith of Christ, and of the Holy Church, purposing to follow the true and
sincere Doctrine of Holy Church, with a pure and free Heart, voluntarily mind,
will, and intend, utterly to forsake, relinquish, renounce and despise the said
detestable Errors, Heresies, and damnable Opinions; granting and confessing
now, That Christ took Flesh of the Virgin Mary; and that the Baptism of Infants
is profitable and necessary. And by this Submission and Penance doing, Thombe
escaped.

But another of the same Opinion, more obstinate, came to a sadder End; and was
Burnt; namely, Joan Bocher, or Joan of Kent. Joan Boche^s Heresy*
Her Opinion is in the Instrument drawn up against her in the ABp's Register.
Which ran thus; That you believe that the Word was made Flesh in the Virgin's
Belly; but that Christ took Flesh of the Virgin you believe not, because the
Flesh of the Virgin being the outward Man, was sinfully gotten, and born in
Sin. But the Word, by the Consent of the inward Man of the Virgin, was made
Flesh. This she stood perversely in. So the Archbishop himself excommunicated
her judicially; the Sentence being read by him, April 1549, in S. Mary's
Chapel within the Cathedral Church of Paul's, Sir Thomas Smith, William Cook
Dean of the Arches, Hugh Latimer, Richard Lyell, LL. D. the King's
Commissioners, assisting. She was committed afterward to the Secular Arm; and
certified so to be by an Instrument made by the Commissioners to the King.
After she was condemned, she was a Sevennight in the Lord Chancellor Rich his
House: and every day the Archbishop and Bishop Ridley came and reasoned with
her, that if possible they might save her from the Fire: But nothing would do.
I will here produce Latimer's Censure of her, Latime^'s Censure of her*
who well knew her Case, being one of the Commissioners that sat upon her. She
would say, (says he in his Sermon on S. John Evangelist's Day) That our
Savior was not very Man, nor had received Flesh of his Mother Mary. And yet
she could show no reason why she should believe so. Her Opinion was this, The
Son of God, said she, penetrated through her as through a Glass, taking no
Substance of her. This foolish Woman denied the common Creed, Natus ex Maria
Virgin, and said that our Savior had a fantastical Body.

A Dutch Man, an Arian, named George van Paris, denying Christ to be true God,
came to a like End with Joan, namely, Georg^ Van Paris.
that of burning to Death, being condemned for Heresy; that was in the Year
1551. But tho I make some Anticipation in my History, yet I do it, that I may
lay these Heresies here together, that started up, or rather showed themselves
more visibly in this Reign.

CHAP. IX. The Archbishop Visits.
THE Archbishop in this Year held a Visitation in diverse Places throughout his
Diocese. The ABp visits his Diocese.
Wherein enquiry was to be made concerning the Behavior both of the Priests
and the People, in eighty six Articles. Whereby may be seen the Archbishop's
conscientious Care and Solicitude for the abrogating of Superstition, and the
promoting of true Religion: That he might reduce the Clergy to Learning,
Sobriety, and Diligence in their Vocation; and the People to Loyalty and
Obedience to the King, and the sincere worshipping of God.

His Articles for the Clergy.
Concerning the Priests, he ordered enquiry to be made; Whether they preached
four times a Year against the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, and in
behalf of the King's Power and Authority within his own Realms. Whether in
their Common Prayers, they used not the Collects made for the King, and
mentioned not his Majesty's Name in the same. Whether they had destroyed and
taken away out of the Churches, all Images and Shrines, Tables, Candlesticks,
Trindals or Rolls of Wax, and all other Monuments of feigned Miracles, Idolatry
and Superstition; and moved their Parishioners to do the same in their own
Houses. Enquiries were made concerning their due Administration of the
Sacraments; concerning their preaching God's Word once at least in a Quarter;
and then exhorting their Parishioners to Works commanded by Scripture, and not
to Works devised by Men's Fancies, as wearing and praying upon Beads, and
suchlike. Concerning the plain reciting the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and Ten
Commandments in English, immediately after the Gospel, as often as there were
no Sermon. Concerning the examining of every one that came to Confession in
Lent, whether they were able to say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten
Commandments, in English. Concerning the having Learned Curats, to be procured
by such as were absent from their Benefices. Concerning having the whole Bible
of the largest Volume in every Church, and Erasmus's Paraphrase in English.
Concerning teaching the People of the Nature of the Fast of Lent, and other
Days in the Year, that it was but a mere positive Law. Concerning Residence
upon Benefices, and keeping Hospitality. Concerning finding a Scholar in the
Universities, o^ some Grammar School, incumbent on such Priests as had an
hundred pounds a Year. Concerning moving the Parishioners to pray rather in
English, than in a Tongue unknown, and not to put their Trust in saying over a
number of Beads. Concerning having the New Testament in Latin and English, and
Erasmus's Paraphrase, which all Priests under the Degree of Batchelors in
Divinity, were examined about. Concerning putting out of the Church-Books the
Name of Papa, and the Name and Service of Thomas Becket, and the Prayers that
had Rubricks, containing Pardons and Indulgences. And many the like Articles.
Which may be seen by him that will have recourse to them, as they are printed
in Bishop Sparrow's Collections.

Those Articles that related to the Laity, were, And for the Laity.
Concerning the Letters or Hinderers of the Word of God read in English, or
preached sincerely. Concerning such as went out of the Church in time of the
Litany, or Common Prayer, or Sermon. Concerning ringing Bells at the same time.
Concerning such as abused the Ceremonies, as casting Holy Water upon their
Beds, bearing about them Holy Bread, S. John's Gospel; keeping of private
Holydays, as Tailors, Bakers, Brewers, Smiths, Shoemakers, etc. did. Concerning
the misbestowing of Money arising from Cattle, or other moveable Stocks of the
Church, as for finding of Lights, Torches, Tapers or Lamps, and not employed to
the poor Man's Chest. Concerning abusing Priests and Ministers. Concerning
praying upon the English Primer, set forth by the King, and not the Latin, for
such as understand not Latin. Concerning keeping the Church-Holy-day, and the
Dedication-day, any otherwise, or at any other time than was appointed.
Concerning Commoning and Jangling in the Church, at the time of reading the
Common Prayer or Homilies, or when there was preaching. Concerning maintenance
of Error and Heresy. Concerning common Swearers, Drunkards, Blasphemers,
Adulterers, Bawds. Enquiries were also to be made after such as were common
Brawlers, Slanderers; such as used Charms, Sorceries, Enchantments and
Witchcraft; such as contemned their own Parish Church, and went elsewhere.
Concerning Marrying within the Degrees prohibited, and without asking the
Bannes. Concerning the honest discharge of Wills and Testaments, in such as
were Executors or Administrators. Concerning such as contemned married Priests,
and refused to receive the Communion and other Sacraments at their Hands.
Concerning such as kept in their own Houses Images, Tables, Pictures, Painting,
or Monuments of fained Miracles undefaced, etc.

In this Year also the Archbishop, An Exchange made between the ABp and the
Lord Windsor.
with the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, granted the Patronage, Rectory, etc.
of Ri^eborough Monachorum in the County of Bucks, to the Lord Windsor, for
fourscore and nineteen Years: And in Exchange, the said Lord granted to the
Archbishop the Advouson, Patronage and Nomination of Midley in Kent for the
same duration of Years.

September the 9 th, being Sunday, Robert Farrar, Bishop of S. David's
Consecrated.

Cran. Regist. Fol. 327.


D. D. was Consecrated Bishop of S. David's, by Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, endued with his Pontificals, and assisted by Henry Bishop of
Lincoln, and Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, at Chertsey in the Diocese of Winton,
in the Archbishop's House there. Then certain Hymns, Psalms and Prayers being
recited, together with a Portion of Scripture read in the vulgar Tongue, out of
S. Paul's Epistles, and the Gospel of S. Matthew, the Archbishop celebrated
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. There communicated the Reverend
Fathers, Thomas Bishop of Ely, Thomas Bishop of Westminster, Henry Bishop of
Lincoln, Nicolas Bishop of Rochester, and Farrar the new Bishop; together with
William May Dean of S. Paul's, Simon Hains Dean of Exon, Thomas Robertson and
John Redman, Professors of Divinity, and others. The Archbishop then
distributed the Communion in English Words. This Bishop (as it is writ in the
Margin of the Register) was the first that was consecrated upon the bare
Nomination of the King, according to the Statute that for that purpose was
published in the first Year of his Reign. The Form of the King's Letters
Patents, whereby he constituted Farrar Bishop, is extant in the Register, dated
from Leghes, August 1. in the second Year of his Reign.

Some account of this Bishop.
At this Bishop of S. David's I will stay a little: proving unhappy by his
Preferment unto a Church, whose Corruptions, while he endeavored to correct,
he sunk under his commendable Endeavors. He was an active Man, and made much
use of in Public Affairs in K. Henry and K. Edward's Days; having been first a
Canon of S. Mary's in Oxon. He was with Bp Barlow, when he was by K. Henry sent
Ambassador to Scotland, An. 1535. Another time employed in carrying old Books
of great Value from S. Oswalds, a dissolved Monastery, as it seems, unto the
Archbishop of York. And in the Royal Visitation in the beginning of King
Edward, he was one of the King's Visitors, being appointed one of the
Preachers, for his great Ability in that Faculty: And being Chaplain to the
Duke of Somerset, was by his means advanced to be Bishop; and upon his Fall he
fell into great Troubles. This Bishop, not long after his first entrance upon
his Bishopric, resolved to visit his Diocese, like a careful Pastor, hearing
of very great Corruptions in it, and particularly among those that belonged to
the Chapter of the Church of Carmarthen; and chiefly Thomas Young Chaunter,
after Archbishop of York, (who pulled down the great Hall in the Palace there
for lucre of the Lead) and Rowland Meric^, one of the Canons, after Bishop of
the said See of S. David's, and Father to Sir Gilly Merick, that came to an
untimely Death, by being in the Business of the Earl of Essex. These two having
been before Commissaries of this Diocese, had spoiled the Cathedral Church of
Crosses, Chalices, and Censors; with other Plate, Jewels and Ornaments, to the
value of five hundred Marks or more; and converted them to their own private
Benefit: and had sealed many Blanks (Sede Vacant) without the King's License
or Knowledge. Whereupon the Bishop issued out his Commission to his Chancellor
for visiting the Chapter, as well as the rest of the Diocese. But the
Commission was, it seems, drawn up amiss by the said Chancellor, to whom the
Bishop left the forming the Draught: For it ran in the old Popish Form, and so
the King's Supremacy not sufficiently acknowledged therein; though he professed
to visit in the King's Name and Authority. This these two, in Combination with
his own ungrateful Register, George Constantine, whom he had preferred, took
their Advantage of; not only to disobey the said Commission, but to accuse the
poor Bishop of a Praemunire. For which he was sain to go down from London,
whither they had before brought him up, to answer at the Assizes of Carmarthen.
And when by reason of the Molestations they gave him, and their detaining him
in London, he could not be so exact in paying in the Tenths, and First Fruits
and Subsidies, due from the Clergy of his Diocese; they took hold of this as
another Crime to lay to his Charge. And hereupon in fine, he was kept in Prison
a long time, and so remained when Queen Mary entered upon the Government. Upon
which Occasion he fell into the Hands of the Pope's Butchers. Who at last, for
maintaining the Truth, sent him into his Diocese, and burnt him at a Stake. And
thus these Men became the Instruments of his Death.

In their vexatious Suits against this good Bishop, The ABp swayed by Farrar's
Enemies.
undertaken the better to conceal their own Faults, our Archbishop seemed to
be engaged, giving too much credit to the ill Reports that Farrar's Enemies
raised against him, in a great heap of frivolous and malicious Articles,
exhibited to the King's Council. Who appointed Sir John Mason and Dr. Wotton
to examine them: Though, I suppose, our pious Archbishop afterward saw
through this Malice, and forbore any further to give Influence to those that
prosecuted this honest Man: Understanding by Letters, which that afflicted Man
sent, both to him and Bishop Goodrick Lord Chancellor, his unjust Vexations
wrought by his Adversaries. One whereof, I mean his Register, remained Register
to that very Popish Bishop that succeeded him, nay, and was assistant at his
Trial and Condemnation. In short, hear what one writes that lived nearer those
Times, and might therefore be presumed to know more of these Matters.

This was a Conspiracy of his Enemies against him, Sut^li^s Answ. to Parson's
Threefold Convers. of England.
and of wicked Fellows who had robbed the Church, kept Concubines, falsified
Records, and committed many other gross Abuses. To conclude, I find, by a
private Letter written to John Fox, that these Men, knowing how they had
wronged the good Bishop, came to him before his Death, and asked him
Forgiveness; and he like a good Christian forgave them, and was reconciled to
them.

CHAP. X. The Archbishop answers the Rebels Articles.
THE Commons this Year brake out into a dangerous Rebellion; and though they
were once or twice appeased, An. 1549.
Rebellion in Devon.
and scattered in some Places, yet they made Insurrections in others: And
chiefly in Devon, where they were very formidable for their Numbers. The Reason
they pretended was double: The one was, the Oppression of the Gentry in
enclosing of their Commons from them. The other, the laying aside the old
Religion; which, because it was Old, and the Way their Forefathers worshipped
God, they were very fond of. The Ld Russel, Ld Privy Seal, who was sent against
them, offering to receive their Complaints, the Rebels sent them to him, drawn
up under 15 Articles. As before they had sent their Demands in seven Articles,
and a Protestation that they were the King's, Body and Goods. In Answer to
which the King sent a Message to them, that may be seen in Fox. They sent also
a Supplication to the King: To the which an Answer was made by the King's
Learned Counsel.

I shall take notice only of the fifteen Articles, The ABp A^^swers the Rebels
Articles*
unto which our Archbishop drew up an excellent Answer at good length: For no
Man was thought so fit as he, to open and unravel these Men's Requests, An. 1549.
and to unfold the unreasonableness of them; and to show what real Mischief
they would pluck down upon themselves and the Nation, should all the Decrees of
our Forefathers, and the Six Articles be revived again: and what great Injury
Religion would receive, should the Latin Masses, and Images, and the
worshipping the Sacrament, and Purgatory, and Abbeys, be restored, and Cardinal
Pole come Home, and the English Bible be called in, and suchlike things which
their Demands consisted of. This Answer of the Archbishop I judge worthy
preserving; (and therefore, though somewhat long, I have laid in the Appendix;
N^. XL.
) because it will show his Wisdom, Learning, and the Knowledge of the State of
the Kingdom that he was furnished with. I met with these Writings in the
Manuscript Librarary of Benet College, being the rough Draught of them, all
under the Archbishop's own Hand. He charged them with Ignorance in putting up
such Articles. And concluded them not to be their own Minds to have them
granted, had they understood them, but that they were indeed devised by some
Priests, and rank Papists and Traitors to the Realm; which he would not so much
as think of them. So that he gently told them, that he must use the same
expression to them, that Christ did to James and John, They asked they wot not
what.

The Archbishop wrote this Answer after the Rout at Exeter given them by the
Lord Russel, Some Account thereof.
and the taking Prisoners diverse of their Captains and Priests, and between the
Condemnation and Execution of Humphrey Arundel, and Bray Mayor of Bodmin; Whom
he prayed God to make penitent before their Deaths, to which they were
adjudged. For which two the Rebels in one of their Articles, had required safe
Conduct to make their Grievances known to the King. As they had, in another
Article, demanded two Divines of the same Popish stamp, to be sent to them to
preach, namely, Moreman and Crispin: Who both seemed now, being Priests of that
Country, to be under Restraint upon suspicion: Men, as the Archbishop told
them, ignorant of God's Word, but of notable Craft, Wilfulness and
Dissimulation, and such as would poison them, instead of feeding them. Crispin.
Of Crispin I find little, but that he was once Proctor of the University of
Oxon, and Doctor of the Faculty of Physic, Mor^man.
and of Oriel College. Moreman was beneficed in Cornwall in King Henry's Time,
and seemed to go along with that King in his steps of Reformation, and was
observed to be the first that taught his Parishioners the Lord's Prayer, the
Creed and the Ten Commandments in English; yet showing himself in the next
King's Reign a Zealot for the old Superstitions. Hence we perceive the Reason
why the Archbishop charged him to be a Man full of Craft and Hypocrisy. In Q.
Mary's Time he was, for his Popish Merits, preferred to be Dean of Exeter, and
was Coadjutor to the Bishop of that Diocese (probably then superannuated,) and
died in that Queen's Reign. Besides these two, there was another Clergyman the
Rebels spent another Article in speaking for, Cardinal Pole.
namely, Cardinal Pole: Whom they would have sent for Home, and to be preferred
to be of the Privy Council. But Cranmer told them his Judgment; first, in
general, of Cardinals, that they never did Good to this Realm, but always Hurt:
And then in particular of this Cardinal, that he had read once a virulent Book
of his writing against King Henry, exciting the Pope, the Emperor, the French
King, and all other Princes, to invade this Realm: And therefore that he was so
far from deserving to be called Home, and to live in England, that he deserved
not to live at all. In fine, in this excellent Composition of the Archbishop,
his Design was, to expose the Abuses and Corruptions of Popery, and to convince
the Nation what need there was, that such Matters should be abolished, as the
Pope's Decrees, Solitary Masses, Latin Service, hanging the Host over the
Altar, Sacrament in one Kind, Holy Bread, and Holy Water, Palms, Ashes, Images,
the old Service Book, praying for Souls in Purgatory: And to vindicate the
English Service, the use of the Holy Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue, and other
Matters relating to the Reformation, made in King Edward's Time. Which he does
all along with that strain of happy Perspicuity and Easiness, that one shall
scarcely meet with elsewhere, mixed every where with great Gravity, Seriousness
and Compassion.

The Archbishop thought it highly convenient in these Commotions round about,
to do his Endeavor to keep those People, The ABp procures Sermons to be made
against the Rebellion.
that were still and quiet as yet, in their Duty. And for this Purpose had
Sermons composed, to be now read by the Curats to the People in their Churches,
to preserve them in their Obedience, and to set out the Evil and Mischief of
the present Disturbances. I find in the same Volume where Cranmer's Answers
aforesaid are, Miscell^n. D.
a Sermon against the Seditions arising now every where, with the Archbishop's
Interlinings, and marginal Notes and Corrections. This Sermon was first wrote
in Latin by Peter Martyr, (as a Note of Archbishop Parker's Hand testifies)
at Archbishop Cranmer's Request to the said Learned Man, no question; and so
by his Order translated into English, and printed, I suppose, for the common
Use in those Times. It begins thus;

The common Sorrow of this present Time, dear beloved Brethren in Christ, if I
should be more led thereby, Peter Martyr's Sermon upon this Occasion*
than by Reason and Zeal to my Country, would move me rather to hold my Peace
than to speak. For the great Evils which we now suffer, are to be bewailed with
Tears and Silence, rather than with Words. And hereunto I might allege for me
the Example of Job, who when he came to his extreme Misery, he lying upon a
Dunghill, and three of his Friends sitting upon the Ground by him for the space
of seven Days, for great Sorrow, not one of them opened his Mouth to speak a
word to another. If then the miserable Estate of Job, like a hard and sharp
Bit, stopped his Mouth from speaking; and the lamentable Case of their Friend,
staid these three Men, being of Speech most Eloquent, that they could not utter
their words; surely it seems, that I have a much more cause to be still, and
hold my peace. For there was the piteous Lamentation of no more but one Man, or
one Household, and that only concerning temporal and worldly Substance; but we
have cause to bewail a whole Realm, and that most Noble, which lately being in
that State, that all other Realms envied our Wealth, and feared our Force, is
now so troubled, so vexed, so tossed and deformed, and that by Sedition among
our selves, of such as be Members of the same, that nothing is left unattempted
to the utter Ruin and Subversion thereof: And besides this, the everlasting
Punishment of God threatens as well the Authors and Procurers of these
Seditions, as all other that join themselves unto them, etc.

Besides this Sermon of P. Martyr's, there is another Discourse penned by him
under his own hand on the same occasion, designed as it seems to be translated
into English, and sent to the Rebels; thus beginning:

Tantum voluit Deus vim charitatis and amoris magnitudinem, inter populum and
magistratum intercedere, ut per Hieremiam admonuerit plebem Israeliticam, quod
pro Rege Nebuchadnezar orarent, qui little Rempub. everterat, illosque adhuc
captivitate Babylonica premebat.

Dominus tametsi voluit suos, instar columbarum, simplices degere, idem
nihilominus admonuit, ut serpentum prudentiam imitarentur, qua suas actiones
Literarum Sacrarum praecept^s regerent and moderarentur, caverentque ne aliena
consilia, ut Papistarum vel Seditiosorum se in transversum auferrent.

Si potuissetis (quod est prudentium) in longinquum prospicere, omnino
vidissetis caeteros hosts (uti nunc res ipsa declarat) fretos vestris
tumultibus in vestrum Regnum arma sumpturos, and ausuros impune, qui nunquam,
si in officio mansissetis, tentassent, etc.

The French take Occasion at this Rebellion.
This last Paragraph respected the French King, who taking occasion from these
Broils at Home, brake out into open Hostility against the Kingdom, recalling
his Ambassador, and on a sudden brought his Ships against the Isles of Iersey
and Guernsey, with an intent to have conquered them. But by the Valor of the
Inhabitants, and some of the King's Ships, he was beaten off with great Loss.
This was in the Month of August.

Bucer's Discourse against the Sedition.
Martin Bucer also wrote a Discourse against this Sedition, as well as Martyr.
Both of them were now, I suppose, under the Archbishop's Roof, entertained by
him. And he thought it convenient that these learned Foreigners should give
some public Testimony of their Dislike of these Doings. Bucer's Discourse
subjoined to Martyr's, began in this Tenor:

Quae dici possunt ad sedandos animos plebis, and ab omni conatu seditioso
absterrendos (quod ad rem ipsam attinet) inscripta sunt omnia, in
Reverendissimi D. N. M. Ven. Collegae nostri Pet. Martyris Schedis, ut nostra
adjectione nulla sit opus, tamen ut consensum spiritus testemur, ha^ subjecta
libuit annotare, etc.

The ABp's Prayer, composed for this Occasion.
An Office of Fasting was composed for this Rebellion, which being allayed in
the West, grew more formidable in Norfolk and Yorkshire. For I find a Prayer
composed by the Archbishop, with these words preceding; The Exhortation to
Penance, or the Supplication, may end with this or some other-like Prayer. And
then the Prayer follows:

O Lord, whose Goodness far exceeds our Naughtiness, and whose Mercy passes
all Measure, we confess thy Judgment to be most Just, and that we worthily have
deserved this Rod wherewith thou have now beaten us. We have offended the Lord
God: We have lived wickedly: We have gone out of the Way: We have not heard thy
Prophets which thou have sent unto us, to teach us thy Word, nor have done as
thou have commanded us: wherefore we be most worthy to suffer all these
Plagues. Thou have done justly, and we be worthy to be confounded. But we
Provoke unto thy Goodness; we Appeal unto thy Mercy; we humble our selves; we
knowledge our Faults. We turn to thee, O Lord, with our whole Hearts, in
Praying, in Fasting, in Lamenting and Sorrowing for our Offenses. Have Mercy
upon us, cast us not away according to our Deserts, but hear us, and deliver us
with speed, and call us to thee again according to thy Mercy: That we with one
Consent, and one Mind, may evermore glorify Thee, World without End. Amen.

After this follow some rude Draughts written by Archbishop Cranmer's own
Hand, for the Composing, as I suppose, of an Homily, or Homilies, to be used
for the Office aforesaid: which may be read in the Appendix. No. X^I.


CHAP. XI. Bishop Boner Deprived.
ON the 8 th of September, The ABp deprives Boner.
a Commission was issued out from the King to our Archbishop, together with
Ridley Bishop of Rochester, Petre and Smith, the two Secretaries, and Dr. May
Dean of Paul's, to examine Boner Bishop of London, for several Matters of
Contempt of the King's Order. The Witnesses against him were William Latimer
and John Hoper. After the patience of seven Sessions at Lambeth, in all which
he carried himself disdainfully, making Excuses and Protestations, first
against Sir Thomas Smith, and then against them all, and Appealing to the King,
the Archbishop in the Name of the rest declared him Obstinate, and pronounced
a Sentence of Deprivation against him; and committed him to the Marshalsea for
his extraordinary Rudeness to the King's Commissioners; and there he abode all
this King's Reign. I will only mention somewhat of his Behavior toward the
good Archbishop.

At his first appearance before the Commissioners, Discourse between the ABp
and him* concerning his Book.
which was on the 10 th of September, when they told him the Reason of their
Commission, viz. To call him to Account for a Sermon lately by him made at
Paul's Cross; for that he did not publish to the People the Article he was
commanded to preach upon, that is, of the King's Authority during his Minority:
He after a bold scoffing manner gave no direct Answer to this, but turned his
Speech to the ABp, swearing, That he wished one thing were had in more
Reverence than it was, namely, the Blessed Mass, as he styled it: And telling
the Archbishop withal, That he had written very well of the Sacrament; but he
marvelled he did not more honor it. The Archbishop perceiving his gross
Ignorance concerning his Book, by his commending that which was contrary to his
Opinion, said to Boner, That if he thought it well, it was because he
understood it not. Boner after his rude manner replied, He thought he
understood it better than he that wrote it. To which the Archbishop subjoined,
That truly he would make a Child of ten Years old understand as much as he. But
what is that, said he, to our present Matter?

Concerning the Sacrament.
At this first Session, when Boner had said, That he perceived the Cause of his
present Trouble was, for that in the Sermon made at Paul's Cross,
beforementioned, he had asserted the true Presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; The Archbishop said, That he spoke much
of a Presence in the Sacrament; but he asked him, What Presence is there, and
what Presence he meant? Boner then in heat said, My Lord, I say and believe,
that there is the very true Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ. What, and
how do you believe? said he to the Archbishop. Then the Archbishop not
minding to answer his Question at this time, asked him further, Whether Christ
were there, Face, Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Arms and Lips, with other Lineaments of
his Body? At which Boner shook his Head, and said, He was right sorry to hear
his Grace speak those words, and urged the Archbishop to show his Mind. But
the Archbishop wisely waved it, saying, That their being there at that time,
was not to dispute of those Matters, but to prosecute their Commission against
him.

Charge the ABp concerning the Preachers he allowed.
At another of these Sessions, staying at the Chamber Door, where the
Commissioners sat, perceiving some of the Archbishop's Gentlemen standing by,
he applied himself to them, requiring and charging them, in God's behalf, and
in his Name, That where they should chance to see and hear corrupt and
erroneous Preachers against the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, they should
tell their Lord and Master of the same, and of these his Sayings also to them,
as they were Christian Men, and should answer before God for the contrary. And
being committed by the Delegates to the Under-Marshal; and going away, he
turned again, and told the Archbishop, That he was sorry that he being a
Bishop, should be so handled at his Hands; but more sorry, that he suffered
abominable Heretics to practice as they did in London and elsewhere, infecting
and disquieting the King's Liege People. And therefore he required him, as he
would answer to God and the King, that he would henceforth abstain thus to do.
And if he did not, he said, he would accuse him before God and the King's
Majesty. Answer to it, added he, as well as you can. And so departed.

The ABp's Answers to Boner's Declaration.
When Boner, after the Sentence of Deprivation, made a solemn Declaration there
against their Proceedings, saying, That he came compelled, and not of his own
free will, being brought as a Prisoner: And so appealed again from them to the
King. The Archbishop answered his Declaration; and told him, That whereas he
said, he came coacted, or else he would not have appeared; he marvelled at him,
for that he would thereby make them and the Audience to believe, that because
he was a Prisoner, he ought not therefore to answer. Which if it were true,
were enough to confound the whole State of the Realm: For I dare say, said the
Archbishop, that of the greatest Prisoners and Rebels that ever the Keeper
there has had under him, he cannot show me one that has used such Defense as
you have here done. To which Boner said, That if his Keeper were learned in the
Laws, he could show him his Mind therein. The Archbishop said, That he had
read over all the Laws as well as he, but to another End and Purpose than he
did, and yet he could find no such Privilege in this Matter. He was Deprived in
the beginning of October, and the Sea remained void for some Months till the
next Year, when Ridley was translated thither, as we shall see by and by.

Indeed this was the most plausible Pretense the Papists had, Papists insist
upon the invalidity of the Laws made in the King's minority.
and which they made much use of, (Which Boner and Gardener had cunningly
invented;) viz. That though the King were to be obeyed, and all were bound to
submit to his Laws, yet not to the Orders and Placits of his Counselors, who
made what Innovations they pleased in his Name, and were none of his Laws: and
that therefore things should remain in the State wherein the former King left
them, till the King, now a Child, came to Years of Discretion to make Laws
himself. This the Rebels in Devon made use of. And this also the Lady Mary
urged very boldly to the Lords of the Council, for her incompliance with the
Communion-Book, and for continuance of the use of the Mass; telling them in a
Letter, That she was resolved to remain obedient to her Father's Laws, till the
King her Brother should have perfect Years of Discretion to order that Power
that God had given him. Which Letter, whereof I have the Original, may be seen
in the Appendix. No. XLII.
For the satisfying therefore of the People in this, the Preachers were fain to
do their Endeavors in the Pulpits: Showing them, that those that were in
Office under the King, were by the Word of God to be obeyed as the King
himself. There be some Men that say, (as Latimer in one of his Sermons in these
Days, Lat. Sermon. Fol. 25.
) when the King's Majesty himself commands me so to do, then I will do it,
not before. This is a wicked Saying, and damnable. For we may not so be excused.
Scripture is plain in it, and shows us, that we ought to obey his Officers,
having Authority from the King, as well as unto the King himself. Therefore
this Excuse will not, nor cannot serve before God. Yet let the Magistrates take
heed to their Office and Duty.

This Year the Archbishop celebrated a great Ordination, An Ordination of
Priests and Deacons.
consisting of such chiefly as showed themselves Favorers of the King's
Proceedings, to be sent abroad to preach the Gospel, and to serve in the
Ministry of the Church. At this Ordination Bishop Ridley also assisted the
Archbishop. The old Popish Order of conferring of Holy Orders was yet in
force, the new Office as yet not being prepared and established: But this
Ordination nevertheless was celebrated after that Order that was soon after
established. At this Ordination great Favor was shown, and Connivance to such
who, otherwise being well qualified for Piety and Learning, scrupled wearing
the Habits used by the Popish Priests. I meet with two famous Men now ordained:
The one was Robert Drakes, who was Deacon to Dr. Tailor Parson of Hadley, at
the Commandment of Archbishop Cranmer, afterward Parson of Thundersley in
Essex, and in the Year 1556, burnt to death in Smithfield, for his constant
Profession of Christ's Religion. The other was Thomas Sampson, Parson of
Breadstreet, London, and successively Dean of Chichester and Christ's-Church,
Oxon. Who in a Letter of his written to Secretary Cecyl in Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, said, That at his Ordination he excepted against the Apparel; and by the
Archbishop and Bishop Ridley, he was nevertheless permitted and admitted.

The Office of Ordination reformed.
All the Divine Offices were now reformed, but only that for Ordination of
Ministers. Therefore for the doing of this the Council appointed Twelve Learned
Men, consisting half of Bishops, and half of other inferior Divines: Whose
Names I do not meet with, excepting Hethe Bp of Worcester. Who because he would
not assist in this Work, was sent to Prison. The chief of them no doubt was the
Archbishop. After mature deliberation, this Office was agreed upon, and
finished. And Ponet was the first Bishop Consecrated after this new Form. And
that I suppose may be the reason, that it is set down at length in the
Archbishop's Register in that manner as it is there to be seen: as we shall
see under the next Year.

The ABp Visits some Vacant Churches. S. David's.
Upon the Vacancy of Cathedral Churches the Archbishop used to visit. So now
the Church of S. David's being vacant upon the remove of Barlow to Bath and
Wells, the Archbishop issued out a Commission to Eliseus Price to visit that
Church. And upon the Vacancy of Gloucester by the Death of Wakeman, Gloucester.
there was a Commission to I. Williams, LL. D. and Prebendary there, to be his
Commissary, and to visit that Church, and to be Keeper of the Spiritualties of
the City and Diocese of Gloucester in this third Year of the King. Norwich.
This Year also the Church of Norwich being become Vacant by the Resignation of
Repps, the Archbishop granted a Commission to John Bishop Suffragan of
Thetford, and Dean of the Church of the Holy Trinity Norwich, to be his Deputy
and Commissary for Visitation and Jurisdiction. But somewhat before this, he
constituted Roland Tailor, LL.D. and Will. Wakefeld D. D. to be Keepers of the
Spiritualties of Norwich. From whose Jurisdiction he protested not to derogate
by those his Commissional Letters to the Suffragan, nor to withdraw from them
any Authority of Jurisdiction. This was dated February 15. Also the Church of
London being Vacant by the Deprivation and Destitution of Boner, London.
the Archbishop constituted Gabriel Done, Residentiary of S. Paul's, to be his
Official, and Keeper of the Spiritualties, to exercise all manner of Episcopal
Jurisdiction in the said City and Diocese.

A new Dean of the Arches.
This Year he made Griffin Leyson LL.D. Dean of the Arches.

CHAP. XII. Duke of Somerset's Troubles. The Common Prayer Ratified.
The ABp writes to the Lords at Ely-house.
WHEN most of the Council had combined together, in the Month of October,
against the Protector of the King's Person, the Duke of Somerset, and had
withdrawn themselves to Ely-House, the King then being at Hampton Court, and
suddenly conveyed by the said Duke to Windsor, upon the fear of Tumult, then I
find the Archbishop and but two Privy-Counsellors more with the King and the
Protector there. Being here, the good Archbishop, though he would not forsake
his Friend the Duke, nor the King his Master; yet he did what lay in him to
appease and pacify these Heats. And so he with the Lord Paget and Secretary
Smith, in their own and the King's Name, wrote an earnest Letter to the
Separating Counselors, and sent it by Sir Philip Hoby. Wherein, as appears by
their Answer, They were charged by the Archbishop with creating much Care and
Sorrow to the King, and that he thought they had not that Care that beseemed
them, of pacifying the present Uproars, and for the preservation of the State
from Danger: That they forgot the Benefits they had received from the King's
Father, nor were mindful of their Duty of Allegiance: That their Doings bespake
Wilfulness; and that the Protector meant nothing but the Safety and Protection
of the King, in what he had done; and that he had that consideration of his
Duty to God, that the Promise and Oath he made, required. They were advised to
do as they would be done unto. And mention was made of Cruelty more than once,
charging them obliquely therewith. And in fine he wrote, that He, and those
with him, knew more than they did, to whom they writ. Probably he meant, that
he knew that this Anger against the Duke arose from the private Malice of some
of them, or their Hatred of the Reformation, notwithstanding all the fair
Pretenses of their Care of the King, and the Protector's Misgovernment.

This Letter the Lords from Ely-house, answered, Their Answer.
Charging and commanding the Archbishop, and those with him, to have a
continual earnest watch of the King's Person, and that he be not removed from
Windsor-Castle, as they would answer the same at their utmost Perils. They
wondered much, they said, that they would suffer the King's Royal Person to
remain in the Guard of the Duke's Men, and that Strangers should be Armed with
the King's Armor, and be nearest about his Person. For, it seems, many of the
King's Servants, in this Fear, were removed away. They advised the Archbishop,
and the Lord Paget, to come over to their Side, and to leave the poor Duke
alone. Upon this the Archbishop and the others wrote a second Letter, dated
October the 10 th. Wherein they assured the Lords, that they could, whenever
they pleased to require it, give such very good Reasons for their so often
mentioning Cruelty in their other Letter, as they questioned not, they would be
well satisfied with. And so upon the Lord's propounding a Meeting with the King
and them, they accorded thereunto, in great prudence willing, for Peace and
Quietness, in that dangerous Time, so to do. These Letters are recorded in the
History of the Reformation. Vol. II. Collect. p. 187.188.

The ABp gets the Common Prayer Book confirmed.




The Common Prayer Book, and Administration of the Sacraments, by the great
care and study of the Archbishop, was now finished, and settled by Act of
Parliament: which would not down with a great many. But upon the taking up of
the Duke of Somerset in the Month of October, and laying him in the Tower, it
was generally said, that now the old Latin-Service should come in again, the
common Opinion being, that the Common Prayer was peculiarly of his procuring.
And that there were such Designs among Somerset's Enemies, who were generally
favorers of the old Religion, it is not improbable. The good Archbishop
thought it now time to interpose in this thing, and to obtain from the
Privy Council, somewhat to confirm the Book of Common Prayer. So there was in
December. 25. a general Letter drawn up to all the Bishops of England: Letting
them understand, That there was no intention of bringing in again
Latin-Service, conjured Bread and Water, nor any such abrogated Ceremonies. And
that the abolishing of these, and the setting forth of the Book of
Common Prayer, was done by the whole State of the Realm. That the Book was
grounded upon the Holy Scripture, and was agreeable to the Order of the
Primitive Church, and much to the edifying of the Subject. And therefore that
the changing of that for the old Latin-Service would be a preferring of
Ignorance to Knowledge, Darkness to Light, and a preparation to bring in
Papistry and Superstition again. The Bishops therefore were bid with all speed
to command their Deans and Prebendaries, and all Parsons, Vicars and Curates,
to bring to such Places as the Bishops should appoint, all Antiphoners,
Missals, etc. and all other Books of Service: and that they be defaced and
abolished, that they be no let to that Godly and uniform Order set forth. And
to commit to Ward any stubborn and disobedient Persons, that brought not the
said Books, and to certify the Council of their Misbehaviour. That they should
make search, if any of these Superstitious Books were withdrawn or hid. That,
whereas there were some Persons who refused to contribute to the buying of
Bread and Wine for the Communion, according to the Order of the Book, whereby
many-times the Holy Communion was fain to be omitted, to convent such Persons
before them, and admonish them; and if they refused to do accordingly, to
punish them by Suspension, Excommunication, or other Censure. This was signed
by the Archbishop and the Lord Chancellor Rich, and four more.

CHAP. XIII. The Archbishop entertains learned Foreigners.
The ABp harbors Learned Strangers.
THE Archbishop had now in his Family several Learned Men. Some he sent for
from beyond Sea, and some in pity he entertained, being Exiles for Religion.
Among the former sort was Martin Bucer, a Man of great Learning and Moderation,
and who bore a great part in the Reformation of Germany. While he and the rest
abode under his Roof, the Archbishop still employed them, sometimes in learned
Conferences and Consultations held with them, sometimes in writing their
Judgment upon some Subjects in Divinity. Here Bucer wrote to the Lady
Elizabeth, a Letter bearing Date the 6 th of the Calends of September,
commending her Study in Piety and Learning, and exciting her to proceed
therein; incited so to do, I make no doubt, MSS. C.C.C.C. Miscellan. A.
by the Archbishop, whom Bucer in that Letter makes mention of, and styles
Patrem suum, and benignissimum hospitem. Hence also he wrote another Letter to
the Marquess of Northampton (who was a Patron of Learning, and a Professor of
Religion) in the behalf of Sleidan, who was promised a Pension by the King, to
enable him to write the History of the Progress of Religion, beginning at
Luther. A part of the Letter translated into English, ran thus.

Therefore if we should not take care, that this so great Act of Divine
Goodness toward us, [ viz. the Reformation began in the Year 1517] should be
most diligently written, and consecrated to Posterity, we should lie under the
Crime of the neglect of God's Glory, and most foul Ingratitude. Therefore John
Sleidan, a very Learned and Eloquent Man, five Years ago began to compile an
History of this Nature, as the Work he had published did witness. But after he
was much encouraged in this Undertaking, and well furnished with Matter; the
Calamities that befell Germany, for our own Deserts, intercepted the pious
Attempts of this Man, so very useful to the Church. Nor does it appear now from
whence, besides the King's Majesty, we may hope that some small Benignity may
be obtained for Sleidan; since the Salaries which he received for this purpose
from the German Princes, failed; and he was poor. That John Alasco, Dr. Peter
Martyr, and he, considering these things, and weighing how the truly Christian
King Edward was even born with a desire of illustrating the Glory of Christ,
and what need there was to set Sleidan again upon finishing the History of the
Gospel restored to us; they had therefore presumed to supplicate the King in
his behalf, and entreated the Marquess to promote and forward their
Supplication, and to vouchsafe to contribute his Help also. We shall hear more
of this hereafter.

I find also Annotations writ by the said Bucer upon S. Matthew, Bucer writes
in the ABp's Family.

MSS. C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D.


reaching as far as the eighth Chapter, and there ending, in this method: There
is the Latin Translation, with large Notes added in the Margin; and at the end
of each Chapter common Places collected from thence in the nature of Inferences
and Observations. Which I conclude the Archbishop put him upon doing while he
was now with him. The Work was looked over and examined by the Archbishop,
Notes and Corrections of his own Hand being here and there inserted. Also the
Gospel of S. Mark is handled in the same method, by another of the
Archbishop's Guests. Which Writing has this Inscription by Cranmer's Hand;
Petrus Alexander in Marcum.

At this time therefore there were at the Archbishop's House, The ABp's Guests.
(besides Bucer) Alasco, Peter Martyr, Paulus Phagius, Peter Alexander,
Bernardine Ochin, Mat. Negelinus, (after a Minister of Strasburgh) who
accompanied Bucer and Fagius into England, and others whose Names do not occur.
Three of these were soon after preferred to public Places of Reading in the
Universities. Peter Alexander was of Artois, and lived with the Archbishop
before Bucer came into England. He was a Learned Man, but had different
Sentiments in the Matter of the Eucharist, enclining to the belief of a
Corporeal Presence with the Lutherans. Though some Years after he came over to
a righter Judgment, as his Companion Peter Martyr signified to Calvin, in a
Letter wrote from Strasburgh.

Peter Martyr coming about the beginning of the Year 1549, unto the University
of Oxford, Calvin. Ep. 197, Martyr dedicates his Lectures at Oxon to the ABp.
his first Readings were upon the eleventh Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. In which Chapter is some Discourse of the Lord's Supper. The
Professor when he came so far, took occasion to expatiate more largely upon
that Argument; and the rather, that he might state it aright in the midst of
those hot Contests that were then about it among Learned Men. These Lectures on
the Sacrament he soon after printed at London, for the Benefit of the World,
(as they were two Years after done at Zurick) and dedicated them to his Patron,
the Archbishop. And that partly to give a public Testimony of his Sense of
the Archbishop's great Humanity and Benefits toward him: Which were so large,
that he must do nothing else but tell of them, to be sufficiently thankful for
them. And known it was to all (as he said) how obligingly he received, and how
liberally he entertained both himself, and many other Strangers of his Rank and
Condition. And partly that by his Authority he would protect and defend what he
should find in his Book to be consonant to the Holy Scriptures, and agreeable
to the King's Laws. For he had, he said, Skill and Industry enough to do it;
who had himself often, both in Public and Private, conflicted with the
Adversaries, and with admirable Learning, accuracy of Wit and Dexterity,
vindicated the Truth from the spinous and confused Cavils of Sophisters. Nor
did he want Will to stand up for Sound and Christian Doctrines, as all good Men
knew: who saw how earnest he was in his Labors of restoring Religion; that for
that Cause he drew upon himself many Enmities and threatening Dangers.

The ABp writes to Bucer to come over.
The first Occasion of Bucer's Call into England was thus. He had wrote to John
Hales (a learned Englishman, his Acquaintance) the sad Estate of Germany, and
that he could scarce stay any longer in the Place where he was. This Hales
acquainted the Archbishop with; which made a great Impression upon his
compassionate Soul, and he brake out into those words of the Psalmist, Mirifica
misericordias tuas, qui salvos facis sperantes in te a resistentibus dexterae
tuae. And forthwith writ to Brucer a Letter in October 1548, to come over to
this Realm, which should be a most safe Harbor for him, urging him to become a
Labourer in the Lord's Harvest here begun; and using other Arguments with him
to move him hereunto, in the most obliging Style possible, calling him, My
Bucer. And that he might come over the safer from Harms and Enemies, the
Archbishop recommended him to one Hills an English-Merchant, to provide for
his Passage. No. XLIII.
The Archbishop's Letter may be found in the Appendix. To this Letter Bucer
wrote an Answer, seeming, upon some Considerations, to decline the
Archbishop's Invitation. This Letter coming to the Archbishop's Hands, he
showed to Peter Alexander; who by the Archbishop's Order, wrote back to Bucer,
in the said Archbishop's and the Protector's Name, to call him again over;
which Letter was dated March 24, from Lambeth; telling him withal, that the
good old Man Latimer saluted him. Letters, I suppose, of the same Import, were
also dispatched to the Learned Fagius.

Bucer and Fagius, who were thus honorably invited into England by repeated
Letters of the Lord Protector, and Archbishop Cranmer, Bucer and Fagius
Professors at Cambridg.
were by them also nominated for Public Professors in the University of
Cambridg, the one of Divinity, the other of the Hebrew Tongue. This was looked
on by their Friends as a notable piece of God's good Providence, that when
these two eminent Champions of the true Religion were in so much present Danger
in Germany, so seasonable a Refuge was provided for them elsewhere. Vet. P.
Fag. per Ministr. aliquos Eccles. Argent*
They both arrived safe in England in the end of April, and abode with the
Archbishop above a quarter of a Year, until toward the end of the long
Vacation, the Archbishop intending they should be at Cambridg when the Term
should begin, in order to their Reading. During this Interval, while they
continued at Lambeth, they were not idle, being every day busied in some Study
and Exercise agreeable to their Function, as was hinted before. But the main of
their Thoughts were taken up in preparing for their University-Lectures. Which
of what Subject Matter they should be, the Archbishop himself directed. As it
had been a great while his pious and most earnest Desire, that the Holy Bible
should come abroad in the greatest Exactness, and true Agreement with the
original Text. So he laid this Work upon these two Learned Men. First, That
they should give a clear, plain and succinct Interpretation of the Scripture,
according to the Propriety of the Language. And, Secondly, Illustrate difficult
and obscure Places, and reconcile those that seemed repugnant to one another.
And it was his Will, and his Advice, that to this End and Purpose their public
Readings should tend. This pious and good Work, by the Archbishop assigned to
them, they most gladly and readily undertook. For their more regular carrying
on this Business, they allotted to each other by consent, their distinct Tasks.
Fagius, because his Talent lay in the Hebrew Learning, was to undertake the Old
Testament, and Bucer the New. The Leisure they now enjoyed with the
Archbishop, they spent in preparing their respective Lectures. Fagius entered
upon the Evangelical Prophet Esaias, and Bucer upon the Gospel of the
Evangelist John. And some Chapters in each Book were dispatched by them. But it
was not long, but both of them fell Sick: which gave a very unhappy stop to
their Studies.

Fagius his Distemper proved mortal; Fagius dies*
who was seized at first with a very acute Fever. And notwithstanding Physic
and Attendance, remaining very ill, he had a great desire to remove to Cambridg
to his Charge appointed him, hoping the Change of Air might help him. He made a
shift to travel thither, leaving his dear Colleague sick behind him. But Fagius
still declining in his Health, ardently desired Bucer's Company: Who on the
fifth of November came to Cambridg. And ten Days after Fagius deceased, aged
about forty five Years, to the extraordinary Loss of that University, and the
Grief of all pious Men that wished well to Religion: and which was most to be
lamented, before he had given any Specimen of his Learning and Abilities in
England; though he had already given many to the World: all showing what a
Master he was in Hebrew and Rabbinical Learning. His published Labors of this
nature (all within the space of six Years) may be seen in the Appendix: Which I
have placed there for the preserving the Memory of that Learned Professor, No.
XLIV.
which our University of Cambridg was once honored with.

The ABp sends money to Fagius's Widow.
The good Archbishop troubled at the sudden Death of this Learned Man, from
whom he had promised himself some great Good to accrue to the University, sent
a Letter, November the last, unto his sorrowful Companion Bucer, desiring him,
among other things, as from him, to comfort Fagius's Widow, and to let her
know, that he had sent her by the Carrier seven and twenty Pounds, which was
part of the Stipend due out of the Exchequer to her Husband. Which although it
were not yet paid into Cranmer's Hands, yet he thought good to send her the
Money so soon, that it might be some alleviation of her present Sorrow. There
were fifty Pounds due for his Readings, reckoning from Lady Day last, when his
Pension began; but three Pounds were disbursed for Charges in taking out the
Patent, and twenty Pounds the Archbishop had sent him before.

Bucer laments his Loss. MSS. C.C.C.C.
Bucer above all lamented the loss of his Mate, and wrote a sorrowful Letter ad
Fratres and Symmystas, to his Brethren and fellow-Ministers in Germany, upon
this Subject. And in a Letter to P. Martyr, then at Oxon, he not only
complained of this heavy Loss, but, as if himself were like to follow him, of
several things that made him uneasy at Cambridg, where he was now placed; as of
the want of a convenient House, of a Body impatient of Cold, which the Time of
the Year made him begin to feel, need of Necessaries: That the Letters Patents
were not yet signed [for his Salary] and the slow and uncertain payment of his
Pension. But Cranmer, out of that high respect he had for him, was not wanting
in his diligence in due time to make all easy to him; and to have so useful and
grave a Man well provided for. But the next Year, the last Day of February, he
followed his Companion to the other World: But not before he had made himself
and his Learning known to the University. Which to qualify him to moderate at
the public Disputations at the Commencement, had given him the Degree of
Doctor, as a peculiar Honor done him, without the common Rites and Forms
ordinarily used in those Cases. Yet he chose to do his Exercises, responding
the first Day of the Commencement, and opposing the second, with great
Learning, and no less Satisfaction of the University.

CHAP. XIV. Peter Martyr disputes in Oxford, being Challenged thereunto.
THE Papists in both Universities were resolved to try the Metal and Learning
of their new Professors; being exceedingly nettled at their coming, and
offended at their Readings.

Those of P. Martyr at Oxon highly provoked many in that University, P. Martyr
challenged publicly to a Disputation.
that could not endure to hear the old Error of the Corporeal Presence opposed.
And of such there were not a few, and especially PETRUS MARTYR VERMILIUS, S.S.
Theologiae apud Oxonienses ^rofessor Regius. Natus Florentiae Sept. 8 Anno MD
Obijt Nov: 12. MDLXII.
the Heads of the Colleges; the elder Sort being more stiff and prejudiced to
their old Ways and Opinions. This doctrine of the Sacrament was first obscured,
and afterward depraved: and so this Error being entertained, became a Door for
the letting in a Flood of Superstition and Idolatry into the Church. Vit. Mart.
per Simler.
This Martyr well knew, and therefore with wonderful Pains endeavored to
vindicate the Truth of the Eucharist from Error and Corruption. And this
procured him many Enemies here. For they could not endure him: and first raised
up among the People Slanders against him; as though he impugned the Doctrine of
the Ancients, and shook the laudable Ceremonies of the Church, and profaned
the Sacrament of the Altar, and in effect trampled it under his Feet. And this
Noise being a little stilled, not long after, the Day before he was to read
publicly, they set up Bills in English upon all the Doors of the Churches,
that on such a Day there should be a public Disputation about the Presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, Martyr knowing nothing of it, though he was designed
to be the Disputant. The Day being come, the Schools were filled with great
numbers of such who favored the Papists. And these were instructed to be ready
to make loud Clamors and Tumults, and to proceed to Blows, if need were. The
Students also and the Townsmen flocked together at the Noise of this Dispute,
to see the Event, and to make a Party, according as they stood affected. When
the Day was come, notwithstanding his Friends persuaded him not to adventure
himself to read that Day, lest he might incur some Danger, he went and did his
Duty. For he said, He would not be wanting to his Office, nor neglect the place
the King had entrusted him with, and that there were many, that came
questionless to hear his Lectures, whom he would not disappoint. As he, with
his Friends accompanying him, went to his Reading, a Servant of Richard Smith,
D.D. whom we have before spoke of, the Chief in this Plot, met him and
delivered him a Letter from his Master, wherein he Challenged him to a Dispute
that Day.

Being come to the Chair, he gently told his Adversaries, His Answer hereunto.
in a modest Speech to them, That he refused not to dispute, but that at that
time he came to read, and not to dispute. And so themselves yielding to it, he
proceeded to his Lecture; which he performed with much constancy and
undauntedness, without the least disturbance of Mind, or change of Countenance
or Color, or hesitation in his Speech, notwithstanding the Murmur and Noise of
the Adversaries. Which got him much Credit and Applause.

As soon as he had done his Reading, Declines it at present, and why.
the Adversaries began to make loud Cries, that he should Dispute, and
especially Smith the Champion. But he modestly refused it, and said, He would
do it at another time, and that he was not then prepared, because they had so
studiously concealed the Propositions to be disputed of, and had not propounded
them publicly, according to the accustomed manner; and that he knew nothing of
them till that very Day. But they told him, He could not be unprepared, who had
read so much of the Lord's Supper, whatsoever Arguments they propounded in this
Matter. They still rudely urging him; he said, He would do nothing in such a
Matter, without the King were first made privy to it, especially when the thing
tended to Sedition. Moreover, for a lawful Disputation, it was requisite, he
said, that certain Questions be propounded, Judges and Moderators constituted;
and public Notaries be present, that might impartially and faithfully write
down the Arguments and Speeches on both Sides.

They agree upon the Conditions of a Disputation.
In fine, the Matter came to that pass, that fearing a Tumult, the
Vice Chancellor decided the Controversy after this manner, That both P. Martyr,
and Smith, with some Friends, should meet in his House, and should appoint the
Propositions to be disputed of, the Time, the Order and Manner of Disputation.
And so the Vice Chancellor, the Beadle making him way, went to the Pulpit where
the Professor was, and took him by the Hand, and led him down through the
Crowds to his own House, his Friends going along with him; and among the rest
Sidal and Curtop, then vigorous Defenders of the Truth; but after, in Q. Mary's
Days, revolting. Smith also and his Friends, Cole, Oglethorp, and three more,
repaired to the Vice Chancellor; where it was agreed, after some jangling, That
Martyr should observe the same Order in Confuting, as he did in Teaching; and
abstaining from strange, barbarous and ambiguous Words, wont to be used in the
Schools: he said, he would use only Carnaliter and Corporaliter, Realiter and
Substantialiter, because the Scripture uses only the words Flesh and Body, Res
or Substantia. And so it was agreed* and the Day set was the fourth of May
ensuing. And it was agreed also on both Sides, That all this whole Matter
should be signified to the Council, that they might have Cognizance of the
thing. And by them the Day of the Disputation was appointed, when some from the
King, as Judges and Keepers of Peace, would be present at it. The Papists
reported falsely, That he having appointed the Time of the Disputation to be ten
Days hence; in the mean time got the Magistrates acquainted with this Affair,
that they might stop and forbid it, (which they did indeed, proroguing it till
some Months after the first Challenge) And that afterward when the Professor
saw his Opportunity, he provoked to a public Disputation, offering to dispute
of his Questions formerly propounded, and thought there would be none to take
him up* For Smith, they say, smelt out some crafty Device taken against him,
and so appeared not at the Dispute. And then indeed few thought convenient to
be there, their Plot of making a Rout and Confusion being spoiled. Indeed
Smith, conscious to himself of making this Tumult, fled before the Day came,
and went into Scotland. But Dr. Tresham, a zealous Man, that this Cause might
not fall, was desirous to undertake the Disputation; and did so, with Dr.
Chedsey, and Mr. Morgan, before the King's Visitors; who were Henry Bishop of
Lincoln, Dr. Cox Chancellor of that University, Dr. Simon Haines Dean of
Exeter, Richard Morison Esquire Christopher Nevison Doctor of Civil Law. Before
these honorable Umpires, (who came with the King's Letters Patents) the
Disputation concerning Transubstantiation, and the Carnal Presence in the
Sacrament, lasted four days; wherein P. Martyr the Respondent did acquit
himself very sufficiently, both from Scripture and Fathers. The Sum of which
may be seen in Fox's Monuments, and the whole in Martyr's Works, in that part
thereof entitled, De Eucharistia Disputatio.

The first day of the Disputation was May the 28 th: They Dispute.
It was managed between Martyr and Tresham. Dr. Cox the Chancellor, began with
a Speech. Then Martyr made his Proemial Oration and Prayer. Then Tresham
succeeded with another Oration, bestowing some Praises upon Martyr. Which he
replying upon, and briefly and modestly declining, began his Argument. The next
Disputation, on May 29, was between Martyr and Chedzey; after Martyr had made a
short Speech and Prayer, and Chedzey his Preface. The third Action was between
Morgan, Tresham and Martyr. The Disputation of the fourth day, June 1, was
again between Chedzey and Martyr. And then all was concluded by another Speech
uttered by the said Chancellor. Wherein he had these words: Peter (and a Peter
indeed for his steady Constancy) Martyr, (and rightly called Martyr, for the
numberless Testimonies by him produced in the behalf of Truth) must needs
obtain much Favor and Respect from us, and all good Men; First, That he has
taken such vast pains in standing under even a Burden of Disputations. For i^
Not Hercules himself against two, what shall we think of Peter alone against
all? Secondly, That he has undertook the Challenge of a Disputation: And so
stopped the vain Speeches of vain Men, who dispersed envious and odious
Insinuations concerning him; as that either he would not, or dared not to
maintain his own Tenets. And, lastly, that he has so excellently well answered
the Expectation of the chief Magistrates, and so of the King himself; while he
has not only recommended to the University the Doctrine of Christ from God's
lively Fountains, but also has not permitted any (as much as lay in him) to
muddy or obstruct them. But I refer the Reader for the rest to Dr. Cox's own
Oration. [No. XLIV.]


The Professor drew up the whole four days Disputation soon after, Martyr sends
the Sum of the Disputation to the ABp.
and sent it by his constant Friend and Companion Julius, to his Patron the
Archbishop. And with the same Messenger he conveyed a Letter, dated June 15,
to Bucer then at the Archbishop's House, concerning his said Disputation.
Therein he signified the Obstinacy and Boldness of his Opponents; and that he
feared, That his Doctrines he then maintained, might not altogether square with
Bucer's Judgment. But he said in his own Justification, That he granted the
Body of Christ was present to us by Faith, and that we are incorporated into
him by Communication. He confessed here, that we do partake of the Matter of
the Sacrament, namely, the Body and Blood of Christ; but he meant it in Mind
and Faith. And in the mean time he granted, that the Holy Ghost is Efficacious
in the Sacraments, by virtue of the Lord's Institution. But that which he
especially endeavored to assert, was, That they mixed not the Body and Blood
of Christ carnally with the Bread and Wine, by any Corporeal Presence. Nor yet
would he have the Sacrament to be Symbols without Honor and Reverence. Another
thing he asserted, which he thought might offend Bucer, was, That it was not
agreeable to the Body of Christ, however glorified, to be in many Places at
once. But for this, he wrote Bucer, as he urged in the Disputation, that the
Scripture obliged to no such belief; How the reason of an humane Body reclaimed
against it; and the Fathers affirmed that such a Quality was granted to no
Creature, but belonged to God alone. And so, inviting him, and Fagius and
Alexander to Oxford, concluded his Letter.

The Disputation published by Martyr;
But when the Papists dispersed vain Stories and many Falsehoods concerning this
Business, he was forced, his Friends also urging him thereunto, to publish an
Account hereof. And with what Fidelity and Diligence he drew up his Book, the
Testimonies of two of the King's Counselors, Ear-Witnesses, added thereto,
sufficiently confirmed. In the Preface to his Relation of these Disputes, he
assigned two Reasons that made him publish them. The one was the Calumnies of
evil Men; the other the Desires of his Friends. Under the former he complained,
how he was by his Adversaries bespattered among all sorts of People, Princes,
Nobles, Commons, Citizens, Clowns: And that all Corners, Streets, Houses,
Shops, Taverns, sounded their Triumphs over him; and he doubted not, that it
was dispersed by them into other Nations. Upon these Considerations, Quid enim
n^gare aus^m Rever. Archi^piscopo Cant. cui plant omnia debto? In Praefat. ad
Disp.
his great Patron, the Archbishop of Canterbury, (to whom he dared to deny
nothing) and the King's Visitors, besides others of his Friends, had advised
and desired him to put forth these his Disputations in his own Vindication, and
in the Vindication of the Truth. These he professed to write with all Fidelity:
And that he might be the more exact, he had compared his own Collections with
the Relations that were drawn up by the Adversaries; and that having read
theirs, what he could recall that he had before omitted, which was of any
moment, he restored out of their Writings.

But Tresham, the chief Disputant, pretending himself aggrieved with this Book,
And by Tresham.
as tho Martyr had therein misrepresented him, and expressed some Indignation
against him, and added some things that were not spoken; wrote himself another
Account of this Disputation, in justification of himself against the Professor;
and set a Preface before it, by way of Epistle, to the King's Privy Council.
Wherein he most angrily bespattered this Reverend Man, calling him
Pseudo-Martyr, a doting old Man, Subverted, Impudent, and the famous Master of
Errors: And that he fled into Germany to obtain the more License for his Lust,
and that he might enjoy his Adultery, meaning his Wife. The Disputation it self
is too long to be transcribed; it is extant among the Foxian Manuscripts. But
the Epistle Dedicatory, or Preface before it, I will not omit, that the Reader
may there observe the malicious Spirit of Martyr's Adversaries, and collect
some further Account of this Disputation. No. XLV.
But the Reader must remember, that it was an angry Antagonist that wrote it.

Dr. Smith, who had done his best to cause a Riot in the University, Smith
writes to the ABp from Scotland.
and thereby to endanger the King's Professor, and was therefore got away into
Scotland; conscious likewise to himself of Calumnies and Wrongs done by him
against the Archbishop; some time after wrote to the Archbishop a submissive
Letter, praying him to forgive all the Injuries he had done his Grace, and to
obtain the King's Pardon for him, that he might return Home again. And he
promised to write a Book for the Marriage of Priests, as he had done before
against it. That he was the more desirous to come Home into England, because
otherwise he should be put upon writing against his Grace's Book of the
Sacrament, and all his Proceedings in Religion, being then harbored, as he
would make it believed, by such as required it at his Hands. But in Q. Mary's
Days he revolted again, and was a most zealous Papist, and then did that
indeed, which he gave some Hints of before; for he wrote vehemently against
Cranmer's Book.

But from Oxford, let us look over to Cambridg. Disputations at Cambridg before
the Commissioners.
Where Disputations likewise were held in the Month of June, before the King's
Commissioners, who were Ridley Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Bishop of Ely, Mr.
Cheke, Dr. May, and Dr. Wendy, the King's Physician. The Questions were, That
Transubstantiation could not be proved by Scripture, nor be confirmed by the
Consent of Ancient Fathers for a thousand Years past. And that the Lord's
Supper is no Oblation or Sacrifice, otherwise than a Remembrance of Christ's
Death. There were three Solemn Disputations. In the first Dr. Madew was
Respondent, and Glyn, Langdale, Sedgwick, and Young, Opponents. In the Second,
Dr. Glyn was Respondent on the Popish side, Opponents Pern, Grindal, Guest,
Pilkington. In the third, Dr. Pern was Respondent: Parker, Pollard, Vavasor,
Young, Opponents. After these Disputations were ended, the Bishop of Rochester
determined the Truth of these Questions ad placitum suum, as a Papist wrote,
out of whose Notes I transcribe the Names of these Disputants.

Besides these Disputations, when Bucer came to Cambridg, Bucer Disputes.
he was engaged in another with Sedgwick, Pern and Young, upon these Questions.
I. That the Canonical Books of Scripture alone do teach sufficiently all things
necessary to Salvation. II. That there is no Church in Earth that erreth not,
as well in Faith as Manners. III. That we are so freely justified of God, that
before our Justification, whatsoever good Works we seem to do, have the Nature
of Sin. Concerning this last he and Young had several Combats: Which are set
down in his English Works.

As to Bucer's Opinion of the Presence in the Sacrament, His Judgment of the
Sacrament.
the great Controversy of this Time, it may not be amiss to consider what so
great a Professor thought herein; and especially by what we saw before, that
Martyr and he did somewhat differ in this Point. For as he would not admit
those words Carnally and Naturally, so neither did he like Realiter and
Substantialiter. Bucer's Judgment drawn up by himself sententiously in 54
Aphorisms, may be seen in the Appendix, as I meet with it among Fox's Papers.
No. XLVI.
It is extant in Latin among his Scripta Anglicana, and entitled Concessio D.
M. Buc. de Sancta Eucharistia, in Anglia Aphoristicos scripta, Anno 1550. And
so we take our leave of Bucer for this Year. We shall hear of him again in the
next.

CHAP. XV. Matters of the Church, and its State now.
LET me now crave a little room to set down some Matters that relate to the
Church coming within the compass of this Year, which will show what mean
Advances Religion as yet had made in the Nation.

Relics of Popery remaining.
Diverse Relics of Popery still continued in the Nation, by means partly of the
Bishops, partly of the Justices of Peace, Popishly affected. In London Bishop
Boner drove on but heavily in the King's Proceedings, though he outwardly
complied. In his Cathedral Church there remained still the Apostles Mass, and
our Lady's Mass, and other Masses under the Defense and Nomination of our
Lady's Communion, used in the private Chapels, and other remote places of the
same Church, tho not in the Chancel, contrary to the King's Proceedings.
Therefore the Lord Protector and others of the Council wrote to the Bishop June
24. Fox's Acts.
Complaining of this, and ordering that no such Masses should be used in S.
Paul's Church any longer; and that the Holy Communion, according to the Act of
Parliament, should be ministered at the high Altar of the Church, and in no
other place of the same, and only at such times as the high Masses were wont to
be used; except some number of People, for their necessary Business, desired to
have a Communion in the Morning; and yet the same to be exercised in the
Chancel at the high Altar, as was appointed in the Book of Public Service.
Accordingly Boner directed his Letters to the Dean and Chapter of Paul's, to
call together those that were resident, and to declare these Matters.

The Council gives Orders to the Justices.
As it was thus in London, so in the Countries, too many of the Justices were
slack in seeing to the execution of the King's Laws, relating not only to
Religion, but to other Affairs. And in some Shires that were further distant,
the People had never so much as heard of the King's Proclamation, by the
Default of the Justices, who winked at the Peoples neglect thereof. For the
quickening of the Justices of Peace at this time, when a Foreign Invasion was
daily expected, and Foreign Power was come into Scotland to aid that Nation
against England; the Lord Protector and the Privy Council assembled at the
Star Chamber, and called before them all the Justices, (which was a thing
accustomed sometimes to be done, for the Justices to appear before the King and
Council, there to have Admonitions and Warnings given them for the discharge of
their Duty). And then the Lord Chancellor Rich made a Speech to them, That they
should repair down into their several Countries with speed; and give warning to
other Gentlemen to go down to their Houses, and there to see good Order and
Rule kept, that their Sessions of Jail-delivery, and Quarter Sessions be well
observed, that Vagabonds and seditious Tale-bearers of the King or his Council,
and such as preached without License, be repressed and punished. That if there
should be any Uproars, or Routs, and Riots of lewd Fellows, or privy Traitors,
they should appease them. And that if any Enemy should chance to arise in any
Place of England, they should fire the Beacons, as had been wrote to them
before, and repulse the same in as good Array as they could. And that for that
purpose they should see diligently, that Men have Horse, Harness and other
Furniture of Weapon ready.

And to the Bishops the Council now sent Letters again for Redress of the
Contempt and Neglect of the Book of Common Prayer; And writes to the Bishops.
which to this time, long after the publishing thereof, was either not known at
all to many, or very irreverently used: Occasioned especially by the winking of
the Bishops, and the stubborn Disobedience of old Popish Curats. The Letter is
dated the 23 d of July, and is extant in Fox.

In London, by the Connivance and Remisness of the Bishop, Neglect in London.
many neglected the Divine Service then established: and others did in secret
Places of the Diocese often frequent the Popish Mass, and other Superstitious
Rites, not allowed by the Laws of England. The Sins of Adultery greatly
increased. The Churches, and particularly the Mother Church of S. Paul's, ran
into Dilapidations; the Glass was broken, and the Ornaments and other Buildings
belonging to Churches neglected. Many refused to pay Tithes to their Curates,
probably of both sorts; such as were Papists to those Curats as more diligently
preached Reformation, and obeyed the King's Laws: and such as were not so, to
such Curats as were more backward thereunto. Bishop Boner also himself now
seldom came to Church, seldomer preached and celebrated the English Communion.
Wherefore the Council sent certain private Injunctions to Boner for the redress
of these things. That he should preach in his own Person at Paul's Cross, and
declare certain Articles, relating to the beforementioned Neglects, which the
Council now sent to him to redress. That he should preach once in a Quarter,
and exhort the People to Obedience; and that he should be present at every
Sermon at Paul's Cross: that he should on the principal Feasts celebrate the
Communion, and at all times, that his Predecessors used to Celebrate and sing
High Mass. That he should call before him all such as did not frequent the
Church and Common Prayer, and the Holy Communion, and punish them, as also
Adulterers: and that he should look to the Reparation of S. Paul's and other
Churches, and that the People pay their Tithes.

The Adulteries before hinted, Adulteries frequent.
which the Council thought fit to recommend to the Bishop to take particular
cognizance of, makes me add, that about this time the Nation grew infamous for
this Crime. It began among the Nobility, and so spread at length among the
inferior sort. Noblemen would very frequently put away their Wives, and marry
others, if they liked another Woman better, or were like to obtain Wealth by
her. And they would sometimes pretend their former Wives to be false to their
Beds, and so be divorced, and marry again such whom they fancied. The first
occasion of this seemed to be in the Earl of Northampton, divorcing himself,
from his first Wife Anne, Daughter to the Earl of Essex, and after marrying
Elizabeth Daughter to the Lord Cobham. In like manner Henry Son of William Earl
of Pembroke, put away Katharine Daughter to Henry the Duke of Suffolk, and
married Mary, the Daughter of Sir Henry Sidney. These Adulteries and Divorces
increased much; yea, and marrying again without Divorce; which became a great
Scandal to the Realm, and to the Religion professed in it, and gave much Sorrow
and Trouble in good Men to see it. In so much that they thought it necessary to
move for an Act of Parliament to punish Adultery with Death. This Latimer in a
Sermon preached in the Year 1550, signified to the King. For the Love of God,
says he, take an order for Marriage here in England.

Books dispersed by Protestants.
This is some Account of the Retardation of Religion. On the other hand the
Endeavors of those that wished well to it were not wanting. Now the Protestants
began more freely to put forth Books, and to disperse such as were formerly
printed beyond Sea, in the behalf of Religion against Popery, and concerning
such as had suffered under the Cruelties of the Church of Rome. Bale about
these Days dispersed his Books. One was The Image of both Churches, applying
the Divine Prophecy of the Revelations to the Apostate Church of Rome. Another
was a Vindication of the Lady Anne Ascue, who suffered the cruel Death of
Burning about the end of King Henry's Reign: Whose Cause the Papists studiously
had rendered bad. This Book he entitled The Elucidation of Anne Ascue's
Martyrdom. Which was this Year exposed publicly to sale at Winchester, and the
Parts thereabouts, as a Reproach to the Bishop of Winchester, who was the great
Cause of her Death. Four of these Books came to that Bishop's own Eyes being
then at Winchester; they had Leaves put in as Additions to the Book, some
glewed, and some unglewed: which probably contained some further Intelligences
that the Author had gathered since his first writing of the Book. And herein
some Reflections were made freely, according to Bale's Talent, upon some of the
Court, not sparing Paget himself, though then Secretary of State. Another of
Bale's Books that went now about, was touching the Death of Luther. Therein was
a Prayer of the Duke of Saxony mentioned, which the Bishop of Winchester gladly
took hold on: Wherein that Duke, as to the justness of his Cause, remitted
himself to God's Judgment to be showed on him here in this World, if the Cause
he undertook were not Just concerning Religion; and desired God, if it were not
Good, to order him to be taken and spoiled of his Honors and Possessions. Since
which the Duke was taken Prisoner: and at the very time of his taking, the
Papists made an Observation, that the Sun appeared so strangely in England, as
the like had not been seen before. So apt are Men to interpret Events according
to their own preconceived Opinions. But at this Winchester took much Advantage.
Letter to the Lord Protector.
Whereas indeed the Issues of God's Providence in this World are not favorable
always even to the best Causes.

Preaching against Lent.
The keeping of Lent was now called into Controversy; and asserted, that it was
not to be observed upon a religious Account. And this was done the rather,
because the Papists placed so much Religion in the bare Fast. In the Pulpit it
began to be cried down. Tongue and Joseph, two great Preachers in London, said,
That Lent was one of Christ's Miracles, which God ordained not Men to imitate
or follow. And that it was an insupportable Burden. There was a set of Rhimes
now made about the burial of Lent, which was called, Jack of Lent's Testament,
and publicly sold in Winchester Market: therein Steven Gardener, the Bishop was
touched, who was a great Man for keeping it. For in the Ballad Stephen
Stockfish was bequeathed in this Will to Stephen Gardener. Of this he made a
long Complaint to the Protector. But yet this Neglect of Lent was not
encouraged by the Superiors. For it was kept at Court; and Preparations for the
King's Diet were made accordingly this Lent by the Protector. The Protestants
indeed were for keeping it, and an Order was issued out for that purpose; tho
not upon a Religious but Politic Account. But the greater part of the ordinary
People would not be brought to it by this Distinction. So that the Preachers
were fain to be employed. Latimer preached, That those that regard-not Laws and
Statutes, were despisers of Magistrates. There be Laws made of Diet, he said,
what Meats we shall eat at all times. And this Law is made in Policy, as I
suppose, for Victual's sake, that Fish might be uttered as well as other Meat.
Now as long as it goes so politickly, we ought to keep it. Therefore all
except those that be dispensed withal, as sick, impotent Persons, Women with
Child, old Folk, etc. ought to live in an ordinary obedience to those Laws, and
not to do against the same in any wise.

Gardener urged the great Inconvenience these Rhimes against Lent might
occasion. Gardiner's Judgment of a Rhyme against Lent.
That they could serve for nothing but to learn the People to rail, and to make
others forbear to make their usual Provisions of Fish against the ensuing Year,
fearing Lent to be sick, as the Rhyme purported, and like to die.

About these Times there arose much talk of the King's matching. Latimer
counsels the King about Marriage.
The Protestants were much afraid of his marrying with some Foreign Princess
Abroad, that might turn his Heart from Religion. But the Popishly-affected did
their endeavors to persuade him to please himself with some Lady Abroad, as
best agreeable with Politic Ends, as the enlarging of his Dominions, and the
Surety and Defense of his Countries. Some therefore put Latimer upon giving the
King Counsel in this Matter from the Pulpit. So he advised the King to choose
him one that is of God, that is, which is of the Household of Faith; and such an
one as the King can find in his Heart to love, and lead his Life in pure and
chaste Espousage with. Let him choose a Wife that fears God. Let him not choose a
Proud Wanton, and one full only of rich Treasures and worldly Pomp.

The Sentiments of the Protestant Foreigners concerning the present English
State, deserves a particular Remark. Foreign Protestants their offer to King
Edward.
They took such great Joy and Satisfaction in this good King, and his
Establishment of Religion, that the Heads of them, Bullinger, Calvin, and
others, in a Letter to him, offered to make him their Defender, and to have
Bishops in their Churches as there were in England, with the tender of their
Service to assist and unite together. This netled the Learned at the Council of
Trent, who came to the knowledge of it by some of their private Intelligencers;
and they verily thought, that all the Heretics, as they called them, would now
unite among themselves, and become one Body, receiving the same Discipline
exercised in England. Which if it should happen, and that they should have
Heretical Bishops near them in those Parts, they concluded that Rome and her
Clergy would utterly fall. Whereupon were sent two of their Emissaries from
Rotterdam into England, who were to pretend themselves Anabaptists, and preach
against baptizing Infants, and preach up Rebaptizing, and a Fifth Monarchy upon
Earth. And besides this, one D. G. authorized by these Learned Men, dispatched
a Letter written in May 1549, from Delf in Holland, to two Bishops, whereof
Winchester was one, signifying the coming of these pretended Anabaptists, and
that they should receive them and cherish them, and take their Parts if they
should chance to receive any Checks. Telling them, that it was left to them to
assist in this Cause, and to some others whom they knew to be well-affected to
the Mother Church. This Letter is lately put in print. Sir Henry Sydney first
met with it in Queen Elizabeth's Closet, among some Papers of Queen Mary's.
Fox's and Firebrand's, Part II.
He transcribed it into a Book of his, called, The Romish Policies. It came
afterward into the Hands of ABp Usher; and was transcribed thence by Sir James
Ware. Let it be remembered here, and noted, that about this time Winchester was
appointed, with Ridley Bishop of Rochester, to examine certain Anabaptists in
Kent.

I find no Bishops Consecrated this Year.

CHAP. XVI. Ridley made Bishop of London. The Communion-Book reviewed.
An. 1550.
RIdley Bishop of Rochester, was designed to succeed Boner, lately deprived, in
the Bishopric of London; and April 3. took his Oath, Ridley made Bp of London.
an half Year being almost spent before he entered upon the Care of that See,
after Boner's Deprivation. At his entrance, he was exceeding wary not to do his
Predecessor the least Injury in Goods that belonged to him. He had not one
Pennyworth of his moveable Goods; for if any were found and known to be his,
he had License to convey them away, Ridl. Letter, among the Letters of the
Martyrs.
otherwise they were safely preserved for him. There was some quantity of Lead
lay in the House, which he used about it and the Church; but Ridley paid for
it, as Boner's own Officers knew. He continued Boner's Receiver, one Staunton,
in his Place. He paid fifty three or fifty five Pounds for Boner's own Servants
common Liveries and Wages, which was Boner's own Debt, remaining unpaid after
his Deposition. He frequently sent for old Mrs. Boner, his Predecessor's
Mother, calling her his Mother, and caused her to sit in the uppermost Seat at
his own Table, as also for his Sister, one Mrs. Mongey. It was observed, how
Ridley welcomed the old Gentlewoman, and made as much of her as though she had
been his own Mother. And though sometimes the Lords of the Council dined with
him, he would not let her be displaced, but would say, By your Lordships
favor, this Place of Right and Custom is for my Mother Boner. But to see the
base Ingratitude of Boner; when he was restored again in Q. Mary's Reign, he
used Ridley far otherwise than Ridley had used him: For he would not allow the
Leases which Ridley had made; which was in danger to redound to the utter Ruin
and Decay of many poor Men. He had a Sister with three Children, whom he
married to one Shipside a Servant of his, and provided for them. This Sister
Boner turned out of all, and endeavored the Destruction of Shipside, had not
Bishop Hethe delivered him. Ridley, in his Offices, and in an Iron Chest in his
Bedchamber, had much Plate, and considerable Quantities of other Goods; all
which Boner seized upon. Insomuch that Ridley, but a little before his Burning,
wrote a Supplicatory Letter to the Queen to take this into her Consideration,
That the poor Men might enjoy their Leases, and Years renewed, for that they
were made without Fraud or Covin, either for their Parts, or his; and the old
Rents always reserved to the Sea, without any kind of Damage thereof: Or at
least, that they might be restored to their former Leases and Years, and might
have rendered to them again such Sums of Money as they paid him and the Chapter,
as Fines for their Leases and Years taken from them. Which Fines he desired the
Queen would command might be made good out of the Plate and other Things he
left in his House; half whereof would disburse those Fines. This did so much
run in the good Man's Mind, that at the time of his Burning, he desired the
Lord Williams, then present, to remember this his Suit to the Queen. Which he
promised him he would do. But what Effect it had I cannot tell.

In the Vacancy of the Church of Rochester, Rochester Vacant.
by the remove of Ridley, the Archbishop committed the Spiritualities to
William Cook, LL. D. April 18.

The Nobility and Gentry this Year, Bucer writes to Dorset, not to spoil the
Church.
flying so much upon the Spoil of the Church, Bucer, by the Archbishop's
Instigation, as well as his own Inclinations, wrote to the Marquess of Dorset
to forbear, dissuading him from spoiling the Church of her Maintenance. In
which Letter he has these Expressions. Antiquum dictum est, MSS. C. C. C. C.
Miscellan. D.
neminem posse vere ditari furtis aut rapinis, quibus invaduntur res alienae;
multo minus peculatu, quo defraudatur Respublica. Quem igitur habeat sensum
Dei, qui dubitet, minime omnium posse cujusquam opes augeri salutariter
Sacrilegiis, quibus acciduntur res Ecclesiasticae? Sunt nimium amplae hae opes,
addictae Ecclesiis; and in luxum permulti eas diripiunt. Homines plane otiosi;
nec ullam Reip. conferentes utilitatem. Submoveantur igitur hi fuci ab
Ecclesiae alvearibus, nec depasci permittantur apum labores. Deinde
procurentur, ut restitutis passim Scholis nusquam desint Ecclesiarum frugi
ministri, etc. That is, It is an old Saying, No body can grow Rich by the
stealing, and taking away of private Peoples Possessions; much less by robbing
of the Public. What Sense therefore has he of God, that doubts not that his
Riches shall increase to good purpose, that commits Sacrilege, and robs the
Church of what belongs to it? But it is objected, the Church has too much, and
many spend it in Luxury. The Churchmen are idle, and bring no Profit to the
Commonwealth. Let these Drones therefore be removed from the Hives of the
Church, but let not the Pains of the Bees be eaten up. And then having Schools
of good Literature every where restored, let not the Church want sober
Ministers, etc.

A Review was made of the Book of Common Prayer, about the latter end of the
Year, by Archbishop Cranmer, and the Bishops. Diverse things that savoured too
much of Superstition, were endeavored to be changed or amended. The
Common Prayer Book reviewed.
But there were among them some that made what opposition they could. The
Archbishop had now by Wilkes, Master of Christ's College, desired Bucer (that
great Divine then at Cambridg) that he would take an impartial view of the
whole Book, having procured him a Translation of it into Latin, done by Aless,
the Learned Scotch Divine, for his understanding of it, and that he should
judge, if he thought any thing in the Book might be more explained, agreeable
with God's Word, and for better Edification of Faith. Bucer in answer sent the
Archbishop word, first, what his Judgment was of the Book, and then what
Course he intended to use in the Examination of it, that he was now to make. He
said, That when he first came into England, and by the help of an Interpreter
took some knowledge of the Rites and Doctrines of this Church, that he might see
whether he could join his Ministry with it, Nec enim quicquam in illis
deprehendi quod non sit ex Verbo Dei desumptum, aut saltem ei non adversetur,
commode acceptum. Buceri Scripta Anglican.
he thanked God, That had inclined the Officers of the Church to reform the
Ceremonies to that degree of Purity; and that he found nothing in them that was
not taken out of the Word of God, or at least was not repugnant to it, being
fitly taken. For some few things there were, added he, that unless they were
heartily interpreted, might seem not so sufficiently agreeable with the Word of
God. As for what he was now to do in order to the fulfilling what the
Archbishop required of him, he intended in short Notes, at every Chapter of
the Book, to observe what he thought to be according to God's Word, and to be
retained and vindicated; what to be taken away or mended, and what to be more
plainly explained and allowed. After his perusal of the Book, he gave this
Judgment in general; Modus quoque harum Lectionum ac precum, and tempora* sunt
admodumcongruenter, and cum Verbo Dei, and observation^ priscarum Ecclesiarum
constituta. Religione igitur summa retinenda erit, and vindicanda haec
Ceremonia. Censura, inter Scripta Anglican.
That in the Description of the Communion and daily Prayers, he saw nothing
enjoined in the Book, but what was agreeable to the Word of God, either in
Word, as the Psalms and Lessons; or in Sense, as the Collects. Also that the
Manner of their Lessons and Prayers, and the Times of using them, were
constituted very agreeable, both with God's Word, and the Observation of the
Ancient Churches. And therefore that that Book ought to be retained and
vindicated with the greatest strictness. What particular Animadversions the
said Learned Man made upon the Book, may be seen in his Scripta Anglicana, and
in the Bishop of Sarum's History, as he has there abridged them. And such a
Deference was given to his Judgment, that most of the things that he excepted
against were corrected accordingly. And that the Book might be the more exact,
and perhaps be the more agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of Foreign
Churches, the Archbishop recommended the diligent examination of it unto
another great Divine, Peter Martyr, who was now at Lambeth; the Archbishop
desiring him to note what he thought good concerning the Book, and because he
knew not the Language, the Version of Sir John Cheke (who had also translated
it into Latin) was given him. He was also requested to set down in writing what
he thought deserved Correction. And he accordingly made his Annotations.

Martyr agreed clearly in Judgment with Bucer about the Book, as he wrote to
him in a Letter sent him to Cambridg, extant among Archbishop Parker's
Manuscripts. Bucer and Martyr employed in it.

MSS. C.C.C.C. Vol. intit. Epist. Viror. illustr. and German.


On the backside of which Letter is written, by that Archbishop's own Hand,
Censura libri communium precum. In this Letter Martyr told Bucer, that the same
things that he disapproved of, the same likewise had he [ P. Martyr] done. And
that afterward he drew them up into Articles, and showed them to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. That to all that Bucer judged ought to be amended,
he had subscribed; and that he thanked God, that had given occasion to admonish
the Bishops of these things. From this Letter it appears, that the Archbishop
had told Martyr, that in the Conference among the Divines, concerning the
Correction of these Public Prayers, it was concluded to make many Alterations.
But what those things were, as the Archbishop told him not, so neither, as he
wrote, did he dare to ask him. But what Cheke told him, did not a little
refresh him; viz. That if they themselves would not change what ought to be
changed, the King would do it of himself; and when they came to a Parliament,
the King would interpose his Majesty's own Authority.

CHAP. XVII. Hoper's Troubles.
IN the Month of July, John Hoper, Hoper nominated for Bp of Gloucester.
who had lived long abroad in Germany and in Switzerland, and conversed much
with Bullinger and Gual^er, the chief Reformers there, but returned into
England in King Edward's Reign, and retained by the Duke of Somerset, and a
famous Preacher in the City, was nominated by the King to the Bishopric of
Gloucester. But by reason of certain Scruples of Conscience he made to the
wearing of the old Pontifical Habits, as the Chimere and Rochet, and suchlike,
and disliking the Oath customarily taken, he was not Consecrated till eight
Months after, and endured not a little Trouble in the mean Season. Soon after
his nomination, he repaired to the Archbishop, desiring him in these things to
dispense with him. But the Archbishop, for certain Reasons, refused it. Then
was the Archbishop solicited by great Men. The Earl of Warwick, afterward the
great Duke of Northumberland, wrote to him a Letter dated July 23, the Bearer
whereof was Hoper himself, that the rather at his Instance he would not charge
the Bishop Elect of Gloucester with an Oath burthenous to his Conscience. Which
was, I suppose, the Oath of Canonical Obedience. And when Hoper had sued to the
King, either to discharge him of the Bishopric, or that he might be dispensed
with in the Ceremonies used in Consecration, (which he knew the Archbishop
could not do, no more than to dispense with the Laws of the Land, whereby he
should run into a Praemunire) the King wrote a Letter to Cranmer, dated Aug. 5,
therein freeing him of all manner of Dangers, Penalties and Forfeitures that he
might incur by omitting those Rites; but yet (by any thing that appears in the
Letter) without any urging or persuasion used to the Archbishop to omit the
said Rites, leaving that to his own Discretion. But the Archbishop thought the
King's bare Letters were not sufficient to secure him against established Laws.

He and Ridley confer about the Habits.
When this would not do, then endeavor was used to satisfy Hoper's Conscience.
And Ridley, Bishop now of London, was thought, for his great Learning, to be a
fit Person to confer with him. There were long Arguings between them, and at
last it came to some Heats. And Hoper still remained resolved not to comply,
holding it, if not unlawful, yet highly inexpedient, to use those very
Vestments that the Papal Bishops used. The Council upon this sent for Hoper,
and because they would in no wise the stirring up of Controversies between Men
of one Profession, willed him to cease the Occasion hereof. Hoper humbly
besought them, that for Declaration of his Doings, he might put in Writing such
Arguments as moved him to be of the Opinion he held. Which was granted him.
These Arguments it seems were communicated to Ridley to answer. And October the
6 th, MS. of the Council Book.
the Council being then at Richmond, the Archbishop present, they wrote to the
Bishop of London, commanding him to be at Court on Sunday next, and to bring
with him what he should for Answer think convenient.

The ABp writes to Bucer for his Judgment in this Matter.
In the mean time, to bring the Question to more Evidence and Satisfaction, the
Archbishop according to his Custom, to consult in Religious Matters with the
learnedest Men of other Nations, wrote to Cambridg to Martin Bucer for his
Judgment. Who upon occasion of this Controversy, wrote two Epistles; one to
Hoper, and another to the Archbishop, both de re Vestiaria. That to the latter
was in answer to these two Queries, which Cranmer had sent for his Resolution
about.

TheQuestions.
I. Whether, without offending of God, the Ministers of the Church of England
may use those Garments which are now used, and prescribed to be used by the
Magistrates?

II. Whether he that affirms it Unlawful, or refuses to use these Garments,
sins against God, because he says that is Unclean which God has
sanctified; and against the Magistrate, who commands a political Order?

Script. Anglic. p. 705. and 681.
Bucer to both these Questions, gave his Resolution in the Affirmative, in his
Answer to the Archbishop, dated December. 8. But he thought, considering how the
Habits had been Occasion to some of Superstition, and to others of Contention,
that it were better, at some good Opportunity, wholly to take them away.

Martyr writes to Hoper.
Besides Bucer's Letter to Hoper from Cambridg, mentioned before, P. Martyr from
Oxon wrote him a large Letter, dated November. 4. For both these good Men were
desirous that Hoper should have Satisfaction, that so useful a Man might come
in place in the Church. To both these Hoper had wrote, and sent his Arguments
against the Episcopal Vestments, by a Messenger dispatched on purpose. Martyr
told him, That he took much delight in that singular and ardent Study that
appeared in him, Inter P. Mart. Epist.
that Christian Religion might again aspire to a chaste and pure Simplicity.
That for his part he could be very hardly brought off from that simple and pure
Way, which he knew they used a great while at Strasburgh, where the difference
of Garments in Holy Things was taken away. And so he prayed God it might
continue. Thus he said, Hoper might see that, in the Sum, they both agreed
together; he wishing for that which Hoper endeavored. That in Rites, he was
for coming as near as possible to the Sacred Scripture, and for taking Pattern
by the better Times of the Church. But yet that he could not be brought by his
Arguments, to think that the use of Garments was destructive, or in their own
Nature contrary, to the Word of God: A Matter which he thought to be altogether
(...). And that therefore indifferent Things, as they were sometimes to be
taken away, so might be used. And that if he had thought this were wicked, he
would never have communicated with the Church of England. That there might be
some great Good follow from the use at present of the Garments; namely, that if
we suffered the Gospel to be first preached, and well rooted, Men would
afterward better and more easily be persuaded to let go these outward Customs.
But now when a Change is brought in of the necessary Heads of Religion, and
that with so great difficulty, if we should make those things that are
indifferent to be impious, so we might alienate the Minds of all; that they
would not endure to hear solid Doctrine, and receive the necessary Ceremonies.
That there was no doubt England owed much to him, for his great pains in
Preaching and Teaching. And in return he had gained much Favor and Authority
in the Realm, whereby he was in a Capacity of doing much Good to the Glory of
God. Only he bad Hoper take heed, that by unseasonable and too bitter Sermous,
he became not an Hindrance to himself. Besides, that by looking upon these
indifferent Things as sinful and destructive, we should condemn many
Gospel-Churches, and too sharply tax very many which anciently were esteemed
most famous and celebrated.

And whereas there were two Arguments that made Hoper ready to charge the use
of these Vestments to be not indifferent, Hoper's two Objections,
he proceeded to consider them. One was this; That this would be to call back
again the Priesthood of Aaron. The other, That they were Inventions of
Antichrist; and that we ought to be estranged, not only from the Pope, but from
all his Devices.

But as to the former he showed him, That the Apostles, Considered.
for Peace-sake, commanded the Gentiles to abstain from Blood and Fornication;
which were Aaronical Customs. And so are Tithes for the maintenance of the
Clergy. Psalms and Hymns can scarce be shown to be commanded in the New
Testament, to be sung in public Assemblies, which are very manifest to be used
in the Old. That there are not a few things that our Church has borrowed from
the Mosaical Decrees; and that even from the very first Times. The Festivals of
the Resurrection, of the Nativity, of Pentecost, and of the Death of Christ,
are all Footsteps of the Old Law. And are they to be therefore abolished? He
wished with all his Heart, that the Churches in Germany by this one Loss might
obtain their former Liberty.

As to the second Argument, He could not see how it could be asserted upon good
Grounds, that nothing is to be used by us, that is observed in the Popish
Religion. We must take heed, that the Church of God be not pressed with too much
Servitude, that it may not have liberty to use any thing that belonged to the
Pope. Our Ancestors took the Idol-Temples, and used them for Sacred Houses to
worship Christ. And the Revenues that were Consecrated to the Gentile Gods, and
to the Games of the Theater, and of the Vestal Virgins, were made use of for
the maintenance of the Ministers of the Church; when these before had served
not only to Antichrist, but to the Devil. Nor could he presently grant, that
these Differences of Garments had their Original from the Pope. For we read in
Ecclesiastical History, that John at Ephesus wore a Petalum [a Mitre]. And
Pontius Diaconus says of Cyprian, that when he went to be Executed, he gave
his Episcopal Garments.
Birrus to the Executioner, his Episcopal Garments.
Dalmatica to the Deacons, and stood in Linen. And Chrysostom makes mention of
the white Garments of Ministers. And the Ancients witness, that when the
Christians came to Christ, they changed their Garments, and for a Gown put on a
Cloak; for which when they were mocked by the Heathens, Tertullian wrote a
Learned Book De Pallio. And he knew Hoper was not ignorant, that to those that
were initiated in Baptism, was delivered a white Garment. Therefore before the
Tyranny of the Pope, there was a Distinction of Garments in the Church.

Nor did he think, that in case it were granted, that it was invented by the
Pope, that the iniquity of Popery was so great, that whatsoever it touched was
so dyed and polluted thereby, that good and godly Men might not use it to any
holy purpose. Hoper himself granted, that every humane Invention was not
therefore presently to be Condemned. It was an humane Invention to communicate
before Dinner: it was an humane Invention, that the things sold in the
Primitive Church were brought and laid at the Apostles Feet. That he was ready
to confess with him that these Garments were an humane Invention, and of
themselves edified not; but it was thought by some conducive, to be born with
for a time: For that it might be a cause of avoiding those Contentions, whereby
greater Benefits might be in danger to be obstructed. But that if hence an
occasion of Erring might be given to the Weak, they were to be admonished, that
they should hold these things indifferent: and they were to be taught in
Sermons, that they should judge not God's Worship to be placed in them.

Hoper had writ, that the Eyes of the Standers-by, by reason of these Garments,
Another Objection of Hoper considered.
would be turned away from thinking of serious things, and detained in gazing
upon them. But this would not happen when the Garments were simple and plain,
without Bravery, and such as hitherto were used in the Service of God. But
Martyr answered, That Use and Custom would take away Admiration. And perhaps
when the People were moved with Admiration, they would the more attentively
think of those things that are serious. For which end, he said, the Sacraments
seemed to be invented, that from the Sight and Sense of them we might be
carried to think of Divine Things.

Hoper urged moreover, That whatsoever was not of Faith, was Sin. But said
Martyr, That we may enjoy a quiet Conscience in our Doings, that of the Apostle
seems much to tend, Other things urged by him.
and that to the Clean all things are clean, says the same Apostle to Titus;
and to Timothy, that every Creature of God is good.

He urged also, That we ought to have express Scripture for what we do in holy
things. But Martyr was not of that Mind, But that that was enough in general,
to know by Faith, that indifferent things cannot defile those who act with a
pure and sincere Mind and Conscience. And this was the substance of P. Martyr's
Judgment of these things. Which might give much light to that Reverend Man in
this Controversy, though he was not yet convinced, nor could comply.

As Hoper all this while refused the Habits, Hoper Confined to his House, and
silenced.
so we may conjecture by a Passage in the former Letter, that he liberally
declamed against them in the London Pulpits. For Martyr takes notice to him of
his unseasonable, and too bitter Sermons. Whether it were for this, or his
incompliance, or both together, I know not, but at length he was, by the
Privy-Counsel commanded to keep his House; Council-Book.
unless it were to go to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Bishops of Ely,
London or Lincoln, for Counsel and Satisfaction of his Conscience; and neither
to Preach nor Read, till he had further License from the Council. But
notwithstanding this Command, he kept not his House, and writ a Book and
Printed it, entitled, A Confession of his Faith: Written in such a manner,
that it gave more distaste, and wherein was contained Matter he should not have
written. He went about also complaining of the King's Counselors; as Martyr
wrote in a private Letter to Bucer.

On January the 13 th. The Court then at Greenwich, Committed to the ABp's
Custody.
he appeared there before the Council, (the Archbishop being then present,)
touching the matter of not wearing the Apparel, and for disobeying the Council.
Who for this Disobedience, and for that he continued in his former Opinion of
not wearing the Apparel prescribed for Bishops to wear, committed him to the
Archbishop of Canterbury's Custody, either there to be reformed, or further
punished, as the obstinacy of his Cause required.

Being with the Archbishop he did his endeavor to satisfy him. Sent to the
Fleet.
But Hoper was as immovable to whatsoever the said ABp could propound and
offer, as he was before with Ridley. So the Archbishop signified to the
Council, that he could bring him to no Conformity, Council-Book.
but that he declared himself for another way of Ordination, than was
established. The Effect of this was, that on January 27, Upon this Letter of
the Archbishop, That Hoper could not be brought to any Conformity, but rather
persevering in his Obstinacy (they are the words of the Council-Book) coveted
to prescribe Orders and necessary Laws of his Head, it was agreed that he
should be committed to the Fleet. And a Letter was drawn for the Archbishop to
send Mr. Hoper to the Fleet upon the occasion aforesaid: and another Letter to
the Warden of the Fleet to receive him, and to keep him from the Conference
with any Person, saving the Ministers of that House. This Disobedience of Hoper
to the Council's Orders will make the severity of the Council less liable to
censure. Neither was Cranmer any other ways instrumental to Hoper's
Imprisonment, than by doing that which was expected from him, viz. giving a
true Account of his unsuccessful dealing with him. But at last he complied,
Hoper conforms.
and received Consecration after the usual Form: and the Church enjoyed a most
excellent Instrument in him at this time, for his Learning, Zeal, Courage and
Activity.

Martyr to Gualter concerning Hoper's Conformity.
This News Peter Martyr signified in a Letter to Gualter. For he and Bullinger,
and the rest of his Friends at Zurick, had heard of this Contention, and were
much concerned for this their Acquaintance. But as he was Consecrated in March,
so in April following Martyr wrote to the said Gualter, That he had never been
wanting to Hoper [whether in his Counsel for satisfying his Conscience, or in
respect of his Interest with the Archbishop or other chief Men,] and that he
always hoped well of his Cause. That he now was freed of all his troubles, and
that he was actually in his Bishopric, and did discharge his Office piously
and strenuously. This was the more acceptable News to the Foreigners, because
some of the Bishops took occasion, upon this Disobedience of Hoper, liberally
to blame the Churches abroad, among which Hoper had been, as tho they had
infused these principles into him: and then fell foul upon Bucer and Martyr,
that were set the one Professor in Cambridg, and the other in Oxon; as though
they would corrupt all the Youth in both Universities: who would suck in from
them such Principles, as Hoper had done. This Bucer heard of, and writ it with
a concern to Mar^^r. Who writ again, how amazed and almost stupefied he was to
hear this. But that it was well, that the Bishops saw his Letter to Hoper,
which would vindicate him from such Imputations. And indeed both his and
Bucer's Letter, concerning this point, did or might seasonably stop this
Clamor.

CHAP. XVIII. Bishop Hoper Visits his Diocese.
Hoper Visits his Diocese.
THE Summer next after his Consecration, he went down and made a strict
Visitation of his Diocese, fortified with Letters from the Privy Council; that
so his Authority might be the greater, and do the more good among an ignorant,
superstitious, stubborn Clergy and Laity. I have seen a Manuscript in Folio,
giving an Account of the whole Visitation, of the Method thereof, and of the
Condition he found the Clergy of the Diocese in, as to their Learning and
Abilities. First, He sent a general Monitory Letter to his Clergy, signifying
his Intention of coming among them; gravely advising them of their Office, and
what was required of them who were entered into this Holy Vocation. This Letter
may be found in the Appendix. No. XLVII.
When he visited them, he gave them Articles concerning Christian Religion, to
the number of Fifty; which bore this Title, Articles concerning Christen
Religion, given by the Reverend Father in Christ, John Hoper Bishop of
Gloucester, unto all and singular Deans, Parsons, Prebendaries, Vicars, Curats,
and other Ecclesiastical Ministers within the Diocese of Gloucester, to be had
and retained of them, for the Unity and Agreement, as well as the Doctrine of
God's Word, as also for the Conformation of the Ceremonies agreeing with God's
Word. Let me give the Reader but a taste of them.

I. That none do teach any manner of thing to be necessary for the Salvation of
Man, His Articles of Religion.
other than what is contained in the Books of God's Holy Word.

II. That they faithfully teach and instruct the People committed unto their
Charge, that there is but one God, Everlasting, Incorporate, Almighty, Wise and
Good, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; by
whom also he will be called upon by us. And though one God in Essence and Unity
in the Godhead, yet in the same Unity three distinct Persons.

III. That they teach all the Doctrines contained in the three Creeds.

IV. That they teach, that the Church of God is the Congregation of the
Faithful, wherein the Word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments justly
ministered, according to the Institution of Christ. And that the Church of God
is not by God's Word taken for the Multitude or Company of Men, as of Bishops,
Priests, and such other; but that it is the company of all Men hearing God's
Word, and obeying to the same; lest that any Man should be seduced, believing
himself to be bound unto an ordinary Succession of Bishops and Priests, but
only unto the Word of God, and the right use of his Sacraments.

V. That tho the true Church cannot err from the Faith; yet nevertheless,
forasmuch as no Man is free from Sin, and Lies, there is, nor can be any Church
known, be it never so perfect or holy, but it may err. These are the five first.

Then he gave them Injunctions to the number of one and thirty; Seven and
twenty Interrogatories and Demands of the People and Parishioners, and of their
Conversation, His Injunctions and Interrogatories.
to be required and known by the Parsons, Vicars and Curats. Sixty one
Interrogatories and Examinations of the Ministers, and of their Conversation,
to be required and known by the Parishioners. There were also Articles,
whereupon all Ministers were examined concerning the Ten Commandments, the
Articles of Faith, and the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, viz. to each
Minister were these Questions put; 1. Concerning the Commandments, 1. How many
Commandments. 2. Where they are written. 3. Whether they can recite them by
Heart.
2. Concerning the Christian Faith, 1. What are the Articles of the Christian
Faith. 2. Whether they can recite them by Heart. 3. That they corroborate them
by Authority of Script.
3. Concerning the Lord's Prayer, 1. Whether they can say the Petitions by
Heart. 2. How they know it to be the Lord's Prayer. 3. Where it is written.



Which Demands, how easy soever they were, many Curats and Priests (such was
the Ignorance of those Days) could say but little to. Some could say the Pater
Noster in Latin, but not in English. Few could say the Ten Commandments. Few
could prove the Articles of Faith by Scripture. That was out of their way.

The Memory of such as have been greatly useful in the Church or State, ought
religiously to be preserved. Of this Number was this Bishop, who as he was
naturally an active Man, put forth all his Strength and Vigor of Body and
Mind, to set forward a good Reformation in Religion, and afterward as
courageously shed his Blood for it.

Holds Worcester in Commendam.
Therefore I cannot part with this good Prelat till I have gathered up and
reposited here some farther Memorials of him. The Diocese of Worcester becoming
void by the Deprivation of Hethe in October. 1551. and requiring an industrious
Man to be set over that See, it was given to Hoper to hold in Commendam. In the
Year 1552, in July, he visited that Diocese, which he found much out of Order.
But before he had finished, he was fain to go back to Gloucester, hearing of the
ungodly Behavior of the Ministers there. He left them the last Year seemingly
very compliant to be reformed, and took their Subscription to his Articles of
Religion. But in his absence, when his Back was turned, they became as bad
altogether as they were before. Yet he conceived good hopes of the Lay People,
if they had but good Justices and faithful Ministers placed among them, as he
wrote to Secretary Cecyl. To whom he signified his Desire, that the Articles of
Religion, which the King had mentioned to him when last at London, were set
forth. Them he intended to make the Clergy, not only subscribe, (which being
privately done, he saw they regarded not) but to read and confess them openly
before their Parishioners. At his Visitation he constituted certain of his
Clergy Superintendants, who in his absence were to have a constant Eye over the
Inferior Clergy.

And visits that Church and Sec.
After this Visit to Gloucester, he returned back again to Worcester in October,
and then proceeded in his Visitation there. Here Johnson and Iollisf, two
Canons of this Church, disallowing some Doctrines, recommended to them by the
Bishop, (in his Articles abovesaid) held a Dispute thereupon with him, and Mr.
Harley, (who was afterward Bishop of Hereford.) And one of these, behaved
himself most insolently and disrespectfully to both. The Bishop sent up by
Harley, a large Relation of his Visitation in writing, and the Matter these
Canons misliked, and recommended Harley to the Secretary to give Account of the
Disputation. This caused him to break out into a Complaint, for want of good
Men in the Cathedrals. Ah! Mr. Secretary, that there were good Men in the
Cathedral Churches! God then should have much more Honor than he has, the
King's Majesty more Obedience, and the poor People better Knowledge. But the
Realm wants Light in such Churches, whereas of right it ought most to be. In
Worcester Church he now put in execution the King's Injunctions for the removal
of Superstition. For which there arose a great Clamor against him, as though
he had spoiled the Church, and yet he did no more than the express Words of the
Injunctions commanded to be done.

After his Visitation was over, he accounted not his Work done; Goes over both
his Diocesses again.
but soon went over both his Diocesses again, to take account of his Clergy,
how they profited since his last examining them; and to oversee even his
Superintendents themselves, to commend their Well-doings, and to see what was
ill done. So great was his Pains and Zeal; which made him most truly and
experimentally write as he did to the Secretary: There is none that eat their
Bread in the sweat of their Face, but such as serve in Public Vocation. Yours
is wonderful, but mine passes. Now I perceive that private Labors be but
Plays, nor private Troubles but Ease and Quietness. These Matters I extract
from two Original Letters of this Bishop to Secretary Cecyl; which I have
thought well worthy of preserving in the Appendix; and there they may be met
with. No. XLVIII.


Whereas it was mentioned before, The Council's Order concerning the two
Canons. MS. Council-Book.
how the Bishop had sent up a Writing of the Matters in Controversy, between
the two Canons and himself, we may see what Care the Council took hereof, and
what Countenance they gave the Bishop, by an Order they made November. 6. 1552.
Which was, that a Letter should be wrote to Mr. Cheke and Mr. Harley, to
consider certain Books sent unto them touching Matters of Religion in
Controversy, between the Bishop of Worcester, and two of the Canons of
Worcester, and to certify their Opinion hither, that further Order may be
therein taken.

Ian. 29. 1551. License for the Bp of Gloucester to attend upon the Duchess of
Somerset in the Tower.
Upon suit made by the Duchess of Somerset to Sir Philip Hobby, and Mr. Darcy
Lieutenant of the Tower, to be a Mean unto the King's Majesty, and my Lords,
that the Bishop of Gloucester, (who had been Chaplain unto the Duke) might be
suffered to have access unto her for the settling of her Conscience; Order was
by their Lordships taken for the same, and a Letter written to the Lieutenant
of the Tower in that behalf, as follows; To the Lieutenant of the Tower, to
permit the Bishop of Gloucester, from time to time, to speak with the Duchess
of Somerset, in the presence of Sir Philip Hobby, and of the said Lieutenant:
And in case the said Lady of Somerset desire to speak with the said Bishop
apart, that in that case they license her so to do.

May 29, 1552. Other Matters relating to this Bishop.
A Warrant to make a Book to the Elect Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, of
discharge of the first Fruits and Tenths to be paid for the same, in
consideration, that he has departed with certain Lands to the King's Majesty.
Which probably he seeing would, whether he would or no, be pulled away from
him, to be conferred upon some of the Mighty of the Court, made the best of a
bad Market, and got himself freed from that Charge payable to the King.

April 12, 1553. A Letter was wrote to the Chancellor of the Augmentations, to
cause a Book to be made from the Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, of a
Surrender to the King's Majesty of his Jurisdiction in the Forest of Dean, with
a certain Deanery, which of right belongs to the Bishopric of Hereford. And
thereupon to make another Book of the Grant thereof from his Highness to Mr.
Harley Elect Bishop of Hereford.

April 16, 1553. A Letter to the Chancellor of the Agumentations, to cause a
Book to be devised in form of Law, Licensing the Bp of Worcester and Gloucester,
to give to three poor Vicarages in his Diocese, the Parsonages whereof are
impropriated to his Bishopric, such Augmentation of Living toward their
better Maintenance, as he shall think convenient, out of the Lands of the said
See.

April 25, 1553. A Warrant to the Receiver of the Wards, to deliver to the
Bishop of Worcester, by way of Reward, twenty Pounds for his Attendance here
ever since the Parliament by his Majesty's Commandment. These are
Transcriptions out of a Council-Book.

CHAP. XIX. Troubles of Bishop Gardener.
IN this Year 1550, the Council and our Archbishop had much trouble, with some
other Bishops also, of a quite different Judgment from the above-spoken of; I
mean Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Nicolas Bishop of Worcester, and Day Bishop
of Chichester. Of whom what I shall here briefly set down, are for the most
part Extractions out of an old Council-Book, and K. Edward's Journal.

At Greenwich, June 8. was this Order of Council concerning Bishop Gardener,
Diverse great Lords repair to Gardener.
Considering the long Imprisonment that the Bishop of Winchester has
sustained, it was now thought time he should be spoken withal; and agreed, that
if he repented his former Obstinacy, and would henceforth apply himself to
advance the King's Majesty's Proceedings, His Highness in this Case would be
his good Lord, and remit all his Errors passed. Otherwise his Majesty was
resolved to proceed against him as his Obstinacy and Contempt required. For the
Declaration whereof, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Privy Seal, the Lord great Chamberlain, and Mr. Secretary Petre, were appointed
the next Day [i. e. June 9.] to repair unto him. Signed by E. Somerset. T.
Cant. W. Wilts. I. Bedford. E. Clynton. T. Ely. A. Wyngfeld. W. Herbert. W.
Petre. Edw. North. Accordingly, June 9. The Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of
Northampton, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Bedford, and Secretary Petre, went
to the Bishop of Winchester, to know what he would stick to; Whether to conform
to, and promote the King's Laws, or no? He answered, That he would obey and set
forth all things set forth by the King and Parliament. And if he were troubled
in Conscience, he would reveal it to the Council, and not reason openly against
it. And then he desired to see the King's Book of Proceedings. At Greenwich,
June 10. Report was made by the Duke of Somerset and the rest, sent to the
Bishop of Winchester, that he desired to see the said Book. The next day were
the Books sent to him, and delivered to him by the Lieutenant of the Tower, as
the Council appointed, to see if he would set his Hand to them, and promise to
set them forth to the People. At Greenwich, June 13. the Lieutenant of the
Tower, declared unto the Council, that the Bishop, having perused the Books of
the Proceedings, said unto him. He could make no direct answer, unless he were
at Liberty, and so being, he would say his Conscience. On the 14 th Day, the
Duke of Somerset, and five more of the Council again repaired to the Bishop, to
whom he made this Answer; I have deliberately seen the Book of Common Prayer.
Although I would not have made it so my self, yet I find such things in it, as
satisfy my Conscience. And therefore I will both execute it my self, and also
see others my Parishioners to do it. And this the Counselors testified under
their Hands, as his Saying.

July the 9 th. There were certain Articles drawn up, The Council's proceedings
with him.
signed by King and Council, for the Bishop to subscribe; which contained the
Confession of his Fault, the Supremacy of the King and his Successors; the
establishing of Holy Days, or dispensing with them to be in the King; the
Service Book to be Godly and Christian; the acknowledgment of the King to be
Supreme Head, and to submit to him and his Laws under Age; the abolishing the
Six Articles; and the King's Power of correcting and reforming the Church.
These Articles, together with a Letter from the King, the Earl of Warwick Lord
great Master, the Lord S. John Lord Treasurer, Sir William Herbert Master of
the Horse, and Secretary Petre, carried to the Bishop, requiring him to sign
them. Which he did, only making exception to the first.

July 10. The said Lords made report unto the Council, that they had delivered
the King's Letter unto the Bishop, together with the Articles. Unto all which
Articles he subscribed thus with his own Hand, Stev. Winton, saving the first.
Against which he wrote in the Margin these words, I cannot in my Conscience
confess the Preface, knowing my self to be of that sort I am indeed, and ever
have been. To which Articles, thus subscribed by the Bishop, these of the
Council wrote their Names, E. Summers. W. Wilts, I. Warwick, I. Bedford, W.
Northampton, E. Clynton, G. Cobham, William Paget, W. Herbert, W. Petre, Edw.
North.

July 11. at Westminster, This was brought to the Council. And his boggling in
this manner at the Confession displeased the King, that being the principal
Point. But to the intent he should have no just cause to say he was not
mercifully handled, it was agreed, that Sir William Herbert and the Secretary
should go the next day to him to tell him, that the King marvelled he refused
to put his Hand to the Confession. And that if the words thereof seemed too
sore, then to refer it to himself, in what sort, and with what words he should
devise to submit himself; That upon the acknowledgment of his Fault, the King
might extend his Mercy toward him, as was determined.

July 13. Sir William Herbert and the Secretary reported, that the Bishop
stood precisely in his own Justification. He said, Articles propounded to him
to subscribe.
That he could not subscribe to the Confession, because he was Innocent, and
also because the Confession was but the preface to the Articles. Upon this it
was agreed by the Council, that a new Book of Articles, and a new Submission
should be devised for the Bishop to subscribe. And the Bishop of London,
Secretary Petre, Mr. Cecyl, and Goodrick, a Common Lawyer, were commanded to
make these Articles according to Law. And then for the more authentic
proceeding with the Bishop, the two former Persons were again to resort to him
with the new Draught, and to take with them a Divine, which was the Bishop of
London, and a Lawyer which was Goodrick. These Articles were 22 in Number, and
to this Tenor, That King Henry VIII. had justly suppressed Monasteries; That
persons may Marry, who are not prohibited to contract Matrimony by the
Levitical Law, without the Bishop of Rome's Dispensation. That vowing or going
Pilgrimages were justly abolished; the Conterfeyting S. Nicholas, St. Clement,
etc. was mere Mockery. That it is convenient that the Scriptures should be in
English. That the Late King, and the present, did upon just ground, take into
their Hands Chauntries, which were for maintenance of private Masses. That
private Masses were justly taken away by the Statutes of the Realm, and the
Communion placed instead thereof, is very Godly. That it is convenient, that
the Sacrament should be received in both Kinds. That the Mass, where the Priest
does only receive, and others look on, is but the Invention of Man. That it was
upon good and Godly Consideration ordered in the Book, that the Sacrament
should not be lifted up, and showed to the People to be adored. That it is
politickly and godly done, that Images in Churches, and Mass-Books were enacted
to be abolished. That Bishops, Priests and Deacons have no Commandment in the
Law of God to vow Chastity, or abstain from Marriage. And that all Canons and
Constitutions which do prohibit Marriage to the Clergy, be justly taken away by
Parliament. That the Homilies and the Forms set forth of making Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are Godly and wholesome, and ought to be received.
That the Orders of Subdeacon, Benet and Colet, etc. be not necessary, and
justly left out in the Book of Orders. That the Holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all Doctrines necessary to Salvation. That upon good and godly
Consideration it was injoined that Erasmus's Paraphrases should be set up in
Churches. And that it was the King's Pleasure, that the Bishop should affirm
these Articles by Subscription of his Hand, and declare himself willing to
publish and preach the same. These Articles were brought to the Bishop by the
Master of the Horse, and Secretary Petre, with the Bishop of London and
Goodrick. To whom the Bishop answered, That he would not consent to the Article
of Submission; Praying to be brought to his Trial, and desired nothing but
Justice. And for the rest of the Articles, when he was at Liberty, then it
should appear what he would do in them, it not being reasonable he should
subscribe them in Prison.

This being reported to the Council, July 15, it was agreed, that he should be
sent for before the whole Council, and examined, Whether he would stand at this
Point? Which if he did, then to denounce the Sequestration of his Benefice for
three Months, with intimation, if he reformed not in that space, to deprive
him. This Order was Signed by Somerset, Wilts, Bedford, Clynton, Paget,
Wyngfield, Herbert.

July 19. The Bishop of VVynton was brought before the Council; and there the
Articles before mentioned were read unto him distinctly. Whereunto he refused
either to subscribe or consent: Winchester Sequestered for three Months.
Answering in these words, That in all things his Majesty would command him, he
was willing and most ready to obey; but forasmuch as there were diverse things
required of him, which his Conscience would not bear, therefore he prayed them
to have him excused. And thereupon Secretary Petre, by the Council's Order
proceeded to read the Sequestration. Thus fairly and calmly was this Bishop
dealt with by the King and his Council, from June 8. to July 19. And
notwithstanding this Sentence, the Council favorably ordered, that the Bishop's
House and Servants should be maintained in their present State, until the
expiration of the three Months; and that the Matter in the mean time should be
kept secret.

The three Months expired October. 19. but with such Clemency was he used, that
it was November 23, The Sequestration expires.
before his Business was renewed. And then, Council-Book.
considering the time of his Intimation was long sithence expired, it was
agreed, that the Bishop of Ely, Mr. Secretary Petre, Dr. May and Dr. Glynne,
all Learned in the Civil Law, should substantially confer upon the Matter: and
upon Tuesday next, the 26 th day of this present, to certify unto the Council,
what was to be done duly by order of the Law in this Case. And now the
Archbishop of Canterbury began to be concerned in this troublesome Business. A
Commission, dated December. 12, was issued out from the King, to the said
Archbishop, and to the Bishops of London, Ely, Lincoln, to Sir William Petre,
Sir James Hales, and some other Lawyers, to call the said Bishop of Winchester
before them, and, continuing in his Contempt, to proceed to deprive him.

December 14. The Lieutenant of the Tower was ordered to bring the Bishop on
Monday next to Lambeth before my Lord of Canterbury, and other Commissioners,
upon his Cause: and likewise upon their Appointment to bring him thither from
day to day, at times by them prefixed.

December 15, was the day of VVinchester's first Appearance. The Commissioners
sit to examine him.
The Business done this Session, was the opening and reading the Commission,
and after that, diverse Articles against the Bishop. Who then made a Speech.
Wherein first, He protested against these his Judges, and excepted against
their Commission; and required this his Protestation to be entered into the Acts
of the Court. Then desiring a Copy of the Commission, it was granted him,
together with that of the Articles too, to make his Answers to. Next, the
Archbishop gave him his Oath to make true Answer. Which he took still with his
Protestation. Then the Bishop desiring Counsel, the Archbishop and the rest
not only granted his Request, but allowed him whomsoever he should name. Which
was the next Day allowed also by an Order of Council. Certain honorable
Persons were deposed, and sworn for Witnesses, as Sir Anthony Wingfield
Controller of the Household, Sir William Cecyl Secretary, Sir Rafe Sadleir, Sir
Edward North, Dr. Cox Almoner, and others. The Bishop also protested against
them, and the Swearing of them. At this first Sessions he had also said, in the
hearing of a great Multitude present, concerning the Duke of Somerset and some
other Privy-Counsellors, sent to him in the Tower, That they had made an end
with him before, for all the matters for which he was committed. In so much
that he verily thought he should never have heard any more of it.

A Letter of some Noblemen, whom he had belied.
This, coming soon to the Ears of these Nobles, highly offended them, as
reporting falsely of them. So that to justify themselves in as public a
manner, the next Sessions they sent their Letter, dated December 17, signed by
the Duke of Somerset, the Earls of Wiltshire and Bedford, and Sir Edward North:
wherein they denied any such Matter; saying, That the Bishop defended his Cause
with Untruths, and that upon their Fidelities and Honors, his Tale was false
and untrue; For that their coming to him in the Tower was to do their endeavor
to reclaim him. And they prayed the Commissioners, that for their Vindication,
they would cause this their Letter to be publicly read. Which was accordingly
done; though the Bishop, thinking how this would reflect upon him, under his
former Protestation, labored hard that he might first be heard, and that he
had something to propose, why it should not be read. Which notwithstanding they
would not grant.

January 19. The Council sitting at Greenwich, the Bishop's Servants came and
desired, that certain of them might be sworn upon certain Articles for Witness
on his behalf. And if they might not be sworn, that upon their Honors, as they
would answer before God, they would witness truly according to their
Conscience, and as effectually as if they were sworn upon a Book. And they were
allowed.

Gardener offers his Book against Cranmer to the Commissioners.
The Bishop to make his Cause the more plausible, as though he were the public
Defender of the Roman Catholick-Church in England at this time, labored to
make it believed, that he fell into all this Trouble for the Defense of the
Real Presence in the Sacrament, and for maintaining the Catholic Doctrine in a
Sermon before the King; and that he made his Book to vindicate himself therein.
And therefore in one of his Appearances before the Commissioners, openly in the
Court delivered them his Book against Archbishop Cranmer, printed in France:
and to make it suit the better, he had altered some lines in the beginning of
his Book, so as to make it to relate to his present Case. But in truth Gardener
had wrote, and finished his Book before. This Cranmer unvailed in his Answer to
this Book of Gardiner's: Page 2.
Saying there, That he made his Book, before he was called before the
Commissioners, as he could prove by a Book under his own Handwriting; and that
he was called before the Commissioners by his own Suit and Procurement, and as
it were enforcing the Matter. But indeed the true Cause was, That he was called
to Justice for his manifest Contempt and continual Disobedience from time to
time, or rather Rebellion against the King's Majesty; and was deprived of his
State for the same.

In short, after a greal deal of Pains and Patience, the Bishop was by the
Archbishop and the rest of the Commissioners deprived, after no less then two
and twenty Sessions, held at diverse places, He is deprived.
that is, from the 15 th of December to the 14 th of February: though Stow
falsely names but seven. The Bishop when he saw the Sentence Definitive ready
to be pronounced, made an Appeal from them to the King. For his doing which he
produced these Reasons. For that these his pretended Judges were not
indifferent, but prejudiced against him. That my Lord of Canterbury had caused
him to be sent to Prison, (whereas the Archbishop was only present at the
Council when he was by them ordered to the Tower). And so had Hales, Goodrick
and Gosnold counseled to send him thither. Also, that the Archbishop and the
Bishops of London and Lincoln, did contrary to the Laws Ecclesiastical, and
taught and set forth manifest condemned Errors against the Presence in the
Sacrament. And because the Bishop, as well in his Writings, as otherwise, did
set forth the Catholic Faith of the very Presence of Christ's Body and Blood:
therefore they showed themselves unduly affected toward him. That Sir William
Petre decreed the Fruits of his Bishopric to be sequestered de facto, sed non
de jure, and now was Judge in his own Cause. But notwithstanding this Appeal,
the Archbishop with the rest of the Commissioners pronounced him Deprived, and
his Bishopric void. After this was done, the Bishop appealed again to the
King, instantly, more instantly, most instantly, from their Sentence as Injust,
and of no effect in Law; and asked of them Letters Dimissory to be granted to
him, and a Copy of the Judgment. But the Judges declared they would first know
the pleasure of the King and his Council therein. And so this last Session
brake up.

The day after, being the 15 th of February, The Council's order for his strait
Confinement.
the Council sitting at Westminster, upon debating the Bishop of VVinton's
Case; Forasmuch as it appeared, he had at all times, before the Judges of his
Cause, used himself unreverently to the King's Majesty, and slanderfully
toward his Council; and especially Yesterday, Council-Book.
being the Day of his Judgment given against him, he called his Judges
Heretics and Sacramentaries, they being there the King's Commissioners, and of
his Highness's Council; it was therefore concluded, by the whole Board, that he
should be removed from the Lodging he has now in the Tower, to a meaner
Lodging, and none to wait upon him but one, by the Lieutenant's Appointment, in
such sort as by the resort of any Man to him, he have not the liberty to send
out to any Man, or to hear from any Man. And likewise that his Books and Papers
be taken from him, and seen; and that from henceforth he have neither Pen, Ink,
nor Paper, to write his detestable Purposes, but be sequestered from all
Conferences, and from all means that may serve him to practice any way.

March 8. at Westminster. This day, by the King's Majesty's own Appointment,
Dr. Poynet Bishop of Rochester, Poynet made Bp of Winton.
was chosen Bishop of Winchester. And the Archbishop of Canterbury had given
him 266 l. 13 s. 4 d. (i. e. 400 Marks) for his Pains and Charges about the
Bishop of Winchester. And thus I have, from very Authentic Authority,
gathered together these Memorials of this turbulent haughty Man; who was now so
seasonably laid aside in this King's Reign, till we hear of him loudly in the
next; when he sufficiently wracked his Revenge against our good Archbishop and
the true Religion.

CHAP. XX. Bishop Hethe and Bishop Day, their Deprivations.
Other Popish Bps dealt with.
WHile the aforesaid Bp lay under Sequestrationin the Tower, two other Bps that
were wayward to the King's Proceedings in the Reformation of the Church, ( viz.
of Worcester and Chichester) came under the Hands of the Privy Council,
resolving to make them comply, or deprive them. That others more willing and
better affected to Reformation, might succeed and do service in the Church; and
that the Archbishop might go forward with less Stop and Impediment in the good
Work he had dedicated himself unto. Both of them were of the Archbishop's
raising, and seemed very compliant with the Archbishop during K. Henry's
Reign. But now both hung off from him, seeming much offended with him for his
relinquishing the Doctrine of the Corporeal Presence, and for writing a Book
against it. Whereof they made mention, with dislike, in their Depositions in
the Bishop of Winchester's Trial before the Commissioners.

Bp Hethe's Troubles.
In the last Year, the Year 1549, Twelve Learned Divines, Bishops and others,
were appointed by the Council to prepare a new Book for the Ordination of
Ministers, purged of the Superstitions of the old Ordinal. Hethe Bishop of
Worcester was nominated for one of these. But he not liking the thing, would
not agree to what the others did, nor subscribe the Book when made. For which,
in March, he was committed to the Fleet; where he lay under easy Confinement
all the next Year, the Year 1550; during which time I find him once produced as
a Witness on Bishop Gardiner's behalf.

Sent for before the Council. Council-Book.
But in the Year 1551, the Court being at Chelsey, and the Council sitting
September 22. by virtue of the King's express Commandment, Nicol^s Bishop of
Worcester was sent for, and came before the Lords and others. To whom was
repeated the Cause of his Imprisonment to be, For that he refused to subscribe
the Book devised for the Form of making Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, being authorized by Parliament. At the time of which refusal, being
not only gently and reasonably required to subscribe it, but also being
manifestly taught by diverse other Learned Men, that all Things contained in the
Book were Good and True, and that the Book was expedient and allowable, the
said Bishop declared himself to be a v^ry obstinate Man. And for this his
doing, it was now showed unto him, that he deserved longer Imprisonment.
Nevertheless the King's Majesty's Clemency was such, that now if he had, or
would reconcile himself to obey his Majesty in this former Commandment, he
should recover the King's Majesty's Favor. For which Cause it was told him,
That he was then presently sent for, and willed now to subscribe the same.
Whereunto he answered, That he took the Cause of his Imprisonment to be as was
alleged, and that also he was very gently used, rather like a Son than a
Subject. Nevertheless (he said) he remained still in the same mind, not willing
to subscribe it, although he would not disobey it. And although he was reasoned
withal by every of the said Council in disproving his manner of answer, that he
would not subscribe it, being every thing in the said Book, True and Good; and
being devised by eleven other Learned Men, to which he was joined as the
twelfth, and received of all the whole Estate of the Realm; agreeing also that
he would obey it, not subscribe it, which contained a Contradiction in Reason:
Yet he still, as a Man not removeable from his own Conceit, refused to
subscribe it. Whereupon to prove all manner of Ways for the winning of him to
his Duty, he was offered to have Conference with Learned Men, and to have time
to consider the Matter better. Whereunto he said, That he could not have better
Conference than he had heretofore: and well might he have time, but of other
Mind he thought never to be: Adding, that there were many other things
whereunto he would never consent, if he were demanded, as to take down the
Altars and set up Tables. And in this sort seeing him obstinately settled in
Mind not to be conformable, he was in the King's Majesty's Name expressly
commanded and charged to subscribe the same Book before Thursday next
following, being the 24 th hereof, upon pain of Deprivation of his Bishopric,
to all and singular Effects which might follow thereof. And hearing the
Commandment, he resolutely answered, He could not find in his Conscience to do
it, and should be well content to abide such End, either by Deprivation or
otherwise, as pleased the King's Majesty. And so as a Man incorrigible, he was
returned to the Fleet. This Order was subscribed by these of the Privy Council,
W. Wilts. I. Warwyck. W. Herbert. W. Cecyl. Io. Mason.

That which gave the Council the first Occasion against Day Bishop of
Chichester, Bp of Chichester his Troubles.
was partly his refusal of complying with the Order of changing the Altars in
his Diocese into Tables; and partly going down into his Diocese, and there
preaching against it, Council-Book.
and other Matters of that nature then in agitation, to the raising of
dangerous Tumults and Discontents among the People. This came to the Council's
Ears; and October. 7. this Year, Dr. Cox, the King's Almoner, was ordered to
repair into Sussex, to appease the People by his good Doctrine, which were now
troubled through the seditious preaching of the Bishop of Chichester and others.

November. 8. The said Bishop appeared before the Council to answer such things
as should be objected against him for preaching. And because he denied the
words of his Accusation, therefore he was commanded within two days to bring in
writing what he preached.

November. 30. This day the Duke of Somerset declared to the Council, That the
Bishop of Chichester came within two days past, Bp Day will not pull down
Altars.
and showed to him, that he received Letters from the King's Majesty, signed
with his Majesty's Hand, and subscribed with the Hands of diverse Lords of the
Council. The Tenor of which Letter here ensues; Right Reverend Father in God,
etc. [It is the same Letter as is printed in Fox's Acts, about pulling down
Altars]; According to this Letter the said Bishop said, He could not conform
his Conscience to do that he was by the said Letter commanded; and therefore
prayed the said Duke he might be excused. Whereunto the said Duke, for Answer,
used diverse Reasons moving the said Bishop to do his Duty, and in such things
to make no Conscience, where no need is. Nevertheless the said Bishop would not
be removed from his former Opinion. Therefore the said Duke said, He would make
report to the rest of the Council. And so in the end he prayed the Lords of the
Council this Day, that the Bishop might be sent for, and show his Mind touching
this Case. Which was agreed, and Commandment given for the Bishop to be at the
Council the next Day.

Appears before the Council.
December. 1. The Bishop came before the Council; and being asked what he said to
the Letters sent to him from the King's Majesty? He answered, That he could not
conform his Conscience to take down the Altars in the Churches, and in lieu of
them to set up Tables, as the Letter appointed. For that he seemed for his
Opinion to have the Scripture, and Consent of the Doctors and Fathers of the
Church; and contrariwise did not perceive any strength in the six Reasons,
which were set forth by the Bishop of London to persuade the taking down Altars
and erection of Tables. And then being demanded what Scripture he had? he
alleged a saying in Esaias. Es. xix.19.
Which place, being considered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, and other Lords of the Council, was found of no purpose to maintain his
Opinion.

The ABp and Bp of Ely reason with him.
And thereupon by the said Archbishop and Bishop of Ely diverse good Reasons
were given to prove, that it was convenient to take down the Altars, as things
abused; and in lieu of them to set up Tables, as things most meet for the
Supper of the Lord, and most agreeable to the first Constitution. And besides
that, his other Reasons were then fully answered.

The Council give him time to confer.
Wherefore the Council commanded him expressly, in the King's Name, to proceed to
the execution of his Majesty's Commandment in the said Letter expressed.
Whereunto he made request, That he might not be commanded to offend his
Conscience: saying, If his Conscience might be instructed to the contrary, he
would not thus molest the Council with his refusal. Which his Saying considered
by the Council, moved them to show thus much Favor unto him; that they willed
him to resort unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Ely or London,
and confer with them in the Matter, so as he might be instructed by them to
accept the just Command of the King's Majesty with a safe Conscience. And for
his second Answer, Day was given him until the 4 th of this Month. At which day
he was commanded to return again.

Before the Council again.
December. 4. This day, the Bishop of Chichester came before the Council; and was
demanded, Whether he had been with the Archbishop of Canterbury and the other
Bishops, according to former Order given him; Who answered, That he was one
Afternoon at Lambeth, to have waited on the Archbishop, but he was answered,
that he was at the Court. And upon a demand what time his Grace would come
home, one of the Chamberlains, as he says, answered, That he doubted it would
be late e're his Grace come home, because he so used. Therefore he tarried not.
And to any other Bishops he made no repair: saying further, He had not been
well in Health. For the which cause he took some Physic yesterday. The
Archbishop thereunto said, that the same Afternoon that the Bishop of
Chichester had been there, he came home very early on purpose to have conferred
with the said Bishop. For the which cause he had leave of the King's Majesty to
depart the same day home sooner than for other Business he might conveniently.
To the Matter, he was asked, what mind he was of, touching the executing the
King's Command; and what he could say* why the same should not be obeyed? Who
answered as he did before, That his Conscience would not permit him to do the
same; for that the same was against the Scripture and the Doctors. And being
asked of the first, he alleged a place in the last to the Hebrews, mentioning
the word ALTAR. Which place, Heb. xiii.10*
being considered, was manifestly by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Bishop of Ely, declared to be meant of Christ: as by the very Context of the
same most manifestly appeared to every Reader. Next to this he alleged the
former place of Esaias, which also was most evident to be meant otherwise than he
alleged, and so proved. As to the use of the Primitive Church, besides the
Texts of the New Testament, it was most clearly by Origin contra Celsum,
proved, That in his time, Christen Men had no Altars, by direct negative
Propositions. Besides this, the abuse of the Altars was showed unto him, and
Reasons declared how necessary it was to reform the same. Touching the naming
the Table an Altar, it was left indifferent to him, because Ancient Writers
sometimes call the Table an Altar. But yet, notwithstanding that his own
Reasons were fully solved, and diverse good and weighty Reasons made, he
persevered in the pertinacy of his own singular Opinion. Whereupon the Council,
rehersing to him the evil that should come of this his Disobedience, if he
should be suffered, commanded him, in the King's Majesty's Name, upon his
Allegiance expressly to become an obedient Subject, and so to execute the King's
Commandment. And for that it should appear to him, that there was as much Favor
meant as might be, not offending the King's Majesty, in his Majesty's behalf
they would be so bold as to appoint him Sunday next to make his final Answer;
And in the mean time he might advise himself, and weigh the Cause as it ought
to be. And so the day was given him.

December. 7. Before the Council the third Time.
The Bishop of Chichester again appeared before the Council; and being asked
touching the execution of his Majesty's Commandment in the Letter, he answered
plainly, He could not do it, saving his Conscience: For the Altars seemed to
him a thing anciently established by the agreement of the Holy Fathers, and
confirmed by Ancient Doctors, with the Custom also of a number of Years, and as
he thought, according to the Scriptures* Wherefore he could not in Conscience
consent to the abolishing of them, and determined rather to lose all that ever
he had, than to condemn his own Conscience, with many other Circumstances to
that effect. Finally, the Matter being well debated, it was thought good yet to
give him two Days respit further to be advised, in hope he might reconcile
himself: which if he did not upon his next Answer, appointed to be upon Tuesday
next, the Council agreed to proceed ordinarily against him, as against a
contemptuous Person, by way of Sequestration.

And the fourth Time, when he was sent to the Fleet.
December 9. This day the Bishop of Chichester appeared before the Council: and
being demanded whether he would obey the King's Commandment in pulling down the
Altars, as is before rehearsed? he answered, That he thanked both the King's
Highness, and his Council, of their great Clemency used toward him: but he
said he could not by any means persuade himself to do that thing, that was
against his Conscience. Wherefore he prayed them to do with him what they
thought requisite; for he would never obey to do the thing, that his Conscience
would not bear. Whereupon for his Contempt he was, by the Order of the whole
Council, committed to Ward in the Fleet, till further Order should be taken for
him.

Commissioners appointed for Worcester and Chichester.
We hear no more of him and his Fellow, the Bishop of Worcester, till nine
Months hence. And so we leave them both in the Fleet, till September 27, 1551.
When we find Sir Roger Cholmely, Knight. Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir
Richard Read, Richard Goodrick, John Gosnold, John Oliver and Richard Ryel,
being Commissioners appointed by the King's Majesty for the Proceedings in the
Causes laid against these two Bishops, were commanded by Letter from the
Council, to call the said Bishops before them at Whitehall; and beginning with
the Bishop of Worcester's Cause, to proceed also with Chichester. So as the
Judgment of the one might succeed the other, without any delay of time more
then needed. And when the Acts of the Council proceeded in those Causes should
be requisite, the same, upon knowledge given thither, should be sent them. And
in the mean time to use for their Instruction the Acts that were passed upon
Worcester's Cause, and those that Mr. Read had already concerning Chichester;
with Admonition, seeing their Contempts so evident, not to give them any long
delay, by granting any Learned Counsel, or otherwise by such Pretexts.

They are deprived.
September. 28. The Council sent a Letter to the Lord-Chancellor, with the
Commission directed to the abovenamed Persons, for the examination and
determining of the Bishops of Worcester and Chichester's Causes: Praying him to
send the same to such of the Council as are at or near London, whose Hands be
not thereto, that they might sign it; and then to seal it, and send it with a
Letter from the said Lords, enclosed within his, to the said Commissioners.
According to these Orders, within less than a Month, these two Bishops were at
last Deprived, after the expectation of their Compliances a long while.

And October 24, 1551. The Council sent a Letter to the Chancellor of the
Augmentations, to take immediate Order for seizure in the King's Majesty's
Hands of the Temporalties of their Bishoprics, lately given to his Highness by
the Judgment past by the Commissioners, appointed for the hearing of those
Bishops Causes.

These Bishops remained Prisoners in the Fleet after their Deprivation, till
the next Summer. When, Placed the one with the Lord Chancellor, the other with
the Bp of London.
as it seems for their Healths sake, they desired to be removed to some place
of better Air, and more Liberty. Whereupon June 15, 1552. Dr. Day was sent to
the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, and Dr. Hethe to the Bishop of London, by
the appointment of his Majesty. And they were directed to use them as to
Christian Charity should be most seemly. At whose Hands the King doubted not
but they should receive such Christian Advice, as would tend to the Glory of
God. July 17. Upon the motion of the Bishop of London, the Lords of the Council
were content, that he should send Dr. Hethe unto the Bishop's own House at
London [from Fulham] to recover his Health, and then to have him again. So far
more kindly were these Popish Bishops dealt withal in this Reign, than the
Protestant Bishops were in the next. Hoper Bishop of Gloucester succeeded in the Sea of Worcester, and Scory Bishop of Rochester in that of Chichester.

I will here crave the Reader's leave to insert two or three words concerning
Bishop Day; thereby to judge the better of him.

About the Year 1547. Day writes to King's College for leaving off Masses.
Saying of Masses was laid aside in King's College in Cambridg, the Members of
which College generally favored the Gospel. Day, the Provost thereof (which
Place he held in Commendam with his Bishopric) hearing of this, wrote an angry
Letter to the Vice-provost, and in him to the whole College, for diverse things
which they had done, relating to Reformation; and particularly for leaving off
saying Masses. In which he said, They departed from the Institution of the
House, and that they did it rashly, and besides the Law: There being as yet no
Law for so doing. He charged them with the Breach of Statute; and so would
involve them in the Sin of Perjury. And whereas in their public Disputations
they gave Questions against Popish Doctrines, he charged them with disputing
wickedly and turbulently, to the wounding of tender Consciences, and the Infamy
of the House. And finally, required, that things should be put in the same
posture they were before. To which the College, by Dr. Haddon's elegant Pen,
wrote an Answer: Haddoni Ep. p. 169.
That as to their abolishing Masses, they said, they were private Masses; and
the Statutes of the College did seem to enjoin only Masses, wherein was a
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. That that was not Perjury, when by
the common Consent of the College some minuter Matters of the Statutes were
changed. That had he himself been there, he would have done as they did,
considering the Reports that came from the Court, brought by Witnesses worthy
of Credit. And that as for their Disputations they urged, that it was free for
them to dispute Matters controverted, for better Inquiry into the Truth. And
that it was done with Lenity, without any perverseness of Speech.

He had a younger Brother named William (who was above forty Years after Bishop
of Winton). His unnatural Carriage toward his Brother.
This Man was a Scholar of the College, while his Brother was Provost and
Bishop. To whom he sent once a Request, to supply him with a little Money to
buy him some Books and other Necessaries he stood in need of at that time.
Hatcher's MS. Catal. of Provosts, etc. of King's Coll.
His Brother answered him, knowing him to be well affected to the Gospel, That
for his part he held it not fit to relieve those that were not of the True
Church, and therefore he would not in any wise relieve him. Thus had his
Religion destroyed in him the very Principles of Nature.

Preaches against Transubstantiation.
This Bishop had been a vehement Asserter of Transubstantiation: yet in April
1550. he preached against it at Westminster; which King Edward thought fit to
take notice of in his Journal; and he complied, and went along with all the
Steps of the Reformation till the declining of this Year 1550; when the Matter
of taking down Altars was set on Foot. For then it seems either there was a
Prospect that the Reformation, carring on, would have a Stop, or it was
secretly agreed, among the Popishly affected, now to fall off.

His Change charged on him.
In Queen Mary's Days he was a mighty busy Man, and one of the Commissioners for
the examination and condemning to Death the Professors of Religion. When in
Conference with Bradford, that Holy Man had charged him for departing from the
Reformed Church, as it was in King Edward's Days; he told him, That he was but
a young Man, (and yet in the first Year of that King he was five or six and
forty Years of Age;) and that coming from the University, he went with the
World. But it was always against his Conscience. He could it seems dispense
with his Conscience upon Occasion: and yet what a Man of Conscience was he when
Altars were to be pulled down? He sat a Commissioner upon Hoper, together with
Winchester, London, Durham and Landaff: and however gently he had been used in
his Trouble, that was forgot, and he treated that Reverend Man most rudely,
undecently falling upon him with foul Words, and with a scornful Countenance
calling him Hypocrite.

CHAP. XXI. Papists grow bold. Loose Professors restrained.
The Papists write Libels.
THUS indeed when the Papists found they could not prevail by outward Force,
which they had tried to the utmost the last Year, they now used other Arts. One
among the rest was to libel the Government, and disperse scurrilous Rhimes and
Ballads upon the Preachers. One of these was this Year fastened upon the Pulpit
of some eminent Church; probably of S. Paul's. Which nevertheless soon had an
Answer to it. And not long after a more witty Ballad was put abroad, glancing,
as it seems, at the Archbishop, upon occasion of the Liberty of reading the
Bible, and of the English Service, and the publishing the Homily-Book, and
other good Books: Whipping the Government under the Person of one John Nobody,
because that notwithstanding all these religious Pretenses, there was so much
Sin, Lechery, Adultery, Bribery and want of Charity. A taste of this their
Poetry, I have put into the Appendix: because some probably may be so Curious
as to peruse the Fancy of that Age. No. XLIX.


The Papists were at this Juncture very bold, Several Papists now taken up.
whether it were that they had taken up a Conceit that the old Religion would
be again restored upon the Disgrace of the Duke of Somerset, or upon some other
Reasons. To stay these Men, the Council as they had proceeded before against
some Popish Bishops, so they thought fit to use some Rigors toward others
noted to be the forwardest Men. One of these was Dr. Chedsey, Council-Book.
Chedsey.
who was one of the Disputants against P. Martyr, the King's Professor. He took
now upon him to preach openly at Oxford against the Steps of the Reformation
that were made, and making. Wherefore, March 16, he was committed to the
Marshalsea for seditious Preaching. Where he lay till November the 11 th 1551.
And then he was ordered to be brought to the Bishop of Ely's, where he enjoyed
his Table, and an easier Restraint. March 19. Morgan.
Sergeant Morgan was committed to the Fleet for hearing Mass in the Lady Mary's
Chapel. March 22, Sir Anthony Brown was committed to the Fleet for the same
Offense. Brown.
And three days after, viz. March 25. Mr. White Warden of Winchester, White.
appeared before the Council, and confessed, that he had diverse Books and
Letters from beyond Sea, and namely, from one Martyn, a Scholar there, who
opposed the King's Majesty's Proceedings utterly. And it being manifest that he
had consented to things of that sort in such wise, that greater Practices were
thought to be in him that ways, he was committed to the Tower: where lying for
some months, he showed better Conformity in Matters of Religion. So that in
June 14, 1551. The Council wrote a Letter to the Archbishop that he should
send to the Lieutenant of the Tower for Mr. White to be brought to him, and
with him to remain, till such time as he should reclaim him. Which being done,
he was to be sent back again to the Tower, until the King's Majesty's further
Pleasure upon his Lordship's Certificate of his Proceedings with him. This
White, however he complied now, was in Queen Mary's Reign made Bishop
successively of Lincoln and Winchester, and preached that Queen's Funeral
Sermon: and was deprived by the next Queen, for refusing Conformity to the
Religion then established.

And while the Papists on one hand were so busy in promoting their Ends, Other
Professors restrained.
there were a looser sort of Professors of Religion disgraced the Reformation
on the other. For some there were that took the liberty of meeting together in
certain Places, and there to propound odd Questions, and vent dangerous
Doctrines and Opinions. Of these also the Council having notice, they thought
it very fit to discountenance and restrain them. January 27. A number of
Persons, a sort of Anabaptists, about sixty, met in a House on a Sunday, in the
Parish of Bocking in Essex; where arose among them a great Dispute, Whether it
were necessary to stand or kneel, bare-head, or covered, at Prayers: and they
concluded the Ceremony not to be material; but that the Heart before God was
required, and nothing else. Such other like warm Disputes there were about
Scripture. There were likewise such Assemblies now in Kent. These were looked
upon as dangerous to Church and State. And two of the Company were therefore
taken and Committed to the Marshalsea; and Orders were sent to apprehend the
rest, viz. to Sir George Norton Sheriff of Essex, to apprehend and send up to
the Council those Persons that were assembled for Scripture Matters in Bocking:
Nine of them were named, being Cowherds, Clothiers, and such like mean People.
The like Order was sent to Sir Edward Wotton and to Sir Thomas Wyat, to
apprehend others of them, seven whereof are named, living in Kent. February 3.
Those that were apprehended for the meeting at Bocking, appeared before the
Council, and confessed the Cause of their Assembly to be, For to talk of the
Scriptures; that they had refused the Communion for above two Years, and that,
as was judged, upon very superstitious and erroneous Purposes: with diverse
other evil Opinions, worthy of great Punishment. Whereupon five of them were
committed: and seven of them were bound in Recognizance to the King in forty
pound each Man. The Condition, to appear when they should be called upon, and
to resort to their Ordinaries for resolution of their Opinions, in case they
had any Doubt in Religion.

CHAP. XXII. Foreigners allowed Churches. A Lasco.
The ABp's Care of the Souls of Strangers residing here.
WE shall now show a remarkable Instance of the ABp's Episcopal Piety, in the
care he took of the Souls of Foreigners, as well as of the Native English. For
in King Edward's Reign there were great numbers of Stangers in the Realm;
French, Dutch, Italians, Spaniards, who abode here upon diverse Occasions: some
for Trade and Commerce, and some no doubt to be secret Spies, and Promoters of
the Pope's Affairs, and to hinder the Propagation of the Religion: But the most
were such as fled over hither, to escape the Persecutions that were in those
Times very violently set on foot in their respective Countries, and to enjoy
the Liberty of their Consciences, and the free Profession of their Religion.
Our Prelate had a chief hand in forming these Strangers into distinct
Congregations for the Worship of God, and in procuring them convenient Churches
to meet in, and setting Preachers of their own over them, to instruct them in
the true Religion: Cecyl and Cheke joining with him in this pious Design, and
furthering it at Court with the King and Duke of Somerset. And this they did
both out of Christian Charity, and Christian Policy too: this being a probable
means to disperse the Reformed Religion into Foreign Parts. That when any of
these Strangers, or their Children, should return into their own Country, they
might carry the tincture of Religion along with them, and sow the Seeds of it
in the Hearts of their Countrymen. The Dutch Congregation, begun under John a
Lasco.


This Year, the German or Dutch Congregation began under Johannes a Lasco, a
Nobleman of Poland, styled their Supirintendent: JOHN A-LASCO POLANDER First
Pastor of the DUTCH Church in ENGLAND. Regn. Edw. 6.
and this by the Favor and Influence of our Archbishop, who had entertained
him in his Family with respect due to his Quality, and great Piety. This Person
had forsaken his Country and Honors for the sake of the Gospel, and became a
Preacher to a Protestant Congregation at Embden in East-Friezland. The Occasion
of his coming into England.
But seeing all things look Black and Stormy round about him, and tending to a
Persecution, he took an Opportunity to embrak for England. Where, being a
Person not only of Honor, but of great Learning and Piety, and withal an Exile
for the sake of Christ, and voluntarily taking up the Ministry out of Zeal to
promote the Gospel, he met with a very honorable and friendly Reception; and
soon became acquainted with many eminent Persons here: as with Dr. Turner, the
Duke of Somerse's Physician, and Dean of Wells. Sir John Cheke, Sir William
Cecyl, and our Archbishop; and, by their means, with the Duke of Somerset
himself. His Business here.
His chief Business here seemed to be, to make some Provision for himself and
his Congregation, in case of Persecution. For this purpose he got a Conference
with the said Duke, a way, as it seems, being made thereunto by the Archbishop;
requesting that he and his Congregation might have leave to transplant
themselves to London, that they might have a Church here, and certain
Privileges likewise: moving the Protector thereunto by Arguments as well taken
from Charity as Policy, namely, that hereby a Trade and gainful Manufacture
would be introduced into England. He desired therefore that they might be
incoporated by the King's Letters Patents, and that some old dissolved Church
or Monastery might be granted to them, to worship and serve God in. When he had
done this, he desired a certain Italian Friend or his to acquaint Cecyl with
the Sum of his Discourse with the Protector: and so taking an opportunity on a
sudden, of passing again to Embden along with some Ambassador, that was going
into those Parts, he took his leave of England; leaving the Archbishop and
Cecyl to second his Business with the Duke as occasion should serve. Being at
Yarmouth, before his going Aboard, he wrote to Cecyl his full Mind in case he
and his Congregation should be driven away. He desired him, That if he should
understand any thing concerning his Call into England, or would be informed by
him of any other matters, that he would convey his Letters unto one Robert
Legate, an English Man, living at Embden, who would communicate them unto him.

Being arrived at Embden, he writ to the Archbishop, From Embden he wrote to
the ABp;
relating all Passages that he knew concerning the State of Affairs, and
particularly of Religion in those Parts: desiring him to impart them to the
Protector. He write also unto Cecyl, And to Cecyl.
his Letter bearing date in April 1549, referring him to the Protector's
Letters: and withal acquainting him in what a ticklish and dangerous Condition
they were. That they certainly expected the Cross: The sad Condition of the
Protestants there.
that they did mutually exhort one another to bear it, with invocation upon
God's Holy Name; that by Patience and Faith they might overcome all whatsoever
God should permit to be done against them, to the Glory of his Name, or for
their Trial. They were sure he had a care of them, and that he was so powerful,
that he could in a moment, by a Word of his Mouth, dash in pieces all the
Forces of their Enemies, whatsoever they were. And that he was so good, that he
would not suffer so much as an Hair, without cause, to fall from their Head,
although the whole World should make an Assault upon them. And that he could no
more wish them Harm, than a Mother could her own Infant, or any one the Apple
of his own Eye; yea, no more than he himself could not be God. Who was to be
praised in all things whatsoever happened to them, since he permitted nothing
to fall out to them, but for their Good; and so, for their Welfare. And that
therefore they committed themselves wholly to him, and did expect with all
Toleration whatsoever he should allow to be done to them. In this pious manner
did A Lasco write to Cecyl; and no doubt in the same Tenor to the Archbishop.
This made a very great Impression upon the Godly Hearts of them both, and
caused them vigorously to use their Interest with the Protector, to provide a
safe Retreat for him and his Congregation. Which was obtained for them soon
after. His whole Letter in a hansome Latin Style, as some Memorial of him, No.
L.
I have reposited in the Appendix.

Latimer mentions A Lasco to the King.
Latimer also made way for his Reception: who in one of his Sermons before K.
Edward made honorable mention of him; using an Argument proper for that
Audience, namely, How much it would tend to the bringing down God's Blessing on
the Realm, to receive him, and such pious Exiles as he. John a Lasco was here a
great Learned Man, and, as they say, a Nobleman in his Country; and is gone
his way again. If it be for lack of Entertainment, the more pity. I could wish
such Men as he to be in the Realm. For the Realm should prosper in receiving
them. Third Sermon before the King, Anno 1549.
He that receives you, receives me, said Christ. And it should be for the
King's Honor to receive them, and keep them.

It was but a little after the King had received this Congregation of
Foreigners into England, and had granted them a Church, viz. St. Augustins,
Contest amongst A Lasco's People. MSS. of Benet College.
but great Contest happened among them about their Church, yielded them for
their religious Worship. This P. Martyr took notice of with grief to Bucer: and
adds, That their Minds were so implacable to one another, that the Difference
was fain to be referred to the Privy Council to make an end of. But not to
leave our Superintendent yet.

The Care of A Lasco over his Church, and its Privileges.
A Lasco with his Strangers being settled at London, and incorporated by the
King's Patents, being their chief Pastor and a stirring Man, was very
industrious to procure and maintain the Liberties and Benefits of his Church.
The Members thereof had planted themselves chiefly in S. Katharines, and in
great and little Southwark. Here they were now and then called upon, by the
Churchwardens of their respective Parishes, to resort to their Parish
Churches: though the Ministers themselves did not appear in it. In the Month of
November, Anno 1552, some of these Strangers, inhabiting the parts of
Southwark, were again troubled by their Churchwardens, and threatened with
Imprisonment, unless they would come to Church. Whereupon their Superintendent
A Lasco applied himself to the Lord Chancellor, who then was Goodrich, Bishop
of Ely. By the way one might enquire, why he resorted not rather to his Friend
and Patron, the Archbishop of Canterbury. But the reason may soon be guessed:
namely, That after the Fall of Somerset, the Archbishop's good Friend, he came
not so often to Court, or transacted Business there, unless sent for: knowing
his Interest likewise to be but little with the Duke of Northumberland, who now
bare all the Sway, and who had a jealous Eye of him, as he had of all
Somerset's Friends. And so the Archbishop might have rather hindered than
forwarded A Lasco's Business if he had appeared in it. But this en passent.
Favorably received by the Lord Chancellor Goodrich.
The Chancellor gently received A Lasco, and dismissing him, sent him to
Secretary Cecyl with this Message, to get him to propound the Business the next
Day in the Afternoon at the Council Board, when himself should be there:
promising him likewise, that he would be assistant to him, in procuring him a
Warrant in Writing to be directed to all Ministers and Churchwardens of the
Parishes of Southwark and S. Katharines, that for the time to come the
Strangers of this Congregation should receive no Molestation in that regard any
more. Labors with the Secretary to procure Letters from the Council in behalf
of his Church.
Accordingly A Lasco, the next Morning sent one of the Elders of his Church to
Cecyl with his Letter, excusing himself that he came not, being grievously
afflicted with a Pain in his Head. Therein he acquainted him with the Sum of
his Conference with the Lord Chancellor: adding, that the obtaining such a
Warrant would be necessary for them to produce and show to such as at that
present did annoy them, and to be hereafter kept by the Church. That they might
not be forced at other times, upon the like Occasions, to create new trouble to
the King's Council, or himself, in suing for new Warrants of that Nature.
Meaning hereby to put the Secretary upon drawing this up the more formally and
substantially. And so entreating him to hear what the Elder had to say, and to
dispatch him, he took his leave. No. LI.
This Letter also is inserted in the Appendix.

The Superintendency of A Lasco seemed to extend not only to this particular
Congregation of Germans, The extant of his Superintendency.
but over all the other Churches of Foreigners set up in London, as also over
their Schools of Learning and Education. They were all subject to his
Inspection, and within his Jurisdiction. Melancthon's Epistles, printed at
Leyden, 1647.
And Melancthon in an Epistle to him in the Month of September. 1551. speaks of
the Purity of Doctrine in his Churches. His Condition now, as to worldly
Circumstances, began to be so good, that he was able to relieve and succor
such Learned Foreigners as should retire hither. For when one Nicolas Forced, a
Learned and grave Man, who had lived long in the University of Lovain, and had
spent some time with Melancthon, was minded, for the sake of Religion, to
convey himself into England; he recommended him earnestly to the
Superintendent, as a Person fit to teach in his Churches and Schools: and that
he would friendly entertain him as an Exile for the same Cause himself was, and
find him some little Nest to remain in. Nay, Melancthon thought to shelter
himself under him.
and the said Melancthon himself had some thoughts of sheltering himself under
A Lasco here, as appears by the forementioned Letter, wherein he styles him his
Patron. For the Superscription of his Letter is thus, Illustri, Magnifico, ac
Reverendo Viro, Nobilitate generis, Virtute and Sapientia praestanti Dn.
Iohanni a Lasco, Patrono suo colendo. So much of Deference and Honor did
Learned and Pious Men then use to give him. In this Letter Melancthon told him,
that the Calamities of the Churches were great, and that he himself expected
Banishment, and might probably in a short time arrive where he was. And in
respect of his hospitable reception of Strangers, he told him, that he believed
he did often remember that saying of the exiled Queen, Non ignara mali, miseris
succurrere disco.

His great Abilities for Government.

Erasmus's Praise of him.

Ep. 3. Lib. 28.


Nor was A Lasco any ways unfurnished for this Spiritual Government, being a Man
of good Learning, and of great Piety, Strictness and Gravity from his younger
Age: and of whom the great Erasmus himself acknowledged, that he learned much.
For in his Epistle to Johannes a Lasco, the Archbishop of Gnesne, who was
Namesake and Uncle to our Superintendent, he speaks thus of his Nephew, That
he was but Young, yet Grave beyond his Years; and that he himself accounted it
none of the least parts of his Happiness, that he happened to have his Converse
and Society for some Months: praising the Endowments that God had given him;
And particularly, concerning the Benefits he received by him, he could not but
confess, Senex juvenis convictu factus sum melior, ac sobrietatem,
temperantiam, verecundiam, linguae moderationem, modestiam, pudicitiam,
integritatem, quam juvenis a seen discere debuerat, a juvene senex didici. That
by the Conversation of that young Man, he an old Man became better: and that
Sobriety, Temperance, Awfulness, government of the Tongue, Modesty, Chastity,
Integrity, which the Young ought to learn of the Old, he an old Man had learned
of a Young. This he wrote in August 1527, soon after A Lasco was gone from him.
Lib. 19. Ep. 15.
And in June the same Year, while he resided with him, in another Letter to
Leonard Cox, a Learned English Man, he signified the great complacency he took
in his Company. Iohannis a Lasco tale sum expertus ingenium, ut vel hoc uno
amico mihi videar satis beatus. That he had found A Lasco's Parts to be such,
that he seemed happy enough in his single Friendship.

And this good Understanding continued between them, as long as Erasmus lived.
Purchased Erasmus's Library.
For A Lasco seems to have been with him in his last Sickness; when as the last
Token of Erasmus's esteem of him, he made a purchase to him of his own Library,
Abel Rediviv.
(that incomparable Treasure,) if we may believe the Author of his Life in
English.

A Lasco a married Man.
A Lasco thought not the Clergy obliged to Celibacy, or single Life: for he
himself was a married Man. Who his Wife was, I know not; but as for her
Qualities, she was in all probability a pious and discreet Woman, whereby she
gained a great share in his Affections. He styled her, The other part of
himself. But in August 1552. God deprived him of her. Which Stroke put him for
some time under much sadness, and indisposition both of Mind and Body, as
appears by one of his Letters.

His influence in the Reformation under Q. Elizabeth.
He was alive at the Accession of Q. Elizabeth to the English Throne. And though
he came not back then to England again, whence he departed upon K. Edward's
Death, yet, according to that great Interest he had here with the most eminent
Persons, and even the Queen her self, he neglected not by his Letters to
promote the Reformation, and to give his grave Counsel in order thereunto. And
Zanchy, Public Professor at Stratsburgh, knowing the sway he bare here, in a
Letter to him in the Year 1558, or 59, excited him in these words; Non dubito,
quin T. P. jamdudum scripserit ad reginam, eique consuluerit, quae pro illius
regni conservatione, and regni Christi instauratione facienda judicarit, etc.
That he doubted not, he had before now written to the Queen, and given her his
Advice, what he judged fit to be done for the preservation of her Kingdom, and
for the restoring of the Kingdom of Christ. Yet he would not omit to pray him,
to do it again and again by his repeated Letters. For I know, said he, how
great your Authority is with the English, and with the Queen her self. Now
certainly is the time that you, and such as you be, should by your Counsels
help so pious a Queen, and consult for the Safety of so great a Kingdom, yea,
and succor the whole Christian Church every where afflicted and vexed. For we
know that if Christ's Kingdom be happily introduced into the Kingdom of
England, no small Aid will thence come to all the other Churches dispersed
through Germany, Poland, and other Countries.

There is one thing that is wont to be urged against him, Blamed for meddling in
our Controversies.
and which makes him to this Day to be somewhat ill thought of; which was, that
he opposed himself so openly, by writing against the Habits prescribed the
Clergy, and the posture of Kneeling at the Reception of the Holy Sacrament.
Whereby he incurred the Censure of a meddling Temper, and of Ingratitude to
that Nation that so kindly had entertained him. Concerning the Habits, Bucer
and he had some Controversy. The sum of which on both parts Archbishop Parker
drew up, (upon the desire, I suppose, of Sir William Cecyl) about the Year
1565, when that Controversy was hotly renewed again by Humfrey and Sampson.
This Sum whosoever is minded to see, may probably hereafter find it in the
Memorialls of that Archbishop, if God grant Life, and Opportunity to me, to
write them.

About this time, viz. in the Year 1550, or 1551, A Church of Italians
constituted in London.
there was also a Church of Italians constituted in London, by the influence
and care of our Archbishop and Sir William Cecyl, under A Lasco's
Superintendency. This Church consisted of diverse Italian Nations, as
Florentines, Genoezes, Milanois, Venetians and others: though several of them
joined themselves with this Congregation, more out of worldly Ends, than
Conscience, as will appear afterward. For they had a kindness for the Mass, and
could not endure to hear the Pope's Supremacy called in question, and inveighed
against. Michael Angelo their Minister.
One Michael Angelo Florio, a Florentine by birth, was appointed their
Preacher: probably Brother, or Kinsman, unto Simon Florio, Preacher at the City
of Clavenna among the Rhaetii, an eminent Professor of the Gospel in those
parts: who wrote a Letter to Gratalorius an Italian Physician, concerning two
whole Towns in Calabria, utterly destroyed by reason of the rigor of
Persecution exercised there: and about eight hundred, or a thousand of the
Inhabitants put to Death, because they professed the Gospel. Which Letter is
extant in Fox, in his Table of the Italian Martyrs.

For the encouragement of this Congregation the Archbishop procured the
Members of it to be free Denizens, The Service the ABp did for this Church;
to live and traffic here with as much Freedom, as natural English Subjects.
Which they were admitted to by swearing Fidelity and Allegiance. For their more
easy and convenient dwelling here, they often petitioned the King for new
Privileges and Immunities, as they saw they needed them. And such Favor and
Countenance was shown them, that they seldom failed of their Suits. And for the
Minister.
The Archbishop also, that their Preacher might be provided for, dealt with
the Congregation, and made them oblige themselves to provide him with all
Necessaries, as a Dwelling, and a competent yearly Salary. In the Year 1552,
Anno 1552.
Michael Angelo sued again to our Archbishop for some favor to be obtained
from the King, whether it were for the better establishment of his Church, or
for some further Immunities to be granted to the Members thereof, it does not
appear. But this the most Reverend Man readily furthered, by writing in that
behalf to the Duke of Northumberland from his House at Ford near Canterbury,
the Duke being, I suppose, with the King in Progress at this time. He likewise
dispatched another, dated November. 20. the Year abovesaid, to the Secretary,
entreating him to forward that Cause as much as lay in him.

Diverse of this Church fall out with their Minister, and go to Mass again.
But however serviceable this their Minister had been unto these Italians, in
preaching the Gospel to them, and soliciting the Archbishop for their Benefit;
yet many of them carried themselves but little obliging to him. Whether it were
some Misbehaviour, or Imprudences in him, which he was not altogether void of,
or his too violent declaiming against the Pope and Popish Doctrines, which they
were not yet enough ripened in Evangelical Knowledge to receive, or that he too
roughly charged them with the hardness of their Hearts, and backwardness to
receive Gospel Truths, as he did use to do: but many of them wholly withdrew
from him, and went to Mass again. His Contribution also fell very low, not
having received above five Pounds in a considerable time from them. Hereupon he
resorted to the Secretary, Making heavy Complaints of his own Poverty, that
many of his People had forsaken his Assembly, spoke very slanderously against
him and his Ministry, and the Gospel which he preached, after they saw and
heard him in an open manner preaching against the Pope's Doctrines, his Tyranny
and Hypocrisy, and reproving them for their Unbelief, and the hardness of their
Hearts. The too much Vehemence and Passion of this Man, A Conjecture at the
Cause thereof.
and his neglect of informing the Judgments of these Italians in milder and
more leisurely Methods, I suspect to have been a great cause of this Apostasy.

But upon this Complaint, the Secretary bade the Pastor send him a List of the
Names of those that had thus behaved themselves, Their Minister sends their
Names to the Secretary, and accuses them.
and that he himself would call them before him, and discourse with them.
Accordingly he sent the Names of fourteen in a Letter to the said Secretary,
withal aggravating to him their Misbehaviour, and informing of their daily
going to Mass: and adding, that therefore, they, being free Denizons, and so
Subjects to the English Laws, ought to be punished as any Englishman would be,
if he heard Mass. He quoted a place or two in Deuteronomy, where those, that
rebelled against God, the Laws and the Judges, should be slain without Mercy.
He subjoined, that Elisha by God's Command anointed Iehu to be King for this
very purpose, that he should wholly root out the House of Ahab, and kill all
the Priests of Baal. And thence makes his uncharitable Conclusion, (more
agreeable to the Religion, that he was so hot against) that therefore these
Italians should be so served, since they opposed the Gospel, and the King's
Pious Proceedings. But it might make one apt not to think overfavourably of
this Man; a Pastor, thus to turn Accuser of his Flock; a Professor of the
Reformed Religion, to require the utmost Rigor of Punishment for differing in
Religion.

I also find the Morals of this Man tainted, The Morals of this Man tainted.
having once made a very foul Slip, being guilty of an Act of Uncleanness. For
which Sir William Cecyl, Secretary of State, who had been his good Friend, was
exceedingly displeased with him, and withdrew all Favor and Countenance from
him, calling him Wicked Man, and intending to inflict some severe Punishment
upon him: which seemed to be Banishment out of the Nation, or at least turning
him out of his Family, where he seems to have been entertained. Writes a
penitent Letter to the Secretary.
Angelo wrote him a very penitent Letter, minding him of the frailty of Human
Nature, and of the Mercy of God to Moses, Aaron, David, Jonas, Peter after
their Falls. And that if he were forced to depart the Kingdom, he must either
be compelled to renounce the Truth of the Gospel, or have his Blood shed by the
Enemies thereof. This was as I suppose, in the Year 1551. In fine, he got over
this Brunt, and recovered mild Cecyl's Favor. For I find a Year after, our
Archbishop wrote to him to further a certain Business of Michael Angelo at
Court, as much as he could.

This is all I have to say of that Italian Congregation, and the Minister
thereof. For further memory of which, I have added in the Appendix two Letters
of this Michael Angelo to Secretary Cecyl, No. LII. LIII.
whence many of the Matters, next above mentioned, were collected.

As there was thus a German and Italian Church in London, A French Church also
in London.
so also there was a third of French Men, under A Lasco's Superintendency. One
Member of which, a very honest Man, and of sound Religion, by the general
Testimony of that Church, had desired to set up a Printing House for his
Livelihood, chiefly for printing the Liturgy, and other Books of the Church of
England, in French, for the use of the French Islands under the English
Subjection. In whose behalf the Superintendent readily interceeded by a Letter
with the Secretary to procure the King's Letters Patents* for his License and
Authority so to do. The issue of which will be seen in the progress of this
History. The Letter I have transcribed to accompany two others of A Las^o in
the Appendix. No. LIVE.


CHAP. XXIII. The Church at Glastenbury.
Another Church of Strangers at Glastenbury. Their Trade Weaving.
IN the same Year, viz. 1550. another Church of Strangers, and they most what
French, and Walloons, began to settle at Glastenbury in Somersetshire. They
were Weavers, and followed the Manufacture of Kersies, and Cloth of that
Nature, as I conjecture. Their great Patrons were the Duke of Somerset, and Sir
William Cecyl, I add, and our Archbishop, though I do not find his Name
mentioned in the Papers I make use of, relating to this Church: For there is no
question, but that his Counsel and Aid concurred in the settlement of this
Church, as well as those in London: and particularly as to the Preacher; whom I
suspect to have been one of those Learned Foreign Divines, whom he harbored in
his own House. Valerandus Pollanus their Preacher and Superintendent.
His Name was Valerandus Pollanus, a Man of great worth both for Learning and
Integrity, who had the Title of Superintendent of the Strangers Church at
Glastenbury, as John a Lasco had of that at London; given to each, to fix a
Character of Honor and Esteem upon their Persons, and perhaps to exempt them
and their Churches from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of those respective
Diocesses. This Pollanus turned into Latin, and printed, the Disputations held
in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, between the Protestants and Papists at
the Convocation, Anno 1553. If any desire to know the particular State and
Condition of the establishment of these Strangers, as to their Trade, it stood
thus.

How they came to fix here.
Pollanus in behalf of the rest, had preferred a Petition to the Duke of
Somerset, and the rest of the Lords of the Council, to this Effect; That they
might be permitted to form themselves into a Church for the free Exercise of
Religion, and to follow peaceably their Calling of Weaving; declaring, as an
Argument to persuade them to allow the same, the considerable Benefit that
would accrue thence to the Realm. And that for Shops and Working-houses, and
for reception of them and their Families, they might enjoy some old dissolved
Religious House. Their Petition was condescended to. And the Duke, being a
great Cherisher of those of the Religion, resolved to be their Patron, and to
take the managing of this whole Cause upon himself. The Duke in the Month of
June this Year, had made an exchange of certain Lands with the King, and that
probably for the better accommodating of these Strangers. He had parted with
the Castle and Lordship of Sleford, and other Lands and Tenements in the County
of Lincoln, to the King: and the King had granted him, in lieu thereof, all and
singular his Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
Appurtenances, in the Town of Glastenbury, (namely what had belonged to the
Abbey) and other Lands and Tenements in Kingston upon Hull, to the value of 214
l. 14 s. 5 d. obq. as I find in a Manuscript Book, mentioning the several Sales
that King made. Having obtained such Conveniences in Glastenbury, he resolved
to plant this Manufacture here; which he thought would tend so much to the
Benefit of the Country, himself, and these poor Strangers too. Conditions were
mutually entered into.

The Conditions on Somerset's part were, That he should provide them Houses
convenient for their Occupations, Conditions of Trade between Somerset and them.
and to contain themselves and Families: that five Acres of Pasture Land, or as
much as would serve for the feeding of two Cows throughout the Year, should be
allotted to each of them: and until Land were so allotted, they should enjoy
the Park in common for the said use, with some part also of the Gardens. They
were also to be supplied with Moneys from the Duke to buy Wool, and defray
other Charges necessary to set them on Work. They were also empowered to employ
both English Men and Women, as they should have occasion, in Spinning, and
other Works belonging to their Trade. And so accordingly they went down to
Gastenbury, and fell to work.

But upon the Troubles and Fall of Somerset, Their Trade obstructed by the
Troubles of Somerset.
which happened about fourteen or fifteen Months after, their Affairs were much
obstructed. His Servants neglected to furnish them with Money according to
Contract. Nor was he at leisure now to regard them. The People, among whom they
lived, took this opportunity to express what little kindness they had for them:
it being the Temper of the Common-sort to be jealous of Strangers, and rude to
them. So that they were not without their Discontents and Discouragements: For
they wanted those Conveniences of room for Workhouses and Habitations, that
were promised them. They ran in Debt, and were forced to lay to pawn the
Clothes they had wove, to supply their Wants. Cornish, one of the chief of
their Procurators, appointed to oversee them, and further their Trade, proved
very deceitful and false to them. Who came to them, pretending Letters from the
Council, and treating them at first with fair Words, and after with
Threatenings: and so compelled them to deliver the Clothes, that they had made,
to him, though they had by mere Necessity been forced before to pawn them. He
had also by his Importunity and Fraud, got the Grant of the Park from them,
though he knew the Duke had fully purposed and intended it for their Use, for
the necessary Maintenance of themselves and Families.

Things being in this ill Condition with them, Apply themselves again to the
Council,
and Somerset no longer able to befriend them, they were glad to apply again to
those above. Pollanus therefore in their behalf petitioned the Lords of the
Council to take their declining State into their consideration, and to carry on
that good Work the Duke of Somerset had begun. He did also ply the Secretary to
further their Petition, And to the Secretary Cecyl:
(who was indeed of his own accord their most hearty Friend;) and labored
particularly with all earnestness imaginable, both by Word of Mouth, and by
diverse Letters, to get the Factory discharged of Cornish, urging that the
Weavers had never found the least grain of Integrity, Justice or Candor in
him. This Man was now very industrious and busy at Court to get himself
continued in his Office: which the Strangers understanding, were as diligent to
get themselves delivered of him. The Superintendent had but a little before
dispatched to the Secretary one Peter Wolf, a good Man, and a great Sufferer, a
Brabanter by Nation, to relate the evil Deeds of this Man: and now again he
dispatched Stephen Le Provost, a Deacon of his Church, with another Message to
the same import to the said Secretary. Telling him, That those who were to be
set over others, ought themselves in the first place to be Honest and Just; but
especially they ought to be so in the highest degree, that were to be placed
over such Good Men, and who were Exiles only for the sake of Christ: Unless any
could be willing that such upright Men should be undone, and that those very
considerable Advantages that were likely to accrue to the Commonwealth by
them, should be diverted to some other Place or Country. That they could not
enough wonder with what forehead this Man should attempt this thing, after he
had so plainly betrayed his base Treachery and Ill Will toward them: and could
not but know, how very hardly they could away with him, and who were going to
sue to the Duke for that which they now desired. That himself was solicited by
the Prayers of those Good Men, to write this to him, that he would be their
Advocate with the Lords in this behalf.

The Council become their Patrons, and assist them.
The Result was, That the Lords consented to uphold and encourage them. And sent
down their Letters to the Overseers of this Manufacture, and to the chief
Officers of the Town, Powis, one of the King's Servants, and Hyet the chief
Magistrate and others, to examine into the present State of these Strangers,
and to give them in writing an Account thereof. These Letters the
Superintendent delivered to them; and one Clark a Justice of Peace was then
present. Who being a Gentleman and a Scholar, that understood both French and
Latin, did, out of his good Will to them, interpret to the rest Pollanus's
Petition to the Lords of the Council, and the Contents of their Contract with
the Duke of Somerset, and other Matters relating to this Business; that so they
might be the better acquainted with their Affairs, and it might appear there
were no Neglects or Breaches of Covenants on the Strangers parts. And so
Letters were dispatched back to the Lords from the Overseers, signifying how
they had examined the Affairs of these Strangers, and had found all things Fair
and Just on their side; mentioning likewise what considerable Commodity they
hoped for by them: and likewise from the chief of the Town to the same import.

Orders from the Lords to set this Manufacture forwards.
Speedily upon this, Orders came down from the Lords to certain Gentlemen of the
Town and Neighborhood, whereof one Dyer was one, a Person of good Religion,
and their cordial Friend, commissionating them to set this Manufacture forward,
and to take care the Undertakers might be relieved in what they needed,
according to their former Contract with the Duke. So they obtained the use of
the Park for the running of threescore Head of Kine, till other Pasture were
provided them. Thirty Houses were ordered to be forthwith repaired and fitted
up for them. And Money was paid sufficient for the clearing them of their
Debts. These Gentlemen had also assigned them a stated Provision of Money for
the future, but it was too scanty; the Allowance that they had proportioned
them for two Months, would scarcely hold out for five Weeks. Nor was any Wool
at all bought for their use, though their Stock was almost at an end; and then
their Work must stand still for want thereof, having no Money themselves to
purchase more: and to take it up upon Credit, would enhance the price thereof.
For one Crowch had demanded of them thirty two Shillings for Wool, when they
could buy it of their Neighbors for four and twenty, had they Money. Their
only hope was in Dyer, who promised them Wool at a far more reasonable rate,
and kindly offered them a long Day of payment for it, without consideration for
forbearance: their Doubt only was, whether his Wool was proper for their Use.
But the Interest of Cornish was such, that he was continued by the Lords in his
Office over these Tradesmen, and enjoyed a part of the Park to himself. These
things were transacted in the Month of November, Anno 1551, which was the Month
after the Duke's Commitment.

In all this Affair Pollanus was very much employed, Pollanus very serviceable
to them.
taking a great deal of Pains in settling this Trade. For he took many Journeys
between Glastenbury and the Court, and was, as himself wrote, at incredible
Expenses; and in fifteen Months space received not an Halfpenny, though he had
a large Family to maintain. The Office also of surveying the Reparation of the
Houses lay upon him. And fearing the Lords of the Council might be displeased
at the greatness of the Charge they had been at already in the Repairs, and the
little Profit that as yet arose to quit the Cost, he entreated the Secretary,
that he would bear up their Reputation with the Lords; telling him, That he
doubted not, that the Project would hereafter redound much to their own Praise,
by reason of the very great Emolument, that all Men should perceive would come
to the Realm thereby within three Years, God prospering them, as he had begun
^o do. And for himself, all he desired was, that for all his Charge and
Trouble, he might obtain a Stipend of fifty Pounds, to be settled upon him. The
Letters of Valerandus Pollanus, being three in number, I have inserted in the
Appendix. No. LV.LVI.LVII.

An Apology for the largeness of the former Relation.




I acknowledge, that many of these things I have related concerning this
Business, may seem too little and minute for an Historian to take notice of.
But I was loath any Particulars of so remarkable a Design should be lost, which
in probability would have turned so much to the Benefit of our Nation. It being
also an Instance of the pious Care, and good Policy, that was then taken by the
Court for the Relief and Sustentation of poor Fugitives, flying hither from
their Native Country, Friends and Livelihood, for Christ's Sake, and yet that
the Public might be as little burdened by them as might be.

Queen Mary's access to the Crown spoiled this good Design. After the King's
Death they remove to Frankford*
For all Strangers being then commanded suddenly to depart the Realm, this
Congregation accordingly brake up, and removed themselves to Frankford in
Germany. Where the Magistrates kindly entertained them, and allowed them a
Church. And when afterward, Troubles at Frankford*
viz. 1554. diverse of the English Nation fled thither for their Religion, the
Governors of the Town, upon their Petition received them also, and all other
such English as should resort thither upon the same Account, as many did. And
two Members of this French Congregation, Prove Friends to the English Exiles
there.
mindful undoubtedly of the former Kindness themselves or their Countrymen had
received in England, assisted them much; namely, Morellio a Minister, and
Castalio an Elder. The English here made use of the same Church the French did;
these one Day, and the English another: and upon Sundays the use of it
respectively, as themselves could agree.

And as there were settled here Congregations of French, Italians and Dutch
Strangers, so I am very apt to believe, there was also a Church of Spaniards
too. A Spanish Church.
Indeed I do not find express mention of any such till the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's Reign; when Cassiodorus and Anthonius Corranus Hispalensis [of
Sevil] (a Member of the Italian Congregation) were their Preachers,
Cassiodorus, and Corra^us their Preachers.
of whom I shall have occasion to say something in my Memorials of Archbishop
Grindal. It is certain, Many of King Philip's Spaniards become Protestants.
that in Queen Mary's Days many of those Spaniards, who came over in the
Retinue of Philip, the Spanish Prince, or after, forsook Popery, and became
Professors of the Reformed Religion. Which one cannot well tell how it should
come to pass, unless it were by the hearing of the Gospel preached in their own
Language here. And it is observable, that among these, many had been sent for
over, in that Queen's Time, to convert our Nation from Heresy, as they termed
it, and to reduce it to the Roman Church. This notable Success and Power, which
the clear Evidence of Truth had upon these Men, was in those Times taken much
notice of, as it might well be. James Pilkington, the Master of S. John's
College in Cambridg, and who was afterward Bishop of Durham, makes a Note of
it to the University, in the Sermon which he preached at the Restitution of
Bucer and Fagius, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, after the
barbarous Indignities that had been offered them in the former Queen's Reign,
in raking their dead Bodies out of their Graves, and burning them. It is much
more notable, said he, that we have seen to come to pass in our Days, that the
Spaniards, sent for into the Realm on purpose to suppress the Gospel, as soon
as they were returned Home, replenished many parts of their Country with the
same Truth of Religion, to the which before they were utter Enemies.

Great numbers of Protestants in Spain and Italy.
Nay, and not long after this, such earnest Professors of the True Religion were
found in Spain, that many of them endured the fiery Trial, and offered up their
Bodies to the Flames, for Christ's Sake, and more were cast into Prisons. And
yet the Gospel got ground there to admiration: as Zanchy gave a Relation
thereof to A Lasco in one of his Letters. Wherein he spoke of the great numbers
of true Professors in Italy also. The Place being so much to our present
purpose, I will take leave to lay before the Reader. In Calabriae duobus
Castellis, Zanchii Ep. Lib. 2.
etc. In two Castles of Calabria, one belonging to the Duke of Montalto, the
other to a Nobleman of Naples, were found 4000 Brethren, being the remainders
of those Brethren, called Waldenses. They were for many Years unknown, and
lived safely in their Ancestors Possessions. For though they approved not of
Masses, yet they thought the Faithful might go to them with a safe Conscience.
But being untaught this bad Doctrine, they did wholly and universally abstain
going any more. And so it came to pass, that they could not be concealed any
longer. Therefore a Persecution was raised up against them. They writ to the
Brethren at Geneva, to assist them by their Prayers, their Counsel, and also by
humane Aid. We see also in Italy, where the Seat of Antichrist is, there is a
great Harvest; but very few to gather it. O God, have Mercy upon Italy. In
Spain very many were burnt, more cast into Prison. Nevertheless in the mean
time, the Gospel goes forward, as we hear, wonderfully. And in another Letter
he writes thus; There is a very great Persecution in Italy, nor a less in
Spain: A sign there be many Faithful there that dare confess Christ.

CHAP. XXIV. The Archbishop's Care of the Revenues of the Church. Bucer dies.
I Return now to our Prelate again, to take a further view of him, The ABp
labour^ (...) preserve the Revenues of the Church.
acting in his high Function in the English Church. It must not be omitted to
be ranked among his good Services toward it, that he did what in him lay to
preserve the Revenues of it in his Time, when there were so many hungry
Courtiers gaping after them. These were again in a new Danger after the Duke of
Northumberland and his Party had removed Somerset, and made themselves the
great Controllers of Public Affairs.

It was indeed the Scandal of the Reformation, The detaining the
Church-Revenues a Scandal to the Reformation.
that the Demeans that had been settled long before by our pious Ancestors, for
the maintenance of God's Ministers, as they had been formerly wrongfully
appropriated to Monasteries, and swallowed up by Lazy Monks, so they had not
now recurred and been restored to their true Owners; but became possessed by
Laymen. So that in many scores of Parishes there remained not sufficient to
buy Bread for the Incumbents and their Families. And it was more than
suspicious, that many Patrons did render the Condition of the Church still
worse in these Days, by retaining and reserving to themselves, whether by
Contract or Power, the Tithes of the Benefices they presented to. And by these
means Pluralities and Nonresidences, the old Mischief of the Church, were not
redressed, but rather made necessary. This Abuse grieved good Men, and Lovers
of the Reformation, both at Home and Abroad, because they saw how the preaching
of the Gospel was obstructed hereby.

Concerning this, Calvin to the ABp upon this matter.
Bucer from Cambridg wrote privately to Calvin in the Year 1550. And this made
Calvin address a Letter to our Archbishop, telling him, That for the
flourishing State of Religion he thought it highly needful to have fit Pastors
that might seriously set themselves to perform the Office of Preaching. One
great obstacle whereof he makes very truly to be, Quod praedae expositi sunt
Ecclesiae reditus; That the Rents of the Church were exposed to be a Prey. Ep.
127.
Which he calls Malum sane intolerabile. And of the same thing, and not long
after, viz. July 1551. he admonished the Duke of Somerset, in a French Letter
all of his own handwriting: which because of the Antiquity of it, And to the
Duke of Somerset.

No. LVIII.


and the Matter it treats of, referring to our Church, and not being among his
printed Epistles, I have added in the Appendix. In which Letter he excites the
Duke to take care, that there might be fit and able Ministers, fixed in
Parishes, to teach the People. The want whereof he attributed to two Causes.
The one whereof he made to lie in the Universities; and the other in the Matter
that we are speaking of. That the Revenue of the Cures was withdrawn and
dispersed away: So that there was nothing to maintain good Men, who were fit to
perform the Office of true Pastors. And hence it came to pass, that ignorant
Priests were put in; which made great Confusion. For the Quality of the Persons
begat great Contempt of God's Word. Advising the Duke to endeavor to bring
those that had these Spiritual Possessions, to be willing to part with them: in
as much as they could not prosper in defrauding God's People of their Spiritual
Food, which they did by hindering the Churches of good Pastors.

Bucer, the King's Divinity-Professor at Cambridg, was this Year engaged in a
public Disputation, Bucer publicly disputes at Cambridg.
as his Colleague, Peter Martyr, the King's Professor at Oxon, had been there
the last. Before this Disputation happened, Bucer communicated his Purpose to
his said Colleague and Friend. Who having sufficient experience of the
vainglorious Ends of the Papists in these kinds of Disputations, and of their
unfair Dealings, advised him in a Letter, not to engage in it, but to decline
it. On which Letter Archbishop Parker, into whose Hands it fell, MSS. C.C.C.C.
wrote this Inscription, Ad Bucerum, prudens Martyris consilium, ut non det se
in disputatione cum gloriosulis Thrasonibus. But it seems he was too far
engaged to avoid it with Reputation, nor thought he fit to do it for the
vindication and sake of Truth. The Questions disputed of, and his Antagonists
were before mentioned. It seems he came off with great Credit; for his Friend
Martyr in a Letter to him, soon after it was over, professed a great deal of
gladness, that his Disputations had that good Success: and that it so well
happened was by God's Providence: Which he said, he could scarce have believed
to have been a thing possible, without Visitors, or other grave Judges; since
the Papists reckoned it enough for their Business only to dispute, afterward
studiously dispersing their Lies, to their own Advantage, and the disparagement
of those that disputed against them. And therefore Martyr said, he wondered not,
that Christ in the beginning confirmed the Disputations of his Apostles with
Miracles.

Novem. 9. Bucer began a learned Reading of the Power and Use of the Ministry,
but lived not to finish it. For the latter end of this Year put an end to this
Learned Man's Life. Dies.
Of whose Counsel and Advice our Archbishop made great use in the Steps he
made for Reformation of Religion. He made his Will before he left Strasburgh:
but the Codicil to that Will he added, February 22. a few days before his
Death. Wherein he left to his Wife to take the Advice of Mr. Bradford, and the
Minister of Alhallowes, for ordering of his Burial, and constituted two eminent
Men of that University MARTINUS BUCERUS S.S. Theologiae apaid Cantabrigienyes
Profefsor Regius. Natus Selestadij Anno MCCCCXCI. Denatus MDLI.
his Executors, namely, Dr. Matthew Parker, who was afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Dr. Walter Haddon, after Master of Requests to Q. Elizabeth.
And both of them adorned his Funerals, the one with a English Sermon before the
University, and the other with a Latin Oration, being University-Orator. Both
which are extant in print. He died but poor; and seemed to be in some want of
Necessaries in his last Sickness. For there is a short Letter, in a scrawling
Hand, which I have seen, wrote by him to the aforesaid Parker, then Master of
Benet-College, and his great Friend, to lend him ten Crowns. Which because it
was the last Letter, I believe, he ever wrote, and but short, I shall here
insert. S. D. Oro D. T. Clarissime D. Doctor, ut des mihi X coronatos mutuo,
uno tantum mense. Reddam bona fide. Opt. vale.

D. T. deditiss. in Dno.

Martinus Bucerus manu peraegre propria.

Under which is writ by Dr. Parker, out of the Honor he had for his Memory,
Scriptum novissimum omnium quod scripsit D. Bucerus, paulo aute mortem ejus.

Bucer's Friends, The University wrote up concerning his Death.
after they had taken care for giving him an honorable Funeral, consulted the
Supply of his Widow, Wibrand Bucerin; that she might be well gratified, and
presented with some Gratuities that might show the Respect the Nation had for
her learned Husband. So the University wrote a Letter to the King and Council
concerning Bucer's Death, and their respectful Interment of him, with the
signification of their Desire, that his Majesty would send them another able
Professor in his room. With this University-Letter, Dr. Parker wrote another to
Sir John Cheke; entreating him to present their Letter, and that he would
particularly speak to the Council, and to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to
remember the Widow. Sir John Cheke, March 9. wrote a Letter in answer to Dr.
Parker's; which I have placed in the Appendix. No. LIX.
He therein lamented the loss of this Man: commended him for his Depth of
Knowledge, Earnestness in Religion, Fartherliness in Life, and Authority in
Knowledge. He added, that the King would provide some grave Learned Man to
maintain God's true Learning in that University: though he thought in all
Points they would not meet with Bucer's like. He desired Parker, that all
Bucer's Books and Writings might be sent up and saved for the King's Majesty,
except Mrs. Bucer might turn them to better Account some other way.

These Books and Papers were apprized at one hundred Pounds. Bucer's Library.
But she received but fourscore Pounds of those that bought them. Which she
desired Parker and Haddon, the Executors here in England, to testify under
their Hands: that she might show it, to vindicate her Truth and Honesty, not to
have wronged the Heirs. The Library was divided into three parts. The King had
the Manuscripts, which was one part; The Duchess [of Somerset, I suppose] had
the greater part of the Books, and the Archbishop of Canterbury had the
remainder: for which he for his share, paid her forty Pounds. The University
gave her an hundred Crowns: the King an hundred Marks more, besides her
Husband's half-year's Pension, though he died before Lady Day when it came due.
He also allowed for such reasonable Repairs as Bucer had bestowed about the
House wherein he lived. His Widow retires to Germany.
And, March 31. 1551. She had a Passage by Sea granted her with eight Persons
in her Company. She returned unto Strasburgh, whither She retired, by Mr. Rich.
Hills Merchant, the Sum of two hundred twenty six Pounds, two Shillings. From
Strasburgh, in February the next Year, She wrote a Letter to the Executors,
wherein She acknowledged their Kindness to her, praying God for them, in
respect of their singular Humanity and Benefits which they had showed to her
Husband and her self, and especially when he was dead. Miseram me, said She in
that Letter, omnique solatio destitutam non deseruistis, sed in vestram me
tutelam benign suscepistis; omnia denique Christianae charitatis officia
demonstrastis. Bucer left a Son named Nathaniel, and a Daughter named
Elizabeth, behind him, at Strasburgh, when he came into England: Which, I
suppose, were all the Children he left surviving him, whom he had by a former
Wife that died of the Plague there. By her he had many more, but they died
before him.

The Correspondence between him and Martyr. MSS.C.C.C.C.
As long as Bucer lived, there was a dear Correspondence between him and P.
Martyr, while they were the one at Cambridg, and the other at Oxford. In the
private Library at Benet-College, there be still remaining diverse Letters from
Martyr to him. One whereof was writ upon occasion of Bucer's communicating to
him his Judgment of the Habits; which he had composed for the use of Hoper.
Which Letter began thus, S. P. Perlegi, Vir Dei, quae de Vestium discrimine
docte pieque scripsisti, ac ex illis non mediocrem voluptatem cepi, tum quia
vera quae praedicas intelligebam, tum quod per omnia consentiebant cum his,
quae ego Londinum ad Hopperum ipsum, pridie ejus diei, qua tuae mihi
redderentur miseram. So that hence it appears they were both unanimous for
wearing of the Habits enjoined: and so had given their Judgments to Hoper. In
the same Letter he answered a Case put to him by Bucer, Quamdiu fidem in
Christo generalem, confusam aut implicitam satisfuisse ad hominum salutem. And
the resolution of this Question being the chief Matter of this Letter,
Archbishop Parker (into whose Hands it fell) entitled it thus, Quamdiu Fides
implicita licuerit.


And on the Margent of the same Letter, where he entered upon another Argument,
is written by the same Hand, De concordi confessione in re Sacramentaria. For A
Lasco had lately wrote to Martyr his Desire, that some Confession about the
Sacrament might be drawn up; to which he and Bucer, and Bernardin, and Martyr,
might set their Hands, to testify the Foreign Protestants Consent.

Another Letter wrote by Martyr to Bucer, bore this Title, set to it by the
same Hand with the former, Quibus artibus instituerint Disputationem
Theologicam in Comitiis Oxoniensibus. And on the side of this Letter, Gaudet
Disputationem non esse factam and Astutia Papistica in Disputatione.

In a third Letter he gave Bucer advice, that he should not engage in any
Disputation with the vainglorious Papists.

There is yet a fourth Letter: Wherein Martyr communicated to him, how he had
been employed by the Archbishop of Canterbury in taking into examination the
English Book of Common Prayer, with his Judgment thereon. This Letter has this
Title put to it by Parker, Censura libri communium precum.

The Contents of the second and fourth Letter, A Plot of the Papists at Oxo^,
against Martyr, at an Act.
having some things very remarkable for the Illustration of our History, I
shall here set down more largely. In the former, having congratulated Bucer's
coming off so well in his Disputation with Young the Papist, he took notice of
the unfair Ways the Papists used in their Disputes: and then proceeded to tell
what happened to himself the last Act at Oxford this Year, by a Party there,
that did what they could to affront him, and the Evangelical Truth which he
taught. Certain that then went out Bachelors of Divinity, made this Combination
among themselves. One of them they set up to be Respondent. The Opponents, who
were of the same Strain, and the Question to be disputed, they suppressed, and
kept under great silence; on purpose; that Peter Martyr, the King's Professor,
should not know: And when some had urged to them, that it belonged to the
Professor to know the Question, they answered, That it did not; and that it was
enough for them to know it, that were to dispute on it. The Day before the
Disputation was to be undertaken, about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, they
set up the Question upon the Church-Doors: and then it appeared to be in behalf
of Transubstantiation. And to exclude the Professor, they chose to themselves a
great Papist, Dr. Chedsey, for their Father. And here the Opponents were to
have taken and managed all Martyr's Arguments; and the Respondent was to have
assoiled them as he thought good. And then the Opponents were to acknowledge,
they were satisfied with the Answers given thereunto. And their Father, who was
to occupy the Professor's Place, was by a Speech highly to approve and applaud
all that had been done. And things were so to be ordered that Day, that the
Professor should not have any opportunity of speaking. For these Disputations
were to have been performed but a little before Night, after the Civilians had
finished their parts; which used to be the last Exercises. Or if after this
Divinity-Disputation were done, the Professor had been minded to say any thing,
he must do it when it was Night, and when the tired Auditors would be all going
Home. And then these Disputants and their Party were every where to cry
Victory, and carry away the Glory. There was now observed a greater confluence
of People at this Act, than could have been believed: For they had sent about
their Letters to invite such hither, as were for their own Turn: and all to
increase the Triumph. Among the rest there were present the Chaplains of
Winchester and Durham. But all this elaborate and fine-spun Plot was by a
Providence broken on a sudden; the Vice Chancellor, whether he feared any Riot,
or for what other Cause, it was uncertain, forbidding the Divinity-Disputations
that Day, without the privity of the Professor.

The Matter of Martyr's other Letter, wrote to Bucer in January, (as the former
was in September before) related to the Book of Common Prayer. For the
Correction of which the Archbishop, Martyr's Judgment of the Communion-Book
the Bishop of Ely, and the other Bishops were, by the King's Command, met
together in Consultation. And that this Work might be the more effectually
performed, the Archbishop thought good to have the Judgment herein of both the
Public Professors, Bucer and Martyr. Accordingly Bucer wrote his Censure, and
Martyr his Annotations, Page 210.
as was said before. A Copy of which Censure Bucer had communicated to Martyr.
Who in this Letter declared his Consent and Approbation thereunto. As to his
own Annotations, Cheke's Latin Version which he used, was so brief and
defective, that for that reason many things were omitted by him, which he would
have noted, had he seen the Book complete. But after he had sent in those his
Annotations to the Archbishop who earnestly required them, he saw Bucer's
Censure, whereby he perceived diverse other things called for Correction, than
he had taken notice of. So he reduced whatsoever was wanting in his
Annotations, into certain brief Articles, and acquainted the Archbishop
therewith; and that in them all he did freely agree with Bucer, that it were
fit they should be altered. But Martyr's Annotations did fully accord with
Bucer's Animadversions, though they were at a distance, and consulted not at
all with one another before they wrote their Judgments. But one thing was past
over by Bucer, which Martyr wondered at: it was in the Office for the Communion
of the Sick. Where it was ordered, That if this private Communion happened to
be on the same Sunday, when there should be a public One, then the Priest was
to take along with him some of the Consecrated Elements, and with them to
administer the Sacrament in the House of the Sick. Wherein this offended
Martyr, as he said, that the Office that belonged to the Communion should not
be repeated before the sick Man, and the rest that communicated with him, since
the words of the Supper do rather belong to the Men, than to the Bread and
Wine. And his advice was, that all that was necessarily required to the Lord's
Supper, should be said and done, whenever it was privately as well as
publicly celebrated. He subscribed to Bucer's Censure in every thing; and he
thanked God, that had administered an Occasion, that the Bishops should by them
be admonished of those Matters. So that it was concluded by the Bishops at
their Conference about the Communion-Book, that much should be changed therein,
as the Archbishop told Martyr, then at his House. And if they would not do it,
the King was resolved to do it by himself and his Parliament, without them. In
this Letter he speaks something concerning Hoper, whose Behavior he disliked;
and concerning Dr. Smith, who had lately written against the Archbishop's Book
of the Sacrament, and against himself concerning Monastic Vows. Both these
Letters, as well worthy the sight and perusal of the Reader, I have reposited
in the Appendix. No. LX.LXI.


Thus this Reverend and Learned Foreigner, after many great Difficulties passed
through, for the Cause of Religion, flying from one place to another, came at
last to a natural Death and a quiet End in this Land. For his Fame and Wisdom,
Bucer's great Dangers.
he was called by the Electors, Palatine, and of Brandenburgh, with the
Emperor's Permission, to temper the Emperor's Rescript about Religion, which
was to be published, that so it might please both Parties. But he thought he
could not do it with any Honesty; and rather than meddle with it, he fled to
Strasburgh with his Wife and Children: hereby he fell under the Displeasure of
those Princes, as well as before he had done under that of the Emperor for the
Reformation of Colen; the Envy of which Melancthon escaped, but it fell on poor
Bucer. Being at Strasburgh, he also contracted much Ill Will by means of the
Anabaptists and others whom he opposed, and who by their pretended Sanctimony
had a great Party there. His Friends apprehended him on these Accounts in great
Danger; but he thought of no removal to any other Place, Patron or Church,
trusting himself in God's Hands, till Sturmius and some others advised him by
all means to depart into England. Which he at length yielding to, the said
Sturmius admonished him, for his safer Travel, to take a more uncommon Way,
through Lorain and Rhemes, and some other parts of France, to Calais, and there
to cross over the Sea. Which he did, and was very hospitably here entertained,
as was said before.

Bishops Consecrated.
June 29. John Ponet, or Poynet, D.D. Chaplain to the Archbishop, Ponet*
was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester at Lambeth-Chappel, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury; assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, an^ Arthur Bishop of Bangor.
This Consecration was performed with all the usual Ceremonies and Habits,
probably for this Reason, to give as little occasion of Offense to Papists as
might be, and to keep close to the old Usages, avoiding Superstition: Therefore
it was set down in the Register at large in what Formalities all was now done.
Cranm. Reg.
The Archbishop is described, Vsitatis insigniis redimitus, and uno Epitogio,
sive Capa, indutus, Oratorium suum praedictum honest and decenter ornatum
ingressus, etc. Having on his Mitre and Cope, usual in such Cases, went into
his Chapel, handsomely and decently adorned, to celebrate the Lord's Supper
according to the Custom, and by Prescript of the Book, entitled, The Book of
Common-Service. Before the People there assembled, the Holy Suffrages first
began, and were publicly recited, and the Epistle and Gospel read in the
Vulgar Tongue, Nicolas Bishop of London, and Arthur Bishop of Bangor,
assisting; and having their Surplices and Copes on, and their Pastoral Staves
in their Hands, led Dr. John Ponet, endued with the like Habits, in the middle
of them, unto the most Reverend Father; and presented him unto him, sitting in
a decent Chair; and used these words, Most Reverend Father in God, we present
unto you this godly and well-learned Man to be consecrated Bishop. The Bishop
Elect forthwith produced the King's Letters Patents before the Archbishop.
Which by command of the said ABp, being read by Dr. Glyn, the said Ponet took
the Oath of renouncing the Bishop of Rome, and then the Oath of Canonical
Obedience to the Archbishop. These things being thus dispatched, the
Archbishop exhorted the People to Prayer and Supplication to the Most High,
according to the Order prescribed in the Book of Ordination set forth in the
Month of March 1549. According to which Order he was Elected and Consecrated,
and endued with the Episcopal Ornaments, the Bishop of London first having read
the third Chapter of the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy, in manner of a
Sermon. These things being done, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
celebrated upon a Table, covered with a white Linen Cloth, by the Archbishop
and the two assisting Bishops, the same Archbishop decreed to write to the
Archdeacon of Canterbury for the Investiture, Installation and Inthronization
of the said Bishop of Rochester, as it was customary. Present Anthony Huse,
principal Register of the Archbishop; Peter Lilly, John Lewis, John Incent,
public Notaries; and many others, as well Clerks as Laics.

Hoper.
March 8. John Hoper was consecrated Bishop of Gloucester, just after the same
manner, by the Archbishop, Nicholas Bishop of London, and John Bishop of
Rochester, assisting, clothed (say the Words of the Register) in Linen
Surplices and Copes, and John Elect of Gloucester in the like Habit.

CHAP. XXV. The Archbishop publishes his Book against Gardener.
An. 1551.
Cranmer publishes his Book of the Sacrament.
THIS Year our Archbishop published his Elaborate Book of the Sacrament,
confuting the gross and carnal Presence of Christ there, in vindication of a
former Book of his, wrote against by Bishop Gardener and Dr. Smith. For, to
give the Reader some distinct Account of this Matter, in the Year 1550, Cranmer
printed a Book in English in Quarto with this Title, His first Book.
A Defense of the True and Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ; with a Confutation of sundry Errors concerning the
same: Grounded and established upon God's Holy Word, and approved by the
Consent of the most ancient Doctors of the Church. The great Reason that moved
him to write this Book was, that he might the more effectually purge the Church
of Popery, esteeming Transubstantiation and the Mass, to be the very Roots of
it. The taking away of Beads, Pilgrimages, Pardons, and suchlike Popery, was,
(as he wrote in his Preface) but the lopping off a few Branches; which would
soon spring up again, unless the Roots of the Tree, which were
Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, were pulled up. Therefore
out of a sincere Zeal to the Honor of God, he would labor, he said, in his
Vineyard, to cut down that Tree of Error, Root and Branch. By this Book very
many were enlightened to perceive the Errors of the Popish Doctrines of the
Sacrament. This Treatise he divided into five Books or Points. I. Of the True
and Catholic Doctrine and Use of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ. An. 1551.
II. Against the Error of Transubstantiation. III. The manner how Christ is
present in the Sacrament. IV. Of the eating and drinking of the Body and Blood
of Christ. V. Of the Oblation and Sacrifice of our Savior Christ. In the third
Part he made mention of the Bishop of Winchester, in these words: As many of
them [ i. e. of the Papist Writers] as I have read, (the Bishop of Winchester
only excepted) do say, That Christ called not the Bread his Body. This Bishop
was much offended that he was named in the Book, and pretended this to be one
Reason why he did write against it, to vindicate himself, as well as the Papal
Church, hereby so dangerously struck at. This Book of Cranmer's was turned into
Latin by John Young; who complied afterward with the old Religion under Queen
Mary, and was Master of Pembroke-Hall, Cambridg.

At this Book the Defenders of Popery were so nettled, Wrote against by
Gardener and Smith.
that in the same Year 1550, Winchester then in the Tower, and fickle Dr. Smith
then at Lovain, printed Answers. Of Smith's Book I shall only note by the way,
that March 8. 1550. there was an Order of Council to examine the bringer over
of his Book against Cranmer. Such a Countenance did the State give to the
Archbishop and his Book. Gardiner's Book made the greatest noise: Which was
printed in France, and entitled. An Explication and Assertion of the true
Catholic Faith touching the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, with the
Confutation of a Book written against the same. In the Beginning of his Book he
wrote, That his Sermon before the King, [on St. Peter's Day] touching the
Sacrament of the Altar, gave occasion to the Archbishop's Book against it; and
that he was called before the King's Commissioners at Lambeth for his Catholic
Faith in the Sacrament. Whereas indeed this was not the Cause of his Troubles;
nor had some former Copies of his Book these words: But after the Commission
was issued forth against him, to make his Cause appear the more specious, as if
it were the Cause of the Church, he thought fit to make an Alteration in the
beginning of his Book in the manner abovesaid. And to carry on the Scene, he in
open Court offered his Book before the King's Commissioners.

To this Book of Gardiners, Vindicated in another Book by the ABp.
our Archbishop studied and composed an Answer; holding himself bound, for the
Vindication of the Evangelical Truth, as well as of his own Writing, and for
the Satisfaction of the People, not to suffer it to lie untaken notice of. When
it was known the Archbishop was preparing an Answer against Gardener, the
People were in very great expectation, and conceived an earnest desire to see
and read it: Having therefore dispatched his Copy, and sent it to Rainold Wolf
his Printer, it was printed off in the Month of September 1551. But there was
some stop put to the publishing of it, occasioned by a Proclamation issued out
from the King; whereby, for some political Ends, both the printing and selling
of English Books, without the Allowance of the King's Majesty, or six of his
Privy Council, was forbidden. The Archbishop being desirous, that his Book
might come abroad the next Term, for the Contentation of many who had long
expected the same, sent to Secretary Cecyl and Sir John Cheke, to procure,
either from the King or Council, a License to the said Wolf for printing and
selling his Book. Which was obtained, and the Book published accordingly. This
Letter of the ABp's, dated Sept. 29. I have thought not amiss to reposit in the
Appendix. No. LXII.
October. 1. A License was granted to Wolf to publish the Book, under the King's
Privilege, the Court then being at Hampton Court, and the Archbishop himself
present. The Title this second Book of the Archbishop's bore was, An Answer by
the Reverend Father in God, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, and Metropolitan, unto a crafty and sophistical Cavillation, devised
by Stephen Gardener, Doctor of Law, late Bishop of Winchester, against the true
and godly Doctrine of the most Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ. Wherein is also, as occasion serves, answered such Places of
the Book of Dr. Richard Smith, as may seem any thing worthy the answering. Also
a true Copy of the Book written, and in open Court delivered by Dr. Stephen
Gardener, not one Word added or diminished, but faithfully in all Points
agreeing with the Original. This Book of Archbishop Cranmer's, was printed
again at London, 1580, with his Life, and some other things.

The Method of the ABp's Reply.
His Reply to Gardener was in the most fair and candid Method that could be
devised. For he first set down his own Treatise, Piece by Piece; then
Gardiner's Reply thereunto Word for Word, leaving not one Paragraph without a
full Answer. His Reply to Smith was only of some things most worthy to be taken
notice of, the rest of Smith's Book being mere Trifles. This Reply to Smith he
inserted in the Body of his Answer to Gardener, as occasion served. Only at the
end he made a particular Reply to Smith's Preface.

The Judgments made of this Book. In Antiq. Brit.
It seemed to be a very complete Exercitation upon that Subject. The Book was
stored with so great Learning and Plenty of Arguments, Vt ea Controversia,
says one of his Successors, a nemine unquam contra Pontificios accuratius
tractata esse videatur; That no one Controversy was by any ever handled against
the Papists more accurately. It may not be amiss to mention here the Opinion
that Cranmer himself had of his Book, in that famous and renowned Confession he
made of his Faith in S. Mary's Church, Oxon, immediately before he was led away
to his Burning. Where he expressed his full Approbation and great Confidence of
the Doctrine contained therein: saying, That as for the Sacrament, Fox's Acts.
he believed as he had taught in his Book against the Bishop of Winchester.
The which Book, he said, taught so true a Doctrine of the Sacrament, that it
should stand at the last Day before the Judgment of God, where the Papistical
Doctrine contrary thereto should be ashamed to show her Face. The Papists spoke
as much against this Book, being much galled by it. Dr. Tresham, in his
Disputation with Latimer, said, There were six hundred Errors in the Book.
Weston, thinking to invalidate the Book by the pretended Novelty of the
Doctrine, asked the same Father, How long he had been of that Opinion? He said,
Not past seven Years; that is, about the Year 1547; and that Archbishop
Cranmer's Book confirmed his Judgment therein: and added, That if he could but
remember all therein contained, he would not fear to answer any Man in this
Matter.

The Archbishop had acknowledged to the Queen's Commissioners at Oxford, that
Ridley had first begun to enlighten him, as to the true Notion of the Presence,
as he had maintained it in his Book. How the ABp came off from the Opinion of
the Corporal Presence.
Hereupon one of them took occasion to try to baffle the true Doctrine, by
making the whole stress of it to depend upon the Authority of single Ridley.
Latimer, said he, leaned upon Cranmer, and Cranmer leaned upon Ridley. Whereas
the truth of this was no more, but that Ridley reading Bertram's Book of the
Body and Blood of Christ, was sharpened to examine the old Opinion more
accurately, of the Presence of Christ's Flesh and Blood; and looking into
Ecclesiastical Authors, he found it greatly controverted in the ninth Century,
and learnedly writ against. Which made him begin to conclude it none of the
ancient Doctrines of the Church, but more lately brought into it. These his
Thoughts he communicated to Archbishop Cranmer, which was about the Year 1546.
Whereupon they both set to examine it with more than ordinary Care. And all the
Arguments that Cranmer gathered about it, he digested into his Book. Nor was
the good Archbishop ashamed to make a public Acknowledgment in print of this
as well as of his other Popish Errors, in his Answer to Smith's Preface, who it
seems had charged him with Inconstancy. This I confess of my self, that not
long before I wrote the said Catechism, I was in that Error of the Real
Presence, as I was many Years past in many other Errors, as of
Transubstantiation, of the Sacrifice propitiatory of the Priests in the Mass,
of Pilgrimages, of Purgatory, etc. being brought up from my Youth in them. For
the which, and other the Offenses of my Youth, I do daily pray unto God for
Pardon and Mercy. After it pleased God to show me, by his Holy Word, a more
perfect knowledge of his Son Jesus Christ, I put away my former Ignorance. As
God gave me Light, so through his Grace I opened my Eyes to receive it. And I
trust in God's Mercy for pardon of my former Errors. I set this down the more
at large, to show the great Ingenuity as well as Piety of this good Man.

Peter Martyr in the Year following this, The ABp's great Skill in this
Controversy.
printed a Book of the Sacrament, which was the Sum of what he had read before
upon that Point in the University of Oxford. Which Book he dedicated to his
Patron, the Archbishop of Canterbury: And giving the Reason why he made the
Dedication to him, said, That he knew certainly, that Cranmer had so great
Skill in this Controversy, as one could hardly find in any one besides. That
there was none of the Fathers, which he had not diligently noted; no ancient or
modern Book extant, that he [ Martyr] had not with his own Eyes seen noted by
the Archbishop's Hand. Whatsoever belonged to the whole Controversy, he said,
that the Archbishop had digested into particular Chapters; Councils, Canons,
Popes Decrees pertaining hereunto: and that with so great labor, that unless
he had been an Eyewitness of it and seen it, he could not easily have believed
others, if they had told him, in regard of the infinite Toil, Diligence and
Exactness, wherewith the Archbishop had done it. He added, that the
Archbishop had not bestowed such kind of Pains and Study in the Matter of the
Sacrament only, but that he had done the same thing, as to all other Doctrines,
in effect, which in that Age were especially under Controversy. And this that
Learned Man said, he had made good Observation of. Nor, as he went on, that he
wanted Skill, a Method, and Industry in defending what he held. Which might, he
said, be known by this, because he had so often conflicted with his
Adversaries, both publicly and privately, and by a mavelous strength of
Learning, quickness of Wit, and dexterity of Management, had asserted what he
held to be true, from the thorny and intricate Cavils of Sophisters [glancing
at his Controversies with Winchester, who was commonly then called the
Sophister] and that he wanted not a Will, yea, a Mind ready to defend Sound and
C^ristian Doctrines. That all Men did sufficiently understand, who saw him burn
with so great an endeavor of restoring Religion, that for this Cause only he
had great and heavy Enemies, and neglected many Commodities of this Life, and
underwent horrible Dangers. The great and intimate Converse that P. Martyr had
with Cranmer, gave him opportunity to know him very well: and therefore I have
chosen to set down this Character that he gave of him, and particularly of his
Ability in this Controversy of the Eucharist.

P. Martyr enlightened by Cranmer.
And I am apt to think that the careful perusal of these Authorities, collected
by the Archbishop, and his Conversation with this Learned Prelate, being much
with him at Lambeth, was a cause of bringing Martyr to the True Doctrine. For
at his first coming to Oxon, he was a Papist, or a Lutheran, as to the belief
of the Presence. And so Feckenham, Fox's Acts.
Dean of S. Paul's, told Bartlet Green at his Examination; and that Martyr
perceiving the King's Council, as he uncharitably suggested, to be of another
Opinion, he, to please them, forsook the true Catholic Faith. But Mr. Green,
who had been a hearer of him at Oxon, replied, That he had heard Martyr say,
That he had not, while he was a Papist, read S. Chrysostom upon the tenth to
the Corinthians, nor many other places of the Doctors. But when he had read
them, and well considered them, he was content to yield to them, having first
humbled himself in Prayer, desiring God to illuminate him, and bring him to the
true understanding of Scripture.

Fox's Conjecture of the ABp.
As to the Authorities the Archbishop alleges in his Book, it was the
Conjecture of John Fox, that he made use of Frith's Book, which he wrote of the
Sacrament against More diverse Years before: and that from the said Author the
Archbishop seemed to have collected the Testimonies of the Doctors, which he
produced in his Apology against the Bishop of Winchester: and that he gathered
the principal and chiefest Helps thence, that he leaned to. But although he
might peruse Frith, as he did almost all other Authors that wrote of this
Controversy, yet he was too well versed in the Ecclesiastical Writers, that he
needed to go a borrowing to the readings of any others for Sentences and
Allegations out of them.

A second Book of Gardener against the ABp.
Cranmer lived to see his Book replied again unto by his Adversary Gardener, in
Latin, under the fained Name of Marcus Antonius Constantius a Divine of Lovain.
His Book went under this Title, Confutatio cavillationum, quibus sacrosanctum
Eucharistiae Sacramentum ab impiis Capernaitis impeti solet. Printed at Paris,
1552. In this Book he spared the Name of the Archbishop, but reduces all the
Archbishop's Book into no less then 255 Objections. To each of which, one by
one, the Catholic is brought in making answer. Next, whereas Cranmer had laid
down twelve Rules for the finding out the true Sense of the Fathers in their
Writings, the Catholic examines them, and enervates them. Then follows a
Confutation of the Solutions, whereby the Sectary, as he is called, (that is,
Cranmer) endeavored to take off the Arguments of the Catholics. And, which is
the fourth and last part of the Book, he defends Catholic Men's Sense of the
Allegations out of the Fathers against the Sectaries. Gardener, when he
compiled this Book, was in the Tower a Prisoner; but yet he was under so easy
restraint, that he was furnished there with Workmen, and Amanuenses. Preface to
P. Martyr's Book, in Def. of Cranmer.
As they of old to the building of the Tabernacle, so he to the preparing of
his Book, a kind of Papistical Tabernacle, [to use the words of Martyr] all
sorts contributed something. For his Book was Pandora's Box, to which all the
lesser Gods brought their Presents. For every Man, were his Learning less or
more, that had any Arguments for the Popish Doctrine, brought them all to him,
(many whereof were windy and trivial enough) and he out of the heap made his
Collections as he thought good. But Watson and Smith were his chief Assistants.

The Archbishop, though the Times now soon after turned, The ABp begins a
third Book; but, lives not to ^^nish it.
and he cast into Prison, was very desirous to prepare another Book in
Confutation of Marcus Antonius, and in Vindication of his own Writing. He lived
long enough to finish three Parts: whereof, two unhappily perished in Oxford,
and the third fell into John Fox's Hands, and for ought I know, that by this
time is perished also. But the great desire he had to finish his Answer to that
Book, was the chief cause, that at his last Appearance before the Queen's
Commissioners, he made his Appeal to a General Council. That thereby he might
gain some time and leisure to accomplish what he had begun, before his Life
were taken away, which he saw was likely to be within a very short space.
Otherwise, [as he writ to his Lawyer, who was to draw up his Appeal] it was
much better for him to die in Christ's Quarrel, and to reign with him, than to
be shut up and kept in that Body. Unless it were to continue yet still a while
in this Warfare, for the Commodity and Profit of his Brethren, and to the
further advancing of God's Glory.

Peter Martyr, his surviving and learned Friend, Martyr takes up the Quarrel.
being solicited by many Englishmen by Letter and word of Mouth, undertook the
answering this Book. But before he had finished it, an English Divine and
Friend of Martyr's, with whom he held Correspondence in Q. Mary's Reign, wrote
him word, in the Year 1557. that an Answer to Antonius, by some other hand, was
then in the Press, naming the Author. Martyr replied, That he was rather glad
of it, Ma^t. Epist.
than any ways moved or disturbed at it, as a disappointment of what he was
doing: and added, that he expected nothing from that Man, but what was very
exquisite, acute and elaborate. But that he feared the noise thereof would not
hold true. And so it proved. Whether this Learned Man withdrew his Book, that
he might give way to that which P. Martyr was writing, or whether it were a
Flam given out to stop Martyr in his Design, it is uncertain. But not long
after this Learned Italian put forth his Answer. He had it under the Press at
Zurick in December 1558; and it came out the next Year. P. Martyr Ep.
Wherein, as he wrote to Calvin, he did unravel and confute all the Sophisms
and Tricks of the Bishop of Winchester. And it came forth very seasonably, as
Martyr hoped. For hereby the English Papalins might see, at this time
especially, that that Book was not, as they boasted hitherto, invincible. He
gave this Title to his Book, Defensio Doctrina veteris and Apostolicae de S.S.
Eucharistiae Sacramento. In the Preface to which he showed, How this Work fell
to his Lot: Not that that most Reverend Father wanted an Assistant, for he
could easily have managed Gardener himself. For he knew how Cranmer, in many
and various Disputes, formerly had with him, came off with Victory and great
Praise; but because the ABp when in Prison, was forced to leave his Answer,
which he had begun, unfinished, by reason of his strait keeping, having scarce
Paper and Ink allowed him, and no Books to make use of; and being cut off so
soon by Death, before he could bring to perfection what he had writ. Wherein,
as Martyr said, he had harder measure by far from the Papists, than Gardener
had from the Protestants in K. Edward's Days, when he wrote his Book.

Gardener in that Book of his, under the Name of M. Constantius, had shown such
foul play with Cranmer's Book, Cranmer puts out his Book of the Sacrament in
Latin.
mangling it, and taking Pieces and Scraps of it here and there, and
confounding the Method of it, to supply himself with Objections to give his own
Answers to with the most advantage; that the Archbishop thought, that if
Learned Foreigners saw but his first Book of the Sacrament, as he wrote it, it
would be vindication enough against Gardiner's new Book against it: And
therefore he took order to have it translated into the same Language in which
Gardener wrote, that is, Latin, that impartial Strangers might be able to read
and judge: and Sir John Cheke elegantly performed it for his Friend the
Archbishop. This Book of Cranmer's thus put into Latin, with some Additions,
came forth 1553. Before it he prefixed an Epistle to King Edward VI. dated at
Lambeth, Idib. Mart. the same Year. Wherein he said, It was his Care of the
Lord's Flock committed to him, that put him upon renewing and restoring the
Lord's Supper according to the Institution of Christ. And that that was the
Reason, that about three Years ago he set forth a Book in English against the
principal Abuses of the Papistical Mass. Which Book had great Success upon the
Peoples Minds, in bringing them to embrace the Truth. Whereby, he said, he
perceived how great the Force of Truth was, and understood the Benefits of the
Grace of Christ, that even the Blind should have their Eyes opened, and partake
of the Light of Truth, as soon as it was revealed, and showed it self clearly
to them. But that this gave great Offense unto Gardener, then Bishop of
Winchester, so that he thought nothing was to be done till he had answered the
Book, supposing that there would be no helper of so declining and forsaken a
Cause, unless he put to his Hand. And so the Archbishop proceeded to show how
that Bishop first put forth his English Book, endeavoring to overthrow the
true Doctrine, Constantius libro latin scripto, ita argumenta mea persequitur*
ut sibi optimum videtur, and ut causam juvet; saepe truncata, saepe inversa,
saepe disjecta, sic introducit; ut non magis a me agnosci potuerint, quam
Medeae liberi in multa membra dissecti and desormati, etc.
and to restore and bring again into Repute the Mass, with all its
Superstitions; and afterward his Latin Book, under a feigned Name. In which
Gardener had so unfairly dealt with the Archbishop's Arguments, chopping and
changing, defacing and disfiguring them, that he could not know them for his
own; and all that he might make it serve his own turn the better: Insomuch that
he resolved to have his own Book translated out of English into Latin, that his
true Opinion and Mind in this Controversy might the better be apprehended. The
whole Epistle is writ in a pure elegant Latin Style, with a good sharpness of
Wit.

The publication of this his Latin Book, he thought sufficient for the present
to entertain the World, till he should put forth, in Latin also, a full Answer
to Gardener, which he intended shortly to do. To this Latin Book, the
Archbishop occasionally reviewing it, while he was in Prison, made sundry
Annotations and Additions; not of any new Arguments, but only of more
Authorities out of the Fathers and Ancient Writers. This valuable Autograph
fell into the Hands of some of the English Exiles at Embden, it may be by the
Means of Bp Scory, who was Superintendent of the English Church there, Printed
again at Embden.
or Sir John Cheke, who also for some time was in this Place, both great
Friends of the Archbishop. In the Year 1557, the Exiles here printed it with
this Title, Defensio, etc. a Thoma Cranmero Martyr scripta. Ab Authore in
Vinculis recognita and aucta. Before it, is a new Preface to the Reader, made
as it is thought by Sir John Cheke, relating to the Archbishop and this his
Book, showing how well-weighed, and well-thought on this Doctrine of the
Sacrament was, before he published it, and that he let it not go abroad, till
he had diligently compared and pondred all Scriptures and Ancient Authors, and
confirmed it at last by his Blood. In the body of the Book, the places where
any Enlargements are, Autographon ^jus in nostra apud Aembdanos Ecclesia pro
Thesauro quodam, and clariss. viri, sanctique Christi Martyris Mnemosyno
servamus. In Epist.
are signified by an Hand pointing thereunto. In the Margent is often to be
found this word Object. with certain Numbers added: Which Numbers show those
Places which Gardener, under the Name of Marcus Antonius, did endeavor to
confute. The very Original these English Exiles here at Embden kept, as a great
Treasure, among them, and as a Memorial of the Holy Martyr.

Besides this, the Archbishop fully intended to have his Vindication of his
Book, impugned by Gardener, put into Latin also; but he lived not to see that
done. Cranmer's second Book intended to be put into Latin. Fox. Epp. MSS.
But care was taken of this Business among the Exiles. Insomuch that both Sir
John Choke and John Fox were busied about it at the same time. But the former
surceased, and left the whole Work to Fox then at Frankford, after he had
finished the first part. In this Piece done by Cheke, John a Lasco had an hand;
for he put in the Latin School-Terms, instead of more pure good Latin which
Cheke had used. And it was judged fit that such Words should be used,. where
the ABp in his English had used them. And this Cheke and A Lasco themselves
wrote to Fox. Fox undertook the rest, by the Incitation and Encouragement of P.
Martyr, and of Grindal and Pilkington, both Bishops afterward. Who gave him
Directions for the translating; and as Doubts occurred concerning the Sense of
certain Matters in the Book, as he met with them, he consulted with these Men
for their Judgments therein. Grindal in one Letter, bad him write a Catalogue
of all Passages by him doubted of, and send it to him. Fox finished his
Translation in the Year 1557, before June. For which he had a Congratulatory
Letter from Grindal, who was his chief Assistant and Counselor herein. The
Work was dispatched to the Press, at Basil I suppose; and when one Part was
printed, the Censors of the Press thought it would be better to defer an
Argument of that Nature to better Times, the Controversy having been bandied up
and down so much already. But Froscover undertook the printing of the whole
Book. Fox would do nothing of himself; but leaving himself to the Judgment of
his Learned Brethren, to commit the Work now to Froscover, or no, Queen Mary's
Death, and the return of the Exiles, I suppose, stopped further progress in
this Matter. The Original Manuscript, under Fox's own Hand, in very cleanly
elegant Latin, I have lying by me: It bears this Title, De tota Sacramenti
Eucharistiae causa Institutionum Libri V. Autore D. THOMA CRANMERO
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi. Quibus and Stephani Garneri Episcopi Wintoniensi,
and SMYTHI Doctoris Theologi, impugnationibus, respondetur.

Some Notes of Cranmer concerning the Sacrament. Miscellan. A.
And that I may bring here together all that relates to Cranmer, as to this
Matter of the Sacrament, I must not omit what I saw in the Benet-Library. There
is a thin Note-book of this Archbishop's with this Title, wrote by his own
Hand, De re Sacramentaria; which I verily believe are his Meditations and
Conclusions, when he set himself accurately to examine the Sacramental
Controversy, and fell off from the Opinion of the Carnal Presence. The Notes
consist of nothing but Quotations out of ancient Ecclesiastical Authors about
the Lord's Supper; interlined in many Places by the Archbishop's Pen. On the
top of some of the Pages are these Sentences writ by himself, being Doctrines
provable out of the Sentences there produced, and transcribed.

Panis vocatur Corpus Christi, and Vinum Sanguis.

Panis est Corpus meum, and Vinum est Sanguis meus; figurativae sunt locutiones.

Quid significet haec figura, Edere carnem, and bibere sanguinem.

Mali non edunt and bibunt corpus and sanguinem Domini.

Patres Vet. Testamenti, edebant and bibebant Christum, sicut and Nos.

Sicut in Eucharistia, ita in Baptismo, presens est Christus. Contra
Transubstantiationem.

After this, follow these Writings of the Archbishop's own Hand (which
Archbishop Parker elsewhere transcribed for his own Satisfaction).

Multa affirmant crassi Papistae, seu Capernaitae, quae neque Scriptura neque
ullus Veterum unquam dixerat. Viz.

Quod Accidentia maneant sine subjecto.

Quod Accidentia panis and vini sunt Sacramenta: non panis and vinum.

Quod Panis non est figura, sed accidentia panis.

Quod Christus non appellavit panem corpus suum.

Quod cum Christus dixit; Hoc est corpus meum, pronomen Hoc non refertur ad
panem, sed ad corpus Christi.

Quod tot corpora Christi accipimus, aut toties corpus ejus accipimus, quoties,
aut in quot parts, dentibus secamus panem.

Thus having set down diverse Assertions of Papists, or Capernaites, as he
styled them, which neither Scripture nor Ancient Fathers knew any thing of; his
Notes proceed to state wherein Papists and Protestants disagree.

Praecipua Capita in quibus a Papisticis dissentimus.
Christum Papistae statuunt in pane, nos in homine comedente.

Illi in comedentis ore, nos in toto homine.

Illi Corpus Christi aiunt evolare, masticato vel consumpto pane: Nos manner in
homine dicimus, quamdiu membrum est Christi.

Illi in pane statuunt per annum integrum, and diutius, si duret panis: Nos in
homine statuimus inhabitare, quamdiu Templum Dei fuerit.

Illorum Sententia, quod ad realem praesentiam attinet, non amplius edit homo
quam bellua, neque magis ei prodest, quam cuivis animanti.

Thus God made use of this Archbishop, Martyr succeeds Cranmer in this
Province.
who was once of the most violent Asserters of the Corporal Presence, to be the
chiefest Instrument of overthrowing it. But this good Work required to be
carried on after Cranmer's Death. For great Brags were made of Gardiner's
second Book; and it was boasted, that none dared to encounter this their
Goliath. P. Martyr was thought the fittest Man to succeed Cranmer in this
Province, to maintain the Truth that began now to shine forth. He, overcome by
the Solicitation of Friends, Writes against Gardener,
composed a Book against Gardener, as was said before, and printed it at
Zurick. Wherein, I. He defended the Arguments of our Men; which had been
collected together, and pretended to be confuted by Gardiner's Book. II. He
defended those Rules which Cranmer had put forth in his Tract of the Sacrament.
III. He maintained those Answers, whereby the Arguments of the Adversaries were
wont to be refuted. And, IV. He asserted the just and true Interpretation of
certain Places out of the Fathers, which Gardener and his Companions brought
for themselves and their Errors.

After this Defense followed another by the same Author, printed in the same
Town of Zurick, against two Books of Dr. Rich. Smith, And Smith.
concerning the single Life of Priests, and Monastic Vows: which he wrote at
Lovain against Martyr. For when Martyr had read at Oxford upon 1 Corinthians
Chap. vii. where the Apostle speaks much of Virginity and Matrimony; (the Notes
of which Readings Smith had very diligently taken, being constantly present at
them) from thence he composed two Books, not so strong as malicious, Of the
Celibacy of Priests, and of Vows: designing thereby to confute Martyr's
Arguments: Which he therefore thought fit to vindicate. In this Book he not
only answered Smith's Arguments, but whatever else he could meet with upon that
Subject. But it was thought to be a very improper Undertaking, and proved cause
of Mirth, that so filthy a Fellow as Smith was known to be, and once taken in
the Act of Adultery, should write a Book of Priestly Chastity. Which occasioned
these Verses made by Laur. Humfrey, Haud satis affabre tractans fabrilia
Smithus,
Librum de vita caelibe composuit, etc.
Dumque pudicitiam, dum vota monastica laudat,
Stuprat, sacra notans foedera conjugii,


CHAP. XXVI. The Duke of Somerset's Death. New Bishops.
The Duke of Somerset's Death.
THE Archbishop of Canterbury this Year lost the Duke of Somerset, whom he much
valued, and who had been a great Assistant to him in the Reformation of the
Church, and a true Friend to it. His violent Death exceedingly grieved the good
Archbishop, both because he knew it would prove a great Let to Religion, and
was brought about by evil Men, to the shedding of Innocent Blood, for the
furthering the Ends of Ambition: and begat in him Fears and Jealousies of the
King's Life. It is very remarkable what I meet with in one of my Manuscripts.
Inter Foxii MSS.
There was a Woman, somewhat before the last apprehension of the Duke, Wife of
one Woocock of Pool in Dorsetshire, that gave out, that there was a Voice that
followed her, which sounded these words always in her Ears, He whom the King
did best trust, should deceive him, and work Treason against him. After she had
a good while reported this, Sir William Barkley, who married the Lord Treasurer
Winchester's Daughter, sent her up to London to the Council, with two of his
Servants. She was not long there, but, without acquainting the Duke of
Somerset, whom it seemed most to concern, (he being the Person whom the King
most trusted) was sent home again with her Purse full of Money. And after her
coming home, She was more busy in that talk than before. So that She came to a
Market Town, called Wimborn, four Miles from Pool, where she reported, that the
Voice continued following her as before. This looked, by the Circumstances,
like a practice of some Popish Priests accustomed to dealing in such Frauds, to
make the World the more inclinable to believe the Guilt of the good Duke, which
Somerset's Enemies were now framing against him. And so some of the Wiser Sort
thereabouts did seem to think; For there were two Merchants of Pool that heard
her, and took a Note of her Words, and came to the House of Hancock, Minister
of Pool, who was known to the Duke, counselling him to certify my Lord of her.
Which Hancock accordingly did, and came to Sion, where the Duke then was, and
told him of the Words. He added, Whom the King does best trust we do not know,
but that all the King's loving Subjects did think that his Grace was most
worthy to be best trusted; and that his Grace had been in Trouble: and that all
the King's Loving Subjects did pray for his Grace to the Almighty to preserve
him, that he might never come in the like trouble again.

Then the Duke asked him whether he had a Note of the Words. Which when he had
received from Hancock, he said, to him, suspecting the Plot, Ah! Sirrah, this
is strange, that these things should come before the Counselors, and I not
hear of it. I am of the Council also. He asked Hancock, Before whom of the
Council this matter was brought? Who replied, He knew not certain, but as he
supposed. The Duke asked him, Whom he supposed? He answered, Before the Lord
Treasurer, because his Son-in-Law, Sir W. Barkley sent her up. The Duke
subjoyned, It was like to be so. This was three weeks before his last
Apprehension. This I extract out of Mr. Hancock's own Narration of himself and
and his Troubles: to which he added, That at his first apprehension, the report
was, that the Duke, what time as he was fetched out of Windsor-Castle, having
the King by the Hand, should say, It is not I that they shoot at; This is the
Mark that they shoot at, meaning the King. Which by the Sequel proved too true.
For that good, Godly and virtuous Prince lived not long after the Death of that
good Duke.

Indeed it seemed to have been a Plot of the Papists, Winchester supposed to be
in the Plot.
and the Bishop of Winchester at the Bottom of it. This is certain, when in
October 1549. the Duke was brought to the Tower, the Bishop was then born in
hand, he should be set at Liberty. Of which he had such Confidence that he
prepared himself new Apparel against the Time he should come out; thinking
verily to have come abroad within eight or ten Days. But finding himself
disappointed, he wrote an expostulatory Letter to the Lords within a Month
after, to put them in remembrance, as Stow writes.

The Articles that were drawn up against the Duke, Articles against the Duke.
upon his second Apprehension and Trial, were in number Twenty, which I shall
not repeat here, as I might out of a Manuscript thereof, because they may be
seen in Fox. But I do observe one of the Articles is not printed in his Book,
namely the Tenth: which ran thus. Also, you are charged, that you have diverse
and many times, both openly and privately said and affirmed, That the Nobles
and Gentlemen were the only Causes of the Dearth of things, whereby the People
rose, and did reform things themselves. Whence it appears, that one Cause of
the hatred of the Nobility and Gentry against him, was, because he spoke
against their Debauches and Excesses, Covetousness and Oppressions. But that
which I chiefly observe here is, that the draught of these Articles, which I
have seen, were made by Bp Gardener, being his very Hand, unless I am much
mistaken. So that he, I suppose, was privately dealt with and consulted, (being
then a Prisoner in the Tower) to be a Party in assisting and carrying on this
direful Plot against the Duke, to take away his Life: Notwithstanding his
outward Friendship and fair Correspondence in Letters with the said Duke. But
Gardener was looked upon to be a good Manager of Accusations; and he was ready
enough to be employed here, that he might put to his Hand in taking off one
that was such a great Instrument of promoting the Reformation.

He is generally charged for the great Spoil of Churches and Chapels; What he
is blamed for.
defacing ancient Tombs and Monuments, and pulling down the Bells in
Parish-Churches, and ordering only one Bell in a Steeple, as sufficient to call
the People together. Which set the Commonalty almost into a Rebellion.

The new Book of Common Prayer established.
As the Archbishop the last Year had procured Amendments and Alterations in the
Book of Public Prayers, and had consulted therein with the two Learned Foreign
Divines, Bucer and Martyr; so this Year, in January, an Act was made by the
Parliament for authorizing the new Book, and obliging the Subjects to be
present at the reading of it. In this Book the general Confession was added,
and the Absolution. At the beginning of the second Service was added the
Recital of the Ten Commandments, with the short Ejaculation to be said between
each Commandment. Something was left out in the Consecration of the Sacrament,
that seemed to favor a Corporal presence. Several Rites were laid aside, as
that of Oil in Confirmation, and Extreme Unction, and Prayer for the Dead,
which was before used in the Communion-Office, and that of Burial: together
with the change and abolishing of some other things that were offensive or
Superstitions: as may be seen by those that will take the pains to compare the
two Books, the one printed in the Year 1549, and the other 1552. And this was
brought about by the great and long Diligence and Care of our pious
Archbishop, and no question to his great Joy and Satisfaction. So that I look
upon that, but as an improbable report, that was carried about in Frankford in
those unseemly Branglings among the English Exiles there, that Bullinger should
say, Troubles at Frankford.
That Cranmer had drawn up a Book of Prayers an hundred times more perfect,
then that which was then in being, but the same could not take place, for that
he was matched with such a wicked Clergy and Convocation, with other Enemies.
But as his Authority was now very great, so there was undoubtedly a great
Deference paid to it, as also to his Wisdom and Learning, by the rest of the
Divines appointed to that Work: so that as nothing was by them inserted into
the Liturgy, but by his good Allowance and Approbation, so neither would they
reject or oppose what he thought fit should be put in or Altered.

Coverdale made Bp of Exon.
The Learning, Piety, and good Deserts of Miles Coverdale, in translating the
Holy Scriptures into the English Tongue, and in a constant preaching of the
Gospel, and sticking to the true Profession for many a Year; and withal, very
probably, their ancient acquaintance in Cambridg, were reasons that made our
Archbishop a particular Friend to him. When the Lord Russel was sent down
against the Rebels in the West, he was attended by Coverdale to preach among
them. Coverdale afterward became Coadjutor to Veyzy the Bishop of Exeter, who
seldom resided, and took little care of his Diocese. But this Year, whether
voluntarily, or by some Order, he resigned up his Bishopric, having first
greatly spoiled it of its Revenues. And when some wise and bold Person, and
excellent Preacher, was found extremely needful to be sent thither, to inspect
the Clergy and Ecclesiastic Matters in those Parts, the late Rebellion having
been raised chiefly by Priests in hatred to the Religion, heating, and
disaffecting the Minds of the common People, Coverdale was judged a very fit
Person to succeed in that Charge. Being now Bishop Elect of Exon, he had long
attended at Court to get his Matters dispatched; namely, The doing of his
Homage, and the obtaining a Suit to be excused the payment of his first Fruits,
being but a poor Man. But such at that Time were the great and urgent Affairs
of the State, or the secret Hinderers of the Gospel, that he found nothing but
Delays. So that he was forced to apply himself unto his Friend, the
Archbishop, to forward his Business. Who forthwith sent his Letters to
Secretary Cecyl, making Coverdale himself the Bearer, Entreating him to use his
Interest to get this Bishop dispatched, and that with speed: Urging this for
his Reason, (becoming his paternal Care over his Province) That so he might
without further delay go down into the Western Parts, which had great need of
him. And also because he was minded on the 30 th of August, to consecrate him
and the Bishop of Rochester [Scory] according to the King's Mandate.

This Scory was at first preferred by the Archbishop to be one of the six
Preachers at Canterbury: Scory Bp Elect of Rochester.
and always continued firm to the Purity of Religion, and endured Trouble for
the good and wholesome Doctrine that he preached; having been presented and
complained of, both in the Spiritual Courts, and to the Justices at their
Sessions, when the Six Articles were in Force. He was a Married Man, and so
deprived at the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, fled beyond Sea, and was
Superintendent of the English Congregation at Embden in Friezland. There, in
the Year 1555, he wrote and printed A Comfortable Epistle unto all the Faithful
that be in Prison, or in any other Trouble for the defense of God's Truth.
Wherein he does as well by the promises of Mercy, as also by the Examples of
diverse holy Martyrs, comfort, encourage and strengthen them patiently, for
Christ's Sake, to suffer the manifold cruel and most tyrannous Persecutions of
Antichristian Tormentors. As the Book bears title.

There were diverse Bishoprics vacant this Year. The ABp appoints a Guardian of
the Spiritualties of Lincoln.
As that of Lincoln by the Death of Holbech. The Archbishop deputed the
Spiritualties to John Pope, LL. B. and Chancellor of that Church. The Church
commending unto the Archbishop this Pope, and two more, viz. John Prin, LL. D.
Subdean of the Church, and Christopher Massingberde, LL. B. Archdeacon of
Stow. So he chose the first: But yet he committed a special trust to Tailor,
the Dean of Lincoln, Cranm. Reg*
(whom he knew to be tight to Religion) sending a Commission fiduciary to him,
before Pope entered upon his Office, to give the said Pope his Oath, Legally and
faithfully to perform his Office committed to him by the Archbishop, and to
answer to the said Archbishop for all Obventions coming to him by virtue of
his Jurisdiction and Office; and that he should not, by Malice or Wrong, squeez
the Subjects of the King, and of that Diocese, whether Clerks or Laics; that he
should not knowingly grieve them in their Estates or Persons: and that he shall
abstain from Oppressions, Extortions and unlawful Exactions: and that he shall
renounce the Bishop of Rome his usurped Jurisdiction and Authority, according
to the Statutes of Parliament. And of all this he wrote a Letter to the said
Pope, signifying that he required such an Oath of him to be taken before the
Dean. The Tenor of the Archbishop's Letter to the Dean went on further,
requiring him by his sound Council, singular Prudence, and by the assistance of
his sincere Judgment, to be present with him in any hard Cases and of great
Moment, and that he would not be wanting to him in any Matters of that sort,
being a Person of that Knowledge in Sacred and Profane Learning, of that
Prudence, Circumspection and Dexterity in managing Business. And so finally
joined him with Pope to perform all this piously and catholickly, according to
the Rule of Evangelick Religion, and the Exigency of the Laws and Statutes of
this Kingdom. And deputed him his Vicegerent. This Letter was dated at
Croydon, the 20 th of August. This Commission seemed to be somewhat
extraordinary: The occasion whereof might be, because the Archbishop did not
confide in this Chancellor of the Church, suspecting his Religion, and
Compliance with the King's Proceedings, therefore he thought good to associate
him with Tailor the Dean, of whom he was well assured.

And of Wigorn.
The Church of Worcester became also Vacant by the Deprivation of Hethe the
Bishop. The Archbishop committed the Spiritualties thereof to John Barlo Dean
of the said Church, and Roland Tailor LL. D. his Domestic Chaplain. Cranm.
Regist.
These he constituted his Officials to exercise all Episcopal Jurisdiction.
This Commission was dated at Lambeth, Ian. 10. 1554, by an Error of the Scribe
for 1551. as appears by a Certificate sent from the Church to that Archbishop
signifying the Vacation of it.

And of Chichester.
Upon the Vacancy of the Church of Chichester, by the Deprivation of Day, the
Archbishop made John Worthial Archdeacon of Chichester, and Robert Tailor LL.
B. Dean of the Deanery of South-Malling, his Officials. This Commission to
them, dated November. 3, 1551, was to Visit, etc.

And of Hereford.
Upon the Vacancy of the Church of Hereford, by the Death of Skip late Bishop
there, the Spiritualties were committed to Hugh Coren, LL. D. Dean of that
Church, and Rich. Cheny, D.D. Archdeacon of Hereford. Their Commission was to
Visit, etc.

And of Bangor.
Upon the Vacancy of the Bishopric of Bangor, either by the Death of Bulkly the
Bishop, or his Resignation upon his blindness, the Archbishop made his
Commissaries, Griffin Leyson his principal Chancellor and Official, Rowland
Merick a Canon of S. David's, and Geofrey Glynn, L L. D D. The Church of
Rochester also became this Year Vacant by the Translation of Scory to
Chichester. In these Vacancies the Bishoprics were lamentably pilled, by
hungry Courtiers, of the Revenues belonging to them.

Hoper visits his Diocese.
This Year Bishop Hoper was by the Council dispatched down (as was said before)
into his Diocese: where things were much out of order, and Popery had great
footing; and therefore it wanted such a stirring Man as he was. That he might
do the more Good, he had the Authority of the Lords of the Council to back him,
by a Commission granted to him and others. He brought most of the
Parish Priests and Curates from their old Superstitions and Errors concerning
the Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Recantation of one of
them of more note named Phelps, the Incumbent of Ciciter, which he made
publicly and subscribed, may be seen in the Appendix. No. LXIII.


This Year there happened two learned Conferences in Latin, Two Disputations
concerning the Sacrament.
privately managed, about the Corporeal Presence in the Sacrament. The one on
the 25 th of November, in the House of Sir William Cecyl Secretary of State,
performed by the said Cecyl, Sir John Cheke, Horn Dean of Durham, Whitehead
and Grindal, on the Protestant side: and Feckenham and Young on the Popish. But
first before they began, Cecyl under his solemn Protestation assured them, that
every Man should have free Liberty to speak his Mind, and that none should
receive any Damage or incurr any Danger. Cheke began by propounding this
question, Quis esset verus and germanus sensus verborum Coenae, Hoc est corpus
meum; Number quem verba sensu grammatico accepta prae se ferebant, an aliud
quiddam. To whom Feckenham answered. There were present besides those that
disputed, these noble and learned Persons, The Lord Russel, Sir Anthony Coke,
Mr. Hales, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Frogmartin, Mr. Knolles, Mr. Harrington. The second
Disputation was December. 3. following, in Mr. Morisin's House: where were
present the Marq. of Northampton, the Earl of Rutland, the Lord Russel, and
those above named, and Watson added on the Papists side. Then Cheke again
propounded the Question, Whether the words of the Supper are to be understood
in a grammatical, or in a figurative Sense? To which Watson Responded. Both
these Disputations are too large for this place, but they are set down in one
of the Manuscript Volumes of the Benet-Library. Miscellan. C.


In November died Dr. John Redman, Dr. Redman dies.
Master of Trinity-College in Cambridg, and one of the great Lights of that
University, for the bringing in solid Learning among the Students: a Prebendary
of the Church of Westminster; B^con's Reports. Fox's Acts.
and who in the Year 1549 assisted in the compiling the English Book of
Common Prayer, and preached a Sermon upon the Learned Bucer's Death the day
following his Funeral. He was a Person of extraordinary Reputation among all
for his great Learning and Reading, and profound Knowledge in Divinity. So that
the greatest Divines gave a mighty Deference to his Judgment. And therefore
when he lay sick at Westminster, many learned Men repaired to him, desiring to
know his last Judgment of several Points, then so much controverted. And he was
very ready to give them Satisfaction. Among the rest, that came, were Richard
Wilks Master of Christ's College Cambridg, Alexander Noel, afterward Dean of
Paul's, and Young, a Man of Fame in Cambridg for his disputing against Bucer
about Justification. In these Conferences with these learned Man, he called the Sea of Rome, Sentina Malorum, A Sink of Evils; he said, That Purgatory, as the
Schoolmen taught it, was ungodly, and that there was no such kind of Purgatory
as they fancied. That the offering up the Sacrament in Masses and Trentals for
the Sins of the Dead, was ungodly. That the Wicked are not partakers of the
Body of Christ, but receive the outward Sacrament only. That it ought not to be
carried about in Procession. That nothing that is seen in the Sacrament, or
perceived with the outward Sense, is to be worshipped. That we receive not
Christ's Body Corporaliter, grossly, like other Meats, but so Spiritualiter,
that nevertheless Vere, truly. That there was not any good ground in the old
Doctors for Transubstantiation, as ever he could perceive; nor could he see
what could be answered to the Objections against it. That Priests might by the
Law of God marry Wives. That this Proposition, Faith only justifies, so that
this Faith signify a true lively Faith, resting in Christ, and embracing him,
is a true, godly, sweet and comfortable Doctrine. That our Works cannot deserve
the Kingdom of God. And, he said, that it troubled him that he had so much
strove against Justification by Faith only. A Treatise whereof he composed,
which was printed at Antwerp after his Death, in the Year 1555. He said also to
Young, That Consensus Ecclesiae was but a weak Staff to lean to; and exhorted
him to read the Scriptures, for there was that which would comfort him, when he
should be in such a case as he was then in. One asked him concerning the
Doctrine of the School-Doctors, that Bread remained not after Consecration. He
replied, There was none of the School-Doctors knew what Consecratio did mean.
And pausing a while, said, It was Tota actio, The whole Action in ministering
the Sacrament, as Christ did institute it. After the Conference with him was
ended, Young retiring into another Chamber, said to Wilks, that Dr. Redman so
moved him, that whereas he was before in such Opinion of certain things, that
he would have burned and lost his Life for them, now he doubted of them. But I
see, said he, a Man shall know more and more by process of time, and by reading
and hearing others. And Mr. Dr. Redman's saying shall cause me to look more
diligently for them. Ellis Lomas, Redman's Servant, said, he knew his Master
had declared to King Henry, that Faith only justifies, but that he thought
that Doctrine was not to be taught the People, lest they should be negligent to
do good Works. All this I have related of this Divine, that I may in some
measure preserve the Memory of one of the Learnedest Men of his Time; and lay
up the dying Words of a Papist, signifying so plainly his dislike and
disallowance of many of their Doctrines.

The Sweating-sickness breaking out this Year in great violence, (whereby the
two Sons of the Duke of Suffolk were taken off) Letters from the Council dated
July 18, were sent to all the Bishops, to persuade the People to Prayer, and to
see God better served.

The ABp and others appointed to Reform the Ecclesiastical Laws.
It being enacted 1549, That the King might, during three Years, appoint sixteen
Spiritual Men, and sixteen Temporal, to examine the old Ecclesiastical Laws,
and to compile a Body of Ecclesiastical Laws, to be in force in the room of the
old: this third Year, October. 6. a Commission was issued out to the same number
of Persons, authorizing them to reform the Canon Laws; that is to say, to eight
Bishops, eight Divines, eight Civil Lawyers, and eight Common. Whose Names, as
they occur in an Original, are as follow:

BISHOPS.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Exeter,
Gloucester, Bath, Rochestre.

DIVINES.
Mr. Tailor of Lincoln, Cox, Almoner, Parker of Cambridg, Latimer, Cook, [ Sir
Anthony I suppose] Peter Martyr, Cheke, Ioannes a Laseo.
CIVILIANS.
Mr. Peter, Cecyl, Sir Tho. Smith, Tailor of Hadeligh, Dr. May, Mr. Traheron,
Dr. Lyel, Mr. Skinner.
LAWYERS.
Justice Hales, Justice Bromly, Goodrick, Gosnal, Stamford, Carel, Lucas, Brook
Recorder of London.
It was so ordered, The Method they observed.
that this number should be divided into four distinct Classes, or Companies;
each to consist of two Bishops, two Divines, to Civilians, and two
Common-Lawyers. And to each Company were assigned their set parts: Which when
one Company had finished, it was transmitted to the other Companies to be by
them all, well considered and inspected. But out of all the number of two and
thirty, eight especially were selected, from each rank two, viz. out of the
Bishops, the Archbishop and the Bishop of Ely; out of the Divines, Cox and
Martyr; out of the Civilians, Tailor and May; out of the Common-Lawyers, Lucas
and Goodrick: To whom a new Commission was made November. 9, for the first
forming of the Work, and preparation of the Matter. And the Archbishop
supervised the whole Work. This Work they plied close this Winter. But lest
they should be straightened for time, the Parliament gave the King three Years
longer for accomplishing this Affair. So, Feb. 2. A Letter was sent from the
Council to make a new Commission to the Archbishop, and to the other Bishops
and Learned Men, Civilians and Lawyers, for the establishment of the
Ecclesiastical Laws, according to the Act of Parliament made in the last
Session. This was a very noble Enterprise, and well worthy the Thoughts of our
excellent Archbishop. Who with indefatigable Pains had been, both in this and
the last King's Reign, laboring to bring this Matter about, and he did his
part, for he brought the Work to perfection. But it wanted the King's
Ratification, which was delayed, partly by Business, and partly by Enemies.

Bishops Consecrated.
August the 30 th. John Scory, Ponet being translated to Winchester, Scory.
Cranm. Regist*
was consecrated Bishop of Rochester, at Croyden, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, and John Suffragan of Bedford.

Miles Coverdale was at the same time and place Consecrated Bishop of Exon, all
with their Surplices and Copes, Coverdal^.
and Coverdale so habited also.

An. 1552.
CHAP. XXVII. The Articles of Religion.
The Articles of Religion framed and published.
OUR Archbishop, and certain of the Bishops and other Divines, but whom by Name
I find not, were this Year chiefly busied in composing and preparing a Book of
Articles of Religion; which was to contain what should be publicly owned as
the Sum of the Doctrine of the Church of England. This the Archbishop had long
before this bore in his Mind, as excellently serviceable for the creating of a
Concord and Quietness among Men, and for the putting an End to Contentions and
Disputes in Matters of Religion. These Articles the Archbishop was the Penner,
or at least the great Director of, with the assistance, as is very probable, of
Bishop Ridley. And so he publicly owned afterward, in his Answer to certain
Interrogatories put to him by Queen Mary's Commissioners; Fox.
viz. That the Catechism, the Book of Articles, and the Book against
Winchester, were his Doings. These Articles were in number Forty two, and were
agreed to in the Convocation 1552. And in the Year 1553, they were published by
the King's Authority both in Latin and English. After they were finished, he
labored to have the Clergy subscribe them: but against their Wills he
compelled none; though afterward some charged him falsely to do so: Which he
utterly denied, as he declared before the said Queen's Commissioners. But to
enter into some Particulars concerning so eminent a Matter Ecclesiastical as
this was.

The ABp's diligence in them.
In the Year 1551, the King and his Privy Council ordered the Archbishop to
frame a Book of Articles of Religion for the preserving and maintaining Peace
and Unity of Doctrine in this Church, that being finished, they might be set
forth by Public Authority. The Archbishop, in obedience hereunto, drew up a
set of Articles, which were delivered to certain other Bishops to be inspected
and subscribed, I suppose, by them. Before them they lay until this Year 1552.
Then, May 2. a Letter was sent from the Council to our Archbishop, to send the
Articles that were delivered the last Year to the Bishops, and to signify
whether the same were set forth by any Public Authority according to the
Minutes. The Archbishop accordingly sent the Articles, and his Answer, unto
the Lords of the Council. In September I find the Articles were again in his
Hands. Then he set the Book in a better Order, and put Titles upon each of the
Articles, and some Additions for the better perfecting of the Work, and supply
of that which lacked. And so transmitted the Book again from Croydon, September.
19. to Sir William Cecyl and Sir John Cheke, the one the King's Principal
Secretary, and the other his Tutor, being the two great Patrons of the
Reformation at the Court: Desiring them together to take these Articles into
their serious Considerations; for he well knew them to be both wise and good
Men, and very well seen in Divine Learning. And he referred it to their
Wisdoms, whether they thought best to move the King's Majesty therein before
his coming to Court; as though he conceived the King might make some demur in
so weighty an Affair, till he should consult with the Metropolitan, in order to
the coming to a Resolution; or that there were some great Persons about the
King, that might cast some Scruples and Objections in his Mind concerning it,
which he by his Presence might prevent, or be ready at hand to resolve. Cecyl
and Cheke thought it more convenient the Archbishop should offer them to the
King himself. So coming to Court soon after, he delivered the Book to the King,
and moved him for their publishing and due observation. And so leaving them
before the King and Council, they were then again delivered unto certain of the
King's Chaplains, who made some Alterations. For I find, Council-Book.
that October. 2. a Letter was directed to Mr. Harley, Bill, Horn, Grindal, Pern
and Knox, to consider certain Articles (which must be these Articles of
Religion) exhibited to the King's Majesty, to be subscribed by all such as
shall be admitted to be Preachers or Ministers in any part of the Realm; and to
make report of their Opinions touching the same.

The Time of the Year declined now toward the latter end of November; and the
Archbishop being retired down from Croydon to his House at Ford near
Canterbury, the Privy Council, November. 20. dispatched, by a Messenger, the
Articles unto him to be reviewed, and for his last Hand, that they might be
presented before the Convocation, and allowed there; and so be published by the
Royal Authority. The Archbishop received the Book and Letter from the Council,
November. 23. And making some Notes upon it, enclosed them in a Letter to the
Lords, and sent them, together with the Book, the next day; beseeching them to
prevail with the King, that all Bishops should have Authority to cause their
respective Clergy to subscribe it: And then he trusted, (as he wrote) that such
a Concord and Quietness in Religion would soon follow, as otherwise would not
be in many Years. And thereby God would be glorified, the Truth advanced, and
their Lordships rewarded by him, as the setters forth of his true Word and
Gospel. No. LXIV.
This pious Letter may be read in the Appendix.

The King went a Progress this Summer; The ABp retires to Ford.
and the Archbishop retired to Croydon; where I find him in July, August and
September. And thence, October. 11. he went to Ford, to spend some time in his
Diocese. Now he was absent from the Court, and the King abroad at that
distance, that he could not frequently wait upon him, and be present at the
Council; his Enemies were at work to bring him into trouble, as we shall see by
and by.

CHAP. XXVIII. Persons nominated for Irish Bishoprics.
THERE were certain Bishoprics in Ireland about this time vacant; one whereof
was that of Armagh. Consulted with for fit Persons to fill the Irish See^.
And it was thought convenient to have them filled by Divines out of England.
In the Month of August the Archbishop was consulted with for this; that so by
the Influence of very wise and learned Men, and good Preachers, the Gospel
might be the better propagated in that dark Region. But because it was foreseen
to be difficult to procure any English Men, so endowed, to go over thither,
therefore Secretary Cecyl, being then with the King in his Progress, sent a
Letter to the Archbishop at Croyden, to nominate some worthy Persons for those
Preferments, and whom he thought would be willing to undertake them. He
returned him the Names of Four, viz. Mr. Whitehead of Hadley, Mr. Turner of
Canterbury, Sir Thomas Rosse and Sir Robert Wisdom. He said, He knew many
others in England that would be meet Persons for those Places, but very few
that would gladly be persuaded to go thither. For it seems the English were
never very fond of living in Ireland. But he added concerning these four which
he had named, That he thought, they being ordinarily called, for
Conscience Sake would not refuse to bestow the Talent committed unto them,
wheresoever it should please the King's Majesty to appoint them. He recommended
likewise a fifth Person for this Promotion, one Mr. I suppose this might be a
slip of the ABp's Pen or Memory, writing Whitacre for Goodacre, who afterward
was placed in that Irish See, and ha^ been Poynet 's Chaplain.
Whitacre, a wise and well-learned Man, (as he characters him) who was Chaplain
to the Bishop of Winchester [Poynet]. But he doubted whether he would be
persuaded to take it upon him.

Some Account of the four Divines nominated by him for the Archbishopric of
Armagh.

Mr. W^ithead.


It may not be amiss to make some enquiry who and what those Four
beforementioned Persons were.

Mr. Whithead was an Exile in Queen Mary's Reign, and Pastor of the English
Congregation at Frankford. And at the Conference in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's Government, he was one of the Nine Disputants on the Protestant
side, and one of the appointed Eight to revise the Service Book. The Writer of
the Troubles at Frankford mentions three, viz. Coverdale, Turner, and this
Whitehead; of whom he says, That they were the most ancient Preachers of the
Gospel, and the most ancient Fathers of this our Country; and that from their
Pens, as well as their Mouths, most of Queen Elizabeth's Divines and Bishops
first received the Light of the Gospel. Why Cranmer should style him VVhithead
of Hadley, I do not apprehend, seeing Dr. Rowland Tailor, his Chaplain, was now
Par^on of Hadley, who not long after was there burnt: And one Yeomans was
Taylor's Curat there, who also was afterward burnt at Norwich. But I suppose
this was some other Hadley.

Mr. Turner.
I find two about this Time bearing the Name of Turner; both eminent Men, and
Preachers: The one was named William Turner, a Doctor in Physic, and greatly
befriended by Sir John Cheke and Sir William Cecyl. This Man, a Native of
Northumberland, was the first English Man that compiled an Herbal; which was
the Groundwork of that which Gerard laid the last Hand unto. He was a Retainer
to the Duke of Somerset in Edward the Sixth's Time, and was Physician in
ordinary to his Family. And the Year before this, viz. 1551, I find him Dean of
Wells. The other was Richard Turner, a Staffordshire-Man, in former time Curate
of Chartam in Kent, and commonly called Turner of Canterbury, living in the
family of Mr. Morice, the Archbishop's Secretary, (of whom afterward) who
held the Impropriation of that Parsonage, and had presented this Man to the
Vicarage. For his free and bold preaching against Popish Errors, and asserting
the King's Supremacy, and for the extraordinary Success of his Ministry in
bringing Multitudes of People in those Parts, out of Ignorance and
Superstition, he was put to much Trouble and Danger. He was first complained of
to the King: And being brought up, the Archbishop, and other Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, were commanded to examine him upon certain Articles. But by the
secret Favor of the Archbishop, and his own prudent Answers, he was then
discharged. Soon after, upon some false Reports told of him, King Henry was so
offended, that he sent for the Archbishop, willing him to have him whipped out
of the Country. But the Archbishop pacified the King, and sent him Home the
second time. Afterward, a third time, his old Enemies, the Popish Clergy, got
him convented before the Privy Council, and committed for Doctrines preached by
him, before he came into Kent. The Archbishop being then down in his Diocese,
Turner was sent back to him with an Order to recant. To whom when his fast
Friend and Patron, Mr. Morice, had applied himself in his behalf, the
Archbishop himself, being now under some Cloud, dared not to interpose,
because, as he then said, it had been put into the King's Head, that he was the
great Favourer and Maintainer of all the Heretics in the Kingdom. Morice then,
that he might prevent this Recantation, if possible, which would have been such
a Reflection to the Doctrine he before had preached, addressed his Letters to Sir
Anthony Denny, Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber, and Sir William Butts, his
Physician, relating at large Turner's Cas^. And by their means the King became
better informed of the Man, and in fine commanded him to be retained as a
faithful Subject. This Story is at large related by Fox. And this, I judge, to
be that Turner, whom the Archbishop nominated for Ireland* having lived long
in his Diocese, and so well known to him; and whom he had, I suppose, removed
to Canterbury, to a Prebend, or some other Preferment there. Here he did this
remarkable and bold piece of Service* that when about three Years past the
Rebels were up in Kent, he then preached twice in the Camp near Canterbury: for
which the Rebels were going to hang him. But God preserved him. In Queen Mary's
time he fled to Basil; Bale's Cent.
where he expounded upon S. James, the Hebrews and the Ephesians, to the Exiles
there: when James Pilkington expounded Ecclesiastes, and both Epistles of of
Peter, and the Galatians; And Bentham, the Acts of the Apostles.

Thomas Rosse, or Rose, was also as memorable a Man; Thomas Rosse, or Rose.
very eminent both for his Preachings and Sufferings. He was a West-country
Man, but by Providence was removed into Suffolk. And at Hadley had preached
against Purgatory, and worshipping Images, about the time that Bilney and
Latimer did the like in Cambridg, (which was five and twenty or thirty Years
past:) whereby he had brought many to the knowledge of the Truth in that Town.
About the Year 1532, when certain Persons out of their Zeal against Idolatry,
had stolen by Night the Rood out of the Church at Dover-court in Essex, for
which being found guilty of Felony, they were hanged; Rose seemed to have been
privy hereunto; For with the Rood they conveyed away the Slippers, the Coat and
the Tapers belonging to it: which Coat Rose burnt. Whether for this, or some
other thing, he was complained of to the Council, and brought before them, and
by the Bishop of Lincoln was committed to Prison. Where he lay for some Days
and Nights with both his Legs in an high pair of Stocks, his Body lying along
on the Ground. Thence he was removed to Lambeth, in the Year that Cranmer was
Consecrated, (which was 1533) who set him at liberty. Afterward he was admitted
by Crumwel to be his Chaplain, that thereby he might get a License to preach.
After various tossings from Place to Place, for safety of his Life, he fled
into Flanders and Germany, and came to Zurick, and remained with Bullinger, and
to Basil, where he was entertained by Grineus. After some time he returned back
into England. But was glad to fly beyond Sea again. Three Years after in his
Voyage back to his own Country again, he was taken Prisoner by some French, and
carried into Diep, where he was spoiled of all he had. His Ransom was soon
after paid by a well-disposed Person, who also brought him over into England.
Then the Earl of Sussex received him, and his Wife and Child privately into his
House. But when this was known, the Earl sent him a secret Letter to be gone.
And so he lurked in London till the Death of King Henry VIII. King Edward gave
him the Living of VVest-Ham near London, in Essex. Being deprived upon Queen
Mary's coming to the Crown, he was sometime Preacher to a Congregation in
London. But was taken at one of their Meetings in Bow-Church-yard. Which I
suppose was in the Year 1555. For then he was in the Tower: and thence in the
Month of May, by the Council's Letters, he was delivered to the Sheriff of
Norfolk, to be conveyed and delivered to the Bishop of Norwich, and he either
to reduce him to recant, or to proceed against him according to Law. Much
Imprisonment and many Examinations he underwent, both from the Bishops of
Winchester and Norwich, but escaped at last, by a great Providence, beyond Sea,
where he tarried till the Death of Queen Mary. And after these his Harassings
up and down in the World, he was at last, in Queen Elizabeth's happy Reign,
quietly settled at Luton in Bedfordshire, where he was Preacher, and lived to a
very great Age.

Robert Wisdom.
The fourth was Robert Wisdom, a Man eminent, as the rest, both for his
exemplary Conversation, and for his Preaching, together with his Sufferings
attending thereon. In Henry the Eighth his Reign he was a Person of Fame among
the Professors of the Gospel in the South Parts of the Nation: whence, after
many painful Labors and Persecutions, he fled into the North: as did diverse
other Preachers of the pure Religion in those Times. There in Staffordshire he
was one of those, that were entertained by John Old, a pious Professor, and
Harbourer of good Men: and Thomas Becon was another, who was taken up with
Bradford in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, and committed to the Tower. Of
this Old the said Becon, in a The Jewel of Joy.
Treatise of his, printed in Edward the sixth his Reign, gives this Character.
That he was to him and Wisdom, as Jason was to Paul and Silas: He received us
joyfully into his House, and liberally for the Lord's Sake ministered to our
Necessities. And as he begun, so did he continue a right hearty Friend, and
dearly loving Brother, so long as we remained in the Country. They were both
forced to recant openly at St. Paul's Cross, in the Year 1544, together with one
Shingleton, And her^upon, I suppose, they conveyed themselves into the North
parts for Security.
While Wisdom was here, he was ever virtuously occupied, and suffered no Hour
to pass without some good Fruit: employing himself now in Writing, as he had
before in Preaching. Besides other Books formerly writ by him, he penned here a
very godly and fruitful Exposition upon certain Psalms of David. Of the which
he translated some into English Meter. There is one of them, and I think no
more, still remaining in our ordinary singing Psalms, namely, the hundred
twenty fifth. Which in the Title is said to be composed by R. W. There is also
a Hymn of his preserved and set usually at the end of our English singing
Psalms, in our Bibles, beginning, Preserve us Lord by thy dear Word. He writ
here also many godly and learned Sermons upon the Epistles and Gospels, read on
Sundays. He translated a Postil of Antonius Corvinus, a Lutheran Divine, and
diverse other Learned Men's Works. And some of his Adversaries, having laid
certain Errors to his Charge very unjustly, he writ a Confutation thereof; a
Book, it seems, replenished with all kind of godly Learning. These, and several
other things, he writ, while he was here, but they were not published. After
his abode in this Place some time, he was by Letters called away again among
his former Friends and Acquaintance. And what became of him afterward, I find
not, until here in Edward the Sixth's Reign, he was nominated by our
Archbishop, to be made Archbishop of Armagh. But in Queen Mary's Reign he
fled to Frankford, where he remained one of the Members of the English
Congregation there. And when an unhappy Breach was made there among them, some
being for the use of the Geneva Discipline and Form, and others for the
continuance of that Form of Prayers that had been used in England in K.
Edward's Days; and the Faction grew to that Head, that the former separated
themselves from the rest, and departed to Geneva: this Wisdom did, in a Sermon
preached at Frankford, vindicate the English Book, and somewhat sharply blamed
them that went away, calling them Mad-heads. As one Tho. Cole wrote from thence
to a Friend, with this Censure on him, That he so called them, he would not
say, Unwisely, [alluding to his name Wisdom] but he might well say,
Uncharitably.

I have thought good to give this Account of these Men, that we may perceive
hence the good Judgment of our Archbishop in propounding them for those Irish
Preferments; so fit and well qualified for them, as in other Respects of
Prudence and Learning, so especially for their tried Zeal and Boldness in
preaching the Gospel, and their Constancy in suffering for it; which were
Virtues that there would be great occasion for in Ireland.

Of all these Four, The Character the ABp gave of the two former.
our Archbishop judged Mr. Whithead the fittest; giving this Character of him,
That he was endued with good Knowledge, special Honesty, fervent Zeal, and
politic Wisdom. And the next to him in fitness he judged Turner; of whom he
gives this Relation, That he was Merry and Witty withal, Nihil appetit, nihil
ardet, nihil somniat, nisi Iesum Christum. And in the lively preaching of Him
and his Word, declared such Diligence, Faithfulness and Wisdom, as for the same
deserves much Commendation.

Turner designed for Armagh*
In fine, Turner was the Man concluded upon by the King, for the Archbishopric
of Armagh; Whithead either being not overcome to accept it, or otherwise
designed. And the Archbishop had Order from Court to send to Canterbury for
him to come up. Which accordingly he did. And now, about the middle of
September, much against his Will, as not liking his designed Preferment, Turner
waited upon the Archbishop. Who urging to him the King's Will and Pleasure,
and his ordinary Call unto this Place, and suchlike Arguments, after a great
Unwillingness, prevailed with him to accept it. But the Archbishop told the
Secretary, that Turner seemed more glad to go to hanging, (which the Rebels
three Years before were just going to do with him, for his preaching against
them in their Camp) than he was now to go to Armagh. He urged to the
Archbishop, That if he went thither, he should have no Auditors, but must
preach to the Walls and Stalls; for the People understood no English. The
Archbishop on the other hand endeavored to answer all his Objections. He told
him, They did understand English in Ireland; tho whether they did in the
Diocese of Armagh, he did indeed doubt. But to remedy that, he advised him to
learn the Irish Tongue; which with diligence he told him he might do in a Year
or two. And that there would this Advantage arise thereby, that both his Person
and Doctrine would be more acceptable, not only unto his Diocese, but also
throughout all Ireland. And so by a Letter to Secretary Cecyl, recommended him
to his Care; entreating, That he might have as ready a Dispatch as might be,
because he had but little Money.

But declines it.
This Letter of the Archbishop is dated Sept. 29, 1552. So that it must be a
Mistake in the late excellent Historian, when he writes, That Bale and Goodacre
were sent over into Ireland to be Bishops, in the Month of August. Hist. Ref.
Vol. 1. p. 205.
Which cannot agree with this Letter of Cranmer, which makes Turner to be in
nomination only for that See a Month after. And by certain Memorials of King
Edward's own Hand, which I have, it appears, that as Turner at last got himself
off from accepting that Bishopric, so by the Date thereof it is evident, it
was vacant in October following. For the King under that Month put the
providing for that Place, which Turner refused, among his Matters to be
remembered. The Archbishop's Letters concerning this Irish Affair are in the
Appendix. N.LXV, LXVI.


So that at last this Charge fell upon Hugh Goodacre, the last Man, as it
seems, Goodacre made ABpof Armagh.
nominated by the Archbishop; whom he termed A Wise and Learned Man. He and
Bale, as they came together out of Bishop Poynet's Family unto their
Preferments, so they were consecrated together by Brown Archbishop of Dublin,
Febr. 2. assisted by Thomas Bishop of Kildare, and Eugenius Bishop of Down and
Connor. Which makes me think they were not come over long before. Goodacre died
about a quarter of a Year after at Dublin, and there buried, not without
suspicion of Poison, by procurement of certain Priests of his Diocese, for
preaching God's Verity, and rebuking their common Vices, as Bale writes. He
left many Writings of great Value behind him, as the said Bale his dear Friend
relates; but none, as ever I heard of, published. As he was a sober and
virtuous Man, Vocation of John Bale. Beatae memoriae in Hibernia concionatorem
vigilantissimum, ac Theologica eloquentia non immerito commendatum. Balaei
Centur.
so he was particularly famed for his Preaching. He was at first, I suppose,
Chaplain to the Lady Elizabeth; at least to her he had been long known. And for
him, about the Year 1548, or 1549, she procured a License to preach from the
Protector; as appears by a Letter she wrote from Enfield to Mr. Cecyl, who then
attended on him. Of which Goodacre himself was the Bearer. Wherein she gave
this Testimony of him; That he had been of long time known unto her to be as
well of honest Conversation, and sober Living, as of sufficient Learning and
Judgment in the Scriptures, to preach the Word of God. The advancement whereof,
as she said, she so desired, that she wished there were many such to set forth
God's Glory. She desired him therefore, that as heretofore at her Request, he
had obtained License to preach for diverse other honest Men, so he would
recommend this Man's Case unto my Lord, and therewith procure for him the like
License as to the other had been granted.

And lastly, Letters from the Council to Ireland, recommending the Irish
Bishops.
that Goodacre and his Colleague Bale might find the better Countenance and
Authority, when they should exercise their Functions in that Country, the
Privy Council wrote two Letters to the Lord-Deputy and Council of Ireland; the
one dated October. 27. in commendation of Bale Bishop Elect of Ossory;
Council-Book.
and the other dated November. 4. in commendation of Goodacre Bishop Elect of
Armachan.

CHAP. XXIX. The Archbishop charged with Covetousness.
TO divert the King, after the loss of his Uncle, A Rumor gigen out, of the
ABp's Covetousness and Wealth.
whom he dearly loved, Northumberland took him in Progress in the Summer of
this Year. While he was in this Progress, some about his Person, that they
might the better make way for their Sacrilegious Designs, and to make the King
the more inclinable to lay Hands on the Episcopal Demeans, or at least to clip
and pare them, buzzed about the Court Rumors, how Rich the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the other Bishops were; and withal, how niggardly and unsutably
they lived to their great Incomes, laying up, and scraping together to enrich
themselves and their Posterities; whereby Hospitality was neglected, which was
especially required of them. Hereupon Sir William Cecyl the Secretary, who was
now with the King, Which Cecyl sends him word of.
and took notice of these Discourses, and saw well the malicious Tendency
thereof; (and moreover thought them perhaps in some measure to be true)
labored to hinder the ill Consequence: For he was ever a very great Favourer,
as of the Reformed Clergy, so of their Estate and Honors. This put him upon
writing a private Letter from Court to the Archbishop, desiring him favorably
to take a piece of good Counsel at his Hands, as he intended it innocently and
out of a good Mind, acquainting him with the Reports at the Court of his
Riches, and of his Covetousness; reminding him withal of that Passage of St.
Paul, They that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare; meaning
probably thereby, the Danger that he and the rest of his Brethren might expose
their Revenues to thereby. The ABp's Answer, for himself and the other Bishops.
The Archbishop seemed somewhat netled, and perceiving the ill Designs,
dispatched an Answer hereunto, giving a true Account of his own Condition, and
of the other Bishops as to temporal Things, and letting him understand, how
much the World was mistaken in him and the rest* That for himself he feared not
that Saying of St. Paul half so much as he did stark Beggary. That he took not
half so much Care for his Living, when he was a Scholar of Cambridg, as he did
at that present. For although he had now much more Revenue, yet, he said, he
had much more to do withal. That he had more Care now to live as an
Archbishop, than he had at that Time to live like a Scholar. That he had not
now so much as he had within ten Years past by an hundred and fifty Pounds of
certain Rent, besides Casualties. That he paid double for every thing he
bought. And that if a good Auditor had this Account, he should find no great
Surplusage to grow rich upon. And then as for the rest of the Bishops, he told
him, That they were all Beggars, but only one single He probably was Holgate
ABp of York.
Man of them: and yet he dared well say, that he was not very Rich. And that if
he knew any Bishop that were Covetous, he would surely admonish him. Entreating
the Secretary, that if he could inform him of any such, he would signify him,
and himself would advertise him, thinking he could do it better than the other.
Who seemed to have hinted his Mind to the Archbishop, that he intended to do
it. This Letter will be found among the rest in the Appendix. No. LXVII.


No doubt the Archbishop was thus large and earnest on this Subject to supply
the Secretary with Arguments to confute that malicious Talk at Court concerning
the Bishops, and to prevent the Mischiefs hatching against them.

This very Slander raised upon him to K. Henry.
Nor indeed was this the first time this Archbishop was thus slandered. For
some of his Enemies, diverse Years before, had charged him to his loving Master,
King Henry VIII. with Covetousness and ill Housekeeping. And the chief of
these, that raised this Report, was Sir Thomas Seimour. But the King made him
to convince himself, by sending him to Lambeth about Dinnertime upon some
pretended Message. Where his own Eyes saw, how the Archbishop lived in far
other sort than he had told the King, keeping great and noble Hospitality. So
that when he returned, he acknowledged to his Majesty, that he never saw so
honorable a Hall set in this Realm, besides his Majesty's, in all his Life,
with better Order, and so well furnished in each Degree. And the King then gave
this Testimony of him, Fox.
Ah good Man! all that he has, he spends in Housekeeping.

K. Henry promised him Lands.
For this Reason probably it was, as well as upon the account of his good
Service, and also of the Exchanges he was forced to make, that the said King
gave him a promise of a Grant of some Lands, and by a general Clause in his
Will signified as much; which was, That certain Persons should be considered.
Accordingly I find in the forementioned Manuscript-Book of Sales of King's
Lands, that Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury did, in the first Year of King
Edward VI. partly by Purchase, This promise performed by King Edward.
and partly by Exchange of other Lands, procure diverse Lands of the King. He
obtained the Rectory of VVhalley, Blackbourn and Rachdale in the County of
Lancaster, lately belonging to the Monastery or Abbey of VVhalley in the same
County; and diverse other Lands and Tenaments in the Counties of Lancaster,
Kent, Surrey, London, Bangor. And this partly in Consideration of King Henry
VIII. his Promise, and in performance of his Will; and partly in exchange for
the Manor and Park of Mayfield in the County of Sussex; and diverse other Lands
and Tenements in the Counties of Middlesex, Hertford, Kent, Buckingham and
York. This Purchase he made, I suppose, not for himself, but for his See. About
the same time he also bought of the King, His Purchases.
for the sum of five hundred and eighty Pounds eight Shillings and four Pence,
the Manor of Sleford in the County of Lincoln, and of Middleton-Cheny in the
County of Northampton, and diverse other Lands and Tenements in the said
Counties. He made another Purchase of the King the same Year, that is the first
of his Reign, for four hundred twenty nine Pounds, fourteen shillings and two
Pence, and for the fulfilling the last Will of the late King, and in
consideration of Services, as it is expressed in the said Book of Sales. This
Purchase was the Priory of Arthington in the County of York, and diverse other
Lands and Tenements in York, Nottingham and Kent. An Extract of which three
Purchases, exactly taken out of the said Book, with the Value of the Lands, and
the Rent reserved, and the Time of the Issues, and the Test of the Patent, I
have thought fit to insert in the Appendix: No. LXVIII.
which probably may not be unacceptable to curious Persons.

Which Purchases, when we consider, The Archbishopric fleeced by K. Henry.
we might be ready to make a stand, to resolve our selves, how the Archbishop
could represent his Condition so mean as he did in the Letter beforementioned,
as though he feared he should die a Beggar. But it will unriddle this, if we
think how the Archbishopric had been fleeced by King Henry VIII. in ten Years
before: insomuch that the Rents were less by an hundred and fifty Pounds per
Annum, than they were before; besides the loss of Fines, and other accidental
Benefits, as it is mentioned by the Archbishop in his Letter. Add those
extraordinary Expenses he was at in the maintenance of Divines and Scholars
Strangers, that were Exiles for Religion, and the Salaries, and Pensions, and
Gratuities sent to Learned Men abroad: besides his great and liberal
Housekeeping, and constant Table, and large Retinue.

But to make appear more particularly in this place, Lands past away to the
Crown by Exchange.
how K. Henry pared his Revenue, I will give one Instance of what was past away
at one clap by Exchange: which was indeed so considerable, that it was commonly
called The great Exchange. This way of exchanging Lands was much used in those
Times; wherein the Princes commonly made good Bargains for themselves, and ill
Ones for the Bishoprics. This Exchange made by Cranmer with the King, was on
the first day of December, in the twenty ninth Year of his Reign, being the
very Year of the Suppression of the greater Abbeys and Religious Convents. They
were the ancient Demeans belonging to the Archbishopric, consisting of many
noble Manors, whereof some had Palaces annexed to them. I shall name only those
that lay in the County of Kent, Villar^ Cantian.
as I find them dispersed in Philpot's Book of Kent.

I. The Manor and Palace of Maidstone: Which Palace L^land says, was once a
Castle.

II. The Manor and Palace of Charing.

III. Wingham.

IV. Wingham-B^rton, in the (...) of Alresford. But in this Philpot is
mistaken; for th^s was (...) Edward Bainton for ninety nine Years, by means of
the King'^ own Solicitation to the Archbishop.

V. Wrotham.

VI. Saltwood; that had in times past a magnificent Castle and Park; and many
Manors held of it by Knights Service; which made it called an Honor.

VII. Tenham.

VIII. Bexley.

IX. Aldington. Where was a Seat for the Archbishop, a Park, and a Chase for
Deer, called Aldington-Frith. Besides Clive or Cliff; and Malingden, a Manor
appendant thereunto: which King Henry took away from this See and Bishop,
without any Satisfaction, as far as I can find. Also Pynner, Heyes, Harrow,
Mortlake, etc. were part of this great Exchange. Lands made over to the
Archbishop.
In lieu of these Demeans past over to the Crown by way of Exchange, the King
conveyed several Manors to the Archbishop, all which had appertained to the
lately dissolved Religious Houses. Namely these among others: I. Pising; a
parcel of the Abbey of S. Radigunds. II. Brandred; another Manor belonging to
the said Abbey. III. The College of Bredgar. IV. Raculver; another Abbey
suppressed. V. Dudmanscomb; belonging to the Priory of S. Martins in Dover.


The Archbishop parted also with Knoll and Otford to the King.
One Author, viz. Kilburn, that has wrote of Kent, makes Cranmer also to have
made over to the King the sumptuous Palace of Otford, built by Archbishop
Warham, which cost him thirty three thousand Pounds (a vast Sum in those Days)
as Lambard tells us. Philpot, another Writer of that County, says, That this
was incorporated into the Revenue of the Crown by the Builder himself,
Archbishop Warham, about the twelfth Year of that King's Reign; together with
the Magnificent Seat of Knoll near Sevenoke; exchanging both with the King for
other Lands, to extinguish the Passions of such as looked with regret and
desire upon the Patrimony of the Church. MSS.C.C.C.C.
But it appears by a Writing of Cranmer's own Secretary, that this Archbishop
parted with both Otford and Knoll at once to the King, after he had possessed
them some Years, and not Warham, as Philpot mistakes.

What moved him to make these Exchanges.
The World is apt to blame Cranmer for parting with these Revenues of the Sea.
But surely it was a true Apology that the Author before-named, made for the
Archbishop's great Exchange, namely, Because he finding that the spreading
Demeans of the Church were in danger to be torn off by the Talons of Avarice
and Rapine, to mortify the growing Appetites of Sacrilegious Cormorants,
exchanged them with the Crown. Which may be enough to stop any Clamours against
this most Reverend Prelat for this his doing: Especially considering what I
shall add upon this Argument hereafter, from his own Secretary.

His Care and Concern for the Welfare of the English Church, His Cares and
Fears for the King.
made him ever most earnestly to love the King, and to have a very tender
Regard for the Safety of his Person. Who in the Summer of this Year, as was
hinted before, went a Progress, accompanied by the Duke of Northumberland;
brought about probably by him to get more into the King's Affections, and to
have his own Designs the better to take effect, and with the less Opposition
and Control: and possibly, that the King might be the further off from the
Archbishop to consult withal. But he had now a more especial Concern upon him
for his Majesty at this Time, as though his Mind had prophetically presaged
some Evil to befall the King in that Progress, (and indeed it was the last
Progress that ever he made). And so methinks do these Expressions of the
Archbishop sound, in a Letter dated in July, to Cecyl, then attending the
Court; Beseeching Almighty God to preserve the King's Majesty, with all his
Council and Family, and send him well to return from his Progress. And in a
Letter the next Month, He thanked Cecyl for his News; but especially, said he,
for that ye advertise me, that the King's Majesty is in good Health: Wherein I
beseech God long to continue his Highness. And when in the latter end of the
following Month, the Gests (that is, the Stages of his Majesty's Progress) were
altered, which looked like some ill Design, the Archbishop entreated Cecyl to
send him the new resolved-upon Gests from that time to the end, that he might
from time to time know where his Majesty was; adding his Prayer again for him,
That God would preserve and prosper him.

CHAP. XXX. His Care for the Vacancies. Falls Sick.
WHILE the King was thus abroad, His care for filling the Vacancies of the
Church.
and the Archbishop absent, unworthy or disaffected Men were in a fairer
probability of getting Promotions in the Church, while he was not at hand for
to nominate fit Men to the King, and to advise him in the bestowing the vacant
Dignities and Benefices. The Archbishop knew very well, how much Learning and
Sobriety contributed toward the bringing the Nation out of Popery, and that
nothing tended so effectually to continue it as the contrary. This Matter the
Archbishop seemed to have discoursed at large with Secretary Cecyl at parting.
Who therefore, by a Letter sent to the said Archbishop, then at his House at
Ford, desired him to send him up a Catalogue of Learned Men, and such as he
esteemed fit for Places of Preferment in the Church and University: that so as
any Place fell in the King's Gift, the said Secretary might be ready at the
least Warning to recommend fitting and worthy Men to supply such Vacancies, and
to prevent any Motion that might be made by any Courtiers or Simonists, for
ignorant Persons, or corrupt in Religion. In answer to which Letter, the
Archbishop writ him word, That he would send him his Mind in that Matter with
as much Expedition as he could. And undoubtedly we should have seen the good
Fruits of this afterward in the Church, had not the untimely Death of that
admirable Prince, that followed not long after, prevented this good Design.

Labored under an Ague this Autumn.
This Year the Archbishop labored under two Fits of Sickness at Croydon. The
latter was caused by a severe Ague; of which his Physicians doubted whether it
were a Quotidian, or a double- Tertian; and seizing him in the declining of the
Year, was in danger to stick by him all the Winter. But by the Care of his
Physicians, in the latter end of August, it had left him two Days, which made
him hope he was quit thereof; yet his Water kept of an high Color. That second
Day he wrote to Cecyl, and desired him to acquaint Cheke how it was with him.
And now the most Danger was, as he said, that if it came again that Night, it
was like to turn to a Quartan, a most stubborn Ague, and likelier to continue
and wear him out. A Disease indeed, that carried off his Successor, Cardinal
Pole, and was, as Godwin observed, a Disease deadly and mortal unto elder Folk.

The great Mortality of Agues about this Time.
The Archbishop's Friends had reason to fear his Distemper, if we think of the
Severity of Agues in that Age, greater, as it seems, than in this. Roger Ascham
complains to his Friend John Sturmius, Anno 1562; That for four Years past,
he was afflicted with continual Agues; that no sooner had one left him, but
another presently followed; and that the State of his Health was so impaired
and broke by them, that an Hectic Fever seized his whole Body: And the
Physicians promised him some Ease, but no solid Remedy. Stow's Chron.
And I find, six or seven Years before that, mention made of hot burning
Fevers, whereof died many old Persons; and that there died in the Year, 1556,
seven Aldermen within the space of ten Months. And the next Year, about
Harvest-time, the Quartan Agues continued in like manner, or more vehemently
than they had done the Year before; and they were chiefly mortal to old People,
and especially Priests: So that a great number of Parishes became destitute of
Curats, and none to be gotten; and much Corn was spoiled for lack of
Harvest-men. Such was the Nature of this Disease in these Days.

That which most concerned him in his Sickness.
But the Severity or Danger of the Archbishop's Distemper, did not so much
trouble him as certain Inconveniences that attended it, viz. That it put him
off from those pious and holy Designs that he was in hand with, for God's
Glory, and the Good of the Church. For so he expressed his Mind to his Friend the
Secretary; However the Matter chance, the most Grief to me is, that I cannot
proceed in such Matters as I have in hand, according to my Will and Desire.
This Terrenum Domicilium is such an Obstacle to all good Purposes. So strongly
bent was the Heart of this excellent Prelat to the serving of God and his
Church. But out of this Sickness he escaped; for God had reserved him for
another kind of Death to glorify him by.

A little before this Sickness befell him, The Secretary sends the Archbishop
the Copy of the Emperor's Pacification.
something fell out which gave him great Joy. Cecyl knew how welcome good News
out of Germany would be to him, and therefore in July sent him a Copy of the
Pacification; that is, the Emperor's Declaration of Peace throughout the
Empire, after long and bloody Wars; which consisted of such Articles as were
favorable unto the Protestants, after much persecution of them: As, that a
Diet of the Empire should shortly be summoned, to deliberate about composing
the Differences of Religion, and that the Dissensions about Religion should be
composed by placid and pious and easy Methods. And that in the mean time all
should live in Peace together, and none should be molested for Religion; with
diverse other Matters. And in another Letter soon after, Vid. Sl^id. Lib. 24.
the said Cecyl advised him of a Peace concluded between the Emperor and
Maurice Elector of Saxony, a warlike Prince, and who headed the Protestant
Army. Which being News of Peace among Christians, was highly acceptable to the
good Father. But he wanted much to know upon what Terms, out of the Concern he
had that it might go well with the Protestant Interest. And therefore Cecyl
having not mentioned them, the Archbishop earnestly, in a Letter to him,
desired to know whether the Peace were according to the Articles, meaning those
of the Pacification, or otherwise. Which when he understood, (for upon the same
Articles that Peace between the Emperor and Duke Maurice stood) it created a
great Tranquillity to his pious Mind. Thus were his Thoughts employed about the
Matters of Germany, and the Cause of Religion there: Which he rejoiced not a
little to see in so fair a way to a good Conclusion.

CHAP. XXXI. His Kindness for Germany.
TO this Country he had a particular Kindness; His Kindness for Germany.
not only because he had been formerly there in quality of Ambassador from his
Master King Henry, and had contracted a great Friendship with many eminent
Learned Men there, and a near Relation to some of them by marrying Osiander's
Niece at Norinberg; but chiefly and above all, because here the Light of the
Gospel began first to break forth and display it self, to the spiritual Comfort
and Benefit of other Nations. He had many Exhibitioners in those Parts, to whom
he allowed Annual Salaries: Insomuch that some of his Officers grumbled at it,
as though his Housekeeping were abridged by it. For when once in King Henry's
Reign, one in discourse with an Officer of his Grace, had said, He wondered his
Lordship kept no better an House, (though he kept a very good one): He
answered, It was no wonder, for my Lord, said he, has so many Exhibitions in
Germany, that all is too little to scrape and get to send thither.

His Correspondence with Germany,
He held at least a monthly Correspondence to, and from Learned Germans: and
there was one in Canterbury, appointed by him on purpose to receive and convey
the Letters. Which his Enemies once, in his Troubles, made use of as an Article
against him. And Gardener, a Prebend of Canterbury, and preferred by the
Archbishop, of this very thing treacherously, in a secret Letter, informed his
grand Enemy and Competitor, Gardener the Bishop of Winton.

And with Herman Archbishop of Colen.
Among the rest of his Correspondents in Germany, Herman, the memorable and
ever-famous Archbishop and Elector of Colen, was one; who by the Counsel and
Direction of Bucer and Melancthon, did vigorously labor a Reformation of
corrupt Religion within his Province and Territories. But finding the
Opposition against him so great, and lying under the Excommunication of the
Pope for what he had done; and being deprived thereupon by the Emperor of his
Lands and Function, he resigned his Ecclesiastical Honor, and betook himself
to a retired Life: which was done about the Year 1547. But no question, in this
private Capacity, he was not idle in doing what Service he could for the good
of that Cause which he had so generously and publicly espoused, and for which
he had suffered so much. I find, that in this Year 1552, our Archbishop had
sent a Message to Secretary Cecyl, who accompanied the King in this Summer's
Progress, desiring him to be mindful of the Bishop of Colen's Letters. And in
another Letter, dated July 21, he thanked the Secretary for the good
remembrance he had thereof. What the Contents of these Letters of the
Archbishop of Colen were, it appears not: But I am very apt to think the
Purport of them was, that Cranmer would solicit some certain Business in the
English Court, relating to the Affairs of Religion in Germany, and for the
obtaining some Favor from the King in that Cause. But the King being now
abroad, and the Archbishop at a distance from him, he procured the Secretary,
who was ever cordial to the State of Religion, to solicit that Archbishop's
Business for him; sending him withal that Archbishop's Letters for his better
Instruction.

And this, whatever it was, seems to have been the last good Office that
Archbishop Herman did to the Cause of Religion; for he died, according to
Sleidan, in the Month of August; and our Archbishop's Letter, wherein that
Elector's Letters are mentioned, were writ but the Month before.

The Sutableness of both these Archbishops Dispositions.
And if one may judge of Men's commencing Friendship and Love, according to the
sutableness of their Tempers and Dispositions, our Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Archbishop of Colen, must have been very intimate Friends. It was said
of this Man, that he often wished, That either he might be instrumental to the
propagating the Evangelical Doctrine and Reformation of the Churches under his
Jurisdiction, or to live a private Life. And when his Friends had often told
him, what Envy he would draw upon himself by the changing of Religion, he would
answer, like a true Christian Philosopher, That nothing could happen to him
unexpectedly, and that he had long since fortified his Mind against every
Event. These two Passages spoke the very Spirit and Soul of Cranmer. Which they
may see that are minded to read what Fox says of him, as to his Undauntedness
and Constancy in the maintaining of the Truth, against the many Temptations and
Dangers that he met with during these three Reigns successively.

And lastly, Their diligence in Reforming.
as our Archbishop devoted himself wholly to the reforming of his Church; so
admirable was the Diligence, Pains and Study this Archbishop took in
contriving the Reformation of his. He procured a Book to be writ concerning it,
called Instauratio Ecclesiarum, which contained the Form and Way to be used for
the redressing the Errors and Corruptions of his Church. It was composed by
those great German Divines, Bucer and Melancthon; which Book was put into
English, and published here as a good Pattern, in the Year 1547. This Book he
intended to issue forth through his Jurisdiction, by his Authority to be
observed. But first he thought fit well and seriously to examine it: and spent
five Hours in the Morning for five Days, to deliberate and consult thereupon:
Calling to him to advise withal in this great Affair, his Coadjutor Count
Stolberg, Husman, Ienep, Bucer and Melancthon. He caused the whole Work to be
read before him; and as many Places occurred, wherein he seemed less satisfied,
he caused the Matter to be disputed and argued, and then spoke his own Mind
accurately. He would patiently hear the Opinions of others, for the information
of his own Judgment; and so ordered things to be either changed or illustrated.
And so dexterously would he decide many Controversies arising, that Melancthon
thought that those great Points of Religion had been long weighed and
considered by him, and that he rightly understood the whole Doctrine of the
Church. He had always lying by him the Bible of Luther's Version; and as
Testimonies chanced to be alleged thence, he commanded that they should be
turned to, that he might consider that which is the Fountain of all Truth.
Insomuch that the said Melancthon could not but admire, and talk of his
Learning, Prudence, Piety and Dexterity, to such as he conversed with; and
particularly to John Caesar, Mel. Epist. Printed at Leyden, 1647. Page 34.
to whom in a Letter he gave a particular Account of this Affair. And it is to
be noted by the way, that the said Book, according to which the Reformation was
to be modelled, contained only, as Melancthon in his Letter suggested, a
necessary Instruction for all Children, and the Sum of the Christian Doctrine;
and the Appointments for the Colleges and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy were very
moderate; the Form of the Ecclesiastical Polity being to remain as it was, and
so were the Colleges, with their Dignities, Wealth, Degrees, Ornaments
thereunto belonging; only great Superstitions should be taken away. Nec aliam
video, nisi hanc unam, ut retineant Episcopi and Collegia s^a (...), and suas
opes, and recipiant doctrinam piam. Ubi supra.
Which the wise Melancthon aforesaid did so approve of, that he professed he
had often propounded it in Diets of the German Nation, as the best way to
Peace. And this I add, that it might be observed how Archbishop Cranmer went
by the same Measures in the Reformation of the Church of England; maintaining
the Hierarchy, and the Revenues, Dignities and Customs of it, against many in
those Times that were for the utter abolishing them, as Relics of Popery. Such
a Correspondence there was between our Archbishop, and the wisest, moderatest
and most learned Divines of Germany. But let us look nearer Home.

CHAP. XXXII. Troubles of Bishop Tonstal.
AS the last Year we heard of the Deprivation of two Popish Bishops, The
Troubles of Bp Tonstol.
so this Year another underwent the like Censure, I mean Tonstal Bishop of
Durham; whose Business I shall the rather relate, because our Archbishop had
some Concern in it. September. 21. A Commission was issued out to the Lord Chief
Justice and his Colleagues, MS. of an old Council-Book.
to examine and determine the Cause of Tonstal Bishop of Durham, and eight
Writings touching the same; which he is willed to consider, and to proceed to
the hearing and ordering of the Matter, as soon as he may get the rest of his
Colleagues to him. It was not long after, viz. about the midst of October, that
this Bishop by these Commissioners (whose Names, besides the Chief Justice, do
not occur) was deprived, and his Estate confiscated. October. ult. Sir John Mason
was ordered by the Council to deliver, to the use of Dr. Tonstal, (so he is now
styled) remaining Prisoner in the Tower, such Money as should serve for his
Necessities, until such time as further Order shall be taken touching his Goods
and Money lately appertaining to him. December. 6. It was agreed by the Council,
that Dr. Tonstal, late Bishop of Durham, should have the Liberty of the Tower:
where he continued till the Time of Queen Mary.

The Cause of this Bp's Punishment.
But we will look back to learn for what Cause this severe Punishment was
inflicted upon this Reverend grave Bishop, and the rather, because the Bp of
Sarum could not find, as he writes, what the Particulars were. In the Year
1550, a Conspiracy was hatching in the North, to which the Bishop was privy at
least, if not an Abetter. And he wrote to one Menvile in those Parts relating
to the same. This Menvile himself related unto the Council, and produced the
Bishop's Letter. Which was afterward, by the Duke of Somerset, withdrawn and
concealed, as it seems, out of kindness to Tonstal. But upon the Duke's
Troubles, when his Cabinet was searched, this Letter was found: Upon which they
proceeded against Tonstal. This is the sum of what is found in the
Council-Book. Viz. May 20. 1551. The Bishop of Durham is commanded to keep his
House. Aug. 2. He had license to walk in the Fields. December. 20. Whereas the
Bishop of Durham, about July 1550, was charged by Vivian Menvile, to have
consented to a Conspiracy in the North, for the making a Rebellion; and
whereas, for want of a Letter written by the said Bishop to the said Menvile,
(whereupon great trial of this Matter depended) the final Determination of the
Matter could not be proceeded unto, and the Bishop only commanded to keep his
House; the same Letter has of late been found in a Casket of the Duke of
Somerset's after his last Apprehension. The said Bishop was sent for, and this
Day appeared before the Council, and was charged with the Letter, which he
could not deny but to be his own Handwriting: and having little to say for
himself, he was then sent to the Tower, there to abide till he should be
delivered by Process of Law* Agreeable to this is that King Edward writes in
his Journal. December. 20. The Bishop of Durham was, for concealment of Treason
written to him, and not disclosed, sent to the Tower.

In the latter end of the Year 1551, a Parliament sitting, A Bill in Parliament
to attaint Tonstal.
it was thought convenient to bring in a Bill into the House of Lords,
attainting him for Misprision of Treason. But Archbishop Cranmer spoke freely
against it, not satisfied it seems with the Charge laid against him. But it
past, and the Archbishop protested. But when it was carried down to the
Commons, they would not proceed upon it, not satisfied with the bare
Depositions of Evidences, but required that the Accusers might be brought Face
to Face: And so it went no further. But when the Parliament would not do
Tonstal's Business, a Commission was issued out to do it, as is above spoken.

In the mean time, The Care of the Diocese committed to the Dean.
that the Bishopric might not want a due Care taken of it, during the Bishop's
Restraint, Feb. 18. 1551, a Letter was sent from the Council to the
Prebendaries of Durham, to conform themselves to such Orders in Religion and
Divine Service, standing with the King's Proceedings, as their Dean, Mr. Horn,
shall set forth, whom the Lords required them to receive and use well, as being
sent to them for the Weal of the Country by his Majesty.

CHAP. XXXIII. The new Common Prayer. The Archbishop in Kent.
THE Book of Common Prayer having the last Year been carefully Revised and
Corrected by the Archbishop and others, The new Common Prayer began to be used.
the Parliament in April this Year enacted, that it should begin to be used
every where at All Saints Day next. And accordingly the Book was printed
against the Time, and began to be read in S. Paul's Church, and the like
throughout the whole City. But because the Posture of Kneeling was excepted
against by some, and the words used by the Priest to the Communicant, at the
reception of the Bread, gave Scruple, as though the Adoration of the Host were
intended: therefore to take off this, and to declare the contrary to be the
Doctrine of this Church, October. 27. a Letter was sent from the Council to the
Lord-Chancellor, to cause to be joined to the Book of Common Prayer lately set
forth, a Declaration signed by the King, touching the Kneeling at the receiving
of the Communion. Which in all probability was done by the Motion of the
Archbishop, who in his late Book had taken such pains to confute the
Adoration; and now thought it necessary, that some public Declaration should
be made in the Church Service against it. So now the first of November being
come, Dr. Ridley, the Bishop of London, was the first that celebrated the new
Service in S. Paul's Church; Stow's Chron.
which he did in the Forenoon: And then in his Rochet only, without Cope or
Vestment, preached in the Choir. And in the Afternoon he preached at
Pauls-Cross, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and Citizens present. His Sermon
tended to the setting forth this new Edition of the Common Prayer. He continued
preaching till almost five a Clock; so that the Mayor and the rest went home by
Torch-light. By this Book of Common Prayer, all Copes and Vestments were
forbidden throughout England. The Prebendaries of St. Paul's left off their
Hoods, and the Bishops their Crosses, etc. as by Act of Parliament is more at
large set forth.

Provision also was made for the King's French Dominions, that this Book, This
Book put into French for the King's French Subjects.
with the Amendments, should be used there. And the Bishop of Ely, Lord
Chancellor (a great forwarder of good Reformation) procured a learned
Frenchman, who was a Doctor of Divinity, carefully to correct the former
French Book by this English new One, in all the Alterations, Additions and
Omissions thereof. For the first Common Prayer Book also was in French, for the
use of the King's French Subjects: Being translated by Commandment of Sir Hugh
Paulet, Governor of Calais: And that Translation, overseen by the Lord
Chancellor, and others at his Appointment. The Benefit of this last Book was
such, that one of the French Congregation in London sought, by the Means of A
Lasco's Interest with Secretary Cecyl, for a License under the King's Letters
Patents, to translate this Common Prayer, and the Administration of Sacraments,
and to print it, for the use of the French Islands of Iersey and Guernsey. But
Cecyl, after a Letter received from A Lasco in August to that effect, not
willing to do this of his own Head, and reckoning it a proper Matter to be
considered by the Archbishop, who were to be entrusted with the translating of
such a Book, desired him, being now at Ford, to give him his Advice and
Judgment herein, both as to the Work and as to the Benefit. To whom the
Archbishop gave this Answer; That the Commodity that might arise by printing
of the Book, was meet to come to them who had already taken the Pains in
translating the same. Enforming the Secretary who they were; namely those
formerly, and now of late employed by Sir Hugh Paulet, and the Lord-Chancellor.
But I find this Book was not presently finished, being not printed till the
Year 1553, for the Use of Iersey and Guernsey.

The Age still vicious.
Notwithstanding this cleansing of the Church from Superstition and Idolatry,
and bringing in the Knowledge of the Gospel, by the Archbishop's constant Pains
and Study, the People generally, even the Professors themselves, were bad
enough as to their Morals; and Religion had yet got but little hold of them. A
clear sight of the Behavior of these Times may be seen by what Tho. Becon,
Iew^l of Joy.
a Chaplain of Cranmer's, writ in his Preface to a Book put forth in those
Days: What a number of falls Christians lyve there at this present day, unto the
exceeding dishonor of the Christen Profession, which with their Mouth confess
that they know God, but with their Deeds they utterly deny him, and are
abominable, disobedient to the Word of God, and utterlye estranged from al
good Works? What a swarm of gross Gospellers have we also among us, which can
prattle of the Gospel very fynely, talk much of the Justification of Faith,
crake very stoutly of the free remissyon of all their Sins by Christ's Blood,
avaunce themselves to be of the Number of those, which are predestinate unto
Eternal Glory? But how far do their Life differ from al true Christianity?
They are puffed up with all kind of Pride: they swel with all kind of Envy,
Malice, Hatred and Enmity against their Neghbour, they brenne with
unquencheable Lusts of Carnal Concupiscence, they walowe and tumble in all kind
of beastly Pleasures: their gredy covetous Affects are insatiable: thenlarging
of their Lordshipps, thencreasyng of their Substance, the scrapyng together of
their Worldly Possessions infynite, and knows no End. In fine, all their
Endeavors tend unto this End, to show themselves very Ethnycks, and utterly
estraunged from God in their Conversation, although in Words they otherwise
pretend. As for their Almes-Dedes, their Praying, their Watchyng, their
Fasting, and such other Godly Exercises of the Spirit, they are utterly
banished from these rude and gross Gospellers. All their Religion consists in
Words and Disputations, in Christen Acts and Godly Deeds nothing at all. These
evil Manners of the Professors themselves, looked with so sad a Face, that it
made the best Men assuredly expect a Change and woeful Times to follow.

September. 27. A new Sect in Kent.
A Letter was sent from the Council to the Archbishop, to examine a Sect newly
sprung up in Kent. Whereof there was now a Book of Examinations sent him:
Council-Book.
and to commune with a Man and a Woman (the Informers) bearers of the Letter,
who could inform him somewhat of the Matter. And to take such order in the same
according to the Commission, that these Errors might not be suffered thus to
overspread the King's Faithful Subjects. What this Sect was appears not. The
Anabaptists were taken notice of, and a Commission issued out against them some
Years before. These were Sectaries more new, and whereof the Council very
lately was informed. It may be they were of the Family of Love, or David George
his Sect, who made himself some-time Christ, and some-time the Holy Ghost. For
a little before these Times, diverse Sects sprang up under the Profession of the
Gospel, in High and Low- Germany; some whereof dispersed themselves into
England. Which Sects began to do so much hurt to the Reformation among us, that
the Author beforementioned, laments it in these words: What wicked and ungodly
Opinions are there sown nowadays of the Anabaptists, Davidians, Libertines,
and such other pestilent Sects, in the Hearts of the People, unto the great
Disquietness of Christ's Church, moving rather unto Sedition, than unto pure
Religion; unto Heresy, than unto things Godly?

The examination of this new Sect, was one of the Businesses the Archbishop
was employed in, The ABp's Business in Kent.
while he was in his Retirement at his House near Canterbury. Another was, the
sitting upon a Commission to him and other Gentlemen of Kent, for enquiry after
such as had embezelled the Plate and Goods belonging to Chauntries, etc. given
by the Parliament to the King, and converting them to their own uses. But this
being somewhat an odious Work, he was not very forward to enter upon,
especially because he thought, whatsoever he and the other Commissioners should
recover, would be but swallowed up by the Duke of Northumberland and his
Friends, and the King be little the better. But because he did not make more
haste, he was charged by his Enemies at Court as a neglecter of the King's
Business. Which cost him a Letter in excuse of himself to the said Duke:
signifying, that he omitted this Business a while till the Gentlemen and
Justices of Peace of Kent, who where then mostly at London, were come home.

A Letter for Installing Bishop Hoper. Council-Book.
December. 2. A Letter was sent from the Council to the Archbishop, to grant out
a Warrant. Ad Installandum, for the Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, without
paying any Fees for the same, because he paid Fees for another Mandate, which
served to no purpose.

The Vicar of Beden.
Febr. 20. An Order was sent to the Archbishop from the Council to examine the
Vicar of Beden in the County of Berks, according to an Information enclosed,
Council-Book.
and to advertise the Lords of his Proceedings therein. What this Vicar's Crime
was I know not; but I observe about these Times the Priests and Curats were
very busy Men, and would take liberty, sometimes to speak against the King's
Proceedings, or his Archbishop, with bitterness enough, and sometimes to vent
fond Opinions, so that oftentimes they were fetched up to the Council Board;
and after an Appearance or two, referred to the Archbishop to examine and
punish: as being Matters relating to Religion; and so proper for his Cognizance.

Sampson and Knox.
About the latter end of this Year, Thomas Sampson was preferred to the Deanery
of Chichester, having been Parson of Alhallowes-Bredstreet, London. February
the 2 d, A Letter was sent from the Privy Council to the Archbishop, to bestow
the said Living upon Mr. Knox, who was one of the King's Chaplains, and in good
esteem in the Court for his Gift of Preaching.

The Council favor Knox. Collect. Vol. 2. p. 42.
This Knox was the Man, whose Name was so dashed in the King's Journal, where
the Names of the King's six Chaplains were inserted, that Bishop Burnet could
not read it. The Council bare a great favor to him, as appears by those
several Letters they wrote in his behalf. One was mentioned before, sent to the
Archbishop for a Living in London; but in that Knox succeeded not, the
Archbishop preferring Laurence Saunders (afterward a Martyr) thereunto. Knox,
being sent this Year into the North, one of the King's Itinerary Preachers,
Council-Book.
a Warrant, dated October. 27, was granted from the Council to four Gentlemen, to
pay to him his Majesty's Preacher in the North (so he is styled) forty Pounds,
as his Majesty's Reward. And again December. 9, a Letter was sent from the
Council to the Lord Wharton (who was Lord Warden in the Northern Borders) in
commendation of Mr. Knox. And the next Year, viz. 1553, being returned out of
the North, and being then in Buckinghamshire, that he might find the more
acceptance and respect there, the Council wrote a Letter to the great Men in
those Parts, viz. the Lord Russel, Lord Windsor, to the Justices of the Peace,
and the rest of the Gentlemen within that County, in favor of the said Knox
the Preacher.

A Bishop Consecrated.
June 26. John Tailor, S. Th. P. Dean of Lincoln, John Tailor.
a Learned and Pious Man, was Consecrated Bishop of Lincoln at Croyden-Chappel,
by the Archbishop, assisted by Nicolas Bishop of London, and John Bishop of
Rochester.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Catechism. The Archbishop opposes the Exclusion of the Lady
Mary.
WE are now come to the last Year of good K. Edward's Reign: An. 1553.
when the Archbishop was as commonly at the Council, as he used to be before.
For the Counselors made great use of him, Great use made of the ABp at Council.
and did not use to conclude any thing in matters relating to the Church
without him. And if he came not, they often sent for him: and once the last
Year, in October, when he had fixed his Day of going into Kent, they stayed him
for some Days, that they might confer with him about some certain Matter; I
suppose, relating to the Articles of Religion, that were then under their
Hands. To look no further than the latter end of the last Year; He was at
Council at Westminster in February, and this Year, in March and April. And the
Court being at Greenwich, where the King lay sick, and died, the Archbishop
was there at Council in June: but not after the eighth Day. The reason he came
no more, we may well conjecture to be, because he did no ways like the Methods
that were now taking by Northumberland, to bring the Crown into his own Family,
and disenherit the King's Sisters. For soon after, viz. June 11. The Lord Chief
Justice Mountagne, and some other Judges, with the King's Attorney and
Solicitor, were sent for to the Council to consult about drawing up the
Instrument.

On one of these Council-Days, The Articles of Religion enjoined by the King's
Authority.
he procured the King's Letters in behalf of the Book of Articles, which he had
taken such Pains about the two last Years, both in composing and in bringing to
effect. The King had before given order to the Archbishop by his Letters, to
put forth these Articles. And now they were put forth, he procured the King's
Letters also to his own Officers, for to see the Clergy of his Diocese to
subscribe thereunto. So the King's Letters were directed to the Official of the
Court of Canterbury, and the Dean of the Deanery of the Arches, and to their
Surrogates, Deputies, Cran. Regist.
etc. Setting forth, That whereas he had given order unto Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, in Letters sealed with his Signet, for the Honor of God, and to
take away Dissension of Opinion, and confirm Consent of true Religion, that he
should expound, publish, denounce, and signify some Articles and other things,
breathing the right Faith of Christ, for the Clergy and People within his
Jurisdiction, the King therefore enjoined them, the Archbishop's Officers, An.
1553.
that they should cause all Rectors, Vicars, Priests, Stipendiaries,
Schoolmasters, and all that had any Ecclesiastical Employment, to appear in
Person before the Archbishop in his Hall at Lambeth, there further to obey and
do on the King's part, according as it shall be signified, and to receive
according to Reason, and the Office owing to the King's Royal Dignity. And in
obedience hereunto, the Official, John Gibbon, LL. D. Commissary of the Deanery
of the Blessed Virgin of the Arches, signified by an Instrument, dated June 2,
to the Archbishop, that he had cited the Clergy. I do not find the success of
this; only that the City-Clergy made their appearance before the Archbishop at
Lambeth: and that he did his endeavor by Persuasion and Argument to bring them
to subscribe: Which no question very few refused. But this Matter afterward
served Q. Mary's Commissioners, for one of their Interrogatories to be put to
the Archbishop, as though he had compelled many against their Wills to
subscribe. Which he denied, saying, He compelled none, but exhorted such to
subscribe as were willing first to do it, before they did it.

In the Month of May, the King by his Letters Patents commanded a Latin
Catechism to be taught by Schoolmasters to their Scholars. It was entitled,
The Catechism for Schools.
Catechismus brevis, Christianae disciplinae summam continens. The King in his
Letters, dated May 20. said, It was made by a certain Pious and Learned Man,
and presented to him; and that he committed the diligent examination of it to
certain Bishops and other Learned Men, whose Judgment was of great Authority
with him. The same Bishops and Learned Men, I suppose, that were framing and
preparing the Articles of Religion the last Year. The Author of this Catechism
is not certainly known. Some conjecture him to be Ponet, the Bishop of
Winchester. The Learned Dr. Ward, one of the English Divines sent to the Synod
of Dort, having this Catechism in his Library, (now in the possession of a
Friend of mine) wrote therein these words, Aro Nllo autore, siquid ego divinare
possum. Meaning probably Alexander Nowel, who was now, if I mistake not,
Schoolmaster of Westminster, and afterward Dean of S. Paul's. But whosoever
was the Author, the Archbishop we may conclude to be the furtherer and
recommender of it unto the King: it being that Prelate's great Design, by
Catechisms, and Articles of Religion, and plain Expositions of the
Fundamentals, to instill right Principles into the Minds of the Youth and common
People, for the more effectual rooting out Popery, that had been so long
entertained by the industrious nurselling up the Nation in Ignorance.

A Catechism set forth by the Synod.
There was a Catechism that came forth about this time, (whether it were this or
another, I cannot say) allowed by the Synod, or Convocation. In the beginning
of Q. Mary, the Popish Divines made a great stir about this Catechism, and
thought they had a great Advantage against it, because it was put forth as from
the Synod, whereas that Synod knew nothing of it. Whereupon Wes^on the
Prolocutor in Q. Mary's first Convocation, brought a Bill into the House,
declaring that Catechism, being Pestiferous and full of Heresies, to be foisted
upon the last Synod fraudulently, and therefore that the present Synod disowned
it. To which he set his own hand, and propounded that all the House should do
the like: Which all but six consented to. One whereof was Philpot, Archdeacon
of Winchester, who stood up, and told them in justification of those that
published the said Catechism, that the Synod, under K. Edward, had granted to
certain Persons, to be appointed by the King, to make Ecclesiastical Laws. And
whatsoever Ecclesiastical Laws they or the most part of them did set forth,
according to a Statute in that behalf provided, might well be said to be done
by the Synod of London; although such as were of the House then had no notice
thereof before the Promulgation. And therefore in this Point he thought the
setters forth of the Catechism had nothing slandered the House, since they had
that Synodal Authority unto them committed. And moreover he desired the
Prolocutor would be a Means unto the Lords, that some of those that were
Learned, and the publishers of this Book, might be brought into the House, to
show their Learning that moved them to set forth the same; and that Dr. Ridley
and Rogers, Fox.
and two or three more might be Licensed to be present at this Disputation, and
be associate with them. But this would not be allowed.

The last thing we hear of concerning our Archbishop in this King's Reign, The
ABp opposes the new Settlement of the Crown.
was his denial to comply with the new Settlement of the Crown, devised and
carried on by the domineering Duke of Northumberland, for the Succession of
Jane, Daughter to Gray, Duke of Suffolk, whom he had married to one of his
Sons. This he did both oppose, and when he could not hinder, refused to have
any hand in it. First, he did his endeavor to stop this Act of the King. He
took the boldness to argue much with the King about it once, when the Marquess
of Northampton, and the Lord Darcy, Lord Chamberlain, were present. And
moreover, he signified his desire to speak with the King alone, that so he
might be more free and large with him. But that would not be suffered: But if
it had, he thought he should have brought off the King from his Purpose, as he
said afterward. But for what he had said to the King, the Duke of
Northumberland soon after told him at the Council Table, That it became him not
to speak to the King, as he had done, when he went about to dissuade him from
his Will. To the Council the Archbishop urged the entailing of the Crown by K.
Henry upon his two Daughters, and used many grave and pithy Reasons to them for
the Lady Mary's Legitimation, when they argued against it. But the Council,
replied, That it was the Opinion of the Judges, and the King's Learned Counsel
in the Law, that that Entailing could not be prejudicial unto the King; and
that he being in possession of the Crown, might dispose of it as he would. This
seemed strange unto the Archbishop. Yet considering it was the Judgment of the
Lawyers, and he himself unlearned in the Law, he thought it not seemly to
oppose this Matter further. But he refused to sign: Till the King himself
required him to set his Hand to his Will, and saying, That he hoped, he alone
would not stand out, and be more repugnant to his Will than all the rest of the
Council were. Which words made a great Impression upon the Archbishop's tender
Heart, and grieved him very sore, out of the dear Love he had to that King, and
so he subscribed. And when he did it, he did it unfeignedly. All this he wrote
unto Queen Mary.

Denies before the Council to subscribe to the Exclusion of the Lady Mary.
Foxii MSS.
To which I will add what I meet with in one of my Manuscripts. When the Council
and the chief Judges had set their Hands to the King's Will, last of all they
sent for the Archbishop [who had all this while stood off;] requiring him also
to subscribe the same Will, as they had done. Who answered, That he might not
without Perjury. For so much as he was before sworn to my Lady Mary by King
Henry's Will. To whom the Council answered, That they had Consciences as well
as he; and were also as well sworn to the King's Will as he was. The
Archbishop answered, I am not judge over any Man's Conscience, but mine own
only. For as I will not condemn their Fact, no more will I stay my Fact upon
your Conscience, seeing that every Man shall answer to God for his own Deeds,
and not for other Men's. And so he refused to subscribe, till he had spoken with
the King herein. And being with the King, he told the Abp, that the Judges had
informed him, that he might lawfully bequeath his Crown to the Lady Jane, and
his Subjects receive her as Queen, notwithstanding their former Oath to King
Henry's Will. Then the Archbishop desired the King, that he might first speak
with the Judges: Which the King gently granted. And he spoke with so many of
them, as were at that time at the Court, and with the King's Attorney also: Who
all agreed in one, that he might lawfully subscribe to the King's Will by the
Laws of the Realm. Whereupon he returning to the King, by his Commandment
granted at last to set his Hand. Sets his Hand.


The ABp ingratefully dealt with.
From the whole Relation of this Affair we may note as the Honesty, so the
Stoutness and Courage of the Archbishop, in the management of himself in this
Cause against Northumberland, who hated him, and had of a long time sought his
Ruin: and the Ingratitude of Q. Mary, or at least the Implacableness of
Cranmer's Enemies; that the Queen soon yielded her Pardon to so many of the
former King's Council, that were so deep and so forward in this Business, but
would not grant it him, (who could not obtain it, till after much and long
suit:) And that it should be put into two Acts of her Parliament (to make him
infamous for a Traitor to Posterity) that he and the Duke of Northumberland
were the Devisers of this Succession, to deprive Q. Mary of her Right: Which
was so palpably false and untrue on the Archbishop's part. But this was, no
question, Winchester's doing; through whose Hands, being now Lord Chancellor,
all these Acts of Parliament past, and the wording of them.

The Council subscribe and swear to the limited Succession.

Vol. II. p. 223.


Finally, I have only one thing more to add concerning this matter: Which is,
that besides the Instrument of Succession, drawn up by the King's Council
Learned in the Law, signed by himself, and 32 Counselors, and dated June 21,
according to the History of the Reformation, there was another Writing, which
was also signed by 24 of the Council. And to this I find our Archbishop's
Name. Herein they promised by their Oaths and Honors (being commanded so to do
by the King) to observe all and every Article contained in a Writing of the
King's own Hand, touching the said Succession, and after copied out and
delivered to certain Judges and Learned Men to be written in Order. This
Writing thus signed, with the other Writing of the King, being his Devise for
the Succession, may be seen in the Appendix, as I drew them out of an Original.
[No. LXVIII.]


CHAP. XXXV. The King dies.
THE good King made his most Christian departure July the 6 th, to the
ineffable loss of Religion and the Kingdom, The King dies.
being in a^^ likelihood, by his early Beginnings, to prove an incomparable
Prince to the English Nation. It was more than whispered that he died by
Poison. And however secretly this was managed, it was very remarkable, that
this Rumor ran not only after his Death, but even a Month or two before it,
Reports spread that he was dead. For which, as being rash Speeches against the
King, Cooper's Chron.
they studiously took up many People, and punished them. Before his Father K.
Henry had him, his only Son lawfully begotten, it was 28 Years from his first
entrance upon his Kingdom. And this Heir made amends for the Nation's so long
expectation of a Prince: His Character.
His singular Excellency in all kind of Princely Towardliness (to use the words
of one who lived in those Times) was such, Nic. Vdal his Pres. to Erasm.
Paraphrase.
that no Place, no Time, no Cause, no Book, no Person, either in public
Audience, or else in private Company, made any mention of him, but thought
himself even of very Conscience bound to powdre the same with manifold Praises
of his incomparable Virtues and Gifts of Grace. And again; How happy are we
Englishmen of such a King, in whose Childhood appears as perfect Grace,
Virtue, godly Zeal, desire of Literature, Gravity, Prudence, Justice and
Magnanimity, as has heretofore been found in Kings of most mature Age, of full
Discretion, of ancient Fame, and of passing high Estimation. And again, That
God has of singular Favor and Mercy toward this Realm of England, sent your
Grace to reign over us, the thing it self, by the whole Process, does declare.

The Archbishop his Godfather took exceeding complacency in a Prince of such
Hopes, The ABp delights in this Prince's Proficiency.
and would often congratulate Sir John Cheke his Schoolmaster having such a
Scholar, even with Tears. His Instructors would sometimes give Account to the
Archbishop of his Proficiency in his Studies, a thing that they knew would be
acceptable to him. Thus did Dr. Cox his Tutor in a Letter acquaint the ABp of
the Prince's Towardliness, Godliness, Gentleness, and all honest Qualities: and
that both the Archbishop, and all the Realm ought to take him for a singular
Gift sent of God. That he read Cato, Vives his Satellitium, Esop's Fables, and
made Latin, besides things of the Bible; and that he conned pleasantly and
perfectly. The Archbishop out of his dear Love to him, and to encourage him,
would sometimes himself write in Latin to him. And one of his Letters to him is
yet extant in Fox.

His great Parts might be seen by his Letters, Journals, Memorials, K. Edward's
Writings.
Discourses, and Writings; which were many: diverse lost, but of those that are
yet extant, these are the most:

Fox.
A Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury his Godfather, from Ampthil, in
Latin, being then but about seven Years old.

Fox.
Another in Latin to the Archbishop from Hartford: which was an Answer to one
from the Archbishop.

Mr. Petyt's MSS.
A Letter in French to his Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, writ December. 18* 1546.

Sir W. H. MSS.
A Letter to his Uncle, the Duke of Somerset, after his Success against the
Scots, 1547.

Sir W. H. MSS.
To Q. Katharine Par, after her Marriage with the Lord Admiral his Uncle.

Sir W. H. MSS.
Another Letter to her.

Sir W. H. MSS.
A Letter to the Earl of Hartford, his Cousin, in Latin.

Full. Chapter Hist.
A Letter to Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, concerning the Duke of Somerset's Arraignment.

Full. Chapter Hist.
Another to B. Fitz-Patrick; consisting of Instructions to him, when he went
into France.

Ibid.
Another to Fitz-Patrick, giving him an Account of his Progress, in August 1552.

Mr. Petyt's MSS.
Orders concerning the Habits and Apparel of his Subjects, according to their
Degrees and Qualities.

Mention is also made in the History of the Reformation of Letters in Latin to
K. Henry his Father, at eight Years old, and to Queen Katharine Par.

Cotton Libr. and Hist. Ref.
His Journal, writ all with his own Hand, from the beginning of his Reign 1547,
until the 28 th of November. 1552.

Trinity-Col. Libr.
A Collection of Passages of Scripture against Idolatry in French; Dedicated to
the Protector.

Cott. Librar.
A Discourse about the Reformation of many Abuses both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal.

Cott. Libr.
A Reformation of the Order of the Garter; Translated out of English into Latin
by K. Edward. These four last are published in the History of the Reformation,
Volume II. among the Collections.

Sir W. H. MSS.
A Book written in French by him at twelve Years of Age, against the Pope,
entitled, A L'encontre les abus du Monde.

Sir W. H. MSS.
A Memorial, February 1551.

Sir W. H. MSS.
Another Memorial, dated October. 13. 1552.

Sir W. H. MSS.
Another Memorial.

Fox.
His Prayer a little before his Death.

I shall rehearse none of these Writings, but only one of the Memorials; because
it bordereth so near upon our present History, and shows so much this Young
Prince's Care of Religion, and for the good Estate of the Church, animated,
admonished, counseled and directed in these Matters by the Archbishop.

For Religion. October. 13. 1552.
I. A Catechism to be set forth, The King's Memorial for Religion.
for to be taught in all Grammar-Schools.

II. An Uniformity of Doctrine; to which all Preachers should set their Hands.

III. Commissions to be granted to those Bishops, that be Grave, Learned, Wise,
Sober, and of good Religion, for the executing of Discipline.

IV. To find fault with the slightfulness of the Pastors, and to deliver them
Articles of Visitation, willing and commanding them to be more diligent in
their Office, and to keep more Preachers.

V. The abrogating of the old Canon Law, and establishment of a New.

VI. The dividing of the Bishopric of Durham into two; and placing of Men in
them.

VII. The placing of Harley into the Bishopric of Hereford.

VIII. The making of more Homilies.

IX. The making of more Injunctions.

X. The placing of one in a Bishopric in Ireland, which Turner of Canterbury
has refused.

Some of these things were already done, and some in Hand. Hereby we may see
what further Steps in the Reformation would have been made, had the good King
lived. So that in this King's Reign, Religion made a good Progress, and
Superstition and Idolatry was in a good manner purged out of the Church. Which
was the more to be wondered at, considering the Minority of the King, the
grievous Factions at Court, and the too common Practice then of scoffing and
buffooning Religion, and the more conscientious Professors of it. For of this
sort of Men, Russians and dissolute Livers, there were many followed the Court,
and were Favorites to the Leading-Men there, I mean, the two Dukes; and proved
after, base Time-servers and Flatterers in the Reign of Queen Mary.

During this Reign, Archbishop Cranmer was a very active Man, The Ab^ (...) at
Council.
and great Deference seemed to be given to his Judgment, by the King and
Council, in the Matters that were then transacting; especially as concerning
the Reformation of Religion. For I find him very frequently at the
Council Board, and often sent for thither, or sent unto when absent. And here I
will not think much to set down all the particular Days when, and Places where,
he was present in Person with the Privy-Counsellors; from the Year 1550,
beginning, unto the middle of the Year 1553, near the the Time of the King's
Death; as it was extracted carefully out of a Council-Book, that commenceth at
the abovesaid Year.

Anno 1550, April 19. His Presence in Council in the Year 1550.
He was present at the Council then at Greenwich. This Month one Putto, who had
been put to silence for his lend Preaching, [that is against the Steps made in
the Reformation] and did now nevertheless, of his own Head, preach as lendly as
he had done before, was referred to the Archbishop, and the Bishop of Ely, to
be corrected, April 28. The Archbishop present at Council, May 2, 4, 7, 11,
(On this day the Duke of Somerset was called again to Council) and 15. At the
Star Chamber, May 16. At Westminster May 28, June 5. At Greenwich, June 8, 11,
13, 20, 22. At Westminster, June 28, 29, 30. and July 1. About which time the
Archbishop seemed to depart into his Diocese, and there to remain that Summer.
October. 11. There was an Order of Council for a Letter to be writ to him, in
answer to his of complaint against the Vicar of Dertford, to imprison him for
his Disobedience unto him; and in Prison to endure, until the said Archbishop
should come to Court. October. 18. Was another Order of Council for three Letters
to be writ: The One to the Archbishop of Canterbury, another to the Bishop of
Ely, and another to the Bishop of Lincoln. Because (as the Words run) the
Parliament draws near: Before which time his Majesty thinks it expedient to
have some Matters there to be consulted. Their Lordships were required
immediately to repair to the Court, where they shall understand his Majesty's
further Pleasure. And that Day his Grace was sent for. November 11. He was
present at Council. At Westminster, November 16, 17, 18, 26. December 4. When
the Archbishop and Bishop of Ely answered the Bishop of Chichester, then before
the Council, as to the Texts by him produced in behalf of Altars. December. 5, 9,
11, 13. On which Day a Letter was sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower to bring
the Bishop of Winchester to Lambeth before the Archbishop. January 13. He was
present at the Council at Greenwich, when Hoper was ordered to be committed to
the Archbishop's Custody. Present again at Council at Greenwich, Febr. 8. At
Westminster the 16, 18. Then upon the Report of the Archbishop made of one
Young, a Learned Man, [I suppose he of Cambridg, that was Bucer's Antagonist]
viz. That he had preached seditiously, [against the King's Proceedings in
Religion] it was ordered that the Archbishop, and the Bishop of Ely should
examine him, and thereupon order him, as they should think good. He was present
at Council, still at Westminster, March 4, 8. (When he was appointed to receive
a Sum of Money in respect of his Charges and Pains in his Process against the
late Bishop of Winchester, now deprived) 9, 11, 12, 22, 24.

In the Year 1551.
Anno 1551. March 26, 31. At Greenwich, April the 8, 9, 11, 26. May 4, 10, 24,
25. June 4, 14. (when a Letter was given to the Archbishop to send to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, for the bringing White Warden of New-College in
Winchester, and delivering him to the Archbishop, to remain with him, till he
might reclaim him) 15, 21, 22. At Richmond, August 9. At Hampton Court, October.
1. When a License was granted to Wolf, under the King's Privilege, to print
the Archbishop's Book. At Westminster, October. 17, 19, 22, 28. November. 2, 5,
9, 10, 15, 17, 21, 26. December. 11, 12. (13. A Letter was sent from the Council
to the Archbishop to send them a Book touching Religion, sent out of Ireland)
17, 18, 19. Ian. 24, 31. Febr. 8, 16, 22, 28. March 22.

In the Year 1552.
Anno 1552. He was present at the Council now sitting at Westminster, March
30. April 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 18, 19, 24. From which time, till the Month of October.
he was not at the Council, and yet seems to have been at Home. October. 7. The
Council sent to him to stay his going into Kent, till Tuesday, because the
Lords would confer with him; that is till October. 11. when he was again present
at Council. The Archbishop now retired into his Diocese, and was at his House
at Ford. Whither several Messages and Letters were sent to him from the
Council: as Nov. 20. They sent him the Articles of Religion, (framed chiefly by
him, and reviewed by the King's Chaplains) for his last Review, in order to the
putting them into due Execution. Nov. 24. Another sent him according to the
Minute, of some Business unknown. December. 2. Another Letter to him for the
installing of Hoper, without paying any Fees. And another Feb. 2. in favor of
Mr. Knox, to be by him collated to the Living of Alhallows. This Month he
returned, and was at the Council at Westminster. Likewise Febr. 21, 22, 2^, 27,
28.

Anno 1553. March 25. April 1, 7. At Greenwich, June 2, 3, 6, 8. An. 1553.
And that was the last time mentioned in the Council-Book ending at June 17.
Nor cared he to come afterward, the Business then in transaction not pleasing
him.

A Bishop Consecrated.
May 26. John Harley, S. T. P. was Consecrated, John Harley.
(and was the last that was Consecrated in this King's Reign) Bishop of
Hereford, upon the Death of Skip, by the Archbishop, at Croyden Chapel,
Nicolas Bishop of London, and Robert Bishop of Carlisle, assisting. This Harley
was one of the King's Six Chaplains, Bill, Bradford, Grindal, Pern and Knox,
being the other five, that were appointed to be Itineraries, to preach sound
Doctrine in all the remotest Parts of the Kingdom, for the Instruction of the
Ignorant in right Religion to God, and Obedience to the King.

The End of the Second Book.
MEMORIALS OF Archbishop CRANMER. BOOK III.
CHAPTER I. Queen Mary soon recognized. The Archbishop Slandered and
Imprisoned.
I Find the Archbishop present among Queen Iane's Counselors. Whose Party
seemed to be resolute for her until the 19 th of July. The ABp's and
Counselors concern with the Lady Jane.
All these Persons of Quality were with her in the Tower, consulting of Affairs
for her Service: Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely Lord
Chancellor, the Earl of Winchester Lord Treasurer; the Dukes of Suffolk and
Northumberland; the Earls of Bedford, Arundel, Shrewsbury, Pembroke; the Lords
Darcy and Paget; Sir Thomas Cheiney, Sir Richard Cotton, Sir William Petre,
Sir John Cheke, Sir John Baker, Sir Robert Bows, being all of her Council. All
which (excepting Northumberland) signed a Letter dated July 19. to the Lord
Rich, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Essex, who had signified to them, that
the Earl of Oxford was fled to the Lady Mary. In their Letter they exhorted him
to stand true and tight to Q. Jane, as they said they did, and would do. It was
penned by Cheke; for Secretary Cecyl was absent, and Petre the other Secretary,
though present, did it not, though he signed it. No. LXIX.
The Letter is in the Appendix. The Day before this Letter was sent, viz, July
18, there being a Rising in Buckinghamshire, and the Parts thereabouts, Queen
Jane her self, thinking her self sure of Sir John Bridges and Sir Nicolas
Poyntz, signed a Letter to them, therein ordering them to raise with speed all
the Power they could of their Servants, Tenants, Officers and Friends, to allay
that Tumult: And so She had written to other Gentlemen in those Parts to do.
This Letter also I have put in the Appendix. No. LXX.


And yet, (to see the vicissitude of Men's Minds, and uncertainty of human
Affairs) July 20. They declare for Q. Mary.
Diverse of those very Counselors that but the Day before set their Hands
resolvedly to stand by Q. Jane, proclaimed Q. Mary in the City of London, and
immediately dispatched the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget unto her with a
Letter, writ from Baynard's-Castle, (where they now were removed from the
Tower). In which Letter they beg her Pardon, and to remit their former
Infirmities, and assure her, calling God to witness to the same, that they were
ever in their Hearts her true Subjects since the King's Death: but could not
utter their Minds before that time without great Destruction and Bloodshed of
themselves and others. No. LXXI.
The Copy of this Letter may be read in the Appendix.

The same day the Council wrote to the Duke of Northumberland their Letters
dated from Westminster, And write to Northumberland to lay down his Arms.
sent by an Herald. Wherein the Duke was commanded and charged in Q. Mary's
Name to disarm, and discharge his Soldiers, and to forbear his return to the
City, until the Queen's Pleasure. And the same was to be declared to the
Marquess of Northampton, and all other Gentlemen that were with him. The Herald
was also, by virtue of his Letters from the Council, to notify in all Places
where he came, That if the Duke did not submit himself to the Queen's Highness,
Stow.
he should be taken as a Traitor, and they of the late King's Council would
persecute him to his utter Confusion. And thus far our Archbishop went. For
this was signed by him, and the Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of
Winchester, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Bedford, Shrewsbury, Pembrook;
the Lord Darcy, Sir Richard Cotton; Petre and Cecyl, Secretaries; Sir John
Baker, Sir John Mason, Sir Robert Bows. The Duke saw it in vain to oppose, and
so submitted to this Order. And the Plot that his ^mbition had been framing so
long and with so much Art, fell on a sudden.

The Queen owned by the Ambassadors.
Very speedily Queen Mary was owned Abroad, as well as at Home: Dr. Wotton Dean
of Canterbury, Sir William Pickering, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Ambassadors in
France, writ their Letters to her and the Council, acknowledging her, and
ceasing any further to act as Ambassadors. She continued Dr. Wotton, and sent
for Pickering and Chaloner Home; and sent Sir Anthony St. Ledger, the beginning
of August, Ambassador thither joined with Wotton. This Determination the
Council August 12, signified to the said three Ambassadors.

The ABp misreported to have said Mass.
But now to cast our Eyes upon the State of Religion at this Time. Upon this
Access of Queen Mary to the Crown, whose Interest as well as Education made her
a Zealous Papist, the good Progress of Religion was quite overthrown; and the
pious Archbishop's Pains and long Endeavors in a great measure frustrated;
and he himself soon after exercised with great Afflictions. The first pretended
Occasion of which was this. It was reported Abroad, soon after King Edward's
Death, that the Archbishop had offered to sing the Mass and Requiem at the
Burial of that King, either before the Queen, or at S. Paul's Church, or any
where else; and that he had said, or restored Mass already in Canterbury. This
indeed had the Suffragan of Dover, Dr. Thornton, done, but without the
Archbishop's Consent or knowledge.

Mass at Canterbury.
But however such good Impressions of Religion had the Archbishop left at
Canterbury, that though Mass was set up there, and Priests were through fear
forced to say it, yet it was utterly contrary to their Wills. And about
New-years-tide, there was a Priest said Mass there one Day, and the next came
into the Pulpit, and desired all the People to forgive him. For he said, he had
betrayed Christ; but not as Judas did, but Peter. And then he made a long
Sermon against the Mass.

But the aforesaid slanderous report so troubled the Archbishop, Which he
makes a public Declaration against.
that to stay it, he wrote a Letter to a Friend of his, that he never made any
promise of saying Mass, nor that he did set up the Mass in Canterbury: but that
it was done by a false, flattering lying Monk, Dr. Thornden (such a Character
in his just Anger he gave him) who was Suffragan of Dover, and Vice-dean of
that Church, in the absence of Dr. Wotton, who was then abroad in Embassy.
Foxii MSS.
This Thornden, says my Manuscript (writ but a few Years after by Scory, or
Becon, as I conjecture) was, A Man, having neither Wit, Learning, nor Honesty.
And yet his Wit is very ready. For he preaches as well extempore, as at a
Years warning: so learnedly, that no Man can tell what he chiefly intends or
goes about to prove: so aptly, that a gross of Points is not sufficient to ty
his Sermon together: Not unlike to Iodocus a Monk, of whom Erasmus makes
mention in his Colloquies, who, if he were not garnished with these glorious
Titles, Monk, Doctor, Vice-dean, and Suffragan, were worthy to walk openly in
the Streets with a Bell and Cocks-comb. Besides this Letter, the Archbishop
resolved to do something in a more public manner, in vindication of the
Reformation, as well as of himself. So he devised a Declaration: Wherein he
both apologized for himself against this false Report, and made a brave
Challenge, with the assistance of Peter Martyr, and a few more, to maintain, by
Disputation with any Man, the Reformation made under K. Edward. This
Declaration, after a first draught of it, he intended to enlarge, and then,
being sealed with his own Seal, to set it upon the Doors of S. Paul's Church,
and other Churches in London. This Writing, wherein the good Religion and
Doctrine practiced and taught in the former Reign, was so nobly owned, and
offered to be defended in such a public manner, was not only read by some Body
boldly in Cheapside, but many Copies thereof were taken; and so became
dispersed. It was also soon after printed in Latin, and I suppose in English
too. Sure I am, in the Year 1557, it was printed beyond Sea by the Exiles. From
which Print I shall here transcribe it, being sent from Grindal to John Fox,
for his use in the writing his History.

A Declaration of the Reverend Father in God Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, condemning the untrue and slanderous Report of some, which have
reported, That he should set up the Mass at Canterbury, at the first coming of
the Queen to her Reign 1553.
AS the Devil, Christ's ancient Adversary, is a Liar, The Declaration.
and the Father of Lying; even so has he stirred his Servants and Members to
persecute Christ, and his true Word and Religion. Which he cease not to do
most earnestly at this present. For whereas the most noble Prince of famous
Memory, King Henry VIII, seeing the great Abuses of the Latin Masses, reformed
something herein in his Time; and also our late Sovereign Lord K. Edward VI,
took the same whole away, for the manifold Errors and Abuses thereof, and
restored in the place thereof Christ's Holy Supper, according to Christ's own
Institution, and as the Apostles in the Primitive Church used the same in the
beginning. The Devil goes about by lying to overthrow the Lord's Holy Supper,
and to restore the Latin Satisfactory Masses, a thing of his own Invention and
Device. And to bring the same more easily to pass, some have abused the Name of
Me, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, bruting abroad, that I have set up the
Mass at Canterbury, and that I offered to say Mass before the Queen's Highness,
and at Paul's Church, and I wot not where. I have been well exercised these
twenty Years, to suffer and bear evil Reports and Lies; and have not been much
grieved thereat, and have born all things quietly. Yet when untrue Reports and
Lies turn to the hindrance of God's Truth, they be in no wise to be tolerate
and suffered. Wherefore these be to signify to the World, that it was not I
that did set up the Mass at Canterbury, but it was a false, flattering, lying
and dissembling Monk, which caused the Mass to be set up there, without my
Advice or Counsel.

And as for offering my self to say Mass before the Queen's Highness, or in any
othea Place, I never did, as her Grace knows well. But if her Grace will give
me leave, I shall be ready to prove, against all that will say the contrary;
and that the Communion-Book, set forth by the most innocent and godly Prince,
K. Edward VI, in his High Court of Parliament, is conformable to the Order,
which our Savior Christ did both observe and command to be observed, and which
his Apostles and Primitive Church used many Years. Whereas the Mass, in many
things, not only has no Foundation of Christ, his Apostles, nor the Primitive
Church, but also is manifest contrary to the same: and contains many horrible
Blasphemies in it. And although many, either unlearned, or maliciously do report,
that Mr. Peter Martyr is unlearned; yet if the Queen's Highness will grant
thereunto, I with the said Mr. Peter Martyr, and other four or five which I
shall choose, will by God's Grace, take upon us to defend, that not only our
Common Prayers of the Churches, Ministration of the Sacraments, and other Rites
and Ceremonies, but also that all the Doctrine and Religion, by our said
Sovereign Lord K. Edward VI, is more pure, and according to God's Word, than
any that has been used in England these thousand Years: so that God's Word may
be the Judge, and that the Reason and Profes may be set out in writing. To
thentent as well all the World may examine and Judge them, as that no Man shall
start back from their Writing; and what Faith has been in the Church these
fifteen hundred Years, we will join with them in this Point: and that the
Doctrine and Usage is to be followed, which was in the Church fifteen hundred
Years past. And we shall prove, that the Order of the Church, set out at this
present in this Church of England by Act of Parliament, is the same that was
used in the Church fifteen hundred Years past. And so shall they never be able
to prove theirs.

Some Copies of this Declaration soon fell into the Hands of certain Bishops,
who brought them to the Council. The Council sent a Copy to the Queen's
Commissioners. Appears before the Commissioners at Paul's,
Who soon after ordered him to appear before them, and to bring in an Inventory
of his Goods. The reason, as is alleged, of his being ordered to bring in this
Inventory, was, because it was then intended, that he should have a sufficient
Living assigned him, and to keep his House, and not meddle with Religion. So on
the Day appointed, which was August 27, the Archbishop, together with Sir
Thomas Smith, Secretary of State to K. Edward, and May Dean of S. Paul's, came
before the Queen's Commissioners in the Consistory of Paul's: and the
Archbishop brought in his Inventory. We are left to guess what he was now
cited for. I suppose, it was to lay to his charge Heresy, and his Marriage;
What more was done with him at this time I find not. He retired to his House at
Lambeth, where he seemed to be confined.

For about the beginning of August, And before the Council.
as may be collected from a Letter of the Archbishop's to Cecyl, he was before
the Council, about the Lady Iane's Business, without all question. And then
with the severe Reprimands he received, was charged to keep his House, and be
forthcoming. At that time he espied Cecyl who was in the same Condemnation;
and would fain have spoken with him, but durst not, as he told him in a Letter
dated August 14; as it seems, out of his Love and Care of him, lest his very
talking with Cecyl might have been prejudicial to that Pardon which he now lay
fair for. But by Letter he desired him to come over to him to Lambeth, because
he would gladly commune with him, to hear how Matters went, and for some other
private Causes, Cecyl being now at Li^erty. September 13 following, the
Archbishop was again summoned to appear that Day before the Queen's Council.
Then he appeared, and was dismissed; but commanded to be the next Day in the
Star Chamber. And so he was. The effect of which appearance was, that he was
committed to the Tower, partly for setting his Hrnd to the Instrument of the
Lady Iane's Succession, and partly for the public Offer he made a little
before of justifying openly the Religious Proceedings of the deceased King. But
the chief Reason was the inveterate Malice his Enemies conceived against him
for the Divorse of K. Henry from the Queen's Mother: the blame of which they
laid wholly upon him, though Bishop Gardener and other Bishops were concerned
in it as deep as he. In the Tower we leave the good Archbishop a while, after
we have told you, that soon after the Queen coming to the Tower, some of the
Archbishop's Friends made humble suit for his Pardon, and that he might have
access to her: but She would neither hear him, nor see him.

Holgate also, The ABp of York committed to the Tower; and his Goods seized*
C.C.C.C. Librar. Miscell. B^
the other Archbishop, about the beginning of October, was committed to the
Tower, upon pretense of Treason, or great Crimes: but chiefly, I suppose,
because he was Rich. And while he was there, they rifled his Houses at
Battersea and Cawood. At his former House they seized in Gold coined three
hundred Pounds; in Specialties and good Debts, four hundred Pounds more; in
Plate gilt and Parcel gilt, sixteen hundred Ounces: A Mitre of fine Gold with
two Pendants, set round about the sides and midst with very fine pointed
Diamonds, At Battersea.
Saphires and Balists, and all the Plain with other good Stones and Pearls, and
the Pendants in like manner, weighing one hundred twenty five Ounces. Six or
seven great Rings of fine Gold, with Stones in them; whereof were three fine
blew Saphires of the best; an Emerald very fine; a good Turkeys, and a Diamond;
a Serpent's Tongue set in a Standard of Silver, gilt and graven; the
Archbishop's seal in silver, his Signet, an old Antic in Gold: The
Counterpane of his Lease of Wotton, betwixt the late Duke of Northumberland and
him, with Letters Patents of his Purchase of Scrowby.

At Cawood.
Taken from Cawood, and other Places appertaining to the Archbishop, by one
Ellis Markham; First, in ready Money, nine hundred Pounds: Two Mitres; in
Plate, parcel gilt, seven hundred and seventy Ounces; and gilt Plate, eleven
hundred fifty seven Ounces; One broken Cross of Silver gilt, with one Image
broken, weighing forty six Ounces; three Obligations, one 37 l. 5 s. 10 d;
another for 15 l; another for 10 l. Sold by the said Markham fivescore Beasts,
and four hundred Muttons. Sold all the Sheep belonging to the Archbishop,
supposed to be two thousand five hundred. Moreover, he took away two
Turky-carpets of Wool, as big and as good as any Subject had: Also a Chest,
full of Copes and Vestments of Cloth of Tissue: Two very good Beds of Down, and
six of the best young Horses that were at Cawood. Proffered to make Sale of all
his House-hold-stuff in five Houses; three very well furnished, and two metely
well. Sold all his Stores of Household: Wheat, two hundred Quarters; Malt, five
hundred Quarters; Oats, sixty Quarters; Wine, five or six Tun. Fish and Ling,
six or seven hundred, with very much Household Store; as Fuel, Hay, with many
other things necessary for Household. Horses at Cawood, young and old, four or
five scorce: They received Rent of his own Land, five hundred Pounds yearly at
the least. This was done by this Markham upon pretense, that he was guilty of
Treason, or great Crimes. He gave to many Persons Money to the value of an
hundred Pounds and above, that they should give Information against him.
Besides, they took away good Harness and Artillery sufficient for seven score
Men. All this Spoil was committed, when he was cast in the Tower. Of all this
Injury he made a Scedule afterward, and complained thereof to the Lords. By
this one Instance, which I have set down at large, as I extracted it from a
Paper in the Benet-College Library, we may judge what Havoc was made of the
Professors of Religion, in their Estates as well as their Persons; as this
Bishop was served, before any Crime was proved against him.

Thus the other Archbishop (of York) was not to go without Animadversion, any
more than he of Canterbury. The former lay eighteen Months in the Tower, and
was deposed at last for being Married, Gardiner's Passage of the two ABps.
as well as Cranmer. Of this, Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in his Sermon at
Paul's Cross, (at which were present King Philip and Cardinal Pole) gave, as he
thought this nipping Gird: Thus while we desired to have a Supreme Head among
us, it came to pass, that we had no Head at all; No, not so much as our two
Archbishops. For that on one side, the Queen, being a Woman, could not be Head
of the Church; and on the other side, they were both convicted of one Crime,
and so deposed. This Archbishop of York continued in Prison till 1554, when
the Queen granted the Request of the new King, for the Liberty of a great many
Prisoners, whereof this Prelate was one. He died the next Year through Grief
(as it is probable) and Suffering.

CHAP. II. Protestant Bishops and Clergy cast into Prisons, and deprived.
INdeed in this first Entrance of Q. Mary's Reign, This Reign begins with
Rigor.
it was a wonder to see that fierceness that it was ushered in with; the
Papists thinking that this Rigor at first would terrify all out of their
former Principles of true Religion, and bring them to the Devotion of the
Church of Rome again. And it was as mavelous to observe the stedfastness of
the generality of the Professors. This Queen began her Reign after that manner,
Halts Oration.
(I use the words of one that lived in that Time) that it might be conjectured,
what She was like after to prove. Sending up for abundance of People to appear
before the Council, either upon the Lady Iane's Business, or the Business of
Religion; and committing great numbers into Prisons. And indeed She boasted her
self a Virgin sent of God to ride and tame the People of England.

To explain somewhat these Austerities. They thought fit to begin with the
Protestant Clergy, Bishops and others. The Protestant Bishops deprived.
For this purpose a Commission was directed to the Bishops of London,
Winchester, Chichester and Durham, Men sufficiently sowred in their Tempers by
what befell them in the last Reign. These were to discharge the Protestant
Bishops and Ministers of their Offices and Places, upon pretense, either of
Treason, Heresy or Marriage, or the like, to make way for their own Men.
Registr. Eccl. Cant.
Thus John Tailor Bishop of Lincoln was deprived, because he had a bad Title,
there being this clause in the Letters Patents, whereby he was made Bishop,
Quamdiu been se gesserit, and because he thought amiss concerning the
Eucharist. John Hoper was deprived of the Bishopric of Worcester by the
restitution of Nicolas Hethe, formerly deprived: and removed from the Sea of
Gloucester, for his Marriage and other Demerits. John Harley Bishop of Hereford
deprived for Wedlock and Heresy. Robert Farrar, Bp of S. David's, deprived for
Wedlock and Heresy. William Barlow, Bishop of Bath, made a voluntary
Resignation. The Bishopric of Rochester was void three Years, since Scory was
translated to Chichester. John Bird, an old Man, Married, was deprived of the
Bishopric of Chester. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury (for I do but
transcribe now out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury) being called
into question for high Treason, by his own Confession was judged guilty
thereof. Whence in the Month of December the Sea of Canterbury became Vacant.
Robert Holgate Archbishop of York was deprived for Wedlock, and was cast into
the Tower, and led a private Life. The like happened to Miles Coverdale of
Exeter, by the restoring John Vayse, who out of fear had formerly resigned.
Cuthbert Bishop of Durham, formerly deprived, was restored. Edmund Bonner
Bishop of London restored: Nicolas Ridley being removed from the said See, and
cast into Prison for making an ill Sermon, and being noted for heretical
Pravity. Stephen Gardener Bp of Winchester restored: John Poinet being ejected
and Imprisoned, and deprived of Episcopacy for being Married. To which I must
add, the Sea of Bristol, resigned by Paul Bush the Bishop thereof.

The hard Usage of the inferior Clergy.
How they proceeded with the inferior Clergy in general for being Married, may
be measured by their proceedings with the Clergy of London and Canterbury,
which we shall see by and by. So that K. Edward's Clergy were now in the very
beginning of this Queen very hardly used. Some were deprived, never convict, no
^or never called Mr. Rich. Wilks.
(I use the words of an Dr. Parker.
Author that Lived in that Queen's Reign, and felt her Severity) Some called,
that were fast locked in Prison, and yet nevertheless deprived immediately Mr.
Bradford, Bullingham, and May.
. Some deprived without the cause of Marriage after their Orders A great Number.
. Some induced to resign upon promise of Pension, and the Promise, as yet never
performed Dr. Ponet, Tayl^r, Parker.
. Some so deprived, that they were spoiled of their Wages, for the which they
served the half Year before; and not ten days before the Receipt sequestered from
it. Some prevented from his half Years Receipt, after Charges of Tenths and
Subsidy paid, and yet not deprived six weeks after. Some deprived of their
Receipts somewhat after the day, Preface to the Defense of Priests Marriage.
with the which their Fruits to the Queen's Majesty should be contented. And in
general the Deprivations were so speedy, so hastily, so without warning, etc.
The Bishops (says another Mr. Aylmer.
Writer and Sufferer in these Days) that were Married, were thrust out of the
Parliament House, and all Married Deans and Archdeacons out of the
Convocation: many put out of their Livings, and others restored, without Form
of Law. Yea some Noblemen and Gentlemen were deprived of those Lands which the
King had given them, without tarrying for any Law, lest my Lord of Winchester
should have lost his Quarter's Rent. Harbor for Faithful Subjects.
Many Churches were changed, many Altars set up, many Masses said, many Dirges
sung, before the Law was repealed. All was done in post haste.

Professors cast into the Marshalsea.
Nor was their Deprivation all they endured, but they, together with many other
Professors of the Religion, were taken up very fast: For Winchester did
resolve to make quick Work, to reduce, if he could, the Realm to the old
Religion. So that they came into the Marshalsea thick and threefold for
Religion, sent by him thither. And that they might be sure to suffer Hardship
enough, when the Bishop's Almoner, Mr. Brook's (he, who was I suppose after
Bishop of Gloucester) came to this Prison with his Master's Alms-Basket, he told
the Porter, Winchester's Alms.
named Britain, that it was his Lord's Pleasure that none of the Heretics that
lay there, should have any part of his Alms. And that if he knew any of them
had any part thereof, that House should never have it again so long as he
lived. To which the Porter replied, That he would have a care of that he would
warrant him; and that if they had no Meat till they had some of his Lordship's,
they should be like to starve. And so he bad him tell his Lord: and added, That
they should get no favor at his Hand.

These Sufferings P. Martyr, now gotten out of England, Pet. Martyr writes of
this to Calvin.
took notice of in a Letter to Calvin, dated November. 3. Where having related to
him, how the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of Worcester
and Exon, and many other Learned and Pious Preachers, were in Bonds for the
Gospel, and together with them many other godly Persons were in extreme Danger,
he proceeded to mention two things to Calvin, to mitigate the Trouble he knew
he conceived for this ill News. The own was, That although the Infirmity of
some betrayed them, yet great was the constancy of far more than he could have
thought. So that he doubted not England would have many famous Martyrs, if
Winchester, who then did all, should begin to Rage according to his Will. The
other was, That it was the Judgment of all, that this Calamity would not be
long. And therefore, said Martyr, P. Martyr's Epist.
let us pray to God, that he would quickly tread down Satan under the Feet of
his Church.

The same Learned Man, The State of the Church now.
speaking in another Letter concerning the good Forwardness of Religion at the
first coming of Queen Mary to the Crown, said, That he had many Scholars in
England Students in Divinity, not to be repented of, whose Harvest was almost
ripe. Whom he was forced to see, either wandering about in uncertain Stations,
or remaining at home unhappily subverted. And that there was in this Kingdom
many Holy as well as Learned Bishops, that were then in hard Confinement, and
soon to be dragged to the extremest Punishments, as if they were Robbers. And
that here was the foundation of the Gospel, and of a Noble Church laid: and by
the Labors of some Years the holy Building had well gone forward, and daily
better things were hoped for. But that unless (...), God from above, P. Martyr
Amico cuidam.
came to the succor of it, he thought there would not be a Footstep of
Godliness left at last, as to the external Profession.

All the Matters of the Church the Queen left wholly to the management of the
Bishop of Winchester, The Queen leaves all Matters to Winchester.
whom She now advanced from a Prisoner in the Tower, to be Lord High Chancellor
of England. And indeed the Governance of the whole Realm was committed to him
with a few other. He ruled Matters as he would, and that all England knew and
saw plainly. Nay, the Consent of the whole Parliament followed his Head and his
Will. So that against their Wills, and against the Wills of many thousand true
Hearts in the Realm, as they of the Parliament well knew, they condescended
unto him: and what he could not do in one Parliament, that he did in another.
So that in a Year and an half he had three Parliaments. During which time, many
things the Parliament condescended unto against their Wills. As that the Queen
should Marry with a Foreign Prince; that the Service in the English Tongue
should be taken away: that the Bishop of Rome should have his old ejected
Authority here again: as one of the Divines in those Times had intended to have
told Winchester to his Face, I. Rogers.
had he been permitted Speech.

October 1. The Queen was Crowned at the Abby-Church at Westminster. The Queen
crowned.
And then was proclaimed a Pardon; but not over-gracious. For all the Prisoners
in the Tower and Fleet were excepted, and sixty two besides; whereof the
Printers of the Bible, Grafton and Whitchurch, were two. Most of these excepted
were of the chief Professors of the Gospel: No Pardon for them. At the
Coronation, among other triumphal Shows, Paul's Steeple bare top and top
Gallant, like a Ship with many Flags and Banners, and a Man stood triumphing
and danceing on the top. Whereat one Underhill, a Gentleman, that sat on
Horseback there to see the Show, said to those about him, At the Coronation of
King Edward I saw Paul's Steeple lay at Anchor, and now She wears top and top
Gallant: Surely the next will be Shipwreck or it be long. And indeed there
followed a Shipwreck of the Church.

The Service still said.
The Service established in K. Edward's Days did not cease upon Queen Mary's
grasping the Scepter. But the Ministers performed the Worship of God, and
celebrated the Holy Sacrament, and used the Common Prayer diligently and
constantly. And the People frequented the same with more seriousness than
before. They foresaw what Times were coming; which made them meet often
together, while they might: Lamenting bitterly the Death of K. Edward, and
partaking of the Sacrament with much Devotion. It was the Bishop of
Winchester's Resolution, to redress this in London: For he was purposed to
stifle the Religion as speedily and as vigorously as he could. And one way he
had to do this, was to send his Spies into all the Churches in London. And
these would come into the Churches, and disturb the Ministers with rude Words
and Actions in their very Ministration; and then go to the Bishop and make
their Informations. And so the Ministers were fetched up by the Officers before
him, and then committed, unless they would comply. And this in the very
beginning of the Queen's Reign, when the Preachers did but according to the
Laws then in Force, before the Parliament had repealed the Book of
Common Prayer, and the rest of K. Edward's Reformation. And there were forward
Men in most Parishes, that were very active and violent for the restoring the
old Superstitions. The Queen's Proclamation of her Religion.
For the Queen had set forth a Proclamation, which did declare what Religion
She did profess in her Youth, That She did continue in the same, and that She
minded therein to end her Life: Willing all her Loving Subjects to embrace the
same. And this they reckoned to be sufficient Warrant to set up Mass, and
introduce Popish Priests and Popish Usages everywhere, without staying for
Orders and Acts of Parliament.

Signs of a Change of Religion.
Nor was this Change of Religion, and these Miseries following it, unexpected.
The Learned and pious Sort in King Edward's Time did reckon upon a great
Calamity impending over their Heads: Concluding thereupon, from two Causes,
among others. One was, the corrupt Manners that generally overspred the Nation,
notwithstanding the Light of the Gospel, and the much and earnest preaching up
of Sobriety and Virtue. The other was, the taking off by Death diverse most
eminent Men, the great Stays of Religion. So that the Preachers did commonly in
their Sermons declare and foretell, what afterward indeed fell out. This Becon,
an Exile, in his Epistle to those in England, that suffered Persecution for the
Testimony of Christ's Gospel, spoke of in these words. Diverse Signs had we long
before, besides the Godly Admonitions of the faithful Preachers, which plainly
declared unto us an utter subversion of the true Christian Religion to be at
Hand, except it were prevented by hasty and hearty Repentance. What shall I
speak of that good and mighty Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, which in the
Time of his Protectorship, did so banish Idolatry out of this our Realm, and
bring in again God's true Religion, that it was a wonder so weighty a Matter to
be brought to pass in so short a Time. Was not the ungentle handling of him,
and the unrighteous thrusting him out of Office, and afterward the cruel
Murdering of him, a Man, yea, a Mirror of true Innocence, and Christian
Patience, an evident token of God's Anger against us? The sudden taking away of
those most goodly and virtuous young Imps, the Duke of Suffolk and his Brother,
by the sweating Sickness, was it not also a manifest Token of God's heavy
Displesure against us? The Death of those two most worthy, and godly Learned
Men, M. Paulus Fagius, and D. Martin Bucer, was it not a sure Prognostication,
some great Mishap concerning Christen Religion to be at Hand? But passing over
many other, to come to that which is most lamentable, and can never be
remembered of any true English Heart without large Tears, I mean the Death of
our most Godly Prince and Christen King, Edward VI. that true Josias, that
earnest destroyer of false Religion, that fervent setter up of God's true
Honor, that most bounteous Patron of the godly Learned, that most worthy
Maintainer of good Letters and Virtue, and that perfect and lovely Mirror of
true Nobility, and sincere Godliness: Was not the taking away of him, (alas!
for Sorrow) a sure Sign and an evident Token, that some great Evil hanged over
this Realm of England? Who, considering these things, perceived not a Shipwreck
of the Christen Religion to be at Hand?

CHAP. III. The Archbishop advises Professors to fly.
THE Favorers of Religion, The ABp advises to flight.
seeing it was now determined to proceed in all manner of Severity against
them, began to flee into other Countries for their Safety as fast as they
could. Indeed there were some, that made a Case of Conscience of it: Among the
rest one Mrs. Wilkinson, a Woman of good Quality, and a great Reliever of good
Men. Her the Archbishop out of Prison advised to escape and avoid a Place
where She could not truly and rightly serve God. He took off with spiritual
Arguments the Objections, which She or others might make for their stay; As
their lothness to leave their Friends and Relations, and that it might look
like a slandering of God's Word, if they should thus run away, and decline the
open and bold Defense of it. The Letter of the Archbishop deserves to be read,
as it fell from that Venerable Prelat's own Pen. Which I have therefore put in
the Appendix. No. LXXII.


Though Cranmer himself refused to flee, being advised by his Friends so to do,
Cranmer will not flee.
because of the Reports that were abroad, that he should be speedily carried to
the Tower. For he said, It would be no ways fitting for him to go away,
considering the Post in which he was; and to show that he was not afraid to own
all the Changes that were by his means made in Religion in the last Reign.

Whither the Prosessors fly.
But great numbers fled, some to Strasburgh, some to VVesel, some to Embden,
some to Antwerp, some to Duisburgh, some to Worms, some to Frankford, some to
Basil, Zuric, and Arrow in Switzerland, and some to Geneva, to the number of
eight hundred, and upwards. And these are the Names of some of these Refugees.

BISHOPS.
And who?
Poynet of Winchester, Barlow of Bath and Wells, Scory of Chichester, Coverdale
of Exon; And Bale of Ossory.

DEANS.
Richard Cox, Dean of Christ's- Church Oxon, and of Westminster; James Haddon,
Dean of Exeter, Robert Horn of Durham, William Turner of Wells, Thomas Sampson
of Chichester.

ARCHDEACONS.
Edmund Cranmer, the Archbishop's Brother, Archdeacon of Cant. John Aelmer of
Stow, Bullingham of Lincoln, Thomas Young Precenter of S. David's.

DOCTORS of Divinity and Preachers.
Edmund Grindal, Robert King, Edwin Sands, Ios. Jewel, Reinolds, Pilkingtons,
two Brothers; John Joseph, David Whitehead, John Alvey, John Pedder, John
Biddil, Thomas Becon, Robert and Richard Turner, Edmund Allein, Levers, three
Brothers, John Pekins, Tho. Cottisford, Tho. Donel, Alex. Nowel with hi^
Brother, Barthol. Traheron, John Wollock, John Old, John Medwel, Ioh. Rough,
John Knocks, John Appleby, John Perkhurst, Edward Large, Galf. Jones, Robert
Crowley, Robert Wisdom, Robert Watson, William Goodman, Ant. Gilby, Will.
VVhittingham, John Makebrey, Hen. Reynolds, James Perse, Iugg, Edmunds, Cole,
Mounteyn; two Fisher's, Da. Simson, John Bendal, Beaumont, Humfrey Bentham;
Reymiger, Bradbridg, Saul, etc.

Besides, of Noblemen, Merchants, Tradesmen, Artificers and Plebeians,
Chiliades. Pref. to Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, in Latin.
many hundreds. And God provided graciously for them, and raised them up
Friends in England, that made large Contributions from time to time for their
Relief, and for the maintenance of such as were Scholars and Students in
Divinity especially. And great was the Favor that the Strangers showed to
their Fugitive Guests.

Here at home Vengeance was taken upon those that set up the Lady Jane. And the
Chief of all, the Duke of Northumberland, Duke of Northumberland put to death.
was brought to Tower^ill to lose his Head. Who indeed was cared for by no
Body, and was the only Instrument of putting the King upon altering the
Succession; and who was broadly talked of to have been the shortner of that
excellent Prince's Life by Poison, to make Room the sooner for his Son's
Advancement, who had Married the said Jane. In Prison he was Visited by Bishop
Hethe, and afterward pretended to be brought off by him to the acknowledgment
of the Roman Catholick-Religion. After his Condemnation he, with the Marquess
of Northampton, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir John Gates, Sir Thomas Palmer, heard a
Mass within the Tower, and received the Sacrament in one kind, after the Popish
fashion. The Duke of Northumberland was drawn hereunto by a Promise that was
made him, That if he would Recant and hear Mass, he should have his Pardon,
yea, though his Head were upon the Block.

In his Speech August 22, when he was Executed* he acknowledged, His Speech.
How he had been misled by others; and called the Preachers Seditious, and
Lewd, and advised the People to return home to the old Religion. And that since
the new Religion came among them, God had plagued them by Wars and Tumults,
Famine and Pestilence. He propounded the example of the Germans, how their new
Doctrine had brought Ruin upon them. And quoted that Article in the Creed to
them, I believe the Catholic Church, to convine them of the Roman Catholic
Faith. If this Speech were not of Hethe's inditing to be used by the Duke, yet
this Argument from the Creed, I am apt to think was his, it being his Custom to
make use of it. For I find in a Conference betwixt this Bishop, and Rogers, he
asked him, if he did not know his Creed, and urged Credo sanctam Ecclesiam
Catholicam. But Rogers could tell him, that he did not find the Bishop of Rome
there. If any be minded to see the Duke's Speech at length, he may have
recourse to the Appendix, where I have set it down, No. LXXIII.
as I found it in one of the Cottonian Volumes.

But Gates and Palmer, notwithstanding their hearing Mass, Sir John Gates his
Speech;
at their Execution the same Day and Place, confessed the Faith they had
learned in the Gospel. The former confessed, That he had lived as vitiously and
wickedly all his Life, as any in the World. And yet, that he was a great reader
of the Scripture; but a worse follower there was not living. For he read it,
not to edify, but to dispute, and to make Interpretations after his own Fancy.
Exhorting the People to take heed how they read God's Word, and played and
gamed with God's Holy Mysteries. For he told them, that except they humbly
submitted themselves to God, and read his Word charitably, and to the intent to
be edified thereby; it would be but Poison to them, and worse. And so asked the
Queen, and all the World Forgiveness.

Palmer thanked God for his affliction. For, And Palmer's.
That he had learned more in one little dark Corner of the Tower, than ever he
learned by any Travailes, in as many Places as he had been. There he had seen
God, what he was, and his numerous Works, and his Mercies. And seen himself
thoroughly what himself was; a Lump of Sin and Earth, and of all Vileness the
vilest. And so concluding, that he feared not Death; That neither the
sprinkling of the Blood of two shed before his Eyes, nor the shedding thereof,
nor the bloody Ax it self, should make him afraid. And so praying all to pray
for him, he said some Prayers, and without any daunting laid down his Head upon
the Block.

The Duke's labors to get hi^ Life.
But the Duke of Northumberland submitted himself to base and mean Practices to
save his Life. He renounced his Religion: nay, disavowed, That he ever was of
the Religion professed in K. Edward's Days (if we may believe Parsons) but only
hypocritically for worldly Ends complied with it. Wardword, p. 43.
And if he might but have lived, he could have been contented to spend his Days
in a Mouse-hole. For from a Priest I have this Relation, and the Papists best
knew the Intrigues of Queen Mary's Reign. After Sentence pronounced upon him,
he made Means to speak with Bishop Gardener, who he knew could do most of any
with the Queen. When the Bishop came to him in Company with another Councellor,
to be Witness of their Discourse, (who himself told my Author these Passages)
the Duke asked the Bishop, If there were no hope at all for him to live, and to
do some Penance the rest of his Days for his sins past. Alas! said he, let me
live a little longer, though it be but in a Mouse-hole. The Bishop replied,
That he wished to God any thing could have contented his Grace, but a Kingdom,
when he was at liberty, and in prosperity. And even at that present he wished
it lay in his Power to give him that Mousehole: For he would allow him the best
Palace he had in the World for that Mousehole. And did moreover then offer to
do for him what he could possible. But because his offense, he said, was great,
and Sentence past against him, and his Adversaries many, it would be best for
him to provide for the worst: and especially, that he stood well with God, in
matter of Conscience and Religion. For to speak plainly, as he went on, it was
most likely he must Die. The Duke answered, He would dispose himself, and
desired he might have a learned Priest sent him for his Confession, and
spiritual Comfort. And as for Religion, said he, you know, my Lord Bishop, that
I can be of no other but of Yours, which is the Catholic. For I never was of
any other indeed, nor ever so foolish as to believe any of that which we had
set up in K. Edward's Days: but only to use the same for my own purpose of
Ambition. For which God forgive me. And so I mean to testify publicly at my
Death. For it is true. The Bishop, says my Author, went away with an afflicted
Heart, and shed many Tears, as he returned: and went to the Queen, and
entreated so earnestly for him, as he had half gained her Consent for his Life.
Which so much terrified the Duke's Adversaries, as presently they got the
Emperor Charles, that was in Flanders, to write to the Queen a very resolute
and earnest Letter, that it was not safe for her, nor his Estate, to Pardon his
Life. And with that he was Executed.

Whatever credit is to be given to the rest of this Relation, I can hardly
believe that Passage that he is reported to say to the Bishop, That he was
never otherwise than a Roman Catholic, and that he did all along dissemble his
Religion for worldly Ends: Whether he was always ^ Papist.
and that he would testify as much at his Death. Because this does no ways
comport with his Speech upon the Scaffold; wherein he mentions no such thing,
but rather the contrary. Nor did he declare any such thing when he came to Die.
He said indeed, that he was deceived and misled, but no where, that he
dissembled. And if he were deceived, he dissembled not.

CHAP. IV. Peter Martyr departs. A Parliament.
THE Strangers had this piece of Mercy shown them, P. Martyr departs.
that they were suffered to depart the Kingdom. Among the rest that went away
this Year was Peter Martyr, the famous and learned Professor of Divinity in
Oxford. But with much ado; For at first he was not only forbid to read his
Lectures, but not to stir a Foot out of the City of Oxon, nor to convey any of
his Goods away. He obeyed, and afterward was permitted by the Council to
depart. He came first to Lambeth to the Archbishop; but when he was committed
to Prison, Martyr went to London, where he remained in great Danger, both for
his Religion, and for his great Familiarity with the Archbishop, and other
pious Protestant Bishops. However he thought not fit to transport himself
without leave from the Government. He signified to them, that he came not
hither on his own Head, but that he was sent for by K. Edward, and sent from
the Town of Strasburgh. And produced his Broad-seals from both. And so since
there was no further need of him, he desired leave to depart. Which he obtained
by Letters from the Queen her self. But the Papists, his fatal Enemies, cried
out, That such an Enemy of the Popish Religion ought not to be dismissed, but to
be fetched out of the Ship, and carried to Prison, and punished. He understood
also by his Friends, that when he was got over the Sea, the Danger was not
past. For there were Snares for him in Flanders and Brabant; whereby they made
no doubt to take him. But he used his Wits to save himself. For when other
Congregations of Protestant Strangers went straight, some for Freezland, and
some for Denmark, by Vessels they had hired, (among which was John a Lasco's
Congregation) he procured an honest and godly Ship-master, who kept him
fourteen Days in his own House, that so all might think he was gone with the
other Strangers, and his Enemies cease making search for him in the Vessels
that were bound for Foreign Parts. And then the Master sailed away with P.
Martyr to Antwerp, going into that Place by Night for the more privacy. And by
him he was brought to his Friends; and by them, before Day, conveyed in a
Wagon out of Town, and so traveled safely through Countries that hated him,
unto Strasburgh. And by God's Goodness, and his own Celerity, he arrived safe
among his Friends, who received him with the greatest Joy. And the Senate
conferred upon him his old Place which he enjoyed before he went for England.
Vit. P. Mart. per Simler.


And Martyr needed not to be discontented that he was gotten out of England,
Malice toward him.
considering how insufferably he was affronted, undermined, belied by the
Popish Party in Oxon: Who, one would think might have better entreated a Man of
Quality by Birth; a Man besides, of great Learning, Integrity and Reverence,
and whom the King had thought good for his great Parts to place for his
Professor of Divinity in that University; and a Man who also had always carried
himself inoffensively unto all. The blame of this inhospitable Usage might lie
upon the English Nation, and be a Reflection upon the Natives; were it not more
truly to be laid to the furious Spirit that Popish Principles inspire Men with.
This Peter Martyr did resent, and took notice of to the Archbishop of
Canterbury in his Epistle Dedicatory, before his Book of the Eucharist. There
he writes, That he could not have thought there were any in the World, unless
he had found it, that with such crafty Wiles, deceitful Tricks, and bitter
Slanders, would rage so against a Man that deserved no manner of Evil of them,
nor ever hurt any one of them either in Word or Deed. And yet they tore his
Name with most shameless Lies; and would never make an end. And if they did
thus rudely carry themselves toward him in K. Edward's Time, what then may we
conclude they would do, when the Government favored them?

A Scandal of the Queen.
In this first Year of Q. Mary, a very foul Scandal was blown about of her, that
She was with Child by her Chancellor, Bishop Gardener; however it was raised,
whether of her Enemies to render her odious, or of some Zealots of Popish
Religion, to show the desire they had of her Matching with him, or some other
round Roman Catholic, as he was, and for whom She carried a very great
Reverence. A great Reflection upon her Chastity, and might have spoiled her
Marriage. It fled as far as Norfolk, and there spread it self. But such an
infamous Report, not being fit to be put up, Henry Earl of Sussex, being Lord
Lieutenant of that County, took upon him to examine this Scandal, and to search
it to the very first Reporter. Titus B. 2.
And so I find a Bill drawn, in the Cotton-Library, subscribed by that Earl's
own Hand, which set forth, that Laurence Hunt of Disse in Norfolk, came to
Robert Lowdal, Chief Constable, and told him, That he did hear say, that the
Queen's Majesty was with Child by the said Bishop, and that his Wife did tell
him so. And when his Wife was examined, She said, She had it of one Sheldrake's
Wife. And when Sheldrake's Wife was examined She said, She had it of her
Husband. And when he was examined, he said he had it of one Wilby of Diss. And
Wilby examined, said, he had it of one John Smith, of Cockstreet. And John
Smith said, he heard it of one Widow Miles. And She being examined, said, she
had it of two Men, but what they were she could not tell, nor where they dwelt.
And then after this Bill follow all their Examinations distinctly. Which I
suppose was drawn up for the Council, signed with Sussex's Hand. And what
followed of this I know not. Only in another Manuscript there is a Memorial of
one John Albone of Trunch in Norfolk, who in the first of the Queen was
indicted for saying, that the Queen was with Child by Winchester.

A Parliament met this Year in the Month of October. The Queen knew how
difficult it would be to obtain her Purpose, A Parliament.
to overthrow all that had been established concerning Religion in her
Brother's Days; And therefore when this Parliament was to be summoned, She
impeached the free Election of Members, by dispatching abroad into the several
Counties her Letters directing the choice. Hales Oration*
And such Knights and Burgesses were chosen by Force and Threatening for many
Places, as were judged fit to serve her Turn. And diverse that were duly chosen,
and lawfully returned, were thrust out, and others without any Order or Law put
in their Places. For the People were aware what the Queen intended this
Parliament should do; and therefore did bestir themselves in most Places to
return honest Men. In the Upper House Tailor Bishop of Lincoln was in his Robes
violently thrust out of the House. In the House of Commons, Alexander Nowel,
and two more, chosen Burgesses, lawfully chosen, returned and admitted, were so
served. Which, according to the Judgment of some, made the Parliament actually
void, as by a Precedent of the Parliament holden at Coventry in the 38o of H.
VI. it appears. As also her third Parliament was reckoned by many to be void,
because in the Writs, from Philip and Mary, part of the Title of the Kings of
England, viz. Supreme Head of the Church of England, was left out. Which by a
Statute made in the 35o of Henry VIII. was ordained to be united and annexed
for ever to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. In which third Parliament of the
Queen they repealed what was done by K. Henry VIII. for the restitution of the
Liberty of the Realm, and extinguishing the usurped Authority of the Bishop of
Rome. This Flaw Gardener, the Lord Chancellor well seeing, thought craftily to
excuse by saying, (as may be seen in a Piece of the Statute made in the same
Parliament, Cap. 8.) That it lay in the free Choice, and free Liberty of the
Kings of this Realm, whether they would express the same Title in their Style,
or no. But it is replied to this, that though any Man may renounce his own
private Right, yet he may not renounce his Right in that which touches the
Commonwealth, or a third Person. And this Title and Style more touched the
Commonwealth, and the Realm of England, than the King.

In this first Parliament an Act was made for confirmation of the Marriage of
the Queen's Mother to her Father K. Henry. The Parliament repeal Q. Katherine's
Divorce; and Cranmer taxed for it.
Herein the leading Men showed their Malice against the good Archbishop by
their wording of the Preamble: as That Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop did,
most ungodly and against Law, judge the Divorce upon his own unadvised
Understanding of the Scriptures, and upon the Testimonies of the Universities,
and some bare and most untrue Conjectures. And they declared the Sentence given
by him to be unlawful. But I cannot let this pass, for the Reputation of the
Archbishop, without taking notice of the Censure that the Bishop of Sarum does
worthily bestow upon Bishop Gardener, Hist. Reform. Vol. 2. p. 254.
whom he concludes to be the drawer up of this Act: That he showed himself
herein to be past all Shame, and that it was as high a pitch of Malice and
Impudence, as could be devised. For Gardener had been setting this on long
before Cranmer was known to the King, and had joined with him in the
Commission, and had given his Consent to the Sentence. Nor was the Divorce
merely grounded upon Cranmer's understanding the Scriptures, but upon the
fullest and most studied Arguments, that had perhaps been in any Age brought
together in one particular Case. And both Houses of Convocation had condemned
the Marriage before his Sentence.

CHAP. V. The Archbishop Attainted.
The ABp attainted of Treason.
THIS Parliament Attainted Cranmer with the Lady Jane and her Husband, and some
others. And in November he was adjuged guilty of High Treason at Guild Hall.
And under this Judgment he lay for a good while: which was very uneasy to him,
desiring to suffer under the imputation of Heresy under this Government, rather
than Treason. He was now looked upon as divested of his Archbishopric, being
a Person attainted: And the Fruits of his Bishopric were Sequestered.

The Dean of Canterbury acts in the Vacancy.
Canterbury being now without an Archbishop, the Dean, Dr. Wotton, acted in
that Station, according to his Office, in the Vacancy of the Sea. So he sent
out many Commissions. There was a Commission from him to John Cotterel, and
William Bowerman, to exercise Jurisdiction in the Sea of Wells, Ex Reg. Eccl.
Cant.
by the Resignation of Barlow Bishop there. Another Commission to the Sea of
Bristol, upon the Resignation of Bush. Another for the Sea of Litchfield, upon
the Death of Richard Sampson. Which Commission was directed to David Pool, LL.
D. dated 1554. September. ult. Another to exercise Jurisdiction in the Sea of
Exon, Vacant by the Death of Veysy, February 9. 1554. Another for the
Consecration of Gilbert Bourn Bishop of Bath and Wells, John White Bishop of
Lincoln, Morice Griffith of Rochester, John Cotes of Chester, Henry Morgan of
S. David's, James Brook of Gloucester. Who were all Consecrated together in the
Church of S. Savior's Southwark, April 1. 1554. This Commission I suppose was
to the Bishop of Winchester. Another Commission for the Consecration of Hopton
Bishop of Norwich, dated October. 6. 1554. consecrated October. 28. following.
Another Commission to Consecrate Holiman Bishop of Bristol, and Bayn Bishop of
Litchfield, dated November. 16, 1554. consecrated November. 18. following. Another
Commission to Consecrate James Turbervil Bishop of Exon, who was Consecrated
September 8. 1555. And for William Glin Bishop of Bangor, the same Date. All
these five last named were Consecrated in a Chapel of the Bishop of London in
London.

The ABp sues for Pardon of Treason.
The poor Archbishop most instantly sued to the Queen for his Pardon,
acknowledging his Fault in the most submissive manner that could be. But though
She had granted Pardons to diverse others that had signed K. Edward's Will, and
made no such boggle to do it as the Archbishop did, yet the Archbishop
remained unpardoned. He sent diverse humble petitionary Letters to the Queen and
her Council for the obtaining this Favor. In one Letter to her, he called it
his Heinous Folly and Offense: and said, That he never liked it; nor that any
thing that the Queen's Brother ever did, grieved him so much: and that if it
had been in his Power, he would have let the doing of it: That diverse of the
Queen's Council knew what he had said to the King and the Council against
proceeding in it: and that he endeavored to talk to the King alone about it,
but was not permitted: and that when he could not dissuade him from this Will,
he was hardly brought to sign it, notwithstanding what the Judges told him, to
satisfy him in Point of Law. And that at last it was the King's earnest Request
to him, that he would not be the only Man that refused it. Which with the
Judgment of the Lawyers, overcame him to set his Hand. But I refer the Reader
to the Appendix to weigh this whole Letter, No. LXXIV.
as it is there transcribed. Another Petition the next Year, 1554, he sent up
from Oxon, by Dr. Weston, to the Council. And therein he begged them to
interceed with the Queen for his Pardon. But Weston carrying it halfway to
London, and then opening it, and seeing the Contents of it, sent it back again
to the Archbishop, and refused to be the Messenger.

This at length was the Resolution that was taken concerning him in this
Matter: (because for shame, Obtains it.
they could not deny him a Pardon, when others far more Guilty, and deeper in
the Business, had it) That he should be pardoned the Treason as an Act of the
Queen's Grace, and then he should be proceeded against for Heresy, for di^ they
were resolved he should. When this Pardon was at length obtained, he was right
glad; being very gladly ready to undergo Afflictions for the Doctrine that he
had taught, and the Reformation he had set on Foot, because this he reckoned to
be suffering for God's Cause, and not as an Evil-doer.

The Archbishop looked now with weeping Eyes upon the present sad Condition of
Religion, He desires to open his Mind to the Queen concerning Religion.
and the miserable Apostasy of the Church, lapsed into all the formerly
rejected Superstitions. Nor could he now procure any Redress. Yet he felt a
pressure upon his Spirit to do something toward it. So he attempted in a
Letter to the Queen, to get Liberty from her freely to open to her his Mind
about the State of Religion: Hoping that when She heard plainly and truly the
Reasons that moved her Father and Brother to do what they did (a thing
studiously concealed from her) She might be better inclined. He told her, That
indeed it lay not in him* nor in any private Subject, to reform Things, but
only in her Majesty, but quietly to suffer what they could not amend; yet he
thought it his Duty, considering what Place he once bore, and knowing what he
did, and bearing a great part in all the Alterations made in Religion, to show
the Queen his Mind. And when he had done this, then he should think himself
discharged. And therefore he earnestly sued to her for her leave. But I do not
find that ever he obtained it.

CHAP. VI. A Convocation.
A Convocation.
THERE was now a Convocation: which was so packed, or so compliant, that six
only of the whole House publicly owned K. Edward's Reformation: Haddon Dean of
Exon, Philips Dean of Rochester, Young Chanter of S. David's, Philpot
Archdeacon of Winchester, Elmer Archdeacon of Stow, and Cheiny Archdeacon
of Hereford, which last owned the Presence with the Papists, but denied the
Transubstantiation. The Queen commanded this Convocation to hold a public
Disputation at S. Paul's Church, concerning the Natural Presence of Christ in
the Sacrament of the Altar. Which how well it was opposed by four or five of
the six (for Young went away) in the presence of abundance of Noblemen and
others, recourse is to be had to Fox. There was a true Report of the
Disputation of these Men at this Convocation, which Philpot, one of the
Disputants, wrote, and had it printed. Which he owned at one of his
Examinations before the Bishop of London and others; And perhaps may be the
same we have extant in Fox's Mon^ments.

But because both Fox and Bishop Burnet are brief concerning the opening of
this Convocation, How it opened.
therein I shall be more large and particular. The Bishop of London's Chaplain,
Harpsfield, began in a Sermon at Paul's to the Clergy then assembled. That
finished, those of the Upper House advised those of the Lower to choose a
Prolocutor. And they chose Weston Dean of Westminster. Who by P^ Dean of
Chichester, and VVymbesly Archdeacon of London, was presented by Speeches to
the Bishops. At which time Weston made his gratulatory Oration to the House,
and the Bishop of London answered him. Which Sermon and four Orations were put
together in a Book printed in December, 1553. by Cawood. Harpsfield's Text was,
Attendite vobis, and universo gregi, etc. Act. 20. Whence he took occasion to
treat of three Things. I. How well Paul took heed to himself and his Flock. II.
How ill the Pastors of late regarded each. III. What way was to be used, that
they might take heed to themselves and their Flocks. Under the first Head he
showed how S. Paul took heed to himself by keeping under his Body, and bringing
it into Subjection: by taking heed of three Pests of an Ecclesiastical Li^e,
Flattery, Avarice, and Vainglory: and that he might in all things propound
himself a Pattern to Believers. And Secondly, as he thus took heed to himself,
so he took heed to the Flock in three particulars: In the Doctrine, which he
preached; In his diligence to preserve his Flock from Wolves; and in his
Imposition of Hands, whereby he provided ^it Ministers for the Church. And
then, when he came unto the Second Head in the Division of his Discourse, he
took occasion at large to vent his Malice against the Reformed Ministers in K.
Edward's Days; showing how they failed in all the Particulars before-said. That
they were Belly-Gods; gave themselves over to Junketings and pampering of their
Carcases: that they were unchaste, taking to themselves Wives, some that had
lived threescore Years single. That they were Flatterers, Insinuating
themselves into the Favor of the Courtiers: Covetous also, keeping no
Hospitality; Vainglorious, vaunting themselves to understand the Holy
Scripture, as well as any of the Ancients, daring to compare themselves with
Hierom, Augustine, Ambrose, etc. And some of them from a Shop, endued with no
liberal Discipline, not so much as Grammar, would mount the Pulpit, and there
give out themselves for Learned Men, if they did but rail against whatsoever
was Holy, and boast that they had the Spirit. No Vice of the Laity, but they
were guilty of it. And then as to their neglect of the Flock, their Doctrine
was such, as they might well repent and be ashamed of. How did they tear the
Lord's Flock, and how many Souls send to Hell, and what pernicious Doctrines
bring into the Kingdom? That they brought into the Ministry, and to preach
God's Word, Cobblers, Dyers, Weavers, Fullers, Barbars, Apothecaries, Beggars,
Jesters, fitter for the Plow-tail than the Ministry of the Word. And with a
great deal more of such railing Stuff were the Minds of the Clergy to be
prepared, vigorously to overthrow all the Reformation, and to bring back Popery
again.

The Tower, as well as the Fleet and Marshalsea, The ABp and three more crowded
together in the Tower.
was crowded with Prisoners. All that were supposed to favor Religion, or that
made any whisper against the Popish Religion, or that had any the least Hand in
Q. Iane's Business, being taken up and committed. The Tower being so full, our
Archbishop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and Bradford, were all thrust together
into one Chamber. Which however inconvenient it were, yet they were very glad
to be together; that they might have the opportunity of conferring with one
another, and establishing one another. There they read over the New Testament
together with great deliberation and study; on purpose to see if there were any
thing that might favor that Popish Doctrine of a Corporal Presence. But after
all, they could find no Presence, but a Spiritual. Nor that the Mass was any
Sacrifice for Sin. But they found in that Holy Book, that the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross was perfect, holy and good; and that God did require none
other, nor that it should be ever done again: as Latimer, one of the four,
related in his Protestation given to Weston.

CHAP. VII. The Queen sends to Cardinal Pole.
THE Queen out of that great Opinion She had of Cardinal Pole, The Queen sends
to Pole.
either to make him her Husband, or her Archbishop in Cranmer's Room, sent
Letters to him, one dated from London, October 28. written in Latin, conveyed
to him from the Emperor's Court: probably brought thither by Commendone, who
had been sent by the Pope's Legate in that Court, a private Agent unto her: and
another Dated January 28. The Cardinal was coming now from the Pope, as his
Legate, and in his Journey staid, for some Reason of State, in the Emperor's
Dominions. In this stay he thought fit in answer to both her Letters, to send
his Mind at large by his Messenger Thomas Goldwel; who was once, if I mistake
not, Prior of the Church of Canterbury; but long since fled out of England, and
lived with Pole; and by the Queen afterward preferred to the Bishopric of S.
Asaph.

The Contents of her Letters.
The Contents of the Queen's former Letter consisted in two Points: The one
concerning the difficulty She feared in renouncing the Title of the Supremacy.
Concerning theSupremacy.
For She writ him, that when the Parliament yielded to the abolishing of the
Laws, wherein her Mother's Matrimony was made Illegitimate, the lower House
willingly agreed to the establishment of her Right of succeeding to the Crown,
but made a great boggle of abolishing the Title of the Supremacy: thinking that
might be a way to the introducing the Pope's Authority again, which they could
not gladly hear of: And therefore neither did they like to hear of a Legate
from the Pope. Hence the Queen, who knew Pole was now commissioned by the Pope
for his Legate in this Kingdom, and ready to come, did entreat him to stop for
a while. And She desired his Advice, in case the Parliament would not be
brought to let go the Law, wherein the Supremacy was placed in the Crown
Imperial of this Land. The other Point, wherein the Queen desired information
of the Cardinal, was, how the Commission She had privately given to Commendone,
was published in the Consistory of Rome, as her Ambassador resident at Venice
had certified her.

Concerning the new Bishops.
The Sum of her other Letter to the Cardinal, was, concerning certain Persons,
that She had in her intentions to make Bishops in the void Sees: They were
Morgan, White, Parfew, Coats, Brooks, Holiman and Bayn: How they might be put
into those Sees without derogation to the Authority of the Sea Apostolic. For
She intended not to extend the Power of the Crown further than it was in use
before the Schism. She sent him also the two Acts that had past in the
Parliament, the one of the Legitimation of the Matrimony of Q. Katharine with
K. Henry, and the other of the Sacraments to be used in that manner as they
were used the last Year of K. Henry VIII. which She sent to him, because She
knew they would be Matter of Comfort and Satisfaction to him.

Pole's Advice to the Queen.
As to both these Letters of the Queen, he gave Instructions to Goldwel to
signify to her Majesty what his Thoughts were. As to the first his Advice was,
That the Authority and Acceptableness of the Person goes a great way, to make
any Proposition well entertained and received by the People. Instructions to
Goldwel. Titus B. 2.
And that seeing there were none, neither of the Temporalty nor Spiritualty,
but that had either spoke or writ against the Pope's Supremacy; therefore he
thought that her Majesty her self would be the fittest Person to propound it
with her own Mouth. Which was the course the Emperor took to justify his War
with the French King. He did it by his own Mouth before the Pope and Cardinals.
He would have her at the same time to let the Parliament know plainly, that he
(Cardinal Pole) being the Pope's Legate, was to be admitted and sent for. And
therefore that in order to this the Law of his Banishment might be repealed,
and he restored in Blood. As to the second Point, which seemed to offend the
Queen, that Commendone had revealed that in the Consistory, which She told him
in much Secresy, Pole said, That he kept her Counsel, and told nothing that he
heard from her Mouth, but only what he had heard of certain devout Catholics
that knew the Queen's mind. Which was in general concerning the devout Mind her
Majesty bare to God and the Church: But that nothing was spoken of that
particular Matter, that She would have none but the Pope made acquainted with.
Which private matter it seems was, that She desired the Pope to make Pole his
Legate to England.

But that he should be thus stopped in his Journey, Disgusts his stop.
when the Pope had sent him upon such a weighty Errand, the Cardinal signified
in the same Letter his disgust of. And, He feared it might be so ill taken by
the Pope and Cardinals, that they might send for him back again to Rome, and
not permit him to go on that intended charitable Design. And that it was
contrary to her first Commission; when She showed, more fervency to receive the
Obedience of the Church, (as he took the confidence to tell her). And that
therefore he was in some suspicion, that the next Commission he should receive
from the Pope, should be to return back into Italy again: Because the Pope
might think, that he had done his part touching his Demonstration of his Care
of the Queen, and her Realms, when he offered both so readily all Graces that
tended to make a Reconciliation of both to the Church. In which perhaps, (said
he) the Cardinals would think his Holiness had been too Liberal. And that they
might take his Stop, without their Consent, for a great Indignity. And this
Revocation he still more feared, if his stay should be deferred any longer
space.

The Cardinal upon this his Stay sent a Servant of his by Post to Rome to make
a fair Excuse for this Stop; namely, Sends to Rome about this his stop,
that the Queen shortly trusted that the Matters of the Parliament should have
that Satisfaction that the Cardinal desired. Which was the effect of a Letter
the Queen writ to one Henry Pyning his Servant. He also let the Pope know by
the aforesaid Messenger, that it was the Empeperor's Advice, that the Queen
should proceed in Matters of Religion warily and slowly, and not to be too
hasty, until temporal Matters were better settled.

He also wrote Letters to the Emperor, And to the Emperor.
which he sent by his Servant Pyning, to persuade him to remove this Stop: and
bad his said Servant to repair to the Emperor's Confessor, that he should
personally resort unto him, and by all means possible, move the Emperor to let
the Cardinal go forward.

As to the two Acts of Parliament, which the Queen sent him, His Judgment of
two late Acts of Parliament.
he wrote her, That they were partly to his Satisfaction, and partly not. For
the Act of Ratification of the Matrimony was defective, in that the Parliament
mentioning the Wisdom of the Parents in making the Match, did make no mention
of their Wisdom; in that, besides their own Consent, they procured the Pope's
Dispensation, and the Authority of the Sea Apostolic; whereby the impediments
of Conjunction by the Laws of the Church were taken away: Which, (he added)
ought by all means to have been mentioned. As to the other Act for Confirmation
of the Sacraments, the defect of that, (he said) lay, in that this Act made
those capable of partaking of the Sacraments, that were not yet entered into the
Unity of the Church, and remained still in Schism. But to receive more full
Satisfaction in these matters I refer the Reader to the Instructions given by
the Cardinal to Goldwel, as they may be read in the Appendix. No. LXXV.


CHAP. VIII. The Dealings with the Married Clergy.
The married Clergy deprived, and divorced.
THE Marriage of the Clergy gave great Offense to those that were now uppermost.
For many of both Persuasions, Papists as well as Protestants, had taken Wives;
it being allowed by a Law in K. Edward's Days; but would now no longer be
endured, and was pretended to be against an Oath they had taken, when they
received Holy Orders. For the Queen sent a Letter and Instructions, dated March
4, to all the Bishops; some of the Contents whereof were, To deprive all the
Married Clergy, and to amove them from their Benefices and Promotions
Ecclesiastical; and besides this, not to suffer them to abide with their Wives,
or Women, (as the Papists now chose rather to style them) but to divorse and
punish them. But that such Priests should be somewhat more favorably dealt
withal, that with the Consent of their Wives, did openly promise to abstain.
These nevertheless were to be enjoined Penance by the Bishop, and then it lay
in him to admit them again to their former Ministration; but not in the same
Place they were in before. Of which they were to be deprived; and a part of
that Benefice they were outed of, was to be allowed them, according to the
Bishop's Discretion. According to these Instructions of the Queen, a sad Havoc
was made among the Clergy, some thousands being computed to be put out of their
Livings upon this Account. And a good Expedient it proved to get rid of the
soberer Clergy, that were not for the present Turn.

That the Reader may take some prospect of these Transactions with the Married
Clergy, I will here set down what was done with some of them under the
Jurisdiction of Canterbury by the Dean and Chapter, our Archbishop being now
laid aside.

Married Priests in London cited to appear.
Of those Priests, beneficed in London, that pertained to the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Jurisdiction there, nine were cited, by a Citation March 7, (that
is but three Days after the Queen's Letter) from the Dean and Chapter, Sede
Cant. tunc vacant, (as it is said in the said Citation) to appear in
Bow-Church London, before Henry Harvey, LL. D. Vicar General, for being Married
Men. These Persons thus cited were these: John Joseph Rector of the Church of
S. Mary Le Bow, Stephen Green Rector of S. Dionys Back-Church, Laurence
Saunders Rector of the Church of Alhallowes in Bredstreet. Peter Alexander
Rector of Alhallowes Lumbard-street, Christopher Ashburn Rector of S. Michael's
Crooked-Lane, Thomas Mountain Rector of S. Michaels in Riolane, John Turnor
Rector of S. Leonards in East-cheap, Richard Marsh Rector of S. Pancrace, John
Eliot Schoolmaster in the Parish of S. Leonard East-cheap. It may not be amiss
to set down the Tenor, wherein the Citation ran, viz.

That since it was (alas!) notoriously manifest, Ex Regist. ^ccl. Cant.
Quod Rectores and Presbyteri, quorum nomina in pede hujus Edicti
specificantur, contra jura Ecclesiae, sanctorum patrum Decreta, and laudabiles
Ecclesiae Catholicae generatim observatas and usitatas consuetudines, sese
praetextu foederis conjugalis cum nonnullis foeminis illicite conjunxerint, sub
falsa Matrimonii appellatione, cum iisdem public cohabitaverint, and impudice
vixerint, in voti sui alias emissi violationem, animarum suarum detrimentum, ac
aliorum Christi fidelium exemplum long perniciosum, in Christi Ecclesia non
ferendum, unde pro officii nostri debito, and tantorum scelerum ab Ecclesiae
Christi eliminatione penitus eradicandum, etc. juxta illustrissimae Dominae
nostrae Reginae monitionis in hac part continentiam procedere volentes, etc.
The Citation was returned by the Apparitor: who declared, That he found and
personally cited Richard Marsh and John Turnor, and that he affixed the
Citation of the rest on the Church Doors, belonging to the respective Rectors,
on March 8. And no wonder the Apparitor met with no more of them, some being
fled, and some in Prison, and some already violently turned out of their
Churches and gone. On March 16. according to the Citation, Marsh and Turnor
made their personal appearance, and were sworn to make true answer to such
Interrogatories as should be put to them. What those Interrogatories were, I
shall set down by and by. These Persons confessed, that they made profession of
Religious Vows, and after holy Orders, were married, and lived with their
Wives. Hereupon Sentence was denounced against them, to prohibit them to
officiate, and to suspend them from the Profits of their Benefices. And on
Monday following, to appear again to receive further Sentence of Deprivation,
Divorce, etc. John Eliot, Schoolmaster, it seems submitted to Penance: for he
was not presently thrust out of his School, but enjoined not to teach his
Scholars Matins, Psalter, or the like, in English, but in Latin, so as they
might be able to answer the Priest that officiated. The rest, that appeared
not, were declared contumacious, and to be proceeded against on Monday
following, by Deprivation, etc.

The Interrogatories ministered unto these Men, Interrogatories for the married
Clergy.
and to be ministered to all other Married Priests, were these.

I. An fuit Religiosus: Cujus ordinis; and in quo Monasterio sive Domo.

II. An fuit promotus ad sacros Ordines, dum fuit in Monasterio.

III. In quo and quibus sacris: and an ministravit in Altaris ministerio; and
quot annis.

IV. An citra professionem regularem conjunxit se mulieri sub appellatione
Matrimonii.

V. Cum qua: and in qua Ecclesia fuit solemnizatio Matrimonii; and per quem.

VI. Quam duxit, eratne soluta, an vidua.

VII. An cohabitavit cum ea in una and eadem domo, ut vir cum uxore.

VIII. An prolem, vel proles ex ea sustentaverit, necne.

IX. An post and citra Matrimonii hujusmodi solemnizationem, assecutus fuit,
and est, beneficium ecclesiasticum, habens Curam animarum, and quot annis illud
obtinuit.

X. An officium Sacerdotis post and citra assertum matrimonium hujusmodi
contractum, in altaris ministerio se immiscuit, and Sacramentis and
Sacramentalibus ministrandis se ingessit.

XI. An praemissa omnia and singula fuerunt and sunt vera.

According to these Articles, the Confessions of Marsh, Turnor and Eliot, are
registered at large. On Monday March 19, Sentence was pronounced against Marsh
and Turnor, 1. Of Deprivation from their Benefices. 2. Of Suspension from their
Priestly Function. 3. Of Inhibition to cohabit with their Wives. 4. Of nulling
and voiding the pretended Bond of Matrimony; And, 5. of declaration of further
Punishments, according to the Canons of the Church. And* March 20, the like
Sentence was pronounced against the rest that did not appear. Next, the
Sentence of Divorce against John Turnor and his Wife was pronounced: and he was
ordered to do penance on May 14, 1554, in his late Parish Church of East-cheap,
by holding a burning wax Taper, and making a Solemn Confession openly and
distinctly, with a loud Voice, standing in the Body of the Church before the
face of the People, in these words following:

Turnor's Confession.
GOod People, I am come hither, at this present time, to declare unto you my
sorrowful and penitent Heart, for that being a Priest, Ex Regist. Eccl. Cant.
I have presumed to marry one Amy German, Widow; and under pretense of that
Matrimony, contrary to the Canons and Custom of the Universal Church, have kept
her as my Wife, and lived contrary to the Canons and Ordinances of the Church,
and to the evil Example of good Christen People: Whereby now being ashamed of
my former wicked living here, I ask Almighty God Mercy and Forgiveness, and the
whole Church; and am sorry and penitent even from the bottom of my Heart
therefore. And in token hereof, I am here, as you see, to declare and show unto
you this my Repentance, that before God on the latter Day you may testify with
me of the same. And I most heartily and humbly pray, and desire you all, whom
by this evil Example doing I have greatly offended, that for your part you will
forgive me, and remember me in your Prayers, that God may give me Grace, that
hereafter I may live a continent Life, according to his Laws, and the godly
Ordinances of our Mother the holy Catholic Church, through and by his Grace.
And do here before you all openly promise for to do, during my Life. The manner
of the Restitution of these Priests, thus performing their Penance, may be seen
in the Appendix. No. LXXV.


And this is some Account of the Church of Canterbury's Doings, in pursuance of
the Queen's Instructions beforementioned. Boner deprives the married Clergy in
London, without order.
But Bishop Boner, with his Zeal, was beforehand with the Queen; not staying
for any Orders from Above in dealing with his Clergy; but of his own Power, in
the latter end of February, deprived all married Priests, in his Diocese in
London, from their Livings. And after this done, commanded them all to bring
their Wives within a fortnight, that they might be divorced from them.

These were some of the Doings with the Married Priests in London. And in the
same manner did they proceed about this time in Canterbury with Edmund Cranmer,
the Archbishop's Brother, Married Prebendaries in Canterbury, proceeded
against.
Archdeacon and Prebendary of that Church; together with William Willoughby,
William Devenish and Robert Goldson, Prebendaries, and diverse others. For March
15. At the Chapter House in Canterbury, before Henry Harvey LL. D.
Vicar General, Richard Bishop of Dover, Subdean, Richard Parkhurst and John
Mills, Prebendaries of the said Church, personally appeared the said
Archdeacon and Prebendaries, Thomas Brook and Tho. Stevens, Preachers, and
Sherland and Goodrick Petty Canons of the said Church: Who all subscribed with
their own Hands to a Confession of certain Articles exhibited against them,
touching their being Married. And being asked, what they could say, why they
should not be suspended, and deprived for the said pretended Marriages, They
gave this Answer, as it is set down in the Register of that Church; Se nihil
habere dicendum, etc. That they had nothing to say that might be profitable for
them, the Ecclesiastical Law, and the Decrees of the Holy Fathers standing in
their full Force: But by the Law of God, they thought they had lawfully married
their Wives; and being married, might not forsake them with a safe Conscience.
Then Sentence of Suspension from Priestly Function, Sequestration, Deprivation,
and Prohibition to live with their Wives, was pronounced. It is registered, that
they acquiesced in these Sentences against them, no one of them appealing, but
all remaining silent. This is the Account of the good Archbishop's Brother,
his manner of Deprivation, and his peaceable Behavior under it.

Thus he was deprived of his Prebend, Edmund Cranmer deprived of all.
and one Robert Collins was admitted into the same: Of his Rectory of Ickham,
and Robert Marsh succeeded him there, April 12. 1554. and of his Arch-deaconry,
and Nicolas Harpsfield was admitted thereunto. Reg. Eccl. Cant.
Who at the same time entered into Obligation to pay, out of the Profits of the
said Arch-deaconry, unto William Warham late Archdeacon, during his Life, a
yearly Pension of forty Pounds Sterling, March 31. 1554. But some of the Church
then appeared not, being either fled, or in Prison; and those were pronounced
Contumacious, viz. John Joseph, Peter Alexander, and Bernard Ochin,
Prebendaries; Lancelot Ridley, Richard Turner, Thomas Becon and Richard Besely,
Preachers.

These Doings in all Quarters of the Realm raised great Admiration among the
People, upon diverse and sundry Considerations, The Injustice of these
Proceedings.
incident and depending upon such Proceedings: Since these Marriages were no
more than what were agreeable to the Laws of the Land. So that these married
Preachers, in Marrying themselves, were no Transgressors of the Law: and yet
underwent as great Punishments, as though they were so in some high Degree. And
the Proceedings seemed contrary even to the Queen's Commission, comprised in
certain Articles (beforementioned) to her Bishops: Which was, That they should
proceed, according to Learning and Discretion, in these weighty Matters, and
that they should not put any other Canons and Constitutions of the Church in
exercise, than such as might stand with the Law of the Realm. Yet they went in
most Places both against Learning and Discretion, and the Laws of the Land.

Martin's Book against Priests Marriage.
For the bringing this to pass, they first possessed the Queen with great
Prejudices against these Marriages. They cried in her Ears, how uncomely these
Copulations were; how against God and his Honor; how against the Churches
Decrees and Discipline; and how worthy to be dissolved again. And when they had
obtained their Ends with the Queen, and gotten out her Letter and Instructions
for that purpose, and by Warrant thereof executed their Purposes; then for the
giving a better Countenance to a thing that looked so odious, and had so much
Severity in it, to the ruining of so many thousand Families, Books were thought
fit to be published; the purpose of which was to make Married Priests
contemptible, and to show how unlawful and wicked Marriage was in Men of Holy
Orders. Dr. Thomas Martin's Book made the greatest Noise; a Book writ with a
Brow of Brass, so did it abound with confident Untruths and Falsehoods. And to
the further accumulation of the heavy State of the Ministers deprived, were
added in this Book most slanderous Accusations, and untrue Matters surmised
against them to the Queen and Realm. The Author greatly pretended Antiquity and
Authority all along for his Doctrine: Whereas indeed it was nothing but
counterfeited Imitation of Authority, and belying Antiquity. And in short, (to
give you the sense of one Supposed to be Bp Ponet.
who wrote against the Book, and did sufficiently expose it) It was mere
Subtilty without Substance, Wit without Wisdom, Zeal without Knowledge, and Heat
without Charity. To give but one Instance of the unfair and false dealing of
the Author, he says, in his Book, That the Heretics affirmed, that all
Priests and Bishops must of necessity Marry, whether they have the Gift of sole
Life, or no; and that they were so beastly and ignorant, that they should teach
that the Fellowship and Company of a Woman in a Spiritual Man, is a means to
perfect Religion, and that single Life was an hindrance to the same, and that
they should despise all manner of Virginity and single Life in them that had
the Gift of God; and that they pronounced it wicked and abominable, and termed
it a Doctrine of Devils, and the Invention of Antichrist. All which Bishop
Ponet, in the Name of all the Protestants, in his Book did utterly deny, that
ever they said, writ, or thought so.

Wherein Winchester had the greatest Hand.
This Book was indeed made by the Bishop of Winchester, when he was in the
Tower, (and he borrowed much of it from Albertus Pighius) and published about
that time: Martin being then a Student at the University of Bourges in France;
it once happened in some Conversation there, that Edward the King of England
was commended, whether it were for his Virtue, or Learning, or Abilities beyond
his Years; whereat Martin began, as it seemed, to eclipse the King's Honor by
mentioning the Imprisonment of Winchester, saying, That there was a Head-Papist
Prisoner in England, meaning him. Upon which several asked him, Whether it was
not the same Winchester, that had set out an Hodgpodg concerning Marriage of
Priests? He laughing, answered, It was even he. But that no Man ought to
marvel; for that Winchester was more meet for Warlike, Declaration of Boner's
Articles, 1554.
than for Ecclesiastical Disputations. Which Passage I have from Bale; who was
acquainted at that University with Franciscus Baldwin, the Learned Professor of
Law there. Thomas Martin, or Winchester under that Name Fol. 15. Mr. Martin,
Winchester's own Voice. Fol. 40. Gardener in his Book lately spread under the
Name of Tho. Martin. Fol. 77. Bale's Declar.
Out of this Book Martin framed that which went under his Name, with
Winchester's Privity. And this was well enough known to Bale and others in
those Times. Ponet said, that Martin was abused by others, who set him a-work
to bear the Name, and to desire the Fame of so gay a Book, rather than he was
the Author of it indeed.

The said Ponet, or Poinet, late Bishop of Winchester, but now an Exile, very
learnedly answered this Book, in two several Treatises. The first was entitled,
An Apology against Tho. Martin's Blasphemies. In this Treatise, upon occasion
of the Papists prohibition of Marriage to Priests, he proved, that the said
Papists were Heretics, and had taken part in the most principal Parts with all
the Heretics, Answered by Ponet.
that had corrupted the true Church of Christ. The Second Treatise, replenished
with great Learning, he lived not to finish, (though some doubt whether he were
the Author of this Book) but the Copy falling into the Hands of Matthew Parker
Archbishop of Canterbury, he published it in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, with very large and excellent Additions of his own. Ponet had thoroughly
studied this Point, and I believe was put upon the Study of it by Archbishop
Cranmer, whose Chaplain he was. For before this, he put forth two Books upon
this Argument, viz. Of the Marriage of Ministers; And a Defense of that
Marriage.

The last thing I have to say concerning these Orders taken with the Married
Clergy, is, That there were two things thought very Hard, The Confessions of
the Married Priests.
which were put upon those that were willing to comply, and put away their
Wives. The one was in relation to the public Confessions they were to make.
Which were put into their Mouths by others, and drawn up for them in that
manner, as made them tell horrible Lies. They must speak their own Shame in
Bills of their Penance: lying against themselves most vilely, and most
shamefully; disabling their Credit and Estimation for ever. And to give an
Instance: One such Confession, which was much cried out against, was made by
one Sir John Busby of Windsor, June 29. in the Year 1555. Which Ponet calls a
goodly Confession of his hearty and earnest Repentance. Which, says he, was so
finely penned, Def. of Pr. Mar. p. 269.
and so Catholickly tracted, that I warrant you it was none of the smallest
Fools that forged it.

The other thing was, Married Priests that did their Penance, hardly dealt with.
that after these poor Men had thus done their Penances, and spoke their
Confessions, the Imposers of these Penalties upon them were not so good as they
pretended they would be, and as the Queen's Instructions required them to be,
toward them: Not restoring them to their Ministration. Some that had been two
or three Years parted from their Wives, could not be admitted again to
Ministration: yet they must do open Penance, and go by the Cross, without any
Redemption or Entreaty, that could be made.

CHAP. IX. Evils in this Change. A Parliament.
A twofold Evil upon this turn of Religion.
BY this time the face of the Church was perfectly changed: and all the
Reformation that was made for twenty Years before, namely, from Cranmer's first
ascent to the Archiepiscopal Chair to this time, was unravelled in less than a
Year, and abolished. But the Favorers of the Gospel lamented it exceedingly:
And Bishop Ridley writ a Treatise, wherein he showed what a deplorable Change
in Religion this was, by setting down at large what Religion was in K. Edward's
Days, and what it was at that present, laying the Cause of this sore Judgment
upon the vile and naughty Lives of the People, so unsuitable to the good
Religion professed. The Professors lamented two great Evils, lighting upon the
People upon this turn of Religion: Not only that it brought the People into
error and Superstition, but involved them universally in the Crime of Perjury.
The blame of which they laid upon the Popish Clergy. For they not only had
connived at, but allowed and encouraged the casting off the Pope's Supremacy,
and made both Priests and Laity swear to the King. And now they set up the
Pope's Authority again in England, and required all to swear to that. For they
compelled not only such as were Priests to perjure themselves, but all the
Laity, Nobility, Gentry, Magistrates, Merchants and others; for hardly any were
exempted the Oath of Supremacy in the former Reigns. For in every Law-day, the
Keepers of the same were sworn to call all the Young Men of their Hundred, even
as they came to Years of Discretion, to swear never to receive the Bishop of
Rome, nor no other Foreign Potentate, to be Head of the People of England, but
only the King and his Successors. Which Oath, if it were unlawful, as the
Clergymen now said, then all the Realm had reason of high Displeasure against
them, that so led them and knew it. The Dissimulation of the Priests.
Such gross Dissembling were the Bishops guilty of to the involving the People
in Guilt. And this dissembling Quality the Priests still retained in this
Queen's Days. For when any came to some of them, showing them that his
Conscience was not satisfied in the present way of Religion, the Priest would
tell him, that he said the Truth; My Conscience, would he say, is as yours; but
we must bear for a time; and that he himself looked for another Change. When
another of a contrary Opinion came to the Priests, and talked about Religion,
they would say to him, That they had been deceived; and thanks be to God, said
they, that ye kept your Conscience all this while. And even so was mine, but I
durst not do any otherwise, but trusted that this time would come, as is now,
thanks be to God. Nay and sometimes in the same Town, they would minister the
Service two ways to the People, to please both. In so much that the Bishops and
Priests grew, for this Cause, as well as for their Cruelty, into great dislike
with the People. This more at large is showed in a short Manuscript Treatise I
have, made by a certain Person nameless, imprisoned for Religion, entitled
thus, All sorts of People of England have just Cause of displeasure against the
Bishops and Priests of the same. An. 1554.


There was this Year, April 2, a new Parliament, A Parliament restore the Pope.
that the last Year being dissolved. Great was the Sadness that now possessed
the Hearts of the English Nation, even of Papists themselves, the most
considerate and wisest part of them, seeing the great Slavery the Kingdom was
like to be ensnared in, by what the Parliament was now in doing; that is to
say, restoring the Pope's Tyranny here in England, that had been so long and
happily cast out, and allowing the Queen's matching with Prince Philip; whereby
a Spaniard should become King of England: Which when P. Martyr had signified,
in a Letter from Strasburgh, to Calvin, May 8, he told him, Tanta est rerum
perturbatio, ut nullo pacto explicari queat: That it could not be told what a
Disturbance there now was; and that all good Men that could, fled away from
their own Country, from all Parts of the Land: Mentioning three noble Knights
to be come lately to Strasburg, not less famous for Piety then Learning,
Morisin, Cheke and Cook. At this Parliament, wherein the Mass was set up, and
confirmed by an Act, all that were suspected to favor the Truth, were turned
out of the House. Which made Hoper out of Prison in one of his Letters write,
Doubtless there had not been seen before our Time such a Parliament as this,
that as many as were suspected to be Favorers of God's Word, should be
banished out of both Houses.

In this Parliament a strong and certain Report went, A Design to revive the
Six Articles.
that the bloody Act of the Six Articles should be revived, and put in
execution. This created abundance of Terror in Men's Hearts. There was nothing
but Sighs and Lamentations every where: and a great many were already fled out
of the Realm; unto whom this Rumor had reached. John Fox, a Learned and Pious
Man, who had an excellent pathetick Style, was now set on work. Who took his
Pen in his Hand, and in the Name of the Protestant Exiles, wrote a most earnest
expostulatory Letter to the Parliament, to dissuade them from restoring this
Law again. He told them they had a Queen, who as She was most Noble, so She was
ready to listen to sound and wholesome Counsel. And that they had a Lord
Chancellor, that as he was Learned, so of his own Nature he was not Bad, were
it not for the Counsels of some. But that, as among Animals, some there were
that were born to create Trouble and Destruction to the other: so there were
among Mankind some by Nature cruel and destructive; some to the Church, and
some to the State. The Letter is worthy the Reading. Which I have therefore
placed in the Appendix, No. LXXVI.
as I transcribed it out of a Manuscript Collection of Fox's Letters. There was
indeed such a Design in the House of Commons, of bringing again into force that
Act of the Six Articles; but whether it were by the importunity of this and
other Petitions, or that the Court thought it not convenient so much to
countenance any of K. Henry's Acts, this Business fell. And this Parliament was
short-lived, for in May it was dissolved; by reason of a Bill for confirming
Abby-Lands to the present Possessors, which it seems gave offense to the Court.

CHAP. X. Archbishop Cranmer disputes at Oxon.
A Convocation appoint a Dispute with Cranmer at Oxford.
A Convocation of the Clergy now met in S. Paul's, but was adjourned, the
Prolocutor Dr. Weston Dean of Westminster, and some other of the Members, being
sent to Oxon (and it was generally thought the Parliament would remove thither
too) to dispute certain Points of Religion in Controversy, with three of the
Heads of the Protestant Party, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, and old
Father Latimer, now all Prisoners. Who for that purpose, in the Month of April,
were removed from the Tower, by the Queen's Warrant to the Lieutenant, toward
Windsor, and there taken into Custody of Sir John (afterward Lord) Williams,
who conveyed them to Oxford, there to remain in order to a Disputation. The
Convocation, while they sat at London, agreed upon the Questions to be
disputed; and they resolved, that these three pious Men should be baited by
both the Universities; and therefore that they of Cambridg should be excited to
repair to Oxford, and engage in this Disputation also. The Questions were these:

The Questions.
I. In Sacramento Altaris virtute verbi divini a Sacerdote prolati, praesens est
realiter, sub speciebus panis and vini, natural corpus Christi, conceptum de
virgin Maria: item naturalis ejus sanguis.

II. Post consecrationem non remanet substantia panis and vini, neque alia ulla
substantia, nisi substantia Christi, Dei and Hominis.

III. In Missa est vivisicum Ecclesiae Sacrificium pro peccatis, tam vivorum,
quam mortuorum, propitiabile.

Sent to Cambridg.
These Questions the Convocation sent to the University of Cambridg, requiring
them seriously to weigh and deliberate upon them, and if they contained true
Doctrine, then to approve of them. Accordingly the Senate of that University
met, and after due deliberation found them agreeable in all things to the
Catholic Church, and the Scripture, and the ancient Doctrine taught by the
Fathers: and so did confirm and ratify them in their said Senate. And because
Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, the Heads of the Heretics, that held contrary to
these Articles, were formerly Members of their University, and being to be
disputed withal at Oxford concerning these Points, they decreed, in the Name of
all the University, to send seven of their Learned Doctors to Oxford, to take
their parts in disputing with them, and to use all ways possible to reclaim
them to the Orthodox Doctrine again. And accordingly the said Senate, April 10.
made a public Instrument to authorize them in their Names to go to Oxford and
dispute: Which Instrument may be seen in the Appendix. No. LXXVII.
They also wrote a Letter the same Date to the University of Oxford, to
signify, that they had appointed those Persons to repair unto them, not so much
to dispute Points so professedly Orthodox, and agreeable to the Fathers and
General Councils, and the Word of God, as to defend those Truths in their
Names, and reduce those Patrons of false and corrupt Doctrine, if possible,
unto a sound Mind. No. LXXVIII.
This Letter is also in the Appendix. So that this coming of the
Cambridg-Divines to Oxford was to seem a voluntary thing, to show their Zeal
for Popery, and vindication of their University against liking or approbation
of Cranmer and his two Fellow Prisoners. So roundly was the University already
come about to the old forsaken Religion.

This Oxford-Disputation was after this manner; The Disputants of Oxford and
Cambridg.
Hugh Weston S.T.P. Prolocutor of the Lower House of Convocation, Owin
Oglethorp, John Seton, W. Chedsey S. Th.P.P. Hen. Cole, Will. Geffrey LL.PP.
William Pie, Ioh. Feckenham, Ioh. Harpsfield, S.T.B.B. representing the whole
Lower House of Convocation, went down to Oxford. To them were joined by
Commission, the Chancellor of the University, the Vice Chancellor, the
Professors and Doctors, etc. as namely, Holyman, Tresham, Ri. Marshal, Morwent,
Smith, S. T. P. P. of Oxford: And John Young, William Glyn, Ri. Atkinson, Tho.
Watson, Cutbert Scot, Alban Langdale, Tho. Sedgwick, S. Th. P. P. of Cambridg,
in the Name of the Whole University. All these being met at S. Mary's, there
were read the Letters Commissional to them, sealed with the Bishop of London's
Seal, and the Subscription besides of the Bishops of Winton, Durham, Wigorn,
Chichester, Lincoln, Bath, Roff. Hereford, S. David's, Gloucester and Oxon. And
with these Letters were conveyed certain Articles, which had been lately by the
Upper House resolved upon; which Articles were, of the Sacrament of the Altar,
of Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Eucharist, and the
Reservation of the Sacrament of the Church, and of its Institution, and by
whom, and for whom, and to whom it is to be offered. The Contents of the Letter
were to summon before them Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, and to propound those
Articles to them to dispute on publicly. The Sum of which it seems were
contracted into the three Questions abovesaid. Then they provided themselves
three public Notaries. Next, they celebrated and sung the Mass of the Holy
Ghost. Then they went a Procession according to the Custom of the University.
This formal Pageantry being finished, and the Commissioners returned to S.
Mary's, and being come into the Choire, to the number of three and thirty,
seated themselves before the Altar. And then sent to the Mayor and Bailiffs to
bring Dr. Cranmer before them, by virtue of the Queen's Letters to them. Who
within a while was brought guarded with Bill-men.

Coming before them, he gave them great Reverence, Cranmer brought before them.
and stood with his Staff in his Hand. They offered him a Stool to sit, but he
refused. Then Weston the Prolocutor, began a Speech, wherein he commended
Unity in the Church of Christ: and withal turning to the Archbishop, told him,
how he had been a Catholic Man once, and in the same Unity, but that he had
separated himself from it by teaching and setting forth erroneous Doctrine,
making every Year a new Faith. And therefore that it had pleased the Queen to
send them to him to recover him again, if it might be, to that Unity. And then
showed him the Articles to be disputed on, causing them to be read to him, and
requiring his Answer and Opinion thereupon. Then the Archbishop answered
extempore, That as for Unity, he was very glad of it, and said, that it was a
Preserver of all Commonwealths, as well Heathen as Christian. And illustrated
the Matter by some Stories out of the Roman History. And added, that he should
be very glad to come to an Unity, so it were in Christ, and according to the
Church of God. Then he read over the Articles three or four times. And being
asked, whether he would subscribe to them, he answered, That in the form of
words in which they were conceived, they were all false and against God's Word;
and therefore that he would not agree in that Unity with them. Nevertheless, he
said, if they would give him a Copy of the Articles, and time to consider of
them, he would by to Morrow send them an Answer. Which was granted him, the
Prolocutor bidding him write his Mind of them that Night. It was moreover
agreed between them, that in whatsoever he dissented from them, they would
proceed to public Disputation thereupon, in the public Schools, by
Scholastical Arguments in Latin. And lastly, they told him, he should have what
Books he would ask for. And so Weston gave the Mayor charge of him, to be had
to Bocardo, where he was before.

His Behavior.
His Behavior all this while was so grave and modest, that many Masters of Art,
who were not of his Mind, could not forbear weeping. This was the Work of
Saturday. On Sunday Cranmer sent in what he had writ upon the Articles to the
Prolocutor to Lincoln-College, where he lay.

Ridley brought,
After Cranmer was carried back, the Mayor and Bailiffs brought Bishop Ridley.
And when the same Articles were read to him, he said, That they were not true.
But desired a Copy of them, and he would draw up in writing his Answer, and
soon transmit it to them. And did offer to dispute, as Cranmer had done before.

And Latimer.
Lastly, Latimer was brought, to whom the Prolocutor said as he had to the two
former. Latimer confessed, that in the Sacrament of the Altar there was a
certain Presence, but not such an one as they would have. And he also promised
to send them his Answer shortly to these Articles, requiring a Copy. But by
reason of his old Age, his Infirmities, and the weakness of his Memory, he
said, he could not bear a Dispute; but that he could and would declare his Mind
of the said Articles. All this that I have above said concerning the managery
of this Affair, I do for the most part extract out of a Letter of VVeston's
writ unto the Bishop of London, from Oxon. I cannot here omit old Father
Latimer's Habit at this his appearing before the Commissioners, which was also
his Habit, while he remained a Prisoner in Oxford. He held his Hat in his Hand;
he had a Kerchief on his Head, and upon it a Nightcap or two, and a great Cap
such as Townsmen used, with two broad Flaps, to button under his Chin: an old
thredbare Bris^ow freez Gown, girded to his Body with a penny lether Girdle, at
which hanged, by a long string of Leather, his Testament, and his Spectacles
without case hanging about his Neck upon his Breast. This was the Work of
Saturday.

Cranmer brought to his Disputation.
On Monday Cranmer was brought into the Respondents Place in the
Divinity-Schools, the Mayor and Aldermen sitting by him. In the midst of the
Disputation, because what he was to answer was more than he could well remember
extempore, he gave in to Dr. Weston his Opinion written at large in answer to
each Proposition; and desired Weston, who sat on high, to read it. These
Writings are preserved in Fox's Monuments, and may there be seen. This
Disputation began at eight in the Morning, and lasted till two. The Beadle had
provided Drink, and offered the Archbishop thereof sometimes; but he refused;
nor did he stir all the while out of his Place, though the Prolocutor had
granted him leave to retire for a while, if he had any occasion. And after
having learnedly and boldly maintained the Truth against a great many clamorous
Opponents, he was carried back by the Mayor to Prison. And then the two next
days Ridley and Latimer took their Courses.

Cranmer had cautiously provided two Notaries to take Notes of what he said,
lest he might be misrepresented. His Notarie^*
And they were Jewel, afterward Bishop of Sarum, and one Gilbert Mounson. Who
also at Ridley's request were granted him.

Cranmer required at the Commissioners Hands, Cranmer's Demands.
more time to have these weighty Matters more diligently scanned and examined:
Urging, that he had so much to speak, that it would take up many Days, that he
might fully answer to all that they could say. He required also, that he and
his Fellows might Oppose, as well as Respond: that they might produce their
Proofs before the Popish Doctors, and be answered fully to all that they could
say. But neither of these Demands would be allowed him. Which he in a Letter
complained of to the Council. For indeed, as Cranmer plainly apprehended, the
Design now was not to look impartially into the Truth or Falsehood of these
Doctrins, but to gain Glory to themselves, and to have a show for the
Resolution that was before taken up of condemning them all three.

The same Week, on Thursday, Harpsfield disputed for the degree of Bachelor of
Divinity. And among other Opponents, Cranmer disputes again.
Cranmer was called forth for one by Dr. Weston. Where first taking notice of
Weston's opposing Harpsfield out of the Scripture against a Corporal Presence
(which was Harpsfield's Question) but whereas he left the sense of the
Scripture to the Catholic Church, as Judge, Cranmer told him he was much
mistaken, especially because, that under the Name of Church, he appointed such
Judges, as had corruptly judged, and contrary to the sense of the Scriptures.
He wondered also, he said, why Weston attributed so little to the reading of
Scriptures, and conferring of Places, seeing Scripture does so much commend the
same, in those very Places which himself had alleged. And as to his Opinion of
these Questions, he said, they had neither ground of the Word of God, nor the
Primitive Church. Nay, and that the Schools have spoken diversely of them, and
do not agree among themselves. And having prefaced all this, he began his
Disputation with Harpsfield, by asking him some Questions: as how Christ's Body
was in the Sacrament, according to his Mind and Determination? And whether he
had the Quantity and Qualities, Form, Figure, and suchlike Properties of
Bodies? And when there was great declining to answer this; and some affirmed
one thing, and some another; Harpsfield said, they were vain Questions, and not
fit to spend time about; and added, that Christ was there as it pleased him to
be there. Cranmer to that, said, He would be best contented with that Answer if
their appointing of the Carnal Presence, had not driven him of necessity to
have inquired, for disputation-sake, how they placed him there, sithence they
would have a natural Body. Then some denied it to be Quantum; some said, it
was, Quantitativum; and some affirmed, that it had Modum quanti: and some
denying it, Dr. Weston then stood up, and said, It was Corpus quantum, sed non
per modum quanti. A very grave decision of the Point!

Then Cranmer asked, Whether good and bad Men do eat the Body in the Sacrament;
and then, how long Christ tarried in the Eater. Harpsfield said, They were
curious Questions, unmeet to be asked. Cranmer replied, He took them out of
their Schools, and Schoolmen, which they themselves did most use. Then he
asked, how far he went into the Body, and how long he abode in the Body. With
these Questions Cranmer puzzled them most heavily. For which way soever they
answered, there would follow Absurdities, and Inextricable Difficulties. In
conclusion, Dr. Weston gave him this Complement, That his wonderful gentle
Behavior and Modesty was worthy much commendation: Giving him most hearty
thanks in his own Name, and in the Name of all his Brethren. At which all the
Doctors put off their Caps.

The Papists undecent management of the Disputation.
On Wednesday, as soon as Latimer, who came up last, had ended his Disputation,
the Papists cried Victoria, applauding themselves loudly, as though they had
vindicated their Cause most strenuously and satisfactorily against Cranmer, and
his two Fellows. And so Weston had the confidence to tell them to their Faces.
Though to him that reads the whole Disputation, and considers the Arguments
on both sides impartially, there will appear no such matter: allowing for all
the Hissings and Noises, confused Talk and Taunts, that were bestowed upon
these very Reverend and good Men. Whereof Ridley said, In his Preface to his
Account of his Dispute.
in reference to his Disputation, That he never in all his Life saw or heard
any thing carried more vainly and tumultuously; and that he could not have
thought, that there could have been found among English Men any Persons,
honored with Degrees in Learning, that willingly could allow of such Vanities,
more fit for the Stage, than the Schools. He added, That when he studied at
Paris, he remembered what Clamors were used in the Sorbon, where Popery chiefly
reigned; but that that was a kind of Modesty in comparison of this Thrasonical
Ostentation. Whence he concluded very truly, That they sought not for the
sincere Truth in this Conference, and for nothing but vain Glory.

The Protestants glad of this Disputation.
But the Professors of the Gospel on the other hand, were as glad of this
Dispute, wherein these three chief Fathers of the Church had so boldly and
gallantly stood in the defense of the Truth, and maintained the true Doctrine
of the Sacrament so well. And Dr. Rowland Tailor, in Prison elsewhere at this
time for Christ's sake, wrote them a Congratulatory Letter in the Name of the
rest. Which is as follows.

RIght Reverend Fathers in the Lord, I wish you to enjoy continually God's
Grace and Peace through Jesus Christ. And God be praised again for this your
most excellent Promotion, Dr. Tailor to the three Fathers after their
Disputations.
which ye are called unto at this present, that is, That ye are counted worthy
to be allowed amongst the number of Christ's Records and Witnesses. England
has had but a few Learned Bishops, that would stick to Christ ad ignem
inclusive. Once again I thank God heartily in Christ for your most happy Onset,
most valiant Proceeding, most constant suffering of all such Infamies,
Hissings, Clappings, Taunts, open Rebukes, loss of Living and Liberty, for the
Defense of God's Cause, Truth and Glory. I cannot utter with Pen how I rejoice
in my Heart for you three such Captains in the Foreward, under Christ's Cross,
Banner, or Standard, in such a Cause and Skirmish: when not only one or two of
our dear Redeemer's strong Holds are besieged, but all his chief Castles,
ordained for our Safeguard, are traitorously impugned. This your Enterprise, in
the sight of all that be in Heaven, and of all God's People in Earth, is most
pleasant to behold. This is another manner of Nobility, than to be in the
Forefront in worldly Warfares. For God's sake, pray for us, for we fail not
daily to pray for you. We are stronger and stronger in the Lord, his Name be
praised; and we doubt not, but ye be so in Christ's own sweet School. Heaven is
all, and wholly of our side. Therefore Gaudete in Domino semper, and iterum
gaudete, and exultate: Rejoice always in the Lord, and again rejoice and be
glad.

Your assured in Christ, Rowland Tailor.


Ridley knowing their Tricks, Ridley pens the Relation of his Disputation.
and suspecting they would publish hi^ (...) unfairly, and to their own
advantage, prudently took (...) gave an account of it with the greatest
exactness, as he (...) it in his Memory. He was promised by the Prolocutor,
that he should have a view of the Dispute, as it was taken by the Notaries,
that he might supply and amend, and alter, as he should see any Error or
Mistake in the Notes. He promised him likewise, and that in the Face and
hearing of the rest of the Commissioners, and the whole Schools, that he should
have a Time and Place allowed him, wherein he might produce, what he had more
to say, for the confirmation of his Answers. But nothing was performed. Ridley
never found Language more ready to him, nor such a Presence of Mind in any
Business he had to do, as he had in this Disputation. Which he took particular
notice of, and thanked God for. Of this Relation, as he himself had penned it,
he wrote to Grindal, then at Frankford, That except he had that he gathered
himself after his Disputation done, he could not think that he had it truly;
but if he had that, then he had therewithal the whole manner, after the which
he was used in that Disputation.

This whole Disputation between these three excellent Men, The University sends
the Disputations up to the Convocation.
and the Oxford-Divines, was, under the Seal of the University, and the
Subscription of Notaries, exhibited into the House of Convocation by Hugh
Weston, and some Lawyers. This John Fox had found some Years after, writ in
the Register of a certain Church in London. Whereupon, for the sight hereof, he
applied himself to Dr. Incent, that had been Actuary: But he put him off,
telling him the Writings were in Boner's Hand, or in the custody of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and that he had them not; probably not being minded
they should come to light. Fox, when his Pains succeeded not, wrote to the
ArchBp and the Bp of London, Parker and Grindal, about 1567, acquainting them
with this; and desired their assistance: and the rather because perhaps there
might have been other things met with there, not unworthy knowledge, under the
same Seal. And so he left the Archbishop and Bishop to consult as they thought
fit, for the finding out these Writings of the Disputations.

Various Copies of these Disputations.
Fox by his diligence procured many and diverse Copies of them. Which I have
seen; and that which he printed in his Acts and Monuments, was I suppose from a
Copy which he reckoned the largest and truest. Ridley apprehended, there would
many Copies of these Disputations fly about, (as there were) whereby they might
be wronged. Therefore to prevent Misrepresenting, as I said before, he wrote a
brief Account of what he had said at his Disputation. This whether he writ it
in English or Latin originally, I cannot tell; I suppose in Latin; as it was
lately in the Year 1688 published at Oxon. Among Fox's Manuscripts I meet with
a better Copy than that, which by comparing both, I find faulty in many things:
besides Ridley's Epilogue to the Reader, which is there placed as a Preface
before the Book, the true place being at the end of it.

CHAP. XI. Cranmer condemned for an Heretic.
Cranmer condemned for Heresy.
WIthin two days after these Disputations were ended, that is, on Friday April
20, Cranmer, with his two Fellows, were brought again to S. Mary's before the
Commissioners. Weston dissuaded them from their Opinions; and asked them,
Whether they would subscribe? and required them to answer directly and
peremptorily: and told the Archbishop that he was overcome in Disputation,
with more words to that purpose. To whom the Archbishop boldly replied, That
whereas Weston said, that he had answered and opposed, and could neither
maintain his own Error, nor impugn the Truth, he said, All that was false. For
he was not suffered to oppose as he would, nor could answer as he was required,
unless he would have brawled with them, and ever four or five interrupting him.
Latimer and Ridley, being asked what they would do? said, They would stand to
that which they had said. Then being called together, Sentence was read over
them, That they were no Members of the Church; and therefore they were
condemned as Heretics. And while this was reading, they were asked if they
would turn? They bad them read on in the Name of God: for they were not minded
to turn. And so the Sentence of Condemnation was awarded against them. Then the
Archbishop said, From this your Judgment and Sentence, I appeal to the just
Judgment of the Almighty: trusting to be present with him in Heaven. For whose
Presence in the Altar I am thus condemned. And so Cranmer was returned to
Bocardo, and the other two to other Places: as they were kept apart almost all
the while they were in Oxon.

Weston, after this ungrateful Business done, Cranmer writes to the Council.
went up the next week to London. And Cranmer wrote to the Lords of the Council
a Letter, containing two Points: One was to desire the Queen's Pardon, as to
his Treason, (for so little Favor could he find at Court, that he had not yet
this absolutely granted him) And the other was an account of the Disputation:
Weston being desired by the ABp to carry the Letter. But after he had carried
it half way, reading the Contents, he liked them so ill, that he sent back the
Letter most churlishly to Cranmer again. Indeed he cared not to carry
Complaints of himself to the Court. But because it gives further light into
these Matters, I have inserted it in the Appendix. No. ^XXIX.


It was such an imaginary Victory, as they had now got at Oxford, Disputation
intended at Cambridg.
that they intended also to obtain at Cambridg. And much talk at this time
arose, that Hoper, Rogers, Crome and Bradford, whom they had in Prisons at
London, were to be had to this Universi^y* to be baited, as Cranmer, Ridley and
Latimer newly had been at Oxford: and several of the Doctors of Oxford should
be sent in likewise to Cambridg for this purpose. But Hoper, Farrar, Tailor,
Philpot, Bradford, and the others, having an inkling of it, consulted among
themselves what to do; and resolved to decline it, unless they might have
indifferent Judges. And for this purpose Bradford sent a private and trusty
Messenger to Oxford to Ridley, to have his, and his two Fellows, their
Judgments concerning this Matter. They were at this time all separated from one
another: So, though Ridley signified this in a Letter to Cranmer, yet he could
only give his own Sense. He misliked not, he said, what they were minded to do.
In his Letter to Bradford.
For he looked for none other, but that if they answered before the same
Commissioners that he and his Fellows had done, they should be served and
handled as they were, though ye were as well Learned, said he, as ever was
either Peter or Paul. Yet he thought occasion might afterward be given them;
and the consideration of the profit of their Auditory might perchance move them
to do otherwise. But determinately to say what was best he could not, but
trusted, He whose Cause they had in hand, would put them in Mind to do that,
which should be most for his Glory, the Profit of his Flock, and their own
Salvation. It came at length to that forwardness, that Weston and his
Accomplices had taken out the Commission. And it was easy to obtain such a
Commission at such a Lord Chancellor's Hands. And they were likely speedily to
put it in execution. Hoper, who seemed to have the first notice of it, sent the
intelligence in a Letter to Farrar, Tailor, Bradford and Philpot, Prisoners in
the King's Bench. He showed them what his Advice was, and desired them to
consult among themselves what Course were best to be taken. His own Thoughts
were, considering what foul Play the three Learned Men had at Oxford, and which
they were like to have themselves at this Disputation; I. Because they did
commonly make false Allegations of the Doctors, and took Pieces and Scraps of
them, to prove their Tenets, against the real Mind and Sense of those Authors,
they should therefore refuse wholly to dispute, unless they might have Books
present before them. II. To have sworn Notaries, to take things spoken
indifferently: which would be hard to have, the Adversaries having the
oversight of all things: and so would make theirs better, and the Protestants
worse. III. If they perceived, when they were disputing, that two or three, or
more, spoke together, and used Taunts and Scoffs, as they did at Oxon, then to
refuse to dispute any longer; but to appeal to be heard before the Queen, and
the whole Council. Whereby this Benefit would happen, that they should be
delivered from the Commissioners, appointed to hear and judge them, who meant
nothing less, than to hear the Cause indifferently, being all Enemies already
unto the Protestants, and their Cause, and at a point to give Sentence against
them. And then many at the Court might be strengthened, who know the Truth
already; and others better informed, who erred rather of Zeal than Malice; and
a third sort, that be indurate, might be answered fully to their shame. He
knew, he said, the Adversaries would deny their Appeal, but yet he advised to
challenge it, and to take witness thereof, of such as should be present, and
require, for indifferency of Hearing and Judgment, to be heard either before
the Queen and Council, Hoper's Letter.
or else before all the Parliament, as it was used in K. Edward's Days. So wise
and wary now were they. But I do not find, that this Project of the Papists
went further.

And let us return, and visit these three faithful Prisoners of Jesus Christ.
Their Condition after Condemnation.
After their Disputation and Condemnation, their Servants were discharged, that
so they might not have any Conference, or Intelligence of any thing abroad. But
God provided for every one of them, instead of their Servants, faithful
Fellows, that would be content to hear and see, and do for them whatsoever they
could, as Ridley wrote in a Letter to Bradford. To these Fathers also came
supplies of Meat, Money and Shirts from London, not only from such as were of
their Acquaintance, but from Strangers, with whom they had no acquaintance;
doing it for God's Sake, and his Gospel's. The Bailiffs so watched them now,
that they would not suffer them to have any Conferences among themselves. The
Scholars of that University seemed universally against them. Which Ridley, in a
Letter to his Friend Bradford, could not but take notice of, calling it, A
wonderful thing, that among so many, never yet Scholar offered any of them, so
far as he knew, any manner of Favor, either for, or in Christ's Cause. They
had all things common among them, as Meat, Money, and whatever one had, that
might do another good.

Their Employment in Prison.
Neither of them now in Prison, were idle. Old Latimer read the New Testament
through seven Times deliberately, while he was a Prisoner. Cranmer busied
himself earnestly in vindication of his Writings of the Sacrament against
Winchester, under the Name of Marcus Constantius. And so did Ridley: who in two
Treatises, which he now made, showed how Winchester varied from other Papists
in eighteen Articles, and from himself in eighteen more. And a third Paper he
wrote, showing several things Winchester yielded unto, concerning the spiritual
Use of the Sacrament. Fox has set down these in his History, and preserved
them to us, these Collections of Ridley falling into his Hands. Ridley also
wrote, while he was a Prisoner in Oxford, De Abominationibus Sedis Romanae, and
Pontificum Romanorum: and Annotations more large upon Tonstal's first Book, (of
Transubstantiation, I suppose;) and more sparingly upon the Second. He was now
also diligent to set others on work for the exposing false Religion: Desiring
one Grimbold to translate Laurentius Valla his Book, which he made and wrote
against the Fable of Constantine's Donation and glorious Exaltation of the Sea
of Rome. And having done that, he would have had him to translate a Work of
Aeneas Sylvius, De Gestis Basiliensis Concilii. In which although, Letters of the
Martyrs.
said he, there be many things, that savor of the Pan, yet I dare say the
Papists would glory but a little to see such Books go forth in English. He
directed Austin Bernher, Latimer's Servant, to recommend those Works unto
Grimbold, who had been his Chaplain, and a Man, (as Ridley gave him the
Character) of much Eloquence both in English and Latin; (but he complied and
subscribed.) And he also bad Austin tell Grimbold, That if he would know where
to have these Books, he might find them in a Work set forth by Ortwinus
Gratius, entitled, Fasciculus rerum expetendarum. And added, That if such
things had been set forth in our English Tongue heretofore, he supposed great
Good might have come to Christ's Church thereby.

But we have not yet mentioned all the Pieces that Ridley wrote in Prison. For
besides those abovementioned, were these following. Other Works of Ridley in
Prison.
I. A little Treatise, which was jointly composed by him and Latimer in the
Tower (which is preserved in Fox) with the Letters N. R. before Ridley's
Sayings, and H. L. before Latimer's. II. A Draught, which he drew out of the
Evangelists and S. Paul, showing thence that the words of the Lord's Supper are
figuratively to be understood, alleging out of the Doctors, three of the Greek
Church, Origin, Chrysostom and Theodoret, and three of the Latin, Tertullian,
Augustine and Gelasius. III. Three Positions to the third Question propounded in
Oxford, concerning the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass. IV. His Disputation
in the Schools, as he wrote it, after it was over. V. A Letter, Ad Fratres in
diversis Carceribus. All these fell into the Hands of the Papists, by this
Mishap, or Treachery. Grimbold expressing a great desire to have every thing
that Ridley had writ during his Imprisonment, Mr. Shipside, Ridley's
Brother-in-Law, procured and sent him all those Writings before mentioned: but
they were all seized, whether in Grimbold's Possession, or in the sending them
to him, it was uncertain. Some suspected Grimbold himself, but others rather
the Messenger, for it would not enter into Shipside's Head, that Grimbold
should play such a Iudas's part.

CHAP. XII. A Parliament. Pole reconciles the Realm.
The Queen's Letters, directing the Elections of Parliament Men.
GREAT Care was now to be taken of getting Parliament Men, that might do what
was to be laid before them, now the Pope's Legate was to be received, and the
last Parliament failing Expectation. Therefore Letters were dispatched from the
Queen, and Interests made all the Nation over, to procure such Persons to be
elected, as should be named to them. In a Manuscript containing diverse Orders
that were sent into Norfolk in Q. Mary's Time, there is a Letter from that
Queen, Anno 2o, dated October. 6, to the Earl of Sussex, directing him to assist
in choosing such Men to sit in Parliament, As were of Wise, Grave and Catholic
sort, such as indeed meant the true Honor of God, with the Prosperity of the
Nation. The Advancement whereof We, (as the Letter runs) and our dear
Husband the King, do chiefly profess and intend, without alteration of any
Man's particular Possession, as amongst other false Rumors, the hinderers of
our good Purposes, and favorers of Heresies, do most utterly report. For to
make the intent of restoring the Abby-Lands to be the less credited, it was
thought convenient to be laid upon the Heretics. With these general Letters,
there seemed to go private Instructions what particular Men were to be set up.
For upon the aforesaid Letter, the Earl of Sussex sent a Letter, October. 14, to
Sir Tho. Woodhouse, High Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, and to Sir William
Woodhouse, about the Elections of Knights of those Shires, viz. That they
should reserve their Interests and Voices for such as he should name, and that
he would soon consult with them about the Matter. He then, in pursuit of the
Queen's Letter, recommended to the Bailiff of Yarmouth, John Millicent, to be
elected Burgess for that Town. This Parliament sat November. 11.

Cardinal Pole was this Summer brought to Flanders by the Emperor, Pole comes
over.
who had stayed him before on the Way. The Queen sent over the Lord Paget, and
the Lord Hastings to the Cardinal to conduct him over, in quality of the Pope's
Legate. And the same day he landed at Dover, (which was November. 21.) the Bill
past for the taking off his Attainder. Three days after he came to London, and
so to Lambeth-house: Which was ready prepared for his coming. Cardinal Pole,
before he came into England, and in the last Reign, had the reputation here
ordinarily of a virtuous, sober and learned Man, and was much beloved by the
English Nation as well for his Qualities, as his honorable Extraction.
Latimer, in one of his Sermons before K. Edward, has these words of him: I
never remember that Man, (speaking of Pole) but I remember him with a heavy
Heart; a Witty Man, a Learned Man, a Man of a Noble House: so in favor, that
if he had tarried in the Realm, and would have conformed himself to the King's
Proceedings, I heard say, and I believe it verily, he had been Bishop of York
at this Day. And he would have done much good in that part of the Realm. For
those Quarters have always had need of Learned Men, and a preaching Prelate.
One great Author the Cardinal much conversed in, was S. Hierom. Latimer wished,
That he would have followed S. Hierom in his Exposition of that Place, Come out
of her, my People. Where that Father understood it of Rome, and called that
City, The purple Whore of Babylon. Almighty God says, Get you from it; get you
from Rome, says Hierom. It were, subjoined Latimer, more commendable to go
from it, than to go to it, as Pole has done.

Soon after his return into England, The Cardinal absolves Parliament and
Convocation.
he was mighty busy in reconciling the Realm to the Pope. He performed it in
his own Person to the Parliament on the thirtieth of November, with much
Solemnity; and to the Convocation on the sixth of December. On which day, the
Parliament being dissolved, he, the Lord Legate, sent for the whole Convocation
of Upper and Lower House to Lambeth: And there he absolved them all from their
Perjuries, Schisms, and Heresies. Which Absolution they received upon their
Knees. Then he gave them an Exhortation, and congratulated their Conversion:
and so they departed.

January 23. Upon the dismission of the Convocation, The Clergy again wait upon
the Legate.
the Bishops and inferior Clergy waited again upon the Legate at Lambeth. Where
he willed them all to repair to their Cures and Charges, and exhorted them to
entreat their Flocks with all Mildness, and to endeavor to win them by
Gentleness, rather than by Extremity and Rigor: and so let them depart.

January 28. He granted a Commission to the Bp of Winchester, A Commission
granted by him against Heretics.
and diverse other Bishops, to sit upon, and judge according to the Laws lately
revived against Heretics, all such Ministers and others that were in Prison
for Heresy. Which was done undoubtedly to take off all the eminentest of the
Protestant Clergy, then in hold. And the very same day (such haste they made)
they sat in Commission in S. Mary Overies Church, upon Rogers, Hoper and
Cardmaker. And the next to that, upon Hoper and Rogers again, upon Tailor also
and Bradford; when the two former were formally excommunicated. The day
following, they sat upon Tailor and Bradford again: to which were added Ferrar,
Crome and Saunders. Then they excommunicated Bradford and Saunders.

But that this Reconciliation to the Pope and Church of Rome might sound the
louder in all Parts and Corners of the Nation, His Commissions to all the
Bishops, to reconcile their Diocesses.
and all Persons every where might make their formal Submissions to the Pope,
and thankfully take the mighty Benefit of his Yoke upon them again, the Legate
was not contented to reconcile the Nation himself under their Representatives
in the Parliament and Convocation; but upon pretense that he could not, in his
own Person, pardon and reconcile all the People, therefore he granted out a
Commission to each Bishop in his own Diocese, to do it to their respective
Clergy and Laity, deputed in his Name, and by his Authority derived from the
Pope.

Such a Commission he granted February 8, The Commission to the Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury.
to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, that See being then held Vacant.
Therein authorizing them to absolve all manner of Persons, as well Lay as
Ecclesiastics, Religious as Secular, from their Schism, Heresies and Errors,
and from all Censures due thereupon. And to dispense with the Clergy upon
diverse Irregularities: as with such who had received Orders from Schismatical
Bishops, or had been collated into their Livings by them. To dispense also with
the Religious and Regulars for departing from their Cloisters without the
Pope's License, permitting them to wear the Habit of Priests, and to serve
Cures, considering the scarcity of Priests, and to live out of their Cloisters.
Also, to dispense with Priests that had married Wives, though they were Widows,
or Women defiled, and with such who had been twice married, doing Penance and
forsaking their Wives. Allowing them to minister at the Altar, and to serve
Cures, provided it were out of the Diocesses, where they were married. The said
Bishops, by this Commission, were also empowered to grant, to fit Rectors and
Curates, a Power to reconcile and absolve their respective Parishes. This
Commission I have placed in the Appendix, No. LXXX.
as it was transcribed out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury.

The Legate's Instructions to the Bishops.
The Lord Legate also, for the better discharging of this his mighty Office,
gave out his Instructions, how the Bishops and Officials of the Vacant Sees
should perform this Work of the Reconciliation, deputed to them by the said
Legate: together with the Form of Absolution to be pronounced. Which
Instructions and Form, as they were extracted from the said Register, No. LXXXI.
may be found in the Appendix. Each Bishop was to call before him the Clergy of
his respective City, and to instruct them in diverse things: As concerning the
Pope's fatherly Love and Charity toward the English Nation, in sending
Cardinal Pole his Legate hither, as soon as he knew the Lady Mary was declared
Queen, to bring this Kingdom, so long separated from the Catholic Church, into
Union with it, and to comfort and restore them to the Grace of God: Concerning
the joyful coming of the said Legate; concerning what was done the last
Parliament, when the Lords and Commons were Reconciled; and concerning the
repealing of all the Laws made against the Authority of the Roman See by the
two last Kings, and restoring Obedience to the Pope and Church of Rome:
Concerning the Authority restored likewise to the Bishops; especially, that
they might proceed against Heretics and Schismatics. Then the Bishops were to
acquaint their Clergy with the Faculties yielded to them by the Legate: which
were to be read openly. Then all that were lapsed into Error and Schism, were
to be invited humbly to crave Absolution and Reconciliation, and Dispensations
as well for their Orders, as for their Benefices. Next, a Day was fixed, when
the Clergy were to appear, and petition for the said Absolutions and
Dispensations. On which day, after they had confessed their Errors, and
sacramentally promised that they would make Confession of the same to the
Bishop himself, or some other Catholic Priests, and to perform the Penance
that should be enjoined them; then the Bishop was to reconcile them, and to
dispense with their Irregularities: Always observing a distinction between
those that only fell into Schism and Error, and those who were the Teachers of
them, and Leaders of others into Sin. The same time was to be appointed another
day for a Solemn Festival; wherein the Bishops and Curates in their Churches
should signify to the People all that the Bishops before had spoken to their
Clergy; and then should invite them all to confess their Errors, and to return
into the Bosom of the Church; promising them, That all their past Crimes should
be forgiven, if so be they repented of them, and renounced them. And a certain
Term was to be fixed, namely the whole Octaves of Easter, within which Term all
should come and be reconciled. But the Time to be reconciled in, being lapsed,
all that remained unreconciled, as also all that returned to their Vomit after
they had been reconciled, were to be most severely proceeded against.

The said Bishops and Officials (where any Sees were Vacant) were to name and
depute the Rectors of the Parish-Churches, and other fit Persons, who should
absolve the Laity of their Parishes from Heresy and Schism, and Censures,
according to a Form to be given them by the Bishops.

The Bishops, and Officials, and Curates, were to have each a Book; in which
were to be writ the Names and Parishes of all that were reconciled: That it
might afterward be known, who were reconciled, and who were not.

After the Octave of Easter was past, the Bishops were to visit, first their
Cities, and then their Diocesses; and to summon before them all such as had not
been reconciled; and to know of them the Cause why they would not depart from
their Errors: and remaining obstinate in them, they were to proceed against
them.

In this Visitation, all the Clergy were to be required to show the Titles of
their Orders and Benefices; and notice was to be taken, if any Defect were
therein. And now the Bishops were to take care to root out any Errors in their
Diocesses, and to depute fit Persons to make Sermons, and hear Confessions.
They were also to take care to have the Sacred Canons observed; and to have
inserted into the Books of Service the Name of S. Thomas the Martyr, and of the
Pope, formerly blotted out: and to pray for the Pope, according as it was used
before the Schism.

They were advised to insist much upon the great Miseries we were in before,
and the great Grace that God now had showed to this People: Exhorting them to
acknowledge these Mercies, and devoutly to pray for the King and Queen, that had
deserved so exceedingly well of this Kingdom; and especially to pray for a
happy Offspring from the Queen.

In these Instructions there are several Strictures, Pole a severe Persecutor.
that make it appear Pole was not so gentle toward the Heretics, (as the
Professors of the Gospel were then styled) as is reported, but rather the
contrary; and that he went hand in hand with the bloody Bishops of these Days.
For it is plain here, that he put the Bishops upon proceeding with them
according to the Sanguinary Laws, lately revived, and put in full Force and
Virtue. What an Invention was that of his, a kind of Inquisition by him set up,
whereby not a Man might escape, that stood not well affected to Popery? I mean,
his ordering Books to be made and kept, wherein the Names of all such were to
be written, that, in every Place and Parish in England, were reconciled: and so
whosoever were not found in those Books, might be known to be no Friends to the
Pope; and so to be proceeded against. And indeed after Pole's crafty and
zealous Management of this Reconciliation, all that good Opinion that Men had
before conceived of him, vanished: and they found themselves much mistaken in
him; especially, seeing so many Learned and Pious Gospel-Bishops and Ministers
imprisoned and martyred under him, and by his Commission. Insomuch that now
People spoke of him as bad as of the Pope himself, or the worst of his
Cardinals. The Gospellers before this did use to talk much among themselves,
that he did but dissemble at Rome in his present outward Compliances with them
and their Superstitions; and that he would, upon a good Opportunity, show
himself an open Professor of the Truth. And indeed he often had Conferences
before him of Christ, and of the Gospel, of a living Faith, and Justification
by Faith alone; and he often would wish the true Doctrine might prevail. But
now the Mask was taken off, and he showed himself what he was. A notable Letter
to this Purpose was written, concerning the Cardinal, about this Time, by a
pious Italian to his Friend, who had conceived these good Opinions of him. This
I have put in the Appendix; and the rather, because it will give some Light
into our present History. No. LXXXII.


CHAP. XIII. A Convocation. Articles framed therein.
AT a Convocation the latter end of this Year, an Address was made by the Lower
House to the Upper, A Convocation.
wherein they petitioned for diverse things in 28 Articles, meet to be
considered for the Reformation of the Clergy. Articles presented to the Upper
House.
One whereof was, That all Books, both Latin and English, concerning any
heretical, erroneous, or slanderous Doctrines, might be destroyed and burnt
throughout the Realm. Cranmer's Book to be burnt.
And among these Books, they set Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of
Canterbury, his Book, made against the Sacrament of the Altar, in the
forefront; and then next, the Schismatical Book, as they called it, viz. the
Communion-Book. To which they subjoined the Book of ordering Ecclesiastical
Ministers, and all suspect Translations of the Old and New Testament; and all
other Books of that nature. (So that if Cranmer's Book was burnt, it was burnt
with very good Company, the Holy Bible, and the Communion-Book.) And that such
as had these Books, should bring the same to the Ordinary by a certain Day, or
otherwise to be taken and reputed as Favorers of those Doctrines. And that it
might be lawful for all Bishops to make enquiry, from time to time, for such
Books, and to take them from the Owners. And for the repressing of such
pestilent Books, Order should be taken with all speed, that none such should be
printed or sold within the Realm, nor brought from beyond Sea, upon grievous
Penalties. And from another Article we may learn, from what Spring all the
Bloody Doings that followed the ensuing Years sprang; namely, from the Popish
Clergy. For they petitioned, That the Statutes made in the fifth of Richard II.
and in the second of Henry IV. and the second of Henry V. against Heresy,
Lollards, and false Preachers, might be revived, and put in force. And that
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Ordinaries [whose Hands had been tied by some
later Acts] might be restored to their pristine Jurisdiction against Heretics,
Schismatics, and their Fautors, in as large and ample manner, as they were in
the first Year of Henry VIII. I shall not recite here the whole Address, as I
find it in a Volume of the Benet-College Library, Intit. Synodalia.

Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. Collect. p. 266*


because the Bishop of Sarum has faithfully printed it thence in his History.
Only I observe, that the 17 th Article is in the Manuscript scratched out and
crossed, viz. That all exempt Places whatsoever might be from henceforth under
the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop or Bishop, or Archdeacon, in whose
Diocesses or Arch-deaconaries they were. That they judged might grate a little
too much upon the Pope's Authority, which they were now receiving, since these
Exemptions were made by Popes. And the last, or 28 th Article was added by
another Hand, viz. That all Ecclesiastical Persons, that had lately spoiled
Cathedral, Collegiate or other Churches, of their own Heads, might be compelled
to restore them, and all singular things by them taken away, or to the true
value, and to reedify such things as by them were destroyed or defaced. This I
suppose was added by Boner's Interest, that he might hereby have a pretense
against Ridley his Predecessor; it affording a fair opportunity to crush the
good Bishops and Preachers, that had in Zeal to God's Glory taken away out of
their Churches all Instruments of Superstition and Idolatry. And it might serve
their turn, who had lately in a most barbarous manner plundered the rich
Archbishop of York*

And as they of this Convocation were for burning Heretics Books, Men burnt to
Death without Law.
so they were as well disposed to the burning of the Heretics themselves. For
Protestants were already not only imprisoned, but put to Death, without any
Warrant of Law, but only by virtue of Commissions from the Queen, and the Lord
Chancellor. Whereupon, when one in the Convocation started this Objection, That
there was no Law to condemn them: Weston, the Prolocutor, answered, It forces
not for a Law: We have a Commission to proceed with them: and when they be
dispatched, let their Friends sue the Law.

CHAP. XIV. The Condition of the Protestants in Prison. Free-Willers.
BY this time, by the diligence of the Papists, Popery fully established.
the Popish Religion was fully established in England. This Apostasy Cranmer
saw with a sad Heart before his Death, and all his Labor overturned. And
Ridley sends the bad News of it from Oxon to Grindal beyond Sea, in these
words; To tell you much naughty Matter in a few words, Papismus apud nos,
ubique in pleno suo antiquo robore regnat.

As for the Protestants, some were put in Prisons, Protestants.
some escaped beyond Sea: some went to Mass, and some recanted, and many were
burned, and ended their Lives in the Flames for Religion's sake.

The Pastors in Prison.
They that were in Prison, whereof Cranmer was the chief, being the Pastors and
Teachers of the Flock, did what in them lay to keep up the Religion, under this
Persecution, among the Professors. Which made them write many comfortable and
instructive Letters to them; and send them their Advices, according as
Opportunity served.

Free-Willers.
One thing there now fell out, which caused some disturbance among the
Prisoners. Many of them that were under restraint for the Profession of the
Gospel, were such as held Free Will, tending to the derogation of God's Grace,
and refused the Doctrine of Absolute Predestination, and Original Sin. They
were Men of strict and holy Lives, but very hot in their Opinions and
Disputations, and unquiet. Diverse of them were in the King's Bench, where
Bradford, and many other Gospellers were. Many whereof by their Conferences
they gained to their own Persuasions. Bradford's concern with them.
Bradford had much discourse with them. The Name of their chief Man was Harry
Heart: Who had writ something in defense of his Doctrine. True and Abingdon were
Teachers also among them: Kemp, Gybson and Chamberlain were others. They ran
their Notions as high as Pelagius did, and valued no Learning: and the Writings
and Authorities of the Learned they utterly rejected and despised. Bradford was
apprehensive, that they might now do great Ha^m in the Church, and therefore
out of Prison wrote a Letter to Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, the three chief
Heads of the Reformed, (though Oppressed) Church in England, to take some
Cognizance of this Matter, and to consult with them in remedying it. And with
him joined Bishop Ferrar, Rowland Tailor and John Philpot. This Letter, worthy
to be read, may be found among the Letters of the Martyrs, and transcribed in
the Appendix. No. LXXXIII.
Upon this Occasion Ridley wrote a Treatise of God's Election and
Predestination. And Bradford wrote another upon the same Subject; and sent it
to those three Fathers in Ox^ord for their Approbation: and theirs being
obtained, the rest of the eminent Divines, in and about London, were ready to
sign it also.

His Kindness to them.
I have seen another Letter of Bradford to certain of these Men, who were said
to hold the Error of the Pelagians and Papists concerning Man's Free Will, and
were then Prisoners with him in the King's Bench. By which Letter it appeared,
that Bradford had often resorted to them, and conferred with them; and at his
own Charge and Hindrance had done them good. But seeing their Obstinacy and
Clamours against him, he forbore to come at them any more: but yet wrote
Letters to them, and sent them Relief. They told him, He was a great Slander to
the Word of God in respect of his Doctrine, in that he believed and affirmed
the Salvation of God's Children to be so certain, that they should assuredly
enjoy the same. For they said it hanged partly upon our Perseverance to the
end. Bradford said, it hung upon God's Grace in Christ; and not upon our
Perseverance in any Point: For then were Grace no Grace. They charged him, that
he was not so kind to them as he ought, in the Distribution of the
Charity-Money, that was then sent by well-disposed Persons to the Prisoners in
Christ, [of which Bradford was the Purse-bearer] But he assured them he never
defrauded them of the Value of a Penny: and at that time sent them at once
thirteen Shillings and four Pence; and if they needed as much more, he promised
that they should have it. But abating these little casual Heats and
Peevishnesses, there was a good Christian Correspondence maintained among them.
The forementioned Holy Man advised them, That though in some things they
agreed not, yet let Love bear the Bell away; and let us pray, said he, one for
another, and be careful one for another. He said, That he was persuaded of
them, that they feared the Lord, and therefore he loved them. I have loved you
in him, my dear Hearts, though you have taken it otherwise, without Cause on me
given. He added, That he had not suffered any Copy of his Treatise of
Predestination to go abroad, because he would suppress all Occasion so far as
might be. I am going, said he, before you to my God and your God, to my Father
and your Father, to my Christ and your Christ, to my Home and your Home.

By Bradford's Pains and Diligence he gained some from their Errors: and
particularly one Skelthorp: for whom, Bradford gains some of them.
in a Letter to Careless, he thanked God, who gave this Man to see the Truth at
the length, and to give place to it; hoping that he would be so heedy in all
his Conversation, that his old Acquaintance might thereby think themselves gone
astray.

Careless also, another eminent Martyr, as well as Bradford, Careless's Pain^
with them.
had much conference with these Men, Prisoners with him in the King's Bench. Of
whose Contentiousness he complained in a Letter to Philpot. Martyrs Letters.
Philpot's Counsel.
And there is extant an Answer of Philpot to Careless about them: Where he
writes, That he was sorry to hear of the great Trouble which these Schismatics
did daily put him to, and wished that he were with him in part, to release his
Grief. He bad him take his Advice, and to be patient, whatsoever his
Adversaries could say or do against him: That he should commit the Success of
his Labors [in rightly informing these Men] unto God, and not to cease* with
Charity, to do his endeavor in the defense of the Truth, against these
arrogant and self-willed blinded Scatterers. That these Sects were necessary
for the trial of our Faith, and for the beautifying thereof: Not to be
perverted with them that were perverse and intractable. That he should show as
much Modesty and Humility as he might possible: and that then others, seeing
his modest Conversations among these contentious Bablers, should glorify God in
the Truth of him, and the more abhor them. That he should be content that
Shimei do rail at David, and cast Stones a while. That he should desire all the
Brethren, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, to keep the Bond of Peace, which is
the Unity of Christ's Church: To let no Root of Bitterness spring up, which the
Devil, with all his Diligence, seeks to thrust in among the Children of God.
To kiss one another with the Kiss of unfeigned Brotherly Love, and to take one
another by the Hand cheerfully, and say, Let us take up our Cross together, and
go to the Mount of Calvary.

This Contention could not be laid asleep amongst them, notwithstanding the
grievous Tribulations they endured for the same Cause of Religion. They wrote
also against one another: For in 1556, Careless wrote a Confession of his
Faith, Careless draws up a Confession of Faith.
some Part whereof savored absolute Predestination against Free Will. This
Confession he sent unto the Protestant Prisoners in Newgate from the
King's Bench, where he lay. Whereunto they generally subscribed; and
particularly twelve that were a little before condemned to die. Heart having
gotten a Copy of this Confession, on the backside thereof wrote his Confession
in opposition thereunto. When they in Newgate had subscribed Careless's
Confession, this Heart propounded his unto them; and he, with one Kemp and
Gybson, would have persuaded them from the former to the latter, but prevailed
not. One Chamberlain also wrote against it. I do not meet with this Confession;
only I find one Article was, That the Second Book of Common Prayer, set forth
in K. Edward's Days, was Good and Godly: But that the Church of Christ has
Authority to enlarge and diminish things in the same Book, so far forth as it
is agreeable to Scripture. This Paper of Careless's Confession, with the Answer
wrote on the backside by Heart, fell by some accident into the hands of Dr.
Martin, a great Papist; who took occasion hence to scoff at the Professors of
the Gospel, because of these Divisions and various Opinions amongst them. But
Careless, before the said Martin, disowned Heart, and said that he had seduced
and beguiled many a simple Soul with his foul Pelagian Opinions, both in the
Days of K. Edward, and since his Departure.

Some few Arians.
Besides these Anti-predestinarians, there were some few, who laid in Prison for
the Gospel, were Arians, and disbelieved the Divinity of Jesus Christ. Two of
these lay in the King's Bench. These different Opinions occasioned such
unseemly quarrelsom Disputes and Heats among them, that the Marshal was ^ain to
separate them from one another. And in 1556, the Noise of this reached to the
Council; who, the better to know the Matters controverted between them, sent
Dr. Martin to the King's Bench to examine it.

The Prisoners offer to justify K. Edward's Proceedings.
These were some of the Transactions that past among the Prisoners. Another
Matter concerning them deserves relating: which was this; They boldly and
bravely made a Declaration to the Queen and Parliament that sat this Year:
taxing them for overthrowing (as they had lately done) the Laws of K. Henry and
K. Edward, and the Reformation so maturely and deliberately made, and after the
Rejection of a Religion, which, as they said, there was not a Parish in England
desired to have restored again. They offered likewise to maintain the Homilies
and Service, set forth in K. Edward's Days, before them, either by Writiting,
or by Disputation in the English Tongue. By whom this Declaration was drawn up,
unless by John Bradford, I know not: for I meet with it a MS. which contains
diverse Pieces of that good Man. This remarkable Declaration I have reposited in
the Appendix. No. LXXXIV.
This now is the second time a public Challenge was made to justify K.
Edward's Reformation; the former the last Year by Cranmer, the latter now by
diverse of the Learned Men in Prison.

After they had lain fifteen or sixteen Months thus in Prison, their Livings,
Houses and Possessions, Goods and Books taken from them, they made such another
Address unto the King and Queen, And again offer it.
and the Parliament: therein undertaking, either by Word or Writing, before
them, or indifferent Arbiters to be appointed by them, to prove themselves no
Heretics, nor Teachers of Heresy, as they were pretended to be, nor cut off
from the true Catholic Church, (though by the Popish Clergy excommunicated:)
and Secondly, By the Testimony of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, and the
Godly Fathers of the Church, to prove the Doctrine of the Church, the Homilies
and Service, taught and used in K. Edward's Time, to be the true Doctrine of
Christ's Catholic Church, and most agreeable to the Articles of the Christian
Faith. And this was the third public Challenge they made. This being preserved
in Fox's Acts, Edit. 1610. p. 1348.
I forbear to transcribe it.

CHAP. XV. The Exiles, and their Condition.
BUT let us now turn our Eyes from the Prisoners, The Exiles.
which were kept under close Confinement here in England, unto the Exiles, that
by the good Providence of God made their Flight into foreign Countries from
these Storms at home. These were both of the Clergy and Laity. Who, though
great watch was laid for them, and Prohibitions given out against any that
should privately attempt to transport themselves, yet by taking their
Opportunities, and the favor of diverse Masters of small Vessels at Lee in
Essex, and upon the Coasts in those Parts, they safely got to the other side of
the Sea.

They scattered themselves, The Lutherans refuse to give Harbor to the Exiles.
and took up their Harbors as they could. But they found little Hospitality in
Saxony, and other places in Germany, where Lutheranism was professed. But on
the contrary, the Exile English were much hated by those of that Profession,
because they looked upon them as Sacramentaries, and holding as Calvin and
Peter Martyr did in the Doctrine of the Sacrament. Therefore when any English
came among them for Shelter, they expelled them out of their Cities. And when a
grave Pastor of Saxony, (a Friend of P. Martyr's, Mart. Ep. p. 770.
who though he were a Minister, yet was not of their Mind) had entertained some
of them, the rest clamoured against him, and hated him for it. About this time
the Saxon Divines wrote many Books against the Sacramentaries; and namely, Ep.
P. Martyr. ad Calvin. Anno 1555.
one Ioachim Westphalus wrote a Book against Calvin. And he and the rest got
these Books printed at Frankford, on purpose, as Martyr conjectured, the more
to spite the English and French Churches that abode now there, and to provoke
them.

At Wesel the English were under some trouble: The English at Wesel.
and the Senate were about to command them to depart thence, because of their
different Sentiments from the Augustan Confession in some Points. Bal. Praef.
ad Act. Pontif.
But Philip Melancthon interposed, and interceded with the Senate on their
behalf. And when some clamoured against them, he took their part, saying, That
their Case ought to be weighed by friendly Disputations, and not exploded by
Noise and Hissing: and declared his judgment to be, That these poor Exiles were
to be retained and helped, not afflicted and vexed by any rough Sentence. He
wrote also to the Governors of Frankford to the same purpose, viz. That the
English were not to be oppressed, but to be cherished, considering their
Sentiments were found in the main Articles of the Christian Confession: and
that whereas they differed in some Points, they were to be instructed and
informed, and not to be rudely thrown out from among them by Force and Violence.

The Lutherans Heat against Sacramentaries.
And indeed it was admirable to observe at this Time the exceeding Heats that
were in the Lutherans against all other Protestants, only for differing from
them in this one Point of the Sacrament. There was a Book published in the Year
1555. in favor of their Opinion of the Corporeal Presence, which was called,
Farrago Doctrinae Lutheranae. This P. Martyr called Valde insulsa, a very
foolish Book. It contained a Collection of Sentences out of the Fathers, and
also out of the Writings of Luther, Philip, Brentius, Pomeran, etc. They added
some out of Bucer, Illyricus, and Ioachim Westphalus, to show that they agreed
together. They inserted diverse Letters sometime writ against the
Sacramentaries. Indeed Calvin and Martyr they mentioned not by Name, but A
Lasco they did. In this Book there was a Discourse added under this Title, Quod
Christi Corqus sit ubique. Which was to serve as a Proof of their Doctrine. And
in the conclusion there was a Commonplace, De Magistratus officio. Which was
thought to be put in upon no other reason, but to inflame and irritate Princes
against the Sacramentaries. These Saxon Divines were exceeding hot against
those that believed not as they did. In their ordinary Discourses they styled
them Heretics, False Prophets, Suermeros, Sacramentiperdas. About this Time
they were gathering new Votes against Calvin, and, as it was thought, they
intended to attempt some Excommunication against such as differed from them in
this Point. And this that I have said is enough to explain the Reason of the
Inhospitality of the Lutherans to our Exiles.

At Zurick and other Places well received.
But in other Places they were received with much Kindness, and had the Liberty
of their Religious Worship granted them, as in Strasburgh, Frankford, Embden,
Doesburge, Basil, Zurick, Arrow, Geneva.

At Zurick they were received into one House with Bullinger, and had great
Favor and Countenance shown them by the Townsmen and Magistrates. Who offered
them, by Bullinger, to supply them with such a quantity of Bread-corn and Wine,
as should serve to sustain thirteen or fourteen People. But they with Thanks
refused it: Having, I suppose, wherewith to subsist otherwise of themselves,
and being willing to be as little burdensome as might be.

TheirEmployments.
In these Places some followed their Studies, some taught Schools, some wrote
Books, some assisted at the Printing-Presse, and grew very dear to the Learned
Men in those Places. At Embden, they ^aving gotten among them, by Sir John
Cheke's Means, as was thought, an Original Copy of Archbishop Cranmer's Book
of the Sacrament, translated it into Latin, and printed it there, with a
Preface before it. And there they preserved the said Original, as a most
invaluable Treasure. Here they printed other good Books in English, and
conveyed them into England. At Geneva a Club of them employed themselves in
translating the Holy Bible into English, intending to do it with more
Correctness, than had hitherto been done; having the opportunity of consulting
with Calvin and Beza in order thereunto. What they performed may be perceived
by the Bible that goes under the Name of the Geneva Bible at this Day. It was
in those Days when it first came forth, better esteemed of than of later Times.
At Frankford, Contentions at Frankford.
where they had great Countenance of the Magistrates of the City, arose great
Contentions and Quarrels among themselves, about the Discipline of the Church,
and in framing a New Service, different from what was before set forth in K.
Edward's Reign, to be used in the public Congregation: which new Service came
nearer to the Form of the Church of Geneva. This occasioned great Troubles,
Animosities and Separations, to the discredit of themselves and the
Reformation. These Matters may be seen at large in the Troubles at Frankford.
There is one thing which that Book making I think no mention of, I will here
relate. Some Children of the Exiles baptized by Lutherans.
Some of the English upon this Dissension carried their Children to be baptized
by Lutheran Priests: for tho the Lutherans were against the poor Exiles, they
thought so well of them, as to be willing their Children should be initiated
into the Church by their Ministry. The Occasion whereof seemed to be, that in
the Divisions of this Church, one Party would not let their Children be
baptized by the English Minister. This causing a new Disturbance, some wrote to
the great Divine P. Martyr, now at Argentine, for his Resolution of this
Question, An liceat hominibus Evangelicis Baptismum a Lutheranis accipere. To
this he answered in a Letter to the Church, disapproving of their doings:
Telling them, That the way to heal their Differences, was, to bring their
Children to be baptized in such Churches, with which they agreed in Faith and
Doctrine. So that this created a new Quarrel among them; for some held it
unlawful to receive Baptism from those that were not Orthodox in their
Doctrine: and others again thought it lawful. And this made them send to Martyr
for his Judgment, as aforesaid. Who wrote, That he would not say it was
unlawful, for that it could not be judged by the Word of God; but he disliked
the Practice, and propounded diverse Arguments against it. Those that were for
it, said, It was an indifferent thing. To which Martyr, made this reply, That
indifferent things were not to be used to the Scandal of the Weak. They said,
The Difference was not so great between us in the matter of the Sacrament. But
Martyr said, It was of great Moment, because in it there was a Contest
concerning the chief Head of Religion. They added, that the Lutheran Divines
did think in the Matter of Baptism, as they did. But Martyr answered, That they
were mistaken: for those Divines affirmed more of the Sacrament, than is fit:
and tied the Grace of God to Baptism: and that they thought there was no
Salvation without Baptism: and that they affirmed that Infants had Faith.

To the Exiles residing here at Frankford, some in the Year 1555, conveyed
Gardiner's Book against Cranmer, Pieces of Ridley's Writings conveyed to
Frankford.
entitled Marcus Antonius, with Ridley's Answer to the Objections of that Book,
and a Treatise in English of Transubstantiation, wrote by the same Ridley. This
last they intended to turn into Latin, and so to print both. But on second
Thoughts they demurred upon it: fearing it might enrage Gardener the more
against Ridley, who was yet alive. Whereupon Grindal wrote to him to know his
Mind therein, before they proceeded to Print.

Exiles at Basil.
Many of the Fugitives took up their Residence at Basil upon two Reasons: one
was, because the People of that City were especially very kind and courteous
unto such English as came thither for Shelter: the other, because those that
were of slenderer Fortunes might have Employment in the Printing-houses there,
the Printers in Basil in this Age having the Reputation of exceeding all others
of that Art throughout Germany, for the Exactness and Elegancy of their
Printing. And they rather chose English Men for the Overseers and Correctors of
their Presses, being noted for the most careful and diligent of all others.
Whereby many poor Scholars made a shift to subsist in these hard Times.

Diverse of the Exiles, Writers.
Indeed many of these Exiles assisted in promoting of Learning and Religion, by
publishing to the World their own or other Men's Writings.

Scory.
John Scory, that had been Bishop of Chichester, wrote a very comfortable
Epistle unto all the Faithful, that were in Prison, or in any other Trouble for
the Defense of God's Truth: Printed in the Year 1555. He was Preacher to the
English Congregation at Embden, and styled their Superintendent. From hence
this, and many other good Books were sent into England, by certain Persons, to
be dispersed about in London, and other Places. There was one Elizabeth Young,
that came thence with a Book, called Antichrist, and several others. Who was
taken up for bringing in Prohibited and Heretical Books, and endured much
Trouble. There was also another named Thomas Bryce, that brought Books from
Wesel into Kent and London; he was watched and dogged, but escaped several
Times. Sir John Baker a Kentish Man, and a great Papist, and a Courtier, laid
his Spies to attack him.

Old.
John Old printed a Book at Waterford 1555, entitled, The Acquittal, or
Purgation of the most Catholic Christen Prince, Edward VI. against all such as
blasphemously and traitorously infamed him, or the Church in his Reign, of
Heresy or Sedition. The writing of this Book was occasioned from the Preachers
of England in Q. Mary's Time in their Sermons at S. Paul's Cross, and in other
Pulpits: spewing out, as the Book expresses it, with Scolding, Roaring and
Railing, the Poison of Antichrist's Traditions; and infaming the Order, Form
and Use of Preaching, Prayers and Administration of the Holy Sacraments, set
forth and exercised by common Authority in the Church of England, reformed
under the Government of Edward VI. and vilely slandering of his Father K. Henry
VIII. for banishing the violent usurped Power and Supremacy of the Romish
ancient Antichrist for his Brother's known Wife, and for taking justly upon him
the Title and Estate of Supremacy, incident and appertaining, by the undoubted
Ordinance of God, to his Regal Office and Imperial Crown.

Thomas Sampson, formerly Dean of Chichester, Sampson.
wrote an Epistle to the Inhabitants of Alhallows-Breadstreet, where in K.
Edward's Time he had been Incumbent.

William Turner Doctor of Physic, Turner.
and that had been Physician in the Duke of Somerset's Family, and after Dean
of Wells, another Exile, put forth a Book, Anno 1555. called A new Book of
Spiritual Physic for diverse Diseases of the Nobility and Gentlemen of England.
Dedicating it to diverse of the chief Nobility. It consisted of three Parts. In
the first he showed who were Noble and Gentlemen, and how many Works and
Properties belong unto such, and wherein their Office chiefly stands. In the
second Part, he showed great Diseases were in the Nobility and Gentry, which
let them from doing their Office. In the third Part, he specified what the
Diseases were: as namely, the whole Palsy, the Dropsy, the Romish Pox and the
Leprosy: showing afterward the Remedies against these Diseases. For being a
very facetious Man, he delivered his Reproofs and Counsels under witty and
pleasant Discourse. He wrote also The hunting of the Romish Fox.

John Iuel, afterward Bishop of Salisbury, Iuel.
assisted Peter Martyr at Strasburgh, in setting out his Commentaries upon the
Book of Judges. Who being public Reader of Divinity there, had first read
those Commentaries, and had many Learned Englishmen for his Auditors; as
Poynet, Grindal, Sands, Sir John Cheke, Sir Anthony Cook, and diverse other
Knights and Gentlemen, as well as Divines. And when he was removed to Zurick to
succeed Pelican, he took Iuel with him thither. In Frankford there happening,
as was said before, unhappy Contentions about Ceremonies and Matters of
Discipline, (and it was feared that these Dissensions might spread themselves
into the other Fraternities in Zurick and other places) Iuel's great Business
was to allay these Animosities, partly by Letters, and partly by his own verbal
Exhortations: That they should, as Brethren, lay aside Strife and Emulation,
especially for such small Matters: That they would hereby offend the Minds of
all good Men: which things they ought to have a special heed of. Some who
seemed more complaining and uneasy at these things, he exhorted to Patience,
admonishing, That we ought not to leap from the Smoke into the Fire: and that
we ought to bear a part in Christ's Cross, and to consider how much better it
was with them, than with their poor Brethren, that endured Tortures in England.
And he would often repeat to them, Bear a while then, things will not endure an
Age.

Thomas Becon, formerly a Minister in Canterbury, Becon.
and well known to the Archbishop, wrote an Epistle in his Exile, and sent it
to certain Godly Brethren in England: Declaring in it the Causes of all the
Miseries and Calamities that were fallen upon England: How they might be
redrest; and what a merciful Lord our God is to all faithful penitent Sinners,
that unfeignedly turn to him. This Epistle was brought into England, and read
of the Brethren in their Religious Meetings, not without Fruit. In this Epistle
he added a Supplication to God, at good length, for the restoring of his Holy
Word to the Church of England: Wherein the devout Christian complains his
Grief and Sorrow to his Lord for taking away the Light of Christ's Gospel, and
humbly acknowledging his Fault, and worthy Punishment; most heartily wishes
the Subversion of Anti-christ's Kingdom, and the Restitution of Christ's most
Glorious Kingdom in this Realm. He wrote also an Epistle to the Massing
Priests, wherein he showed what a wicked Idol the Mass was, and what a
Difference there was between the Lord's Supper and that: and what Popes brought
in every part of the Mass, and put them together, as it was then used.

Laurence Humfrey, while he was in exile, wrote a Book in Latin, entitled,
Humfrey.
Optimates, being Instructions for Noblemen, in three Books. It was printed at
Basil by Oporinus, and dedicated to Q. Elizabeth soon after her entrance upon
her Kingdom. The Reason of this his Discourse was out of an universal Love to
Mankind, and desire to better the Condition of the World, whose Welfare
depended so much upon the Sobriety and Virtue of those of Noble Rank and
Quality: Since Nobility, as he wrote, widely spread it self through all the
Regions and Coasts of Christendom, and was preferred to Places of Trust and
Honor in all Princes Courts, and was the very Nerve and Strength of
Commonwealths: and since from it issued the greatest Helps or Hindrances to the
Public Safety, Pure Religion, the Lives and Manners of Men: Therefore he
thought the Gentry and Nobility being imbued with Right and Christian Opinions,
not formed to the corrupt Rules of Antiquity, Kings would govern better, the
Ministers of Ecclesiastical Matters would more faithfully perform their
Functions; and the common Sort would more diligently discharge all necessary
Offices, and the whole Commonweal might seem more healthfully to breath, to
live, and to recover and persist in a good Constitution. Beside this excellent
Book both for the Matter and Elegancy of the Latin Style, he printed two or
three other things at Basil; and he wrote, while he was abroad, a Commentary
upon the Prophet Isaiah. But I know not whether it were published.

Bartholomew Traheron, Library Keeper to K. Edward, and Dean of Chichester,
Traheron.
made diverse Readings to the English Congregation upon the beginning of St.
John's Gospel; and after printed them, against the wicked Enterprises of the
new start-up Arians in England.

John Fox, famous to Posterity for his immense Labors in his Acts and
Monuments, Fox.
was received by the Accurate and Learned Printer Oporinus of Basil, for the
Corrector of his Press. He published (and which I think was the first thing he
published, and his first fruits) a Chronological History of the Church. The
first Part, from the first Times unto Martin Luther. This Book he presented
unto Oporinus, with an handsome Epistle: Wherein he desired to be received by
him into his Service, and that he would vouchsafe to be his Learned Patron,
under whom he might follow his Studies, being one that would be content with a
small Salary: Promising him, that if he would employ him either there, at
Basil, or at Argentine, or some University, (which he should rather choose) Aut
me, (said he) destituent omnia, aut efficiam, Christo opitulante, ut omnes
politioris literaturae homines intelligant, quantum Operiano and nomini and
officinae debeant.

While he was here employed by Oporinus, His Acts and Monuments.
at spare Hours he began his History of the Acts of the Church in Latin. Which
he drew out more briefly at first; and before his return home into England,
well near finished. Having here completed the Copy, which was but the first
Part of what he intended, but making a just Volume in Folio, he sent this Work
to Basil to be printed. And so it was in the Year 155 --. It remained many
Years after in those Parts in great Request, and was read by Foreign Nations;
although hardly known at all by our own. Being now in Peace and Safety at Home,
Fox reviewed this his Work, and in the Year 1566, first published it in English
very Voluminous, because of those many Relations of the Persecutions in Q.
Mary's Days, that came to his Hands. All this Work he did himself, without the
help of any Amanuensis, nor had he any Servant to do his necessary Domestic
Business: being fain to be often diverted by his own private Occasions from his
Work. He afterward enlarged these his Labors into three large Volumes, which
have since undergone many Editions.

But to look back to what he published in his Exile: Books by him published in
Exile.
There came to his Hand all the Trials and Examinations of the Learned Martyr
Ioh. Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester, drawn up by himself, and finally his
Death, being burnt in Smithfield, 1555. These things Fox put into Latin, (as he
had an excellent Latin Style) and printed with this Title, Mira ac elegans cum
primis Historia, vel Tragoedia potius, de tota ratione examinationis and
condemnationis J. Philpotti Archidiaconi Wincestriae, nuper in Anglia exusti:
Ab autore primum lingua sua congesta; nunc in Latinum versa, Interpret J. F.
A. He had also a great Hand in publishing of Zonaras and Balsamon upon the
Apostles Canons in Latin. To which he set this Title, Enarrationes, seu
Commentarii in Canones Sanctorum Apostolorum and Synodorum, tum quae
Vniversales, tum quae Provinciales: Quaeque item and privatim quorundam
priscorum Patrum propriae extiterunt. Autoribus Jo. Zonara Monacho religiosae
and Sanctae Glyceriae: Qui prius Drungarius, seu Praefectus erat Biglae, and
summus Secretarius. Atque etiam Theodoro Balsamensi; qui prius ecclesiae
Antiochenae Diaconus, Librarius seu custos chartarum, and Praepositus
Blachernensium, deinde and Archiepiscopus est factus ejusdem Ecclesiae simul
and totius Orientis. Which probably was a Book printed at Oporinus's Press,
over which he had Care; and made this Title, and perhaps translated it into
Latin.

Here at Basil, Translates Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament into Latin.
Fox was set on work by Peter Martyr to translate into Latin Archbishop
Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament: that is, his large Dispute with Winchester.
Which Fox fell upon, while Cranmer was yet in Prison. In quo [libro] videbit
spero, says he, in a Letter to Oporinus, propediem universa Germania, quicquid
de causa Eucharistica vel dici vel objici, vel excogitari a quoquam poterit.
But this never saw the Light, the Manuscript thereof yet lying in my Hands. In
1557, Fox set forth a little Book, pleading the Cause of the Afflicted with
their Persecutors, and comforting the Afflicted. Of which Thomas Lever, who was
Preacher to the English Congregation at Arrow, gave this Character, in a Letter
which he sent to Fox, who had presented him with this Book: Lever to Fox.
SAlutem P. in Christo, Charissime Frater; Literas tuas accepi, and libellum
parvum, in quo magna cum eruditione, and Pientissimo zelo, causam afflictorum
apud persecutores tyrannos sic agis, ut omnes, qui curant aut impios
admonendos, aut pios consolatione recreandos, Foxii MSS.
id plene a te perfectum videant. Quod ipsi been curatum velint. Et quoniam
meae vocationis munus in hujusmodi admonitionibus and consolationibus versatur
plurimum, scias velim, quod misso ad me parvo libello, magnum dedisti mihi
beneficium. Dignum igitur, nihil habens, quod tibi pro meritis rependam,
exiguum aureolum mitto, rogoque accipias, ut certum indicium mei animi erga te
tuaque studia; quibus alendis augendisque tantum nunc polliceor, quantum unquam
potuero, praestare. Vale in Christo, and mihi saluta Uxorem tuam atque omnem
Familiam: Rogoque ut mei, me^que ministerii memores sitis in precibus vestris
apud Deum. Iterum vale, vivens in Domino.

Aroviae, 7. November. 1557. Tuus fideliter in Christo, Th. Leverus.




Fox also wrote an Expostulatory Letter to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of
England, to desist those Barbarities that were then used toward innocent Men
in England: Killing, Burning, Imprisoning, Sequestring them without all Mercy.
The Letter so pathetically penned, No. LXXXV.
deserves a place in the Appendix, for the preservation thereof.

Bale.
To all these English Writers during their Exile must John Bale the Antiquarian,
be added, who now published and printed in Basil, his admirable Book of
Centuries, giving an Account of the Lives and Writings of all such as were born
English and Scottish.

John Knokys or Knox, another Fugitive, is the last I shall mention, Knox.
fearing I have been too large in this Digression already. He was a Scotch-Man,
but had lived in England in King Edward's Days, with great Respect; and very
zealously preached the Gospel in London, Buckinghamshire, Newcastle, Berwick,
and other Places of the North and South Parts. He wrote now an Epistle to the
Faithful in those Places, and to all others in the Realm of England. Wherein he
earnestly dissuaded them from communicating in the Idolatry then established;
and to flee, as well in Body as Spirit, having Society with the Idolaters: and
that as they would avoid God's Vengeance: as the burning of Cities, laying the
Land waste, Enemies dwelling in the strong Holds, Wives and Daughters defiled;
and Children falling by the Sword. Which he assured them would happen to the
Nation, because of its return to Idolatry, and refusing of God's Mercy, when he
so long had called upon them. This his Affirmation, he said, would displease
many, and content few. But to confirm them in the belief of what he had said,
he bad them recollect what he had formerly spoke in their presence, and in the
presence of others: a great part whereof was then come to pass. He mentioned
particularly what he said at Newcastle and Berwick, before the Sweating
Sickness, and what at Newcastle upon All Saints Day, the Year in which the Duke
of Somerset was last apprehended: and what he said before the Duke of
Northumberland in the same Town, and other Places more. Also what he said
before the King at Windsor, Hampton Court and Westminster; and what he said in
London, in more Places than one, when both Fires and riotous Banquetings were
made for the proclaiming of Q. Mary. He foretold these present Calamities; not
that he delighted in them, as he said, or in the Plagues that should befall this
unthankful Nation. No, his Heart mourned: but if he should cease, he should
then do against his Conscience and Knowledge. Then he proceeded to give them the
ground of this his Certitude: which he took from the Scriptures. And so in
conclusion, he counseled them, as they would avoid the Destruction that was
coming, that they should have nothing to do with the abominable Idol of the
Mass; that is, the Seal of that League which the Devil had made with all the
pestilent Sons of Antichrist, as he phrazed it. Foxe's MSS.


It may be enquired, how these Exiles were maintained, How the Exiles subsisted;
considering the great Numbers of them, and the Poverty of many. God stirred up
the Bowels of the abler sort both in England, and in the parts where they
sojourned, to pity and relieve them, by very liberal Contributions conveyed
unto them from time to time. From London especially came often very large
Allowances: till Bishop Gardener, who had his Spies every where, got knowledge
of it; and by casting the Benefactors into Prison, and finding means to
impoverish them, that Channel of Charity was in a great measure stopped. After
this, the Senators of Zurick, at the motion of Bullinger their Superintendent,
opened their Treasures unto them. Besides, the great Ornaments then of Religion
and Learning, Melancthon, Calvin, Bullinger, Gualter, Lavater, Gesner, and
others, sent them daily most comfortable Letters, and omitted no Duty of Love
and Humanity to them all the time of their Banishment. Some of the Princes, and
Persons of Wealth and Estate, sent also their Benevolences: Among these was
Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg; who gave at one time to the Exiled English at
Strasburgh three or four hundred Dollers, besides what he gave at Frankford: as
Grindal Bishop of London signified to Secretary Cecyl, in the Year 1563, when
that Prince had sent a Gentleman upon Business to the Queen. The Bishop desired
the Secretary to move the Queen to make some signification to this Person, that
She had heard of his Master's former Kindness to the poor English, that it
might appear his Liberality was not altogether buried in Oblivion: Or at least
he wished some remembrance thereof might pass from the Secretary's own Mouth.

CHAP. XVI. Many Recant. Some go to Mass.
Many recant.
MANY of the Clergy, that were very forward Men under K. Edward, now, by the
Terror of the Times, recanted and subscribed. And these were of two Sorts. Some
out of weakness did it, but persisted not in it. But as soon as they could,
revoked their Subscriptions and Recantations, and after their Releases and
Escapes out of Prison, made a sorrowful Confession in public of their Falls.
Of this sort were Scory and Barlow, Bishops; Jewel, and others. But some after
their Recantations persisted in the Popish Communion. Of this sort was Bush and
Bird, Bps; Harding, Chaplain to the D. of Suffolk, to whom the Lady Jane sent
an Expostulatory Letter; Sydal and Curtop of Oxon, Pendleton, West, etc. Of
this last-named Person, let me cast in here one or two Remarks. West was in
Orders, and had been Steward to Bishop Ridley. Of whom the said Bishop wrote
thus to Grindal, then in Strasburg, That his old Companion, and sometime his
Officer, relented, but that the Lord had shortened his Days. For it was but a
little after his Compliance that he died. Fox writes the Occasion of it,
namely, That when he had relented, and said Mass against his Conscience, he
shortly after pined away, and died for Sorrow. When his Master the Bishop was
laid in Prison for Religion, he shrank away: and out of his compassion to him,
being very loath, as it appeared, that his said Master should be put to Death,
he wrote a Letter to him, whereby to move him, if he could, to alter his
Judgment. The Contents of whose Letter may be gathered out of Ridley's Answer.
No. LXXXVI.
Which Answer being so excellent, I have put into the Appendix, as I
transcribed it out of a Manuscript. Which concluded thus, in Answer to a
Sentence that West had concluded his with, namely, That he must agree, or die:
the Bishop told him, in the Word of the Lord, that if he and all the rest of
his Friends did not Confess and Maintain to their Power and Knowledge what was
grounded upon God's Word, but either for Fear or Gain, shrank and played the
Apostates, they themselves should die the Death. After the receipt of which
Answer, West either out of Compassion to his Master, or rather out of Anguish
for his own Prevarication, died within a few Days himself: and his Master
outlived him, and writ the News thereof into Germany to Grindal his
Fellow-Chaplain, as was said before.

The Persecution was carried on against the Gospellers with much Fierceness by
those of the Roman Persuasion, The Persecution hot.
who were generally exceeding Hot as well as Ignorant: Chiefly headed by two
most cruel-natured Men, Bishop Gardener, and Bishop Boner; in whose Diocesses
were London and Southwark, and the next bordering Counties, wherein were the
greatest Numbers of Professors. And the Servants were of the same Temper with
their Masters. One of Boner's Servants swore, Tims Letter.
By his Maker's Blood, That wheresoever he met with any of these vile
Heretics, he would thrust an Arrow into him.

Many now therefore, partly out of Fear and Terror, and partly out of other
worldly Considerations, did resort to Mass, though they approved not of it, and
yet consorted likewise with the Gospellers: Gospellers go to Mass.
holding it not unlawful so to do: viz. That their Bodies might be there, so
long as their Spirits did not consent. And those that used this Practice, bore
out themselves by certain Arguments which they scattered abroad.

This extraordinarily troubled the good Divines, Bradford labors to hinder it.
that were then in Prison for the Cause of Christ, and particularly Bradford.
Who complained in a Letter to a Friend, That not the tenth Person abode in
God's Ways: and that the more did part Stakes with the Papist and Protestant.
So that they became maungy Mongrels, to the infecting of all the Company with
them, to their no small Peril. For they pretended Popery outwardly, going to
Mass with the Papists, and tarrying with them personally at their Antichristian
and Idolatrous Service: but with their Hearts, they said, and with their
Spirits they served the Lord. And so by this means, said he, as they saved
their Pigs, I mean, their worldly Pleasures, which they would not leese, so
they would please the Protestants, and be counted with them for Gospellers.
This whole Letter deserves to be transcribed, as I meet with it in one of the
Foxian Manuscripts, but that I find it printed already at Oxon by Dr. Ironside,
in the Year 1688.

The same Bradford counseled the true Protestants not to consort with these
Compliers, Counsels not to consort with them.
but to deal with them as a certain eminent Man, named Simeon Archbishop of
Seleucia, did with Vstazades, an ancient Courtier to Sapores King of Persia,
who by his Threatenings and Persuasions had prevailed with the said Courtier, a
Christian, to bow his Knee to the Sun. Tripart. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 2.
For which base compliance Simeon passing by where this Vstazades was, formerly
his great Friend and Acquaintance, would not now look at him, but seemed to
contemn and despise him. Which when he perceived, it pierced him so to the
Heart, that he began to pull asunder his Clothes, and to rend his Garments, and
with weeping Eyes cried out, Alas! that ever he had so offended God in his
Body, to bow to the Sun. For, says he, I have herein denied God, although I
did it against my Will. And how sore is God displeased with me, with whom mine
old Father and Friend, Simeon, his dear Servant, will not speak, nor look
toward me? I may by the Servant's Countenance perceive the Master's Mind. This
Lamentation came to the King's Ear; and therefore he was sent for, and demanded
the Cause of his Mourning. He out of Hand told him the Cause to be his
unwilling bowing to the Sun. By it, said he, I have denied God. And therefore,
because he will deny them that deny him, I have no little cause to complain and
mourn. Woe unto me, for I have played the Traitor to Christ, and also dissembled
with my Liege Lord. No Death therefore is sufficient for the least of my
Faults; and I am worthy of two Deaths. When the King heard this, it went to his
Stomach; for he loved Vstazades, who had been to him and to his Father, a
faithful Servant and Officer. Howbeit the Malice of Satan moved him to cause
this Man to be put to Death. Yet in this Point he seemed to gratify him. For
Vstazades desired that the Cause of his Death might be published. This I ask,
said he, for the Guerdon of my Time-service to thee, and to thy Father. Which
the King readily granted, thinking, that when the Christians should all know
it, it would make them the more afraid, and sooner to consent to him. But so
soon as it was published, and Vstazades put to death, Lord, how it comforted
not only Simeon, then being in Prison, but also all the Christians? Bradford
having told this History, improved it after this Tenor. This History, I wish,
said he, were marked, as well of us as of all our Popish Gospellers, which have
none other things to excuse them, than Vstazades had. For his Heart was with
God, howsoever he framed his Body. We should behave our selves straightly against
such Brethren, as Simeon did; and then they the sooner would play Vstazades
Part. Which thing, no marvail, though they do not, so long as we rock them
asleep, by regarding them, and their Companions, as daily we do: and so are
partakers of their Evil; and at the length shall feel of their Smart and
Punishment.

Of these outward Compliers with the Mass, was one Ann Hartipol, Ann Hartipol
goes to Mass.
that formerly harbored the Lady Ann Ascue, burnt in King Henry's Reign. She
now went to Mass, pretending her Conscience to be ^ound before God, and that
her Conscience gave her leave to go. To whom Philpot wrote an excellent Letter,
which is extant among the Letters of the Martyrs.

Page 247.
The People of this Practice had been tampering with the Lady Vane, a pious
Lady, The Lady Vane puts certain Cases concerning the Mass.
and a great Benefactor to the poor Prisoners of Christ: Insomuch that she
propounded to Bradford three Questions concerning the Mass, being Cases of
Conscience, what she were best to do, whether to go to it, or not? He told her
in a Letter, That the Questions would never be well seen nor answered, until
the Thing whereof they arose were well considered. That is, how great an Evil
it was: That there was never Thing upon the Earth so great, and so much an
Adversary to God's true Service, to Christ's Death, Passion, Priesthood,
Sacrifice and Kingdom, to the Ministry of God's Word and Sacrament, to the
Church of God, to Repentance, Faith, and all true Godliness of Life; as that
was whereof the Questions arose. And that therefore a Christian Man could not
but so much the more abhor it, and all things that in any Point might seem to
allow it, or any thing pertaining to the same. Bradford also writ a little Book
on this Argument, entitled* The Hurt of the Mass. This Book he sent to his
Acquaintance, to stop their going to the Popish Service; and particularly to
Mr. Shaleros, a Friend of his in Lancashire; and recommended the reading of it
to one Riddleston, that had defiled himself in this false Service.

CHAP. XVII. An. 1555.
A bloody Time. The Queen's great Belly. A Convocation.
THE Year 1555, was a bloody Year, and many honest People, Many burned.
both of the Clergy and Laity, were burnt alive in all Parts, because they
believed not Transubstantiation. Insomuch that a tender Heart cannot but shrink
at the very remembrance thereof.

And as if there were a kind of Delight in this sort of cruel Executions,
Instructions were sent abroad, in the beginning of the Year, Instructions to
the Justices.
unto the Justices of Peace through all Counties in England, to enquire
diligently in every Parish for Persons disaffected to the Popish Religion. And
in each Parish were some appointed to be secret Informers against the rest. And
for the better discovery of such poor Professors of the Gospel, that fled from
Place to Place for their Safety, the Constables, and four or more of the
Catholic sort in every Parish, were authorized to take Examination of all such
as might be suspected, how they lived, and where they were? And such as
absented from the Mass, and conformed not themselves to the Church, were to be
brought before the Justices: Who were to persuade them to conform; and if they
would not, to bind them to good Abearing, or commit them to Prison. The
Justices were also commanded, by another Order soon after, to deliver such as
leaned to Erroneous and Heretical Opinions, and would not be reclaimed by the
Justices, to the Ordinaries, to be by them travailed with; and continuing
Obstinate, to have the Laws executed upon them.

May 27. Orders sent into Norfolk against the Professors.
These Orders came from the King and Queen to the Justices of Norfolk: Which,
as I extract from a Manuscript, relating the Orders sent into that County, were
in these special Articles.

I. To divide themselves into several Districtions.

II. To assist such Preachers as should be sent; [For it was thought convenient
to send abroad Itinerary Preachers, as was done in the last King's Reign, who
should by their Doctrine endeavor to reduce the People to the old Religion]
and to use them reverently, and to be present at their Sermons; and to travail
soberly with such as abstained from coming to Church, or by any other open
Doings, should appear not persuaded to conform themselves: and to use others
that be wilful and perverse, more roundly, either by rebuking them, or binding
them to good Behavior, or by imprisoning them, as the Quality of the Persons,
and the Circumstance of their Doings may deserve.

III. To lay special wait for Teachers of Heresies, and Procurers of secret
Meetings to that purpose. That they and their Families show good Examples, and
begin first to reform their Servants, if any of them be faulty.

IV. To apprehend spreaders of false and seditious Rumors.

V. To procure one or more in every Parish, secretly instructed, to give
information of the Behavior of the Inhabitants.

VI. To charge the Constable, and four or more Catholic Inhabitants of every
Parish, to give account of idle Vagabonds and suspected Persons, [meaning by
these the poor Professors, or Preachers of the Gospel, who crept about for
their own Safety, and had no settled Habitation] and the Retainers of such
Persons. To observe Hue and Cry; and to look after the Watches in every Parish.

VII. To send an Account of Felons, etc. when any should be apprehended.

VIII. To meet every Month, and confer about these Matters.

The Effect thereof.
Whereupon the Justices meeting together, it was resolved by them to obey every
of the said Orders: Particularly concerning the Fifth they resolved, That these
secret Informations should be given to the Justices; and that the accused
Parties should be examined, without knowledge by whom they were accused.

The Earl of Sussex receives Information against some.
The Earl of Sussex lived in that County, and was one of chief Trust there: For
this Earl had Command in Norfolk of Queen Mary's Army, when she first laid her
Claim to the Crown; and managed it with that Prudence and Conduct, that others
were induced by his Means to come in. This Earl received several Informations
against Ministers and others; for it seems, notwithstanding all these severe
Usages, the Popish Mass had not yet so prevailed every where, but that in
diverse places there were some remainders of King Edward's Reformation and
Service. Among the rest, the Curat of old Bokenham, and diverse in that Parish,
were complained of, because the Ceremonies of the holy Time of Easter were not
observed there. And it seems the Bishop's Officers themselves were not all so
diligent as they should be. The Earl signified this Information to Hopton the
Bishop; who being in his Visitation soon after, sent for several of the Parish,
and made his Inquiries, but found things in other sort than were represented to
the Earl. And being returned to his House at Norwich, informed him hereof, and
desired the Earl to inform him further, if any thing were amiss, even amongst
his own Officers, and he would endeavor to reform them.

Popish Spies set every where.
In these Times, for the better taking up of all Gospellers, there were certain
Spies and secret Informers set every where, to give notice of any that came not
to Church, or that spoke any thing against the Superstitions. For London were
John Avales, Beard, and others: For Stepney one Banbury, a Shifter, a Dicer,
and a Whoremonger. By which means none almost could be safe. Yet the Professors
made* some Provision against this Evil. There were some, that kept them
Company, who were honest Men; by whom they often had secret Intelligence what
Persons Avales and Beard intended to take up. And so several by shifting Places
and Houses, were preserved. The Knight-Marshal, Sir Thomas Holcroft, the
Under-Marshal, the Knight-Marshal's Secretary, were secret Friends of the
Protestants: and when Designs were laid to take any of them, some signification
was often privately brought them, that Search would within some few Hours be
made for them; and therefore that they should depart from their Lodgings, and
conceal themselves. And when any good Men were under their Hands in Prison,
they would take all occasions to show them Kindness, The Protestants frequently
assemble.
as far as safely they might.

But notwithstanding these Persecutions, and that very few of the Ministers
remained, being either burnt or fled; yet the Protestants in London had very
frequently their Assemblies. And sometimes for want of Preachers of the Clergy,
Laymen exercised. Among these, I find one old Henry Dance, a Bricklayer of
White-chappel, who used to preach the Gospel in his Garden every Holy Day:
Where would be present sometimes a thousand People.

The very beginning of May there was exceeding Joy among the Papists for the
Birth of an Heir-male to the Crown. Confidently reported that a Male-Heir to
the Crown was Born.
Whereof the Report was so confident every where, that in the County of
Norfolk, the Mayor of Norwich sent word of it to the Earl of Sussex; and the
Bishop had Te Deum sung in the Cathedral and other Places of the City. And all
expressions of Joy both in City and Country were shown. And so it was, no
question, in other Parts of the Nation. And which is more strange, so long did
this Bruit hold, that besides the first Intelligence thereof brought to
Norwich, within a day or two after came two Persons more averring the Truth
thereof. The Bishop desired the Earl, according as he heard, if he had any
further knowledge, to impart it to him. The Contents of all this may be read in
the Original Letter, which is transcribed into the Appendix. No. LXXXVII.


But the belief of the Queen's great Belly went not over so. The Queen's great
Belly.
For then it was given out* that in June about Whitsuntide was the Time that
the Queen expected her Delivery: and Midwives, Rockers and Nurses were
provided. And just when that Time came, another Rumor was blown about in
London, that the Queen was delivered of a Child. And the Bells were rung,
Bonfires and Processions made: and in most parts of the Realm so it was. Nay in
Antwerp Guns were shot off by the English Ships, and the Lady Regent rewarded
the Mariners with an hundred Pistols.

But there happened now two things which make it seem, as tho all this were but
Design to impose upon the Belief of the World. Like a Design.
The one was this: There was a Woman, living near Aldersgate, delivered June
the 11 th, 1555, being Whitsunday Morning, Fox. p. 1450.
of a Man-Child. Unto whom the Lord North, and another Lord came, and desired
to have her Child from her, with very fair Offers. As that her Child should be
well provided for, and that She should take no care for it, if She would swear,
that She never knew nor had such Child. And after this, other Women came to
her: of whom one, they said, should have been the Rocker. But She would in no
case part with her Child. This very Woman, before Witness, made this
Declaration unto Mr. Fox and others* about the Year 1568, while he was printing
his Book: but he leaves it to the liberty of the Reader to believe what he
list. Add to this one other Passage of a Man within four Miles of Berwick* who
speaking of the Bonfires for Joy of the Birth of a Prince, said, There was a
joyful Triumph, but at length all would not prove worth a Mess of Pottage.

As the Queen's great Belly gave these great Disappointments, The Queen's Zeal.
so while She went with it, it gave her occasion to be more severe against the
poor Gospellers, who were now daily burnt. For She thought, and so She said,
She could not be safely and happily delivered, nor that any thing could succeed
prosperously with her, unless all the Heretics in Prison were burnt ad unum,
not sparing one. Which Cruelty I do suppose her Priests and Confessors put into
her Head. Pet. Martyr ad Pet. Alexand.


A Convocation.
There was a Convocation in November this Year; Wherein Cardinal Pole presided.
The Queen gave him a License under the Great Seal, to hold a Synod. Wherein She
ordered him to decree what Canons he thought fit. So he composed a Book, with a
very specious Title, viz. Reformatio Angliae, Ex Decretis Reginaldi Poli
Cardinalis, etc. which was printed. A Manuscript Copy whereof was in the famous
Library of Mr. Smith, of late Years sold by Auction. The Decrees of this Book,
in number Twelve, were agreed to in February. They are briefly set down by the
Bishop of Sarum in his History. Part II. p. 324.
There was an Article made in Favor of Non-residences; Vol. intit. Synodalia.
which I meet with in the Benet-Library: There is no Date, but I strongly
conjecture it is to be laid to this Convocation. The Cardinal seemed not to
favor Non-residences; but the rich Clergy, and Dignitaries were of another
Mind: wherefore they made this Proposition;

Decretum perpetuae Residentiae juxta Canonum Sanctiones optant pii* sed multa
sunt, quae hodie impediunt, quominus suum effectum juxta bonorum virorum vota
consequatur. To which are subjoined Reasons for this Proposition; and Remedies
for this evil. Which may be read in the Appendix. N. LXXXVIII.


CHAP. XVIII. Ridley and Latimer burnt.
Some petition the Queen for Cranmer.
WE can declare little this Year of the poor Archbishop, being now a Prisoner
at Oxford, and out of all place of Action. The Archbishopric was sequestered
into the Hands of Cardinal Pole, and his Palace at Lambeth appointed for the
Cardinal's Abode. In a Petition, that some of those that were abroad had sent
over to the Queen this Year, to dissuade her from these Persecutions that were
now so rigorously set on foot in England, they interceded for Cranmer, putting
her in mind how he had once preserved her in her Father's Time, by his earnest
Intercessions with him for her. So that, they said, she had more reason to
believe he loved her, and would speak the Truth to her, than she had of all the
rest of the Clergy. But, alas, this did little good.

He sees Ridley and Latimer going to their burning.
In October, Ridley and Latimer were brought forth to their Burning; and passing
by Cranmer's Prison, Ridley looked up to have seen him, and to have taken his
Farewell of him; but he was not then at the Window, being engaged in Dispute
with a Spanish Friar. But he looked after them, and devoutly falling upon his
Knees, prayed to God to strengthen their Faith and Patience in that their last,
but painful Passage.

Latimer's Character.
And here for a Farewell to these two Reverend Fathers, let us make a little
Halt, to take some view of them. Of Ridley sufficient HUGH LATIMER Bishop of
WORCESTER Martyred 16 October. 1555
has been said to acquaint us with the Worthiness of that Man. Of Latimer a
word or two. His Character is best taken from them who best knew him, and lived
in his Time. Becon in his Jewel of Joy.
One of these thus speaks of him, while he was yet alive, in the beginning of
King Edward. Latimer was very famous, not only for the Pureness of his Life,
which had always been Innocent and Blameless, but for the Sincerity and
Goodness of his Evangelical Doctrine. Which since the beginning of his
Preaching, had in all Points been so conformable to the Teaching of Christ, and
of his Apostles, that the very Adversaries of God's Truth, with all their
menacing Words, and cruel Imprisonment, could not withdraw him from it. But
whatsoever he had once preached, he valiantly defended the same before the
World, without fear of any Mortal Creature, although of never so great Power
and high Authority, wishing and minding rather to suffer, not only loss of
worldly Possessions, but also of Life, than that the Glory of God, and the
Truth of Christ's Gospel should in any Point be obscured or defaced through
him. His Life was not dear unto him, so that he might fulfill his Course with
Joy, and the Office that he received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of God's Favor. His Fame began to grow apace, while he was at Cambridg, [which
was some Years before 1530.] doing abundance of Good there among the Students
by his Sermons, which were many, by him preached both in Latin and English. The
Scholars flocked after him, and took great notice of his Doctrine, and
commending it sometimes to Letters, as most faithful Treasures of Memory.
Before them he did, by Authorities out of God's Word, and invincible Arguments,
besides the Allegation of the Doctors, prove, That the Holy Scriptures ought to
be read in the English Tongue of all Christen People, whether they were Priests
or Laymen. Though many Friars and others could not abide this Doctrine, and
would resist him, and preach against him, notwithstanding he, or rather God in
him, got the Victory. And it came to pass according to his Teaching, [when the
reading of the Scripture was allowed by the Royal Authority.] Before the
Scholars also he inveighed against Temple-works, good Intents, blind Zeal,
superstitious Devotion; as the painting of Tabernacles, gilding of Images,
setting up of Candles, running on Pilgrimage, and such other idle Inventions of
Men; whereby the Grace of God was obscured, and his Works of Mercy the less
regarded. He was also wont to rebuke the Beneficed Men, with the Authority of
God's Word, for neglecting and not teaching their Flock, and for being absent
from their Cures, they themselves being idle, and masting themselves like Hogs
of Epicurus, taking no thought, tho their poor Parishioners miserably pined
away, starved, perished and died for Hunger. He would condemn also, at these
his University-Sermons, foolish, ungodly and impossible Vows, as the Vow of
Chastity: wishing rather that Liberty of Marriage might be granted to them,
which had so vowed, by the Higher Powers, than so to continue, through single
Life, in all kind of abominable Uncleanness. O how vehement was he in rebuking
all Sins, namely, Idolatry, false and idle Swearing, Covetousness and Whoredom!
Again, how sweet and pleasant were his Words in exhorting unto Virtue! He spoke
nothing, but it left, as it were, certain Pricks or Stings in the Hearts of the
Hearers, which moved them to consent to his Doctrine. None, except they were
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart, went away from his Sermons, which
were not led with a faithful Repentance of their former Lives, affected with
high detestation of Sin, and moved unto all Godliness and Virtue.

The Writer of all this said, He knew certain Men, which, through the
persuasion of their Friends, went unto his Sermons, swelling blown full, and
puffed up like Esop's Frogs, with Envy and Malice against him; but when they
returned, his Sermon being done, and demanded how they liked him, and his
Doctrine, they answered, with the Bishops and Pharisees Servants, There was
never Man spoke like unto this Man. He would also speak freely against buying
and selling of Benefices, against promoting such to the Livings of Spiritual
Ministers, which were unlearned and ignorant in the Law of God; against Popish
Pardons; against the reposing our Hope in our own Works, or in other Men's
Merits. He was also a charitable Man, when he was at Cambridg, according to his
Ability, to poor Scholars and other needy People: So conformable was his Life
to his Doctrine. Insomuch that there was a common Saying in that University,
When Mr. Stafford read, and Latimer preached, then was Cambridg blessed.

Cranmer's Employment in Prison.
But to return to our ABp in his Prison. Where he divided his melancholy Time,
partly in Disputings and Discourses with Learned Men of the contrary
Persuasion, who labored to bring him over, thinking thereby to obtain a great
Glory to their Church; and partly in preparing an Answer to Bishop Gardener,
under the name of Marcus Antonius, in vindication of his own Book concerning
the Sacrament. And he finished three Parts in Prison. Two whereof were lost in
Oxford; and one came into the Hands of John Fox, as he tells us himself; which,
he said, was ready to be seen and set forth, as the Lord should see good.
Bishop Ridley also in his Confinement wrote Marginal Annotations on the side of
Gardiner's said Book, with the Lead of a Window, for want of Pen and Ink. Great
pity it is, that these last Studies of the Archbishop are lost: For even that
part which was once in Fox's Custody, is gone with his Fellows, for ought that
I can find among his Papers.

It was some time before this, that there was a Report spread, that the Queen
was Dead. Report of the Queen's Death.
The Rumor presently extended it self over the Seas. Which occasioned the Death
of one pious Professor of the Gospel, namely, Bartlet Green a Lawyer. For
Christopher Goodman having writ to him, his former Acquaintance in Oxford, to
certify him of the Truth thereof, he in a Letter in answer wrote thus, The
Queen is not yet Dead. This and diverse other Letters, that were given to a
Bearer, to carry beyond Sea to the Exiles there, were intercepted; and being
read at the Council, some would have it to amount to Treason, as though there
had been a Plot carrying on against the Queen's Life. But the Law not making
those words Treason, he after long lying in the Tower, was sent by the Council
to Bishop Boner. Who upon examination found him too firm to be moved from the
Doctrine of the Gospel: and so condemned him to the Fire.

CHAP. XIX. The last Proceedings with Cranmer.
AFter Ridley and Latimer were dispatched, Proceedings against Cranmer.
and had sealed their Doctrine with their Blood at Oxford: the said Course was
resolved to be taken with Cranmer late Archbishop, but now the Arch-Heretick,
as he was esteemed by them. They had been all three condemned, and adjudged
Heretics by Dr. Weston in the University of Oxford, after their Disputations.
But that Sentence was void in Law; because the Authority of the Pope was not
yet received: Therefore they were tried and judged upon new Commissions. The
Commission for judging the two former was from Pole the Cardinal, Lord Legate.
Wherein the Commissioners constituted were, White Bishop of Lincoln, Brooks
Bishop of Gloucester* and Holiman Bishop of Bristow. But there was a new
Commission sent from Rome for the Conviction of Cranmer. Brooks of Gloucester
was the Pope's Sub-delegate under Cardinal Puteo* to whom the Pope had
committed this Process; and Martin and Story, Doctors of the Civil Law, were
the Queen's Commissioners: The former of which was now, or soon after, for his
good Services, made one of the Masters in Chancery, and was much employed in
these Trials of poor Men. Notwithstanding this Man complied in Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, and took his Oath against the Pope now a second Time. In this Commission
from the Pope, he decreed, in a formality of Words, That the ABp should have
Charity and Justice showed to him, and that he should have the Laws in most
ample manner to answer in his behalf. He decreed also, That the said
Archbishop should come before the Bishop of Gloucester, as high Commissioner
from his Holiness, for the examination of such Articles as should be produced
against him: and that Martin and Story should require, in the King and Queen's
Name, the Examination of him. In pursuance of this Command from the Pope, and
in Obedience to the King and Queen, they came down to Oxon upon this
Commission; and September. 12. (which was seven days before the Condemnation of
Latimer and Ridley) sat in S. Mary's Church, accompanied with many other
Doctors, and suchlike; and among the rest, the Pope's Collector. The
Archbishop was brought forth out of Prison, habited in a fair black Gown, and
his Hood of Doctor of Divinity on both Shoulders. Then some Proctor said aloud,
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, appear here, and make answer to that which
shall be laid to thy Charge for Blasphemy, Incontinency and Heresy. What due
Honor the Archbishop gave unto the Queen's Commissioners, as representing the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, and how he gave none to Brooks, the Pope's
Representative, keeping on his Cap; and the Speeches, that the said Brooks,
and the other two made unto him, with the Archbishop's discreet and excellent
Answers, still interposing his Protestation against Brooks his Authority, may
be seen at large in Fox's Monuments.

Martin acts as the Queen's Proctor.
Only it may not be amiss here briefly to mention, (for the better understanding
of the Form of the Process) that after the Archbishop was cited, as before was
said, into the Court, the Bishop of Gloucester first made an Oration, directed
unto the Archbishop at the opening of his Commission. Next Dr. Martin made a
short Speech; and being with Dr. Story, appointed the King's and Queen's
Attorneys, he offered unto the said Bishop their Proxy, sealed with the
Broad-Seal of England; and then presenting himself to be Proctor on their
behalf. After that, he proceeded to exhibit certain Articles against the
Archbishop, containing Adultery and Perjury, (the one for being Married, the
other for breaking his Oath to the Pope.) Also he exhibited Books of Heresy,
made partly by him, and partly by his Authority published. And so produced him
as a Party principal to answer to his Lordship. After this, having leave given
him, the Archbishop beginning with the Lord's Prayer and Creed, made a long
and learned Apology for himself. Which is preserved to Posterity in the Acts
and Monuments.

His greatest Trouble at this Time.
By his Discourse before the Commissioners it appeared, how little he was taken
with the splendour of worldly Things. For he professed, That the loss of his
Promotions grieved him not: He thanked God as heartily for that poor and
afflicted State in which he then was, as ever he did for the Times of his
Prosperity. But that which stuck closest to him, as he said, and created him
the greatest Sorrow, was, to think that all that Pains and Trouble, that had
been taken by K. Henry and himself, for so many Years, to retrieve the Ancient
Authority of the Kings of England, and to vindicate the Nation from a Foreign
Power, and from the Baseness and infinite Inconveniences of crouching to the
Bishops of Rome, should now thus easily be quite undone again. And therefore,
he said, all his Trouble at that time, and the greatest that ever he had in his
Life, was to see the King and Queen's Majesty's, by their Proctors there, to
become his Accusers, and that in their own Realm and Country, before a Foreign
Power. For that if he had transgressed the Laws of the Land, their Majesty's
had sufficient Authority and Power, both from God, and the Ordinance of the
Realm, to punish him. Whereunto he would be at all times content to submit
himself.

Interrogatories put to him, with his Answers.
At this time of his Trial, several Interrogatories were administered unto him,
to make answer to: As concerning his Marriage; Concerning his setting abroad
Heresies, and making and publishing certain Books of Heresy. To which he
confessed, That the Catechism, and the Book of Articles, and the Book against
Bishop Gardener, were of his doing. Concerning subscribing those Articles, and
his compelling Persons to subscribe. Which he denied; but that he exhorted them
that were willing to subscribe, he acknowledged. Concerning his open
maintaining his Errors in Oxon: [Whereas they brought him to the Disputation
themselves.] Concerning his being noted with the Infamy of Schism; and that he
moved the King and Subjects of his Realm, to recede from the Catholic Church
and See of Rome. Which he acknowledged: but that their Departure, or Recess,
had in it no matter of Schism. Concerning his being twice sworn to the Pope.
And Dr. Martin then showed a Copy of his Protestation against the Pope at his
Consecration, under a public Notary's Hand. That he took upon him the Sea of
Rome, in consecrating Bishops, and Priests, without Leave or License from the
said See. To which he answered, That it was permitted to him by the Public
Laws of the Realm Concerning his standing out still to subscribe to the Pope's
Authority, when the whole Nation had. This being done, a public Notary entered
his Answers. Then the Bishop of Gloucester made another Speech, at breaking up
of this Meeting, and Dr. Story another, reflecting upon what Cranmer had said,
with Reviling and Taunts.

The last thing they did at this Meeting was to swear several Persons, who were
the next Day to declare what they knew, Witnesses sworn against him.
or could remember against this Reverend Father. And these were Dr. Marshal
Dean of Christ's-Church, a most furious and zelotical Man; and who to show his
spite against the Reformation, had caused Peter Martyr's Wife, who deceased
while he was the King's Professor, to be taken out of her Grave, and buried in
his Dunghill: Dr. Smith Public Professor, who had recanted most solemnly in K.
Edward's Days, and to whom the Archbishop was a good Friend, yet not long
afterward he wrote against his Book, and was now sworn a Witness against him:
Dr. Tresham a Canon of Christ-Church, who was one of the Disputers against
Cranmer, and had said, in his Popish Zeal, That there were 600 Errors in his
Book of the Sacrament: Dr. Crook; Mr. London, a Relation I suppose of Dr.
London, who came to shame for his false Accusation of Cranmer and others in K.
Henry's Reign; and now this Man, it is like, was willing to be even with
Cranmer, for his Relation's sake: Mr. Curtop, another Canon of Christ's-Church,
formerly a great Hearer of P. Martyr, Mr. Ward; Mr. Serles, the same, I
suppose, who belonged to the Church of Canterbury, and had been among the
number of the Conspirators against him in K. Henry's Days. And these being
sworn, the Archbishop was allowed to make his Exceptions against any of them.
Who resolutely said, He would admit none of them all, being perjured Men,
having sworn against the Pope, and now received and defended him; And that
therefore they were not in Christian Religion. And so the good Father was
remitted back for that time to Prison again.

I know not what the Depositions of these Witnesses were, Cited to Rome.
given in against him the next Day. For Fox relates nothing thereof, nor any
other, as I know of. Doubtless they were some of the Doctrines that he
preached, or taught, or defended, in Canterbury formerly, or more lately in his
Disputations in the Schools, or in his Discourses in his Prison, or at
Christ's-Church, where he sometimes was entertained. But to all that was
objected against him he made his Answers. And the last thing they of this
Commission did, was to cite him to appear at Rome within eighty Days, to make
there his Answer in Person* Which he said, He would be content to do, if the
King and Queen would send him. And so he was again remanded back to durance,
where he still remained. And an account of what these Commissioners had done,
was dispatched to Rome forthwith. From whence the final Sentence was sent in
December next.

The Pope's Letters against him.
Then Pope Paul sent his Letters Executory unto the King and Queen, and to the
Bishops of London and Ely, to degrade and deprive him: and in the end of those
fourscore Days he was declared Contumax, as wilfully absenting himself from
Rome, when he was summoned to go, though he was detained in Prison; which might
have been a lawful and just Excuse. But these Matters must proceed in their
Form, whatsoever Absurdity or Falsehood there were in them.

The Process against him at Rome.
By these Letters Executory, (which are in the first Edition of Fox, but omitted
in all the rest) we may collect how the Process went against Cranmer at Rome,
which I shall here briefly set down. First, the King and Queen sent their
Information to the Pope against Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, viz. That he
had brought this noble Realm from the Unity of the Catholic Church. That he
was a Person guilty of Heresy, and many other grand Crimes, and not worthy to
enjoy his Bishopric, and most worthy greater Punishments, and they requested
that Process might be made against him. For the better enquiry into, and taking
cognizance of the Truth of these Accusations, the Pope gave a special
Commission, signed with his Hand, to James Puteo, Cardinal of S. Mary's, and
afterward of S. Simeon, to cite the said Thomas before him, and all such
Witnesses as should be needful, to come to a true knowledge of the Archbishop's
Crimes: and accordingly to give the Pope an account of all he should find. This
he was to do in his own Person, or to constitute any dignified Person, abiding
in these Parts, to do the same. So the said Cardinal appointed Brooks Bishop
of Gloucester, and some Colleagues with him, to manage this Commission in his
stead. This Brooks, having been Bishop Gardiner's Chaplain, was probably
nominated and recommended by the said Gardener, as I do suppose he was the
Person that directed the whole managery of this Process against the
Archbishop. And so Brooks, being now by this Deputation the Pope's
Sub-delegate, proceeded in this Cause, as was said before. In regard of the
Archbishop's Citation to Rome to answer there, and make his personal
appearance before the Pope, the Letters Executory say, Comparere non curaret,
as an Aggravation of his Crime, that he took no care to appear, (which was
false;) and that therefore, as the said Letters ran, the King and Queen's
Proctors at Rome, named Peter Rouilius, and Anthony Massa de Gallesio, and
Alexander Palentarius, the Proctor of the Pope's Treasury, had sued that
Contumacy might be definitively pronounced against the said Thomas Cranmer,
being cited and not appearing. Therefore, He, Pope Paul IV. sitting in the
Throne of Justice, and having before his Eyes God alone, who is the Righteous
Lord, and judges the World in Righteousness, did make this definitive
Sentence, pronouncing and decreeing the said Thomas Cranmer to be found Guilty
of the Crimes of Heresy and other Excesses, to be wholly unmindful of the
Health of his Soul, to go against the Rules and Ecclesiastical Doctrines of the
Holy Fathers, and against the Apostolical Traditions of the Roman Church and
Sacred Councils, and the Rites of the Christian Religion hitherto used in the
Church; especially against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, and
Holy Orders; by thinking and teaching otherwise, than the Holy Mother Church
preaches, and observes; and by denying the Primacy and Authority of the
Apostolic See; and against the Processions, which every Year, on Corpus
Christi Day, were wont to be celebrated by the Pope's Predecessors. Mention
also is made of his Bringing in again the Heresy abjured by Berengarius, of his
believing the false and heretical Doctrines of Wicklif and Luther, those
Arch-Hereticks: printing of Books of that nature, and publishing them, and
defending those Doctrines in public Disputations, and that before his
Sub-delegate, and persisting herein with Obstinacy. Therefore the Pope
excommunicated him, and deprived him of his Archbishopric, and all other
Places* and Privileges whatsoever, and adjudged him to be delivered over to the
Secular Court, and all his Goods to be confiscate. And the Pope absolved all
Persons from any Oath of Fidelity given to Cranmer, and imposed perpetual
Silence upon him. And moreover, upon the instance of the abovesaid Proctors,
commanded the Bishops of London and Ely to degrade him, and so to deliver him
over to the Secular Court. This bore date December 14.

In obedience to these Letters from Rome, the two Bishops, The Pope's Letters
read.
the Pope's Delegates, came down to Oxford; and sitting in the Choire of
Christ's-Church, before the High Altar, the said Commissional Letters were
read: wherein it was specified, That all things were indifferently examined on
both Parties, and Counsel heard as well on the King's and Queen's behalf, who
were Cranmer's Accusers, as on the behalf of Cranmer, so that he wanted nothing
to his necessary Defense. Whereat the Archbishop could not but exclaim (while
these things were reading) against such manifest Lies, That, as he said, when
he was continually in Prison, and could never be suffered to have Counsel or
Advocate at Home, he should produce Witness, and appoint his Counsel at Rome.
God must needs punish, added he, this open and shameless Lying.

But this Command of Degrading our Archbishop was presently proceeded upon:
Thomas Thirlby Bishop of Ely, his old Friend, They degrade him.
infinitely before-time obliged by the Archbishop, shed many Tears at the
doing of it. So that Cranmer moved at it, was fain to comfort him, and told
him, He was well contented with it. So they apparelled the Archbishop in all
the Garments and Ornaments of an Archbishop; only in mockery every thing was of
Canvas, and old Clouts. And the Crosier was put into his Hand. And then he was,
piece by piece, stripped of all again. When they began to take away his Pal, he
asked them, Which of them had a Pal, to take away his Pal? They then answered,
acknowledging they were his Inferiors, as Bishops, but as they were the Pope's
Delegates, they might take away his Pal. While they were thus spoiling him of
all his Garments, he told them, That it needed not; for that he had done with
this Gear long ago. While this was doing, Boner made a Triumphant Speech
against the poor Archbishop. But when they came to take away his Crosier, he
held it fast, and would not deliver it: but pulled out an Appeal out of his
left Sleeve under his Wrist, and said, I appeal unto the next General Council;
and herein I have comprehended my Cause, He Appeals.
and the Form of it, which I desire may be admitted. And prayed diverse times to
the standers by to be Witnesses, naming them by their Names. This Appeal is
preserved in Fox, which is well worthy the reading.

He is ill dealt with in his Process.
The Archbishop was all along ill dealt with in diverse respects in this his
Process, which himself was well sensible of. One was, That he had desired the
Court, that considering he was upon his Life, he might have the use of
Proctors, Advocates and Lawyers. But they would allow him none. After the
Court, wherein Brooks was Sub-delegate, had done, they promised him that he
should see his Answers to Sixteen Articles, that they had laid against him;
that he might correct, amend and change them, where he thought good. And that
Promise they performed not. And so entered his Answers upon record, though his
Answer was not made upon Oath, nor reserved, nor made in judicio, but extra
judicium. Which Cranmer made a Protest of: But not to the Bishop of Gloucester,
as Judge, whom he would not own, but to the King's and Queen's Proctors, Martin
and Story. To them, for these Reasons, he wrote a Letter, That he trusted they
would deal sincerely with him, without Fraud or Craft, and use him as they
would wish to be used in the like case themselves: Bidding them remember that
with what Measure they meet, it should be measured to them again.

The Reasons of his Appeal.
Therefore to make himself some amends for all this foul Dealing, his last
Refuge was an Appeal. Whereof he seriously bethought himself, when, and in what
manner to make it. The Causes for his resolving upon it, besides those already
mentioned, were, because he remembered Luther once did so in such a Case; and
that he might not seem rashly to cast away his own Life; and because he was
bound by his Oath never to receive the Pope's Authority in this Realm; and
because the Commissioners had broken their Promise with him, as above was said:
and because he thought the Bishop of Rome was not an indifferent Judge in this
Cause, which was his own Cause: for all the Archbishop's Troubles came upon
him for departing from him. He therefore wrote privately to a trusty Friend,
and Learned in the Law, then in the University, to instruct him in the Order
and Form of an Appeal: and whether he should first Appeal from the
Judg-Delegate to the Pope, or else from that Judge immediately to a General
Council. And so earnestly entreated him to lay aside all other Studies, and to
take this in Hand presently, because he was summoned, to make his Answer at
Rome, the sixteenth Day of this Month, that is, of February. There was one
reason more moved him to Appeal, which must not be omitted, namely, that he
might gain Time to finish his Answer to Marcus Antonius. He feared after all,
they would not admit his Appeal. But he did not much pass, and desired God's
Will might be done: So that God might be glorified by his Life or Death. He
thought it much better to die in Christ's Quarrel, than to be shut in the
Prison of the Body, unless it were for the advancement of God's Glory, and the
Profit of his Brethren. This Letter of the Archbishop being writ with so much
Strength and Presence of Mind, and showing so much Prudence and Wit, is happily
preserved in Fox's Monuments where it may be read.

This Appeal, He presses his Appeal.
when the Archbishop had produced and preferred to the Bishop of Ely, he told
him, That they could not admit of it, because their Commission was to proceed
against him, Omni Appellatione remota. Cranmer replied, That this Cause was not
every private Man's Cause, but that it was between the Pope and him
immediately, and none otherwise: and that no Man ought to be Judge in his own
Cause. And therefore they did him the more Wrong. So at last Thirlby received
it of him, and said, If it might be admitted, it should.

And so after this Interruption, they proceeded to degrade him, taking off the
rest of his Habits. And then put him on a poor Yeoman-Beadle's Gown threadbare,
and a Towns-man's Cap. And Boner told him, He was no Lord any more: and so was
sent to Prison.

CHAP. XX. Cranmer Writes to the Queen.
AND now, Writes two Letters to the Queen.
having undergone these Brunts with all this Gravity, Discretion, Learning and
Courage, he next resolved to give the Queen a true and impartial Account of
these Transactions, to prevent Misreports, and to justify himself in what he
had said and done. Two Letters therefore he wrote to her, but thought not fit
to entrust them with the Commissioners, since Weston had served him such a
Trick in the like Case before. In these Letters he related the reason of his
refusing the Bishop of Gloucester for his Judge, and of his Appeal. For as he
thought it his Duty at that juncture to declare himself in that public manner
against the Bishop of Rome, so he reckoned he ought to declare himself also to
the Supreme Magistrate. And therefore before the Bishop of Gloucester, and the
Commissioners, he said, That as he had thus discharged his own Conscience
toward the World, so he would also write his Mind to her Grace touching this
Matter.

He wrote to her, The Content^ of the first.
That the twelfth Day of that Month he was cited to appear at Rome the
eightieth Day after. And that it could not but grieve the Heart of a natural
Subject to be accused by the King and Queen of his own Country, and before any
outward Judge: as if the King and Queen were Subjects within their own Realm,
and were fain to complain and require Justice at a Stranger's Hand against
their own Subject, being already condemned to Death by their own Laws. As
though the King and Queen could not have or do Justice within their own Realm,
against their own Subjects; but they must seek it at a Stranger's Hand in a
strange Land.

Then he proceeded to show her, why he refused the Pope's Authority, when
Brooks Bishop of Gloucester came to try him; namely, Because he was sworn never
to consent, that the Bishop of Rome should have, or exercise any Authority or
Jurisdiction in the Realm of England. Another reason why he denied his
Authority, was, Because his Authority repugned to the Crown Imperial of this
Realm, and to the Laws of the same. For the Pope says, all manner of Power,
both Temporal and Spiritual, is given unto him of God: and that Temporal Power
is given to Kings and Emperors to use it under him. Whereas contrary to this
Claim, (said the Archbishop) the Imperial Crown of this Realm is taken
immediately from God, to be used under him only, and is subject to none but God
alone.

Moreover, to the Imperial Laws of this Realm, all the Kings in their
Coronations, and all Justices, when they receive their Offices, are sworn, and
all the whole Realm bound to defend them. But contrary hereunto the Pope (he
said) made void, and commanded to blot out of our Books, all Laws and Customs
repugnant to his Laws.

Then he proceeded to show, how contrary the Laws of the Realm, and the Pope's
Laws were. And therefore that the Kings of this Realm had provided for their
Laws by the Praemunire. So that if any Man let the execution of the Law by any
Authority from the Sea of Rome, he fell into the Praemunire. And to meet with
this, the Popes had provided for their Law by Cursing.

He supposed that these things were not fully opened in the Parliament House,
when the Pope's Authority was received again: For if they were, he could not
believe, that the King and Queen, the Nobles and Commons would again receive a
Foreign Authority, so hurtful and prejudicial to the Crown, and to the Laws and
State of this Realm. He rebuked the Clergy, who were the main Movers of this at
the Parliament, for their own Ends. For they desired to have the Pope their
chief Head, to the intent that they might have, as it were, a Kingdom and Laws
within themselves, distinct from the Laws of the Crown; and live in this Realm
like Lords and Kings, without damage or fear of any Man. And then he glanced at
some of the Clergy, [probably meaning Thirlby, Hethe, Tonstal, etc.] that they
held their Peace for this Consideration, though they knew this well enough. Who
if they had done their Duty to the Crown and Realm, should have opened their
Mouths at this Time, and shown the Peril and Danger that might ensue to the
Crown hereby.

Another Cause he urged to the Queen, why he could not allow the Pope's
Authority, was, Because he subverted not only the Laws of the Nation, but the
Laws of God. So that whosoever be under his Authority, he suffered them not to
be under Christ's Religion purely. For proof of which he gave these Instances.
God's Will and Commandment is, that when the People be gathered together to
serve God, the Ministers should use such a Language as the People might
understand, and take profit thereby. For God said by the Mouth of S. Paul, As a
Harp or Lute, if it give no certain sound, that Men may know what is stricken,
who can dance after it? it is put in vain. So it is in vain, profits nothing,
if the Priest speak to the People in a Language they know not. And whereas,
when he urged this to the Commissioners, they told him, That that Place
respected Preaching only. He told the Queen, That S. Paul's words meant it not
only of Preaching, for that he spoke expressly of Praying, Singing and giving
Thanks, and of all other things, which the Priests say in the Churches. And so
(he said) all Interpreters, Greek and Latin, Old and New, School-Authors, and
others, that he had read, understood it: Till about thirty Years past, Eckius
and others of his Sort, began to invent this new Exposition. And so (he said)
all the best Learned Divines, that met at Windsor 1549, for the Reformation of
the Church, both of the New Learning and the Old, agreed without Controversy,
(not one opposing) that the Service of the Church ought to be in the
Mother Tongue; and that that Place of S. Paul was so to be understood.

Again, Christ ordained the Sacrament to be received of Christian People, under
both Forms of Bread and Wine, and said, Drink ye all of this. The Pope gives a
clean contrary Command, That no Layman shall drink of the Cup of their
Salvation. So that if he should obey the Pope in these things, he must needs
disobey his Savior.

Again, He instanced in the Pope's taking upon him to give the Temporal Sword
to Kings and Princes, and to depose them from their Imperial States, if they
were disobedient to him; and in commanding Subjects to disobey their Princes:
Assoiling them as well from their Obedience, as their lawful Oaths made unto
them; directly contrary to God's Commandment, that commands all Subjects to
obey their Kings, and their Rulers under them.

Then he spoke of the Superiority the Pope claimed above Kings and Emperors,
and making himself Universal Bishop. And how his Flatterers told him he might
dispense against God's Word, both against the Old and New Testament: and that
whatsoever he did, tho he drew innumerable People by heaps with himself to
Hell, yet might no mortal Man reprove him; because he is the Judge of all Men,
and might be judged by no Man. And thus he sat in the Temple of God, as he were
a God, and named himself God, and dispensed against God. If this were not (he
said) to play Antichrist's part, he knew not what Antichrist was, that is,
Christ's Enemy and Adversary. Now (added he) until the time that such a Person
may be found, Men might easily conjecture where to find Antichrist.

He took God to record, that what he spoke against the Power and Authority of
the Pope, he spoke it not for any Malice he ought to the Pope's Person, whom he
knew not; nor for fear of Punishment, or to avoid the same; thinking it rather
an Occasion to aggravate, than to diminish the same: but for his most bounden
Duty to the Crown, Liberty, Laws and Customs of this Realm of England; and most
especially to discharge his Conscience, in uttering the Truth to God's Glory,
casting away all Fear by the Comfort which he had in Christ, who says, Fear
not them that kill the Body.

As touching the Sacrament, he said,

That forasmuch as the whole Matter stood in the understanding those words of
Christ, This is my Body; This is my Blood: He told the Commissioners, That
Christ in those words made demonstration of the Bread and Wine, and spoke
figuratively, calling Bread his Body, and Wine his Blood; because he ordained
them to be Sacraments of his Body and Blood. And he told them, He would be
judged by the old Church, which Doctrine could be proved Elder; and that he
would stand to. And that forasmuch as he had urged in his Book Greek and Latin
Authors, which above a thousand Years continually taught as he did; if they
could bring forth but one old Author, that said in these two Points as they
said, he offered six or seven Years ago, and offered so still, that he would
give place.

Then he showed her how fond and uncomfortable the Papists Doctrine of the
Sacrament is: For of one Body of Christ is made two Bodies: One natural, having
distance of Members, with Form and Proportion of Man's perfect Body; and this
Body is in Heaven. But the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, by their own
Doctrine, must needs be a monstrous Body, having neither distance of Members,
nor Form, Fashion or Proportion of a Man's natural Body. And such a Body is in
the Sacrament, teach they, as goes into the Mouth with the Form of Bread, and
enters no further than the Form of Bread goes, nor tarrieth no longer than the
Form of Bread is by natural Heat digesting. So that when the Form of Bread is
digested, the Body of Christ is gone. And what Comfort (said he) can be herein
to any Christian Man, to receive Christ's unshapen Body, and it to enter no
further than the Stomach, and depart by and by as soon as the Bread is
consumed? It seemed to him a more sound and comfortable Doctrine, that Christ
has but one Body, and that has Form and Fashion of a Man's true Body. Which
Body spiritually enters into the whole Man, Body and Soul. And though the
Sacrament be consumed, yet whole Christ remains, and feeds the Receiver
unto eternal Life, if he continue in Godliness, and never departs until the
Receiver forsakes him.

That if it could be showed him, that the Pope's Authority be not prejudicial
to the things beforementioned; or that his Doctrine of the Sacrament be
erroneous, then he would never stand perversely in his own Opinion, but with all
humility submit himself to the Pope, not only to kiss his Feet, but another
Part also.

For all these Reasons he could not take the Bishop of Gloucester for his Judge,
representing, as he did, this Pope. But another Reason was, in respect of his
own Person, being more than once perjured, having been diverse times sworn never
to consent that the Bishop of Rome should have any Jurisdiction within this
Realm, but to take the King and his Successors for Supreme Heads thereof. And
he was perjured again, in taking his Bishopric both of the Queen and the Pope,
making to each of them a solemn Oath: Which Oaths be so contrary, that the one
must needs be Perjury. And further, in swearing to the Pope, to maintain his
Laws, Decrees, Constitutions and Ordinances, he declared himself an Enemy to
the Imperial Crown, and to the Laws of the Realm. Whereby he showed himself not
worthy to sit as a Judge in this Realm.

This was the Sum of this excellent Letter of the Archbishop to the Queen.

He wrote another to her soon after: wherein he plainly told her, The Contents
of his second Letter.
That at her Coronation, she took an Oath to the Pope, to be obedient to him,
to defend his Person, to maintain his Authority, Honor, Laws and Privileges:
And at the same time another Oath to the Kingdom, to maintain the Laws,
Liberties and Customs of the same. He prayed her to weigh both Oaths, and see
how they did agree; and then to do as her Grace's Conscience should give her:
For he was sure (he said) she would not willingly offend. He feared there were
Contradictions in her Oaths, and that those that should have informed her
Majesty thoroughly, did not their Duties herein. He complained, that he was now
kept from Company of Learned Men, from Books, from Counsel, and from Pen and
Ink, saving to write to her Majesty at that time: and as to his appearance at
Rome, he said, if she would give him leave, he would appear there; and he
trusted God would put in his Mouth to defend his Truth there, as well as here.

These Letters of his, The Bailiff of Oxford carries his Letters.
one of the Bailiffs of Oxon carried up to the Queen. Something else he wrote
to her, enclosed and sealed; which he required Martyn and Story to be delivered
without delay, and not to be opened until it were delivered unto her own Hands.
These and other of his smart and learned Letters, no question made Impression
upon the Queen, or at least upon those that read them; for they were delivered
by the Queen to no less a Person than the Holy Father, Cardinal Pole himself;
who was advised to frame an Answer to them.

So he wrote to the Archbishop in answer to one of them, Pole answers them.
a long Letter, dated from St. James's, November. 6. Wherein he pretended a great
deal of Compassion to his Soul; which he told him was ready to be lost, as well
as his Body: And that the Condemnation that was lately past on him, was so
horrible to him to hear, that he testified to him before God, and upon the
Salvation of his Soul, that he would rather choose to be the Means of bringing
him to Repentance, than to receive the greatest Benefit that could be given him
under Heaven in this World. Which the Cardinal might say, to take off the Odium
of the Suspicion, as though he hastened Cranmer's Death, that he might jump
into his Place. And so the Cardinal proceeded to attempt to convince him in the
two great Points of his Letter, viz. concerning the Authority of the Pope, and
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. Especially, because Cranmer had said in
his Letter, That he would not be perverse, to stand wilfully in his own
Opinion, if any could show him by Reason, that his Doctrines were Erroneous.
But I refer the Reader to the Appendix, if he be minded to read the Cardinal's
Letter; No. LXXXIX.
which I met with among Fox's Manuscripts. By comparing of this Letter of
Pole's with that of Cranmer's, any one may see a mighty difference. Strength,
Evidence and Conviction in the Archbishop's, who had Truth on his Side, but a
Flashiness and Debility in the Cardinal's, made up of poor Shifts and weak
Arguings, and impertinent Allegations of Scripture, and personal Reflections,
to help out a bad Cause.

To mention some few of this sort. He charged the Archbishop with Covetousness
and Ambition, Some Account of the Cardinal's Letter to Cranmer.
in affecting the Archbishopric. And then, by and by, not well remembering
what he had said before, in his Heat against the good Archbishop, he gives a
contrary Reason thereof, namely, That he might be in a capacity to reform the
Church according to his Mind. And that it was for the sake of that, that he
took an Oath to the Pope at his Consecration, though he were fain to make a
Protestation against the said Oath. He said in this Letter, That the
Archbishop's fall into Error, was not as the fall of others usually were, by
Frailty or Curiosity, but by deliberate Malice: And that the Archbishop, by
his Protestation that he made before he took his Oath to the Pope, brake his
Oath, and was forsworn before he did swear. Which methinks is pretty strange.
And concerning this Protestation, he said, It was a privy Protestation, and
that he had privy Witnesses of it: Whereas it was done in the most open and
public manner that could be, two or three times over, before Public Notaries,
and by them entered on Record, on purpose that all might take notice of it. And
whereas the Archbishop had said, That it was much more probable, that the
Bread and Wine should be a Figure, than the real Body and Blood. The Cardinal
said, The more probable it was, the more false; because the great Sophister and
Father of Lies deceived by probability of Reason. The Consequence whereof one
would think should be, the more improbable any Opinion in Religion was, the
more true. But (he said) the true Doctrine was taught another way. He
represented the Archbishop, as challenging them of the other Side to bring any
one single Doctor of the Church, that ever spoke in favor of
Transubstantiation; leaving out, For a thousand Years next after Christ, which
the Archbishop expressly had said. And in fine, every where he triumphed over
the Archbishop's wilful Blindness and Ignorance; and told him, in much
Charity, That he was under the Vengeance of God, a Member of Satan, and damned.
This, and a great deal more, may be seen in Pole's Letter.

To which I might have added another Letter of the said Cardinal to the same
Archbishop, Another Letter of the Cardinal to Cranmer.
concerning the Sacrament, a little after the Disputation at Oxford, but that
it would be too prolix, being a just Treatise against Cranmer's Book of that
Argument. This Treatise bears this Title.

REGINALDI POLI Cardinalis Legati Apostolici Epistola ad Thomam Cranmerum, qui
Archiepiscopalem sedem Cantuariensis Ecclesiae tenens, novam de Sacramento
Eucharistiae Doctrinam contra perpetuum Catholicae Ecclesiae consensum
professus est, ac tradidit. Qua Epistola eum nec Magistrum tanti Mysterii,
neque Discipulum idoneum esse posse; Simulque unde hic ejus Error manarit,
ostendit; E^ ad poenitentiam hortatur. CHAP. XXI. He Recants, Repents, and is
burnt.
HAving brought the Archbishop unto his Degradation and Appeal, wherein he
showed so much Christian Courage, He Recants.
Wisdom and Fortitude, I must now represent him making a great Trip and a sad
Fall; and mention one of the greatest Blemishes of his Life. For now the Popish
Party, thinking what a piece of Glory it would be, to gain this great Man to
their Church, used all Means, all Arts, as well as Arguments, to bring him to
recant. They set the Doctors of the University upon him. He was entertained at
the Dean of Christs-Church his Lodging: There they treated him with good Fare.
They got him to Bowls with them. They let him have his Pleasure in taking the
Air. Sometimes they accosted him with Arguments and Disputations: Sometimes by
Flatteries, Promises and Threatenings. They told him, The Noblemen bare him
good Will: that his Return would be highly acceptable to the King and Queen.
That he should enjoy his former Dignity in the Church; or if it liked him
better, he should lead a quiet Life in more privacy* And that it was but
setting his Name in two Words in a piece of Paper. They told him, the Queen was
resolved to have Cranmer a Catholic, or no Cranmer at all. That he was still
lusty and strong, and might live many a Year more, if he would not willingly
cut off his own Life by the terrible Death of Burning. He rejected these
Temptations a long while, but at last was overcome and yielded. The Recantation
I shall not repeat, it being to be seen at large in Fox. It was signed by his
Hand. The Witnesses thereunto were two or three, who had been exceedingly busy
in tampering with him: One Sydal, (a great Professor in the last Reign) and
John and Richard two Spanish Friars.

The Doctors and Prelates caused this Recantation speedily to be printed and
dispersed. When the Queen saw his Subscription, Notwithstanding his Burning is
ordered.
she was glad of it, but would not alter her Determination to have him burned,
by the instigation, as I suppose, of Pole the Legate. The Writ for which was
sent down by Hethe, Lord Chancellor, in the latter end of February, under the
Broad Seal. It was charged upon his Converters, that they were negligent in
procuring his Life from the Queen: But the true Reason was, the Queen was
resolved not to grant it. She privately gave Instruction to Cole, to prepare a
Sermon to preach at his Burning: And several Lords, and other Justices of the
Peace in those Parts, were ordered to attend there, with their Servants and
Retinue, to keep Peace, and to see him Executed. Cole coming with his Errand to
Oxon, visited him in the Prison, and asked him if he stood firm to what he had
subscribed? This was the Day before his Execution, but saying nothing to him of
his determined Death. The next Day, being the Day he was to be burned, viz.
March 21. he came again, and asked him if he had any Money? And having none, he
gave him certain Crowns to bestow to what Poor he would; and so departed,
exhorting him to Con-Constancy. But the disconsolate Archbishop perceived to
what this tended: and being by and by to be brought to S. Mary's, (where Cole
was to preach) there openly to confess what he had more privately subscribed,
he resolved with himself to disburden his Conscience, and to revoke his
Recantation. And he prepared a Prayer, and a Declaration of his Faith, which he
drew up in writing, and carried it privately along with him, to make use of it
when he saw his Occasion. The manner how he behaved himself after Cole's
Sermon, and how he delivered his last Mind, and with what Bitterness and Tears
he did it; and how he was pulled down by the Scholars, Priests and Friars, with
the greatest Indignation at this their Disappointment; and how he was led out
of the Church forthwith to the Place of Burning, over against Baliol College:
and how he there first put his right Hand into the Flames to be consumed, for
that base Subscription that it made; and how his Heart was found whole and
unconsumed in the Ashes, after he was burnt; These, and the rest of the
Particulars of his Martyrdom, I might leave to Fox, and other Historians from
him, to relate.

Yet because it is not convenient so briefly to pass over such a remarkable
Scene of his Life, A Letter from Oxford concerning Cranmer's Death.
being his last appearance upon the Stage of this World, I shall represent it
in the Words of a certain grave Person unknown, but a Papist, who was an Eye
and Ear-Witness, and related these Matters, as it seems, very justly, in a
Letter from Oxon to his Friend. Which is as follows.

But that I know for our great Friendship, and long-continued Love, Inter Foxii
MSS.
you look even of Duty, that I should signify to you of the Truth of such
things as here chances among us: I would not at this time have written to you
the unfortunate End, and doubtful Tragedy of T. C. late Bishop of Canterbury:
Because I little pleasure take in beholding of such heavy Sights. And when they
are once overpassed, I like not to rehearse them again; being but a renewing of
my Woe, and doubling my Grief. For although his former Life, and wretched End,
deserves a greater Misery (if any greater might have chanced, than chanced unto
him) yet setting aside his Offenses to God and his Country, and beholding the
Man without his Faults, I think there was none that pitied not his Case, and
bewailed his Fortune, and feared not his own Chance, to see so noble a Prelat,
so grave a Counselor, of so long-continued Honor, after so many Dignities, in
his old Years to be deprived of his Estate, adjudged to die, and in so painful
a Death to end his Life. I have no delight to increase it. Alas, it is too much
of it self, that ever so heavy a Case should betide to Man, and Man to deserve
it.

But to come to the matter: On Saturday last, being the 21 th of March was his
Day appointed to die. Cranmer brought to S. Mary's.
And because the Morning was much Rainy, the Sermon appointed by Mr. Dr. Cole
to be made at the Stake, was made in S. Mary's Church. Whither Dr. Cranmer was
brought by the Mayor and Aldermen, and my Lord Williams. With whom came diverse
Gentlemen of the Shire, Sir T. A Bridges, Sir John Brown, and others. Where
was prepared, over against the Pulpit, an high Place for him, that all the
People might see him. And when he had ascended it, he kneeled down and prayed,
weeping tenderly: which moved a great number to Tears, that had conceived an
assured hope of his Conversion and Repentance.

Then Mr. Cole began his Sermon. The sum whereof was this. Cole's Sermon.
First, He declared Causes, why it was expedient, that he should suffer,
notwithstanding his Reconciliation. The chief are these. One was, for that he
had been a great cause of all this Alteration in this Realm of England. And
when the Matter of the Divorce, between King Henry VIII. and Queen Katharine,
was commenced in the Court of Rome, he having nothing to do with it, set upon
it, as Judge, which was the entry to all the Inconveniences that followed. Yet
in that he excused him, that he thought he did it not of Malice, but by the
Persuasions and Advice of certain Learned Men. Another was, that he had been
the great setter forth of all this Heresy received into the Church in this last
Time; had written in it, had disputed, had continued it, even to the last Hour:
and that it had never been seen in this Realm, (but in the time of Schism) that
any Man continuing so long, has been pardoned: and that it was not to be
remitted for Ensamples-sake. Other Causes he alleged, but these were the
chief, why it was not thought good to pardon him. Other Causes beside, he said,
moved the Queen, and the Council thereto, which were not meet and convenient
for every one to understand them.

The second Part touched the Audience, how they should consider this thing:
That they should hereby take example to fear God: and that there was no Power
against the Lord: having before their Eyes a Man of so high Degree, sometime
one of the chiefest Prelates of the Church, an Archbishop, the chief of the
Council, the second Peer in the Realm of long time: a Man, as might be thought,
in greatest assurance, a King of his side; notwithstanding all his Authority
and Defense to be debased from an high Estate to a low Degree; of a Counselor
to be a Caitiff; and to be set in so wretched Estate, that the poorest Wretch
would not change Conditions with him.

The last and End appertained unto him. Turns his Speech to Cranmer^
Whom he comforted and encouraged to take his Death well, by many places of
Scripture. And with these, and such, bidding him nothing mistrust but he should
incontinently receive that the Thief did: To whom Christ said, Hodie mecum eris
in Paradiso. And out of S. Paul armed him against the Terrors of the Fire, by
this; Dominus fidelis est: Non sinet nos tentari ultra quam far potestis: By
the Example of the three Children; to whom God made the Flame seem like a
pleasant Dew. He added hereunto the Rejoicing of S. Andrew in his Cross; the
Patience of S. Laurence on the Fire: Ascertaining him, that God, if he called
on him, and to such as die in his Faith, either will abate the fury of the
Flame, or give him Strength to abide it. He glorified God much in his
Conversion; because it appeared to be only his Work: Declaring what Travel and
Conference had been used with him to convert him, and all prevailed not, till
it pleased God of his Mercy to reclaim him, and call him Home. In discouring of
which place, he much commended Cranmer, and qualified his former Doing.

And I had almost forgotten to tell you, that Mr. Cole promised him, that he
should be prayed for in every Church in Oxford, and should have Mass and Dirige
Sung for him; and spoke to all the Priests present to say Mass for his Soul.

When he had ended his Sermon, he desired all the People to pray for him: After
Sermon all pray for him.
Mr. Cranmer kneeling down with them, and praying for himself. I think there
was never such a number so earnestly praying together. For they, that hated him
before, now loved him for his Conversion, and hope of Continuance. They that
loved him before could not suddenly hate him, having hope of his Confession
again of his Fall. So Love and Hope increased Devotion on every side.

His penitent behavior.
I shall not need, for the time of Sermon, to describe his Behavior, his
Sorrowful Countenance, his heavy Cheer, his Face bedewed with Tears; sometime
lifting his Eyes to Heaven in Hope, sometime casting them down to the Earth for
Shame; To be brief, an Image of Sorrow: the Dolor of his Heart bursting out at
his Eyes in plenty of Tears: Retaining ever a quiet and grave Behavior. Which
increased the Pity in Men's Hearts, that they unfeignedly loved him, hoping it
had been his Repentance for his Transgression and Error. I shall not need, I
say, to point it out unto you; you can much better imagine it your self.

Speaks to the Auditory.
When Praying was done, he stood up, and having leave to speak, said, Good
People, I had intended indeed to desire you to pray for me; which because Mr.
Doctor has desired, and you have done already, I thank you most heartily for
it. And now will I pray for my self, as I could best devise for mine own
comfort, and say the Prayer, word for word, as I have here written it. And he
read it standing: and after kneeled down, and said the Lord's Prayer; and all
the People on their Knees devoutly praying with him.

His Prayer was thus: He prays.
O Father of Heaven; O Son of God, Redeemer of the World; O Holy Ghost,
proceeding from them both, Three Persons and one God, have Mercy upon me most
wretched Caitiff, and miserable Sinner. I who have offended both Heaven and
Earth, and more grievously than any Tongue can express, whither then may I go,
or whither should I fly for succor? To Heaven I may be ashamed to lift up mine
Eyes; and in Earth I find no refuge. What shall I then do? shall I despair? God
forbid. O good God, thou art Merciful, and refusest none that come unto thee
for Succor. To thee therefore do I run. To thee do I humble my self: saying, O
Lord God, my Sins be great, but yet have Mercy upon me for thy great Mercy. O
God the Son, thou wast not made Man, this great Mystery was not wrought, for
few or small Offenses. Nor thou did not give thy Son unto Death, O God the
Father, for our little and small Sins only, but for all the greatest Sins of
the World: so that the Sinner return unto thee with a penitent Heart; as I do
here at this present. Wherefore have Mercy upon me, O Lord, whose Property is
always to have Mercy. For although my Sins be great, yet thy Mercy is greater.
I crave nothing, O Lord, for mine own Merits, but for thy Name's Sake, that it
may be glorified thereby: and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's Sake. And now
therefore, Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

Then rising, he said, Every Man desires, good People, His Words before his
Death.
at the time of their Deaths, to give some good Exhortation, that other may
remember after their Deaths, and be the better thereby. So I beseech God grant
me Grace, that I may speak something at this my departing, whereby God may be
glorified, and you edified.

First, It is an heavy case to see, that many Folks be so much doted upon the
Love of this false World, and so careful for it, that or the Love of God, or
the Love of the World to come, they seem to care very little or nothing
therefore. This shall be my first Exhortation. That you set not overmuch by
this false glosing World, but upon God and the World to come. And learn to know
what this Lesson means, which S. John teaches, That the Love of this World
is Hatred against God.

The Second Exhortation is, That next unto God, you obey your King and Queen,
willingly and gladly, without murmur or grudging: And not for fear of them
only, but much more for the Fear of God: Knowing, that they be God's Ministers,
appointed by God to Rule and Govern you. And therefore whosoever resists them,
resists God's Ordinance.

The third Exhortation is, That you Love all together like Brethren, and
Sistern. For alas! pity it is to see, what Contention and Hatred one
Christian-Man has to another: Not taking each other, as Sisters and Brothers;
but rather as Strangers and mortal Enemies. But I pray you learn and bear well
away this one Lesson, To do good to all Men as much as in you lies, and to
hurt no Man, no more than you would hurt your own natural and loving Brother or
Sister. For this you may be sure of, that whosoever hates any Person, and
goes about maliciously to hinder or hurt him, surely, and without all doubt,
God is not with that Man, although he think himself never so much in God's
Favor.

The fourth Exhortation shall be to them that have great Substance and Riches
of this World, That they will well consider and weigh those Sayings of the
Scripture. He quoted also a third place out of James against covetous rich Men;
Weep and howl for the Miseries that shall come upon you; your Riches does rot,
your Clothes be Moth-eaten, your Gold and Silver is cankered, etc*
One is of our Savior Christ himself, who says, It is hard for a Rich Man to
enter into Heaven: A sore saying, and yet spoke by him, that knew the Truth.
The second is of S. John, whose saying is this, He that has the Substance of
this World, and sees his Brother in Necessity, and shuts up his Mercy from
him, how can he say, he loves God? Much more might I speak of every part; but
Time suffices not. I do but put you in remembrance of things. Let all them
that be Rich, ponder well those Sentences: For if ever they had any Occasion to
show their Charity, they have now at this present, the poor People being so
many, and Victuals so dear. For though I have been long in Prison, yet I have
heard of the great Penury of the Poor. Consider, that that which is given to
the Poor, is given to God. Whom we have not otherwise present corporally with
us, but in the Poor.

And now for so much as I am come to the last End of my Life, whereupon hangs
all my Life passed, and my Life to come, either to live with my Savior Christ
in Heaven, in Joy, or else to be in Pain ever with wicked Devils in Hell; and I
see before mine Eyes presently either Heaven ready to receive me, or Hell ready
to swallow me up; I shall therefore declare unto you my very Faith, how I
believe, without Color or Dissimulation. For now is no time to dissemble,
whatsoever I have written in Times past.

First, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.
and every Article of the Catholic Faith, every Word and Sentence taught by our
Savior Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, in the Old and New Testament.

Consesseth his dissembling.
And now I come to the great Thing that troubles my Conscience more than any
other thing that ever I said or did in my Life: and that is, the setting abroad
of Writings contrary to the Truth. Which here now I renounce, and refuse, as
things written with my Hand, contrary to the Truth, which I thought in my
Heart, and writ for fear of Death, and to save my Life, if it might be: and
that is, all such Bills, which I have written or signed with mine own Hand,
since my Degradation: wherein I have written many things untrue. And forasmuch
as my Hand offended in writing contrary to my Heart, therefore my Hand shall
first be punished. For if I may come to the Fire, it shall be first burned. And
as for the Pope, I refuse him, as Christ's Enemy and Antichrist, with all his
false Doctrine.

And here being admonished of his Recantation, and Dissembling, he said, Alas,
my Lord, I have been a Man, that all my Life loved Plainness, and never
dissembled till now against the Truth; which I am most sorry for. He added
hereunto, That for the Sacrament, he believed as he had taught in his Book
against the Bishop of Winchester. And here he was suffered to speak no more.

His Reply to my L. Williams.
So that his Speech contained chiefly three points, Love to God, Love to the
King, and Love to the Neighbor. In the which talk he held Men very suspense,
which all depended upon the Conclusion. Where he so far deceived all Men's
Expectations, that at the hearing thereat, they were much amazed; and let him
go on a while, till my Lord Williams bad him play the Christen Man, and
remember himself. To whom he answered, That he so did: For now he spoke Truth.

Goes to the place of his Burning.
Then he was carried away; and a great number, that did Run to see him go so
wickedly to his Death, ran after him, exhorting him, while Time was, to
remember himself. And one Friar John, a godly and well-learned Man, all the way
traveled with him to reduce him. But it would not be. What they said in
particular I cannot tell, but the Effect appeared in the End. For at the Stake
he professed, that he died in all such Opinions as he had taught, and often
repented him of his Recantation.

Coming to the Stake with a cheerful Countenance, His Talk and Behavior at the
Stake.
and willing Mind, he put off his Garments with haste, and stood upright in his
Shirt: And a Batcheler of Divinity, named Elye, of Brazen-nose-College,
labored to convert him to his former Recantation, with the two Spanish Friars.
But when the Friars saw his Constancy, they said in Latin one to another, Let
us go from him; We ought not to be nigh him: For the Devil is with him. But the
Batcheler in Divinity was more earnest with him. Unto whom he answered, That as
concerning his Recantation, he repented it right sore, because he knew it was
against the Truth; with other words more. Whereupon the Lord Williams cried,
Make short, Make short. Then the Bishop took certain of his Friends by the
Hand. But the Bachelor of Divinity refused to take him by the Hand, and blamed
all others that so did, and said, He was sorry that ever he came in his
Company. And yet again he required him to agree to his former Recantation. And
the Bishop answered, (showing his Hand) This is the Hand that wrote it, and
therefore shall it suffer first Punishment.

Fire being now put to him, he stretched out his right Hand, He burns his
right Hand.
and thrust it into the Flame, and held it there a good space, before the Fire
came to any other Part of his Body; where his Hand was seen of every Man
sensibly burning, crying with a loud Voice, This Hand has offended. As soon as
the Fire got up, he was very soon Dead, never stirring or crying all the while.

His Patience in the Torment, his Courage in dying, if it had been taken either
for the Glory of God, the Wealth of his Country, or the Testimony of Truth, as
it was for a pernicious Error, and subversion of true Religion, I could
worthily have commended the Example, and matched it with the Fame of any Father
of ancient Time: but seeing that not the Death, but the Cause and Quarrel
thereof, commends the Sufferer, I cannot but much dispraise his obstinate
stubbornness and sturdiness in dying, and specially in so evil a Cause. Surely
his Death much grieved every Man; but not after one sort. Some pitied to see
his Body so tormented with the Fire raging upon the silly Carcass, that counted
not of the Folly. Other that passed not much of the Body, lamented to see him
spill his Soul, wretchedly, without Redemption, to be plagued for ever. His
Friends sorrowed for Love: his Enemies for Pity: Strangers for a common kind of
Humanity, whereby we are bound one to another. Thus I have enforced my self,
for your sake, to discourse this heavy Narration, contrary to my Mind: and
being more than half weary, I make a short End, wishing you a quieter Life,
with less Honor; and easier Death, with more Praise. The 23 d of March.

Yours I. A.



All this is the Testimony of an Adversary, and therefore we must allow for
some of his Words; but may be the more certain of the Archbishop's brave
Courage, Constancy, Patience, Christian and Holy Behavior, being related by
one so affected.

Two Remarks upon his Martyrdom.
In regard of this Holy Prelat's Life taken away by Martyrdom, I cannot but take
notice here of two t^^ngs, as tho God had given him some intimation thereof
long before it happened. The one is, that whereas his paternal Coat of Arms was
three Cranes, (alluding to his Name) K. Henry appointed him to bear in the room
thereof three Pelicans, feeding their Young with their own Blood. The like Coat
of Arms, or much resembling it, I find several of Q. Elizabeth's first Bishops
took, whether to imitate Cranmer, or to signify their Zeal to the Gospel, and
their readiness to suffer for it, I do not determine. The other Remark I make
is, what his Friend Andreas Osiander in an Epistle to him in the Year 1537, Ep.
Dedicat. ante Harmon. Evan.
told him: Which was, that he had Animum vel Martyrio parem; A Mind fit, or
ready, for Martyrdom. And so took occasion to exhort him at large, to bear the
Afflictions that were to attend him: as though God had inspired that great
German Divine with a prophetic Spirit, to acquaint this his faithful Servant
by what Death he should glorify God, and what Sufferings he must undergo for
his sake. He urged him, To contemn all Dangers in asserting and preserving the
sincere Doctrine of Christ, since as S. Paul testified, That all that would
live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution. How much, said he, ought
we to reckon, that you are to receive the various Assaults of Satan, seeing you
are thus good for the Good of many. But, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior
ito. Yield not to these Evils, but go on the more boldly. And seeing you must
bear Adversity, remember that we are baptized into the Death of Christ, and
buried together with him, that we may be once made partakers of his
Resurrection and eternal Happiness.

Who instigated the Queen to put him to death.
I do not find, who were the Queen's great Instigators (now Winchester was dead)
stirring her up not to spare this Prelat, but by any means to put him to Death,
and that even after his Subscription; nor for what Reason of State this
Resolution was taken at Court, notwithstanding his former good Merits toward
the Queen, who therefore certainly must have felt great Strugglings before She
could yield to have him die. But I am apt to suspect the Cardinal (who now
governed the Queen) had no small Hand in it, to show his Zeal for the Papacy,
and to revenge the Injuries done it in K. Henry's Reign, as well as to succeed
in his Place. For his Latin Letter to the Archbishop mentioned above, savoured
of a great deal of Malice and mortal Hatred toward him. In this Letter it
appears the Cardinal looked upon our Archbishop as a mere Infidel and Apostate
from Christianity, and so to be treated. For in the very beginning he makes it
a Matter of Conscience to write to him, It being in effect as much as receiving
him into his House: Against which S. John gave a charge, speaking of Christians
turned Heathens, That they should not be received into our Houses, Ep. John
2.10.
nor bid God speed. And therefore, he wrote, he was once in his Mind not to
speak at all to him, but to God rather concerning him, to send Fire from Heaven
and consume him. And asks the Question [as though it could not be reasonably
gain-said] whether he should not do justly in this Imprecation upon him, who
had before cast out the King out of the House of God, that is, the Church. He
meant, as he explained himself, casting him out, as Satan cast out Man from
Paradise; not by force, but by deceivable Counsels. That him the Archbishop
had followed, and by his impious Advice forced the King to disjoin himself from
the Communion of the Church, and his Country together with himself; And
wickedly betrayed the Church, the Mother of us all; to the opposing whereof, he
gave Satan all advantages, to the destruction as well of Souls as Bodies. That
he was the worst of all others. For they, being beset on all sides with diverse
Temptations, a great while resisted, and at last indeed gave way; But he, the
Archbishop, of his own free accord, walked in the Counsel of the Ungodly; and
not only so, but stood in it, and in the Way of Sinners, and confirmed the King
therein: And moreover sat in the Seat of the Scornful. That when he came first
to the Episcopal Chair, he was called to it to cheat both God and Man: and that
he began his Actions with putting a Cheat upon the King, and together with him
upon the Church, and his Country. This and a great deal more to the same
purpose he tells the Archbishop plainly and expressly, though under a show of
great Sanctity. Which shows with what an implacable Mind he stood affected
toward him.

And thus we have brought this excellent Prelate unto his End, No Monumen^ for
him, but his Martyrdom.
after two Years and an half's hard Imprisonment. His Body was not carried to
the Grave in State, nor buried, as many of his Predecessors were, in his own
Cathedral Church, nor enclosed in a Monument of Marble or Touchstone. Nor had
he any Inscription to set forth his Praises to Posterity: No Shrine to be
visited by devout Pilgrims, as his Predecessors S. Dunstane, and S. Thomas had.
Shall we therefore say, as the Poet does; Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at
Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo. Quis putet esse Deos?
No; we are better Christians, I trust, than so, who are taught* That the
Rewards of God's Elect are not Temporal, but Eternal. And Cranmer's Martyrdom
is his Monument, and his Name will outlast an Epitaph, or a Shrine. But
methinks it is pity, that his Heart, that remained found in the Fire, His Heart
unconsumed.
and was sound unconsumed in his Ashes, was not preserved in some Urn. Which
when the better Times of Q. Elizabeth came, might, in Memory of this truly
great and good Thomas of Canterbury, have been placed among his Predecessors in
his Church there, as one of the truest Glories of that See.

Though these three Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, The Bailiffa Expenses
about these three Martyrs.
were parted asunder, and placed in separate Lodgings that they might not
confer together; yet they were suffered sometimes to eat together in the Prison
of Bocardo. I have seen a Book of their Diet every Dinner and Supper, and the
Charge thereof. Which was at the Expense of Winkle and Wells, Bailiffs of the
City at that time; under whose Custody they were. MSS. C.C.C.C.
As for example in this Method: The first of October Dinner.
Bread and Ale ii d. Item, Oisters i d. Item, Butter ii d. Item, Eggs ii d.
Item, Lyng viii d. Item, A piece of fresh Salmon x d. Wine iii d. Cheese and
Pears ii d. ii s. vi d.


From this Book of their Expenses, give me leave to make these few
Observations. They ate constantly Suppers as well as Dinners. Their Meals
amounted to about three or four Shillings; seldom exceeding four. Their Bread
and Ale commonly came to two pence or three pence. They had constantly Cheese
and Pears for their last Dish, both at Dinner and Supper; and always Wine; the
price whereof was ever three Pence, and no more. The Prizes of their Provisions
(it being now an extraordinary dear time) were as follow. A Goose 14 d. A Pig
12 or 13 d. A Cony 6 d. A Woodcock 3 d. and sometimes 5 d. A couple of Chickens
6 d. Three Plovers 10 d. Half a dozen Larks 3 d. A dozen of Larks and two
Plovers, 10 d. A Breast of Veal 11 d. A Shoulder of Mutton 10 d. Roast Beef 12 d.

The last Disbursements (which have Melancholy in the reading) were these.
s. d. For three Loads of Wood-Fagots to burn Ridley and Latimer, 12 0 Item,
One Load of Furs-Fagots, 3 4 For the carriage of these four Loads. 2 0 Item, A
Post 1 4 Item, Two Chains 3 4 Item, Two Staples 0 6 Item, Four Laborers 2 8
Then follow the Charges for burning Cranmer.
s. d. For an 100 of Wood-Fagots 06 0 For an 100 and half of Furs-Fagots. 03 4
For the carriage of them 0 8 To two Laborers 1 4

The Bailiffs not repaid.
It seems the Superiors in those Days were more zealous to send these three good
Men to Oxon, and there to serve their Ends upon them, and afterward to burn
them, than they were careful honestly to pay the Charges thereof. For Winkle
and Wells, notwithstanding all their Endeavors to get themselves reimbursed of
what they had laid out, which came to sixty three Pounds, ten Shillings and two
Pence, could never get but twenty Pounds. Which they received by the means of
Sir William Petre, Secretary of State. In so much that in the Year 1566, they
put up a Petition to Archbishop Parker and the other Bishops; That they would
among themselves raise and repay that Sum, which the said Bailiffs were out of
Purse in feeding of these three Reverend Fathers. In which Petition they set
forth, That in the second and third Years of King Philip and Queen Mary,
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Ridley, were by order of
Council committed to the Custody of them, and so continued a certain Time; and
for them they disbursed the Sum of 63 l. 10 s. 2 d. Whereof but 20 l. was paid
to them. Therefore they pray his Grace, and the rest of the Bishops, to be a
means among themselves, that the remaining Sum may be paid to them, being 43 l.
10 s. 2 d. Or some part thereof. Otherwise they, and their poor Wives and
Children should be utterly undone. And to give the better countenance to these
Men, that were going to carry up their Petition, Laurence Humfrey, President of
Magdalen College, and the Queen's Professor, wrote this Letter on their behalf
to Archbishop Parker.

IEH.
MY humble Commendations presupposed in the Lord. Humfrey to ABp Parker in
their behalf.
To be a Suitor in another Man's Case, it seems Boldness; and in a Matter of
Money, to write to your Grace, is more than Sauciness: Yet Charity, Operiens
multitudinem peccatorum, Ex Biblioth* C.C.C.C.
does move me, and will persuade you to hear him. A Debt is due unto him for
the Table of Mr. Dr. Cranmer, by the Queen's Majesty's Appointment. And Mr.
Secretary in Oxford, wished him at that time of Business in Progress, to make
some Motion to the Bishops for some Relief. The Case is miserable. The Debt is
just. His Charges in the Suit have been great. His Honesty, I assure your
Grace, deserves pitiful Consideration. And for that my Lord of Sarum writes to
me, as here, in Oxford, he promised, That his part shall not be behind, what
Order soever it please my Lords to take, for the dispatch of the same. I
request your Grace, as Successor to that right Reverend Father, and chief
Patron of such poor Suitors, to make by your good* Means some Collection for
him, among the rest of my Lords, the Bishops; that his good Will, showed to
that worthy Martyr, may of you be considered. And so he bound to your Goodness,
of his part altogether undeserved. Thus recommending the Common Cause of
Reformation to you; and my self, and this poor Man to your good remembrance, I
leave to trouble you. Requesting you once again to hear him, and tender his
Cause even of Charity for God his Sake. To whose Protection I commend your
Grace. From Oxon, November 22, Anno 1566.

Your Grace's humble Orator, Laur. Humfrey.


Though I cannot trace this any further, yet I make no doubt this Petition was
favorably received with the Archbishop and Bishops. It seems in Cranmer's
Lifetime, Money was sent to Oxford for the sustentation of these Prisoners of
Christ, but embezzelled. For one W. Pantry of Oxford received forty Pounds at
Mr. Stonelye's Hand, for my Lord Cranmer, and the other two in like Case. This
was declared by the Bailiffs, to Thomas Doyley Esquire, Steward to Archbishop
Parker.

CHAP. XXII. Cranmer's Books and Writings.
HAving brought our History of this singular and extraordinary Light of the
Church to this Period, we will, before we take our leave of him, gather up some
few Fragments more: thinking it pity, that any thing should be lost, that may
either serve to communicate any Knowledge of him to Posterity, or to clear and
vindicate him from Aspersions or Misrepresentations, vulgarly conceived of him.
And here will fall under our consideration, first his Books and Writings; after
them, his Acquaintance with Learned Men, and his Favor to them and Learning:
then, some Matters relating to his Family and Officers: And lastly, we shall
conclude with some Observations upon him.

His Books and Writings.
For the Pen of this great Divine was not idle, being employed as earnestly as
his Authority and Influence, for the furtherance of Religion, and rescue of
this Church from Popish Superstition and Foreign Jurisdiction. He laid a solid
Foundation in Learning, by his long and serious Studies in the University. To
which he was much addicted. Insomuch that this was one of the Causes which made
him so labor, by the interest of his Friends with King Henry, to be excused
from taking the Archbishopric of Canterbury: because this Promotion would so
much interrupt his beloved Studies: Desiring rather some smaller Living, that
he might more quietly follow his Book. And as he had been an hard Student, so
he was a very great Writer; both in respect of the number of Books and
Treatises he compiled, as of the Learning, Judgment and Moment of them.

The first Treatise he wrote was, that which was done at the Command of Henry
VIII. viz. His first Book.
Concerning the Unlawfulness of his Marriage with his Brother Arthur's Widow.
Which he made appear to be both against the Word of God, and against the
Judgment of the Ancient Fathers of the Church; and therefore a Case
indispensable by the Pope. And so well had he studied the Point, and so well
was assured of what he had wrote, that he undertook before the King, to
maintain the Truth of it at Rome, in the presence of the Pope himself. The King
accordingly dismissed him to the Pope, in joint Embassy with the Earl of
Wiltshire, and some others, for that purpose. He presented his Book to the
Pope, offering to stand by it against any whomsoever, that should attempt to
gainsay it. But the Pope thought not fit to suffer so tender a Point to be
disputed, wherein his Prerogative was so much touched. When he had finished
th^s Discourse, it was sent to Cambridg, and had the Approbation and
Subscription of the eminentest Doctors there, viz. S^lcot, Repps, Come, and
diverse others. Among which I suppose, were, Heines, Litiner, Shaxton, Skip,
Goodrick, Hethe, who were then Gremials.

After this Book, ^e was much employed in writing more, Other of his Writings.
at various Times, and upon various Occasions. Fox mentions Cranmer's Book of
the ^eformation; (which I suppose was that of the Public Service) the
Catechism, the Book of Homilies, which was part by him contr^ed, and part by
his Procurement, and by him approved and pubished. Likewise the Confutation of
eighty eight Articles, devised and propounded by a Convocation in King Henry's
Reign, and labo^red to be received and enjoined, though they were not.

But his Disco^rse, His Book of the Doctrine of the Sacrament.
wherein he stated the Doctrine of the Sacrament in five ^ooks, must especially
be remembered. Which he wrote on purpose for the public Instruction of the
Church of England. And it ^s the more to be valued, as being writ by him in his
mature Age, after all his great Readings and Studies, and most diligent and
serio^s perusals of all the Ecclesiastical Writers; whereby he became thoroughly
acquainted with their Judgments and Opinions in that Doctrine. And in it are
contained his last and ripest Thoughts on that Argument. This Book displayeth
the great Weakness of that ^istinguishing Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
asserts Transubstantiation.

Besides these, Other Writings mentioned by Bp Burnet.
many other Writings and Discourses were made by him. Which we are beholden to
the Bishop of Sarum, for retrieving the Memory of, and preserving the Substance
of diverse of them, in his excellent History, viz.

A Learned Speech made to the Lords concerning the Pope, Hist. Reform. P. I. p.
174.
and a general Council: Which that Right Reverend Author thinks was made about
the Year 1534, which was soon after his being made Archbishop.

Some Queries in order to the correcting of several Abuses in Religion; whereby
the People had been deceived. Vbi supr. p. 364


Some Queries concerning Confirmation: Ibid.
With the Answers which were given to them by Archbishop Cranmer.

Some Considerations to induce the King to proceed to a further Reformation.
Ibid.
These three last were presented by the Archbishop to the King, about the Year
1536, as the Bishop of Sarum supposes: And having seen the Originals thereof
in the Cotton-Library, has transcribed them to us in the Addenda to the
Collections.

His Resolution of seventeen Questions concerning the Sacraments, Vbi supr. p.
289
Anno 1540.

A Collection of Passages out of the Canon Law, Vbi supr. p. 33^
to show the necessity of Reforming it, Anno 1542.

His Letters to Osiander, and Letters of Osiander to him; Page 171.
concerning the Proceedings of the German Divines: Whose Violence the
Archbishop disliked.

A Speech made in the Convocation. Hist. Reform. P. II. p. 4^.
Wherein he exhorted the Clergy to give themselves to the study of the
Scriptures, and to consider seriously what things in the Church nee^ed
Reformation, Anno 1547.

His Answer to the Demands of the Rebels in the West; drawn up by him by Order
of the Council, Page 116.
Anno 1549.

Page 248.
His Declaration, to vindicate himself from an Aspersion, That he had caused
Mass to be sung in Canterbury: And offering therein a public Dispute to
maintain the Reformation, Anno 1553.

Besides two Volumes in Folio, writ by Cranmer, own Hand, upon all the Heads of
Religion: Hist. Res. P. II. p. 171.
Consisting of Allegtions of Texts of Scripture, and of ancient Fathers, and
later Doctos and Schoolmen, upon each Subject. There were also six or seve^
Volumes of his Writings, which were in the Lord Burleigh's I^ssession; as
appeared by a Letter of the said Lord, which the Bishop of Sarum saw. But he
thought these may now be lost. Most of the forementioned Writings are preserved
in the Cotton-Library, or i^ that of Corpus-Christi, Cambridg; or among the
Manuscripts of the Right Reverend Bishop Stillingsleet.

Athen. Oxon. p. 578.
To which we must add the mention of a bundle of Books lying in the
Palace-Treasury in Westminster, in defense of the King's Title of Supreme Head,
and concerning the Divorce, and seveal other Matters; with a P^eface against
Cardinal Pole. Which a^e supposed to be written, partly by Dr. Clark Bishop of
Bath and Wels, and partly by our Archbishop.

More of his Writings still.
Several other Letters, Speeches, and Arguments of our Archbishop, may be found
in these Memorials; which I omit here rehersing. But I will add to these diverse
Pieces besides of this Prelat's writing, as they are set down by Melchior Adam,
at the End of Cranmer's Life. Who indeed did but transcribe them from Gesner;
and he from John Bale's Centuries.

I. A Preface to the English Translation of the Bible. This is transcribed in
the Appendix.

II. A Catechism of Christian Doctrine; printed by Gualter Lynn, Anno 1548.
This Catechism was first framed in Germany; and by the Archbishop himself, or
his special Order, turned into English. And to fix an Authority to the same, he
caused it to be published in his own Name, and owned it for his own Book. This
Dr. Rowland Tailor, See Dr. Taylor's Letter in Fox.
who lived in the Archbishop's Family, declared before Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, and Lord Chancellor, at his Examination before him. And in this
sense we must understand the Author of the History of the Reformation, when
speaking of this Catechism, he styles it, Hist. Re^. P. II. p. 71.
A Work that was wholly his own. It was said before, that Iustus Jonas (he, I
suppose, that dwelt with the Archbishop) was the Translator of it into Latin.
It treated of the Sacrament after the Lutheran way. Which Way the Archbishop
embraced next after his rejection of the gross Papal Transubstantiation. This
Catechism was printed first by the Archbishop's Order about the Time of King
Henry's Death, or soon after. In a second Edition the word Not was inserted in
a certain place of the Book, to alter the Doctrine of the Real Presence; which
was asserted in the first Edition. This Dr. Martin, one of Queen Mary's
Commissioners, threw in his Dish at his Examination in Oxford. But the
Archbishop professed his Ignorance concerning the foisting in of that Word.
The addition of which Word indeed he thought was needless, still holding the
Body and Blood truly present in the Holy Supper, though after a spiritual
manner.

III. The Ordinances or Appointments of the Reformed Church. This was the Book
of Common Prayer, with the Preface before it, beginning, There was never any
thing, etc. as I learn out of Bale.

IV. One Book of Ordaining Ministers. Which I suppose was the Form of
Ordination, published in the Year 1550.

V. One Book concerning the Eucharist with Luther. With whom Cranmer once
consented in the Doctrine of the Presence.

VI. A Defense of the Catholic Doctrine, in five Books. Which was his
excellent Work, in vindication of himself against Bishop Gardener, and Dr.
Richard Smith. Whereof much has been said before.

VII. Ecclesiastical Laws, in the Time of King Edward. This was the Book of the
Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws; the management of which was, by the
King's Letters, committed to eight, whereof Cranmer was the chief.

VIII. The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper; against Gardiner's Sermon. This
Sermon is the same, I suppose, with that Book of his, entitled, A Detection of
the Devil's Sophistry, wherewith he robs the unlearned People of the true
Belief of the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Which gave occasion to the
Archbishop's first writing upon this Argument.

IX. One Book against the Error of Transubstantiation.

X. One Book, How Christ is present in the Supper.

XI. One Book, Concerning eating the Lord's Supper.

XII. One Book, Concerning the offering up of Christ. These five Books last
mentioned, are nothing else but the five Parts of his Book of the Holy
Sacrament, mentioned before.

XIII. One Book of Christian Homilies. Which must be the first Part of our Book
of Homilies, published under King Edward.

XIV. One Book in answer to the Calumnies of Richard Smith* For this Man had
writ against Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, as well as Gardener; but done so
scurrilously, that Cranmer calls it, his Calumnies.

XV. Confutations of Unwritten Verities. Written against a Book of the same
Smith, entitled, De veritatibus non scriptis. Which he afterward recanted.

XVI. Twelve Books of Common-Places, taken out of the Doctors. Those Volumes
mentioned by Bishop Burnet, I suppose, were some of these Commonplace Books.

XVII. Concerning not marrying the Brother's Wife: Two Books. Which must be
those drawn up for the Use, and by the Command of King Henry.

XVIII. Against the Pope's Supremacy: Two Books. This was the Declaration
against the Papal Supremacy, said to be put forth by the Bishops, in the Year
1536, upon occasion of Pole's Book of Ecclesiastical Union.

XIX. Against the Pope's Purgatory: Two Books.

XX. Concerning Justification: Two Books. I cannot trace these two
last-mentioned Books; unless by them be meant, those two Treatises of
Justification and Purgatory, that are set at the end of the Institution.

XXI. Pious Prayers: One Book. This Book, I suppose, was the Orarium, seu
libellus precationum, put forth by the King and Clergy 1545. From whence a Book
of Prayers was translated into English, Anno 1552.

XXII. Letters to Learned Men: One Book. This I cannot hear any tidings of.

XXIII. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass, and against the Adoration of the
Bread: One Book. Said to be writ while he was a Prisoner. Which makes me
conclude it to be part of his Reply to Gardiner's second Assault of him, under
the Name of Constantius.

XXIV. To Queen Mary: One Book, or rather one Letter; which was that he writ
after his Examinations before her Commissioners, and the Pope's Sub-delegate.

If some body of Leisure, and that had the Opportunity of Libraries, would take
the pains to collect together all these Books, and other Writings of this
Archbishop, and publish them, it would be a worthy Work, as both retrieving
the Memory of this extraordinary Man, who deserved so well of this Church, and
serving also much to illustrate the History of its Reformation. But I know
nothing of this nature done since the industrious John Day, in the Year 1580,
printed a Book in Folio, containing our Archbishop's Answer unto Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, against the true Doctrine of the Sacrament: Also
to Richard Smith. Also, a true Copy of the Book writ by Stephen Gardener. Also,
The Life and Martyrdom of Cranmer, extracted out of the Book of Martyrs.

ABp Parker was in pursuit of certain MSS. of Cranmer, concealed.
And now we are mentioning this great Prelat's Writings, it may not be unworthy
to take notice of what I meet with in a Letter of Archbishop Parker to
Secretary Cecyl, in the Year 1563, his Grace being then at Canterbury. Where he
spoke of the Great notable written Books (as he styles them) of his Predecessor
Dr. Cranmer, which he had left behind him at some of his Houses at or near
Canterbury, whether Ford or Bekesborn, or both, or with some Friends in those
Parts. These Manuscripts it seems were embezeled, and surreptitiously taken
away by private Hands, probably during his restraint in Queen Mary's Days, and
now studiously concealed by some that were minded, it may be, to stifle them,
being chiefly levelled against the Roman Church and Bishop. Parker, who was a
great and painful Searcher after Ancient and Learned Manuscripts, and a
diligent Retriever of eminent Men's Writings, had, by credible Information,
learned in what Hands many of those Books were; and had sent either for the
Persons concerned, or to them, to demand the said Books. But they denied them:
Whereupon knowing no other way to recover them, he desired the Secretary, by
some Power from the Queen's Council, to authorize him to enquire and search for
those Books, and suchlike Monuments, by all Ways, as by the said Parker's
Discretion should be thought good; whether giving the Parties an Oath, or
viewing their Studies. Wishing he might recover them to be afterward at the
Queen's Commandment: Adding, that he should be as glad to win them, as he would
be to restore an old Chancel to Reparation. This Letter of Archbishop Parker,
I have inserted in the Appendix. No. XC.
But whether after all his diligence he succeeded in the recovery of those
Manuscripts, I know not: I am apt to think he did; and that these Writings of
Cranmer, that were in his Possession; and afterward bequeathed unto the
Library of Benet-College; and those other diverse Volumes, which were, as was
before-said, in the keeping of the Lord Burghley, might be some at least of
them.

An inquisitive Man would be glad to know, What the Subject of his numerous
Writings were.
what the Matter and Contents of these numerous Writings of our Archbishop
were: and that seeing so many of them are perished, the knowledge of the various
Subjects of them at least might be preserved. This, besides what has been
shown already, may be gathered by what I find in a Supplication made to Queen
Elizabeth by Ralph Morice, that had been his Secretary for the space of twenty
Years. During which time, he was employed by that most Reverend Father, in
writing for him, about the serious Affairs of the Prince and Realm, committed
unto him by those most noble and worthy Princes, King Henry VIII; and King
Edward VI, concerning, as well the Writings of those great and weighty
Matrimonial Causes of the said K. Henry VIII, as also about the extirpation of
the Bishop of Rome, his usurped Power and Authority, the Reformation of corrupt
Religion and Ecclesiastical Laws, and Alteration of Divine Service; and of
diverse and sundry Conferences of Learned Men for the Establishing and
Advancement of sincere Religion, with such like. Wherein, he said, he was most
painfully occupied in writing of no small Volumes from time to time.

CHAP. XXIII. The Archbishop's Regard to Learned Men.
FROM these truly Noble and Useful Exercises of his great Knowledge and
Learning, let us descend unto the Respect he bare to good Letters. Which
appeared from his Favor to Places of Learning, and Men of Learning. We showed
before, what were the Applications of the University of Cambridg to him, and
what a gracious Patron he was to it and its Members.

Among whose good Offices to that University, Paul. Fagius and Mar. Bucer
placed at Cambridg by his Means.
besides those already mentioned, it must not be omitted, that he was the great
Instrument of placing there those two very Learned Foreign Divines, Paulus
Fagius, and Martin Bucer. By his frequent Letters to them then at Strasburg,
urging them with the distracted and dangerous State of Germany, he first
brought them over into England in the Year 1548: and having entertained them in
his Family, the next Year he preferred them both in Cambridg, Fagius to be
public Professor of the Hebrew Tongue, and Bucer of Divinity. And beside the
University-Salary, he procured for each of them from the King, Procures them
honorary Stipo^ds from the King.
in the third Year of his Reign, Patents for an Honorary Stipend of an hundred
Pounds per Annum each, De gratia speciali Domini Regis, to be paid by the Hands
of the Clerk of the Hanaper, or out of the Treasury of the Court of
Augmentations, Durante beneplacito Domini Regis: As I find by King Edward the
Sixth's Book of Sales, formerly mentioned. Which Patents bare date September. 26.
Anno 1549. and their Salaries payable from the Feast of the Annunciation of the
Blessed Virgin. By the way, I do not see any where in the said Book of Sales,
that Peter Martyr, placed Professor of Divinity in the other University of
Oxon, enjoyed any such Royal Salary, though he also had been invited over by
Canterbury with the King's Knowledge and Allowance, and placed there by that
Archbishop's Means.

Allowances to P. Martyr and Ochin.
Yet he and his Companion, Ochinus, had their Annual Allowances from the King;
and so, I suppose, had all other Learned Foreigners here. Melancthon also, who
was now expected over, was intended some more extraordinary Gratuity. Unto this
Noble Christian Hospitality, and Liberality, Latimer, the great Court-Preacher,
excited the King in one of his Sermons before him. The Passage may deserve to
be repeated. I hear say, Master Melancthon, that great Clerk, The third Sermon.
should come hither. I would wish him, and such as he is, two hundred Pounds a
Year. The King should never want it in his Coffers at the Year's end. There is
yet among us two great Learned Men, Petrus Martyr, and Bernard Ochin, which
have an hundred Mark a piece. I would the King would bestow a thousand Pounds
on that Sort. These Matters, I doubt not, were concerted between Latimer and
our Archbishop before: at whose Palace he now was for the most part. As I find
by one of his Sermons, wherein he speaks of his taking Boat at Lambeth; and in
another Place he mentions a Book he met with in my Lord of Canterbury's
Library, and elsewhere of many Suitors that applied to him at my Lord of
Canterbury's, that interrupted his Studies there. The use I make of this is,
that it is a fair Conjecture hence, that this and the many other excellent
Things so plainly propounded by this Preacher to King Edward, happened by the
Counsel and Suggestion of the Archbishop. But to return.

Dr. Mowse Master of Trinity-Hall, favored by Cranmer.
There was one Dr. William Mowse a Civilian, and probably one of his Officers,
whom for his Merits and Learning our Archbishop for many a Year had been a
special Benefactor to. Sir John Cheke also bare him a very good Will. Upon the
removal of Dr. Haddon to some other Preferment, this Dr. Mowse succeeded Master
of Trinity-hall in Cambridg. And in the Year 1552, the Archbishop valuing his
Worth and Integrity, was a Suitor at Court for some further Preferment for him,
whatever it were, which the Study of the Civil Law had qualified him for:
writing his Letters on Mowse's behalf to Secretary Cecyl, who was then with the
King in his Progress, not to forget him. And accordingly he was remembered, and
obtained the Place. For which the Archbishop afterward gave him his most
hearty Thanks. And Dr. Mowse also sent the same Secretary a Letter of Thanks
from Cambridg for the Preferment he had obtained by his Means: The main Drift
thereof was, to excuse himself for his Neglect, in that he had not sooner paid
his Acknowledgments. Which, as it seems, the Secretary had taken some notice
of, having expected to be thanked for the Kindness he had done him. This
Letter, because there is therein mention made of our Archbishop's singular
Munificence, and Cheke's Affection toward him, and Mowse himself once making a
Figure in that University, I have thought it not amiss to insert in the
Appendix: No. XC^.
Though this Man seemed to be none of the steadiest in his Religion. For I find
him put out of his Mastership of Trinity-Hall in the beginning of Queen Mary's
Reign, for having been a Protestant, and to make way for the Restoration of Dr.
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, who had been outed before. Upon whose Death that
Mastership falling void, and Mowse having complied with the Romish Religion, he
became Master there again. And soon after, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he was
deprived by her Commissioners for being a Papist, and one Harvey came in his
Room.

Dr. Mowse's Fickleness appeared, His Inconstancy,
that upon the first tidings that fled to Cambridg of Queen Mary's Success
against the Lady Iane's Party, he, with several other temporizing
University-Men, changed his Religion, and in four and twenty Hours was both
Protestant and Papist. The Truth is, his Judgment varied according to his
worldly Interest. And being one of those that came about so roundly, he was
appointed, by the complying Party of the University, to be one of the two (Dr.
Hatcher being the other) that should repair unto Dr. Sands then the
Vice Chancellor, to demand of him, without any color of Reason or Authority,
the University-Books, the Keys, and such other things as were in his keeping.
And so they did. And Ingratitude. Fox.
And my Author makes an Observation of his Ingratitude, as well as of his
Inconstancy, viz. That he that was an earnest Protestant but the day before,
and one whom Dr. Sands had done much good for, was now become a Papist, and his
great Enemy.

Thus was our Archbishop a Friend to this Man, and diverse others, who went
along with him, as far as he, and the Times favored them: but when these
failed them, they failed the Archbishop through Timorousness in some, and
worldly Respects in others.

But on^e more of this Dr. Mowse, and I have done with him. Becomes Reader of
the Civil Law at Oxon.

Ath. Oxoniens^


As a Reward of his forwardness at Cambridg, before mentioned, I find he was
soon after incorporated at Oxon, (together with Andrew Pern D.D. a Man of the
same Inconstancy) and preferred to be Reader of the Civil Law there, in the
room of Dr. Aubrey, who probably was removed for Incompliance. And when the
next Change happened under Queen Elizabeth, Mowse came about again; and in the
Year 1560, obtained a Prebend in the Church of York. He lived till the Year
1588, leaving some Benefactions to his old College.

The Archbishop was indeed a great Patron to all Learned and Pious Men,
especially those of the Reformation: The ABp a Patron to Learned Foreigners.
cherishing those not only of his own Country, but Foreigners and Strangers
also. And as he brought over diverse with him, when he returned into England
from his Embassy in Germany, so he sent for more. And such as came to him, he
gave honorable Harbor and Maintenance to; keeping them at his own Cost, till
he had made Provisions for them either in the Church, or University.

To Erasmus, allowing him an Honorary Pension.
For Erasmus our Archbishop had a great value; whose Worth and Service to the
Church he well knew. He allowed him an Honorary Pension: promising him, that he
would be no less kind unto him, than his Predecessor Warham had been before
him. Which Archbishop was one of Erasmus his best and most extraordinary
Friends and Benefactors. Of whom he used these words to a Friend of his, Qui
mihi unus multorum instar erat. Soon after the succession of Cranmer into this
Archbishop's Room, Eras. Ep. 10. lib. 27.
Sir Thomas More wrote to Erasmus, that he that then filled the Sea of
Canterbury, bore no less love to him, than Warham had done before; and, Quo non
alius vixit tui amantior, That there was no Man living loved him better. And
Erasmus himself, mentioning his great Loss in Archbishop Warham, and diverse
other Patrons of his, that were taken off by Death, comforted himself, that God
had made up those Losses to him by raising him up other Friends. Ep. 7. lib. 27.
So says he, in the room of Warham succeeded the Reverend Thomas Cranmer,
(Professione Theologus, Vir integerrimus, candidissimisque moribus. Qui ultro
pollicitus est sese in studio ac beneficentia erga me, priori nequaquam
cessurum: and quod sponte pollicitus est, sponte praestare coepit: ut mihi
Vuaramus non ereptus, sed in Cranmero renatus videri queat) By Profession a
Divine, a Person of the greatest Integrity, and most unblamable Behavior. Who
of his own accord promised* That in Favor and Kindness toward me, he would be
no ways behind his Predecessor. And that which he voluntarily promised, he has
voluntarily begun to make good. So that methinks, Warham is not taken away from
me, but rather Born again to me in Cranmer. One Specimen of his Munificence
toward this Learned Man I meet with in one of his Letters, wherein he
acknowledged to have received of Cranmer eighteen Angels: when the Bishop of
Lincoln sent him also Fifteen, and the Lord Crumwel Twenty.

To Alexander Aless a Scotch-man.
Alexander Aless was another Learned Stranger, whom our Archbishop gave
Harbor, and showed Favor to. A Scotch-Man by Birth, but that had long lived
and conversed with Melancthon in Germany. Who, knowing the generous and
hospitable Disposition of the Archbishop, recommended this Aless to him:
giving a high Character of him for his Learning, Probity and Diligence in every
good Office. In the Year 1535, By him Melancthon sends a Book to the ABp,
he brought over from Melancthon a Book, to be presented to the Archbishop:
wherein That Learned German labored, (as he told the Archbishop in his Letter
sent at the same time) to state diligently and profitably most of the
Controversies, and, as much as he could, to mitigate them: leaving the Judgment
of the whole unto his Grace, and such learned and pious Men as He, from whose
Judgment, he said, he would never differ in the Church of Christ: desiring him
also to acquaint Aless, what his Grace's own Judgment was of the Book, that
Aless might signify the same unto him. Such was the Deference Melancthon gave
unto the Learning and Censure of Cranmer. This Book I should suppose to have
been his Common Places, but that they came out a Year after. And to the King.
By the same Messenger he sent another of these Books to be presented in his
Name to the King; and in case the Archbishop approved of what he had wrote, he
entreated him to introduce the Bringer, and to assist him in the presenting of
it. Upon these Recommendations of Aless, and the Archbishop's own Satisfaction
in the Worth of the Man, he retained him with him at Lambeth, and much esteemed
him. This was that Aless, that Crumwel, Aless brought by Cromwell into the
Convocation.
probably by Cranmer's means, brought with him to the Convocation in the Year
1536, whom he desired to deliver there his Opinion about the Sacrament. Who did
so, and enlarged in a Discourse, asserting two Sacraments only, instituted by
Christ, Where he asserts two Sacraments only.
namely Baptism and the Lord's Supper. As the Author of the British Antiquities
relates ad Ann. 1537. calling him there Virum in Theologia perductum, A
thorow-paced Divine.

This Man compiled a useful Treatise against the Schism laid to the Charge of
Protestants by those of the Church of Rome. Writes a Book to clear Protestants
of the Charge of Schism.
The Substance and Arguments of which Book were Melancthon's own Invention, but
Aless composed and brought it into Method and Words. This Book Melancthon sent
unto George Prince of Anhalt. The Consolations of which, as he wrote to that
Noble and Religious Man, he was wont to inculcate upon himself, against those
who objected commonly to them the horrible Crime of Schism, as he styles it.
Atrox Schismatis crimen. Ep. 36. lib. 1.
For, says he, their monstrous Cruelty is sufficient to excuse us. Which it
seems was one of the Arguments whereby they defended themselves against that
Charge: Esteeming it lawful and necessary, Satis excusat nos istorum horribilis
crudelitas, quam pro^ecto n^que adjuvare neque approbare debemus. Ubi supra.
to leave the Communion of a Church, which countenanced and practiced Cruelty,
a thing so contrary to one of the great and fundamental Laws of Christian
Religion, namely, that of Love; and that their abiding in a Church, where such
bloody and barbarous Practices were, would argue their approbation and
concurrence.

And as Melancthon made use of him in composing his Thoughts into a handsome
Style, so did another great Light of the same Nation, Translated a Book of
Bucer's, about the English Ministry.
I mean Bucer. In King Edward's Days, he had wrote a Book in the German, that
is, in his own Country-Language, about Ordination to the Ministry in this
Kingdom of England, entitled, Ordinatio Ecclesiae, seu Ministerii Eccesiastici
in florentissimo Angliae regno. This our Aless turned into Latin, and
published, for the Consolation of the Churches every where in those sad Times,
as it ran in the Title.

If any desire to look backward unto the more early Times of this Man, the
first Tidings we have of him was about the Year 1534. When upon a sharp
Persecution raised in Scotland, he, with other Learned Men, fled thence into
England, Received into Crumwel's Family.
and was received into Crumwel's Family. And it is said, that he became known
to, and grew into such Favor with King Henry, that he called him his Scholar.
But after Crumwel's Death, in the Year 1540, he taking one Fife with him, went
into Saxony: Hist. Res. P.I. p. 308.
where both of them were for their great Learning, made Professors in the
University of Leipzig.

In the Year 1557. I find this Man at Leipzig, where he was Professor of
Divinity, as was said before. Aless Professor of Divinity at Leipzig.

M^l. Ep. p. 3^9* Edit. 1647*


Hither this Year Melancthon sent to him from Worms, giving him some Account
of the Preparations that were making by the Roman Catholic Party, in order to
a Conference with the Protestants. At which the said Aless was to be present,
and make one of the Disputants on the Protestant side. And ten Years before
this, viz. 1547, he was the Public Moderator of Divinity, both in the Schools
and Pulpits of Leipzig, or some other University.

Cum and in Templis, and in Scholis doctrinam gabernes. Mel. Ep. 111. lib. 3.
Four others recommended by Melancthon to the ABp. Viz. Gualter. Dryander.
Besides this Aless, there were four other pious and learned Persons,
Foreigners, who bringing along with them Letters of Recommendation from the
said Melancthon, were courteously received, and freely entertained by our
hospitable Archbishop, all of them, in the Year 1548, at which time the
Persecution grew hot upon the Interim. One of these was Gualter, another Scot
by Nation. A second was one named Francis Dryander, an Acquaintance of
Melancthon's of long continuance. Whom, as he told the Archbishop, he had
tried and known inwardly, and found him endowed with excellent Parts, well
furnished with Learning; that he judged rightly of the Controversies,
altogether free from all wild and seditious Opinions; and that he would soon
perceive the singular gravity of his Manners, after some few Days knowledge of
him: motioning withal to the Archbishop his fitness to be preferred in either
of our Universities. As he did also to K. Edward, in Letters brought at this
time to him by the said Dryander. Wherein he recommended him to that King, Ep.
7. lib. 3.
as one that would prove a very useful Person either in his Universities, or
elsewhere in his Kingdom.

Dryander placed at Oxon.
This Recommendation had so much Force, that this Man seemed soon after to be
sent and placed at Oxon, and there remained, till in the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign, when all Strangers were commanded to depart the Realm, he went
hence to Paris, and from thence to Antwerp. Whence he wrote a Letter to one
Crispin, a Doctor of Physic in Oxon; therein relating to him a Passage
concerning the coarse Entertainment which the Divines of Lovain gave Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, upon the Scandal they took against him for his Book De
vera Obedientia. Ad Ann. 1555.
Which Letter is extant in Fox.

Eusebius Menius.
The third was Eusebius Menius, the Son of Iustus Menius. Which Iustus was a
Person of great Fame and Esteem, both for his Learning in Philosophy and
Divinity, and for the Government of the Churches within the Territories of John
Frederick Duke of Saxony. Of this Eusebius his Son, Mel. Ep. 66. lib. 1.
Melancthon writ to our Archbishop; That he had good Preferments in Germany,
but he could not bear to behold the Calamities of his poor Country, which made
him seek for a Being in Foreign Parts. He recommended him to his Grace,
desiring him to cherish him. Adding, That in the Gothic Times, what remained
of the Church, and of right Doctrines, were preserved in our Island; and that
Europe being now in a Combustion, it were to be wished that some peaceable
Harbor might be for Learning. He doubted not but that many flocked hither; but
that it was the part of Piety and Goodness, especially to help the Youth of
Excellent Men, and the Sons of such as had well deserved of the Church;
especially when they themselves also were eminent for their Parts and Learning.
And since this Eusebius was a good Mathematician, and had read Mathematics in
one of their Schools, he propounded him to the Archbishop, to be a fit Person
for the Profession of that Science in our University.

Iustus Jonas.
The fourth was Iustus Jonas, the Son also of a great German Divine of the same
Name, and who was one of the Four, that in the Year 1530 came to Augsburgh,
upon a Diet appointed by the Emperor for Religion, with the Elector of Saxony;
Melancthon, Agricola, and Georgius Spalatinus, being the other Three. Sleid.
lib. 7.
The Son came over with Letters commendatory from Melancthon, as the others
did. He commended his excellent Parts, and his Progress in all kind of
Philosophy and good Manners, and especially his Eloquence; which, he said, he
had a Nature divinely framed to. To which it may not be amiss to subjoin what
Melancthon somewhere else did observe of his Family. Namely, That his
Grandfather was a Person of Fame for Oratory and Civil Prudence: His Father
endowed with such Parts as naturally made him an Orator, in respect of his
fluency of Words, and gracefulness of Delivery. And this Felicity of Nature, he
improved by a great accession of Learning: Which made him tell our Iustus, that
he was born in Oratoria Familia. Ep. 129. lib. 1.
And such care did he take of him when he was young, that he took the pains to
write him a long Letter, containing Instructions for his Improvement in the
Grounds of Learning. This Man the Archbishop was very kind to, gave him
Harbor, and admitted him freely into his Society and Converse. Insomuch that
Iustus Jonas the Father, entreated Melancthon, That he would take particular
notice to the Archbishop, of his great Favor showed to his Son. Among the
Discourses the communicative Prelat held with Jonas while he was with him, one
happened concerning a noted Question in Divinity. Where launching out into free
communication with him upon that Point, he desired him to impart to Melancthon
the Substance of what he had discoursed; and that he should signify to him,
that the Archbishop requested his Judgment thereof. Which accordingly Jonas
did. And Melancthon in a Letter to the Archbishop, styles it non obscarae
Quaestio, and that it had already much shaken the Church, and, says he,
Concutiet durius, shall shake it yet more. Giving his Reason for this
Conjecture, Because those Governors [meaning, I suppose, the Papal Clergy] did
not seek for a true Remedy to so great a Matter. It does not appear to me what
this Question was, that the Archbishop was so earnest to confer with this
great Divine about; whether it were concerning the necessity of Episcopal
Government and Ordination, or concerning the Use of Ceremonies in the Church,
or about the Doctrine of the Sacrament; this last I am apt to believe: But
either of them has, according to Melancthon's Prediction, sufficiently shaken
the Churches of Christ. But to return to Jonas. He had written some Pieces, and
presented them to the King; for which he intended to reward him. And being now
ready to go to France, for the improvement of his Knowledge, and so after a time
to return into England again, for which he had a great Affection, he besought
Secretary Cecyl, in a well-penned Letter, That whatsoever the King intended to
bestow on him, he would do it out of hand, for the supply of his traveling
Necessity. This Letter, for the Antiquity of it, and the Fame of the Man, I
have inserted in the Appendix. No. XCII.
In which is also contained an Extract of part of Jonas the Father's Letter to
his Son concerning the Miseries of Germany.

CHAP. XXIV. Melancthon and the Archbishop great Friends.
Diverse memorable Passages between Melancthon and our ABp.
THESE Occasions of the frequent mention of Melancthon, do draw us into a
relation of some further Passages between him and our Archbishop. In the Year
1549, happened several Disputations, chiefly concerning the Doctrine of the
Lord's Supper, before the King's Commissioners in both Universities. In Oxford
they were managed chiefly by Peter Martyr. And in Cambridg, Ridley then Bishop
of Rochester, and a Commissioner, was the chief Moderator. Soon after, Martin
Bucer in this University, defended three Points, one of the Sufficiency of the
Scripture: another concerning the Erring of Churches; and the last, concerning
Works done before Justification, against Pern, Sedgwick and Young. They on the
Popish Side pretended much, in their Disputations, to have Antiquity and the
Fathers for them.

These Disputations did our most Reverend Prelate, together with his own
Letter, Sends Melancthon certain public Disputations in Oxford and Cambridg.

Melancthon's Reflections thereupon: Ep. 41. lib. 3.


convey to Melancthon by the Hand of one Germanicus a German: Who probably
might be one of those Learned Strangers, that the Archbishop hospitably
entertained.

The Reflection, that that Divine, in an Answer to his Grace, in the Year 1550,
made upon perusal of these Papers, was, That he was grieved to see, that those
who sought so much for the Ancient Authorities, would not acknowledge the
Clearness of them. Nor was there any doubt what the sounder Men in the Ancient
Church thought. But that there were new and spurious Opinions foisted into many
of their Books. Into that of Theophylact most certainly for one. And that there
was some such Passage in the Copy, that Oecolampadius made use of, when he
translated Theophylact, which he liked not of, but yet translated it as he
found it: But this was wholly wanting in the Copy that Melancthon had. That the
same happened in Bede's Books, which he supposed might be found more incorrupt
among us, [ Bid being our Countryman.]

Sends the ABp his Enarration upon the Nicene Creed.
The same Melancthon, with this his Letter, sent our Archbishop a part of his
Enarration upon the Nicene Creed; for this end, that he might pass his Judgment
thereon: As he also did, for the same purpose, to A Lasco, Bucor and Peter
Martyr, all then in England.

The beginning of their Acquaintance.
The beginning of this Learned German's Acquaintance with our Prelat was very
early. For the Archbishop's Fame soon spread abroad in the World, beyond the
English Territories. Which was the Cause of that Address of Melancthon,
mentioned before, in the Year 1535, and in the Month of August, when he sent a
Letter and a Book to him by Alexander Aless. In the Letter, he signified what a
high Character both for Learning and Piety he had heard given of him by many
honest and worthy Men; and That if the Church had but some more such Bishops,
it would be no difficult Matter to have it healed, and the World restored to
Peace: congratulating Britain such a Bishop. And this seems to have been the
first entrance into their Acquaintance and Correspondence.

PHILIP MELANCTHON


In the Year 1548, The ABp propounds a weighty Matter to Melancthon, for the
Union of all Protestant Churches.
Cranmer propounded a great and weighty Business to Melancthon; and a Matter
that was likely to prove highly useful to all the Churches of the Evangelick
Profession. It was this. The ABp was now driving on a Design for the better
uniting of all the Protestant Churches, viz. by having one common Confession
and Harmony of Faith and Doctrine, drawn up out of the pure Word of God, which
they might all own and agree in. He had observed what Differences there arose
among Protestants in the Doctrine of the Sacrament, in the Divine Decrees, in
the Government of the Church, and some other things. These Disagreements had
rendered the Professors of the Gospel contemptible to those of the Roman
Communion. Which caused no small grief to the Heart of this good Man, nearly
touched for the Honor of Christ his Master, and his true Church, which
suffered hereby. And like a Person of a truly public and large Spirit, as his
Function was, seriously debated and deliberated with himself for the remedying
this Evil. This made him judge it very advisable to procure such a Confession.
And in order to this he thought it necessary for the chief and most Learned
Divines of the several Churches to meet together, and with all freedom and
friendliness to debate the Points of Controversy according to the Rule of
Scripture. And after mature deliberation, by Agreement of all Parties, to draw
up a Book of Articles, and Heads of Christian Faith and Practice. Which should
serve for the standing Doctrine of Protestants.

As for the Place of this Assembly he thought England the fittest in respect of
Safety, as the Affairs of Christendom then stood. The Diligence of the ABp in
forwarding this Design.
And communicating this his purpose to the King, that Religious Prince was very
ready to grant his Allowance and Protection. And as Helvetia, France and
Germany, were the chief Countries abroad where the Gospel was prosessed, so he
sent his Letters to the most eminent Ministers of each, namely, to Bullinger,
Calvin and Melancthon, disclosing this his pious Design to them, and requiring
their Counsel and Furtherance. Melancthon first of all came acquainted with it
by Iustus Jonas junior, to whom the Archbishop had related the Matter at
large, and desired him to signify as much in a Letter to the said Melancthon;
and that it was his Request to him, to communicate his Judgment thereupon. This
Jonas did, and Melancthon accordingly writ to our Archbishop on the Calends of
May this Year to this purpose. Ep. 66. lib. 1. Melancthon's Judgment and
Approbation thereof.
That if his Judgment and Opinion were required, he should be willing both to
hear the Sense of other Learned Men, and to speak his own, and to give his
Reasons, (...), Persuading and being persuaded, as ought to be in a Conference
of good Men: letting Truth, and the Glory of God, and the Safety of the Church,
not any private Affection, ever carry away the Victory. Telling him withal,
That the more he considered of this his Deliberation, than which he thought
there could be nothing set on foot more Weighty and Necessary, the more he
wished and pressed him, to publish such a true and clear Confession of the
whole Body of Christian Doctrine, according to the Judgment of Learned Men;
whose Names should be subscribed thereto. That among all Nations there might be
extant an illustrious Testimony of Doctrine, delivered by grave Authority; and
that Posterity might have a Rule to follow. And he was of opinion, that this
Confession should be much of the nature of their Confession of Augsburgh: only
that some few Points in Controversy might be in plainer Words delivered, than
was in that. That Ambiguities might not hereafter occasion new Differences. His
Caveat of avoiding ambiguous Expressions.

In Ecclesia rectius est Scapham, Scaph^m dice^e.


And that in the Church it was best to call a Spade a Spade: and not to cast
ambiguous Words before Posterity, as an Apple of Contention. And that if in
Germany there had been an entire Consent of all the Churches, they had not
fallen into those Miseries. And so concludes, earnestly exhorting our Prelat to
apply himself vigorously in these his pious Cares and Thoughts for the good
Estate of the Churches.

Not long after he pursued his first Letter with a second. Wherein he again
reminded our Reverend Father of that Caution, Renews the same Caution in
another Letter.
viz. That nothing might be left under general Terms, but expressed with all the
Perspicuity and Distinctness imaginable. Which I suppose, he said, to meet with
the Opinion of some, who thought it might be more convenient, in order to
Peace, to suffer some difficult and controverted Points to pass under dubious
Expressions, or in the very words of Scripture, without any particular decisive
Sense and Explanation imposed on them. And concerning this, it is probable our
Archbishop had desired his Opinion. This Melancthon was against; saying, That
for his part, he loved not Labyrinths; and that therefore all his study was,
That whatsoever Matters he undertook to treat of, they might appear plain and
unfolded. That it was indeed the Practice of the Council of Trent; which
therefore made such crafty Decrees, that so they might defend their Errors by
things ambiguously spoken. But that this Sophistry ought to be far from the
Church. That there is no Absurdity in Truth rightly propounded: and that this
Goodness and Perspicuity of things is greatly inviting, wheresoever there be
good Minds.

And of this very Judgment was Peter Martyr another great Divine. For when
Bucer, Peter Martyr of this Judgment. Quod Vir bonus sibi p^rsuasisset posse
hac ratione tolli gravem, quae est de hac causa, Controversiam, and ita
Eccl^siae pacem di^ desideratam restitui. In Vit. P. Mart. per Iosiam Sinler^m.
in a Discourse with him at Strasburg, had advised him, when he spoke of the
Eucharist, to use more dark and ambiguous Forms of Speech, that might be taken
in a larger Acceptance, urging to him, That this was the course he himself
took, and that a certain good Man [whom I suspect strongly to be our
Arch-bishop] had persuaded him, That by this means the great Controversy,
concerning the Real Presence in the Sacrament, might be at an end, and so
Peace, so long wanted, might be restored to the Church: Martyr was
over-perswaded by his Friend so to do, and used for some time the same Form of
Speech with him, when he had occasion to discourse of that Doctrine. But
afterward he returned to his former more dilucid Style, as well in the Matter
of the Real Presence, as in all other Subjects he treated of. And that both,
because he saw this would not suffice them, who held a gross and carnal
Presence of Christ's Body, unless their gross manner of Expression were
received, and their as gross Interpretation too; and because he found that many
weaker Brethren were greatly offended with these Ambiguities of Speech, and so
entangled and confounded, that they scarce knew what to think in this Point.
And so leaving Bucer to pursue his obscurer Phrases, he chose to speak more
clearly and distinctly. And neither did Bucer disallow of Martyr in this
Course, nor was Martyr ignorant of Bucer's true Sense, however doubtful his
Expressions were: as the Author of his Life tells us. This I mention to show,
Iosia^ Sim^^*
how exactly Martyr accorded with Melancthon in this Opinion, of expressing
things in clear and perspicuous Terms; which the said Melancthon thought it
highly necessary now to be inculcated, when deliberation was had of drawing up
a General Confession of Faith. After he had thus declared his Mind in this
Matter, What Melancthon thought of the Doctrine of Fate.
he particularly descended to the Doctrine of Fate; telling the Archbishop,
how the Stoical Disputes of that Subject among them in the beginning, were too
rough, and horrid, and such as were prejudicial to Discipline. Which I suppose,
might be occasioned from some Passage in the Archbishop's Letter, advising
with this Learned Man how to propound the Doctrines of Predestination and
Free Will.

CHAP. XXV. The Archbishop corresponds with Calvin.
THESE his Counsels he brake also to John Calvin, Calv. Ep. 12^.
the chief Guide of the French Churches. Who also highly approved of his pious
Proposition. The Archbishop, The ABp breaks his Purpose also to Calvin.
in a Letter to that great Reformer, had been lamenting the Differences that
were in the Reformed Churches; having his Eye, I suppose, herein upon those of
Geneva and Germany; and like a true Father of the Church, consulting for the
making up of the Breaches, he thought no fitter Remedy could be used, than for
pious and wise Men, and such as were well exercised in God's School, to meet
together and profess their Consents in the Doctrine of Godliness. Calvin's
Approbation thereof, and Commendation of the ABp.
This Calvin acknowledged was rightly and prudently advised by him: Applauding
him, that he did not only lead the way in purging the Doctrine of God's Church
from Corruption, but did so voluntarily exhort and encourage others therein.
And that he did not only take care of Religion at Home in his own Country, but
all the World over. And as to the Meeting and Converse of Divines, for this
purpose, which Cranmer had told him he had made the King so sensible of the
need and usefulness of, that he was forward in it, and had offered a Place in
his Kingdom for them securely to assemble together in; that French Divine
wished, That Learned and Wise Men from the chief Churches would accordingly
meet, and diligently discussing the chief Heads of Faith, would by common
Consent deliver to Posterity the certain Doctrine of the Scripture. But that
among the great Evils of that Age, this also was to be reputed, that Churches
were so divided from one another, that Human Society was scarcely kept up among
them: much less that Sacred Communion of the Members of Christ, which all
professed with their Mouths, but few did sincerely take care to preserve. That as
to himself, if he might be thought to be of any Use, Offers his Service.
he would not grudg to pass over ten Seas, if there were need. That if it were
only to contribute some Assistance to the Kingdom of England, he should esteem
it a Reason lawful enough; but much more, he thought, he ought to spare no
Labor, no Trouble, to procure a Means, whereby the Churches, that were so
widely divided, might unite among themselves. But he hoped, his Weakness and
Insufficiency being such, he might be spared: and that he would do his part in
prosecuting that with his Prayers and Wishes, which should be undertaken by
others. Excites the ABp to proceed.
And whereas our Archbishop had hinted to him his Jealousy, that the Business
would hardly find a good Issue by reason of certain Difficulties attending it,
Calvin not only exhorted, and earnestly beseeched him to go forward, till it
should have some Effect at least, though it succeeded not in all Respects
according to his Wish. And so prayed God to guide him with his Holy Spirit, and
to bless his Pious Endeavors.

This excellent Purpose frustrated.
But the Troubles at Home and Abroad frustrated this excellent Purpose, which
for two Years he had been laboring to bring to some good Issue. His next
Resolution was to go as far as he could in this Matter, Thinks of dr^wing up
Articles of Religion for the English Church.
since he could not go as far as he would. And he bethought himself of
assembling together the Divines of his own Church, (and that by the King's
Authority) to confer with them about drawing up a Body of Articles of Religion:
which Purpose he had likewise communicated to Calvin. Which he communicates to
Calvin, Ep. 125.
For which he greatly commended him. Telling him, That since the Times were
such, that that could not in the least be hoped for, which was so much to be
wished, viz. That the chief Teachers of the diverse Churches, which embraced the
pure Doctrine of the Gospel, And Calvin's Reply and Exhortation.
might meet together, and publish to Posterity a certain and clear Confession,
out of the pure Word of God, concerning the Heads of Religion then in
Controversy; he did extremely commend that Counsel, which he had taken, to
establish Religion in England; lest things remaining any longer in an uncertain
State, or not so rightly and duly composed and framed, as it were convenient,
the Minds of the People should remain in suspense and wavering. And then
quickening him, told him, That this was his part chiefly to do: That he himself
saw well what that Place required of him, or rather what God exacted, in
respect of that Office he had laid upon him. That he was of very powerful
Authority; which he had not only by the amplitude of his Honor, but the
long-conceived Opinion that went of his Prudence and Integrity. That the Eyes
of the Good were cast upon him, either to follow his Motions, or to remain idle
upon the pretense of his Unactiveness.

Blames him for having not made more Progress in the Reformation.
He took the freedom also with Cranmer, to blame him for not having made more
Progress in the Reformation. Which he thought he might have done in the three
Years space, wherein King Edward had already reigned. And told him, That he
feared, when so many Autumns had been passed in deliberating only, at last the
Frost of a perpetual Winter might follow. Meaning that the People would grow
stark cold in minding a Reformation. Then he reminded him of his Age, that that
called upon him to hasten, lest if he should be called out of the World before
Matters in Religion were settled, the Conscience of his Slowness might create
great Anxiety to him. He particularly put him in Mind of the great want of
Pastors to preach the Gospel, and that the Churches Revenues were made such a
Prey. Which he called An intolerable Evil. And said, that this was a plain
reason, why there was so little Preaching among us. That a parcel of
Slow-bellies were nourished from the Revenues of the Church, to sing Vespers in
an unknown Tongue. But in the close he excused him in regard of the many and
great Difficulties that he wrestled with. Which were certainly most true. In so
much, But not justly.
that if he had not been a Man of great Conduct and indefatigable Industry, the
Reformation had not made so fair a Progress as it did in his Time. And one may
admire rather that he went so far, the Iniquity of the Times considered, than
that he went no farther.

For the Great Ones, in the Minority of the King, The Clergy preach against
Sacriledg.
took their Opportunity, most insatiably to fly upon the Spoils of the Church,
and Charitable Donations; little regarding any thing else, than to enrich
themselves. Very vicious and dissolute they were in their Lives, as the soberer
Sort in those Days complained; and therefore the less to be wondered, they were
so negligent to provide for the promoting the Reformed Religion and Piety in
the Land. In the mean time, the chief Preachers did what they could to redress
these Evils: For they plainly and boldly rebuked this Evil Governance; and
especially the Covetousness of the Courtiers, and their small regard to live
after the Gospel: and sometimes incurred no small Danger by this Freedom. Mr.
Rogers Vicar of S. Sepulchers, and afterward a Martyr under Queen Mary, was
one of these: Who so freely discoursed once at S. Paul's Cross, concerning the
Abuse of Abbeys, and the Churches Goods, that he was summoned before the
Privy Council to answer for it. And so were diverse others upon the same Reason.
And I am apt to think that these Preachers did what they did, by the Counsel
and Direction of the Archbishop. So that the present State of Things, and the
Endeavors of him, and the rest of the Clergy considered, he was a little too
hastily censured by Calvin in that behalf. But Cranmer was of so mild and
gracious a Spirit, that he did not seem to conceive any Displeasure against
Calvin for this his unjust Charge of Negligence; but kept up a great Esteem and
Value for him.

But, The University-Men declaim against it in the School*
that I may take occasion here to insist a little longer upon this Argument,
and vindicate the Honesty and Boldness of the English Clergy, in speaking their
Minds against the Sacrilegious Spirit that reigned in these Times; it may not
be amiss to give some Account of a Communication, that happened about December
or January, 1552, at Court, between Sir William Cecyl the King's Secretary, and
one Miles Wilson a grave Divine, and Acquaintance of the said Cecyl, and a Man
of Eminency in the University of Cambridg. Discourse happening between them of
diverse and sundry things, relating partly to the propagating Christ's Religion,
and partly to the preservation and increase of the Commonwealth; the said
Wilson delivered to Cecyl an Oration to read, which he had composed, De rebus
Ecclesiae non diripiendis; Concerning not spoiling the Church of her Means: and
which he once pronounced in the Public Schools of the University, about that
Time when those Matters were in agitation above. Cecyl, being a good and
conscientious Man, had in this Conference signified to him his earnest desire
to hear and see what could be proposed out of the Holy Scripture, in so unusual
an Argument. To show this, and to give also a short view of his said Oration,
because the Secretary's infinite Business would not allow him to read long
Discourses, Wilson soon after digested the Contents thereof, reducing it into
some Syllogisms, and Ratiocinations, more apt to urge, and easier to remember,
and more accommodate to persuade. These with his Letter he sent to the
Secretary. His Ends herein were to satisfy him in this Point, being a Man of
great Stroke in the Public Transactions of those Times: who might accordingly
use his Interest and Endeavor to retrieve what had been so unjustly taken from
the Church; that the famous Schools lately dissolved, to the great ruin of the
University, might be re-edified again; and that those Livings, which were
miserably spoiled by covetous Patrons, might be restored, and enjoy their whole
Revenues, to the real Honor of the State. And lastly, that the Hospitals,
impoverished or wholly beggared, might by his means be remedied and helped by
the King's Council; that they might revert to their former Condition; that is,
to succor and help the Poor. He urged moreover to Cecyl, that the destruction
of Schools would be the destruction of the Universities: and that all Learning
would soon cease, and Popery and more than Gothic Barbarism would invade all,
if Learned Men were not better taken care of than they were; and if the Rewards
of Learning, viz. Rectories, Prebends and all, were taken away from them.

And the Redress urged upon some at Court.
This Man had also freely discoursed these Matters to two other great and
publick-spirited Men, viz. Goodrich the Lord Chancellor, who was Bishop of Ely;
and Holgate Archbishop of York. To both whom he had also given the Names of a
great many Schools, Parsonages and Hospitals, that had undergon this
sacrilegious Usage. And he particularly mentioned to Cecyl, a Town not far from
Cambridg, called Childerlay, where a Gentleman had pulled down all the Houses
in the Parish, except his own. And so there being none to frequent the Church,
the Inhabitants being gone, he used the said Church, partly for a Stable for
his Horses, and partly for a Barn for his Corn and Straw. This Letter of Wilson
to the Secretary, together with his Arguments against pilling the Church
subjoined, I have thought worthy preserving in the Repository for such
Monuments in the Appendix. No. XCIII.
But to return from this Digression, which Calvin's Censure of our Archbishop
occasioned.

And when in the Year 1551, he dispatched into England one Nicolas, (that
Nicolas Gallasius, I suppose, who was afterward by Calvin recommended to be
Minister to the French Congregation in London, at the desire of Grindal Bishop
of London, that he would send over some honest able Person for that Place) with
Letters to the Duke of Somerset, Calvin sends Letters and certain of his Books
to the King.

Ep. 123.


and likewise to the King; to whom he presented also, at the same time, his
Book of Commentaries upon Esaias, and the Canonical Epistles, which he had
Dedicated to him; both the King's Council, Well taken by the King and Council.
and the King himself were much pleased and satisfied with this Message: And
the Archbishop told Nicolas, That Calvin could do nothing more profitable to
the Church, than to write often to the King. The substance of what he wrote to
the King, What the ABp told the Messenger hereupon.

Ep. 120.


that was so well taken, was to excite and sharpen the generous Parts of the
Royal Youth, as Calvin hinted in a Letter to Bullinger.

CHAP. XXVI. The Archbishop highly valued Peter Martyr.
AS for the Learned Italian, Peter Martyr, who is worthy to be mentioned with
Melancthon and Calvin, P. Martyr, and the ABp cordial Friends.
there was not only an Acquaintance between him and our Archbishop, but a
great and cordial Intimacy and Friendship. For of him he made particular use in
the Steps he took in our Reformation. The use the ABp made of him.
And whenever he might be spared from his Public Readings in Oxford, the
Archbishop used to send for him, to confer with him about the weightiest
Matters. This Calvin took notice of, and signified to him by Letter, how much
he rejoiced that he made use of the Counsels of that excellent Man. Ep. 127.
And when the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws was in effect wholly
devolved upon Cranmer, he appointed him and Gualter Haddon, and Dr. Rowland
Tailor his Chaplain, and no more, to manage that Business. Which shows what an
Opinion he had of Martyr's Abilities, and how he served himself of him in
Matters of the greatest Moment. And in that bold and brave Challenge he made in
the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, to justify, against any Man whatsoever,
every Part of King Edward's Reformation; he nominated and made choice of Martyr
therein to be one of his Assistants in that Disputation, if any would undertake
it with him. This Divine, when he was forced to leave Oxford upon the Change of
Religion, retreated first to the Archbishop at Lambeth; and from thence, when
he had tarried as long as he durst, he departed the Realm to Strasburgh.

This Man was he that saw, Martyr saw the Voluminous Writings and Marginal
Notes of the Archbishop.
and reported those voluminous Writings of this Archbishop, which he had
collected out of all the Ancient Church-Writers, upon all the Heads of
Divinity; and those Notes of his own Pen, that he had inserted in the Margin of
his Books. Which the Archbishop communicated to him, when he conversed with
him at his House. And from these and suchlike of the Archbishop's Labors, he
acknowledged he had learned much, especially in the Doctrine of the Sacrament;
as he writ in his Epistle before his Tract of the Encharist.

The Fame of Peter Martyr, and the Desire of preserving all Remains of so
Learned a Professor, Two Letters of Martyr from Oxford.
and great an Instrument of the Reformed Religion, has inclined me to put two
of his Letters into the Appendix, though otherwise not to our present Purpose;
being Originals, writ by his own Hand from Oxon. N.XCIV.XCV.
The one to James Haddon, a learned Court-Divine, and Dean of Exon, to procure
a License from the King or the Council, for a Friend and Auditor of his, to
preach publicly. The other to Sir William Cecyl, to forward the payment of a
Salary due to him, that read the Divinity-Lecture in the Room of Dr. Weston a
Papist, who had claimed it himself, and labored to detain it from him.

An instance of his Love to the Archbishop.
I cannot forbear mentioning here an Instance of his Love and great Concern for
our Archbishop, his old Friend and Patron, after the Iniquity of the Times had
parted them, the one then in Prison, and the other at Strasburgh. It was in
June 1555, when Queen Mary, supposing her self with Child, was reported to have
said in her Zeal, That she could never be happily brought to Bed, nor succeed
well in any other of her Affairs, unless she caused all the Heretics she had
in Prison to be burnt, without sparing so much as One. Which Opinion, very
likely, the Bishop of Winchester, or some other of her Zelotical Chaplains, put
into her Head. This Report coming to Martyr's Ears, afflicted him greatly; not
only for the Destruction that was like suddenly to befall many Holy Professors,
but more especially for the imminent Hazard he apprehended that great and
public Person, the Archbishop to be in. Which made him express himself in
this manner, in a Letter to Peter Alexander, to whom that most Reverend Father
had also formerly been a kind Host and Patron; That from those Words of the
Queen, he might discover that my Lord of Canterbury was then in great Danger.
P. Martyr Ep. Theolog.


CHAP. XXVII. The Archbishop's Favor to John Sleidan.
TO all these Learned and religious Outlandish-Men, to whom the Archbishop was
either a Patron or a Friend, The ABp's favor to John Sleidan.
or both, we must not forget to join John Sleidan, the renowned Author of those
exact Commentaries of the State of Religion, and the Commonwealth in Germany,
in the time of Charles V. About the end of March, Procures him a Pension from
the King.
Anno 1551, He procured for him from King Edward an Honorary Pension of two
hundred Crowns a Year, as some Aid for the carrying on his Commentaries, which
he then was busy about; and as it seems, encouraged by Cranmer to take in Hand
and prosecute. And when Dr. Bruno, a Learned Man, and Father-in-Law to Sleidan,
departed out of England, which was about the Time before mentioned, being the
Agent of the Duke of Saxony, the Archbishop informed him of this Stipend, by
the King granted unto his Son-in-Law; confirming the same to him in the King's
Name, and encouraging the Commentator hereby to proceed cheerfully in his
useful Undertaking.

The Payment neglected.
But upon the Stirs at Court, the payment of this Pension was neglected a great
while. Which caused Sleidan to call upon the Archbishop more than once, as
also upon his Friends Cheke and Cecyl; entreating them to remind the
Archbishop of him, and to communicate to his Lordship the Letters he had writ
to them. But alas! he needed not to have been excited to things of this Nature*
bearing so good a Will to them, and being of his own Nature so forward to
favor Learned and honest Men, and useful Designs; Nor was his good Will to
Sleidan any whit abated, but his Interest at Court was, now toward the
declension of King Edward's Reign.

But because his Pension depended only upon a verbal Promise of the King,
Sleidan labors with the ABp to get the Pension confirmed by Letters Patents.
and the getting it under his Seal might contribute to the payment of it in
better sort hereafter, he labored with our Prelate, and the two other Persons
mentioned, that it might be confirmed by Letters Patents. He urged to them,
That he could have employed himself in other Business, that would have
redounded more to his Profit, as many others did. But he reckoned himself
called to this Work from Heaven, and that he could take no rest in his Mind
till he had brought the History down to that present Time, (it being then the
Year 1553) That he had hope, that they, according to their Humanity and
Prudence, who well understood things, would take some Pains, that the Arrears
of his promised Stipend might be paid, and that some further Care might be
taken for the due Payment of it hereafter, that so he might the more
conveniently and freely follow that Matter. Leaving it to them to consider how
much that Labor cost him: [as to the Charges he means of Correspondence for
the getting particular and faithful Accounts of things, that past in all
Parts.] And lastly, That it belonged properly to Kings, to cherish such
Labors, as would be Ornaments to Religion and Learning, and of Use to the
Common-Good. And in another Address to Secretary Cecyl he desired, That he
would plead in his behalf with the most Reverend the Archbishop; adding, That
he did wholly give up himself to this Work, and was in a diligent pursuit of
all Matters in order to the compiling a complete History.

Though I have said so much already of Sleidan, yet I will take this occasion
to add somewhat more: that I may retrieve as much as I can of this honest Man,
and excellent Writer. In the Month of September, Anno 1552, he sent to the
King, together with a Letter, Sends his Commentaries to the King.
his Commentaries of the German Wars, brought down to that very Time: being a
short Draught of that he intended afterward more largely and fully to write.
And Cheke and Cecyl were the Men that presented them to his Majesty. With this
kind of Writing the King declared himself much pleased, as Cecyl wrote him
back; and so he and Cheke also were.

This Encouragement put our Author upon another Design, Designs to write the
History of the Council of Trent.
resolving to write the whole Actions of the Council of Trent: wherein he
himself had been a part, having been Agent there for five Months from the City
of Strasburg. This he intended to do for the King's own Sake. For the King's
Use.
That he might thoroughly understand the Form of Councils, and might then make
his Judgment of the rest of the History of the Reformation of Religion, which
he was then writing.

The Spring after he presented the King with a Specimen of his Writing
concerning the Council of Trent. Anno 1553. Sends the King a Specimen thereof.
It was the beginning and entrance into that Treatise he intended to write of
that Subject. This he desired might be kept in the King's Study, and
communicated to no other Hand; and that no Copy of it might be taken, it being
but a small part of a future Work, and so imperfect.

He had now, in the Ides of March, completed his Commentaries from the Year
1517, to the Year 1536; and was resolved, by God's Grace, to go on with it in
the same Method. In order to which, in the Month of December before, In order
to the proceeding with his Commentaries, desires Cecyl to send him the whole
Action between K. H. VIII. and P. Clement VII.
he had desired of Cecyl, that he would procure him the whole Action between
King Henry VIII. and Pope Clement VII. when that King vindicated his own
Liberty, and that of his Kingdom from Papal Pretenses of Supremacy over each.
This Matter between the King and the Pope he called, Locus illustris and
memorabilis, and judged it very worthy for Posterity to know. Adding, that
though he had in his own Hands some Matters relating thereto, yet they were not
so exact and certain as he could wish; because he desired to describe every
thing properly and most exactly according to Truth. He entreated also, that if
either he or Cheke had any other Matters of that Nature to impart, they would
oblige him with them. Which Passages make me conclude that in relation to the
English Affairs he made great use of Intelligences from Cecyl and Cheke, and
probably our Archbishop too. Which consideration may add a great Reputation
unto the Credit of his Book.

Now to preserve as much as we can of this excellent Historian, John Sleidan, I
have thought good to insert diverse of his Letters in the Appendix; and likewise
because mention is often therein made of our Archbishop. To which I have
subjoined a Letter of Martin Bucer, B^cer writes to C^cyl in behalf of Sl^idan.
No. XCVI.XCVII.XCVIII.XCIX.C.CI.CII.
a great Name, wrote to Cecyl in behalf of the said Sleidan. For he did not
only importune those Courtiers before mentioned, but when no Answer came from
them, he made Bucer also his Solicitor from Cambridg. Who Anno 1551, Feb. 18.
wrote to Cecyl to further Sleidan's Business, and to dispatch the Payment of
his Stipend; and that Sleidan might be resolved one way or other; giving Cecyl
this Memento, That this would well become the Administration of a Kingdom so
much adorned as with other things, so with the Benefit of Religion. By the way,
the Date of this Letter would deserve well to be noted, serving to judge of the
true Date of Bucer's Death. Which by Historians is variously set down, if we
may believe Fuller in his History of the University of Cambridg. It is certain
Bucer was ill when he wrote that Letter to Cecyl; for he mentions therein an
Epistle, which he sent to Dr. John Quercetanus the Physician, upon the said
Cecyl's Desire, the which, he said, he was hardly able to dictate. This Letter
to Cecyl, I take, to be writ in his last Sickness, nine Days before the Date,
which Sleidan his Friend, assigned for the Day of his Death. To which agrees
within a Day a Passage at the end of a Piece of Bucer's, Feb. 27. 1551.
entitled, Explicatio de vi and usu S. Ministerii, Scriptae Anglic.
where it is said, That he died at Cambridg, before he finished it. Pridie Call.
Martias, Anno 1551.

John Leland.
I have one Learned Man more behind to mention, and he our own Countryman; to
whom our Archbishop was a Patron; and that is the celebrated Antiquarian John
Leland, Library Keeper to Henry VIII, and who, by a Commission under the Broad
Seal, granted to him for that purpose by the King, had got together a vast Heap
of Collections of the Historical Antiquities of this Nation: which he was many
Years a making by his Travels and diligent Searches into the Libraries of
Abbeys and Religious-Houses, before, and at their Dissolution, and elsewhere.
From whence he intended to compile a complete History of the Antiquities of
Britain; To which he wholly devoted himself. But being at that time poor, and
the Charges of such an Undertaking great, he wanted some Body to make this
known to the King, and to recommend him effectually to his Favor and
Countenance; and to procure him a Royal Gratuity: For which purpose he made his
Application to Cranmer, (who he well knew, was the great Encourager of Learning
and Ingenuity) in a very elegant Address in Verse, as he was an excellent Poet.
And I am apt to think, the Preferments that soon after befell him, as a good
Parsonage near Oxford, and a Canonry of the King's College in that University,
and a Prebendship elsewhere, accrued to him by the means of the Archbishop,
laying open his State before the King. His Copy of Verses were as follow: Ad
Thomam Cranmerum Cantiorum Archiepiscopum.
EST congesta mihi domi supellex,
Ingens, aurea, nobilis, venusta,
Qua totus studeo Britanniarum
Vero reddere gloriam nitori.
Sed fortuna meis noverca coeptis,
Iam felicibus invidet maligna.
Quare ne pereant brevi vel hora
Multarum mihi noctium labores
Omnes, and patriae simul decora
Ornamenta cadant, suusque splendour
Antiquis male desit usque rebus,
Cranmere, eximium decus piorum,
Implorare tuam benignitatem
Cogor. Fac igitur tuo sueto
Pro candore, meum decus, patronumque
Vt tantum faveat, roges, labori
Incoepto: pretium sequetur amplum.
Sic nomen tibi litterae elegantes
Recte perpetuum dabunt, suosque
Partim vel titulos tibi receptos
Concedet memori Britannus ore.
Sic te posteritas amabit omnis,
Et fama super aethera innotesces.


CHAP. XXVIII. Archbishop Cranmer's Relations and Chaplains.
TO look now a little into the Archbishop's more private and domestic
Concerns. He had two Wives. His Wives and Children.
While he was Fellow of Jesus College in Cambridg, not being in Orders, he
married his first, named Joan, dwelling at the Dolphin, opposite to Jesus Lane,
which I think is a public House to this Day. Which occasioned some of his
Enemies afterward to say, That he was once an Ostler, because he lodged
sometime with his Wife at that House. Her he buried within a Year, dying in
Childbed. And then for diverse Years he continued studying hard, and reading
Learned Lectures in the University, and bringing up Youth, till he was called
to the Court. His second Wife, named Ann, he married in Germany, while he was
Ambassador there. By her he had Children. In King Henry's Reign he kept her
Secret; and upon the Act of the Six Articles he sent her away into Germany,
that he might give no Offense, nor draw any Danger upon himself. In the time of
King Edward, when the Marriage of the Clergy was allowed, he brought her forth,
and lived openly with her. He had Children that survived him. For whose sake an
Act of Parliament passed in the Year 1562, to restore them in Blood, their
Father having been condemned for Treason in consenting to the Lady Iane's
Succession to the Crown. For which yet he was pardoned by Queen Mary. Probably
the Pardon was only Verbal, or not Authentickly enough drawn up, or might admit
of some Doubt: To take off which such an Act was procured. How many Children he
had, or what Issue remains of them to this Day, I am not able, after all my
Enquiries, to show.

His Wife survived him. Sincere and modist Defense of English Catholics.
His Wife survived him. For we may give so much Credit to a very angry Book,
writ against the Execution of Justice in England, by Cardinal Allen; Which
charging the Archbishop with Breach of Vows, says, That at the very Day and
Hour of his Death, he was sacrilegiously joined in pretended Marriage to a
Woman, notwithstanding his Vow and Order. And living she was toward the latter
End of Archbishop Parker's Time; and for her Subsistence enjoyed an Abbey in
Nottingham-shire: MS. Life of Cranmer in Benet* College.
which King Henry, upon Dr. Butt's his Motion, without the Archbishop's
knowledge, granted to him and his Heirs.

Diverse Cranmers.
For his Wife and Children he could not escape many a Taunt from his Enemies
behind his Back; and one to his Face from Dr. Martin, one of those that were
commissionated to sit as Judges upon him at Oxford. He told him in reproach,
That his Children were Bondmen to the Sea of Canterbury. Whether there be any
such old Canon Law I know not. But the Archbishop smiled, and asked him, If a
Priest at his Benefice kept a Concubine, and had Children by her, whether those
Children were Bondmen to the Benefice, or no? And that he trusted they would
make his Childrens Case no worse. I find two of his Name in King Edward's
Reign; but whether they were his, or his Brother Edmund's Sons, or some other
Relations, I cannot tell. There was one Richard Cranmer, one of the Witnesses
at the Abjuration of Ashton, Priest, an Arian, 1548. Daniel Cranmer of
Bilsington, of the Diocese of Canterbury, who about administering to a Will, was
for contumacy to the Court of Canterbury, Cranm. Regist.
Excommunicate: and a Significavit was issued out against him thereupon, in the
Year 1552. There was also a Thomas Cranmer about these Times, Su^^er's Ant.
who bought something in Ware-Lane of the City of Canterbury. He was Public
Notary, and Register to the Archdeacon in the Year 1569. I find likewise one
Robert Cranmer Esquire. who was Nephew to the Archbishop, and alive at the latter
End of Queen Elizabeth. This Robert left one only Daughter and Heiress, named
Ann. Whom Sir Arthur Harris of Crixey in Essex, married, and enjoyed with her
three Manors; Postling, which came to the said Robert in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth: Kingsnorth in Vlcomb, and Saltwood: Both which he purchased in the
latter end of that Queen. Upon whose Grandchild, Sir Cranmer Harris of
Lincoln's End Knight. those Estates descended. There was another Cranmer of
Canterbury, who enjoyed a Manor, called Sapinton, in Petham in Kent. One of
whose Offspring by descent successively was entitled to the Propriety of it,
Philpot 's Villar. Cantian.
and was alive when Philpot published his Book of that County, viz. 1659. There
^e living at this Time among diverse others, two Knights of this Name, Sir Caesar
Cranmer once belonging to the Court, and Sir William Cranmer, a worthy Merchant
of London, and now Deputy Governor of the Hamburgh Company.

But if we look backward, The AB's Stock.
the Archbishop's Stock and Pedigree was very Ancient, and of good Credit. His
Father was Thomas Cranmer of Alacton in Nottinghamshire, Esquire; and his
Mother was Agnes, the Daughter of Laurence Hatfield of Willoughby of like
Degree, a Gentleman, if I mistake not, of the same County. Which two had Issue
three Sons, John, and Thomas our Archbishop, and Edmund who was the
Archdeacon: and four Daughters, Dorothy, Ann, Jane and Isabel. Which Sisters
of our Archbishop were thus matched. Dorothy to Harold Rosel of Radcliff in
this County, Esquire Ann to Edmund Cartwright of Ossington in Staffordshire,
Esquire; Jane to John Moning Lieutenant of Dover-Castle, and Isabel to Sir....
Shepey Knight. Matches, I suppose, especially the two latter, of the
Archbishop's own making, for the Preferment of his Sisters. His elder Brother
John married Ione, Daughter of Fretchvile, of a good Family in the same County.
Whose Grandchild Thomas, and Grand-Nephew to our Archbishop, had none but
Daughters. One of whom being a Coheir, married John Rosel, Grandchild to
Harold aforesaid, and the other to good Families in those Parts.

The Archbishop's great Grandfather, Edmund, married Isabel Daughter and Heir
of William de Aslacton, a very Ancient Family. Aslacton.
This Edmund was alive in the Reign of Henry VI.

In the Church of Whatton, in this County, Whatton.
is an Ancient Monument of an Ancestor of our Archbishop, with this
Inscription; Hic jacet Thomas Cranmerus. Qui obiit 27 Maii, 1501. Cujus animae
propitietur Deus. Amen. And on the Monument the Coat of Arms of the Cranmer's;
being a Chevron, between three Cranes, quartered with those of the Aslactons,
Newmarches, Whattons, and two Families more. This might probably enough be the
Archbishop's Father.

The Archbishop in the first Year of King Edward VI, The Rectories whereof the
ABp purchased.
purchased of that King the Rectories of Whatton and Aslacton, (the Manors
whereof belonged to his Family before) with the Advousons of the Churches. Both
which had pertained to the dissolved Monastery of Welbeck. Which Rectories the
Archbishop, as it seems, made over to his Nephew Thomas, Son to his Brother
John. For he died seized of them both. And they descended to his Son and Heir
Thomas. The Manors of the said Whatton and Aslacton are now come into the noble
Family of Dorchester. The Tithes and Glebe to the Armstrongs of Scarrington.
For these Collections I am beholden to Thoroton's History of Nottinghamshire.

And now in the last place, His Chaplains.
let us look into the Archbishop's Domestic Affairs. He took great heed to
the Well-government of his Family, that all things there might beseem the House
of a truly Christian Bishop, and the chief Spiritual Governor of the English
Church. And in order to this, one of his Cares was to have Learned Men about
him. A few whereof, as I could retrive them, I shall here mention, and give
some Account of. And first let us begin with his Chaplains.

Rowland Tailor.
I can find but a few of them: but Men they were of great Parts and
Achievements in Learning, as well as Piety. One of them was Rowland Tailor
Doctor of both Laws, and preferred by the Archbishop to be Parson of Hadley in
Suffolk. Who sealed his Doctrine with his Blood. An extraordinary Man, both for
his Learning, as well as his bold and brave Profession of Christ's Religion,
even to the fiery Trial. He had read over (which was rare in those Days) all S.
Augustine's Works, S. Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen, Eusebius, Origin, and diverse
other Fathers. He professed the Civil Law, and had read over the Canon Law
also: As he told the Lord Chancellor Gardener, when in his Scorn and Rage
together he called him an Ignorant Beetle-brow. The Archbishop made use of him
in his Affairs: and he was one of those, that were joined with him in King
Edward's Days, for making a Reformation in the Ecclesiastical Laws. Soon after
he was invested in his Benefice, leaving the AB's Family, he went and resided,
like a careful Pastor, and performed among his Parishioners all the Parts of an
excellent Minister, in respect of his Doctrine, Example and Charity. He was
sent down to his own Parish of Hadley, where he was extremely beloved, to be
burnt. But I refer the Reader to the large and full Account that Fox gives of
him in his Book of Acts and Monuments; and shall only recite his Epitaph, as it
now remains, or lately did, in a brass Plate hanging in the Church of Hadley,
where he deserved so well. Gloria in Altissimis Deo.
His Epitaph.
OF Rowland Taylor's Fame I show, an Excellent Divine,
A Doctor of the Civil Law, a Preacher rare and fine.
King Henry and King Edward's Days, Preacher and Parson here,
That gave to God continual Praise, and kept his Flock in Fear.
And for the Truth condemned to die he was in Fire and Flame,
Where he received patiently the Torment of the same:
And strongly suffered to the End. Which made the Standers by,
Rejoice in God to see their Friend and Pastor so to die.
O Tailor! were thy mighty Fame uprightly here enrolled,
Thy Deeds deserve that thy good Name were cipher'd here in Gold.
Obiit 1555.
And in Aldham-Common, not far from Hadley Town, is a great Stone, that assigns
the Place where he suffered, and on it are written these words, or to this
effect, Dr. Tailor for maintaining what was good,
In this Place shed his Blood.


His Living was immediately supplied by one Newal. A Sermon preached the Day
after his Burning.
And to deserve his Preferment, or by Commandment perhaps from Above, to render
their taking away Dr. Tailor the more justifiable, he made a Sermon February
10, 1555, being the Day next after he suffered, upon this Text, Sic currite, ut
comprehendatis. His Work was to persuade the People to return to the old
Superstitions, and to bespatter the Martyr with false Reports. And meeting with
a Writing, Inter Foxii MSS.
that contains the Sum of this Sermon, I will crave leave here to insert it;
to give a Specimen of Popish Preaching in these Days.

He exhorted to run in the strait Way, and leave the wide Gate, Wherein the
Martyr is grossly Slandered.
viz. To leave the newfound Learning, and but new found indeed; and follow all
one Religion. For ye were, said he, erroneously taught by soch Men as died
yesterday. Of whom I will speak, but for no Malice, as God I take to record.

His Opinions were, wherefore he died, one, that Priests might have Wives: the
other, that in the Sacrament was not the very Body and Blood of our Savior
Christ, substantially and really.

The first, that Priests should have Wives, he could prove by no Scripture, but
by three other Authors. And he was demanded, if he were willing to stand to
the last? He answered, Yea, before God. Then the Book laid before him, and read
to him in Latin and English: and he reading the English of it himself, said he
would read the Latin, and so did, and confuted himself. And stood then as
amazed; as can witness five hundred.

And I dare say, there were a thousand Texts rehearsed to him to the contrary:
but he could answer not to one. And so had diverse Admonitions, but was so
stubborn in his own Conceit, according to Paul's Saying, Si sit homo sectuum,
Let him be admonished once or twice; And so has he been: If he will not turn,
let him cast out. And so he is now. For better were it so to do, then to put
many Souls in danger with evil Doctrine.

And one Text I will declare to you for Priests having Wives. S. Paul, when he
was tempted, rid to our Savior Christ, and asked what Remedy were for
Temptation, for his Temptation? but whether it were of Lust of the Flesh, or
vain Glory, I cannot tell, but let that go to the Opinion of Men. And Christ
answered, Why Paul, is not my Grace sufficient for thee? But he did not say,
Take a Wife, and let that be thy Remedy. But they strait take a Drab by the
Tail, saying, That no Man can live Chaste without the Gift of God.

And as concerning the Sacrament, to prove it, he brought Paul in the end of
the first to the Corinthians, Luke, John, Sixth of Mark. And it is not to be
called the Supper of the Lord, as these Banbury Glosers have called it. For
Coena facta, he said, This is my Body, which is, or shall be, betrayed. And in
one Text Cyprian, one of the Primitive Church, said in a Sermon of the Supper,
The Bread which Christ gave to his Disciples, by the omnipotency of the Word,
is made Flesh. And Dionysius and Hilary similiter.

To err is a small Fault, but to persevere is a devilish thing. For it moves
many Minds, to see an Heretic constant, and to die. But it is not to be
mervelled at: for the Devil has Power over Soul and Body. For he causes Men
to drown and hang themselves, at their own Wills. Much more he may cause a Man
to burn: seeing he is tied, and cannot fly. Barnabe says so. Cyprian, unus
Clericorum, says, That grievous is the Fault of Discord in Christ's Church,
and cannot be cleansed with Burning, or any other Sacrifice. Ergo, Damned.

For sure he died in damnable Case, if he did not otherwise repent in the Hour
of Pain. For though he did burn in this Case, he shows himself a Christian
Man no otherwise than the Devil shows himself like Christ: and so makes no
End of a Martyr. Austin says, He that will deny the Church to be his Mother,
God will deny him to be his Son.

And so Pope Julius the third prayed for, etc. He made an end for lack of his
Books, because he said, he was but new come, and brought not his Books with him.

Item, Last, The Person being labored by the way, to have left his Opinion,
answered, Alas! what would you have me to do? Once I have Recanted, and my
Living is gone. I am but a Wretch: Make an end of me. And, I warrant you, said
not one word at his Death, more than desired the People to pray for him. Which
was no Token of a Christian, but of Stubbornness. But I am glad, that ye were
so quiet.

A right Popish Sermon, patched up of Ignorance, Malice, Uncharitableness, Lies
and Improbabilities: That he had no Scripture to produce for himself. That his
Adversaries had a thousand against him. That he should be willing to stand to a
Quotation out of a Father, and know no better what it was, as, when he saw it,
to be so confounded and amazed. That if he were so convinced and speechless,
that he should be so stupid and senseless to suffer Death, for Matters, which
he saw were not true. But such a Character was here given of him, as was no
ways agreeable to the great Learning, Wisdom, and Piety, that this excellent
Man was endued with.

John Ponet.
John Ponet, or Poinet a Kentish Man, and of Queen's College, Cambridg, was
another of his Chaplains; a very Ingenious, as well as Learned Man: Afterward
Bishop of Rochester, and then of Winchester. A great Friend to that
accomplished Scholar, Roger Ascham; who in confidence of his Friendship, writ
to him, when Domestic Chaplain to the Archbishop, to deliver his Letter, and
forward his Suit to his Grace, to dispense with him from eating Flesh, and
keeping Lent, as was mentioned before. He was of great Authority with Cranmer,
and of his Council in Matters of Divinity. We may judge of his great Abilities
by what Godwin speaks of him, viz. That he had left diverse Writings in Latin
and English: and that besides the Greek and Latin, he was well seen in the
Italian and Dutch Tongues. [Which last he learned probably in his Exile.] That
he was an excellent Mathematician, and gave unto King Henry VIII. a Dial of his
own Devise; showing not only the Hour of the Day, but also the Day of the
Month, the Sign of the Sun, the Planetary Hour; yea, the Change of the Moon,
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, with diverse other things as strange, to the
great wonder of the King, and his no less Commendation. And he was as eminent
for his Gift in Preaching, as for his other Qualifications, being preferred by
King Edward for some excellent Sermons preached before him. Stow.
One of our Historians writes, that he was with Sir Thomas Wyat in his
Insurrection: and after his Defeat, fled into Germany, where in the City of
Strasburg he died about the Year 1556. But Bale speaks not a word of his being
with Wyat; but that he died being 40 Years of Age, buried at Strasburgh, and
attended honorably to his Grave with abundance of Learned Men and Citizens.

Thomas Becon a Suffolk Man, seems to have been his Chaplain. Tho. Becon.
To Cranmer, Becon dedicated his Treatise of Fasting: wherein he mentioned
several Benefits he had received from the Archbishop. One whereof was, his
making him one of the Six Preachers of Canterbury. He was deprived in Queen
Mary's Reign, as all the other five were, for being Married. He was a famous
Writer, as well as Preacher, in the Reigns of King Henry, King Edward, Queen
Mary and Queen Elizabeth. So eminent, that he was one of the three, Vernon and
Bradford (being the other two) that were sent for by Queen Mary's Council, and
committed to the Tower in the beginning of her Reign, viz. August 16. 1553.
From whence he was not delivered till March 22. following. During which time,
as he complained himself, he underwent a miserable Imprisonment. To conceal
himself in those dangerous Times, he went by the Name of Theodore Basil: and
was one of those Authors, whose Names were specified in a severe Proclamation
put forth by King Philip and Queen Mary, 1555. as being Writers of Books,
which, as contrary to the Pope and Roman Catholic Religion, were forbidden to
be brought into England, or used, and commanded diligently to be searched for,
and brought to the Ordinary, upon Penalty of the Statute of Henry IV, against
Heresy. After his delivery from Prison, skulking about for some time, at length
he saved himself by Exile.

He was a Man mightily tossed about. For to look upon him, before this, in King
Henry's Reign; then for his Security, he was forced to leave his Friends and
Country, wandering as far as Darbyshire, and the Peak: where he privately taught
School for a Subsistence. And coming a mere Stranger into Alsop in the Dale,
one Mr. Alsop, a pious Man, in that barbarous Country, showed him great
Civility. Afterward he traveled into Staffor^shire, where he also educated
Children in good Literature, and instilled into their Minds the Principles of
Christian Doctrine. After a Year's tarrying there, and in Leichestershire, he
flitted into Warwickshire, where he taught also diverse Gentlemen's Sons, and
where he met with old Father Latimer to his great Joy, who had first made him
acquainted with the Gospel, when he was a Scholar in Cambridg, twenty Years
before. He wrote a great many Books, forty in number, suited to the various
Occasions of Christians, both in the Persecutions under Queen Mary, and the
free Profession and Restoration of the Gospel, under King Edward* and Queen
Elizabeth: and many more against the Religion of the Roman Church. All these
did this learned and painful Author compose for the Benefit of the Professors
of Religion. Whereby he did such Service to the enlightening of Men's Minds in
the knowledge of the Truth, and for the exposing the Corruptions of Popery, that
it was thought convenient, that some of that Communion should be employed to
write against him. And so Richard Smith, sometime Reader of Divinity in Oxon,
and one that had subscribed to the Reformed Religion, and after fled into
Brabant, and became a zealous Assertor of Popery, writ in a bitter Style
against some of Becon's Books, as he had done against the Archbishop himself
before.

I find this Becon put up to preach one of the Lent Sermons at St. Paul's Cross,
in the Year 1566. And such then was his Fame for a Preacher, and such his
Favor with the greatest Prelates, that the Lord Mayor for that Year sent a
Message to Archbishop Parker, That his Grace would prevail with him to preach
one of the Sermons at the Spittle that Easter.

In the Year 1564, he revised and reprinted all his former Books in three
Volumes; dedicating the whole to all the Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm.
And in Commendation thereof, Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich, wrote these Verses to
him.

Vidi and perlegi doctos, Baecone, Libellos,
Quos tua non pridem Sancta Minerva dedit.
Dispeream, siquid legi unquam sanctius, aut si
Quid potuit populo tradier utilius.
Auspice perge Deo tales vulgar Libellos:
Vaniloquax sed nec lingua timenda tibi est.
Sic Christum possis avido inculcare popello,
Sic possis nomen condecorare tuum.
Besides these, there was his Postil, being Godly and Learned Sermons on all
the Sunday-Gospels in the Year: Printed in Quarto in the Year 1567.

I shall say no more of his Chaplains, after I shall have mentioned Richard
Harman. Rich. Harman.
Who seems to have been one of his first Chaplains; being once of
King's-College, but went away Scholar (probably for Religion;) afterward lived
in Iesus-College, and commenced Master of Arts with Cranmer: Whom he also
preferred to be his Domestic afterward. This Man was one of those
Cambridg-Men that were elected into S. Frideswide's-College in Oxon; and
suffered much there for Religion. He was afterward a Canon of Windsor; but
fell back to Popery.

CHAP. XXIX. Archbishop Cranmer's Officers.
Rob. Watson the ABp's Steward.
I Shall now add a few words of Two of his Civil Officers: His Steward and his
Secretary: on Nevyl was his Steward in K. Henry's Reign; who conducted Sir John
Seimour, coming with a Message from the King, through the Hall, when the Tables
were sumptuously set, unto the ABp at Dinner; him I have nothing to say of. But
he had another afterward, named Robert Watson, born in Norwich, of whom I have
a word or two say. He was a great Civilian, and an Exile for Religion in Queen
Mary's Reign. But before his escape beyond Sea, he lay in Prison in Norwich a
Year and four Months, says Bale; almost two Years, says Fox. And then was
most fortunately delivered, without doing any Violence to his Conscience, by
the Subscription which he made. Being Abroad, he wrote a Piece, entitled,
Aetiologia, to all that sincerely professed Christ, wheresoever dispersed,
especially his Countrymen, the English, banished with him. In this Tract he
gave a Relation of himself, and his Imprisonment and Escape; and of the
Disputes that happened between him and his Adversaries concerning
Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; and by
what means he escaped safe in Body and Conscience: Which was a rare Matter to
do from such Inquisitors. It was propounded to him to set his Hand to these
words, viz. That he believed and confessed, that the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, through the Omnipotency of God's Word, pronounced by the Priest,
were turned into the Body and Blood of Christ; and after Consecration, under
the Forms of Bread and Wine, remained the true Body and Blood of Christ, and no
other Substance. To which he made this Subscription; His omnibus eatenus
assentior and subscribo, quatenus Verbo Dei nituntur, eoque sensu, quo sunt ab
Ecclesia Catholica, and a Sanctis Patribus intellecta. By the Means of one Dr.
Barret, a Learned Friar of Norwich, he was upon this favorable Subscription
dismissed. But Christopherson Dean of Norwich, when he understood it, was much
incensed, and laid out to take him again. But he, by the help of Friends,
escaped over the Seas.

Now lastly of Ralph Morice his Secretary, so much employed, His Secretary*
Ralph Morice.
and so greatly entrusted by our Archbishop, it may not be amiss to set down a
few Memorials. He was his Secretary, not so much for ordinary Matters incident
to his Archiepiscopal Office, as his Amanuensis for Learned Treatises and
Discourses which he composed. In this Place he remained for twenty Years, that
is, from the Archbishop's first entrance upon his See, to the Death of King
Edward VI, his good Master. He was a very considerable Person, His Parentage*
and of good Birth, being the Son of James Morice of Royden in the County of
Essex Esquire. Which James was sometime Servant unto the Lady Margaret, Countess of
Richmond and Derby, and Clerk of her Kitchen, and Master of her Works; and
particularly of Christs-College and S. John's in Cambridg, both which she
founded. He also and his Son William were joint Receivers of the Lands, called
Richmond-Lands; and other Lands, called the Recovered-Lands.

Our Ralph, by reason of his Service about the Archbishop, Well known to
diverse eminent Bishops.
was well known to Bishop Heth, Bishop Thirlby, Bishop Cox, Bishop Barlow, and
Bishop Scory; Men that were much about the Archbishop, and his Friends; and
who were privy to those Volumes that the Secretary writ out for his Master. He
dwelt sometime in Chartham, not far from Canterbury; and had the Farm of that
Parsonage, and the Nomination of the Curat. And being a Man of Conscience and
Integrity, endeavored to procure here an honest and able Preacher; and so
presented to the Church one Richard Turner, Presents Turner to Chartham*
a Man of an irreprehensible Life, and well-learned in the Holy Scriptures.
Who, for his Doctrine against the Popish Superstition, and the Pope's
Supremacy, And stands by him in his Troubles for his fait^^ul Preaching.
met with great Troubles. But his Patron very stiffly stood by him, and procured
the Archbishop to favor him: And having an Interest with Sir Anthony Denny,
and Sir William Butts, Courtiers, he wrote Mr. Turner's Case at large to them,
and got them to read his Letter before the King. Who, though before he had been
by sinister Reports so incensed against him, as to command him to be whipped out
of the Country, now by this Means he conceived better Thoughts of him, and
commanded him to be cherished as a good Subject; as I have before more at large
related.

An Instance of the ABp's Kindness to this his Secretary.
Another Passage I meet with of this Man, relates to the Kindness of the ABp his
Master to him. Who, in token of his Good Will he bore him, and of his readiness
to reward his Diligence and Faithfulness in his Service, did procure him a
Lease of the Parsonage of Ospring in Kent, being an Impropriation belonging
unto S. Iohns-College in Cambridg, worth better than forty Marks by the Year de
claro, when Wheat was but a Noble the Quarter. This the Archbishop got a Grant
of from the said College for him. But when the Lease was prepared, and ready to
be sealed, one Hawkins of the Guard, by his importunate Suit, got King Henry
VIII, to obtain it of the College to be sealed for the use of him the said
Hawkins. The Archbishop then solicited the King in his Servant's behalf, and
the King promised him, and also Dr. Day the Master of the College, that he
would otherwise recompense Morice for the same, with like Value or better.
Which was never done, the King dying before he did any thing for him.

Morice his Suit to Q. Elizabeth for a Pension.
This caused Morice to prefer a Supplication unto Queen Elizabeth, setting forth
his said Case, and desiring therefore her Liberality, Aid and Succor;
especially considering, that her Royal Father had in his Will provided, that
all such who had sustained any manner of Damage or Hinderance by him, should be
satisfied for the same: Suing therefore to her Majesty for a Pension, that had
been allowed unto one Wilbore, late Prior of the Monastery of S. Augustines,
lately deceased, that it might be conferred upon him during his Life. And
indeed he seemed now in his old Age, to have need of some such Favor, his
Condition being but mean according to worldly Things, and having four Daughters
all marriageable, and not where-withal to bestow them according to their
Quality. This his Poverty he urged to the Queen, and that the granting him this
Pension, would be a good furtherance of his said Daughters Marriage.

His second Suit to the Queen, to confirm certain Lands descended to him from
his Father.
The same Person had some Lands descended to him from James his Father, out of
two Manors, the one called Royden-Manor, and the other called The Temple, both
situate and lying in the Parish of Royden. His said Father, upon some certain
Reasons and Agreements, surrendered two long Leases of both these Manors into
King Henry VIII his Hands. In consideration of which, and of long and true
Services, the said King did give, except and reserve certain Tenements, Lands,
Pastures and Meadows out of the said two Lordships, to the Use of the said
James and his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as appeared by his Letters Patents.
And James did enjoy them peaceably and quietly, without any molestation, until
his Death; which was in the second Year of Queen Mary. But of late the Leases
of the Manors being sold away unto others, they laid Claim and Titl^ unto the
said reserved Lands, upon the Information of one Thurgood, Steward of the
Courts there; pretending that there were not Words sufficient in the said
Letters Patents to justify the said Exceptions. This occasioned Ralph Morice
the Son, who enjoyed some of the Copy-holds within the said Exceptions, to sue
unto the Queen for her Majesty's Letters Patents, to ratify and confirm the
said Exceptions, that the King's Godly Disposition, Intent and Meaning, might
be in Force to James Morice's Heirs and Assigns for ever.

What Success he had in this and the former Petition, I find not; but am ready
to think the Queen gratified him in both, as well for his own Merits, as out of
that high Respect she bore to the Memory of our incomparable Prelat, whose
Servant he had so long been, and for whose sake he recommended himself and his
Suit to her. I have inserted the former of these Supplications in the Appendix,
No. CIII.
being an Original of Morice's own Handwriting, and containing some memorable
Passages in it.

This Man was, by the Archbishop's Means, He was Register to the Commissioners
in K. Edward's Visitation.
appointed Register in King Edward VI his Visitation, which was in the second
Year of his Reign; the Articles whereof were drawn up by the Archbishop, and
preserved to us in Bishop Sparrow's Collections. And being ready to depart with
the King's Commissioners, the Archbishop sent for him to Hampton Court, and
willed him to make Notes of certain Matters in the said Visitation, whereof he
gave him particular Instructions; and had large Discourse with him of the good
Success that this Course was like to have.

In the beginning of Queen Mary he suffered much: Suffered under Q. Mary.
Being glad to fly from his own House; but afterward taken by the Justices,
and committed to Custody. Out of which he escaped by breaking Prison. His House
was often searched. But he outlived those hard Times, and was alive in the
Year 1565; and then lived at Bekesborn.

It was this Morice that supplied Mr. Fox, Morice supplied Fox with many
material Notices in his Book.
the Writer of the Acts and Monuments, with those Memorials concerning the
Bishop of Winchester, which showed how small a Share he had in King Henry's
Affections, notwithstanding his boasting thereof, which he was very apt to do;
and particularly how that King came to leave him out of his last Will. All
which Sir Anthony Denny related to our Archbishop, in the hearing of this his
Secretary: Who was alive when Fox wrote this, and whom he asserts toward the
end of his eighth Book, as a Witness to the same. For it is to be noted here,
that among those Persons that assisted this Author with Matter for the
compiling his laborious Books, this Morice was one, and to whom we are to
reckon our selves beholden for diverse other material Passages of our
Church History, and especially those of his Lord and Master the Archbishop,
which are preserved in the said Books to Posterity. To Day the Printer he sent
many Papers of Monuments for the furnishing Fox's History; and many more he had
communicated; but that in Queen Mary's Reign, his House in two Years was thrice
searched; by which means he lost a great sort of Things worthy perpetual
Memory; and especially diverse Letters of King Edward to the Archbishop, and of
the Archbishop to him.

Morice a cordial Friend to Latimer. Fox.
I meet with one Morice, a ^an of Worship, that was much acquainted with, and
very well affected toward Mr. Hugh Latimer, whom the said Reverend Father
called His trusty Friend. When he was Parson of West-Kingston in Wiltshire, the
Priests at Bristol and thereabouts, had combined against him; and accusing him
in several Articles, which they had maliciously and falsely collected out of his
Sermons, got him convented before Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Stokesly Bishop of London. By them he was detained a great while, and underwent
many an Examination. While he was in these his Troubles, Morice, whom I suspect
to be either this Ralph or his Father, wrote a kind Letter to him to comfort
him. To which Latimer gives an Answer; wherein he explains at large to him the
Reasons of his Troubles, thanking him for this Kindness, as well as for others
heretofore shown him; and for which he prayed God to reward him.

CHAP. XXX. A Prospect of the Archbishop's Qualities.
Morice's Declaration concerning the ABp.
THERE is an Original Writing of this Morice's Hand, preserved in the
Benet-Library, entitled, A Declaration, etc. Which he drew out for the Use, and
by the Command of Archbishop Parker. Wherein diverse remarkable Passages of
this Archbishop, not yet mentioned, are set down: and particularly, he is
herein vindicated from one thing, which to this Day he is by some blamed for;
namely, for Alienations, and long Leases of the Revenues of the Sea, granted to
the King, and others. A great part therefore of this I shall here transcribe.

His Temperance of Nature.
He was of such temperance of Nature, or rather so mortified, that no manner of
Prosperity or Adversity could alter or change his accustomed Conditions: For
were the Storms never so terrible, or odious, or the prosperous State of the
Times never so pleasant, joyous or acceptable; to the Face of the World his
Countenance, Diet or Sleep commonly never altered or changed. So that they
which were most near and conversant about him, never or seldom perceived, by
any Sign or Token of Countenance, how the Affairs of the Prince or Realm went.
Notwithstanding privately with his secret and special Friends, he would shed
forth many bitter Tears; lamenting the Miseries and Calamities of the World.

His Carriage toward hi^ Enemies.
Again, He so behaved himself to the whole World, that in no manner of Condition
he would seem to have any Enemy; although in very ^eed he had both many great
and secret Enemies, whom he always bare with such Countenance and Benevolence,
that they could never take good opportunity to practice their Malice against
him, but to their great displeasure and hindrance in the End. And as concerning
his own regard toward Slanders and Reproach, by any Man to him imputed, or
impinged, such as entirely knew him, can testify, that very little he esteemed
or regarded the Bruit thereof; because he altogether travailed evermore from
giving of just occasion of Detraction. Whereupon grew and proceeded that
notable Quality or Virtue he had, to be beneficial unto his Enemies. So that in
that respect he would not be acknown to have any Enemy at all. For whosoever he
had been that had reported evil of him, or otherwise wrought to do him
displeasure, were the Reconciliation never so mean or simple on the behalf of
his Adversary, if he had any thing at all relented, the Matter was both
pardoned and clearly forgotten; and so voluntarily cast into the Satchel of
Oblivion behind the back Parts; That it was more clear now out of his Memory,
than it was in his Mind, before it was either commenced or committed. Insomuch,
that if any such Person should have had any Suit unto him afterward, he might
well reckon, and be as sure to obtain (if by any means he might lawfully do it)
as any other of his special Friends. So that on a Time I do remember, that Dr.
Hethe late Archbishop of York, partly misliking this his overmuch Lenity, by
him used, said unto him, My Lord, I now know how to win all things at your Hand
well enough. How so, quoth my Lord? Marry, says Dr. Hethe, I perceive, that I
must first attempt to do unto you some notable Displeasure; and then by a
little relenting, obtain of you what I can desire. Whereat my Lord bit his Lip,
as his manner was, when he was moved, and said, You say well; but yet you may
be deceived. Howbeit having some consideration so to do, I may not alter my
Mind, and accustomed Condition, as some would have me to do.

Again, One thing he commonly used, Severe in his Behavior toward offending
Protestants.
wherein many did discommend him; Which was this: He always bare a good Face
and Countenance unto the Papists, and would, both in Word and Deed, do very
much for them; pardoning their Offenses: and on the other side, somewhat
over-severe against the Protestants. Which being perceived not to be done, but
upon some Purpose, on a Time a Friend of his declared unto him, that he therein
did very much harm; encouraging thereby the Papists, and also thereby
discouraging the Protestants. Whereunto he made this Answer, and said, What will
ye have a Man do to him, that is not yet come to the knowledge of the Truth of
the Gospel, nor perchance as yet Called, and whose Vocation is to me uncertain?
Shall we perhaps in his Journey coming toward us, by Severity, and cruel
Behavior, overthrow him, and, as it were in his Voyage, stop him? I take not
this the way to allure Men to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel. And if it be
a true Rule of our Savior Christ, to do Good for Evil; then let such as are
not yet come to favor our Religion, learn to follow the Doctrine of the Gospel
by our Example, in using them friendly and charitably. On the other side, such
as have tasted of sincere Religion, and as it were taken hold of the Gospel,
and seem in Words to maintain the true Doctrine thereof* and then, by the evil
Example of their Lives, most perniciously become Stumbling Blocks unto such as
are weak, and not at all as yet entered into the Viage; what would you have me
do with them? Bear with them, and wink at their Faults; and so willingly suffer
the Gospel, by their outrageous doings, to be trodden under Feet? Using
herewith another notable Saying of our Savior out of our Memory: which says,
The Servant, knowing his Lord and Master's Pleasure and Commandment, if he
regards not the same, is, as a Man might say, of all others worthy of many
Plagues. And thus with these two Scriptures, or Doctrines of our Savior
Christ, he answered mine Eldest Brother, who was earnest with him for his
Amendment of this Quality. Mr. Isaac, yet living, is a Witness of the same.

Stout in God's or the King's Cause.
Again, If there were any Matter of Weight, (besides his own Cause, wherein
evermore with all kinds of Persons, he was ready to relent, and give place,
according to the Quality of the Matter, more than became his State) which
touched God percase, or his Prince, there was no Man more stout, or more
inexorable. So far forth, that neither fear of losing of Promotion, nor hope of
Gain, or winning of Favor, could move him to relent, or give place unto the
Truth of his Conscience. As experience thereof well appeared, as well in
defense of the true Religion against the Six Articles in the Parliament, as in
that he offered to combat with the Duke of Northumberland in K. Edward's Time;
speaking then on behalf of his Prince, for the staying of the Chauntries, until
his Highness had come unto lawful Age: and that especially for the maintenance
of his better State then. But if at his Prince's Pleasure in case of Religion,
at any time he was forced to give place, that was done with such humble
Protestation, and so knit up for the safeguard of his Faith and Conscience,
that it had been better his Good Will had never been requested, than so to
relent or give over as he did. Which most dangerously (besides sundry times
else) he especially attempted, when the Six Articles past by Parliament; and
when my L. Crumwel was in the Tower. At what time the Book of Articles of our
Religion Viz. The Erudition of a Christen Man.
was new penned. For even at that Season the whole Rabblement (which he took to
be his Friends, being Commissioners with him) forsook him, and his Opinion and
Doctrine. And so leaving him Post alone, revolted altogether on the part of
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester. As by Name, Bishop Hethe, Shaxton, Day,
and all other of the meaner sort. By whom these so named were chiefly advanced
and preferred unto Dignities. And yet this sudden Inversion notwithstanding,
God gave him such Favor with his Prince, that Book altogether past by his
Assertion, against all their Minds. More to be marvelled at, the Time
considered, than by any Reason to compass how it should come to pass. For then
would there have been laid thousands of Pounds to Hundreds in London, that he
should, before that Synod had been ended, have been shut up in the Tower,
beside his Friend the Lord Crumwel. Howbeit the King's Majesty, The King sides
with Cranmer against all the Bishops.
having an assured and approved affiance of his both deep Knowledge in Religion,
and Fidelity both to God and Him, suspected in that time other Men in their
Judgments, not to walk uprightly, nor sincerely; For that some of them swerved
from their former Opinions in Doctrine: And having great experience of the
constancy of the Lord Cranmer, it drove him all along to join with the said
Lord Cranmer, in the confirmation of his Opinion and Doctrine against all the
rest to their great Admiration.

For at all Times, His great Ability in answering the King's Doubts.
when the King's Majesty would be resolved in any Doubt or Question, he would
but send word to my Lord over Night; and by the next Day the King would have in
writing brief Notes of the Doctors Minds, as well Divines as Lawyers, both Old
and New; with a Conclusion of his own Mind. Which he could never get in such a
readiness of any; no, not of all his Chaplains and Clergy about him, in so
short a Time. For being thoroughly seen in all kinds of Expositors, he could
incontinently lay open thirty, forty, sixty or more, some whiles, of Authors.
And so reducing the Notes of them altogether, would advertise the King more in
one Day, than all his Learned Men could do in a Month.

And it was no mervail; for it was well known, that commonly, Cranmer studied
three parts of the Day.
if he had not Business of the Prince's, or special urgent Causes before him,
he spent three parts of the Day in Study as effectually, as he had done at
Cambridg. And therefore it was, that the King said on a time to the Bishop of
Winchester, the King and my said Lord of Winchester defending together, that
the Canons of the Apostles were of as good Authority, as the four Evangelists,
contrary to my Lord Cranmer's Assertion; My Lord of Canterbury, said the King,
is too old a Truant for us twain.

Again, His Estimation was such with his Prince, Would speak to the King when
none else durst.
that in Matters of great Importance, wherein no Creature durst once move the
King for fear of Displeasure, or moving the King's Patience, or otherwise for
troubling his Mind, then was my Lord Cranmer most violently, by the whole
Council, obtruded and thrust out to undertake that Danger and Peril in Hand. As
beside many other times, I remember twice he served the Council's Expectation*
The first time was, when he stayed the King's determinate Mind and Sentence; in
that he fully purposed to send the Lady Mary his Daughter, unto the Tower, and
there to suffer as a Subject: Lady Mary.
because She would not obey the Laws of the Realm, in refusing the Bishop of
Rome's Authority and Religion. Whose stay in that behalf the King then said
unto the Lord Cranmer, would be to his utter Confusion at the length. The other
dangerous Attempt was, in the disclosing the unlawful Behavior of Queen
Katharine Howard toward the King, Q. Katharine Howard.
in keeping unlawful Company with Durrant, her Servant. For the King's
Affection was so mervailously set upon that Gentlewoman, as it was never known
that he had the like to any Woman. So that no Man durst take in Hand to open to
him that Wound, being in great perplexity, how he would take it. And then the
Council had no other Refuge, but unto my Lord Cranmer. Who with overmuch
Importunity gave the Charge: which was done with such Circumspection, that the
King gave over his Affections unto Reason, and wrought mervellous colourably
for the Trial of the same.

His Hospitality
Now as concerning the Manner and Order of his Hospitality and Housekeeping. As
he was a Man abandoned from all kind of Avarice, so was he content to maintain
Hospitality, both liberally and honorably, and yet not surmounting the Limits
of his Revenues: Having more respect and foresight unto the Iniquity of the
Times, being inclined to pull and spoil from the Clergy, than to his own
private Commodity. For else, if he had not so done, he was right sure that his
Successors should have had as much Revenues left unto them, as were left unto
the late Abbeys: Especially considering, that the Lands and Revenues of the
said Abbeys, being now utterly consumed and spread abroad; and for that there
remained no more Exercise to set on work, or no Officers, but Surveyors,
Auditors and Receivers; it was high time to show an Example of liberal
Hospitality. For although these said Workmen, only brought up and practiced in
subverting of Monastical Possessions, had brought that kind of Hospitality unto
utter Confusion, yet ceased they not to undermine the Prince by diverse
Persuasions, for him also to overthrow the honorable State of the Clergy.

Falsely accused of ill Housekeeping.
And because they would lay a sure Foundation to build their Purpose upon, they
found the Means to put into the King's Head, That the Archbishop of Canterbury
kept no Hospitality, or House correspondent unto his Revenues and Dignity, but
sold his Woods, and by great Incomes and Fines made Money, to purchase Lands
for his Wife and Children. And to the intent that the King should with the more
facility believe this Information, Sir Thomas Seymor, the Duke of Somerset's
Brother, being one of the Privy-Chamber, was procured to take this Matter in
hand. And before he informed the King thereof, he blasted it abroad in the
Court. Insomuch that the Gentlemen and he fell out for the same: They declare,
That his Report was manifestly false, as well for the keeping of his House, as
for the purchasing Lands for his Wife and Children. This notwithstanding, Mr.
Seymor went through with his Information, and declared unto the King as is
before declared. The King hearing this Tale with the Sequel, (that was, That it
was meet for the Bishops not to be troubled, ne vexed with Temporal Affairs, in
ruling their Honors, Lordships and Manors; but rather, they having an honest
Pension of Money, yearly allowed unto them for their Hospitality, should
surrender unto the King's Majesty all their Royalties and Temporalties) said, I
do marvel that it is said, my Lord of Canterbury should keep no good
Hospitality; for I have heard the contrary. And so with a few more
Commendations of my Lord, as one that little regarded the Suit; but yet, as it
appeared afterward, something smelling what they went about, left off any
further to talk of that Matter, and converted his Communication to another
Purpose.

Notwithstanding, within a Month after, whether it was of Chance, or of
Purpose, it is unknown; the King going to Dinner, called Mr. Seymour unto him,
and said, Go ye straightways unto Lambeth, and bid my Lord of Canterbury come
and speak with me at two of the Clock at Afternoon. Incontinently Mr. Seymor
came to Lambeth, and being brought into the Hall by the Porter, it chanced the
Hall was set to Dinner. And when he was at the Skreen, and perceived the Hall
furnished with three principal Messes, beside the rest of the Tables thoroughly
set, having a guilty Conscience of his untrue Report made to the King, reco^led
back, and would have gone in to my Lord by the Chappel-way. Mr. Nevyl, being
Steward, perceiving that, rose up, and went after him, and declared unto him,
that he could not go that way; and so brought him back unto my Lord through the
Hall. And when he came to my Lord, and had done his Message, my Lord caused him
to sit down and dine with him. But making a short Dinner, because he would
bring the King word again of his Message, he departed and came to the King,
before he was risen from the Table. When he came to the King's Presence, said
the King, Will my Lord of Canterbury come to Us? He will wait on your Majesty,
said Mr. Seymor, at two of the Clock. Then said the King, had my Lord dined
before you came? No forsooth, said Mr. Seymor, for I found him at Dinner. Well,
said the King, What Cheer made he you? With these words Mr. Seymor kneeled
down, and besought the King's Majesty of Pardon. What is the matter? said the
King. I do remember, said Mr. Seymor, that I told your Highness, that my Lord
of Canterbury kept no Hospitality correspondent unto his Dignity: and now I
perceive that I did abuse your Highness with an Untruth. For besides your
Grace's House, I think he be not in the Realm, of none Estate or Degree, that
has such a Hall furnished, or that fares more honorably at his own Table.
Ah, said the King, have you spied your own Fault now? I assure your Highness,
said Mr. Seymor, it is not so much my Fault as other Men's; who seemed to be
honest Men, that informed me hereof. But I shall henceforth the worse trust
them while they live. Then said the King, I knew your Purpose well enough, you
have had among you the Commodities of the Abbeys, which you have consumed: Some
with superfluous Apparel, some at Dice and Cards, and other ungracious Rule.
And now you would have the Bishops Lands and Revenues to abuse likewise. If my
Lord of Canterbury keep such a Hall, as you say, being neither Term nor
Parliament, he is merely well visited at those Times I warrant you. And if the
other Bishops kept the like for their Degree, they had not need to have any
thing taken from them, but rather to be added and helped. And therefore set
your Hearts at rest, there shall no such Alteration be made while I live, said
the King. So that in very deed, where some had penned certain Books for the
altering that State in the next Parliament, they durst never bring them forth
to be read. Whereupon it also came to pass, that when the King understood,
that, contrary unto the Report, my Lord of Canterbury had purchased no Lands,
his Highness was content, upon the only Motion of Dr. Butts, without my Lord
Cranmer's Knowledge, That he should have the Abbey in Nottinghamshire; which his
Wife now enjoys.

Thus much I have declared concerning Mr. Seymor's Practice, to the intent Men
may understand that my Lord Cranmer's Hospitality was a mean to stay the Estate
of the Clergy in their Possessions.

CHAP. XXXI. Archbishop Cranmer preserved the Revenues of his See.
The preserving the Bishops Revenues owing to the ABp.
AND here I must answer for my Lord Cranmer against certain Objections, which
are in diverse Men's Heads, That by his Means all the Preferments, Offices and
Farms, are so given and let out, that his Successors have nothing to give or
bestow upon their Friends and Servants; nor that such Hospitality can be kept
by reason of his Fault, in letting go such things as should have maintained
Provisions of Household. But to answer this in a few words, before I descend to
any particular Declaration. It is most true, that if he had not well behaved
himself toward his Prince, and the World, his Successors should not been
cumbred with any piece of Temporal Revenues; either Lands, Woods, or other
Revenues. And I pray God they may maintain, in this mild and quiet Time, that
which he in a most dangerous World did uphold, and left to his Successors. The
ABp vindicated about his Leases.
Yet for better declaration, in answering to those Objections, it is to be
considered, that when he entered upon his Dignity, every Man about the King made
means to get some Reversion of Farms, or of other Office of him. In so much,
that the King himself made means to him for one or two things, before he was
Consecrated: as for the Farm of Wingham-Barton. Which was granted unto Sir
Edward Bainton Knight. for fourscore and nineteen Years. When my Lord perceived,
that in such Suits as he granted to the King and Queen, Men would needs have an
hundred Years save one, he wrote to the Chapter of Christ-Church, and willed
them in any Condition, not to confirm any more of his Grants of Leases, which
were above one and twenty Years. By this means much Suit was stopped. So that
in very deed he gave out his Leases but for one and twenty Years. Which would
not satisfy the greedy Appetites of some Men: And therefore they found a
Provision for it. For when my Lord had let out certain goodly Farms, at
Pinner, Heyes, Harrow on the Hill, Mortlake, etc. to the number of ten or
twelve Farms, for one and twenty Years, taking no manner of Fine for them; all
these Farms by and by were put into an Exchange for the King. And the King had
them not in Possession six Days, but they were my Lord North's and other Men's.
And they were not past one Year in their Possessions, but that the Reversion of
every of them was sold for more Years: some for an hundred Pounds, and some for
more, and some for less, making Sweepstakes of altogethers. And so was my Lord
used in all things almost that he did let out for one and twenty Years.

By means whereof Justice Hales, By long Leases he saved the Revenues.
and other of his Counsel learned in the Laws, advised him to let out his
Farms for many Years, which might be a mean, that they should not be so much
desired in Exchanges as they were. For those Farms, which came to my Lord,
came with Years enough upon their Backs. And so upon this Conclusion my Lord
was fain to alter his Purpose in letting of his Farms. Whereupon he did let S.
Gregory's in Canterbury to Mr. Nevyl, the Priory of Dover, Chislet-Park, and
Curleswood-Park, with others, for so many Years as he did, on purpose to stay
them, or else he had gone without them one time or other. And as I heard say,
since your Grace was Elect, Curleswood-Park was in Exchange, and the Rent
thereof paid for one half Year unto the Queen's Use. But so soon as they
understood there were so many Years to come, it was reversed to the
Archbishopric again. So that hereby partly may be perceived in what State my
Lord Cranmer stood with his Lands.

And as touching the diminishing of his Rents, Justified from diminishing the
Rents of the Sea.
Houses and other Commodities, for the Provision of his Hospitality; if all
things be well pondered, he had left the same in better State than he found it.
For as touching his Exchanges Men ought to consider with whom he had to do:
especially with such a Prince, as would not be bridled, nor be gainsaid in any
of his Requests, unless Men would danger altogethers. I was by, Otford and Knol.
when Otford and Knol were given him. My Lord, minded to have retained Knol
unto himself, said, That it was too small an House for his Majesty. Mary, said
the King, I had rather have it, than this House, meaning Otford; for it
stands on a better Soil. This House stands low, and is Rheumatick, like
unto Croiden, where I could never be without Sickness. And as for Knol, it
stands on a sound, perfect, wholesome Ground. And if I should make abode
here, as I do surely mind to do now and then, I will live at Knol, and most of
my House shall live at Otford. And so by this means both those Houses were
delivered up into the King's Hands. And as for Otford, it is a notable great
and ample House: Whose Reparations yearly cost my Lord more than Men would
think. And so likewise did Maidstone, which had no manner of Commodity to
belong unto it. And I am sure that after certain Exchanges past between the
King and him, there were an hundred Marks a Year, or thereabouts, allowed unto
him in his last Exchanges, for Recompense of Parks and Chases. And yet those
Parks and Chases, beside the Provision of his Venison, stood him yearly in much
more, by the reason of the Patents and Fees belonging unto them, than he by any
means else got by them.

For as for Curleswood, Curleswood*
it stood him in twenty Nobles a Year Fee. And yet there was no Gain in it, but
only Conies: which the Keeper had also in his Patent. So that the Archbishop
by suppressing of that, and raising that small Rent it pays, may spend
thereby seven Pounds a Year more than it was accustomed to pay toward the
Archbishopric.

Chislet-Park.
And touching Chislet-Park, it came to my Lord in Exchange for eight Pounds a
Year. And the Farmer pays ten Pounds. So that thereby is gained forty
Shillings a Year. Wherefore it cannot be indifferently gathered, that my Lord,
in preferring his Friends unto these things, has any whit hindered the Revenues
of the Bishopric.

Pasture and Meddow.
And as touching Pasture and Meddow for the Provision of his House, both at
Croyden, and about Canterbury, Ford and Chislet, there is thrice so much
Meddow, Pasture, and Mersh as was left unto him.

Woods.
And as for the Sale of his Woods, like as he was driven to exchange them, and
sell them for to maintain his Hospitality, especially having almost twenty
Years together Learned Men continually sitting with him in Commission; for the
trying out, and setting forth of the Religion received, and for the discussing
of other Matters in Controversy. Some of them daily in Diet with him, and some
evermore living in his House. So provided he again like Woods, more commodious
for his Houses; As the Blene-Woods, belonging to S. Austins; and Pyne-Wood, and
others, which be known well enough.

Corn.
And as touching Provision for Corn out of Chislet-Court, and in other Places,
it is incredible what a Business he had and ado with Sir Christopher Hales,
for that Farm and Corn; who challenged it of the King by Promise; and so would
have defeated my Lord thereof, had not the King very benignely stood on his
Side. And it is no small Revenue to have yearly so much Corn, both Wheat, Malt
and Oats, at so mean a Price.

And therefore let Men leave off that Report of him, that he was not beneficial
to his Successors. Other Bishops, some of them lost whole Manors and Lordships,
without any Exchange at all. Thus much my Conscience has compelled me to say,
in defense of my Lord and Master his good Name: Whom I knew to take as much
Care for his Successors in that Bishopric, as ever did Archbishop, or shall.
And would have as much advanced the same, if the Iniquity of the World would
have permitted him.

The best Master toward his Servants.
Now finally, concerning his Behavior toward his Family: I think there was
never such a Master among Men, both feared and entirely beloved. For as he was
a Man of most gentle Nature, void of all crabbid and churlish Conditions, so he
could abide no such Quality in any of his Servants. But if any such
Outragiousness were in any of his Men or Family, the correction of those
Enormities he always left to the ordering of his Officers: who weekly kept a
Counting House. And if any thing universally were to be reformed or talked of;
on that Day, which commonly was Friday, the same was put to Admonition. And if
it were a Fault of any particular Man, he was called forth before the Company:
To whom warning was given, That if he so used himself after three Monitions, he
should lose his Service.

There was an Infamy of him, that he should have been an Hostler. Which the
ignorant Popish Priests, for very M^^ice had published against him. Saying,
That he had no manner of L^^rning at all, more than Hostlers are wont to have.
An Infamy that he was an Hostler.
And this Rumor sprang of that, that when he had married his first Wife, being
Reader then of Buckingham-College, he did put his Wife to Board in an Inn at
Cambridg; and he resorting thither unto her in the Inn, some ignorant Priests
named him to be the Hostler, and his Wife the Tapster. This Bruit then began,
but it much more was quickened when he was Archbishop than before. Insomuch
that a Priest far North, about Scarborough, sitting among his Neighbors at the
Alehouse, and talking of Archbishop Cranmer, diverse Men there commending him:
What, said the Priest, make ye so much of him? He was but an Hostler, and has
as much Learning as the Goslings of the Green that go yonder. Upon which words,
the honest Men of the Parish which heard him, gave Information to my Lord
Crumwel of those his slanderous Words. The Priest was sent for before the
Council, and cast into the Fleet; my Lord Cranmer not being that Day among the
Council, nor hearing no manner of word of the Priest^s Accusation. It chanced
the Priest to lie in the Fleet eight or nine Weeks, and nothing said unto him.
He then made Suit by one, named Chersey, (a Grocer dwelling within Ludgate, now
yet alive, and Uncle, as I suppose, to the Priest) unto my Lord Cranmer for his
Deliverance. This Chersey brought the Copy of the Priest's Accusation from my
Lord Crumwel's House. Whereby plainly appeared, there was nothing laid unto the
Priest but those Words against my L. Cranmer. And therefore he besought him to
help him out of Prison; for it had put him to great Charges living there, and
he had a Benefice which was unserved in his Absence; and said, That he was very
sorry he had so unhonestly abused himself toward his Grace. Whereupon my Lord
Cranmer sent to the Fleet for the Priest. When he came before my Lord, said my
Lord Cranmer to him, It is told me, that you be Prisoner in the Fleet, for
calling me an Hostler, and reporting that I have no more Learning than a
Gosling. Did you ever see me before this Day? No, forsooth, quoth the Priest.
What meant you then to call me an Hostler; and so to deface me among your
Neighbors? The Priest made his Excuse, and said, that he was overseen with
Drink. Well, said my Lord's Grace, now ye be come, you may oppose me to know
what Learning I have. Begin in Grammar, if you will, or else in Philosophy, or
other Sciences, or Divinity. I beseech your Grace pardon me, said the Priest, I
have no manner of Learning in the Latin Tongue, but altogether in English. Well
then, said my Lord, if you will not oppose me, I will oppose you. Are you not
wont to read the Bible, quoth my Lord? Yes, that we do daily, said the Priest.
I pray you tell me, quoth my Lord, then, who was David's Father? The Priest
stood still, and said, I cannot surely tell your Lordship. Then said my Lord
again, if you cannot tell me that, yet declare unto me who was Solomon's
Father? Surely, quoth the Priest, I am nothing at all seen in those
Genealogies. Then I perceive, quoth my Lord, however you have reported of me,
that I had no Learning, I can now bear you Witness, that you have none at all.
There are such a sort of you in this Realm, that know nothing, nor will know
nothing, but sit upon your Ale-bench, and slander all Honest and Learned Men.
If you had but common Reason in your Heads, you that have named me an Hostler;
you might well know, that the King having in hand one of the hardest Questions
that was moved out of the Scripture this many Years, would not send an Hostler
unto the Bishop of Rome, and the Emperor's Council, and other Princes, to
answer and dispute in that so hard a Question; even among the whole College of
Cardinals, and the Rout of Rome. By all likelihood the King lacked much the
help of Learned Men, that was thus driven to send an Hostler on such a Voyage:
Or else the King has many idle Priests, without Wit or Reason, that can so
judge of the Prince and his Council, and of the weighty Matters of the Realm.
God amend you, said he, and get ye Home to your Cure, and (...) henceforth
learn to be an honest Man, or at least a reasona (...).

(...) lamenting his Folly, went his way into his Country; and my Lord Cranmer
discharged him out of the Fleet, because there was no Matter against him, but
that which only concerned my Lord. My Lord Crumwel within four Days after came
to my Lord Cranmer, and swear a great Oath, That the Popish Knaves should pick
out his Eyes, and cut his Throat, before he would any more rebuke them for
slandering him. I had thought that the Knave Priest, which you have discharged
and sent Home, should have recanted at Pauls-Cross on Sunday next. Yea, mary,
quoth my Lord Cranmer, you would have all the World know by that mean, that I
was an Hostler indeed. What manner of Blockheads would so think, quoth my Lord
Crumwel? Too many Papists, quoth my Lord Cranmer. Howbeit, quoth he, you have
caused the poor Priest to spend all that he has in Prison; and would you now
put him to open Shame too? He is not the first, not by five-hundred of them,
that has called me so; and therefore I will not now begin to use Extremity
against this Priest: I perceive he is sorry for it. Well, quoth my Lord
Crumwel, if you not care for it, no more do I: But I warrant you one Day, if
they may, they will make you and me both as vile as Hostlers. This I repeat to
declare his Lenity, and Promptness to remit notable Offenses; howbeit it should
have been placed before if I had remembered it.

Thus I have hastily penned such Things as came to my Memory, since Saturday
last: Beseeching your Grace to take it in good part, being certainly assured,
that I have declared nothing of mine Head, as concerning the very Matters.

CHAP. XXXII. Some Observations upon Archbishop Cranmer.
BEsides these Observations, made to my Hand by another, Observations upon the
ABp.
of this great Archbishop, I shall gather some further Observations of his
Endowments and Qualities, whether Christian or Moral. Whereby we shall have
occasion offered us, of gathering up a few more Memorials of him.

He was a most profound Learned Man in Divinity, His Learning very profound.
as also in the Civil and Canon Laws. As appeared by those many voluminous
Writings and Common-places, by him devised or collected out of all the Fathers,
and Church-Writers: which Peter Martyr reported he himself saw; and were indeed
communicated to him by the Archbishop, while he harbored him at Lambeth. And
there was no Book, either of the Ancient or Modern Writers, especially upon the
Point of the Eucharist, which he had not noted with his own Hand in the most
remarkable Places. No Councils, Canons, Decrees of Popes, which he had not read
and well considered. And from this his indefatigable Reading, and exact
Knowledge of Authors, he ventured publicly, before the Pope's Delegate, and
Queen Mary's Commissioners to make this Challenge, That if it could be proved
by any Doctor above a thousand Years after Christ, that Christ's Body is in the
Sacrament of the Altar really, he would give over.

So that his Library was the Storehouse of Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages.
And which was open for the use of Learned Men. His Library.
Here old Latimer spent many an Hour; and found some Books so remarkable, that
once he thought fit to mention one in a Sermon before the King. And when Ascham
of Cambridg, a great Student of Politer Learning, and of Greek Authors, wanted
Gregory Nyssen in Greek, (not the Latin Translation of him) and which it seems
the University could not afford, he earnestly entreated Poynet his Grace's
Chaplain, to borrow it in his Name, and for his use, for some Months of the
Archbishop. For in those Times it was rare to meet with those Greek Fathers in
their own Language, and not spoiled by some ill Latin Translation. Another of
his Books I will mention, because it is now in the possession of a Reverend
Friend of mine near Canterbury: in which Book the Archbishop's Name is yet to
be seen, written thus with his own Hand, Thomas Cantuariensis; and a remarkable
Book it is, which we may conclude, the Archbishop often perused, viz.
Epistolae and Historiae Joannis Hus. Printed at Wittemberg, 1537.

And this Learning happening in a Mind possessed with Piety, An excellent
Bishop.
made him the more deeply sensible of the greatness of the Charge, that lay
upon him. And as he well knew under what Needs the Church labored, so he was
very solicitous, that nothing might be wanting on his part: showing himself a
most conscientious Bishop, and tender Pastor of Christ's Flock. He was not
guided in his Episcopal Function by vain Glory, or Affectation of popular
Applause, or worldly Ambition, or Covetousness, but only by the Holy and Pious
Ends, of discharging his Duty, and promoting the Honor of Christ, and the
Knowledge of his Gospel, and the Good of his People: as he took God to witness
in the Preface of his Book of the Sacrament. A Paragraph whereof I think not
unworthy to be here inserted, whereby it may appear of what a truly Apostolical
Spirit our Archbishop was. When I see, said he, Christ's Vinyard overgrown
with Thorns, Brambles and Weeds, I know that everlasting Woe appertains to
me, if I hold my Peace, and put not to my Hand and Tongue, to labor in purging
his Vinyard. God I take to witness, who sees the Hearts of all Men thoroughly
unto the bottom, that I take this Labor for none other Consideration, but for
the Glory of his Name, and the Discharge of my Duty, and the Zeal I have toward
the Flock of Christ. I know in what Office God has placed me, and to what
Purpose. That is to say, to set forth his Word truly unto his People, to the
uttermost of my Power, without respect of Persons, or regard of Things in the
World, but of him alone. I know what Account I shall make to him hereof at the
last Day, when every Man shall answer for his Vocation, and receive for the
fame, Good or Evil, according as he has done. I know how Antichrist has
obscured the Glory of God, and the true Knowledge of his Word, overcasting the
same with Mists and Clouds of Error and Ignorance, through false Glosses and
Interpretations. It pitieth me to see the simple and hungry Flock of Christ,
led into corrupt Pastures, to be carried blindfold they know not whither, and
to be fed with Poison, instead of wholesome Meats. And moved by the Duty, Office
and Place, whereunto it has pleased God to call me, I give warning in his Name
unto all that profess Christ, that they flee far from Babylon, if they will
save their Souls, and to beware of that great Harlot, that is to say, the
pestiferous See of Rome, that she make you not drunk with her pleasant Wine,
etc.

His Care of his own Diocese.
And as he had this Care of the whole Church of this Land, as the high Patriarch
thereof, so he particularly had his Eye upon his own Diocese. He took Care,
even in King Henry's ticklish Reign, to place such Ministers in Kent, as were
Learned, and dared to open their Mouths to preach Gospel-Doctrin, and to
convince the People of the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, and of the
Idolatry and Superstitions, wherein they had been so long nursled up. And for
the preventing whereof, for Time to come, he ordered his Archdeacon, and other
his Officers, to take down Images out of Churches, and deface them. Which
things created him much hatred among the Popish Clergy, whose Gain depended so
much therein. He had a peculiar regard of the greater Towns of his Diocese,
that such Places might be furnished with able Men, where the Inhabitants were
numerous, and the Salaries generally small. Whereby he saw it came to pass,
that where there was most need of Learned Men, there the most Ignorant were
placed. Therefore he thought this worthy his redressing. I meet with this
Memorandum in one of his Note-books: In the Benet-Library*
These Towns following are especially to be remembered: that in them there be
placed Learned Men, with sufficient Stipends.

Sandwich, Dover, Folkston, Ashford, Tenderden, Crambroke, Faversham, Hearn,
Whitstable, Marden, Maydston, Wye and Wingham.
In these great Towns, as well as Canterbury, At the great Towns he preached
often.
he often preached himself. And for his Sermons at Sandwich, he was once
complained of openly in the Parliament House, to have brought him under the
Lash of the Statute of the Six Articles. And within seven or eight Years, after
his first entrance into the Sea, he had placed such store of good Preachers
about Kent, that at another time, a long List of Articles were drawn up against
them, and given in to the Justices of the County at a Quarter Sessions of the
Peace; and they by a Combination preferred the Complaint to the King and
Council.

His high Estate puffed him not up, Affected not his high Styles.
nor made him forget the great Work of his Calling; which he very earnestly
desired to prosecute above all things in the World. Nor did he care at all for
the high Titles that were attributed to him, as he was Archbishop of
Canterbury, as may appear by this Passage. Upon occasion of a Question arising
concerning his Style of Primate of all England, for bearing which, in his
Summons for a Provincial Visitation, the Bishop of Winchester out of Malice,
had complained to King Henry against him, as though it were an Encroachment
upon the King's Supremacy; he protested to Crumwel, then Secretary, (who had
sent him word of it) That as God should be merciful to him in the Day of
Judgment, he set not more by any Title or Style, than he did by the paring of
an Apple, further than it should be to the setting forth God's Word and Will.
His Expression was, That they were the Successors of Diotrephes, that affected
glorious Titles, Styles and Pomps. He professed, He could have been willing
that Bishops should lay aside their lofty Styles, and only write themselves by
the Style of their Offices; The Apostles of Jesus Christ. And wished heartily,
that the Christian Conversation of the People, were the Letters and Seals of
their Offices, (as the Corinthians were to St. Paul, who told them, that They
were his Letters, and the Signs of his Apostleship) and not Paper, Parchment,
Lead or Wax.

Great indeed and painful was his Diligence in promoting God's Truth, and
reforming this Church. His diligence in reforming Religion.
Insomuch that he raised up against himself the Malice and Hatred of very many
thereby. These Memorials, before related, do abundantly evince the same. The
Words of Thomas Becon, in an Epistle Dedicatory, deserve here to be
transcribed. In plucking up the Enemies Tares, Before his Treatise of Fasting.
and in purging the Lord's Field, that nothing may grow therein but pure Wheat,
your most godly and unrestful Pains, most Reverend Father, are well known in
this Church of England, and thankfully accepted of all faithful Christen
Hearts. Insomuch that very many do daily render unto God most humble and hearty
Thanks for the singular and great Benefits which they have received of him,
through your virtuous Travel, in attaining the true Knowledge of Justification,
and of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, [those two things especially
he labored to retrieve and promote a true Knowledge of] and such other Holy
Mysteries of our Profession. And albeit the Devil roar, the World rage, and the
Hypocrites swell, at these your most Christian Labors, which you willingly
take for the Glory of God, and the Edifying of his Congregation, yet as you
have godly begun, so without ceasing continue unto the end. And so he did, to
the effusion of his Blood not many Years after.

Puts K. Henry upon a Purpose of reforming many things.
For he was very sensible of the gross Abuses and Corruptions into which the
Christian Church had sunk: Which made him labor much to get it purged and
restored to its Primitive Constitution and Beauty. And this he ceased not to
make King Henry sensible of, putting him upon the Reformation of the English
Church, as he could find Occasion, and Convenience serve him to move him
thereunto. Which found at last that good effect upon the King, that toward the
latter Years of his Reign he was fully purposed to proceed to a regulating of
many more things than he had done. But the subtilty of Gardener Bp of Winton,
As long as Q. Ann, T. Crumwel, Bp Cranmer, Mr. Denny, Dr. Butts, with
suchlike, were about him, and could prevail with him, What Organ of Christ's
Glory did more good in the Church than he? As is apparent by such Monuments,
Instruments and Acts, set forth by him; in setting up the Bible in the Church;
in exploding the Pope with his vile Pardons; in removing diverse superstitious
Ceremonies; in bringing into order the inordinate Orders of Friars and Sects;
in putting Chantrey Pri^sts to their Pensions; in permitting white Meats in
Lent; in ^estroying Pilgrimage-Worship; in abbrogating idle and superstitious
Holy Days; both by Acts Public, and by private Letters to Boner. Acts and
Monum. p. 1147. a. Edit. 1610.
and his own Death, prevented his good Designs. While the aforesaid Bishop was
Ambassador Abroad, employed about the League between the Emperor and the
English and French Kings, our Archbishop took the opportunity of his Absence,
to urge the King much to a Reformation; and the King was willing to enter into
serious Conference with him about it. And at last he prevailed with the King to
resolve to have the Roods in every Church pulled down, and the accustomed
Ringing on Alhallow-Night suppressed, and some other vain Ceremonies. And it
proceeded so far, that upon the Archbishop's going into Kent, to visit his
Diocese, the King ordered him to cause two Letters to be drawn up, prepared for
him to sign: The one to be directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
other to the Archbishop of York. Who were therein to be commanded to issue
forth their Precepts to all the Bishops in their respective Provinces, to see
those Enormities redressed without delay. Which our Archbishop accordingly
appointed his Secretary to do. And the Letters so drawn up, were sent by the
Archbishop up to Court. But the King, upon some Reasons of State, suggested to
him in a Letter from Gardener, his Ambassador beyond Sea, being by some made
privy to these Transactions, suspended the signing of them.

The King again purposes a Reformation.
And that put a stop to this Business for that time, till some time after the
King, at the Royal Banquet made for Annebault the French King's Ambassador,
leaning upon him and the Archbishop, told them both his Resolution of
proceeding to a total Reformation of Religion: signifying, that within half a
Year the Mass both in his Kingdom and in that of France, should be changed into
a Communion; and the usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome should be wholly
rooted out of both; and that both Kings intended to exhort the Emperor to do
the same in his Territories, or else they would break off the League with him.
And at that time also he willed the Archbishop to draw up a Form of this
Reformation, to be sent to the French King to consider of. This he spoke in the
Month of August, a few Months before his Death. This his Purpose he also
signified to Dr. Bruno, Ambassador here from John Frederick Duke of Saxony,
some little time after, saying, That if his Master's Quarrel with the Emperor
was only concerning Religion, he advised him to stand to it strongly, and he
would take his part. But the King's Death prevented all.

And as for this King's next Successor, King Edward, His Influence upon K.
Edward.
the Archbishop had a special Care of his Education. Whose Towardliness, and
zealous Inclination to a Reformation, was attributed to the said Archbishop,
and three other Bishops, viz. Ridley, Hoper and Latimer, by Rodulph Gualter of
Zurick. Who partly by his living sometime in England, and partly by his long
and intimate Familiarity and Correspondence with many of the best Note here,
was well acquainted with the Matters relating to this Kingdom. Of the great
Influence of one of these upon this King, viz. the Archbishop, the former
Memorials do sufficiently show.

CHAP. XXXIII. Archbishop Cranmer procures the Use of the Scriptures.
THE Archbishop was a great Scripturist: A great Scripturist.
and in those darker Times of Popery, was the chief Repairer of the Reputation
of the Holy Scriptures. Urging them still for the great Standard and Measure in
all controverted Matters, relating to Religion and the Church. By these he
disintangled King Henry VIII his great Matrimonial Cause, when all his other
Divines, who had the Pope's Power and Laws too much in their Eyes, were so
puzzled about it; Showing how no Humane Dispensation could enervate or annul
the Word of God. And in the Course he took about the Reforming of Religion, the
Holy Scripture was the only Rule he went by; casting by Schoolmen, and the
Pope's Canons and Decretals, and adhering only to the more sure Word of
Prophecy, and Divine Inspiration. And so Roger Ascham, in a Letter to Sturmius,
in the Year 1550, when they were very busy in the Reformation, writes: Ea verae
Religionis cura apud Josiam nostrum imprimis, and Cantuariensem, and universum
Concilium regium excubat, ut in nulla re aeque laboratum sit, quam ut
Religionis, tum Doctrina tum Disciplina, ex Sacrarum Literarum Font, purissime
bauriatur: and ut sentina illa Romana, qua tot humanae Sordes in Eccl^siam
Christi red^ndarunt, sunditus obstru^tur.
Tha^ ^uch was the Care of their Josiah, (meaning King Edward) the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the whole Privy Council, for true Religion, that they
labored in nothing more, than that as well the Doctrine as Discipline of
Religion, might be most purely drawn out of the Fountain of the Sacred
Scriptures; and that that Roman Sink, whence so many Humane Corruptions
abounded in the Church of Christ, might be wholly stopped up.

Procures the publishing the English Bible.
This his high Value of the Scriptures, made him at last the happy Instrument of
restoring them to the Common People, by getting them, after diverse Years
opposition, printed in the English Tongue, and set up in Churches, for any to
read that would, for their Edification and Comfort; when for some hundred Years
before those Treasures had, for the most part, been locked up and concealed
from them.

The Bishops oppose it.
But first, great was the Labor of our Archbishop, before he could get this
good Work effected, being so disliked and repugned by the Patrons of Popery.
For he had almost all the Bishops against him; as may appear by what I am going
to relate. The King being by the Archbishop brought to incline to the
publishing thereof, the Translation done by Coverdale was, by Crumwel or the
Archbishop, presented into the King's Hands; and by him committed to diverse
Bishops of that Time to peruse, whereof Stephen Gardener was one. After they
had kept it long in their Hands, and the King had been diverse Times sued unto
for the Publication thereof, at last being called for by the King himself, they
redelivered the Book. And being demanded by the King; What their Judgment was
of the Translation? they answered, That there were many Faults therein. Well,
said the King, but are there any Heresies maintained thereby? They answered,
There were no Heresies that they could find maintained in it. If there be no
Heresies, said the King, then in God's Name, let it go abroad among our People.
This Circumstance I thought fit to mention, being the Substance of what
Coverdale himself afterward at a Paul's-Cross-Se^mon spoke in his own
Vindication against some slanderous Reports that were then raised against his
Translation; declaring his faithful Purpose in doing the same: Confessing
withal, That he did then himself espy some Faults; which if he might review it
once again, as he had done twice before, he doubted not (he said) but to amend.
Defense of the EnglishTranslat. Chapter 1. p. 4. Edit. 1583.
This is related by Dr. Fulk, who was then one of Coverdale's Auditors, and
heard him speak and declare all this.

The first Edition of the Bible.
The first Edition of the Bible was finished by Grafton in the Year 1538, or
1539. That Year our Archbishop procured a Proclamation from the King, allowing
private Persons to buy Bibles, and keep them in their Houses. And about two or
three Years after they were reprinted, and backed with the King's Authority,
the former Translation having been Revised and Corrected, Antiq. Brit. in Vit.
Craum.
whether by certain learned Men of both Universities, or by some Members of the
Convocation that were then sitting, it is uncertain. But to this Translation
the Archbishop added the last Hand, mending it in diverse Places with his own
Pen, and fixing a very excellent Preface before it. In which he divided his
Discourse between two sorts of Men: The Preface to the Bible made by the ABp.
The one, such as would not read the Scripture themselves, and labored to
stifle it from others. The other, such as read the Scripture indeed, but read
it inordinately, and turned it into matter of Dispute and Contention, rather
than to direct their Lives. And thereby, while they pretended to be Furtherers
thereof, proved but Hinderers, as the others were; these being as blameless
almost as those.

The Contents ^hereof.
As to the former sort; He marvelled at them that they should take Offense at
publishing the Word of God. For it showed them to be as much guilty of Madness,
as those would be, who being in Darkness, Hunger and Cold, should obstinately
refuse Light, Food and Fire. Unto which three, God's Word is compared. But he
attributed it to the prejudice of Custom: which was so prevalent, that
supposing there were any People that never saw the Sun, such as the Cimmerii
were fancied to be; and that God should so order it, that that Glorious Light
should in process of Time break in upon them, at the first some would be
offended at it. And when Tillage was first found out, according to the Proverb,
many delighted notwithstanding to feed on Mast and Acorns, rather than to eat
Bread made of good Corn. Upon this Reason he was ready to excuse those, who,
when the Scripture first came forth, doubted and drew back: But he was of
another Opinion concerning such as still persisted in disparaging the
publishing of the Scripture, judging them not only Foolish and Froward, but
Peevish, Perverse and Indurate. And yet if the Matter were to be tried by
Custom, we might allege Custom for reading the Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue,
and prescribe more ancient Custom than for the contrary. Showing that it was
not above an hundred Years since the reading it in English was laid aside
within this Realm: and that many hundred Years before, it had been translated
and read in the Saxon Tongue, being then the Mother Tongue; and that there
remained diverse Copies of it in old Abbeys. And when that Language became old,
and out of common usage, it was translated into the newer Tongue: And of this
many Copies then still remained, and were daily found.

Then from Custom, he proceeded to consider the thing in its own Nature;
showing how available it was that the Scripture should be read of the Laity.
For which he takes a large Quotation out of S. Chrysostom, in his third Sermon
De Lazaro; Wherein that Father exhorted the People, To read by themselves at
home, between Sermon and Sermon; that what he had said before in his Sermons
upon such and such Texts, might be the more fixed in their Minds and Memories:
and that their Minds might be the more prepared to receive what he should say
in his Sermons which he was to preach to them. And that he ever had, and would
exhort them, not only to give Ear to what was said by the Preacher in the
Church, but to apply themselves to reading the Scriptures at home in their own
Houses. And a great deal more upon the same Argument.

And then as to the other sort, our Archbishop showed, How there is nothing so
good in the World, but might be abused and turned from Unhurtful and Wholesome,
to Hurtful and Noisome. As above in the Heavens the Sun, Moon and Stars, were
abused by Idolatry; and here on Earth, Fire, Water, Meat, Drink, Gold, Silver,
Iron, Steel, are things of great benefit and use, and yet we see much harm and
mischief done by each of these, as well by reason of the lack of Wisdom and
Providence in them that suffer Evil by them, as by the Malice of them that work
the Evil by them. Advising therefore all that came to read the Bible, which he
called The most precious Jewel, and most holy Relick that remained upon Earth,
to bring with them the Fear of God; and that they read it with all due
Reverence, and used their Knowledge thereof, not to the vain Glory of frivolous
Disputation, but to the Honor of God, Increase of Virtue, and Edification of
themselves and others.

And then he backed this his Counsel, with a large Passage out of Gregory
Nazianzen; which was levelled against such as only talked and babbled of the
Scripture out of Season, but were little the better for it. And lastly, he
concluded his Preface, by directing to such Qualifications as were proper for
such as came to read these Sacred Volumes. Namely, That he ought to bring with
him a Fear of Almighty God, and a firm Purpose to conform himself thereunto;
and so continue to proceed from time to time, showing himself a sober and
fruitful Hearer and Learner. This whole Preface, for the Antiquity and
Usefulness of it, and to preserve as much as we can of the Writings of this
most Reverend Man, I have transcribed and placed in the Appendix. No. CIV.


The Fronticepiece of Cranmers Edition of the Bible.
The Edition in the Year 1540, had a remarkable Frontispiece before it: Which
because it is somewhat rare, both in regard of the Antiquity and Device of it,
I will relate. In the upper ^art thereof, you see King Henry VIII sitting in
State, guarded on each hand of him with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal;
holding in his right Hand a Bible closed, which he delivered unto Archbishop
Cranmer, being on his Knee, in the Name of the rest of the Bishops; all which
stood at his right Hand, bare-headed, their Mitres lying up-the Ground, in
token of their Acknowledgment of the King's Supremacy; and this Motto issuing
out of the King's Mouth, Haec praecipe and doce. Holding also in his left Hand
another Bible, stretched toward the Lords Temporal, and delivered to one,
(whom I suppose to be intended for the Lord Crumwel) at the head of them,
standing on the left Side, and this Word coming out of the King's Mouth toward
them, Quod justum est, judicate; and this, Ita parvum audietis, ut magnum; and
this, A me constitutum est, and decretum, ut in Vniverso Imperio and Regno meo
homines revereantur and paveant Deum Viventem. Among these Nobles is the Figure
of one on his Knees, and these Words issuing out of his Mouth, Verbum tuum
Lucerna pedibus meis. Over the King's Head, is the Figure of God Almighty
sitting in the Clouds, with these Words coming out of his Mouth in a Scrole
toward the right Hand, Verbum quod egredietur de me, non revertetur ad me
vacuum, sed faciet quaecunque volui: And in another Scrole toward the Left,
with his Hand pointing to the King, Ecce servum, qui faciet omnes voluntates
meas. Underneath the Bishops there is another Figure, representing Archbishop
Cranmer, his Coat of Arms by him, with the distinction of a Crescent. He stood
with his Mitre on his Head, and dressed in his Pontificalibus, his Chaplain
behind him, and a Priest with a Tonsure, kneeling before him, in the posture of
a Candidate for Priests Orders, and having his Hand stretched out to receive
the Bible offered him by the Archbishop, and out of his Mouth this Scrole,
Pascite, qui in vobis est, gregem Christi. On the other Side, opposite to the
Archbishop, and underneath the Lords Temporal, stood another Person, whom I
conjecture to be the Lord Crumwel, with his Shield by him blank, without any
bearing; and out of his Mouth came, Diverte a malo, sequere pacem and
persequere. In the lowest part of this Fronticepiece, you have the resemblance
of a Priest, preaching out of a Pulpit before a great Auditory of Persons of
all Ranks, Qualities, Orders, Sexes, Ages; Men, Women, Children, Nobles,
Priests, Soldiers, Tradesmen, Countrymen. Out of the Mouth of the Preacher
went this Verse, Obsecro igitur primum omnium fieri obsecrationes, orationes,
postulationes, gratiarum actiones, pro omnibus hominibus, pro regibus, etc.
Implying the Benefit accruing to Princes by the Peoples Knowledge of the
Scriptures, namely, That it taught them to obey and pray for them. And out of
the Mouths of these Hearers of all sorts, issued, Vivat Rex, Vivat Rex; and out
of the Mouths of the Children, God save the King: denoting the great Joy the
People conceived for the enjoyment of God's Word, and the preaching thereof,
and their Thankfulness to the King for his Permission of the same. In the
middle stood the Title of the Bible: which was this; The Bible in English; that
is to say, The Contents of all the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, with a Prologue thereunto made by the Reverend Father in God Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury. This is the Bible appointed to the Use of the
Churches. Printed by Richard Grafton, Cum Privilegio ad imprimendum solum. An.
Dom. MDXL.

CHAP. XXXIV. Archbishop Cranmer compassionate toward Sufferers for Religion.
AS he had a great Love and Value for the eminent Professors and Patrons of the
Gospel, His Affection and Compassion toward Professors of the Gospel.
Particularly for Sir John Ch^k^ a Prisoner,
so he bare a most compassionate Spirit toward those that suffered for the
sake of it. It made a very great Impression upon him, when he heard that Sir
John Cheke had been taken up, and Indicted, soon after Queen Mary's access to
the Crown, namely, in the Month of August, which was the next Month after. And
not knowing wherefore he was Indicted, whether for his meddling in the Lady
Iane's Business, or for his Zeal in promoting Religion, he earnestly desired
Sir William Cecyl to inform him whether? If for the former, Considering (as he
said) he had been none of the chief Doers in that Matter, he hoped he should
have been one of them that should have partaken of the Queen's Favor. But if
it were for the latter, viz. his earnestness in Religion, if he suffer for
that, (said he) Blessed is he of God, that suffers for his sake, howsoever
the World judge of him. For what ought we to care for the Judgment of the World,
when God absolves us? But wishing most passionately withal, That some means
might be used for the Relief of him and the Lord Russel, And the Lord Russel.
who it seems was clapped up for the same Cause.

And indeed as our Archbishop was in the time of King Edward, A Patron to such
as preached the Gospel in K. Henry's Days.
he was the same under King Henry, that is, the common Patron, as far as he
might, or dared, of such Priests who were drawn into Trouble for professing or
preaching that Gospel. So he showed himself to Turner beforementioned: And in
the Year 1533, or 1534, I find him in a Commission for the relieving of another
that had been most straightly and rigorously handled by Stokesly then Bishop of
London, and his Chancellor: His Name was Thomas Patmore, Parson of Hadham in
Hertfordshire, a Learned and Godly Man, who had by them been condemned to
Imprisonment for Life, together with the loss of his Benefice and Goods,
because he had persuaded his Curat to marry a Wife; and being privy to his
Marriage, did nevertheless suffer him to officiate in his Church: And because
he had preached certain Doctrines at Cambridg, as laying little stress upon the
Pope's Curse, and that we are saved only by God's Mercy; and that all that are
saved, are saved by Faith; and that it is against God's Law to burn Heretics.
This poor Man, after three Years close Imprisonment in Lollards-Tower, by the
Means of his Friends, who put up frequent Petitions to the King and the Lady
Ann Bolen, was at last released, and obtained of the King a Commission to our
Archbishop, to whom were joined Audley Lord Chancellor, and Crumwel Secretary
of State, Fox.
to enquire into his Injuries and unjust handling, and to determine thereof
according to Equity and Justice.

Thus favorable he was to Religion and good Men in the two former Kings
Reigns: But when Queen Mary succeeded, he could no longer be a Sanctuary or
Succor unto them, unless it were to comfort them by Words, and to pray for
them, as was said before.

The Archbishop added, That he was for his part now utterly unable, either to
help or counsel, being in the same Condemnation that they were. But that the
only thing that he could do, he would not omit; and that was, to pray for them,
and all others then in Adversity. But he entreated Cecyl, who by this time
seemed to have gotten his Pardon, or at least to be in good assurance of it,
and so in a better Capacity to raise up Friends to those honest Men, to use
what Means possible he could for them.

His Succor of afflicted Strangers in K. Edward's Days.
This was all he could do now for the Prisoners of Christ. But while he was in
Place and Capacity of succouring such distressed Persons, as he was in King
Edward's Days, he gave them Countenance, Entertainment at his House and Table,
Preferment, Recommendation to the King and Protector. And indeed there was
great need of some such Patrons of poor Protestants, the Persecutions in Italy,
in Spain, in France, in Germany, and other Places, being ab^^t this Time
extremely hot. Which occasioned the flight of great Numbers into this Nation:
Which some of them styled Christi Asylum, A Sanctury for Christ Ad vos, ceu in
Asylum and portum tutissimum sub Sanctissimi Regis alas confluebant Germani,
Galli, Hispani, Itali, Poloni, Scoti, (...) illic Deo suo in Fidei liberate
servirent, quam ipsis patria ingrata negabat. Gualt. Praes. ante Hom. in Prior.
D. Paul. ^p. ad Cor.
. In the Year 1549, the Persecution in France grew very warm: Which was partly
occasioned upon the Inauguration of King Henry II, and his Entrance into Paris
for that Purpose. For the burning of Martyrs in several Streets of the City,
where and when the King was to pass by, made a barbarous part of the Solemnity.
In this Year many French Protestants, who had been Imprisoned for Religion in
their own Country, were either banished, or secretly made their escape into
this Kingdom. These applied to some French Ministers, entertained, as it seems,
in the Archbishop's Family, with Bucer, Peter Martyr, and others. Which
Ministers delivered the Condition of these poor Men to the Archbishop. And
having a Petition to present to the Lord Protector, declaring their miserable
State, and requiring Relief, he appointed the French Ministers to apply
themselves to Cecyl, then Master of Requests to the Lord Protector: and that he
might be the more ready to recommend and forward the Petition, to render it the
more effectual, he advised Bucer, Martyr, Alexander, and Fagius, to write their
Letters jointly unto the said Cecyl, for the French Ministers to carry along
with them as their Letter of Credence. For the Archbishop well knew that Cecyl
had a great Esteem for those Learned Men, and that their Letters would go a
great way with him. Such was the particular Care and Diligence our Prelat
piously used for Relief of these poor French Exiles. The Copy of this Letter I
have thought well worthy to be put in the Appendix. No. CV.


Indeed it was noted at this Time, as a Quality of the Nation, England
harborous of Strangers. Anglos (...) esse non nego, and peregrinorum habiti
sunt admiratores. Humfrid. de Nobilit.
That it was (...), Addicted to show Favor to Strangers; nay, to admire them.
And surely it was not without the Providence of God, that when in these
difficult Times, so many Honest, Pious, Learned Men, were forced from their own
Countries, Friends and Estates, they found such hospitable Entertainment here.
Care was taken for their sufficient Livelyhoods; and for those of them that
were toward Learning, Places were assigned them in the Colleges of the
Universities, and yearly Stipends settled on them. Of those that were most
forward and exemplary in these Christian Offices, Dr. Laurence Humfrey, (one
who lived in those Times, and was well acquainted with these Matters) names
King Edward in the first place. Who, as he asserts of his own knowledge, In lib.
de Nobilitat. p. 253.
was extraordinarily bountiful to them both in London, and in the Universities.
Among the Noblemen, he mentions Henry Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Suffolk: And
among the Bishops, Thomas Cranmer the Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom he
bestowed this Character, That he was worthy to succeed William Warham in his
See, whom he so well imitated, both in courteous Behavior and Hospitality.

And as he was in King Edward's Days of such an hospitable Disposition toward
Strangers, The ABp's Favor to Foreigners.
so he was noted for it in the Reign of his Father King Henry, being wont then
to show himself very kind and humane to such as traveled into these Parts for
Learning, as well as for Shelter. Gualter, the great Divine of Zurick, being
but a young Man, came into England about the Year 1537; and was so affected
with the Civilities he received here, that he let it stand upon Record, in the
Preface to his Homilies upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, how humanely
he was received at Oxford, not only by the Students, but by the Public
Professors, and by diverse at Court. But among them he particularly mentioned,
How Archbishop Cranmer, whom he styled, The immortal Glory of England,
received him, though a young Man then, and a Stranger, and had no experience of
things, nor any Mark or Excellency to recommend him.

Unjustly charged with Covetousness.
And as he was Compassionate and Hospitable, so he was of a free and liberal
Disposition, and as became a Christian Bishop, and an English Peer, kept great
Hospitality. Yet however he could not escape the Imputation of Niggardise and
Closeness. He had been once accused of it to his Master King Henry, but came
off with Honor, the King himself clearing him of that injurious Scandal, and
giving him a Character of a quite contrary Nature.

His words to Cecyl upon this Charge.
And again in King Edward's Reign, in the Year 1552, some taking the advantage
of his Absence from the Court, slandered him as though he were Covetous. Which
coming to his Ear, by the cordial Friendship of Cecyl, the King's Secretary, he
wrote that Courtier a Letter in vindication of himself; professing, That he was
not so doted to set his Mind upon things here, which neither he could carry
away with him, nor tarry long with them. And that he took not half so much Care
for his Living when he was a Scholar at Cambridg, as he did at that present
when he was Archbishop of Canterbury; for as he had now much more Revenue than
he had then, so he had much more to do withal. And, That he rather feared stark
Beggary at last.

This, and other things to the same purpose, he signified in that Letter; that
Cecyl thereby might the better understand his Condition, and know how and what
to plead at Court in his behalf, as Occasion served, as has been more at large
related before.

Reduced, as he feared, to stark beggary before his Death.
By the way, I cannot but reflect upon one of the Archbishop's Expressions,
which seemed to have been uttered prophetically; so exactly did the Event
answer to his Words: for to stark Beggary he was indeed at last reduced: When
in his Imprisonment at Oxon, he had not a Penny in his Purse. And which was
more, his Enemies were so barbarously severe, that it would not be allowed any
well-disposed Person, to relieve his Necessity, nor to give him an Alms, a
Privilege allowed any Beggar beside. And when a Gentleman of Gloucestershire,
sensible of the Archbishop's Need, and withal knowing how dangerous it was to
give the poor Archbishop any Money, had conveyed somewhat to the Bailiffs, to
be by their Hands bestowed on him, Boner and Thirleby, the two Bishops that
degraded him, staid this Gentleman, intending to send him up to the Council,
had he not gotten off by the Intercession of some Friends.

CHAP. XXXV. Some Account of Archbishop Cranmer's Housekeeping.
BUT the more fully to confute this Calumny, Some Account of his Housekeeping.
it will not be amiss to look more narrowly into his Housekeeping. His daily
custom at Lambeth was, to dine in a Room above, where all Noblemen, and
Persons of better Quality that came to dine with him, were entertained. Here he
was very honorably served, both with Dishes and Attendants. In the Hall the
Table was every Day very plentifully furnished, both for Houshold-Servants and
Strangers, with three or four principal head-Messes of Officers: Besides the
Relief of the Poor at his Gates. And which is a very observable Charity, as
well as Hospitality, he appropriated his Mansion House at Bekesborn in Kent,
and his Parsonage-Barn, for Harbor and Lodgings for the Poor, Sick and Maimed
Soldiers, that came from the Wars of Bulloign, and other Parts beyond Seas.
For these he also appointed an Almoner, a Physician, and a Surgeon, to
attend on them, and to dress and administer Physic to such of them as were not
able to resort to their own Countries: Having also daily from his Kitchen hot
Broth and Meat. Besides the common Alms of his Household, that were bestowed
upon the poor People of the Country. And when any of these were recovered, and
were able to travel, they had Money given them to bear their Charges, according
to the number of Miles they were to pass before they got Home.

I do not know whether some might have taken Advantage thus to slander him,
from a laudable Endeavor of his, Retrenches the Clergies superfluous
Housekeeping.
to reduce within some Bounds the Provisions of Clergy-mens Tables, which in
the latter Times of King Henry the Eighth, grew to great Excess and
Extravagancy, so unbecoming Spiritual Men. For in the Year 1541, the
Archbishop, with the Consent of the other Archbishop, and most of the
Bishops, and diverse other Deans and Archdeacons, made a Constitution for
moderating the Fare of their Tables, viz.

That Archbishops should not exceed six diverse kinds of Flesh, or as many
Dishes of Fish on Fish-days. A Bishop not above Five. A Dean, or Archdeacon,
Four; and all under that Degree, Three. But an Archbishop was allowed at
second Course, to have four Dishes, a Bishop Three, and all others Two; as
Custards, Tarts, Fritters, Cheese, Apples, Pears, etc. But if any of the
inferior Clergy should entertain any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, or Archdeacon,
or any of the Laity of like Degree, as Duke, Marquess, Earl, Vicount, Baron,
Lord, Knight, they might have such Provision as were meet for their Degree: Nor
was their Diet to be limited, when they should receive an Ambassador, [to
recommend, I suppose, to Foreigners the English Hospitality.] It was ordered
also, That of the greater Fish, or Fowl, as Cranes, Swans, Turkies, Hadocks,
Pike, Tench, there should be but one in a Dish: Of lesser Sorts than they, as
Capons, Pheasants, Conies, Woodcocks, but Two: Of less sorts still, as of
Partridges; an Archbishop, Three; a Bishop, and other Degrees under him, Two.
The Number of the Blackbirds were also stinted to Six at an Archbishop's
Table, and to Four for a Bishop. And of little Birds, as Larks, Snytes, etc.
the Number was not to exceed Twelve.

But so strongly bent were the Clergy in those Days to this sort of Sensuality,
that these Injunctions of our Archbishop were observed but two or three
Months, and so they returned to their old Superfluity again.

His pious Design therein.
The Archbishop's pious Design hereby, was only to curb Intemperance, and
unnecessary Prodigality in such, upon whose Office those Vices cast such just
Reflections: but it could not reasonably argue any covetous Temper in him; for
that the Poor might not fare the worse for this Intrenchment of Exorbitant
Hospitality, but rather the better, the Archbishop in these aforesaid Orders
provided, That whatsoever was spared out of the old Housekeeping, should not
be pocketed up, but laid out and spent in plain Meats for the Relief of poor
People.

Others charged him with Prodigality.
And that this Charge may still appear to be nothing but a mere detraction,
proceeding from Envy, or some other ill Principle, others there were that would
blame him for the contrary Vice, of too much lavishing and unprofitable
Expense. So hard a matter is it for the best Men to escape the spiteful and
venomous Insinuations of the World. But he patiently and with an even Mind bore
all.

CHAP. XXXVI. Archbishop Cranmer, Humble. Peaceable. Bold in a good Cause.
FOR, which is another thing to be remarked in him, Humble and Condescending.
he was very Humble and Condescending, and did not only bear to be reproved,
but was thankful for it; and that even when the Reproof was undeserved. Which
was the more to be valued in him, considering the Height and Dignity of his
Calling. To give an Instance or two of this.

When in the Year 1552, Cecyl had charged him with the Imputation of
Covetousness, as a Report that went of him in the Court, and which himself
seemed partly to believe, begging withal Pardon of his Grace for his freedom
with him: Our Archbishop told him, That as for the Admonition, he took it very
thankfully; and that he had ever been most glad to be admonished by his
Friends; accounting no Man so foolish, as he that would not hear friendly
Admonishment. And when at another time, the same Cecyl, (who would always take
the liberty to speak his Mind to his Friends, whenever he thought they wanted
Counsel) had signified to him the Hazard he incurred in not showing more
Compliance toward the Duke of Northumberland, who now swayed all; and then
apologizing for his Boldness; Cranmer was so far from taking this ill, that he
returned him his very hearty Thanks for his friendly Letter and Advertisements;
desiring him to be assured, that he took the same in such good part, and to
proceed of such a friendly Mind, as he ever looked for at his Hands, and
whereof he would not be unmindful, if Occasion hereafter served, to requite the
same.

And this good Temper led him also to Gentleness and Lenity. Peaceable and Mild.
He was no Huffer nor Contender, but of an exceeding peaceable and amicable
Spirit. Whereunto he was moved by the Reason of Policy, as well as Religion:
Because he well saw, how a contentious quarrelsome Disposition in great Men,
would be apt to give an ill Example unto Inferiors. There happened once, in the
Year 1552, a Contest between him and the Lord-Warden of the Cinque Ports, who
lived not far from him; and so probably it might be about some worldly Matters.
It was Sir Thomas Cheyny; who in the Year 1549, was one of those that met with
Warwick in London, and published a Proclamation against the Archbishop's
Friend the Duke of Somerset, as a Traitor. Which might be an occasion that the
Archbishop did not much affect Cheyny, nor Cheyny the Archbishop. Concerning
this Difference between them, which it seems was taken notice of at Court, when
his true Friend Cecyl had wrote to him, advising a Reconciliation, he gave this
Christian and meek Answer from his House at Ford; That there was no Man more
loath to be in Contention with any Man than he was; especially with him who was
his near Neighbor, dwelling both in one County, and whose familiar and entire
Friendship he most desired, and that for the Quietness of the whole County.
Adding, That the Examples of the Rulers and Heads, would the People and Members
follow.

His Peaceableness also appeared in his hearty Desires of the Public Peace, as
well as Private. When upon occasion of hearing of the Wars that were about the
Year 1552, eagerly followed, both in Christendom, His Speech upon the News of
Wars abroad.
and out of it, he used these words, The Sophy and the Turk, the Emperor and
the French King, not much better in Religion than they, [such it seems was his
Censure of them, by reason of the Cruelty and Persecution they exercised, and
the Disturbances they made in the World] rolling the Stone, or turning the
Wheel of Fortune up and down; I pray God send us Peace and Quietness with all
Realms, as well as among our selves.

Unacquainted with the Arts of Court-flattery.
But though he were of so quiet and mild a Spirit, yet being a plain downright
Man, he would never learn the Arts of Flattery and base Compliances with them
that were uppermost. Which had like to have created him much trouble from
Northumberland; to whom he carried not himself with that Deference and
Pleasingness as he expected. Would never crouch to Northumberland.
For Cranmer knew the bad Heart of this haughty Man, and could not forget the
ill Measure his Friend, the Duke of Somerset, had found at his Hands. He did
not care to make any Application to him, nor to be an Instrument in forwarding
any of his designing Business. When he was to write up to some of the Court
concerning Reiner Wolf, I suppose for License to print the Articles of
Religion, Anno 1552, he desired to take Cecyl's Advice, to whom he should
write; For I know not, says he, to whom to write but my Lord of
Northumberland; to whom to make any Address he would fain have avoided if he
could. There was, about the Year 1552, a Commission issued out for a strict
Enquiry to be made after all such as had defrauded the King of any Goods or
Treasure, accruing to him by the suppression of Chauntries, or that belonged to
Churches. Now this was done by Northumberland and his Creatures, on purpose
that it might light heavy upon Somerset's Friends, who had been the chief
Visitors in those Affairs, and had many of them been supposed to have enriched
themselves thereby. Commissioners were appointed in each County. In Kent the
Commission was directed to the Archbishop, and to several other Gentlemen and
Justices of Peace. The Archbishop perceiving well the Spite and Malice of this
Commission, acted very slowly in it. Insomuch that Northumberland began to be
highly angry with him. Cecyl observing it, and having ever a great Veneration
for that good Man, and fearing he might feel the Effects of his Fury, writ to
him, signifying Northumberland's Displeasure, and giving him Advice to take
heed of him. For which the Archbishop thanked him, and prudently writ his
Excusatory Letter to that Duke, dated November ^0, signifying, That the Cause
of his Stay of the Commission was, because he was alone, and that the Gentlemen
and Justices of Peace, who were in Commission with him, were then at London,
[probably because of the Term] before whose coming Home, if he should proceed
without them, he might, as he said, travel in vain, and take more Pains than he
should do good. And by such soft, but honest words, mollifying him for the
Procrastination of that which he had no mind to meddle in.

But not long after he, and Ridley Bishop of London, with him, He and Ridley
fall under the Duke's Displeasure.
fell under great Displeasure with this Duke, and the rest of the great Men of
his Party; who in the latter end of King Edward's Reign governed all. The
Reason whereof was, for opposing, as much as they could, though to no effect,
the Spoil of the Church-Goods; which were taken away only by a Commandment of
the Higher Powers, without Request or Consent of them to whom they did belong;
as Ridley himself relates in his Treatise, Ridley's Lamentation.
wherein he lamented the Change of Religion in England: Which indeed was more
than ever Henry VIII had done.

Add to the rest, Bold and undaunted in God's Cause.
that our Bishop was of a bold and undaunted Courage in the Cause of God, and
his Church. It was a brave and generous Act, and worthy the chief Bishop of the
English Church; I mean, that public Challenge which he made, to maintain the
Common Prayer Book, and the other parts of the Reformation, by the Scripture
and Fathers, in open Disputation, against whomsoever, if the Queen so pleased
to permit it. Which was done by him, soon after the Queen's coming to the
Throne. And had he not been prevented by others, who dispersed Copies of this
Challenge without his knowledge, it had been made very solemnly, as he freely
told the Queen's Council, by fixing this his Declaration on the Doors of S.
Paul's, and other Churches, with his Hand and Seal to it. And his Courage herein
appeared the greater, because he was at this very Time under a Cloud, and in
great Danger; having some time before now, been convented before the Council,
and confined to Lambeth.

And whosoever shall consider that good Progress, Falsely charged with
Cowardice, and too much Flexibility.
that by his Means was made in Religion, not only in King Edward's Reign, but
even in that of King Henry, under the Discouragements of antiently-rivited
Superstition and Idolatry; and withal shall ponder the haughty Nature of that
Prince, of so difficult Address, and so addicted to the old Religion; and how
dangerous it was to dissent from him, or to attempt to draw him off from his
own Persuasions; cannot but judge Cranmer to have been of a very bold Spirit, to
venture so far as he did. And undoubtedly his Courage went an equal pace with
his Wisdom and Discretion, and was no whit inferior to his other excellent
Qualifications. And this I say the rather, to vindicate the Memory of this most
Reverend Prelat from an unworthy Reflection, made upon him in a trisling
Account of his Life: Wherein he is charged to be, Ab^l R^di^^^vus.
Of too easy and flexible a Disposition, which made him cowardly to comply with
the Church of Rome. And, that though he never did any harm to the Protestants,
yet he did not unto them so much good as he might or ought. For the confutation
of which, I appeal to numberless Passages which I have written of him. But it
is easy to see from whence this Author had this Character of our Archbishop;
namely, from Parsons and Saunders, two malicious calumniating Jesuits. Three
Conversions.
The former has these words of him; That to the King's Will and Liking he
resolved to conform himself, as well in Religion as in other things. And, that
when King Henry was large toward the Protestants, Cranmer was so also; but
when the King became more strict and rigorous, especially after the Six
Articles, Cranmer was ready to prosecute the same. And therefore Saunders
framed a Name for the Archbishop, calling him Henricianus; in the same sense
as Herod's Creatures in the Scriptures were called Herodiani. A very false
Character of this good Archbishop, to say no worse of it.

Of Ardent Affections.
I must here make a Note of one Quality more of our Archbishop. Which was this,
That he was a Man of ardent Affections, and of an open and generous Temper; and
where he loved, he thought he could never enough express it. An Instance of
this I will give in Bishop Thirleby: To whom for the good Qualities he supposed
were in him, he had a most earnest Love. An Account of this I will lay down in
the words of Morice, the Archbishop's Secretary, Inter Foxii MSS
who well knew it.

Besides his special Favor to him, says he, that way, [in recommending him to
the King] there was no Man living could more friendly esteem any Man of
himself, as my Lord Cranmer did this Thirleby: For there was no kind of
Pleasure which my Lord Cranmer was liable to do, that was not at this Man's
Commandment: Whether it were Jewel, Plate, Instrument, Map, Horse, or any thing
else, though he had it from the King's Majesty; but if this Man did once like,
or commend it, the gentle Archbishop would forthwith give it unto him. And
many times Dr. Thirleby, for Civility-sake, would instantly refuse the same,
yet would he send it unto him the next day after to his House. Insomuch that it
came into a common Proverb, That Dr. Thirleby 's commendation of any Thing of
my Lord's, was a plain winning or obtaining thereof. So that some Men thought,
that if he would have demanded any Finger, or other Member of his, he would
have cut it off to have gratified him therewith; such was his ardent Affection
toward him. This no small sort of honest Men, now living, can testify; that
is, about the Year 1565, when this was written.

Cranmer compared with Card. Wolsey.
It may deserve also a Remark, that our good Prelat rose upon the Fall of
another great Churchman, viz. the Cardinal of York. For about that very Time
the King rejected Wolsey from his Favor and Employment, Cranmer succeeded into
them. It may be also observed, That as the King's great Matter of the Divorce
was first moved and managed by Wolsey; so it was taken up, and vigorously
carried on, and successfully ended by Cranmer. And as the former started it
upon an unjust Policy, and so in the Issue, by God's secret Judgment, prospered
no better by it, it finally proving his Ruin; so the latter acting in it out of
a better and more honest Principle of Conscience and Religion, became thereby
advanced to the greatest Honor in the Church: Which he held for twenty Years
together. Though at last indeed it had the same fatal Issue to him, by the
secret Malice of Queen Mary, as it had to the Cardinal before by the secret
Displeasure of Queen Ann. But as they were thus parallel in the Cause of their
Falls, so their Demeanours under their Calamities were very different. The
Cardinal under his, showed a most abject and desponding Mind; but our
Archbishop's Carriage was much more decent under his, remaining Undaunted and
Magnanimous: having a Soul well fortified by the Principles of solid Virtue and
Religion, which the other had not. And this appeared in him, when being brought
forth to be baited before Brooks, the Pope's Subdelegate; and Martin and Story,
the King's and Queen's Commissioners at Oxford; he gravely, and with an unmoved
Spirit, used these words; That he acknowledged God's Goodness to him in all his
Gifts; and thanked him as heartily for that State wherein he found himself
then, as ever he did in the Time of his Prosperity; and that it was not the
loss of his Promotions that grieved him at all.

CHAP. XXXVII. Osiander's and Peter Martyr's Character of the Archbishop.
THE last Thing I shall observe of him is, That he always remained the same
Man; not altered by his Honors and high Advancements. As he was a Person of
great Piety, Goodness, Affability and Benignity, before he was Archbishop, and
the Sunshine of Royal Favor, so he continued at all Times after. For a
Witness of this, I will set down two Characters given him by two Foreign
learned Men, both which knew him well.

The one shall be of Osiander; Osiander's Character of the ABp.
from whom we may take this Account of what he was before he was Bishop, while
he remained abroad in Germany. Osiander, that great Divine of Norinberg,
professed to love him for some excellent Endowments that were common to him
with some other good Men, but especially for others more extraordinary and
peculiar to himself: Of the former sort was, That he was a Gentleman of good
Birth and Quality; Epist. Dedicat* ante Harmon. Evangelic.
that he had an Aspect and Presence that carried Dignity with it, an incredible
sweetness of Manners; that he had Learning beyond the common Degrees of it; was
Benign and Liberal toward all, and especially to those that were Studious and
of good Literature. Of the latter, were those more abstruse and heroical
Virtues of his Mind, rare to be found in the Age wherein he lived; viz. his
Wisdom, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice; a singular Love toward his
Country, the highest Faithfulness toward the King; a Contempt of earthly
Things, a Love of Heavenly; a most burning study toward the Evangelick Truth,
sincere Religion, and Christ's Glory. And this was Cranmer before he was placed
in his high and honorable Station.

And Peter Martyr's.
The other Character of Cranmer, is that of Peter Martyr; who thus speaks of
him, when he was at the Top of all his earthly Honor, in the middle of King
Edward's Reign; That his Godliness, Prudence, Faithfulness, and his singular
Virtues, were known to all the Kingdom. Ep. Dedicat. ante librum de Eucharist.
That he was so adorned with the Grace and Favor of Christ, as that, though
all others are the Children of Wrath, yet in him Piety, and Divine Knowledge,
and other Virtues, might seem to be naturally born and bred, such deep Root had
they taken in him. So that Martyr often wished and professed, he should esteem
it as a great Benefit vouchsafed him of God, that he might come as near as
might be to his Virtues, which he admired in him as the wonderful Gifts of God.
And, as to himself and others fled into these Quarters for Religion, that
Cranmer's Kindness and Humanity, Merits and Benefits toward them were such,
that if he should render just Thanks, and speak of them as they deserved, he
must do nothing but tell of them; and how much soever he should extol them, the
greatness of the Matter would overreach his Speech. And that it was well known
to all how humanely he received not him only, but many other Strangers of his
Order, and how kindly he treated them.

Balt's Character of the ABp.
To both these I will subjoin the Judgment of another, who, I cannot but
conclude, was well-acquainted with the Archbishop, and a long and diligent
Observer of his Demeanor in his Superintendency over the Church; and that was
John Bale, sometime Bishop of Ossory.

He never placed, said he, the Function of a Bishop in the Administration of
secular Things, In Centur.
but in a most faithful Dispensation of God's Word.

In the midst of wicked Babylon, he always performed the part of a good Guide
of Israel. And among Papists, that tyrannized against the Truth of Christ, he
governed the People of God with an admirable Prudence.

No Man ever so happily and steddily persisted, with Christ himself, in the
Defense of the Truth, in the midst of falsely learned Men, in such imminent
hazard of his Life, and yet without receiving any Harm.

No Man did more prudently bear with some false Apostles for a time, although,
with St. Paul, he knew what most pestilent Men they were, that so they might
not be provoked to run into greater Rage and Madness.

The difficult Times wherein Cranmer lived.
All this that I have before written concerning this our venerable Prelate,
cannot but redound to his high Praise and Commendation. And it is very fit such
Virtues and Accomplishments should be celebrated and recorded to Posterity. Yet
I do not intend these my Collections for such a Panegyric of him, as to make
the World believe him void of all Faults or Frailties, the Condition of human
Nature. He lived in such critical Times, and under such Princes, and was
necessarily involved in such Affairs, as exposed him to greater Temptations
than ordinary. And if any Blemishes shall, by curious Observers, be espied in
him, he may therefore seem the more pardonable; and his great exemplary
Goodness and Usefulness in the Church of God, may make ample Amends for some
Errors.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Archbishop vindicated from Slanders of Papists.
I Have given, I hope, a just, though imperfect, Account, A lying Character of
this ABp, by a la^^ French Author*
from undoubted Records, and authentic Manuscripts, as well as the best
published Books, of the excellent Endowments of this great Prelat, and of his
innocent, prudential, and useful Behavior in his high Place and Station. So
that none, who impartially weighs the Premises, can conclude otherwise of him,
than that he was a very rare Person, and one that deserves to be reckoned among
the brightest Lights that ever shone in this English Church. And this all the
sober, unprejudiced part of Posterity will believe, notwithstanding the unjust
Calumnies some hot-spirited Papists have cast upon his Memory.

I shall pass over the unhandsome Name that Feckenham gave him, calling him
Dolt; as he did also his two other Brethren in Tribulation, Ridley and Latimer,
Prisoners then in Oxford, (Men by far more Learned than himself) upon occasion
of Mr. Hawks esteeming them deservedly Godly and Learned Men.

I shall also pass by what Bishop Boner then said of him, viz. That he dared to
say, that Cranmer would Recant so he might have his Living: As though he were a
Man of a prostituted Conscience, and would do any thing upon worldly
Considerations.

But there is a late French Writer, whom I cannot but take notice of with some
Indignation; who, to show his bigoted Zeal to the Roman Church, has bestowed
this most defamatory Character upon this our Archbishop; Varillas his History
of Heretics.
That he was one of the profligatest Men of England; that had nothing of
Christianity in him, but the outward Appearances; being Ambitious, Voluptuous,
Turbulent, and capable of all sorts of Intrigues. Of which all that I have
written, is an abundant Confutation; besides the severe Chastisements the right
Reverend the Bishop of Sarum has lately bestowed upon this Author. Who
questionless was well versed in those famous Popish Calumniators of our
Reformation, and of this our Archbishop the great Instaurator thereof, and had
a mind to outdo them in their Talent of throwing Dirt. Those, I mean, who,
living in the Age past, did most bitterly and virulently, as it fell in their
way, fly upon Cranmer's Memory and Fame, to eclipse it to Posterity if they
could; namely, Saunders, Allen, and Parsons, and some others. But those who
read these Memorials, will be able easily to confute them, and will perceive
that these Men sought not so much to say what was true, as what might serve the
Ends of their Anger and Spite, their Reports being made up for the most part
of nothing but Lies and Slanders, illy patched together.

Allen's Calumny of the ABp. Sincere and modest Def. of Engl. Catholics* p. 45.
Allen, if he were the Answerer of the Execution of English Ius^ice, says,
That Cranmer was a notorious perjured, and often relapsed Apostata, recanting,
swearing and forswearing at every turn. A heavy Charge; but we are left to
guess what these Perjuries, these so often Swearings and Forswearings, these
Relapses and Recantations be. But it is enough for them to roar out, Notorious
Perjuries, etc. But let us see what Oaths Cranmer took, that might occasion his
Perjuries. He swore, at his Consecration, the usual Oath to the Pope; and in
his future Doings, labored to restore the King's Supremacy against the Pope's
Usurpations, and to promote a Reformation against the Pop^'s Superstitions. Was
this one of his notorious Perjuries? It is pity the doing so good a Thing,
Wiped off.
should fall under so bad a Name. But at the taking of that Oath, did he not
make a solemn Protestation openly before Public Notaries, and that entered down
into Record, That he intended not by the said Oath to do any thing against the
Law of God, the King, or the Realm, and their Laws and Prerogatives; nor to be
abridged thereby from consulting for the Reformation of Religion? In which way
the best Civilians then put him, and assured him, that by this Means: he might
safely, without any Guilt, take the Oath to the Pope: Which otherwise he would
not have done. And truly, for my part, I think there was no other way to escape
that Perjury, that all other Bishops Elect in those Times were entangled in, by
swearing two contrary Oaths, one to the Pope, and another to the King. Cranmer
swear also, at receiving Orders, to live Chastely; But he afterward married a
Wife. Surely hereby he brake not his Oath, but rather kept it. He did likewise
swear to the Succession of Q. Ann: But would Allen have all that submitted to
that Act of Parliament to be perjured? That would reflect upon the Wisdom of
the three Estates at that Time, in making such an ensnaring Law; and involve
all sorts of People, both Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, and all other Persons of
Age, in Perjury, as well as the Archbishop, excepting only two Persons, More
and Fisher, who would not submit to this Act. And even they themselves offered
to swear to the Succession it self, and refused only to swear to the Preamble
of the said Act. There was indeed an Act made, which seemed contrary to this
Act, namely, That which in the Year 1536, put by the Succession of Q. Ann, and
carried it to the King's Children by another Queen; and to this Act the
Subjects were to swear also. And we will suppose that the ABp swore with the
rest to this Act. Neither was there any Perjury here; for this Oath in truth
was not contrary to the former: For by reason of some lawful Impediment of
Queen Ann's Marriage with the King, as was then pretended, it was declared by
the Parliament, That the Issue of that Queen was Illegitimate, and not
Inheritable. And the first Oath was only for the Succession of lawful Issue by
Queen Ann. Therefore there being no lawful Issue of that Queen, as was then at
least supposed, the Oath to the lawful Issue of another Queen might certainly
be very innocently taken, without infringing the breach of the former* And
where at length is this Notorious Perjury, and swearing and forswearing at
every turn?

Allen again lets fly upon him, calling him Apostata. Cleared from his Charge
of Apostasy.
But surely it is not Apostasy, to leave Error, Superstition and Idolatry, for
the true Doctrine and Profession of the Gospel. He charge him also with often
Relapsing and Recanting. He made no Relapses nor Recantations at all, as I know
of, unless a little before his Death, when he subscribed to a parcel of Popish
Articles, by the Importunity of Papists, working upon his Frailty and
long-Sufferings. But he soon revoked all again, and died most patiently in the
Profession of the true Religion. And to this at last comes all this mighty
Clamor, That he was notoriously Perjured, an often relapsed Apostata,
recanting, swearing and forswearing at every Turn.

Saunders his scurrilous and false Accounts of Cranmer are numberless; I will
only mention one or two. He says, Saunders Falsehoods of the ABp. De Schism.
Aug.
That from Cambridg he went to the Service of Sir Tho. Bullen, and by his
Preferment was made Archbishop of Canterbury. Whereas from Cambridg he was
immediately made the King's Chaplain, and wanted not the Recommendation of any
to his Preferment, the King being so well acquainted with his Merits. And
though he abode sometime with the Earl of Wiltshire, whom he styles Sir Tho.
Bullen, yet it was not in the quality of his Chaplain, but of one whom the King
recommended to him. He writes, That the Archbishop carried his Wife about him
in a Chest, when he removed; and adds a ridiculous Story relating thereunto.
And his Brother Parsons says, In his Book of the Three Conversions.
This was a most certain Story, and testified at that Day by Cranmer 's Son's
Widow to diverse Gentlemen, her Friends, from whom Parsons says he had it.
Other Popish Dignitaries in those Days, kept and conversed with their
Concubines and Whores more publicly; and did the Archbishop keep his Wife so
close? But in case he had traveled with her more openly, who should examine
the Archbishop, and call him to Account, whether she were his Wife or his
Concubine? and therefore the Story is most improbable. The King himself knew he
had a Wife well enough. And when the Archbishop saw the Danger of having her
with him, he sent her away to her Friends Beyond Sea for a Time. And that silly
Story comes through too many Hands, before it came to Parsons, to make it
credible. Cranmer's Son tells it to his Wife, No Body knows where: She being a
Widow, tells it to certain Gentlemen, No Body knows who: And they tell it to
Parsons, no Body knows when. No one Place, Person or Time mentioned. And so all
the Faith of the Matter lies upon a Woman's Evidence, and hers upon the Credit
of those two very honest Men, Parsons and Saunders.

In Parsons his three Conversions of England, Parsons his Complements to the
ABp.
are these many favorable Expressions of our Archbishop to be found: That he
was the first Heretic in that Order, [of Archbishops of Canterbury.] Because
he was the first that labored a Reformation of the horrible Errors of the
degenerate Church of Rome. And, that he was the first Archbishop of Canterbury
that ever brake from the Roman Faith. And, that this was the first Change of
Religion in any Arch bishop, from the beginning unto his Days. Designing
thereby to fix a very black Mark upon him, which rather redounds to his
everlasting Honor. In his Calendar.
That he was an unconstant Man in his Faith and Belief: Incontinent in his
Life: Variable in all his Actions: Accommodating himself always to the Times
wherein he lived, and to the Humors of those who could do most; and this in
Matters even against Right and Conscience. No, but quite contrary, he was
constant in his Faith and Belief to the very last, except one Fall, which he
soon recovered: Most chaste in his Life, living in the holy State of Marriage:
Steady in all his Actions: accommodating himself always, neither to the Times
nor to the Humors of any Man, let him be as great as he would, any farther
than he might do in Righ^ and Conscience: And often opposing King, Parliament,
Privy Council and Synods, to his utmost Danger, in defense of Truth, and for
the dis^harge of his own Conscience.

Again, That he was a [Roman] Catholic in most Points during K. Henry 's
Reign. Whereas he was so in no Point, excepting in that of the Corporeal
Presence. That he applied himself to the Religion which the State and Prince
liked best to allow of in that Time, [of K. Henry VIII.] From which he was so
far, that he often boldly and publicly declared against diverse Things which
the King was bent upon; as in the Act of the Six Articles, and in composing the
Book called The Necessary Erudition. That these three, the King, Queen Ann, and
Archbishop Cranmer, held the Catholic Faith, Vsages and Rites; and went as
devoutly to Mass as ever, and so remained they, in outward show, even to their
Deaths. Though some Years before Cranmer's Death, namely, from the first Year
of King Edward, the Mass was wholly laid aside, and never used at all. That
Cranmer and Crumwel went to Mass, after the King married the Lady Ann Bolen, as
before. What they did as to the going to Mass, our Histories tell us little of:
If they did, it was with little Approbation of it. And as Crumwel on the
Scaffold protested, that he was a good Catholic Man, (but there is difference
between a Good Catholic, and a Roman Catholic) and never doubted of any of
the Church-Sacraments then used. Thereby intending, I suppose, to make a
Difference between them and the Gospel-Sacraments. But surely Crumwel in his
Lifetime was so utterly against four or five of them, that he brought Aless, a
Learned Man, into a Convocation, to dispute there for two only. And the like
Cranmer had done no doubt, if he had been brought to the Scaffold in King Henry
's Days. Which had been a happy Case for him. To a Scaffold they of the Roman
Persuasion, endeavored many a Year to bring him; and they would have thought
it a happy Case for them, if they could have brought it to pass. But I verily
believe the quite contrary to this confident Assertion, and that he would have
owned the Truth to the last, as he did afterward in the Reign of that King's
Daughter, Q. Mary.

That he always fell jump with them that governed, and could do most. No, he
never fell in with Gardener, who sometime had the Ascendent over King Henry;
nor with the Duke of Northumberland, who could do most, and did all for a time
with the King Edward. That when King Henry was large toward the Protestants,
Cranmer was so also, joining with Crumwel to protect them. But when the King
became more strait and rigorous, especially after the Six Articles, Cranmer was
ready to prosecute the same. He argued long and earnestly in the House against
those Six Articles; and when he saw they would pass, he protested against it;
and was so troubled about it, that the King sent the Duke of Norfolk, and the
Lord Crumwel, and diverse other Noble Persons, to comfort him in the King's
Name. So that I hardly think he would after this be brought to prosecute that
bloody Act, the making of which he so utterly disliked. Nor is there the least
Foot-step of it in History. Indeed Parsons brings in some Persons, in whose
Deaths he would have the Archbishop to have a Hand. As may appear, says he,
by the Sentence of Death pronounced against Lambert, Tho. Gerard, William
Jerome, and Ann Ascue, and others, condemned by him, for denying the Real
Presence. Though in King Henry's Time the Archbishop believed the Real
Presence, yet he was not for putting any to Death that denied it. No; such
extreme Rigours, for an Error, he utterly detested. Lambert suffered before the
Act of the Six Articles. Nor did the Archbishop condemn him, but only, by the
King's Command, disputed against him. Gerard, [he means Garret] and Jerome, and
Ann Ascue, were condemned and burnt indeed; but he had no manner of hand,
either in their Condemnation or Death, as we can find in our Histories. But
Winchester, Boner, and Wriothesly, and others of that Gang, shed those good
Peoples Blood. And it is an impudent Falsehood to lay their Condemnation to the
Archbishop's Charge.

He says further, That to the King's Will and Liking, he resolved to conform
himself, as well in Religion, as in all other Things. If he had said this of
Bishop Gardener, the Character would have better by far fitted him. He says,
That he divorced the King of his own Authority from Queen Katherine. Whereas in
truth, what he and Winchester, and other Bishops did in this Affair, was by
Commission from the King, and not by their own Authority. That he married the
King to Queen Ann. That it was in open Parliament, under his Handwriting, yet
extant, in public printed Records, to his eternal shame, that the Queen [that
is Queen Ann] was never true Wife unto the said King. Where was the eternal
Shame of this, when he set his Hand to no more, than what she her self
confessed before him? See more of this before. That after this he married the
King to Jane Seymour, and after to Queen Ann of Cleves, and after that to
Katherine Howard, and after that to Katherine Parre. Which we must take upon
his Word: For I think it hard by any good History to know it. And what if
Cranmer did all this? That he joined with the Protector, in overthrowing K.
Henry 's Will; and with Dudley against the Protector. Palpable Falsehoods! The
contrary whereof is notoriously known to any ordinary Historian. Of the same
Truth is, That he joined with Dudley and the Duke of Suffolk, for the overthrow
of the King's two Daughters: and after that with Arundel, Pembroke, Paget, for
the overthrow of Northumberland and Suffolk. He joined with these, for the
setting the true Heir in the Throne, not for the overthrow of any particular
Persons.

Again, he says, Cranmer and Ridley followed K. Henry 's Religion and Humor
while he lived, and resolved to enjoy the Pleasures and Sensualities of this
Time, [of K. Edward] so far as any way they might attain unto. No, they were
Men more mortified, and that made little Account of the Pleasures and Vanities
of this wretched World. Getting Authority into their Hands by the Protector,
and others that were in most Place, began to lay lustily about them, and to
pull down all them, both of the Clergy and others, whom they thought to be able
and likely to stand in their way, or resist their Inventions. Instancing in
Gardener and Boner, and speaking of their unjust Persecution and Deprivation,
by such violent and calumnious manner as is proper to Heretics to use. Whereby
a Man may take a taste what they meant to have done if they had had time. Here
they are set forth as a couple of most worldly, ambitious, haughty Men,
contriving by all, however base and unlawful ways, to build up themselves and
their Fortunes upon the Ruin of others, and to beat down all that opposed their
Designs. Whereas to any that shall read their Histories, there is nothing in
the World so contrary to their Aims, Tempers, and Inclinations. And things were
done toward the two Bishops beforementioned, with great Mildness and
Patience, under unsufferable Provocations offered by them. Nor was it Cranmer's
and Ridley's doings, but rather the King's Council, who thought not fit to put
up the Affronts those Bishops had offered to the Government.

He says, That in King Edward 's Time Cranmer played the Tyrant. That be
punished one Thomas Dobb, a Master of Arts of Cambridg, casting him into the
Counter, where he died. And John Hume imprisoned for the same Cause by Cranmer.
Both these Passages the Author had from Fox. Dobbs indeed, in the very
beginning of K. Edward's Reign, disturbed the Mass that was saying in a Chapel
in S. Paul's. For which the Mayor complained of him to the Archbishop. And what
could he do better than commit him to the Counter, both to punish him for
making a public Disturbance in the Church, and also to deliver him from the
Rage of the Multitude, till his Pardon could be gotten him? Which was obtained
soon after from the Duke of Somerset: But he suddenly died in Prison, before
his Deliverance. And as for Hume, he was a Servant to a very stiff Papist, who
sent him up to the Archbishop, with a grievous Complaint against him for
speaking against the Mass; but whether the Archbishop imprisoned him, or what
followed, Fox mentions not, and leaves it uncertain what was done with him.

He says, That Cranmer stood resolutely for the Carnal Presence in the
Sacrament in K. Edward 's first Parliament. Wherein a Disputation about it was
continued for the space of four Months; that is, from November. 4. to March 14.
Which was the full time of the second Session of that first Parliament, and was
in the Year 1548. What he means by this long Disputation in that Parliament,
for so many Months, I cannot tell. Does he mean, that the Parliament did
nothing else all that Session? K. Edward's Journal.
Indeed there was once a notable Dispute of the Sacrament, in order to an
Uniformity of Prayer to be established. Or does he mean that this four Months
Disputation, was the Work of the Convocation sitting that Parliament-time?
Before it indeed lay now the Matter of the Priests Marriage; Which they agreed
to, almost three against one: And likewise of receiving the Sacrament in both
Kinds; Which was also agreed to, Nemine Contradi^ente. But not a word of any
Disputation th^n about the Real Presence. And yet it is strange, that he should
with such Confidence put this Story upon the World, of four Months Disputation
in the Parliament concerning the Real Presence; and that the Archbishop then
was so res^^ute for it. Which cannot be true neither on this Account, that
Cranmer was a Year or two before this come off from that Opinion. He adds, That
Cranmer stood resolutely in that first Parliament for a Real Presence against
Zuinglianism. But there was neither in that Parliament, nor in that
Convocation, a word of the Real Presence. And that Cranmer and Ridley did allow
a R^al Presence, and would not endure the Sacrament should be contemptibly
spoken of, as some now began to do. The Real Presence that Parsons here means,
is the gross Corporal Presence, Flesh, Blood and Bone, as they used to say.
This Real Presence Cranmer and Ridley did not allow of at this time of Day: Now
they were better enlightened. But most true it is notwithstanding, that they
could not endure to have the Sacrament contemptibly spoken of.

He tells us Romantickly on the same Argument, That many Posts went to and fro,
between P. Martyr and Cranmer, while the imaginary Disputation beforementioned
lasted, whether Lutheranism or Zuinglianism should be taken up for the Doctrine
of the Church of England. For that he was come, in his Reading upon the
Eleventh of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, to those words, This is my
Body, and did not know how to determine it, till it was resolved about. The
Message returned him was, That he should stay, and entertain himself in his
Readings upon other Matters for a while. And so the poor Friar did, [as Parsons
calls that Learned Man] with Admiration and Laughter of all his Scholars.
Surely some of them had more Esteem and Reverence for him. Standing upon those
precedent words; Accepit Panem, etc. And Gratias dedit, etc. Fregit. Et dixit,
Accipite and Manducate, etc. Discoursing largely of every one of these Points.
And surely they were words of sufficient weight to be stood upon, and Points to
be discoursed largely of. And bearing one from the other that ensued, Hoc est
Corpus meum. But when the Post at length came, that Zuinglianism must be
defended, then stepped up P. Martyr boldly the next Day, and treated of This is
my Body: Adding moreover, that he wondered how any Man could be of any other
Opinion. The Reporters of this Story, Parsons makes to be Saunders, Allen and
Stapleton, and others that were present: Excellent Witnesses! P. Martyr is here
represented as a Man of no Conscience or Honesty, but ready to say and teach
whatsoever others bad^ him, be the Doctrine right or wrong; and at the Beck of
the State, to be a Lutheran or a Zuinglian. But if he were of such a versatile
Mind, why did he leave his Country, his Relations, his Substance, his Honor,
that he had there? Which he did because he could not comply with the Errors of
the Church in which he lived. But all this fine pleasant Tale is spoiled, in
case Martyr were not yet come to Oxford to be Reader there: For he came over
into England but in the end of November 1548, Simleri Orat. in Obit. P. Mart.
and was then sometime with the Archbishop before he went to Oxford. Which we
may well conjecture was till the Winter was pretty well over; so that he could
not well be there before the 14 th of March was past. Pa. 107.
The Author of the Athenae Oxonienses conjectures, that he came to Oxon in
February, or the beginning of March; but that it was the beginning of the next
Year that the King appointed him to read his Lecture. So that either he was not
yet at Oxon, or if he were, he had not yet begun his Reading till the
Parliament was over. And thus we have traced this Story, till it is quite
vanished.

Further still, he writes, That Cranmer wrote a Book for the Real Presence, and
another against it afterward. Which two Books Boner brought forth, and would
have read them, when he was deposed by Cranmer and Ridley; or at leastwise
certain Sentences thereof, that were contrary one to the other. If Cranmer
wrote any Book for the Real Presence, it was in Luther's, not in the Popish
Sense; and against that Sense indeed he wrote in his Book of the Sacrament. Nor
did Boner bring any such Books forth at his Deposition, or Deprivation, nor
offered to read them, nor any Sentences out of them, for ought I can find in
any Historians, that speak of Boner's Business: And I think none do, but Fox,
who has not a word of it, though he has given a large Narration of that whole
Affair. Indeed Boner at his first appearance told the Archbishop, That he had
written well on the Sacrament, and wondered that he did not more honor it. To
which the Archbishop replied, (seeing him commend that which was against his
own Opinion) That if he thought well of it, it was because he understood it
not. Thus we may see how Parsons writ he cared not what; and took up any lying,
flying Reports from his own Party, that might but serve his Turn. But observe
how this Writer goes on with his Tale; But Cranmer blushing, suffered it not to
be showed, but said, he made no Book contrary to another. Then he needed not to
have blushed. But if he did, it must be at the Impudence of Boner, who carried
himself in such a tumultuous bold manner throughout his whole Process, as
though he had no Shame left. And lastly, (to extract no more Passages out of
this Author) to prove that our Archbishop was for a Corporal Presence in the
beginning of King Edward, he says, That in the first Year of that Reign he was
a principal Cause of that first Statute, entitled, An Act against such Persons
as shall unreverently speak against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ, commonly called, The Sacrament of the Altar. And a very good Act it
was: But it does not follow, that because the Archbishop was the Cause of this
Act, that therefore he believed a gross Carnal Presence; the plain Design of
the Act being occasioned by certain Persons, who had contemned the whole Thing*
for certain Abuses heretofore committed therein, (I use the very words of the
Act) and had called it by vile and unseemly Words. And it was levelled against
such as should deprave, despise or contemn the Blessed Sacrament. Nor is there
any word in that Act used in favor of the Carnal Presence.

For a Conclusion, let the Reader not hear me, Fox in behalf of Cranmer. Jo.
Fox against Hierom. Osorius, p. 338.
but another speak for our Archbishop against one of these Calumniators, and
he a Portugal Bishop:

After Cranmer by hearing of the Gospel, began to savor of Christian
Profession, what Wickedness was ever reported of him? With what outrage of Lust
was he enflamed? What Murders, what seditious Tumults, what secret
Conspiracies, were ever seen, or suspected so much to proceed from him? Unless
ye account him blameworthy for this, that when King Henry, Father to Mary,
upon great Displeasure conceived, was for some secret Causes determined to
strike off her Head, this Reverend Archbishop did pacify the Wrath of the
Father, and with mild continual Intercession, preserved the Life of the
Daughter: Who for Life preserved, acquitted her Patron with Death.

As concerning his Marriage, if you reproachfully impute that to Lust, which
Paul does dignify with so honorable a Title; I do answer, That he was the
Husband of one Wife, with whom he continued many Years, more chastely and
holily, than Osorius in that his stinking, sole and single Life, peradventure
one Month, tho he flee never so often to his Catholic Confessions. And I see
no Cause, why the Name of a Wife shall not be accounted in each respect as
Holy, with the true Professors of the Gospel, as the Name of a Concubine with
the Papists.

Thus Fox.

And so I have at last, by God's favorable Concurrence, The Conclusion.
finished this my Work: and have compiled an imperfect History, yet with the
best Diligence I could, of this singular Archbishop and blessed Martyr; and in
the conclusion, have briefly vindicated him from those many false Surmises and
Imputations, that his implacable Enemies of the Roman Faction have reported and
published abroad against him: Not contented with the shedding of his Blood,
unless they stigmatized his Name and Memory, and formed the World into a
belief, that he was one of the vilest Wretches that lived, who in Reality and
Truth, appears to have been one of the holiest Bishops, and one of the best
Men that Age produced.

THE END.
THE APPENDIX TO THE MEMORIALS OF Archbishop Cranmer.

THE APPENDIX TO THE MEMORIALS OF Archbishop Cranmer.
NUMBER. I. Account of Mr. Pool's Book by Dr. Cranmer.
To the Right honorable, and my syngular good Lord, my Lord of Wylshire.
IT may please your Lordeshipe to be advertised, that the King his grace, my
Lady your wife, Sir W. H. MSS.
my Lady Anne, your daughter be in good health, whereof thanks be to God. As
concerning the King his cause, Master Raynolde Poole has written a book
much contrary to the king his purpose, with such wit, that it appears, that
he might be for his wisdom of the cownsel to the king his grace. And of such
eloquence, that if it were set forth and known to the commen people, I suppose
yt were not possible to persuade them to the contrary. The pryncypal intent
whereof is, that the king his grace should be content to commyt his great
cause to the jugement of the pope: wherein me seems he lacks much jugement.
But he swadeth that with such goodly eloquence, both of words and sentence,
that he were like to persuade many: but me he persuadeth in that point no
thing at al. But in many other things he satysfyeth me very well. The some
whereof I shall shortly rehearse. Furst, he shows the cause, wherefore he had
never pleasure to intromytte himself in this cause. And that was, the trouble,
which was like to ensue to this realm thereof by dyversitie of tytles. Whereof
what hurt might come, we have had exsample in our fathers days by the tytles
of Lancaster and York. And where os god has gyven many noble gyfts unto the
king his grace, as well of body and mind, os also of fortune: yet this
excedeth al other, that in him al tytles do mete and come together, and this
Realm is restored to tranquillity and peace: so owes he to provide that this
land fall not again to the forsaide mysery and troble, which may come as well by
the people within this realm, which think surely that they have an hair
lawful al^^ady, with whom they al be well content, and would be sorry to have
any other. And yt would be hard to persuade thaym to take any other, levynge
her: os also by the Emperor, which is a man of so great power, the queen
beying his awnt, the Princes his nece, whom he so much does, and ever has
favored. And where he hard reasons for the king his party, that he was moved
of god his law, which does straytly forbed, and that with many great thretts,
that no man shall mary his brother his wife. And os for the people, yt longs
not to thayr judgment, and yet yt is to be thought, that they will be content,
when they shall know, that the awncyente Doctores of the Church, and the
determinations of so many great universities be of the king his sentence. And
os concerning the Emperor, if he be so unryghtful, that he will mayntene an
unjust cause, yet god will never fayl thaym, that stand opon his party, and for
any thing will not transgress his commawndments. And beside that, we shall not
lack the aid of the Frenshe king, which partly for the Lege, which he has
made with us, and partly for the dyspleasure and old grutch, which he bears
toward the Emperor, would be glad to have occasion to be avenged.

Thies reasons he brings for the kings party against his own opinion. To
which he makes answer in this manner. First, os towchynge the Law of god, he
thinks that if the king were pleased to take the contrary part, he might os
well justify that, and have os good grownde of the scripture therefore, os for
that part which he now takes. And yet if he thought the kings party never so
just, and that this his marriage were undowtedly against godds pleasure, than
he cowde not deny, but yt should be well done for the king to refuse this
marriage, and to take another wife: but that he should be a doar therein, and a
setter forward thereof, he cowde never find in his heart. And yet he
grawnteth, that he has no good reason therefore, but only affection, which he
bears, and of dewty owes unto the kings parson. For in so doing he should not
only wayke, ye and utterly take away the Princes Title, but also he must neds
accuse the most, and chief part of all the kings life hiderto, which has been
so unfortunate to lyve more than xx yers in a matrimony so shameful, so
abominable, so bestial and against nature, if it be so os the books which do
defend the kings party do say; that the abomination thereof is naturally written
and graven in every man's heart, so that none excusation can be made by
ignorance. And thus to accuse the noble nature of the kings grace, and to take
away the title of his succession, he cowde never find in his heart, were the
kings cause never so good. Which he does knowledge to be only affection. Now os
concerning the people, he thinks not possible to satisfye thaym by learning
or prechynge; but os they now do begin to hate priests, this shall make thaym
rather to hate much more both learned men, and also the name of learning, and
bring them in abomination of every man. For what lovynge men toward their
prince would gladly hear, that either thayr prince should be so unfortunate,
to lyve so many yers in matrimony so abominable, or that they should be taken
and cownted so bestial, to approve and take for lawful, and that so many years,
a matrimony so unlawful; and so much against nature, that every man in his
heart naturally does abhor yt. And that is more, when they hear this
matrimony dyspraysed, and spoken against, neither by thayr own minds, nor by
reasons that be made against this matrimony, can they be persuaded to grutge
against the matrimony, but for any thing they do grutge against the divorse.
Wherein the people should show thaym selfs no men, but bests. And that the
people should be persuaded herto, he cannot think yt. And os for the authority
of the Universities, he thinks and says, that many times they be led by
affections, which is well known to every man, and wyssheth that they never did
err in thayr determinations. Than he shows with how great difficulty the
Universities were brought to the kings party. And moreover against the
authority of the Universities, he sets the authority of the kings grace
father, and his cowncel, the queen's father, and his cowncel, and the pope and
his cowncel. Than he comes again to the pope and the emperor, and French king.
And first the Pope, how much he is adversary unto the kings purpose, he has
showed diverse tokens already, and not without a cause. For if he should consent
to the kings purpose, he must neds do against his predecessores, and also
restrain his own power more than yt has been in time past, which rather he
would be glad to extend, and moreover he should set great sedition in many
realms, os in Portugal, of which king the emperor has married on suster, and
the Duke of Savoy the other. Than he extolleth the power of the emperor, and
diminish the aid of the Frensh king toward us, saying that the emperor
without drawing of any sword, but only by forbyddynge the course of
merchandise into Flawnders and Spain, may put this realm into great damage
and ruin. And what if he will thereto draw his sword, wherein is so much power,
which being of much less power than he is now, subdued the Pope and the French
king? And os for the French men, they never used to keep leage with us but for
thayr own advantage, and we can never find in our hearts to trust thaym. And
yet if now contrary to thayr old nature they keep thayr leage, yet our nation
shall thynk thaymselfes in miserable condition, if they shall be compelled to
trust opon thayr aid, which always have be our mortal enemies, and never we
loved thaym, nor they us. And if the French men have any suspicion, that this
new matrimony shall not continue, then we shall have no succur of thaym, but opon
such conditions os shall be intolerable to this realm. And if they followynge
thayr old nature and custom, than do break leage with us, than we shall look
for none other, but that England shall be a prey between the emperor and thaym.
After all this he comes to the point to save the kings honor, saying that
the king stondeth evyn opon the brynke of the water, and yet he may save al
his honor; but if he put forth his foot but on step forward, all his honor
is drowned. And the means which he has devised to save the kings honor is
this.

The rest of this matter I must leave to show your Lordshippe by mouth, when I
speak with you, which I purpose, god Willing, shall be to morrow, if the kyng's
grace let me not. Now the berer makes such have, that I can write no more; but
that I hear no word from my benefice, nor Master Russel's servunte is not
yet returned ageyn, whereof I do not a little marveil. The king and my Lady
Anne rode yesterday to Windsower, and this night they be looked for again at
Hampton Court: god be their guide, and preserve your Lordshippe to his most
pleasure. From Hampton court this xiij. day of June.

Your most humble beideman, Thomas Cranmer.

NUMBER. II. Dr. Cranmer, Ambassador with the Emperor, his letter to the King.
To the Kings Highness.
Sir W. H. MSS.
PLeasith it your Highness to understande, that at my last sollicitacion unto
Monsieur Grandeveile for an answer of the contracte of Merchandise between the
Merchaunts of your graces reaulme, and the Merchaunts of themperors
Low Countries; the said Monsieur Grandeveile showed me, that forsomoch as the
Diate concerning the said Contracte was lately held in Flaundres, where the
Queen of Hungary is Governatrice, themperor thought good to do nothing therein
without her advice, but to make answer by her, rather than by me. Wherefore it
may please your grace no further to look for answer of me herin, but of the
Queen, unto whom the whole Answer is committed. Morover, when the said
Monsieur Grandeveile enquered of me, if I had any answer of the aid and
subsidy, which themperor desyered of your grace, I reported unto him fully your
graces answer accordyng^ unto mine instructions sent unto me by your graces
servant William Paget. Which answer he desyered me to delyver him in writing,
that he might refer the same truly unto themperor, and so I did. Nevertheles
themperor, now at his departing, has had such importune busynes, that
Monsieur Grandeveile assigned me to repair unto themperor again at Lintz, for
there, he said, I shall have an answer again in writing. The French
Ambassador, and I with all diligence do make preparacion to furnish our selfs of
wagans, horses, ships, tents, and other things necessary to our viage; but
it will be at the lest viij or x days before we can be ready to depart hens. Yet
we trust to be at Lyntz before themperor; for he will tarry by the way at Passaw
x or xij days.

As for the Turk, he resideth still in Hungary, in the same place, environned
opon al parties, whereof I wrote unto your Highness in my last letters. And
themperor departed from Abagh toward Vienna the second day of this month by
land, not coming by this town: but the same day the king Ferdinando
departed from this Town by water, and at Passaw xiiij myls hens they shall
mete, and so pase forth unto Lyntz, which is the mydds way from hens unto
Vienna. And there themperor will tarry to counsel what he will do: and there all the Ambassadors shall know his pleasure, as Monsieur Grandeveile showed me.

I have sent herewith unto your grace the copy of themperors Proclamation
concerning a general Council, and a reformation to be had in Germany for the
controversyes of the faith. Also I have sent the tax of all the stats of
thempire, how many Soldiers every man is lymitted unto, for the aid against
the Turk. Wherein your grace may perceyve, that the greatest Prince in Germany
(only the Duke of Burgondy and Austry except) is not appointed above 120
horsemen and 554 fotemen. Thus our Lord evermore have your highness in his
preservation and governance. From Regenspurgh the iiij. day of September.

Your graces most humble subjecte, Chaplain, and beidman, Thomas Cranmer.

NUMBER. III. A parcel of Jewels sent from Greenwich to Hampton Court to the King.
To the receipt of which he set his hand.
Henry R.
SENT unto the King's Highness fro Grenewiche to Hampton court, Sir W. S. MSS.
by Master Norrys the xxi st day of Septembre in the xxiiij th year of his
graces Reign thies parcelles ensueing. Which parcellex his grace does knoledge
him self to have receyved by this present bylle, signed with his most gracieux
hand the day and year above expressed.

Furste, One carkeyne of gold antique warke, having a shield of gold, set with
a great Rose, contenyng xij Dyamants. One fayer table Dyamant. One poynted
Dyamant. One table Rubye. One table Emerawde. And iij fayer hinging perles. 2.
Item, Another Carkeyne of gold of hearts with ij hands holding a great owche of
gold, set with a great table balasse. One pointed dyamant: Two table dyamants:
Whereof one rising with Lozanges, and the other flat. And one other long
lozanged diamant. And iiij perles, with one long perle pendaunt. 3. Item,
Another Carkeyne of gold enameled with blac and white, with an owche of gold
enameled white and blew: Set with a great rockey Rubye: One rocky Emerawde: One
pointed Dyamant. One table Dyamant. A heart of a Dyamant, rising full of
Lozanges. And one fayer hinging perle. 4. Item, Another Carkeyne of lynks of
gold. The one enameled blac, the other gold: having an owche of gold, set with
a great rockey balasse: two small table Dyamants; and one Lozanged Dyamant. Five
slight perles, and one long perle pendaunt thereat. 5. Item, Another Carkeyne of
gold, garnished thoroughly with xxij coletts of dyamants, contening in all lxxvij
diamant small and great: and xliij perles, with an owche of Antique, set with
xiiij dyamants, one rockey Rubye, and one rockey Emerawde; and a flat round
hinging perle. 6. Item, Another Carkeyne of gold, enameled blac, with an
owche, set with a fayer table balasse, and three small tryangled dyamants, and
five perles. 7. Item, A George on horse back; garnished with xvj small Dyamants.
And in the belly of the Dragon a rockey perle. 8. Item, Another Carkeyne of
gold: al blac, having a George on horseback; garnished with xviij small
Dyamants. And in the belly of the Dragon a perle ragged. 9. Item, A cheyne of
gold, of Spaynishe facion, enameled, white, red and black.
NUMBER. IV. The King to Dr. Boner, his Majesty's Agent, to declare to the Pope
his Appeal from him, and his Sentence.
By the King.
Henry R.

TRusty and Welbeloved, we great ye well. Signifying unto the same, Sir W. H.
MSS.
that we have appelled from the Popes's Sentence, lately gevyn against us;
which Appele ye receiving herewith, with a Proxy devised for that intent, Our
mind and pleasure is, that if it is thought to you good and beneficial, for
conservation of the same, ye intimate the same to the Pope after the order and
form of Law, and according to our said proxy sent unto you. And if not, to
advertise us of your mind and opinion in that behalf. Geven under our Signet at
our Castle of Windessour, the xviij day of August.

To our Trusty and Welbeloved Mr. Doctor Bonner.
NUMBER. V. Cranmer's Protestation at his Consecration.
IN Dei nomine Amen. Cranm. Reg.
Coram vobis autentica persona and testibus fide dignis, hic presentibus, Ego
Thomas in Cant. Archiepiscopum electus dico, allego, and in hijs Scriptis
palam, public and express protestor: Quod cum juramentum, sive juramenta ab
Electis in Cant. Archiepiscopos summo Pontifici praestari solita, me ante meam
Consecrationem, aut tempore ejusdem pro forma potius quam pro esse, aut re
obligatoria ad illam obtinendam oporteat; non est, nec erit meae Voluntatis aut
intentionis per hujusmodi juramentum vel juramenta, qualitercunque verba in
ipsis posita sonare videbuntur, me obligare ad aliquod ratione eorundem posthac
dicend. faciend. aut attemptand. quod erit aut esse videbitur contra legem Dei,
vel contra illustriss. Regem nostrum Angliae, aut Remp. hujus sui Regni
Angliae, legesve aut praerogativas ejusdem. Et quod non intendo per hujusmodi
juramentum aut juramenta, quovis modo me obligare, quominus libere loqui,
consulere and consentire valeam, in omnibus and singulis, Reformationem
religionis Christianae, Gubernationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae; aut Praerogativam
Coronae ejusdem, Reipublicaeve commoditatem, quoquomodo concernentibus, et ea
ubique exequi and reformare, quae mihi in Ecclesia Anglicana reformanda
videbuntur. Et secundum hanc interpretationem and intellectum hunc, and non
aliter, neque alio modo, dicta juramenta me praestiturum protestor and
profiteor. Protestorque insuper, quodcumque juramentum sit, quod meus
Procurator summo Pontifici meo nomine antehac praestitit, quod non erat
intentionis aut Voluntatis meae sibi aliquam dare potestatem, cujus Vigore
aliquod juramentum meo nomine praestare potuerit contrarium aut repugnans
juramento per me praestito, aut imposterum praestando praefato Illustriss*
Angliae Regi. Et casu, quod aliquid tale contrarium aut repugnans juramentum
meo nomine praestitit, Protestor, quod illud me inscio, and absque mea
authoritate praestitum, pro nullo and invalido esse volo. Quas Protestationes
in omnibus clausulis and sententijs dictorum juramentorum repetitas and
reiteratas volo. A quibus per aliquod meum factum vel dictum quovismodo
recedere non intendo, nec recedam. Sed eas mihi semper salvas esse volo.

NUMBER. VI. Cranmer's Oath taken at his Consecration to the Pope.
EGO Thomas Electus Cantuariensis ab hac hora, ut antea, Cranm. Reg.
fidelis and obediens ero B. Petro* Sanctae Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, and
Domino meo D. Clementi VII. suisque Successoribus canonice intrantibus. Non ero
in consilio aut consensu, vel facto, ut vitam perdant, vel membrum, seu
capiantur mala captione. Consilium vero quod mihi credituri sunt per se aut
nuncios, ad eorum damnum, me sciente, nemini pandam. Papatum Romanum, and
Regalia S. Petri adjutor eis ero, ad retinendum and defendendum, salvo meo
ordine, contra omnem hominem. Legatum Sedis Apostolicae in eundo and redeundo
honorifice tractabo, and in suis necessitatibus adjuvabo; Vocatus ad Synodum
Veniam, nisi praepeditus fuero Canonica praepeditione. Apostolorum limina
Romana Curia existente citra Alps singulis annis, ultra vero montes singulis
biennijs Visitabo, aut per-me, aut per meum nuntium, nisi Apostolica absolvat
Licentia. Possessiones vero ad mensam mei Archiepiscopatus pertinentes non
vendam, neque donabo, neque impignerabo, neque de novo infeudabo, vel aliquo
modo alienabo, inconsulto Romano Pontifice. Sic me Deus adjuvet, and haec
Sancta Dei Evangelia.

NUMBER. VII. Cranmer's Oath to the King for his Temporalties.
I Thomas Cranmer renounce and utterly forsake al such clauses, words,
sentences, Cleopatra, E. 6.
and grants, which I have of the Popes Holiness in his Bulls of the
Archbishopric of Cant. that in any manner was, is or may be hurtful, or
prejudicial to your highness, your heirs, Successors, Estate, or Dignity Royal.
Knowing my self to take and hold the said Archbishopric immediately, and only,
of your Highness, and of none other. Most lowly beseeching the same for
restitution of the Temporalties of the said Archbishopric; Professing to be
faithful, true and obedient subject to your said Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, during my life. So help me God, and the holy Evangelists.

NUMBER. VIII. The King's Proclamation for bringing in Seditious Books.
IT set forth, that sundry contentions and sinister opinions had by wrong
teaching and naughty printed Books increased among his Subjects, Cleopatra, E.
5.
contrary to the true faith and reverence, and due observation of the
Sacraments and Sacramentals, rites and ceremonies heretofore used. And as the
Books are blamed, so the additions and Annotations in the margents, the
Prologues and Kalendars to them made by sundry strange persons, called
Anabaptists and Sacramentaries, lately comen into the Realm, and by some other
his Majesty's Subjects. Whereby many of the Kings loving, but simple Subjects
were induced arrogantly and superstitiously to dispute in open places and
tavernes upon Baptism, and upon the holy Sacrament of the Altar, not only to
their own slander, but to the reproach of the whole realm, and his Graces high
discontentation and displesure, with the danger of the increase of the said
enormities. Therefore the King did streitly charge and command by his present
Proclamation, as well al his subjects, as al others whatsoever resiant within
his Realm, that from henceforth they observe and keep these Articles following.

First, That no person shall without his Majesty's special leave, transport and
bring from foreign parts, any Books printed in the English tongue, nor sell,
give and publish such books, upon pain that the Offenders forfeit al their
goods and chattels, and have imprisonment during his Majesty's pleasure.

Item, None to print any book in the English tongue, unless upon examination
made by some of the privy Council, or other appointed by his Highness, and shall
have License so to do. Nor shall print, or bring ^n any books of the holy
scripture in the English tongue with any Annotations in the Margin, or any
Prologue, or Addition in the Calendar or Table, except such annotations, etc.
be first duly examined and allowed by the Kings Highness, or such of his
Council, as shall please his Majesty to assign thereto: but only the plain
Sentence and Text with a Table or Repertory, instructing the Reader to find
readily the Chapters contained in the said Book, and the effects thereof. Nor
to print any Book of translations in the English tongue, unles the plain name
of the translator thereof be contained in the same book, or else that the
Printer will answer for the same, as for his own privy deed: and otherwise to
make the Translator the Printer to suffer imprisonment, and make a fine at the
Kings Will.

Item, None using the occupation of printing, shall print or cause to be
published any book of Scripture in the English tongue, unles his books be first
viewed and examined by the King, or one of his Privy Council, or one Bishop of
the Realm, upon pain to loose and forfeit all their goods and chattels, and
suffer imprisonment during pleasure.

Item, The King declared concerning Anabaptists and other Sacramentaries lately
comen into the realm, that he abhorred and detested their errors, and intended
to proceed against them, that were already apprehended, according to their
merits; to the intent his subjects should take example by their punishments not
to adhere to such false and detestable opinions, but utterly to forsake and
relinquish them. And that whersoever any of them be known, they be detected,
and his Majesty or Council be informed with all convenient speed, with all manner*
Abetters and printers of the same opinion. And his Majesty charged the same
Anabaptists and Sacramentaries not apprehended or known, that they within eight
or ten days depart out of the Realm, upon pain of los of their life, and
forfeiture of their goods.

Item, Forasmuch as the holy Sacrament of the Altar is the very body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so has and ought to be taken upon peril of
damnation, his Majesty minded to continue his Subjects in this true and just
Faith, and that they be not beguiled away from it, charged that none should
henceforth reason or dispute upon the said blessed Sacrament, or of the
Mysteries thereof, upon pain of los of life and forfeiture of goods. Except to
learned men in holy scripture instructed, and taught in the Universities, their
Liberties and privileges in their schools and places accustomed concerning the
same; and otherwise in communication without slander of any man, for the only
confirmation and declaration of the truth thereof.

Item, And forasmuch as many brooked diverse and many laudable ceremonies and
rites heretofore used and accustomed in the Church of England, not yet
abrogated by the Kings authority; Whereby arose different strifes and
contentions; as for and concerning holy bread, holywater, processions, kneeling
and creeping on Good Friday to the Cross, and Easter day, setting up lights
before the Corpus Christi, bearing of Candles on the day of Purification,
Ceremonies used at the Purification of women delivered of child, and offering
of their Chrysomes, Keeping of the four offering days, Payment of tiths
according to the old custom of the Realm, and other such like ceremonies; (...)
Majesty charged and commanded al his subjects to observe and keep them; so as
they shall use and observe the same without superstition, and esteem them for
good and lawful ceremonies, tokens and signs to put us in remembrance of
things of high perfection, and none otherwise. And not to repose any trust of
salvation in them: but take them for good Instructions, until such time as his
M. change or abrogate any of them, as his Highness upon reasonable consideration
both may, and intends to do.

Finally, Whereas a few Priests, as well Religious as others, have taken Wives
and married themselves, contrary to the wholesome monitions of S. Paul to
Timothy and Titus, and to the Corinthians, and contrary to the opinion of many
of the old Fathers and Expositors of scripture, not esteeming also the promise
of chastity, which they made at the receiving of Holy Orders; his Highness,
minding in no wise, that the Generality of the Clergy should, with the example
of such a few light persons, proceed to marriage without a common consent of his
H. and the Realm, does streitly charge and command, that al such as have
attempted marriage, as also such as will presumptuously proceed in the same, not
to minister the Sacrament or other Ministry m^stical, nor have any office,
cure, privilege, profit or commodity, heretofore accustomed, and belonging to
the Clergy of the Realm: But shall be utterly after such marriage expelled and
deprived, and be held and reputed as Lay persons to al purposes and intents.
And that such as after this Proclamation shall of presumptuous minds take wives
and be married, shall run into his Graces Indignation, and suffer further
punishment and imprisonment at his Graces will and pleasure.

NUMBER. IX. Bishop Fisher to Secretary Crumwel, declaring his willingness to
swear to the Succession.
AFTER my most humble commendations. Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 6. p. 172.
Whereas ye be content, that I should write unto the Kings Highness, in good
faith I dread me, that I cannot be so circumspect in my writing, but that some
word shall escape me, wherewith his Grace shall be moved to some further
displeasure against me, whereof I would be very sorry. For as I will answer before
God, I would not in any manner of point offend his Grace, my duty saved unto God,
whom I must in every thing prefer. And for this consideration I am full loathe,
and full of fear to write unto his Highness in this matter. Nevertheless sithen I
conceive, that it is your mind, that I shall so do, I will endeavor me to the
best I can. But first here I must beseech you, good Master Secretary, to call to
your remembrance, that at my last being before you, and the other
Commissioners, for taking of the oath concerning the Kings most noble
succession, I was content to be sworn unto that parcel concerning the
Succession. And there I did rehearse this reason, which I said moved me. I
doubted not, but that the Prince of any Realm, with the assent of his Nobles
and Commons, might appoint for his Succession royal soche an order as was seen
unto his Wisdom most according. And for this reason I said that I was content
to be sworn unto that part of the oath as concerning the Succession. This is a
very truth, as God help my soul at my most need; albeit I refused to swear to
some other parcels, because that my Conscience would not serve me so to do.

NUMBER. X. Lee Bishop Elect of Litchfield and Coventry to Secretary Crumwel
concerning Bp. Fisher.
PLeasyth you to be adverted, Cott. Librar. Cleop. E. 6. p. 165.
that I have been with my Lord of Rochester, who is as ye left him: that is to
say, ready to take his oath for the Succession, and to swear never to meddle
more in disputation of the validity of the Matrimony, or invalidity, with the
Lady Dowager; but that utterly to refuse. For as for the case of the
prohibition Levitical, his conscience is so knit, tha^ he cannot send it off
from him, whatsoever betide him. And yet he will, and does profess his
Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord, the King, during his life. Truly the man is
nigh going, and doubtless cannot continue, unles the King and his Council be
merciful unto him. For the body cannot bear the clothes on his back, as knows
God. Who preserve you. In have scribbled by your own most bounden.

Roland Co. and Litch. electus and confirmatus.

NUMBER. XI. The Archbishop to Secretary Crumwel, in behalf of Bp. Fisher, and Sr.
Thomas More.
Right Worshipful Master Crumwel,
Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 6. p. 181.
AFTER most hearty Commendations, etc. I doubt not but you do right well
remember, that my Lord of Rochester and Master More were contented to be sworn
to the Act of the Kings Succession, but not to the Preamble The Preamble to
this Act may be read in the History of the Reformation, Part I. p. 145.
of the same. What was the cause of their refusal thereof, I am uncertain, and
they would by no means express the same. Nevertheless it must nedis be, either
the diminution of the authority of the Bushop of Rome, or else the reprobation
of the Kings first pretensed Matrimony. But if they do obstinately persist in
their opinions of the Preamble, yet, me seems, it scholde not be refused, if
they will be sworn to the very Act of Succession: so that they will be sworn to
maintene the same against al powers and potentates. For hereby shall be a great
occasion to satisfy the Princess Dowager and the Lady Mary, which do think they
should dampne their sowles, if they should abandon and relinquish their
astates. And not only it should stop the mouths of thaym, but also of the
Emperor, and other their friends, if they geve as much credence to my Lord of
Rochester, and Master More spekyng and doing against thaym, as they hitherto
have done, and thought that al other should have done, when they spoke and did
with thaym. And peradventure it should be a good quietation to many other
within this reaulm, if such men should say, that the Succession, comprised
within the said Act, is good and according to Gods laws. For than I think
there is not one within this reaulme, that would ones reclaim against it. And
whereas diverse persons, either of a wilfulness, will not, or of an indurate and
invertible conscience cannot, altre from their opinions of the Kings first
pretensed marriage (wherein they have ones said their minds, and percase have a
persuasion in their heads, that if they should now vary therefrom, their fame
and estimation were distained for ever,) or else of the authority of the
Busschope of Rome: yet if all the Reaulme with one accord would apprehend the
said succession; in my judgment it is a thing to be amplected and embraced.
Which thing, although I trust surely in God, that it shall be brought to pass,
yet hereunto might not a little avayl the consent and oaths of these two
persons, the Busschope of Rochester, and Master More with their adherents, or
rather Confederates. And if the Kings pleasure so were, their said oaths might
be suppressed, but when and whare his Highness might take some commodity by the
publyshing of the same. Thus our Lord have you ever in his conservation. From
my manner at Croyden the xvii day of April.

Your own assured ever Thomas Cantuar.

NUMBER. XII. Nix Bishop of Norwich to Warham Archbishop of Cant. for suppressing
such as read books, brought from beyond Sea.
AFter most humble recommendations, Cleopatra, E. 5.
I do your Grace to understand, that I am accumbred with such as kepyth and
readyth these arroneous books in English, and beleve and geve credence to the
same, and techyth others, that they should so do. My Lord, I have done that
lies in me for the suppression of soch persons; but it passes my power, or
any spiritual man for to do it. For diverse says openly in my Diocese, that the
Kings grace would, that they should have the said arroneous books, and so
maintains themselves of the King. Whereupon I desired my L. Abbot of Hyde to
show this to the Kings grace, beseching him to send his honorable Lettres,
under his Seal, down to whom he please, in my Diocese. That they may show and
publish, that it is not his pleasure, that soche books should be had or red;
and also punish soch as says so. I trust before this letter shall come unto
you, my said L. Abbot has done so. That said Abbot has the names of some,
that crakyth in the Kings name, that their false opinions should go forth, and
will die in the quarrel, that their ungracious opinions be true, and trustyth by
Michaelmas day, there shall be more that shall beleve of their opinion, than they
that beleivyth the contrary* If I had known, that your Grace had been at
London, I would have commanded the said Abbot to have spoken with you. But
your Grace may send for him, when ye please, and he shall show you my whole mind
in that matier; and how I thought best for the suppression of soch as holdyth
these arroneous opinions. For if they continue any time, I thynk they shall
undo us all. The said Abbot departed from me on Monday last: and since that
time I have had much trouble and business with others in like matters: And as
they say, that whersomever they go, they hear say, that the Kings pleasure is,
the N. Testament in English shall go forth, and men should have it and read it.
And from that opinion I can no ways induce them. But I had greater authority
to punish them, then I have. Wherefore I beseech your good Lordship, to
advertise the Kings grace, as I trust the said Abbot has done, before this
letter shall come unto your grace; that a remedy may be had.

But now it may be done well in my Diocese: for the Gentlemen and the Communalty
be not greatly infected; But merchants, and soch that has their abiding not
far from the Sea. The said Abbot of Hyde can show you of a Curate, and well
learned in my Diocese, that exhorted his Parishioners to believe contrary to
the Catholic faith. There is a College in Cambridg, called Gunnel haule From
whence came Shaxton Bp. of Sarum, and Skip, Q. Annes Chaplain, and Bp. of
Hereford.
, of the foundat^^n of a Bp. of Norwich. I hear of no clerk, that has commen
out lately of that College, but savoryth of the frying pan, tho he speak never
so holily. I beseech your grace to pardon me of my rude and tedious writing to
you: the zeal and love that I owe to Almighty God cawse me this to do. And thus
Almighty God long preserve your Grace in good prosperity and health. At Hoxne
the xiiij th. day of May, 1530.

Your obediensary and daily Orator.

NUMBER. XIII. Archbishop Cranmer to King Henry, Complaining of a Prior in
Canterbury, that had preached against him.
Cleopatra, E. 6. p. 232.
PLesyth it your Grace to be advertised, That where as well by your Graces special
letters, dated the third day of June in the xxvij th. year of your Graces most
noble reign, as also by mouth in Wynchester at Mich. last past, your Grace
commanded all the Prelates of your Realm, that they with all acceleration and
expedition should do their diligence every one in his Diocese, fully to persuade
your people of the Bp. of Rome his authority, that it is but a false and injust
Usurpation, and that your Grace of very right and by Gods law is the Supreme
Head of this Church of England, next immediately unto God: I to accomplish your
Graces Commandment, incontinent upon my return from Wynchester, (knowing that
all the Country about Otford and Knol, where my most abode was, were
sufficiently instructed in those matters already) came up into these parts of
East Kent only, by preaching to persuade the people in the said two Articles,
and in mine own church at Canterbury. Because I was informed, that that Town
in those two points was least persuaded of al my Diocese. I preached there two
Sermons my self. And as it then chanced Dr. Leighton was present at my first
Sermon, being then your Graces Visitor. Of whom if it so please your Grace you
may hear the report what I preached.

The scope and effect of both my Sermons stood in three things. First, I
declared, that the Bp. of Rome was not Gods Vicar in earth, as he was taken.
And although it is so taught these three or four hundred years, yet it is done
by means of the Bp. of Rome, who compelled men by oaths so to teach, to the
maintenance of his authority contrary to God's word. And here I declared by
what means and craft the Bp. of R. obtained such usurped authority. Second,
Because the Sea of R. was called Sancta Seeds Romana, and the Bp. was called
Sanctissimus Papa; and mennys consciences peradventure could not be quiet to be
separated from so holy a place, and from Gods most holy Vicar: I showed the
people, that this thing ought nothing to move them. For it was but a Holiness
in name. For indeed there was no such holiness at Rome. And hereupon I took
occasion to declare his glory, and the Pomp of Rome, the Covetousnes, the
unchaste living, and the maintenance of al vices. Third, I spoke against the
Bp. of R. his laws. Which he calls Divinas L^ges and Sacros Canones, and
makes them equal with Gods Law. And here I declared, that many of the Laws were
very contrary. And some of them, which were good and laudable, yet they were
not of such holiness, as he would make them; that is, to be taken as Gods laws,
or to have remission of sins by observing them. And here I said, that so many
of his laws as were good, men ought not to contemn or despise them, and
wilfully to break them. For those that be good your G. has received as laws
of your Realm, until such time as others should be made. And therefore as laws
of your realm, they must be observed, and not contempned. And here I spoke as
well of the Ceremonies of the Church, as of the foresaid laws; that they ought
neither to be rejected or despised, nor yet to be observed with this opinion,
that they of themselfes make men holy, or that they remit sins. For seeing,
that our sins be remitted by the death of our Savior Christ Jesus, I said, it
was too much injury to Christ, to impute the remission of our sins to any Laws
or ceremonies of man's making. Nor the Laws and ceremonies of the Church at
their first making were ordained for that intent. But as the common laws of
your G's realm be not made to remit sins, nor no man does observe them for
that intent; but for a common commodity, and for a good order and quietness to
be observed among your Subjects; evyn so were the laws and ceremonies first
instituted in the Church for a good order, and for remembrances of many good
things, but not for remission of our sins. And though it be good to observe
them well for that intent they were first ordened; yet it is not good, but a
contumely unto Christ to observe them with this opinion, that they remit sins;
or that the very bare observation of them, in it self, is a holiness before
God: Although they be remembrances of many holy things, or a disposition unto
goodness. And evyn so do the laws of your G's realm dispose men unto justice,
unto peace, and other true and perfect holiness. Wherefore I did conclude for a
general rule, that the people ought to observe them, as they do the laws of
your G's realm, and with no more opinion of holiness or remission of sin, then
the other common Laws of your G's realm.

Though my two Sermons were long, yet I have written briefly unto your Highness
the sum of them both. And I was informed by sundry reports, that the people
were glad, that they heard so much as they did; until such time, as the Prior
of the black frears at Canterbury preached a sermon, as it was thought and
reported, clean contrary unto all the three things, which I had preached before.
For as touching the first part, which I had preached against the erroneous
doctrine of the Bp. of R. his power; which error was, that by God's Law he
should be Gods Vicar here in earth; the Prior would not name the Bp. of R. but
under color spoke generally, That the Church of Christ never erred. And as
touching the second part, where I spoke of the Vices of the Bishops of R. And
there to the Prior said, that he would not sclawnder the Bishops of Rome. And
he said openly to me in a good Audience, that he knew no vices by none of the
Bishops of Rome. And he said also openly, that I preached uncharitably, when I
said, that these many years, I had daily prayed unto God, that I might see the
power of Rome destroyed: and that I thanked God, that I had now seen it in this
realm. And yet in my sermon I declared the cause wherefore I so prayed. For I
said, that I perceived the Sea of Rome work so many things contrary to Gods
honor, and the wealth of this realm, and I saw no hope of amendment, so long as
that* See reigned over us. And for this cause only I had prayed unto God
continually, that we might be separated from that See: and for no private
malice or displesure, that I had either to the Bp. or See of Rome. But this
seemed an uncharitable prayer to the Prior, that the power of Rome should be
destroyed.

And as for the third part, where I preached against the Laws of the Bp. of
Rome; that they ought not to be taken as Gods Laws; nor to be esteemed so
highly as he would have them: the Prior, craftily leaving out the name of the
Bp. of Rome, preached, that the Laws of the Church be equal with Gods laws.
These things he preached as it is proved both by sufficient witness, and also by
his own confession.

I leave the judgment hereof unto your G. and to your Council, whether this
were a defense of the Bp. of Rome, or not. And I only, according to my bounden
duty, have reported the truth of the Fact. But in mine opinion, if he had
spoken nothing else; yet whosoever says, that the Church never erred,
maintains the Bp. of Rome his power. For if that were not erroneous, that was
taught of his power, That he is Christ's Vicar in earth, and by Gods law Head of
all the World, spiritual and temporal, and that al people must believe that De
necessitate Salutis, and that whosoever does any thing against the Sea of Rome
is an heretic: and that he has authority also in Purgatory, with such other
many false things, which were taught in times past to be Articles of our Faith:
if these things were not erroneous, yea, and errors in the Faith, then must
nedis your G's Laws be erroneous that pronounce the Bp. of Rome to be of no
more power by Gods Law than other Bishops; and them to be Traitors that defend
the contrary. This is certain that whosoever says, that the Church never
erred, must either deny, that the church ever taught any such errors of the Bp.
of Rome his power, and then they speak against that which all the world knows,
and al books written of that matter these three or four hundred years do
testify; or else they must say, that the said errors be none errors, but
truths. And then it is both treason and heresy.

At my first Examination of him, which was before Christmas, he said, that he
preached not against me, nor that I had preached any thing amiss. But now he
says, that I preached amiss in very many things, and that he purposely
preached against me. And this he reports openly. By which words I am
marvellously sclawndered in these parts. And for this cause I beseech your G.
that I may not have the judgment of the cause: for so much as he takes me for
a party: but that your G. would commit the hearing thereof unto my L. Privy
Seal: or else to associate unto me some other persons at your G's pleasure, that
we may hear the case jointly together.

If this man, who has so highly offended your G. and preached against me
openly, being Ordinary and Metropolitan of this Province: and that in soch
matters as concern the misliving and the laws of the Bp. of Rome; and that
also within mine own church; if he, I say, be not looked upon, I leave unto
your G's. prudence to expend what example this may be unto others with like
color to maintain the Bp. of Rome his authority: and also of what estimation I
shall be reputed hereafter, and what credence shall be given unto my preaching,
whatsoever I shall say hereafter.

I beseech your G. to pardon me of my long and tedious writing. For I could not
otherwise set the matter forth plain. And I most heartily thank your G. for
the Stag which your G. sent unto me from Wyndsor Forest. Which if your G. knew
for how many causes it was welcome unto me, and how many ways it did me
service, I am sure you would think it much the better bestowed. Thus our Lord
have you Highness always in his preservation and governance. From Ford the
xxvj day of August.

Your Graces most humble Chaplain and bedisman, T. Cantuarien.

NUMBER. XIV. The Archbishop to Mr. Secretary Crumwel, concerning his styling
himself Primate of al England.
RIght worshipful in my most hearty wise I commend me unto you. Cleop. F. 1. p.
261.
Most heartily thanking you for that you have signified unto me, by my Chaplain
Mr. Champion, the complaint of the Bp. of Winchester unto the Kings Highness in
two things concerning my Visitation. The one is, that in my style I am written
Totius Angliae Primas, to the derogation and prejudice of the Kings high power
and authority, being Supreme Head of the Church. The other is, that his Dioces
not past five years agone was visited by my Predecessor, and must from
henceforth pay the tenth part of the Spiritualties according to the Act granted
in the last Sessions of Parliament. Wherefore he thinks, that his Diocese
should not be charged with my Visitation at this time.

First, as concerning my style, Wherein I am named Totius Angliae Primas, I
suppose that to make his cause good (which else indeed were naught) he does mix
it with the King's cause; (As ye know the man lacks neither learning in the
law, neither witty invention, ne craft to set forth his matters to the best)
that he might appear not to maintain his own cause, but the Kings. Against
whose Highness he knows right well, that I will maintain no cause, but give
place, and lay both my cause and my self at my Princes feet. But to be plain
what I think of the Bp. of Winchester, I cannot persuade with my self, that he
so much tendereth the Kings cause, as he does his own, that I should not visit
him. And that appears by the very time. For if he cast no further then the
defense of the Kings G's authority, or if he intend that at al, why moved he
not the matier before he received my Monition for my Visitation. Which was
within four miles of Winchester delivered unto him the xxii. day of April last,
as he came up to the Court. Moreover I do not a little mervayl, why he should
now find fault rather then he did before, when he took the Bp. of Rome as chief
Head. For though the Bp. of R. was taken for Supreme Head, notwithstanding
that, he had a great number of Primates under him. And by having his Primates
under him, his Supreme authority was not less esteemed, but much the more* Why
then may not the Kings Highness, being Supreme Head, have Primates under him,
without a diminishing, but with the augmenting of his said Supreme Authority.
And of this I doubt not at all, but the Bp. of Winchester knows, as well as
any man living, that in case this said style or title had been in any point
impediment or hindrance to the Bp. of Rome's usurped authority, it would not
have so long been unreformed as it has been. For I doubt not, but all the
Bushops of England would ever gladly have had the Archbushops both authority
and title taken away, that they might have been equal together. Which well
appears by the many contentions against the Archbushops for jurisdiction in
the Court of Rome. Which had be easily brought to pass, if the Bushops of R.
had thought, the Archbushops titles and styles to be an erogation to their
Supreme authority.

All this notwithstanding, if the Bushops of this realm pas no more of their
names, styles and titles, then I do of mine, the Kings Highness shall soon order
the matier betwixt us al. And if I saw, that my style were against the Kings
authority (whereunto I am especially sworn,) I would sue my self unto his G.
that I might leave it; and so would have done before this time. For I pray God
never be merciful unto me at the general judgment, if I perceive in my heart,
that I set more by any title, name or style, that I write, then I do by the
paring of an apple, further then it shall be to the setting forth of Gods word
and will. Yet I will not utterly excuse me herein. For God must be judge, who
knows the bottom of my heart, and so do not I my self. But I speak for so
much as I do feel in my heart. For many evil affections ly lurking there, and
will not lightly be espied. But yet I would not gladly leave any just thing at
the pleasure and suite of the Bp. of Wynchester, he being none otherwise
affectionate unto me, than he is.

Even at the Beginning of Christ's profession Diotrephes desired gerere primatum
in Ecclesia, as says S. John in his last Epistle. And since he has had mo
successors than all the Apostles had. Of whom have come al these glorious
titles, styles and pomps into the Church. But I would, that I and al my
Brethren, the Bushops would leave al our styles, and write the style of our
Offices, calling our selves Apostolos Ies^ Christi: so that we took not upon us
the name vainly, but were so even indeed. So that we might order our Diocese in
such sort, that neither paper, parchment, lead nor wax, but the very Christian
Conversation of the people might be the letters and seals of our offices. As
the Corinthians were unto Paul, to whom he said, Literae nostrae and signa
Apostolatus nostri vos estis.

Now for the second, Where the Bp. of Winchester alleges the Visitation of my
Predecessor, and the tenth part now to be paid to the King. Truth it is, that
my Predecessor visited the Dioces of Winchester after the decease of my L.
Cardinal [ Wolsey] as he did al other Diocesses Sede Vacant. But else I think,
it was not visited by none of my Predecessors this forty years. And
notwithstanding that, he himself, not considering their charges at that time,
charged them with a new Visitation within less then half a year after: and that
against al right, as Dr. Incent has reported to my Chancellor: the Clergy at
that time paying to the King half of their benefices in five years. Which is
the tenth part every year, as they paid before, and have paid since, and shall
pay still for ever by the last Act. But I am very glad, that he has now some
compassion of his Diocese, although at that time he had very small, when he did
visit them the same year, that my Predecessor did visit. And al other Bushops,
whose course is to visit this year, kept their Visitations, where I did visit
the last year, notwithstanding the tenth part to be paid to the Kings G.
Howbeit I do not so in Winchester Dioces. For it is now the third year since
that Diocese was Visited by any man. So that he has the least cause to
complain of any Bushop. For it is longer since his Dioces was visited then the
other. Therefore where he lays, to aggravate the matier, the charges of the
late Act granted, it is no more against me then against al other Bushops, that
do visit this year; nor makes no more against me this year, then it made
against me the last year, and shall do every year hereafter. For if they were
true men in accounting and paying the Kings Subsidies, they are no more charged
by this new Act, then they were for the space of ten years past, and shall be
charged ever hereafter. And thus to conclude, if my said L. of Winchesters
objections should be allowed this year, he might by such arguments both
disallow al manner Visitations, that has be done these ten years past, and
that ever shall be done hereafter.

Now I pray you, good Master Secretary of your advise, whether I shall need to
write unto the Kings Highness herein. And thus our Lord have you ever in his
preservation. At Otteford the 12 day of May.

Your own ever assured Thomas Cantuar.

NUMBER. XV. The Appeal of Stokesly Bishop of London to the King, against the
Archbishops Visitation.
Contra Visitationem Archiep. Cant.
FIrst, Cleop. F. 2. p. 124.
That the Archbp. of Canterbury in all his Monitions and Writings, sent to the
Bp. Abbots, Prior and Archdeacon of London, concerning this his Visitation,
called himself Apostolicae Sedis Legatum: and that therefore the Bp. of London,
with the Chapter, did not only advertise the Archbp. thereof by their Letters
before the day of Visitation: But also the same day of the Commencement th^reof
in the Chapter house of Powles, the said Bp. and Chapter, before the delivery
of the Certificate to the ABp. made there openly a ^rotestation, reading it in
writing, signifying, that they would neither accept him as such a Legate, or
admit or obey his Visitation, jurisdiction, or any thing, that he would attempt
by the pretext or color of that name of Legate, or otherwise, against the Crown
of our Sovereign, his Regality, Statutes, or customs of his realm. And
required the said Archbp. to command his Register there present to enact the
said Protestation. Which he refused utterly to do; showing himself not willing
to admit the said Protestation.

Item, That the Archbp. in his said Monition to the Bp. did expressly intimate
and signify to him* that he would in his Visitation suspend all the jurisdiction
of the Bp. the Dean and Archdeacons from the beginning thereof to the ending.
In such wise, that the Bp. nor his Officers, Dean nor Archdeacon, should or
might at that time, (which he would not determine how long it should endure)
use no jurisdiction, whatsoever causes or necessities should chance of
correction, institutions of benefices, Confirmations of Election, Consecrations
of Churches, Celebrations of Orders, or Probation of Testaments, with many
other things mo appertaining ad forum contentiosum. But al and every of these
the Archbp. and his [Officers] would have, and suffer none other to use and
exercise the same, unto the end of his Visitation. Which he has now continued
until the first day of December: pretending, that then he may likewise continue
it other six months, and so forth without end at his pleasure during his life,
from time to time. So that by this means he only, and none other, should be Bp.
but Titularis, in all his Province during his life, but at his pleasure. Which
were an inconvenience intolerable, and such as never was read nor heard of,
that ever any Metropolitan, private Legate or Bp. of Rome, in the most Tyranny
had usurped the semblable.

Item, That al men learned, and Books of the Canon Law does aggree, that no
Metropolitan or Primate, may thus, by any law written, suspend all the
jurisdiction of the Bishops, for the time of their Visitations, or exercise the
premises during the same Iure Metropolitico. And this the Council of the
Archbishop does not deny, nor cannot.

Item, Where the said AB. does pretend, that his Predecessors times past has
put in use and exercise all the premises: And so, though the Common law does not
favor him, yet he may lean to prescription: First, it is to be considered and
remembered, that the suspension of al jurisdiction of all the Bishops in manner
aforesaid seems to be against holy scripture, and the authority given unto
them by God; and as it was said before, that Suspension were a thing
pernicious, not read, nor heard of, to have be attempted by the most tyranny
of all the Bishops of R., without the great offense of the Bishop. And as for
the rest, considering, that none of his Predecessors this hundred years did
visit thus his Province; and therefore no man Living can know this by
experience, it had been necessary for the Archbp. to have showed books for the
proof of these his sayings and pretenses. Which he and his Officers, being
thereunto desired, as well before the Visitation, as sithence, ever did refuse
and deferr to do.

Item, It is to be remembered, that in case it shall appear in any Book of the
AB. that his Predecessors have attempted any of the Premises; First, that his
Predecessors were Legates, and though they did visit jure Metropolitico, yet
they might peradventure, as Legates, attempt some things, which they had had no
right nor color to do, if they had be only Metropolitans and Primates.
Secondarily, In this behalf and case it is to be remembered, that many of those
Archbps. of Canterbury, were not only Legates, but also Chancellors of England.
By the which authority they peradventure did enforce and maintain many things
attempted against the Law, as the late Cardinal did. And therefore it is to be
dissevered what they did as Legates, and what as Metropolitans, and what by
force after repealed, and what by right peaceably enjoyed. And not to now jure
Metropolitico such things as were done by his Predecessors, as Legates: nor to
challenge prescription, now the authority of the Sea of Rome is repealed and
here extinguished in such things, as were attempted only by the pretext of the
authority of that See; or else after were appealed, repealed or resisted.
Thirdly, In This cause it is to be remembered, that it appears by the ancient
Registers of the Bishops, and their Churches, that when the Predecessors of the
AB. did attempt any of these causes aforesaid, the Bishops and their Clergies
did appeal to the Sea of Rome. And diverse times they obtained sentences and
executions against him: and some remained undecided by the reason of the death
of the AB. or Bp. complainant for remedy and redress of the same. In like manner
as we, your faithful Subjects have now for this our grief appeled unto your
Majesty.

Item, It is to be considered, Whether any Metropolitan in other Christen
realms, being now Legate, does exercise the premises after the form now here
pretended, in his Visitation. And in case they do not, as it is said they do
not attempt any such things, but only, in their Visitations Provincial, uses
that the Common Law gives them, then here to be repealed and extinguished for
ever. To the intent that the Bishops of R. hereafter shall have no color to
maintain and justify, that they keep here yet, and continue the possession of
their authority, and of our subjection by their Legate. Saying, that although
the AB. does relinquish the name of a Legate, yet nevertheless he exercises
such jurisdiction as the Laws never gave to Metropolitans, nor no AB. in
Christendom does exercise (Legates of the Sea of R. only excepted.) And
therefore it is to be provided, that no sparks remain, whereby he might suscitate
any such flame, if the matter should come in question.

Finally, It is to be remembered, that the Bishops, nor their Clergies do not
refuse to accept and obey the Visitation of the AB. as Metropolitan, and to pay
to him proxies due and accustomed. But where the Bishops has not only the
common Laws, but also Bulls and Sentences executed against his Predecessors,
and that long before the making of the Statutes against Provisions, declaring
what sums he shall not pass for the Proxies of their Churches, the Officers of
the AB. demands much more: neither showing the Law, (for there is none to
bear them) nor yet precedent or example in any ancient books, whereby they might
be satisfied. Which done he should without difficulty or grudge, have forthwith
al his Proxies upon the conclusion of his Visitation. Unto the which time it is
not due in money. Many other things and considerations there be, to be alleged
concerning the premises: which may be spoken in time and place, as the
debating of the matter shall require.

And for a conclusion, it may please your Majesty to be advertised, that if my
Lord of Cant. can show by ancient precedents, that any his Predecessors have
used peaceably the premises without interruption, and so have enjoyed the
same, those precedents showed and brought in presence, allowed also by your
learned Council in the laws spiritual, to be precedents sufficient, and of
authority in this behalf, We shall then immediately in all the premises, obey
the said ABp. without any further contradiction: In this our so doing, whether
we offer him reason or not, we refer us only unto your Majesty, and unto your
gracious judgment. Humbly beseeching the same, that for as much as all the Laws
be for us, and this hundred years past: and now also in our days we have not
heard nor seen the contrary used to the said Laws: We now most lowly, as your
poor and true subjects, desire your Majesty, that with your gracious favor and
license, we may use such defense, as your Laws, and your high Court of your
Parliament, has politicly provided for us, and other your Subjects.

NUMBER. XVI. An Inventory of the Cathedral church of S. Swithins in Winchester,
as it was given in, by the Prior and Convent, to Crumwell Secretary of State,
and the Kings Vicar general over al Spiritual men.
C C.C.C. MS. Miscel. G.
And first of the things that are abroad in the Church.
IMprimis, the nether part of the high Altar, being of plate of gold, garnished
with stones. The front above being of brodering work and pearls, and above that
a Table of Images of silver and gilt, garnished with stones. Item, Above that
Altar a great Cross, and an Image of plate of gold, garnished with stones.
Item, Behind the high Altar S. Swithens shrine, being of plate silver and gilt,
and garnished with stones. Item, In the body of the Church a great Cross, and an
Image of Christ and Mary and John, being of plate silver and partly gilt. Item,
A cross of plate of silver and gilt with an Image over the Iron door. And the
two Images of Mary and John are but Copper gilt.
The Inventory of the Sextre.
Jewels of Gold.
Imprimis, There are in the Sextre five Crosses of gold, garnished with
precious stones. And one of the five is but of plate of gold fixed upon Wood.
Item, One shrine of plate of gold garnished with precious stones. Item, One
little pair of Candlesticks of gold. Item, One little box of gold with his
cover to bear the H. Sacrament. Item, Three chalices of gold, and one of them
garnished with precious stone. Item, One little pax of gold. Item, One little
sacring bell of Gold. Item, Four Pontifical rings of gold with precious stones.
Item, One pectoral of gold set with stones. Item, One Pectoral, partly gold,
partly silver, and gilt, set with stones. Item, Two Saints arms of plate of
gold, garnished with stones. Item, S. Philips foot, covered with plate of gold,
and with stones. Item, A book of the four Evangelists, written al with gold;
and the utter side is of plate of gold.
Jewels of Silver.
Imprimis, One Table of our Lady, being of silver and gilt. Item, Nine crosses
of silver and gilt, and one of Cristal. Item, One and twenty shrines, some al
silver and gilt; and some part silver and gilt; and part copper and gilt; and
some part silver and part ivory, and some copper and gilt, and some set with
garnished stones. Item, Twelve chalices of silver and gilt, belonging to the
Sextre, and to the Altars, and chauntries founded in the Church. Item, Four
Paxes of silver and gilt belonging to the Sextre, and other Altars. Item, Six
casts of Candlesticks belonging to the Sextre, and the Chauntries, being of
silver and gilt. Item, One Candlestick of silver, belonging to S. Swithens
shrine. Item, Six pair of Cruits of silver belonging to the Sextre and
Chauntries. Item, Seven Censers of silver and gilt. Item, Two Sarys, one of
silver and gilt, and the other only of silver. Item, Three pair of Basins of
silver and gilt. Item, Two Ewers, one of them silver and gilt, and the other
only silver. Item, Six Images of silver and gilt. Item, One and thirty Collars,
six of them garnished with plate of silver, and gilt, and stones; the residue
of brodering work and pearls. Item, Six pectorals of silver and gilt, garnished
with stones. Item, Three pastoral staves of silver and gilt. Item, One Pastoral
staf of an Unicorns horn. Item, Three standing Mitres of silver and gilt,
garnished with pearls and precious stones. Item, Ten old Mitres, garnished with
pearls and stones, after the old fashion. Item, One Rectors staf of Unicorns
horn. Item, Four Processional staves of plates of silver. Item, Four sacring
bells of silver and gilt, belonging to the Sextre and Altars. Item, Nine pixes
of Crystal, partly garnished with silver and gilt. Item, Seven tables with
Relics fixed in them; and four of them are of plate of silver and gilt, and
the three other of copper and gilt. Item, Five Saints heads, and four of them
of plate of silver and gilt, and the first painted. Item, Three Saints arms,
two of them covered with plate of silver and gilt, and the third is painted.
Item, Seven books, the outer parts of them being plates of silver and gilt.
Item, One Book of K. Henry the Sevenths foundation, covered with velvet, and
garnished with bosses of silver and gilt.
Copys.
Imprimis, One principal Cope of needle work, wrought with gold and pearls.
Item, One Chysible. Two Tymasyles, and parel of the Albes of the same work, of
my L. Cardinal Beaufords gift. Item, Eight and twenty other Copys of diverse
other works and colors, and diverse men's gifts. Item, Forty two Copys of
tisshew: the one half of them blew, and the other of red. Item, Twenty Copys of
red bawdkyne, wrought with Connes* Item, Eight white Copys. Four of them of
White Velvet, and the other four of White Damask, brodered with white red
roses. Item, Eight and twenty Copys of White Bawdkyne, woven with copper gold.
Item, Nine and twenty Copys of blew silk, woven with rays of gold. Item,
Thirty other Copys of diverse colors and works; and many of them perished.
Chysybils, Tynnikyls [Tunicles] and Stolys.
Item, Imprimis, Eleven principal Chysybils with Tynnikyls, of diverse sorts,
and suites. Item, Six and thirty old Chysybils of diverse colors and works, and
been commonly used, and some of them perused. Item, Fourteen stolys of needle
work.
Hangings for the Altars.
Item, Eight diverse hangings for the high Altar, some of them precious, and
some of them of les value. Item, One and twenty pair of Hangings for the Altars
of the Church.
Vestments, Albes, etc.
Item, Twelve Albes of silk. Item, Of linnin Albes, belonging to the Sextre and
other Altars 326. Item, Vestments belonging to the Altars and Chauntries are of
diverse Values and works, to the number of twenty six. Item, Corporows cases,
and Corporaws thirty six. Item, Altar cloths of Diaper, and linnin One and
twenty. Item, Mas books thirteen, belonging to the Sextre and Altars.
The Inventary of our Ladies Chapel.
Imprimis, Five little shrines of copper and guilt. Item, Three chalices of
silver and gilt. Item, Two Paxes, the one of silver and gilt, and the other of
silver. Item, Two pair of Beads, and silver and gilt, being but of ten stones a
piece. Item, Three chapels of diverse suites. Item, Two Copys of silk. Item,
Thirteen Albes, and three of them white silk. Item, Three Collars for the three
Altars of silk, garnished with plate of silver and gilt, and with stones. Item,
Four Altar cloths of linnin. Item, Two Altars of silk for the Altar.
The Inventory of the Priors house.
Imprimis, Six salts, with three covers of silver and gilt. Item, Six spoons of
silver and gilt. Item, Five and twenty other spoons of silver. Item, Three
standing Cups; one plain, and other two swaged with their Covers of silver and
gilt. Item, Seven bollis of silver and gilt with one Cover. Item, Six silver
cupps with one Cover. Item, Four nuts with three covers. Item, Two Masers with
one cover. Item, Two silver Basins with their Ewers. Item, Two Gallon pots of
silver and gilt, to serve Peter and Paul. Item, Two small silver pots. Item, Two
chalices of silver and gilt.
The Inventary of the Subpriors house.
Item, Two salts of silver and gilt with a Cover. Item, One little salt of
silver with a Cover. Item, Three silver pieces. Item, Eighteen silver spoons.
Item, Three old Masers perused.
The Inventary of the Hordars house.
Item, Two Salts of silver and gilt with a Cover. Item, One standing Nut with a
Cover. Item, Three silver pieces. Item, Eighteen silver spoons. Item, Three old
Masers perused.
The Inventary of the Fratrie.
Imprimis, One standing Cup of mother pearl, the foot and Cover being of
silver and gilt. Item, Two great bollys of silver. Item, One standing Cup of
silver and gilt with his Cover. Item, One standing Massar with a Cover of Wood.
Item, Three great bollis of Wood with bonds of silver and gilt. Item, Seven and
thirty silver spoons of diverse fashions. Item, Four old Massars perused.
NUMBER. XVII. A Reply to the Archbishop, against his Court of Audience.
Cleopatra, F. 1. p. 88.
TO the first, His Protestation shows no more, but that he is not to be
suspected to keep that Court of his Audience by the authority of any Legacy
from Rome, as by the name of Legate of Rome. But forasmuch as no ABp. within
Christendom has, nor never had, any authority to keep any such Court by the
reason of the ABric, but only Legates of the Sea of Rome. Which Legates what
vexations and oppressions they have done by the pretense thereof, not only to
Ordinaries, but also to the Layfee, by calling of poor men from the furthest
parts of the realm to London for an halfpeny candle, or for a little
opprobrious word, as was declared and proved plainly in this Parliament: Which
was a great cause of making of a Statute to remedy that, before the Statute of
the abolishment of the Bishops of Romes authority within this realm: Insomuch
that this execution of Legacies in other jurisdictions and realms, has been
one of the greatest and intolerablest usurpations of the Bp. of Rome these many
years among the Commonalty, and therefore a thing most necessary of reformation:
in consideration of the premises no ABp. can exercise this authority, except he
implies to all the world (tho he speak it not, nor write it not) that he is a
Legate of the Sea of Rome. And in case it shall please the Kings Grace to give
like authority, notwithstanding so many incommodities to his Graces Subjects by
the use thereof, and not one commodity at al to be abyden by, it should seem
better to give it to some other by special Commission at his Grace's pleasure.
Whereby it shall be known certainly to come from his Grace rather than to join it
to the ABps See: Whereby the old poison might still lurk and break out one day
again, if it should chance some to be ABp. of Cant. that would change their
copy, as has been in times past.

And moreover, if his Grace should make his Legate, it should peradventure
derogate the power of his Graces General Vicar. And if both should occupy, then
shall the people so much the rather take occasion to think and say, that his
Graces Vicar exercises the power of a Legate by his Graces authority, and the
ABp. of Canterbury, by authority of the Bp. of Rome.

And where the ABp. says, that he sees no cause, why he should not keep that
Court, at the lest, by authority of the Act of Parliament, as al others enjoy by
that Act al things, that they had before from the Sea of Rome; it seems that he
never read the said Act; nor yet can discern betwixt a thing absolute, that may
endure without a Dependence, and an Advouson in gross, and a thing that
stands in a continual Dependence, as Service to the Seignory. For Exemptions
and Dispensations, and such others be Absolutes, depending nothing of the
Grantor after his Grant. But Legacies be but respectives: And as no longer
Lord, no longer Service, so no longer Bp. of Rome Lord here, no longer his
Vicar, which was but his Servant: as appears by the text of his Legacy*
whereof these be the words in the Chapter, Quum non ignoretis De officio
Legati, qui in Provincia sua vices nostras gerere comprobatur. And the Act of
Parliament which he allegeth is so plain to every Reader, that it cannot be
drawn with twenty team of Oxen to stretch to the continuance of this Court of
his Audience. It is in the xxj th. Chapter of the Session Anno xxv. and in the
xxvj th. leaf in the latter end. The words thereof there be these: Provided
always that this Act, or any thing therein contained shall not hereafter be
taken, nor expounded, to the derogation, or taking away, of any Grants or
Confirmations of any Liberties, Privileges or Jurisdictions of any Monasteries,
Abbeys, Priories, or other Houses or Places exempt; which before the making of
this Act, have been obtained at the Sea of Rome, or by the authority thereof.
Loo, this Act speaks only of Exemptions, which is a thing absolute: and that
only of Houses exempt, and of their Jurisdictions. Which might be suffered upon
their few Parochians and neighbors; as Prebends have in their Cathedral
churches. But this Act speaks not of no jurisdiction universal of
Archbishops, Bishops, or other person. Legacy is of that other sort, and
universal jurisdiction depending on him, that usurped an universal authority
through the world.

And considering, that the Bp. of Cant. beside all the Courts within his own
Diocese, keeps in London a Court at the Arches, sufficiently authorized to
hear and to determine al causes and complaints appertaining to a Metropolitan;
why should he require this other Court of the Audience, to keep it in London,
within the Church and jurisdiction of another Bp. except he m^nded to call
other Bps. obedientially out of their jurisdiction, contrary to the Act? Or
else at the lest, forasmuch as this Court is kept within the Church and
jurisdiction of London, and the Arches Court within the city, but not within
the jurisdiction, if he may not vex the Citizens and Diocesans of London at the
Arches, without an Appele first from the Ordinary immediately, because of the
Canon Laws, yet he might pull them to his Audience at Paul's, as he did
heretofore by his Legacy, and yet offend not that Act made anno xxiij. That no
man shall be called out of his own Diocese.

And where the ABp. says, that the Kings Grace bad him continue that Court
still, it is to be marvelled, that he then has not, in his Citations and other
wrirings of that Court, expressed or signified the same, as he did call himself
in all his Writings Legatum Apostolicae Sedis long after that Act of the
Abolishing.

NUMBER. XVIII. Archbishop Cranmers order concerning the Proctors of the Court of
Arches, shown to be inconvenient, by a Paper presented to the Parliament, as
follows.
Cleop. F. 1. p. 91.
ALthough it be expedient, that every thing, which any way may be noyful unto
the common well, be duly reformed; yet is there nothing that should be rather
looked upon for Reformation, than such abuses as may be occasion of not
indifferent ministration of justice. Wherefore among so many things, as
heretofore has been well and condignely reformed, touching other the
Spiritualty or the Temporalty, there is nothing that requires speedyer
Reformation, than a certain Ordinance Lately procured in the Court of the
Arches at London, by the means of the Proctors there, for the advancement of
their singular will only. By which may and do come diverse abuses in the said
Court, and occasion not indifferent ministration of justice, and chargeable and
prolix process there. The effect whereof is this.

The Proctors of the said Court of Arches has of late, upon feigned
suggestion, surmised unto the most reverend Father in God, my Lord Archbp. of
Canterbury, President and Head of the said Court, to have been for the common
well and ease of his Provincialls, induced his Grace to make such an Ordinance
or Statute in the said Court of the Arches, That where heretofore, there were in
the same twenty or four and twenty Proctors, and my said Lords G. at his
liberty always to admit mo or fewer Proctors there, as should be seen
expedient to his G. for the sufficient attending of the causes there depending
for the time; there should be from thenceforth no mo admitted Proctors there,
until the said nombre of Proctors, than being there, were decreased, and come
down to the nombre of Ten: and than the said nombre of Ten Proctors never after
to be exceeded. And furthermore lest my said Lords G. might be advertised
afterward, upon better causes and considerations, to dissolve the said
Statute, as his Predecessors did alike other Statutes, made in semblable cause
long before: the said Proctors knowing, that his G. would, as always did,
apply himself to that thing that should be most profitable for the Common well;
and intending to take away that liberty from him, abusing also his G's
benignity and good zeal, to the restraint of his liberties, and ^ulfilling of
their covetous intent; incontinently upon the obtaining of the said Statute,
procured the same to be confirmed by the Chapter and Convent of Christ's church
in Canterbury. So that by reason of the same confirmation, my said Lords G. ne
his Successors cannot, as the said Proctors do pretend (though they see never
so good a cause thereto) infringe, ne dissolve the same. And so thereby made in
manner an Incorporation among them, tho they call it not so.

Wherein be it considered, whether they have first offended the King's Laws,
which do prohibit such Incorporations to be made without license had of the
King's Highness first thereunto. And though all Incorporations in any mystery
or faculty be not lightly to be admitted, in this case, whereupon depends good
or evil ministration of justice, most of al such Confederacies are to be
eschued.

Also the said Statute is diverse ways noyful to the Commonwele of this Royalm,
and prejudicial to the King's G. Subjects in the same, and occasion of diverse
abuses in the said Court hereafter to be declared.

But because the said Proctors are persuaded, that my said Lord of Canterbury
cannot himself Dissolve the same, and seeing that no man will lighty contend
alone with all the said Proctors for the Dissolving thereof, (For though it
touch every man generally, no man singularly will suppose the same to touch him
so much, that he should for the impugnation of the same put himself in
business against so many and so rich a company, as the said Proctors be) it
were not only expedient, but also necessary, for the indifferent and speedy
ministration of justice in the said Court, that his said unreasonable Statute
were infringed and dissolved by the authority of this present Parliament,
(where al other abuses and excesses noyeful to the Commonwele ought to be
reformed,) for these causes following.

First, The said Statute is prejudicial unto the Commonwele, because it is
occasion of prolix suits and superfluous delays in the said Court, else more
necessary to be restrained than augmented. For the said nombre of Ten Proctors
appointed by the said Statute is unsufficient for the speedy and diligent
attending of men's causes in the said Court, tho al Ten were procuring there at
once: as it is not like but that three or four of the same shall be always
impotent or absent* For such they account also with the nombre of Ten. And
besides that the same Ten or fewer, that shall be only procuring, shall serve
not only for the said Court of the Arches, but also for my said Lord of
Canterburies Audience (wherein be as many causes as in the Arches) and for the
Consistory of the Bp. of London. For by the Statutes of both the same Courts of
Audience and Consistory, there is no man admitted to procure in the same,
unless he be a Proctor admitted first in the Arches. So that so few Proctors,
appointed for so many causes as shall be under travayl in all the said Courts,
can never be able to speed their business without great delays taking.

For heretofore when there were in the said Court twenty Proctors continually
occupying, and more, it has been seen, that diverse of them has been than so
overlayd with causes, that they were driven to take often and many delays and
Prorogations ad idem, for to bring in their matiers, libells and plees. Than
much more must they do the same now being but Ten of them. And most of al,
when of the same Ten there shall be, (as like it is always to be,) three or
four absent or impotent, Undoubtedly they must needs use infinite delays.
Which had else rather more need to be restrained, then that any occasion should
be yet given of more using the same. For by reason of the same the King's
Subjects, called to the same Court, are put to great expenses, tedious Labor,
and loss of time. And therefore diverse, that have good right to many things
pleadable in the said Courts, had lever renounce and forgo their interest in
the same, than enter so desperate a Suit in the said Courts therefore.

Also men's causes cannot be diligently attended by so few Proctors. And men
shall be destitute of council (whereof should be always plenty in every Court.)
And through the negligence of the Proctors, that they must be than of, when
they shall have so much business, diverse good causes must needs perish, for lack
of good looking unto; as likely may be: for the forgetting one hour, or
mistaking of a word, does in the said Courts other whiles mar the best matier.

And it is impossible, that the said Ten Proctors only shall be able to apply
accordingly all the causes, that shall be depending in all the said Courts, as
Proctors of duty should. For a Proctor's office is Laborious, and requires much
business. First, a Proctor must take sufficient instructions of his Clients,
and keep every Court-day, remember every hour, that is appointed him to do any
thing at; solicit and instruct his Advocates; write and pen every Instrument
that shall be requisite to be made in the matiers. And whosoever of the Proctors,
that shall be negligent or forgetful in doing any of these his matiers, must
needs delay. But so few Proctors as be appointed by the said Statute are not
able not only to do so in each matier, but also scant able to remember their
Clients names, for so many that they shall than have. Each matier, if it were
exactly applied, and men able so to do, would require a Proctor alone. But
because every man is not able to find a Proctor for every one matier, it were
best, next the same, that there were so many Proctors appointed, as might most
easily apply their causes, as they should. And though that were less profit to
the said Proctors, whose well is best, when they are most charged with business:
yet it should be more profit for the Common well, whose interest were to have
causes speedily and diligently applied in the said Courts.

Also, the fewer that there be of the said Proctors, the sooner may they agree
among theymselves to give delays each to other: because that one may have the
same leave, that he gave the other: as they do in terms to Prove. Where, to
each of the three terms, which they call Terminos ad proband. a month would
suffice, though they dwelled never so far from the Court within this Royalm;
they take now by cross sufferance of each other of them a quarter of a year
commonly for each of the same three terms. Which were enough and too much,
though the parties dwelled in Paris. Which delays though they be nothing
profitable, ne commodious for the poor Suitors, be both profitable to the said
Proctors; by reason that the causes are kept thereby the longer in their hands.
And also commodious by reason, that they, being greatly occupied, should have
the longer time to do their business in.

And for like consideration the said Proctors do omit commonly in every matier
a certain oath ungeven, called Iuramentum Calumpniae, which is the best
provision ordained in all the said Law of Civil and Canon, for the restraint of
unlawful Suites and prolix processes. The effect whereof is this. Both parties
being in suite, or their Proctors, shall by the same oath swear, first the
Plaintiff, That he believes himself to have a just cause to sue; and the
Defendant, a just cause to defend. Secondarily, That neitherof them shall use
any unlawful delays, whereby justice may be deferred or let. Thirdly, That
either of them, when they shall be asked by the Judge, shall answer truly to
every thing, that is asked of them according to their belief. Fourthly, That
there is nor shall be nothing geven, ne promised, to the Judge, or any other
Officer, but only the Fees and duty permitted by the Law. And fifthly, That
neither of them shall use, ne procure, any false witness wittingly in the matier.

Which Oath, if it were given in every matier, as it should be, there should not
be so many wrongful causes attempted and kept in the said Courts, nor so many
delays, as in the same. But because that neither of both stands with the
profit of the said Proctors, by common assent and cross sufferance of each
another of them, they omit the same most commonly not only ungeven, but also
not spoken of. And if they say, that they do so, because that often accustoming
of oaths makes men to set less by an oath; Truth it is that it does so. And
therefore the said oath ought to be chiefly commended. For the geving of the
same but once in any matier should excuse them from geving of many other oaths
requisite. And where one should serve for all, better it were for avoiding of too
often swearing, that the same alone should be given, and al others omitted, than
that it alone should be left, that all the other does supply.

Also, The said Statute of Ten Proctors may be occasion, that the same shall wax
hault, arrogant, negligent, and loath to take pains, and excessive in taking,
by reason that they should be so few. As we see experiently in all other
faculties, where fewest Occupiers be of the same trust, they be most dangerous,
and hardest to be gotten to do their faculties, and most excessive in taking
for the same: as scarcity or rarity of any thing else makes the same dear. For
when there be few of a faculty, they know than that be they never so excessive
in taking, or negligent in their doing, they shall be occupied well enough: when
men can have no other choice but of a few, that be al alike agreed upon the
price of every thing; as they may soon do, when they be but a few. Where if
they were many, al should be contrary.

Moreover, the said Statute of Ten Procters may be occasion, that justice should
not indifferently proceed in the said Courts for lack of lawful defense. As if
the Juges of the said Courts, or any of them, be affectionate in any matier
depending before them (as it may be that the Juges there shall not be always of
such integrity as they be of, that be there now,) the said Proctors dare not be
retained on his part, that the Juge does not favor: or if they be retained,
they dare not purpose [propose] their Client's best Interest and remedy, if the
same do any thing offend the said Juges affection. By reason that the said
Proctors be removeable from their Proctors offices at the said Juges pleasure,
and the same made so beneficial unto them by reason of the said Statute.

Than, when the said Proctors shall be in such fear of the said Juges, to speak
in matier of Instance, where the Juge does bear but a light affection to
another man: much more will they be so in cases of office, where the Juge is
party himself, and has his own matier in hand. And no mervail, if they dare
not speak in such. For it has not been seldom seen, and heard there, that it
has been spoken unto such Proctors, as has spoken any thing constantly, or
freely, in their Clients causes, by the Juges aforesaid, Non es amicus Curiae:
and that they were threatened of expulsion from their Offices, and put to
silence. Yet no law forbids the contrary, but that every man should have his
lawful defense, yea, against the Juge himself.

But if there were many Proctors in the said Courts, the Juges could not so
lightly keep them al in such subjection and fear of them. Nor than the said
Proctors should not have so great cause to fear them so much, seeing their
offices should not be so beneficial unto them than. And less should they yet
fear to purpose their Clients right duly, if it were ordained, that the same
Proctors should not be removeable from their Offices, at the said Juges pleasure,
(as heretofore they were; and now are) but only for certain great offenses
proved before indifferent Juges, to be committed by them after their admission.
And by reason, that the said Proctors be so abandonned unto the said Juges,
where men had most need of trusty Councillors, there they be most destitute of
the same, as when the Juge is not indifferent. For the partiality of a Juge is
more to be feared, than the manifest malice of an Adversary. For the tone
hurts privily, and is able to execute his malice: and the the other does apertly
all that he goes about. And a man may provide for the avoiding of the intent.
And he is not so able to execute his purpose as the the other is. And though
partiality of any Juge is to be greatly feared, yet most of al in the Courts
spiritual: where al depends upon the Juges hands, and that one man's commonly.
For which partiality the remedy of appeal was first invented. Which remedy,
like as it was at the first most wholesomely provided for the avoiding of the
iniquity of partial Juges; so it is now most wickedly abused for the
maintenance of evil doers in their wrongful causes and avoiding of due
execution of justice, by reason that they be infinite: especially, after the
Canon law. For by Civil, there is but appellation permitted; and that not
without penalty on him that shall than appeal without cause: and that is more
reasonable.

For like as it is dangerous to abide one man's jugement, so it is unreasonable
that a man should abide the jugements of never so many. And therefore it were
very expedient, that the same Appeals were restrained somewhat. For of them it
is chiefly long, that matiers be in manner infinite in the said Courts. And that
may be the better done, by reason that there be two Legates within this Royalm.
Which were so appointed, because that they might determine al matiers spiritual
within this Royalm, without much recourse to Rome, being so far from this
Country.

To the foresaid inconveniences may come also, through the same statute, this
abuse following: that is to wit, if there be a mightier or a richer man, that
do sue a poorer man in the said Courts; the richer man may the sooner, by
reason that there be so few Proctors, retain the most part and the best learned
of them. And the other Proctors, by reason that they shall be than so wealthy
through their great occupying, which they shall have, when they be so few, will
rather set more by the same great men's favor, than the poor man's fee. And
therefore will either refuse to be retained of the poor man's party; or when they
be retained they will be slack in doing their duty, for fear of displeasing the
same great men. Where if there were many Proctors, their Offices would not be
excessive gainful, but that they set as much by their fees, as by any man's
pleasure lightly.

Also, the said Statute is a great discourage to young men to leave their
Studies in the Law. For by the same the reward of Study is taken away, and
possessed by a few. And the fewer that be promoted for their Learning, the fewer
will study to attain the same.

And to this, it may be occasion, that the said Proctors be not so well learned,
nor so diligent, when they are so few, as they would be, if they were many. For
when there is choice enough of them, they that are best learned, and most
diligent shall be always most resorted. And than shall they study every man to
excel other in learning and diligence, when they se such chiefly resorted unto.
And so no man will labor than to be a Proctor, unles he be well learned, seeing
that learned men should only have all the most resort. And they that be unlearned
will away, and provide them Livings elsewhere, when they see theymself nothing
frequented with causes.

Furthermore, the said Statute is plain contrary to their own law of Civil and
Canon. For by the same it is permitted for every man to be Proctor for other;
but only a few, which are especially and justly excepted by the same, as a
Woman, a child, a madd man, and such other. And by the said statute it is
prohibited, that no man shall procure in the said Court for other, but only a
few, that are especially admitted thereto, and that within a precise and
incompetent nombre. The said Law does except and repel very few; and that of
them that are not meet to procure: and the said statute does yet admit fewer,
and that of them that are sufficiently qualified to procure. So that White and
Black can be no more contrary together, than the said Law and Statute be each
to other.

And though any man would rather prefer the said Law before the said Statute,
if he did but only consider, how that the Law is made so long ago by the
concord and discrete opinion of so many great and wise Clerks and holy men, and
afterward approved by continual usage of diverse countries, and long succession
of time, and experiently known to be wholsomely ordained for the common well.
And of the the other side, how that the said Statute is but lately made by the
procurement of a few private persons for their singular advantage; approved by
no tract of time to be profitable for the Common well; but experiently known to
be contrary. Yet beside that, if all that were set apart, the Law is grounded
upon better reason, then the said Statute is. For seeing a Proctor represents
him that he is Proctor for, and may make or mar his Clients matier by one word
speaking well or il; and that the office of a Proctor was first invented for
men, that might or would not intend to their own business theymself; it were
more consonant with reason, that a man were suffered to take to his Proctor
such as he lusts, and may best trust unto of his matier, than be driven to
commit the order of his cause, being mefortune of great weight, to such a one
as he never knew, ne saw before. For when a man is at his choice to choose him
what Proctor he lust best, if his matier do delay through the default of his
Proctor, than, he can blame no body but himself. For that that he would not
take better heed, to whom he should have committed his matier unto. And when a
man is compelled to take one that he knows not, if his matier do than delay, he
may put the blame thereof to that Statute, that constrained him to take such a
Proctor.

Nevertheles though the tone of both those ways, that is the same that is taken
by the same Law, be much better than the the other; yet the mean way betwixt both
(as of al other Extremes) were best. That is to say, that another every man
unlearned, or unexpert, should forthwith be admitted to procure for every man in
the said Courts, lest of that there should be no good order, but a confuse
tumult there: Nor yet that there should be so few admitted thereunto, that they
were not able, ne sufficient, for the due exercise of causes there depending.
But most reasonable and highly expedient for the Common well it is, that it
were enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that there should be
as many of such as were sufficiently learned, and exercised in the experience
and practice of the said Courts, admitted to procure there, as should be seen
convenient to my said Lord of Canterbury his Grace, or other Presidents of the
said Courts, for the due exercise and expedition of causes there depending; as
it was used heretofore, til the obtaining of the said Statute, without
prefixion of any precise nombre, which for no cause may be exceded. For how can
a precise nombre of Proctors be prefixed, when the nombre of causes can never
be appointed? For causes does grow and increase, as the nature of seasons and
men does require.

And therefore it were expedient, that there were mo Proctors than should suffice
admitted, than fewer. For better it were, that some of them should lack causes,
than causes should want them. And that such ones, so admitted, should not be
removeable from the same their Offices at the said Juges, or any other man's,
pleasure, as they were heretofore: but only for certain great offenses proved to
be committed by them after their admission, and juged so to be of indifferent
Juges, chosen to examine the same by the consent of the Proctors, that shall be
accused thereof. And because that the Proctors aforesaid are al sworn [at the]
time of their admission, that they shall never after be against the Liberty,
jurisdiction and prerogatives of the said Courts: but shall maintain and defend
the same to their power: And that there may be in the said Courts otherwhiles
such causes depending, as should appertain to the Kings Gs. determination by
his Royal Prerogative, or such other as may be there attempted against the
Juges or Presidents of the said Courts: It were highly expedient as well for the
Conservation and soliciting of the Kings interest there, as for the faithful
and bold assistence of Proctors there to the Kings Subjects, that were called
thither at the instance of the said Juges, or their fautors, or any other
person; That like as his Grace has, in other his Courts temporal, his
Solicitors and Atturneys, he should also have in his said Courts two Proctors,
or so admitted by his G. and his council, which should be sworn to promote and
solicit his Gs. interest there, and to advertise the same of any thing, that
should appertain to his Gs. prerogative, and to defend such of the Kings
subjects, as shall desire their assistance, boldly and without fear or affection
of the said Juges. And that the same Proctors so admitted be not removeable
from the same their offices by any man, but the Kings G. or his Council.

Which so enacted and established should be the readiest means, that the
foresaid abuses, with diverse others here not rehearsed, caused through the
occasion of the said statute, should be utterly taken away, and justice more
plainly and speedily proceed in the said Courts, than heretofore has been seen
to do. And the Kings subjects called thither from al parts of England should
have plenty of counsil, faithful assistance in their matters, and speedy
process in the same. Which ought to be tendered affectantly of every man, that
regards the increase of the Common well, and true execution of justice.

NUMBER. XIX. The Archbishop to the L. Crumwel giving him some account of his
Visitation of his Diocese.
THese shall be to advertise your Lp. that since my last coming from London into
Kent, Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 192.
I have found the people of my Diocese very obstinately given to observe and
keep with solemnity the hali days lately abrogated. Whereupon I have punished
diverse of the Offenders; and to diverse I have given gentle monitions to amend.
But inasmuch as by examination I have perceived, that the people were partly
animated thereto by their Curates, I have given streit commandment and
injunction unto all the Parsons and Vicars within my Diocese, upon pain of
deprivation of their benefices, that they shall not only, on their behalf, cause
the said hali days, so abrogated, from time to time not to be observed within
their Cures: but also shall from henceforth present to me such persons of their
Parishes, as will practice in word or deed contrary to that Ordinance or any
other; which is, or hereafter shall be, set forth by the Kings Graces authority,
for the redress or ordering of the doctrine or ceremonies of this Church of
England. So that now I suppose through this means all disobedience, and
contempt of the Kings Graces Acts and Ordinances in this behalf, shall be clearly
avoided in my Diocese hereafter. Not doubting also, but if every Bp. in this
realm had Commandment to do the same in their Diocese, it would avoid both much
disobedience and contention in this said realm. I would feign, that all the
enmity and grudge of the people in this matter should be put from the King and
his Council; and that we, who be Ordinaries, should take it upon us. Or else I
fear lest a grudge against the Prince and his Council, in such causes of
religion, should gender in many of the peoples hearts a faint subjection and
obedience.

But, my Lord, if in the Court you do keep such hali days and fasting days as
be abrogated, This was writ with the ABps own hand. All the rest of the Letter
was his Secretaries:
when shall we persuade the people to cease from keeping of them? For the Kings
own House shall be an example unto all the realm to break his own ordinances. Over
this, whereas your Lp. has twice written for this poor man William Gronnow the
bearer hereof to my L. Deputy of Callis, for him to be restored to his room; as
far as I understand, it prevayled nothing at al. For so he can get none answer
of my L. Deputy. So tha^ the poor man dispaireth that your request shall do him
any good. If your Lp. would be so good to him, as to obtain a bil signed by the
Kings Grace to the Treasurers and Controlers of Callis for the time being,
commanding them to pay to the said W. Gronnow his accustomed Wages yearly, and
to none other, your Lp. should not only not further trouble my L. Deputy any
more, but also do a right meritorious deed. For if the poor man be put thus
from his Living, he were but utterly undone. Thus, my Lord, right heartily fare
you well. At Ford the xxviij day of August.

Your Lordships own ever T. Cantuariens.

NUMBER. XX. Richard Grafton the Printer of the Bible to the Lord Crumwel,
complaining of some that intended to print the Bible, and thereby to spoil his
Impression.
1537.
Cleopatra, E. 5.
MOST humbly beseeching your Lp. to understand, that according as your
Commission was, by my servant to send you certain Bibles, so have I now done,
desiring your Lp. to accept them, as though they were well done. And whereas I
writ unto your Lp. for a privy Seal to be a defense unto the enemies of this
Bible, I understand that your Lps. mind is, that I shall not need it. But now,
most gracious Lord, forasmuch as this work has been brought forth to our most
great and costly labors and charges: Which charges amount above the sum of five
hundred pounds; and I have caused of these same to be printed to the sum of
fifteen hundred books complete: Which now by reason that of many this work is
highly commended; there are that will and does go about the printing of the same
work again in a lesser letter: to the intent that they may sell their little
books better cheap then I can sell these great; and so to make that I shall sell
none at al, or else very few, to the utter undoing of me your Orator, and of
all those my Creditors, that has been my Comforters and helpers therein. And
now this work, thus set forth with great study and labors, shall such persons,
moved with a little covetousnes, to the undoing of others for their own private
wealth, take as a thing done to their hands. In which half the charges shall not
come to them, that has done to your poor Orator. And yet shall not they do it
as they find it, but falsify the text; that I dare say, look how many sentences
are in the Bible, even so many faults and errors shall be made therein. For their
seeking is not to set it out to Gods glory, and to the edifying of Christ's
Congregation* but for covetousnes. And that may appear by the former Bibles,
that they have set forth; which has neither good paper, letters, ink, nor
correction. And even so shall they corrupt this work, and wrap it up after their
fashions, and then may they sell it for naught at their pleasures. Yea, and to
make it more truer then it is, therefore Dutch men; living within this realm, go
about the printing of it: Which can neither speak good English, nor yet write
none. And they will be both the Printers and Correctors thereof. Because of a
little covetousnes, they will not bestow twenty or forty pounds to a Learned man
to take pains in it, to have it well done.

It were therefore, as your Lp. does evidently perceive, a thing unreasonable to
permit, or suffer them, which now has no such business, to enter into the
labors of them, that has made both sore trouble and unreasonable charges. And
the truth is this, that if it be printed by any other, before these be sold,
which I think shall not be these three years at the least, that then am I, your
poor Orator, undone.

Therefore by your most godly favor, if I may obtain the Kings most gracious
privilege, that none shall print them till these be sold, which at the least
shall not be this three years, your Lordship shall not find me unthankful, but
that to the uttermost of my power I will consider it. And I dare say, that so
will my L* of Canterbury, with other my most special friends. And at the last
God will look upon your merciful heart, that considers the undoing of a poor
young man. For truly my whole Living lies hereupon. Which if I may have sale
of them, not being hindered by any other men, it shall be my making and wealth,
and the contrary is my undoing. Therefore most humbly I beseech your Lp. to be
my helper here, that I may obtain this my request. Or else, if by no means this
privilege may be had, as I have no doubt through your help it shall; and seeing
men are so desirous to be printing of it again, to my utter undoing as
aforesaid: that yet forasmuch as it has pleased the Kings Highness to License
this work to go abroad; and that it is the most pure religion, that teaches al
true obedience, and reproves al schisms and contentions: and the lack of this
word of Almighty God, is the cause of al blindness and superstition: It may
therefore be commanded by your Lp. in the name of our most gracious Prince, that
every Curate have one of them, that they may learn to know God, and to instruct
their Parishens. Yea, and that every Abbey should have six, to be laid in six
several places; and that the whole Covent, and the resorters thereunto, may have
occasion to look on the Lords Law. Yea, I would have none other, but they of
the Papistical sort, should be compelled to have them. And then I know there
should be ynow found in my L. of Londons Diocese to spend away a great part of
them. And so should this be a godly act, worthy to be had in remembrance while
the world does stand.

And I know, that a small Commission will cause my Lords of Cant. Salisbury and
Worseter, to cause it to be done through their Diocesses* Yea, and this should
cease the whole schism and contention, that is in the realm. Which is, some
calling them of the Old, and some of the New. Now should we al follow one God,
one Book, and one Learning. And this is hurtful to no man, but profitable to
all men.

I will trouble your Lp. no longer, for I am sorry I have troubled you so much.
But to make an end I desire your most gracious answer by my servant. For the
sickness is bryme about us, or would I wait upon your Lp. And because of coming
to your Lp. I have not suffered my servant with me, since he came over. Thus
for your continual preservation, I, with all that truly love God, do most
heartily pray, that you may overcome al you adversaries of the Papistical sort.

Your Orator Rychard Grafton.

NUMBER. XXI. Archbishop Cranmer to the King for a Suffragan of Dover.
EXcellentiss. and potentiss. in Christo Principi and Dno. nostro Dn. Henrico
Octavo Dei gra. Angliae and Fr. regi, ABp Cranm. Regist.
Fidei Defensori, and Dno. Hiberniae, ac in terris Supremo Ecclesiae Angl.
capiti, Vester humilis Orator and Subditus Thomas permissione divina Cantuar.
Archiepiscopus, totius Anglie Primas and Metropolit. Omnimod. Reverentiam, and
Observantiam tanto principi debit. and condignas cum omni subjectionis honor.
Ad sedem Episcopalem de Doveria infra Cantuar. Dioc. existen. Dilectos michi in
Cto. Richardum Yngworth Priorem Domus sive Prioratus de Langley Regis, and
Iohannem Codenham, Sacrae Theolog. Professores, juxta and secundum vim, formam
and effectum Statuti Parlamenti hujus inclyti regni vestri Angliae in hoc casu
editi and provisi, vestrae Regiae Majestati per has literas meas nomino and
praesento; ac eidem Majestati vestrae humiliter supplico, quatenus alteri
little, (cui vestra Regia Majestas id munus conferend. praeoptaverit) titulum,
nomen, stylumque and dignitatem episcopalem ac Suffraganeam ad Sedem praedictam
misericorditer confer. Ipsumque mihi prefato Archiepiscopo infra cujus Dioc.
and Provinciam Seeds antedicta consistit, per literas vestras Patentes regias
intuitu charitatis punctare, michique mandare dignetur vestra regia Majestas,
quatenus ipsum sic nominatum and praesentatum, in Episcopum Suffraganeum Sedis
praedict. juxta formam Statuti praedict. effectualiter consecrem and benedicam*
caeteraque faciam and exequar in ea part, quae ad effectum meum
Archiepiscopale spectaverint, seu requisita fuerint in praemissis. Vivat
denique and valeat in multos annos vestra regia Celsitudo praelibata in eo, per
quem reges regnant, and Principes dominantur. Dat' apud Lambeth primo die
mensis Decembr. Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo tricesimo septimo: and
regni vestri florentiss. vicesimo nono.

NUMBER. XXII. The Archbishops letters of Commission to Richard Suffragan of Dover.
THomas permissione divina Cant. Archiep. tot. Angl. Primas and Metropolitanus,
ABp. Cranm. Regist.
Venerabili confratri nostro Dom. Richardo Dei gra. Sedis Doveriae nostrae
Diocesios Cant' Suffraganeo, Salutem, and fraternam in Domino charitatem. De
tuis fidelitate and circumspectionis industria plenam in Domino fiduciam
obtinentes, ad confirmandum sacri chrismatis unctione pueros quoscunque infra
civitatem and Diocesin nostras Cant', and jurisdictiones nostras, and ecclesiae
nostrae Christ. Cant. immediatas, ac jurisdictionem nostram villae Calisiae,
and marchias ejusdem sub obedientia Excellentiss. Principis, and Domini nostri,
Domini Hen. Oct. Dei gratia Angl. and Fr. regis, fidei Defensoris, and Domini
Hib. ac in terris sub Christo Ecclesiae Anglic. Capitis Supremi ubilibet
constitut. Necnon altaria, calices, Vestimenta, and alia Ecclesiae ornamenta
quaecunque and ea concernen. benedicend. locaque profana siquae inveneris, de
quibus te inquirere Volumus, a divinorum celebratione ultime suspendend,
Ecclesias etiam and coemiteria sanguinis vel seminis effusione polluta forsan
vel polluend. reconciliand. Ecclesias and altaria noviter aedificat.
consecrand. Omnes ordines minores quibuscunque civitatis, Diocesios, and
jurisdictionum nostrarum praedictarum ipsos ordines a te recipere volentib and
ad hoc habilibus ad jurejurando de renuntiando Romans Episcopo and ejus
auctoritati ac de acceptando Regiam Majestatem pro Supremo Capite Ecclesiae
Anglic. juxta Statuta hujus regni in hac part edita ab eisdem ordinand. and
eorum quolibet per te primitus recepto, conferend. Ac etiam oleum sanctum
chrismatis and sacrae unctionis consecrand. Caeteraque omnia and singula, quae
ad officium Pontificale in praemissis, vel aliquo praemissorum quovis modo
pertinent, vel pertinere poterunt, faciend. exercend. and expediend. tibi
tenore praesentium committimus vices nostras, and plenam in Domino potestatem.
Teque quoad praemissa Suffraganeum nostrum ordinamus and praeficimus per
praesentes; donec eas ad nos duxerimus revocand. Et ut officium tuum hujusmodi
possis in praemissis liberius exercere, Vniversis and singulis Decanis,
Rectoribus, Vicarijs, Capellanis, Curatis, and non Curatis, Clericis and
Apparitoribus quibuscunque in virtute sacrae [suae] obedientiae firmiter tenore
praesentium injungendo mandamus, quatenus tibi in praemissis and quolibet
praemissorum sint obedientes, assistentes, and intendentes in omnibus, prout
decet. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum praesentibus est appensum.
Dat. in Manerio nostro de Lamehith, Decimo die Decembr. Anno Domini mill* quin.
xxxvij. and nostrae Consecrationis anno quinto.

NUMBER. XXIII. A Declaration to be read by all Curates upon the publishing of the
Bible in English.
Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 327.
Whereas it has pleased the Kings Majesty, our most dread Sovereign, and Supreme
Head under God of this Church of England, for a Declaration of the great zeal
he bears to the setting forth of Gods word, and to the virtuous maintenance
of the Commonwealth, to permit and command the Bible, being translated into our
Mother tongue, to be sincerely taught by us the Curates, and to be openly laid
forth in every parish church: to the intent, that all his good subjects, as well
by reading thereof, as by hearing the true explanation of the same, may be able
to learn their duties to Almighty God and his Majesty, and every of us
charitably to use other: And then applying themselves to do according to that
they shall hear and learn, may both speak and do christianly; and in all things,
as it beseems christen men: Because his Highness very much desires, that this
thing being by him most godly begun and set forward, may of al you be received
as is aforesaid; his Majesty has willed and commanded this to be declared unto
you, that his Graces pleasure and high commandment is, that in the reading and
hearing thereof, first most humbly and reverently using and addressing your
selves unto it, you shall have always in your remembrance and memories, that al
things contained in this book is the undoubted Will, Law, and Commandment of
Almighty God, the only and streit means to know the goodness and benefits of God
toward us, and the true duty of every christen man to serve him accordingly.
And that therefore reading this book with such mind and firm faith as is
aforesaid, you shall first endeavor your self to conform your own livings and
conversation to the contents of the same. And so by your good and virtuous
example to encourage your wives, children and servants, to live well and
christianly according to the rules thereof.

And if at any time by reading any doubt shall comen to any of you touching the
sense and meaning of any part thereof; that then, not giving too much to your
own minds, fantasies and opinions; nor having thereof any open reasoning in your
open tavernes or alehouses, ye shall have recourse to such learned men, as be,
or shall be authorized to preach and declare the same. So that avoiding al
contentions and disputation in such alehouses and other places, unmeet for such
conferences, and submitting your opinion to the judgments of such learned men
as shall be appointed in this behalf, his Grace may well perceive, that you use
this most high benefit quietly and charitably every one of you, to the edifying
of himself, his wife and family, in all things answering to his Highness good
opinion conceived of you, in the advauncement of virtue, and suppressing of
Vice; without failing to use such discrete quietness, and sober moderation in
the premises, as is aforesaid; as you tender his Graces pleasure, and intend
to avoid his high indignation, and the peril and danger that may ensue to you
and every of you for the contrary.

And God save the King.
NUMBER. XXIV. The Answer or Declaration of Richard Bishop of Chichester, in the
presence of the Kings Majesty, against the sixth Reason or argument of John
Lambert, concerning the most holy and blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
THese are the words of his sixth Article. Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 371.
Paul does take it for a sore inconvenince, Deducere Christum ex alto, Romans 10.
And yet must the Priests do so, bringing his natural body into the Sacrament.
Or else they cannot bring the same body into the Sacrament: Which I believe
rather.

The Answer of the Bishop.
BY this reason you may evidently perceive the Vanity, and also the malice of
this man. So that you may judge by what spirit he is led, to make such an
argument against so high and precious a mystery as this is.

What christen man is so ignorant, that knows not this to be evidently true,
that this most holy Sacrament has not his Virtue of the Priest, which is a
mortal man, and many times a sinner. For he is but a minister, and a very
instrument, by whom God works. S. Chrysostom says, that the minister is as
it were the Pen, God is the hand. The grace, the virtue is of God. In the 27
th. Hom. in the second Tome. So does teach the Apostle to the Corinthians, in
the third chapt. of the first Epistle. What is Apostle, says he, What is Paul?
Ministers of him, in whom ye believe; and as he has given to every one. I have
planted, says S. Paul, Apollo has watered: but God has given the increase.
Wherefore neither he that planteth, nor he that waters, is ought, but he that
gives the increase. For men must esteem us as Ministers of Christ, says he in
the next chapter. By these words he proves, that the minister gives no effect
or virtue, but only God.

S. Augustine ad Cresconium Grammaticum says also expressly, That if there be
among good ministers one better then another, the Sacrament is no better given
by the better; and it is no worse given by an evil man. There is for this
purpose a goodly saying of Eusebius Emissenus, which was much persecuted by the
Arians. These are his words. Invisibilis Sacerdos visibiles creaturas in
substantiam corporis and sanguinis sui, verbi sui secreta potestate, convertit.
No Christen man doubts who is this invisible Priest; which is our Savior, the
high Priest, the perpetual Priest, as the Apostle says Ad Heb. 7. Which to our
carnal eyes is invisible, and otherwise may not be seen, but by the eyes of our
soul, and faith only. This invisible Priest, says Eusebius, converteth and
turns the visible creatures of bread and wine not only into his body and
blood, but into the substance of his body and blood.

It is not then the Priest, that works this work, nor brings Christ out of
heaven, as this man mockingly and scornfully writes in this Article, but it is
Christ himself. For as S. Austin says, Idem est Mediator, qui offert, and qui
offertur.

And what spirit this man has toward this most holy sacrament, you may well
conjecture, and evidently perceive his malignity, which not only gathers a
certain number of vain arguments together, to the number of eight; that it
might appear to the simple ignorant people, as though it were a great
foundation, which he has for his detestable purpose: and yet as I say, they
are al vain, and grounded only upon gross natural reason, which can in no wise
attain to this high mystery: but also in so grave, weighty, and most reverend
cause, as this is, he dallieth, mocketh and scorneth in this fond reason,
without any reason; saying, that the Priest must bring the body of Christ out
of heaven. But it is little to be weighed in this man, though that he scorneth
the ministration of the Priest, since that he so depraveth his very Lord and
Master.

But in case that he should say, that he does not scorn the ministration of the
Priest, then must he needs be very ignorant, to suppose in any wise, that the
Priest works any thing in this, or any other Sacrament, more then as I have
before said.

In this argument also he alleges one part of scripture in the tenth chapter
to the Romans, to blind also the simple people, that they should think all that
he speaks is the very scripture. And surely this place of scripture makes
evidently against him, and such as he is. For it is written against Infidels,
such as will not believe the word of God written, but would yet have knowledge
from heaven. And so the Apostle there makes example of him, that would not
believe that Christ is ascended, but notwithstanding the testimony of
scripture, he demands, Quis ascendet in coelum? Hoc est, Christum de coelo
deducere, says the Apostle. Wherefore the Apostle monisheth every Christen man
in this manner, Ne dixeris in cord tuo, Quis ascendet, etc. That is to say,
Think not in thy mind, Have no such doubt to ask, Who ascended, or how: but
believe the scripture. For as Moses in the 30 th. Chap. of Deuteronomy says,
Thou shall not need to seek into heaven for the knowledge of these things: it is
not set, nor left in heaven; it is not above thee; it is not far from thee; but
the Word of God is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, as it were, and ready at hand:
Believe that, and do according to that. For so it was answered to the rich man
in the 16 th. Chap. of Luke, Thy brethren have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. And, If they will not hear nor believe them, they will not believe any
one, that shall come from hence.

Whersore Chrysostom in the former tenth Chapter of Paul, teaches even
Christen men in these things of the Faith, in no wise to ask or search, how it
may be; but leaving this infirmity and weakness of our thoughts and reasons, let
us receive with a certain undoubted faith the promises of God by his word.

S. Cyprian also, in a work De coena Domini, has these words, The fleshly man
is not to be admitted to this feast of the Table of God. Whatsoever the fllesh
and the blood, that is to say, the natural reason of the mortal man, esteems
or judges, needs must be excluded from this mystery. For it savoureth nothing
to this matter, or in any wise helps, whatsoever the subtilty of man's wit
attempteth to search. Such are wise men of this world, that whatsoever is above
their wit, they think it otherwise then the truth. But the truth, says he,
cannot be comprised by man's wit, which is erroneous and many times deceived.
Wherefore they that are faithful and poor in spirit, and not arrogant of their
own wits, by their faith, do se perfectly this Sacrament.

We have the expres words of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. The
words are plain not only in Matthew, but the same plain words are in Luke and
Mark, without any figurative speaking. Wherefore we may not add, diminish,
change nor alter these words, that are so manifest and plain; but certainly
believe these words to be true in the same sense, that they are clearly spoken,
howsoever they are impossible to man's wit. For as it is impossible for God to
make a ly, as the Apostle says in the sixth Ad Heb. so every thing is possible
to him, howsoever it is thought impossible to men.

We must therefore leave al our carnal reasons, and only receive, without any
doubt, the teaching, the words, the promises of God, howsoever they seem
impossible to our natural and frail reason. Or else we should not believe the
power of God to be so high and absolute as it is: to whom is nothing impossible.

NUMBER. XXV. Tho. Cranmeri Archiep. Cant. Epist. super Controversia de coena
Domini ortam.
Illustri and erudito Viro Joachimo Vadiano, Consuli apud Sanctum Gallum in
Helvetia.
TAndem a Negotijs Consilijsque publicis missionem, vel verius respirationem
nactus, and inter caeteros doctos viros, Ex Dudithi^ Orationib. and Opuscul
quorum epistolis responsa jam diu debueram, tibi quoque, Vadiane, Vir
illustris doctissimeque, nunc demum vertente anno respondere incipiens, (utpote
cujus Literas superiore hyeme acceperim, una cum munere Literario, Quod genus
quidem soleo vel inter preciosissima numerare) illud imprimis mecum reputare
pudebundus occoepi, vererique, ne forte suspicionem, aut etiam opinionem mihi
allquam sinistram apud animum tuum, silentio meo tam diuturno, contraxerim; qui
sciam apud vulgus hominum fieri plerumque solere, cum hospes hospitem salutat,
ut in primo maxim aditu responsum solicit exspectent. Quod si differatur, ut
superbiam aliquam vel neglectum sui, vel, ut minimum, oblivionem, intervenire
suspicantur, qualemque in primo illo accessu invenere, talem in universam
reliquam vitam erga se fore praejudicant. Cum qui cito respondet, libenter and
gratanter id facere judicatur, eumque proinde humanum, facilem gratumque
interpretantur. Contra, qui tarde, fastuosus, difficilis, and incivilibus ac
inamoenis moribus preditus existimatur. Vsque adeo bis facit, quod cito facit,
quicquid quis cito facit. Verum ego de tua neutiquam vulgari prudentia, and
humanitate meliora mihi polliceor, confidoque te hanc meam non spontaneam
tarditatem aut cessationem, sed necessariam dilationem benign accepturum,
eamque non tam moribus quam negotijs meis imputaturum. Quae qualia and quanta
fuerint, puto rumores ad vos usque jampridem pertulisse, and ego de eisdem
nonnihil ad Grynaeum meum, imo nostrum, scripsi, cum quo pro amicitiae jure
omnia, sibi communia futura esse non ambigo. Ad illum igitur te remitto, siquid
hac re offenderis, qui me tibi reddat excusatiorem.

Tuam erga me Voluntatem and promptitudinem animi ad contrahendam mecum
Sanctiorem necessitudinem, in Literis tuis perspicio, and libens amplector
osculorque. Virum enim dignum te judico, quem ego propter eximiam eruditionem,
qua me quoque adjutum profecisse neutiquam dissimulavero, and propter morum
probitatem, multorum gravissimorum virorum testimonijs comprobatam, omni amore,
favore ac veneratione prosequar. Veruntamen ut animi mei sensum (sicuti inter
bonos viros fieri oportet) ingenue tibi profitear, argumentum quod tractas in
sex illis libris Aphorismorum, de consideratione Eucharistiae.
, quos mihi dono dederas, in totum mihi displicet, vellemque vigilias tuas
tantas felicius collocasses, and mecum jucundae amicitiae melioribus, aut certe
minus improbatis, auspicijs fuisses usus. Nam ego nisi certiora afferri video,
quam hactenus videre potui, sententiae illius vestrae nec patronus nec
astipulator esse volo. Et plane mihi vel ex eo maxim persuasum est, causam
esse non bonam, quod eam viri tam ingeniosi, tam diserti, tamque omnibus
artibus and disciplinis instructi, non videamini satis valide tueri ac
sustinere. Vidi pleraque omnia, quae vel ab Oecalampadio, vel a Zuinglio
scripta sunt and edita, didicique omnium hominum omnia cum delectu esse
Legenda. Et fortasse illud D. Hieronymi de Origene elogium in illos quoque non
absurd aliquis detorserit, Vbi been, nemo melius, etc. Nosti enim quod
sequitur. Quatenus quidem Papisticos and Sophisticos errores and abusus
indicare, convincere, corrigereque sunt conati, Laudo and approbo. Atque utinam
intra fines illos constitissent, neque fruges una cum zizanijs conculcassent,
hoc est, veterum doctorum, primorumque in ecclesia Christi scriptorum
authoritatem, una violassent. Nam ut ingenia vestra quantumcunque versaveritis,
mihi tamen certe nunquam approbaveritis, ne cuiquam, opinor, aequo Lectori,
Veteres illos authors in hac controversia pro vestra facere sententia. Fuistis
nimirum in investigandis erroribus plus fatis curiosi, and dum omnia purgare
studetis, illic quoque errorem subesse putavistis, ubi nullus fuit. Quando hic
certe si error est, jam inde a primordio Ecclesiae, ab ipsis Patribus and viris
Apostolicis, nobis fuit propinatus. Quod quis pius sustinuerit vel audire,
nedum credere? Ut n^quid interim dicam, quod bonus Dominus noster unice
dilectam sponsam suam nunquam in tam pudenda caecitate tamdiu dereliquisset?
Quamobrem quum haec, quam tenemus, Catholica fides de vera presentia corporis
tam apertis ac manifestis scripturis fuerit Ecclesiae ab initio promulgata, and
eadem postea, per primos Ecclesiasticos scriptores, fidelium auribus tam clare,
tamque studiose commendata, ne quaeso, ne mihi pergatis eam tam been radicatam
and suffultam velle amplius convellere aut subruere. Satis jam satis tentatum
est hactenus. Et nisi super firmam petram fuisset firmiter aedificata, jam
dudum cum magnae ruinae fragore cecidisset. Dici non potest, quantum haec tam
cruenta controversia, cum per universum orbem Christianum, tum maxim apud nos,
been currenti verbo Evangelij obstiterit. Vobis ipsis affert ingens periculum,
and caeteris omnibus praebet non dicendum offendiculum. Quo circa si me
audietis, hortor and suadeo, imo vos oro, obsecro, and visceribus Jesus Christi
obtestor and adjuro, uti concordiam procedere and coire sinatis, in illam
confirmandam totis viribus incumbatis, pacemque Dei tandem, quae superat omnem
sensum, Ecclesijs permittatis, ut Evangelicam doctrinam unam, sanam, puram, and
cum primitivae Ecclesiae disciplina consonam, junctis viribus quam maxim
propagemus. Facile vel Turcas ad Evangelij nostri obedientiam converterimus,
modo intra nosmetipsos consentiamus, and pia quadam conjuratione conspiremus.
At si ad hunc modum pergimus ad invicem contendere, and commordere, timendum
erit, ne (quod dicens abominor) juxta comminationem Apostolicam, ad invicem
consumamur.

Habes, Optime Vadiane, meam de tota controversia illa neutiquam fictam
sentent^am, una cum admonitione libera ac fideli. Cui si obtemperaveris, non
modo inter amicos, sed etiam vel inter amicissimos mihi nomen tuum ascripsero.
Been vale.

T. Cantuariens.

NUMBER. XXVI. Part of a Letter from a Member of Parliament, concerning the
transactions of the House, about passing the Act of the Six Articles.
AND also news here, Cleopatra, E. 5.
I assure you never Prince showed himself so wise a man, so well learned, and so
Catholic, as the King has done in this Parliament. With my pen I cannot express
his mervailous goodness, which is come to such effect, that we shall have an Act
of Parliament so spiritual, that I think none shall dare say, in the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar does remain either bread or wine after the Consecration:
Nor, that a Priest may have a wife: Nor, that it is necessary [to receive] our
Maker sub utraque specie: Nor* that private Masses should not be used, as they
have be: Nor, that it is not necessary to have Auricular confession. And
notwithstanding my L. of Canterbury, my L. of Ely, my L. of Salisbury, my L. of
Worcester, Rochester, and St. Davyes, defended the contrary long time: Yet
finally his Highness confounded them all with Gods learning. York, Durham,
Winchester and Carlisle have showed themselves honest and well learned men. We of
the Temporalty have be al of one opinion. And my L. Chancellor, and my L. Privy
Seal, as good as we can devise. My L. of Cant. and al his Bishops have given
their opinion, and come in to us, save Salisbury, who yet continues a lewd
fool. Finally, al in England have cause to thank God, and most heartily to
rejoice of the Kings most godly procedings.

Without any name subscribed.

NUMBER. XXVII. The Solution of some Bishop to certain Questions about the
Sacraments.
The King's Animadversions, Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 36.
of his own hand. The Questions. The Answers. Why then should we call them so?
1. What a Sacrament is? 1. Scripture uses the word, but it defines it not. 2.
What a Sacrament is by the ancient Authors? 2. In them is found no perfect
definition, but a general Declaration of the word, as a token of a holy thing.
3. How many Sacraments be there by the Scripture? 3. So named only Matrimony:
in effect moo: and at the least seven, as we find the Scripture expounded. Why
these Seven to have the name, more than all the rest? 4. How many Sacraments be
there by the ancient Authors? 4. Authors use the word Sacrament to signify any
Mystery in the old or new Testament: But especially be noted Baptism,
Eucharist, Matrimony, Chrism, Impositio manuum, Ordo. [Here is omitted
Penance.] Then why has theChurch so long erred, to take upon them so to name
them? 5. Whether this word Sacrament be, and ought to be, attribute to the
Seven only? 5. The word because it is general is attribute to other than the
Seven. But whether it ought especially to be applied to the Seven only, God
knows, and has not fully revealed it so as it has been received. Whether
the Seven Sacraments be found in any of the old Authors, or not? The thing of
al is found, but not named al Sacraments, as before. 6. Whether the determinate
number of seven Sacraments be a doctrine either of the scripture, or the old
Authors; and so to be taught? 6. The doctrine of Scripture is to teach the
thing, without numbering, or naming the name Sacrament, saving only
Matrimony.Old Authors number not precisely. Twelve Articles of the Faith not
numbered in Scripture, ne Ten Commandments, but rather one, Dilectio, Seven
petitions, Seven Deadly sins. * Then Penance is changed to a new term, i. e.
Absolution. Of Penance I read, that without it, we cannot be saved after
relapse: but not so of Absolution. And Penance to sinners is commanded, but
Absolution, yea, in open crimes, is left free to the Askers. Laying of hands,
being an old ceremony of the Church, is but a small proof of Confirmation. 7.
What is found in scripture of the matter, nature, effect, and virtue of such as
we call the seven Sacraments. So although the name be not in Scripture, yet
whether the thing be in Scripture, or no, and in what wise spoken. 7. First of
Baptism manifestly Scripture speaks. Secondly, Of the holy communion
manifestly. Thirdly, Of Matrimony manifestly. 4. Of Absolution * manifestly. 5.
Of Bishops, Priests and Deacons ordered per impositionem manuum cum Oratione
expressly. 6. Laying of the Hands of the Bp. after Baptism, which is a part of
that is done in Confirmation, is grounded in Scripture. 7. Unction of the sick
and prayer is grounded on scripture. This answer is not direct: and yet it
proves another of the two points to be grounded in scripture. 8. Whether
Confirmation cum Chrismate of them that be baptized be found in Scripture? 8.
The thing of Confirmation is found in scripture, though the name Confirmation
is not there. Of Chrisma Scripture speaks not expressly, but it has been had
in high veneration, and observed since the beginning. 9. Whether the Apostles
lacking higher power, and not having a Christen King among them, made Bishops
by that necessity, or by authority given them of God? 9. The calling, naming,
appointment and preferment of one before another to be Bishop or Priest, had a
necessity to be done in that sort, a Prince wanting. The Ordering appears
taught by the holy Ghost in the Scripture per manuum impositionem cum oratione.
10. Whether Bps, or Priests were first: And if the Priests were first, then the
Priest made the Bishop? 10. Bishops, or not after. 11. Whether a Bishop has
authority to make a Priest by the Scripture, or no: And whether any other, but
only a Bp. may make a Priest, or no? 11. Scripture warranteth a Bp. (obeying
high powers as the Prince christianed) to order a Priest per manuum
impositionem cum oratione. And so it has been from the beginning: of others
scripture speaks not. 12. Whether in the N. Testament be required any
Consecration of a Bp. or Priest, or only appointing to the office be
sufficient? 12. Manuum Impositio cum oratione is required. Which is a
Consecration. So as only Appointing is not sufficient. 13. Whether if it
fortune a Prince Chri^stian learned, to conquer certain Dominions of Infidels,
having none but temporal learned men with him, it be defended by Gods law, that
he and they may preach and teach the Word of God there, or no; and also make
and institute Priests, or no? 13. It is to be thought, that God in such cases,
assisting the perfection of such an enterprise, would sometime teach and
inspire the Conscience of such a Prince, what he should and might do, more then
is yet openly taught by the Scripture. Which in that case were a good warrant
to follow. For a secret Vocation supplieth where an open wants. A reason:
Necessity, in things absolutely necessary, contains in it order, law and
authority. 14. Whether it be forefended by Gods law, that if it so fortuned,
that all the Bishops and Priests of a realm were dead, and that the Word of God
should remain there unpreached, the Sacrament of Baptism, and others,
unministred, that the King of that Region should make Bps and Priests to supply
the same, or no? 14. This Question is without the compass of Scripture. Since
the beginning of Christ's church when Christ himself made distinction of
Ministers, the order has a determination from one to another per manuum
impositionem cum oratione. How it should begin again of another fashion, where
it fails by a case, Scripture tells not, ne Doctors write of it, that I
have read. 15. Whether a man be bound by authority of this Scripture Quorum
remiseritis, etc. and such like, to confess his secret deadly sins to a Priest,
if he may have him, or no? 15. Bound ordinarily. 16. Whether a Bp. or a Priest
may excommunicate? 16. They may, being before of their Prince authorized to
minister. For what crime? For open, public, deadly sins. And whether only by
Gods Law. Of Excommunication by others we read not in the new Testament. 17.
Whether Unction of the sick with oil to remit venial sins, as it is now used,
be spoken of in the Scripture, or in any ancient authors. 17. The thing is in
Scripture, and in ancient Authors, according whereunto the use should be. How it
is indeed used is a matter of fact, and not of learning.

NUMBER. XXVIII. The judgment of another Bishop upon the aforesaid Questions.
Cleop. E. 5.
I. TO the first, Scripture shows not what it is, but uses the word
Sacramentum in Latin for the word Mysterium in Greek.

II. Sacrament by the Authors is, Sacrae rei Signum, or Visibile Signaculum,
Sacrosanctum Signaculum. Visibile Verbum, Visibilis forma invisibilis gratiae;
and perfect definition we find none.

III. In Scripture we find no determine number of Sacraments.

IV. There be very many in the most general signification: and there is no
precise or determinate number of Sacraments in the ancient authors.

The ABp. of Cant. Bp. Davys.
V. Not only to the Seven, but to many mo. We find in old Authors Matrimony,
holy Communion, Baptism, Confirmation, Order, Penance and extreme Unction. It
is doubted of the number of Sacraments.

VI. As touching the determine number of Seven only, we find neither in the
Scripture, ne ancient authors, any such doctrine, that should be seven only.

VII. Of Baptism Scripture speaks, that by it sins be remitted. Of
Eucharistia, that we be united by it to Christ, and receive spiritual
nourishment to the comfort of our souls, and remission of our sins. Of
Matrimony, that the act of it is made lawful, and without sin; and Grace given
whereby to direct ordinately the lusts and appetites of the flesh. Of Penance,
that by it we be restored again to the favor of God, from which we did fall by
sin. Of Orders, that by it Grace is given to Ministers effectually in preaching
of the word of God, Archb. Cant.
and Ministration of the Sacraments. Of Confirmation, which is contained in
Scripture, ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes.
speaking De impositione manuum post baptisma, it appears by Scripture how
thereby increase of grace is given. Of Inunction of the sick, ABp. Cant. Bp.
Davyes. Mr. Cocks.
Scripture speaks, that by Unction of the sick, and prayer of the Priests,
comfort is given to sick, and sins be forgiven him.

ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes.
VIII. Impositionem manuum post Baptisma, which we call Confirmation, we read in
the Scripture. But that it was done Chrismate, we find not in the scripture
expressed. But in the old Authors we find, that Chrisma has been used in the
same Confirmation.

ABp. Cant.
IX. Making of Bps has two parts. Appointment and Ordering Where is this
distinction found? [The King's note.]
Appointment; which the Apostles by necessity made by common election, and
sometime by their own several assignment, could not then be done by Christen
Princes. Because at that time they were not. And now at these days
appertains to Christen Princes and Rulers Now* since you confess, that the
Apollystys [Apostles] did occupate the one part, which you now confess belongs
to Princes, how can you prove, that Ordering is only committed to you Bishops?
[The Kings Note.]
. But in the ordering, wherein Grace is conferred (as before) the Apostles did
follow the rule taught by the holy Ghost, Per manuum impositionem cum Oratione,
and jeju^io Ubi hoc? [The Kings Note.]


X. Christ made the Apostles first; which were of his making both Priests and
Bps. But whether at one time some doubt. ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes. Mr. Cocks.
After that the Apostles made both Bps. and Priests. The names whereof in the
Scripture be confounded.

XI. A Bp. having authority of the Christen Prince to give orders, ABp. Cant.
may by his ministry given to him of God in Scripture ordain a Priest. And we
read not, that any other, not being a Bp., has since the beginning of Christ's
church ordained a Priest.

XII. Only Appointment is not sufficient, but Consecration; ABp. Cant. Bp.
Davyes.
that is to say, Imposition of hands with fasting and prayer is also required.
For so the Apostles used to order them that were appointed: and so have been
used continually; and we have not read the contrary.

XIII. In that necessity, the Prince and his learned men should preach and
teach the word of God, and baptize. But as for making and constituting Priests,
the Prince shall and may then do, as God shall then by inspiration teach him.
Which God has promised to do always to his Church, in reveling and teaching
every necessary knowledge, where any doubt requiring discussion does arise.

XIV. The answer to the other Question next before dissolveth this.

XV. He that knows himself guilty of any secret deadly sins, ABp. Cant.
must, if he will obtain the benefit of Absolution ministered by the Priest,
confess the same secret sins unto him.

Absolution to be ministered by a Priest* if a convenient Priest may be had, is
necessary.
York. Duresm. Carelyl. Corwen. Simon. Ogelthorp. Eggeworth. Day. Redman.
Robynson. Wynchestre.
Absolution by a Priest is the surest way, if he may be conveniently had.
Cant. Hereford. Rochestre Davye. Westminst. Layton. Tresham. Cocks. Crayford.

XVI. Bps and Priests, authorized by the Prince, ABp. Cant. Bp. Davyes.
may excommunicate by Gods Law, for public and open crimes. But that others
then Bps and Priests may excommunicate, we have not read in scripture. Some
Schoolmen say, that other, then Priests or Bps., deputed thereunto by the
Church, may excommunicate. Because it is an Act jurisdictionis, and not ordinis.

XVII. We find it spoken of in Scripture and in old Authors. ABp. Cant. Bp.
Davyes.


NUMBER. XXIX. Archbishop Cranmer to Osiander concerning some abuses in Matrimony
among the Germans.
Doctissimo D. Andreae Osiandro, Concionatori Norenburgensi.
Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 111.
SAlve plurimum. Vix tribus abhinc diebus elapsis, Osiander dilectissime,
literas ad te scriptitabam, quas per subitum and sestinatum Tabellarij
discessum coactus sum abbreviare. Imo abrumpere plane, praetermisso eo, quod
and tunc quam maxim scriptum volui, and nunc otij plusculum nactus, nescio
quam nervose, verbose certe decrevi pertractare. Res est, ut mihi quidem
videtur, non parva, neque leniter animadvertenda, ut quae ad omnium Evangelicam
veritatem profitentium sugillationem, ne dicam ignominiam, and culpam manifest
pertineat. Proinde te rogo, ut and scriptum hoc meum legas attente, and tuum
vicissim responsum super eo conficias accurate, matureque remittas, quo habeam
tandem quod respondeam ijs, qui me interrogant. Nosti enim, opinor, ut soleant
homines hic omnium quae istic geruntur, a me rationem exigere: alij quidem bono
animo, and communis Evangelicae causae studio soliciti, nequid a vobis fieret,
secus quam oporteret. Alijs autem malus est animus, mala men's. Nihil magis
cupiunt, aut captant, quam ut justam aliquam, vos and vestra facta dictave
reprehendendi, ansam undecunque apprehendant; and gaudent si mihi in os subinde
talia possint objicere. Quibus duobus inter se diversis hominum generibus
respondeo Ego persaepe, quae vel ipse comminisci possum, vel quae ex scriptis
vestris, sive in publicum emissis, sive ad me privatim missis, possimcolligere.
Incidunt tamen persaepe nonnulla, quae nec negare possum, nec absque rubore
fateri, quae denique quo pacto a vobis honest aut pie fieri doceantur,
rationem ullam saltem excogitare sufficientem nequeo. Nam ut interim de Usuris
taceam, a vobis aut vestrum certe nonnullis, ut apparet, approbatis, deque eo
quod Magnatum filijs concubinas habendas permittitis, (videlicet ne per nuptias
legitimas hereditates dispergantur) qui Concubinatum in Sacerdotibus tantopere
aversati estis: quid poterit a Vobis in excusationem allegari pro eo, quod
permittitis, a divortio, utroque conjuge vivo, novas nuptias coire, and quod
adhuc deterius est, etiam absque divortio uni plures permittitis uxores. Id
quod and tute, si recte memini, in quibusdam tuis ad me literis apud vos factum
diserte expressisti, addens Philippum ipsum sponsalibus posterioribus, ut
paranymphum credo atque auspicem, interfuisse.

Quae ambo, tum ipsius conjugij rationi, quae non duo, sed unam carnem facit,
tum etiam scripturis sunt express and manifest contraria. Ut patet Matthew. 19.
Marc. 10. Luc. 16. To. 7. 1 Cor. 7. Quibus locis perspicuum fit ex Apostolorum,
atque adeo Christi ipsius institutione, unum uni debere matrimonio conjungi,
nec posse sic conjunctos postea, nisi interveniente morte alterutrius, denuo
contrahere. Quod si responderitis, hoc intelligi excepta causa fornicationis:
An Uxoris adulterium fuerit causa quur Philippus marito permiserit aliam
superducere, vos melius nostis. Quod si fuerit, tunc objiciemus, ab ineunte
hucusque ecclesia (cujus exemplis oportet scripturarum interpretationes
conformari) nunquam quod scimus hoc sic suisse acceptum. Augustinus, quid ipse
de hoc senserit, imo quid ecclesia ante ipsum, and usque ad ipsum, clare docet,
li. de adulterinis conjugijs, ad Pollentium. Quid igitur ad haec dicetis,
Libenter vellem audire abs te quidem, si and ipse in eadem cum caeteris es
sententia. Sin minus, per te saltem vellem cognoscere quid ab illis
exploraveris ad talia responsum iri. Nam cum eorum nonnulli, ut audio, statuta
nostra Parlamentaria censorie nimis, ac superciliose: condempnent, quorum tamen
gravissimas, justissimasque causas ac rations ignorant, mirum est quod interim
ipsi non advertant apud ipsos plurima designari, quae optimis atque gravissimis
viris jure optimo displiceant. Scire atque aveo, an ista tanquam honesta, and
promiscue quibusvis Licita, ac Evangelicae veritati non repugnantia defendant:
An secundum indulgentiam (ut dixit Apostolus) ad ea, dum a quibusdam fiunt,
connivent, nequid gravius contingat, non idem omnibus itidemque permissuri.
Illud prius, haud equidem credo illos esse facturos, nisi legis Machometanae
potius quam Christianae assertores videri voluerint. Posterius hoc si faciunt,
videant quomodo permittant, quae Christus, Apostoli, Evangelistae, atque adeo
totius ecclesiae consensus districte ab initio, hu^ usque prohibuit.

Quod si forte dixerint, ea jam quoque tolerari posse, eo quod ante Christum
natum fuerunt, vel approbata vel tolerata; tunc enimvero causam nobis reddant,
cur non and caetera toleremus, qu^cunque tunc legimus pari jure usitata; aut
definiant quaenam hujus generis, aut quatenus erunt admittenda. Nam in Veteri
Testamento expressum habemus olim patrem concubuisse cum filiabus, ut Loath,
Socerum cum nuru, ut Iudam, patrem familias, nempe Abraham, cum ancilla
pellice, conscia uxore, atque etiam id ultro suadente, nempe Sara, eundem ipsum
uxorem suam, adhuc juvenculam, ac formosam, sororem nominasse, eamque Regibus,
Pharaoni and Abimelech, ultro in concubitum permisisse. Praeterea, unum saepe
hominem plures habuisse uxores, ut Jacob and Mosen ipsum, legis latorem a Deo
constitutum. Postremo, Principes multos, eosque nec illaudatos, praeter uxorum
numerosa contubernia, Concub narum etiam greges aluisse: ut Davidem, Solomonem,
etc. Nec Assuero vitio datur, quod singulis paene noctibus concubinam novam
asciverit. Et Hester foemina Laudatissima, utpote quam ad Salutem populi sui
Deus excitavir, quum esset Iudaea, and legi Mosaicae obnoxia, Assueri Regis
cubiculum ante nuptias intravit. Quid pluribus opus, quum gravissimi autores
Ambrosius and Augustimus, disertis verbis affirment, hic Poligamiam, ille
concubinatum, peccato tum caruisse, quando nec contra morem, nec contra
praeceptum fierent, quae nunc and legibus and moribus pronuntiant esse
contraria. Talia, inquam, constat apud Veteres fuisse usitata, nec a bonis
quidem viris tunc temporis improbata. Quae vel omnia probabunt novi isti
homines, and rerum novarum intro ductores, vel aliqua, vel nulla. Quod si Nulla
dicant nobis, cur ista admiserunt? Si Aliqua, quur non and reliqua? Et
praescribant nobis regulam, qua sciamus, quae sunt admittenda, quae vero
rejicienda. Si Omnia (in qua sententia videtur esse Bucerus) quaeso te, qualem
verum faciem, quantumque a priore mutatam in ecclesia Videbimus? Quam erunt
confusa, inversa atque praepostera omnia? Sed adhuc proprius urgebimus eos,
interrogabimusque: An non tantum quae sub lege facta sunt, sed etiam quae ante
legem, and an non tantum, quae a Iudaeis, sed and quae a Gentibus fuerint
usitata, veluti jure postliminij, ad exemplum revocabunt? Etsi illa tantum quur
non haec aeque atque illa? Presertim quae a Sanctioribus and Sapientioribus
viris, ut Socrate, Platone, Cicerone, etc. fuerint vel facta, vel approbata.
Quod si utraque concedent, concedant and nobis Britannis, more majorum
nostrorum, denas, duodenasque uxores habere insimul communes, and maxim
fratres cum ^ratribus, parents cum liberis. Quod aliquando in hac insula
usitatum fuisse Caesar, non ignobilis author, testatur in Commentarijs.
Concedant foeminis Christianis, quod Solon suis Atheniensibus concesserat, ut
quae viros parum ad rem Veneream idoneos sortita^ fuissent, aliquem ex mariti
propinquis impune admitterent. Concedunt quod Lycurgus coneessit Viris
Lacedaemonijs, ut qui minus esset ad procreandam prolem idoneus, alteri cui
vellet suam conjugem impregnandam daret, and prolem precario sibi natam ut
propriam suo nomine nuncuparet. Aut denique quod Romanorum legibus permissum
erat, ut qui satis liberorum procreasse^, uxorem suam alteri commodaret prolem
desideranti. Id quod and Cato vir gravissimus, sapientissimusque habitus,
Hortentio amico suo legitur fecisse. Talia cum probata fuerint antiquitus viris
sapientissimis, ac Philosophorum legumque latorum optimis and sanctissimis, ut
Platoni, Xenophonti, Catoni, etc. quum eadem fuerint moribus recepta
Hebraeorum, Graecorum, Latinorum (quorum populorum Respublicas and Politeias
constat optime fuisse constitutas, and ab omnibus scriptoribus maxim
celebratas) age, faciamus, and nos, si deo placet, similia, and Christianis
fratribus permittamus facienda. Imo Christus Opt. Max. tam foeda, tamque
incestuosa connubiorum portenta a sua sancta ecclesia dignetur avertere, nunc
and in diem Domini, Amen.

Haec Ego ad te potissimum, Charissime Osiander, in presentia scribenda duxi
propter eam, quae inter nos est, and jam diu fuit, summam necessitudinem and
familiaritatem, quamvis putem, atque adeo certo sciam, te ab hujusmodi tam
absurdis and moribus and opinionibus quam alienissimum esse. Cum caeteris
Vestratibus Doctoribus levior and minus arcta michi intercedit amicitia, cujus
ipsius quoque fateor me multum paeniteret, si scirem hos esse fructus novi
Evangelij ab ipsis tantopere jactitati, and a vobis quoque hactenus, ut
putabamus, non temere aliqua ex part probati. Been vale. Dat Lambeth xxvij mo.
Decembr.

Tui Amantissimus, T. Cantuarien.

NUMBER. XXX. The French Kings License to print the English Bible in Paris.
FRanciscus, etc. Dilectis nobis Richardo Grafton and Edwardo Whitchurch,
Cleopatra, E. 5. p. 326.
Anglis, and Civibus Londini, Salutem. Quia fide digna testimonia accepimus,
quod carissimus frater noster Anglorum Rex, Vobis cujus Subditi estis Sacram
Bibliam tam Latin quam Britannice sive Anglice imprimendi, and imprimi
curandi, and in suum regnum apportandi and transferendi, libertatem
sufficientem and legitimam concesserit: Et Vos, tum propter chartam, tum
propter alias honestas considerationes, animos vestros in hac part just
moventes, dictam Bibliam sic imprimendam Parisijs infra hoc nostrum regnum
curaveritis, ac in Angliam quamprimum transmittere intenderitis: NOS, ut haec
vobis facere liceat potestatem facientes, vobis conjunctim and divisim, ac
Procuratoribus, Factoribus, and Agentibus vestris and cujuslibet vestrum, ut in
regno nostro apud Chalcographum quemcunque dictam Sacram Bibliam, tam Latina
quam Anglicana lingua, tuto imprimere, and excudere possitis, and possint:
necnon excusa and impressa in Angliam duntaxat sine ulla perturbatione aut
molestia vel impedimento quocunque, transmittere and apportare: Dummodo quod
sic imprimitis and excuditis, sincere and pure, quantum in Vobis erit, citra
ullas privatas aut illegitimas opiniones, impressum and excusum fuerit: Et
onera ac officia mercatoria nobis and ministris nostris, debite in hac part
extiterint persoluta; licentiam nostram impartimur and concedimus specialem per
praesentes. Dat. etc.

NUMBER. XXXI. Three Discourses of ABp. Cranmer, occasioned upon his review of the
Kings Book, entitled, The Erudition of a Christian man.
I. FAITH.
THIS Book speaks of pure Christian Faith unfeigned, which is without color,
as well in heart as in mouth. He, MSS. C. C. CC. Miscellan. D.
that has this Faith, converteth from his sin, repents him, that he like
Filius prodigus, vainly consumed his Will, Reason, Wits and other goods, which
he received of the mere benefit of his heavenly father, to his said Fathers
displesure: and applies himself wholly to pleas him again: and trusts
assuredly, that for Christ's sake he will, and does remit his sins, withdraws
his indignation, delivers him from his sin, from the power of the Infernal
spirits, takes him to his mercy, and makes him his own son, and his own
heir. And he has also the very Christian Hope, that after this life he shall
reign ever with Christ in his kingdom. For S. Paul says, Si filij sumus, and
haeredes, haeredes quidem Dei, cohaeredes autem Christi. This is the very pure
Christian Faith and Hope, which every good Christian man ought to profess,
Believe, and Trust: and to say of himself even as Job said, Scio quod Redemptor
meus vivit, etc.

And as for the other Faith, that the Good shall arise unto Glory, and the evil
unto pain, or, that those that persevere in Gods precepts and laws, so long as
they so do, they be the right Inheritors of his kingdom, this is not the
commendation of a Christian his Faith, but a most certain proposition, which all the Devils believe most certainly. And yet they shall never have their sins
forgiven by this Faith, nor be Inheritors of Gods kingdom. Because they lack
the very Christian Faith: and not trusting to the goodness and mercy of God for
their own offenses. But they hate God, envy his glory, and be utterly in
despair.

For the more large Declaration of the Christian Faith, it is to be considered,
that there is a general Faith; which all that be christened, as well good as evil,
have. As to believe that God is; that he is the Maker and Creator of al things:
and that Christ is the Savior and Redeemer of the world: and for his sake al
penitent sinners shall have remission of their sins: And that there shall be a
general resurrection at the end of this mortal World; At the which Christ shall
judge all the Good to joy without end, and the Evil to pain without end; with
such other like things. And al these things the Devils also believe, and
tremble for fear and grievousnes of Gods indignation and torments, which they
shall endure, and ever shall do. But they have not the right christen Faith, that
their own sins by Christ's redemption be pardoned and forgiven; that themselves
by Christ be delivered from Gods wrath, and be made his beloved children, and
heirs of his kingdom to come. The other Faith have al Devils and wicked
christen people, that be his Members. But this pure christen Faith have none
but those that truly belong to Christ, and be the very Members of his body, and
endeavor themselves to persevere in his precepts and laws: although many pretend
to have the same pure Faith, which nevertheles have it not, but only in their
mouths. For as there is a ly in the mouth, and a ly in the heart; even so there
is a faith in the mouth, and a faith in the heart. Examine every man, if he
Trust in God, and Love God above al things. And in word he will answer, Yea. But
examine every man's acts and deeds, and surely in a great number their acts and
deeds condemn their words. For they walk after their own Wills and plesures,
and not after Gods commandments. And Christ himself says, Qui diligit me,
mandata mea servat. And S. John says, Qui dicit se nosse deum, and mandata
ejus non custodit, mendax est. And therefore al those, that bridle not their own
appetites, but follow them, and accomplish the will of their own carnal minds,
they trust in God, and trust God no further, then the lips. And if they
persuade themselves, that they trust in God, and love God in their hearts, and
be of any estimation before God, then be they much deceived; and as S. Paul
says, they deceive their own hearts. Our own flesh and carnal mind is contrary
to the Spirit, and motion of God. And they, says S. Paul, that belong unto
Christ, do crucify their flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. And
contrary he says, They that follow the lusts of the flesh shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. These be very notable, and fearful sentences unto al such as be
not repentant, but live after their own wills, and not after Gods will: neither
have the right faith, nor Love unto God, nor shall be inheriters of his kingdom.
And though Christ has paid a sufficient ransom for all the sins in the World,
and is a sufficient Redeemer and Savior of all the World; yet shall they have no
part thereof. For they belong not unto Christ, and Christ utterly refuses them
for his, which have Faith and Love only in their mouths, and have not the same
engraven in their hearts, and expressed in their actions and deeds.

And so he goes on more largely to illustrate this argument of the necessity of
more than a mere faith in the mouth. Afterward the Discourse thus procedes.

If as treacle, kept only in the mouth, does not remedy poison in the whole
body; but the treacle must enter down into the body; and then it alters the
whole body, and expells al venom and poison: In like manner, he whose
profession of his faith is only in his mouth, and alters not his evil life,
is not forgiven his sins; is not delivered from hell, nor from the power of
Devils; is not made the son of God: but continues still in his poison of sin,
in the wrath and indignation of God, and in the damnation of the wicked in hell.

But if the profession of our faith of the remission of our own sins, enter
within unto the deepness of our hearts, then it must needs kindle a warm fire
of Love in our hearts toward God, and toward all others for the love of God;
a fervent mind to seek and procure Gods honor, will and pleasure in all things; a
good will and mind to help every man, and to do good unto them so far, as our
Might, Wisdom, Learning, Counsil, Health, Strength, and al other gifts, which
we have received of God, will extend: And in summa, a firm intent and purpose to
do all that is good, and leave all that is evil. This is the very right, pure,
perfect, lovely, christian, hearty, and justifying Faith, which works by
Love, as S. Paul says, and suffers no venom or poison of sin to remain
within the heart: ( Acts 15. Fide Deus purificans corda.) But gendreth in the
heart a hatred unto al sin, and makes a sinner clean a new man; and is the
Faith which every christen man ought to profess in his Creed. And of this Faith
runs al our Paraphrasis upon the same. For as for the other fained,
pretended, hypocritical and adulterate Faith in the mouth, it is but only a
painted visor before men* but before God it is hollow within, dead, rotten, and
nothing worth.

II. JUSTIFICATION.
AND for a further Declaration, to know how we obtain our Justification, it is
expedient to consider first, how naughty and sinful we are al, that be of
Adam's kindred: and contrariwise, what Mercifulnes is in God, which to al
faithful and penitent sinners, pardons al their offenses for Christ's sake. Of
these two things no man is lightly ignorant, that ever has heard of the fall of
Adam, which was to the infection of al his posterity: and again, of the
inexplicable mercy of our heavenly father, which sent his only begotten Son to
suffer his most grievous passion for us, and shed his most precious blood, the
price of our Redemption. But it is greatly to be wished and desired, that as al
Christen men do know the same, so that every man might acknowledge himself a
miserable sinner, not worthy to be called his son; and yet surely trust, that
to him being repentant Gods mercy is ready to forgive. And he that sees not
these two things verified in himself, can take no manner of emolument or profit,
by knowledging and believing the said things to be verified in others. But we
cannot satisfy our minds, settle our conscience, that these things be true,
saving that we do evidently see, that Gods word so teaches us. The
Commandments of God lay our faults before our eyes; which puts us in fear
and dread, and makes us se the wrath of God against our sins. As S. Paul
says, Per legem agnitio peccati. Et, Lex iram operatur. And makes us sorry
and repentant, that ever we should come into the displeasure of God, and the
captivity of the Devil.

The gracious and benign promises of God, by the mediation of Christ, shows
us, and that to our great relief and comfort, whenever we be repentant and
return fully to God in our hearts, that we have forgiveness of our sins, be
reconciled to God, and be accepted and reputed just and righteous in his sight,
only by his grace and mercy, which he does grant and give unto us for his
dearly beloved Sons sake, Jesus Christ, who paid a sufficient ransom for our
sins; whose blood does wash away the same; whose bitter and grievous passion is
the only pacifying oblation, that puts away from us the wrath of God his
Father: Whose sanctified body, offered on the Cross, is the only Sacrifice of
sweet and pleasant Savor, as S. Paul says; that is to say, of such sweetness
and pleasantnes to the Father, that for the same he accepts and reputeth of
like sweetness al them, that the same offering does serve for. These benefits of
God with innumerable others, whosoever extends and well pondereth in his
heart, and thereby conceives a firm trust and feeling of Gods mercy, whereof
springs in his heart a warm love, fervent heat of zeal toward God: It is not
possible, but that he shall fall to work, and be ready to the performance of al
such works, as he knows to be acceptable unto God.

And these works only, which follow Justification, do please God; forasmuch as
they proceed from a heart endued with pure faith and love to God. But the works
which we do before our Justification, be not allowed and accepted before God,
although they appear never so great and glorious in the sight of men. For after
our Justification only begin we to work, as the law of God requires: then we
shall do al good works willingly, although not so exactly as the Law requires,
by means of the infirmity of the flesh, nevertheles by the merits and benefits
of Christ, we being sorry, that we cannot do al things no more exquisitely and
duly, al our Works shall be accepted and taken of God as most exquisite, pure
and perfect. Now they that think they may come to Justification by performance
of the Law, by their own deeds and merits, or by any other means, than is above
rehearsed, they go from Christ, they renounce his grace. Evacuati estis a
Christo, says S. Paul, Gal. 5. Quicunque in lege justificamini; a gratia
excidistis. They be not partakers of his justice, that he has procured, or the
merciful benefits that be given by him. For S. Paul says, (a general rule for all them, that will seek such bypath to obtain Justification,) Those, says
he, that will not knowledge the justice, or righteousness, which comes by God,
but go about to avaunce their own righteousness, shall never come to that
righteousness, which we have by God, which is the righteousness of Christ. By
whom only all the Saints in Heaven, and al others that have been saved, have
been reputed righteous, and justified. So that to Christ our only Savior and
Redeemer, of whose Righteousness both their, and our Justification does depend,
is to be transcribed all the glory thereof.

III. FORGIVENES of Injuries.
THese two may stand both well together: that we as private persons may forgive
al such as have trespassed against us with all our heart, and yet that the
public ministers of God may se a redres of the same trespasses that we have
forgiven. For my forgivenes concerns only mine own person, but I cannot forgive
the punishment and correction, that by Gods ordinance is to be ministered by the
superior power. For in so much as the same trespass, which I do forgive, may be
the maintenance of vice, not only of the offender, but also of others taking
evil example thereby, it lies not in me to forgive the same. For so should I
enterprise in the office of another, which by the ordinance of God be deputed
to the same. Yea, and that such justice may be ministered to the abolishment of
vice and sin, I may, yea and rather, as the cause shall require, I am bound to
make relation to the superior powers, of the enormities and trespasses, done to
me and others: and being sorry, that I should have cause so to do, seek the
reformation of such evil doers, not as desirous of vengeance, but of the
amendment of their Lives. And yet I may not the more cruelly persecute the
matter, because the offense is peradventure done toward me: but I am to handle
it as if it were done to any other, only for the use of the extirpation of sin,
the maintenance of justice and quietness: Which may right well stand with the
ferventnes of charity, as the Scripture testifies. Non oderis fratrem tuum in
cord tuo, sed public argue eum, ne habeas super illo peccatum. Levit 19. So
that this may stand with charity, and also the forgiveness that Christ
requires of every one of us.

And yet in this doing, I must forgive him with all my heart, as much as lies in
me; I must be sorry, that sin should have so much rule in him; I must pray to
God to give him repentance for his misdeeds; I must desire God, that for
Christ's sake he will not impute the sin unto him, being truly repentant, and so
to strengthen him in grace, that he fall not again so dangerously. I think I
were no true christen man, if I should not thus do. And what other thing is
this, than as much as lies in me, with all my heart to remit the trespass? But I
may by the Laws require all that is due unto me by right. And as for the
punishment and correction, it is not in my power to enterprise therein: but that
only belongs to the superior powers, to whom, if the grievousnes of the cause
shall require by the Commandment, which wills us to take away the evil from
among us, we ought to show the offenses, and complain thereof. For he would not
that we should take away the evil, but after a just and lawful means, which is
only, by the ordinance of God, to show the same to the Superior Powers, that
they may take an order in it, according to Gods judgment and justice.

NUMBER. XXXII. Other Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer.
I. De Consolatione Christianorum contra metum mortis. Ex Doctoribus
Ecclesiasticis.
IF death of the body were to be feared, then them, which have power to kill
the body should we fear, MSS.C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D.
lest they do their exercise over us, as they may at their pleasure. But our
Savior forbids us to fear them, because when they have killed the body, then
they can do no more to us. Wherefore it is plain, that our Savior would not that
we should fear death. To die, says S. John Chrysostom, is to put off our old
garments, and death is a pilgrimage of the spirit from the body: (He means, for
a time) And a sleep, somewhat longer than the old custom. The fear of it,
says he, is nothing else, than the fear of Buggs, and a childish fear of that
thing that cannot harm thee. Remember holy S. Ambrose's saying, which S.
Augustine, lying on his death bed, ever had in his mouth, I do not fear to die;
for we have a good and merciful Lord and Master. Lactantius, the great learned
man confirms the saying of Cicero to be true, which said, that no man can be
right wise, which fears death, pain, banishment or poverty: and that he is
the honest and virtuous man, which not regards what he suffers, but how well
he does suffer. Sedulius, one of disciples, defines death to be the gate, by
the which lies the strait way unto reign and kingdom. Basilius, who as in
name, so both in virtue and learning was great, thus he exhorts us: O! man,
says he, shrink not to withstand your Adversaries, to suffer labors; abhor not
death* for it destroys not, nor makes not an end of you, but it is the
beginning and occasion of life. Nor death is the destruction of al things, but
a departing, and a translation unto honors. And S. Hierom, the strong and stout
champion of Almighty God, says, declaring this saying of holy Job, the day of
death is better than the day of birth; that is, says he, because other
[either] that by death it is declared what we are, or else because our Birth
does bind our liberty of the soul with the body, and death do loose it.

The holy Martyr Cyprian says, he ought to fear death, that would not, nor
has no lust to go to Christ: and that he has no will to God, the which
believes not, that by death, he shall begin to reign with Christ, as it is
written, The right wise man lives by faith. Wherefore, says he, do not ask
that the Kingdom of God may come, if this earthly bondage do delight us, etc.

With a great deal more: al upon allegations.

II. An Exhortation to take sickness well, and adversity patiently: drawn out of
Cyprian.
THis misliketh some men, that disease of sickness comes to the Christen, no
less then to the Heathen. As who should say, that therefore the Christian
believes, because he should be quiet from danger of Adversity, and might have
the fruition of this world at his own pleasure: and not because that after he
has suffered adversity here, he shall be reserved for the joy to come, etc.

III. An Exhortation to take the pain of sickness patiently; Translated out of
S. Augustine. Lib. 1. De Visitatione Infirmorum.
Thou will say, I love God: God grant, says S. Augustine, that it be so indeed
as thou promisest in words. The proof and trial of the love of God is the
fulfilling of his Commandments, the fulfilling of his works, willingly to love
that God loves, with a fervent desire to embrace that, the which God works.
Then if thou love God, thou love that that God does, and if thou love that
that God does, then thou love Gods discipline. When thou art chastened, thou
love Gods rod. Thou art pained with the cough, the lungs fails thee: thy
stomach abhorres his meat: thou pinest away with a Consumption: thou tastest
not thy drink: thou art vexed within thy body: thou art grieved with many
sundry and diverse kinds of diseases. But al these, if thou have an eye to
perceive, if thou reckon God, al these, I say, are the gifts of God. Son, cast
not away the discipline of the Father. There is no child, which the Father does
not correct, etc.

NUMBER. XXXIII. Interrogatories for Dr. London.
WHether he commanded Serles upon Palm Sunday Even, MSS. C. C C C. intit.
Synodalia.
to write such Articles or Sermons, as had been preached in Kent: [by those of
the New learning: Which Serles would have to be done by the Countenance of
Cranmer.]

Whether Serles brought the Articles upon Palm Sunday.

Whether he required Serles to go with him to the Council, to present the said
Articles, or else to subscribe them with his hand. And Serles refused so to do,
because they were not proved by Witnesses, but only by hearsay.

Whether he threatened Serles, because he would not set to his hand;
notwithstanding that Serles knew them not, but by hearsay.

How Dr. London did find out Serles; and how long he had enquired for him
before he could find him.

Whether in the presence of Serles Dr. London did pen the Articles anew,
otherwise then they were presented.

Whether Serles said then to Dr. Willoughby, whom Dr. London had persuaded to
go with him to the Council; Beware what you do: for you shall never be able to
prove of this sort, that Dr. London does now pen them.

Whether beside the Book subscribed by diverse Prebendaries and others of Cant.
Dr. London made another great book of many more articles. Where that book is,
and of whom he had his Instructions.

What matters he knew against the ABp. of Cant. or others in Kent, before
Palm Sunday last past, when he had Articles of Serles. And of whom he had such
knowledge before the said day.

Dr. Willoughbies Confession and Submission; as to his meddling in the ABp. of
Canterburies business, under his own hand.
HE declared, that he first met Serles at Dr. Londons house at London, on
Palm Sunday, coming to London to speak with the Chamberlain of London. And then
they opened the business first to him. That he was not able to say any thing
against any one person mentioned in these Articles, more then by hearsay. That
he and Gardener had been gathering of matter a quarter of a year before. That
he knew nothing that they minded any thing toward his Grace, til he saw it in
writing: By whom, and whose devise God, the Devil and they know; he knew
nothing for his part. And that it was the most deceitful and disobedient
country in the world. As concerning their preferment of their Articles at the
Sessions, he knew nothing of that neither. Nor was in Kent at that time, nor
knew of no Sessions, as God should be his help. Nor that he spoke with any
Justices of Peace in this matter; or that he was privy, that any of them did.
That he told Mr. Moyle, and Mr. Thwaite [two eminent Justices] what Mr. London
said to him, that the Justices al would be shent, because they suffered such
preachings and contentions without doing any thing therein. That he only
consented to bear the name of putting up of these matters [that is, of
preferring the Articles to the Sessions.] He acknowledged, that he said, he
heard that it was in the Country in many places: lying upon himself like a
fool: and yet that he never came before the Council, nor never minded. But to
avoid the suspicion, he made much babbling, bringing himself into much slander.

And for this doing he submitted himself to God, and my Lords Grace. That, by
his Father, [a sort of oath] he had no dealing with Pettit; nor any other
Lawyer, or did know what they did, as to indictment, or any other thing
thereunto belonging: nor ever reasoned with Pettit about any such matter. What
effect or head they intended to bring this matter unto, God knows: Most
likely to subdue his Graces power. That they had good hope to have had other
Commissioners, than his Lordship. So London promised them at the beginning, or
else they would not have meddled so much, as they did: and especially against
his Grace. That as concerning their authority, he suspected they took it of
Londons presumption, seeing him go forward against such men of Worship [meaning
the late Indictments of so many eminent persons at Winsor] and of the rigor in
handling and fetching up of Persons.

Another Confession of Dr. Willoughby.
MR. Serles manitimes resorted home to me, and still lay upon me to put up
Articles that he and they should devise, because I was the Kings Graces
Chaplain. Whereupon I granted, so they might be proveable and true. And so it
fortuned in Passion week, He and I on Friday in the same week rode to London,
and on Saturday he had be with Dr. London, and put up his Articles, (nothing to
my knowledge, that he had any) and promising him, that he would put them up
himself. And on Palm Sunday in the morning he sent for me, and prayed me to go
with him to Mr. London: and so I did. And there (woe worth them both, London and
Serles, who is ordained to cause much trouble) He told London that I would put
up the articles: and so asked me the Question. And I bad him read them, for I
never saw them before, nor knew whether they were true or false: and so I told
him. And Serles said, ye know, it is openly spoken. And I said, though I hear
such things, I am not sure they be true: and also here is no record to affirm
them true: Which methink were row [rough] matter, knowing neither party nor
record. And therefore seeing Serles has put them to you, let him present them
himself. Then Mr. London said, I have showed them to part of the Council
already: and chid sore with Serles, saying, that he would show the truth, who
brought them. Then said Dr. London to me, pu^ ye them up, knowing such shameful
Articles presented here before your own face, it shall be hard for you to bide
the danger hereof, knowing the Kings will is to have it so. And also fear not;
for I have set such a spectacle before you at Winsor, in bringing to light
abominable heresies: at the which the Kings Majesty was astonished, and wondered,
angry both with the doers and bearers. And therefore if ye shrink herein, ye
shall show your self not to be herein the Kings true subject. Therefore seeing ye
be his Chaplain, ye did him never such service, as ye may do herein, to present
them for your discharge. For now ye shall not be rid of them, and ye would.
[Having heard them read, and so being privy to them.]

And with this threatening and fear I was content. And so Dr. London wrote them
new, and added to them at his pleasure: wherewith both Serles and I were vexed.
Meaning, as he said, to bring the matter into the Justices hond, and certain of
the spiritualty; whose names Serles recited at his request: Saying to us, it
would never be known to be our doing. And so was I fain to take the old Copy
with me into Kent, to get them recorded. And he sent his Copy to my L. of
Winchester. And so when I came down into Kent, remembering this Article to be
put up in my name, and neither had record, nor knew them to be true, I came to
the Prebend of Christschurch, and brought with me the Articles, being al of
Serles hand, and gathering of him, and them among themselves: and bad me ask
for one Salisbery that had the key of his chamber, for certain other writings,
and copy al in one, and set their hands to them: and Mr. Gardener to sign for
himself, and Serles to boot. I could get neither writing nor sign. And so I
went up again: and told London of it with a heavy heart. Then Mr. London told
me, I should tell Mr. Moyle, that the Council said to him* that the Justices of
every shire should be shent, that such things should be, and not brought to
knowledge. For if every Justice had done his duty, according to the Kings
Injunctions, such enormities need not to have been. And I told Mr. Moyle and
Mr. Thwaites both, what I heard of London. Also Mr. London came to Mr. Moyles
Lodging one day, and talked with him his mind, as may fortune he has better in
remembrance then I. But then I heard him tell Mr. Moyle, how he took up my L. of
Cant. before the Council. Then the next day I came to Mr. Moyle again; and
because he heard, that the Council should say so, and also had other
Commandments for his discharge, sent certain letters to Mr. Thwaites, Mr.
Walter Moyle, Mr. Green and Mr. Norton, to search out any Priest that lacked a
crown with such Articles as the Country rumoured of. Whereupon each of them sent
up some: And then the Prebendaries wrote up apace. And Mr. Moyle brought all that came to his hand to my L. of Cant. And therewith Mr. London was angry, and
said he would mar al.

Then I went down into Kent again, and brought up the Articles, wherein was
matter against my L. of Cant. and received them of Mr. Gardener on Good Friday
or Easter-Even. Mr. Shether copied them again. Which Articles they prayed me to
carry to my L. of Winchester. And I kept it, and let Dr. London see it. And he
caused me to send it down to be signed with the hands of them. And so I did,
and kept the Copy. And then, when I had it signed, I kept it still, til their
coming. And they took it of me, and carried it to the Council themselves. And
Dr. London had a copy of them, or else before. And they told me, they had great
comfort of my L. of Winchester, and of Mr. Baker both

Also Dr. London brought me by commandment of mine allegiance, to go with him
to the Council chamber door; meaning to have me in before the Council. But he
went in, and told them of my being there; giving me this lesson, that I should
say. My Lords al; It is so, that the Kings Majesty and his Honorable Council
has been at great charges, and taken great pains, to set a good and a godly
way among us. And for all that, in Kent among us we have the most enormous
heresies, that may be. And because I heard of this gracious tidings, that his
will and pleasure is, that every man in pain of his Allegiance to bring in what
he knows, or else hereafter we know, and would not speak it, our damage would
be thence. And because of this, I come for my discharge to show this. But I
came not in, nor spoke with none: their business was so much.

Also the next day after Dr. London carried me to my L. Privy Seals chamber,
and the Articles with us. But he had no leisure to se them.

Also the next day after that I had been with my L. Privy Seal, Dr. London
carried me to my L. of Winchester. And there he was carried in to my Lords
secret chamber: and tarried there an hour, and had his Articles new copied with
him. And in the next day, in the morning betimes, I went there to speak with my
L. of Winchester my self. And I spoke with him, and prayed him, that the
Articles that Mr. London brought, should not be put up in my name, for I knew
not the matter; but in the names of them that sent them. And he said, he would.
And another time I came to my L. of Winchester, and brought a roll from Mr.
London: and then I prayed him again, that he would not put them up in my name,
and had him recommended from Mr. Gardener, that he would be good Lord to him
for a business of for he had taken great pains in this matter. But he made me
no promise. And also my L. of Winch. bad me not fear to do my duty. And the
matter were not to be bide by, the doers should bear the blame, and not the
presenter. It is al our duties to stand in such things, as are contrary to the
Kings Injunctions.

And here is all that ever I did in this matter, as I can remember: and all the
Council that ever I came before in this matter, or any other. But thus by the
comforting in this matter of my L. of Winchester, and Dr. London's threatenings,
have brought my self in great dangers with other men's matters Nothing of my
self, that I can either se or prove, nor never did. But busied my self with
other men's Articles: Yet had I never done it, and London had not been, that
threat me to be no true subject. Woe worth them both, he and Serles: for by
their false inventions I am shamed. If their Articles be false, punish the
Inventors with shame: for shameful matters, and many have been gathered among
them.

Also Mr. London commanding both Serles and me, that in any wise we should get
as much matter as could be devised: for it would be the goodliest deed, and the
most bounden duty to our Prince, that ever we did.

Also Mr. Shether sent his man to me on Sunday before Al-Solne day, bidding me
in any wise not to be known of nothing: for that they had uttered nothing
themselves. And that I should go to his brother Parson, and I should know more.
But he was sworn not to write to me: but he had written to his brother al his
mind; and of him I should knowal. For Mr. Dr. Cocks, and Mr. Hossy, as he
thought, was sent to catch me. And therefore he sent his man to be before. And if
I did speak with them, I should say, that I received no letter, but of Cockson,
which is dead. And this was but to bring me in danger, and skuse themselves.
And if I come before the Council, I will bide by all this: for it is true. But
it is impossible for a man, to have every day or time in remembrance, that has
been done or said in a year. But I put al to Gods grace, and the Kings, and to
your Lordship.

Also, I asked Shethers man, whether he had been with my L. of Winch. since the
coming down of my Lords Grace. And he said, Yea: and told my Lord, how al was
handled here among us. And my L. of Winch. answered and said, My Lord of Cant.
could not kill them. Therefore suffer. For all was against himself that he did.
And he should se, what would come of it.

Also, at the coming up of the Prebendaries to London, Mr. Shether put the
Articles and Writings to Mr. Ford, that married his Sister; that he should
write them. Which was a great book of two days labor. What was the Contents
thereof I know not. I think all the whole Articles compiled together.

Also Mr. Dr. Thornton in the Ale [Alley] before my door in London, I desired
him to speak to my L. of Cant. or some of his Officers, to instruct him, that I
never put up Articles against any man in my life. And he bade me stick to it,
and be not afraid. For he had spoken to the Council his mind therein, as he was
bound: and so be ye, being the Kings Chaplain: or else hereafter it would be
laid to your charge.

By me John Willughby.

Another Writing of Willoughby.
ABout Avent Mr. Serles preached at home with me at Chillam, and there he
talked of his trouble: Saying, he had put up certain Articles to the Kings
Majesty: And yet they were so cloaked, that his Grace never saw them. Whereupon
at his return he was laid in prison. And so he lay upon me, and moved me, to
put up such Articles, as he and his company should devise. Whereupon I granted,
so they might be true and proveable. So I heard no more of this, til
Passion-Sunday. For that day he preached with me again. At which time he told
me, he would to London that week, and so to Oxford. And I promised to ride with
him. And so I did, meaning no more of this matter, than the child unborn. Mine
errand was to speak with the Chamberlain of London. So on Palm^Sunday in the
morning, he sent his man for me to come meet him in Paul's. And so I did meet
him there. And so he prayed me to go to Dr. London with him. Which man I never
saw before, of my faith. But he had been with him the night before, and put up
his Articles: promising him, that he would go on Monday in the Morning with him
to the Court, and put them up before the Council; as Mr. Land. said before his
face. And in the morning he was clean changed; saying to Mr. London, that there
was one Willoughby, that came to the Town with him, which had promised him,
that whenever we will bring our Articles unto him, he will present them. And so
Dr. London told me, that Serles said so unto him; and hereupon he moved me. And
I desired to hear them: And so they were read unto me. Which things methought
were but trifles. And I said, they were of no effect, to present before the
Council: and also neither knew, nor could affirm none of them to be true:
Saying, let Serles put them up, that brought them hither. For here is no record
to affirm none of these to be true. Then said Serles, ye know that all the
Country does speak of these. And I said, though I did hear part of them, yet I
am not able to say, that one of them is true. And because ye know them perfect,
and the doers of them, and have also brought them hither, it is most meet for
you to answer to them. And then Mr. London said, that he had showed them to
part of the Council, and to my L. of Winchester. For I see the Copy that was
sent to my Lord, was of Londons own hand. For he that copied them out before
us, was a Gentleman of my L. Winchesters, or to him belonging, Mr. Londons Copy
lying before him. This appears, that this matter was consulted before: Serles
can tell what the man was; (and so cannot I,) that did write them. But as I now
remember, it was German. [that is, German Gardner.]

By me John Willoughby.

Gardiners penitent letter unto the Archbishop.
GEntle father. Whereas I have not born so good, so tender a heart toward you
as a true child ought to bear, and as you never gave unto me occasion
otherwise, but rather by benefits provoked me unto the contrary, I ask of you
with as contrite a heart, as ever did David ask of God, mercy. And I desire you
to remember the prodigal Child: Which although from his father swarving, yet
into favor received again, to receive me, although unkindly now by folly I did
forsake you, and not born my heart so lovingly, so truly toward you, as in
dutifulness I should have done. I am full sorry for my fault. And yet, Good
father, be you well assured, as I opened my conscience unto you at my last
communing with you, that I never did bear malice against you. But the greatest
cause, that ever occupied my heart against you, and for the which I did bear my
heart so little toward you, was, as God shall save the Soul of me, that I saw
so little quietness among us, and so great jars in Christ's religion: Supposing,
that by your permission and sufferance, (which was not so, as I do now
perceive) That it did arise unto the great grief of my conscience. I
condescended the sooner unto the making of the book against your Grace, when I
was thereunto moved by that same suggester, Willoughby: Where and of whom he
took occasion to bring his bills unto Canterbury, I know not. Good father, for
my setting forth the same book, partly by me made, heartily confessing my
rashness, and indeliberate doings, I ask of you mercy. Requiring of you, of
your charity, to impute the great fault of it unto those, which ministered unto
me occasion; and to remit unto me my lightness. For of truth I was greatly
seduced. Remember, Good father, that our Parent was seduced, and yet of God
forgiven. Forgive me, Good father. By whom I was seduced, my Confession does
declare. And, Father, if it shall please you now, more of your goodness then of
my deserving, (punishment and that sharp I have deserved) to forgive unto me
this my fault and unkindness: You shall never hereafter perceive in me, but that
at al times I shall be as obedient, and as true unto you, as ever was child unto
his natural father. If otherwise at any time you find of me, never trust me,
never do for me; but utterly without al favor cast me into pain, as possible is
for a wretch to suffer. Gentle Father, ponder my grief, which is at my heart
not little. And through your goodness remitting unto me my unkindness, and
granting mercy with liberty, I desire your Grace to set me into ease, both of
heart and body. I am yours, and shall be yours; and that truly, while I live.

God prosper your Grace per me William Gardener.
Good father, I have given my self unto you, heart, body and service; and you
have taken me unto you. Now remember me, that I am your true servant.



Another letter of Gardener to the Archbishop.
MOst Honorable Prelate. Due commendations premised, These be to give thanks
unto your Grace, for that that you did yesterday, so favorably, as my sending
for unto your presence: Whom I thought that I should never (pensiveness lay so
sore at my heart) have seen again. And among al your Communications, that your
Grace had unto me, I noted these words of highest comfort. Your Grace did note
that I did call you father in my Writings, you said unto me yesterday, You call
me father: In good faith I will be a Father unto you indeed. Words of high
comfort unto me. Besides this, Most honorable Lord, you promised that I should
have a book of al Articles laid in against me, to make answer unto them. I
beseech your Grace that I may so have. For there is nothing that I have done or
known to be done, but if I can call it into remembrance, I will truly open it.
God prosper your Grace.

By yours, and ever shall be, William Gardener.

Shethers letter of Submission to the Archbishop.
MY duty always remembered unto your gracious Lordship. I most humbly beseech
the same to have compassion upon me your prisoner. And for as much as I think,
by the Articles, which Mr. Joseph mentioned, that your Grace has not only the
Articles subscribed with the Witness hands, but also other Articles: Which I
noted since that time; as I heard by Mr. Gardener, Coxton, Morice and others.
So that your Gracious Lordship knows al, that ever I have heard. Pleases it
your Lordship to understand, that many of those Articles last noted were of the
Book, that was presented to my L. of Winchester, as unperfect and not proved:
as indeed many could never be justified, as far as ever I heard. And therefore
my L. of Winchester sent it again, as I have said in my first declaration. And
it was never willed to be showed as true. But, Gracious Lord, whether I have
offended in that, that I noted those Articles, after that I was willed by Mr.
Baker, to mark the chiefest fautors of new opinions, I refer it to your
gracious judgment: and whatsoever shall be thought (as nothing can be hid, nor I
would should not, of any my life, from any of you both,) that I have offended
in; I beseech you both of your mercy and favor, and to be good to me, Instantly
and briefly (for I am loath to trouble you, or to seem to mistrust your
goodness) desiring you to have in remembrance my weak nature, and the long and
solatory durance I have suffered, with grievous vexation of mind. And for
refreshing thereof to License me to eat and drink at meals with company: and
being so nigh my chamber, that I may remain in the same: to the intent I may
pas the time with my own Books. Heartily desiring your Good Lp. that
notwithstanding any thing heretofore done, or how ever I have before wandered,
not conformably to your gracious advertisement or expectation: yet Gracious
Lord, accept a poor heart, which would gladly be received into your fatherly
favor again, to declare his faithful mind, he has conceived toward your
Goodness, upon such pity as your Gracious Lp. has showed, and I trust now will,
in his extreme need. Assuring your Grace that my whole confidence and only
trust is reposed in your goodness only, and gentle Mr. Doctors; Dr. Legh.
Whose native merciful hearts, as they have be declared oftentimes toward
many, so I most meekly beseech you both mercifully to interpretate my acts, and
declare your pity in releasing my sorrows as shortly as shall seem convenient to
your Wisdoms. For whom I will not cease to be a perpetual Orator to Almighty
God. I most heartily desire to know your Gracious pleasure in the premises, and
especially whether your Lordship has the Book subscribed with the Witness
hands or no. For although that, in the Copy of my brothers book, it appears
who has subscribed to other Articles of Mr. Drom and Mr. Scory and others,
which I do not remember.

Your Gracious prisoner Edmond Shether.

Milles letter of submission.
MOst Reverend Father in God, My humble duty remembered unto your Grace. And I
know right well in that I subscribed unto certain articles (though unadvisedly)
have showed great unkindness unto your Grace in so doing. And again, for that
have deserved little kindness at your Graces hand, and do now suffer cold
imprisonment at your Graces pleasure. Which is very tedious painful unto me,
and as I fear, great danger might ensue unto me, by augmenting that cold and
cough, that I have taken before, and now increases. Besides the inward
pensiveness of heart taken, for this my rash fact, at other men's light motion,
as others of my company did: Which now I think lamenteth them much: yea so
much, that at such time as I have been in company with them, I have heard them
say, that they could not sleep, neither eat that thing, or drink, that did do
them much good, as I am one of them. Wherefore, most gracious Lord, these
premises and others considered, by the which sickness of body may not the
heart wast, this shall be to humbly beseech your Grace to mercifully entreat me,
and that now I may find some drop of mercy at your Graces hands, for this my
imprisonment. Assuring your Grace that I shall take this punishment for my
Learning; and not at any time hereafter to be so lightly allured at any man's
motion to put so unadvisedly my hand, or consent to any such matter hereafter.
Now, Gracious Lord, show pity and mercy unto me, which I do ask of your Grace,
and do heartily desire it with weeping ey, and sorrowful heart, as knows God.

By your John Myllys.

NUMBER. XXXIV. A letter prepared for the King to sign, to ratify certain
Ecclesiastical laws.
HENRICUS octavus Dei gratia, Angliae and Franciae Rex, Fidei Defensor, and
Dorhinus Hiberniae, ac in terris Anglicanis sub Deo Caput supremum: Omnibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Clericis, Ducibus, Marchionibus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Generosis, ac alijs cujuscunque generis
hominibus, subditis and Legiis nostris, per Regnum nostrum, and Dominia nostra
ubilibet commorantibus, Salutem, and Evangelicae Veritatis incrementum.

Cum VOS optimi cives mei mihique charissimi, me nunc unum atque solum hujus
Regni Principem, in terrisque secundum Deum, hujus Ecclesiae Anglicanae unicum
supremumque Caput, quemadmodum divini atque humani juris ratio postulat,
potestatemque tam Ecclesiasticae quam Mundanae politiae mihi Majoribusque meis,
ipso jure divino concessam (verum multis seculis unius Romani Episcopi malitia,
fraud, dolis atque astutia ereptam) ad Me and Successores meos pertinere una
voce, uno omnium assensu agnoscitis, non possum in dies magis magisque, muneris
atque officij mei rationem non habere, deque illustranda Dei gloria, de
Christianae pietatis vera doctrina propaganda, de imperij hujus incolumitate,
and quiet tuenda, summa animi cura atque cogitatione non esse solicitus.
Occurrant enim subinde animo meo verba illa, quae Sapientiae Cap. septimo
habentur ad hunc modum: Audite Reges and intelligite, quoniam data est a Domino
potestas Vobis, and Virtus ab Altissimo; qui interrogabit opera vestra, and
scrutabitur cogitationes. Ad vos ergo, Reges, sunt hij Sermones mei, ut
discatis Sapientiam, and ne excidatis. Qui enim custodit justitiam, just
judicabuntur, and qui didicerunt justa, invenient quid respondeant, etc. Hinc
facile perspici potest exactissime a regibus potestatis suae reddendam esse
rationem, illosque gravissimas manner poenas, si non, ut oportuit, in Rep.
administranda sese gesserint.

Quod si tanta cura, ac solicitudine quibuscunque regibus opus est, quam anxios
igitur ac solicitos Christianos reges esse debere censendum est, quibus non
politia modo Civilis, sed Ecclesiastica etiam potestas data est? Hos enim non
tantum quae ad Humanam societatem pertinent, sed etiam quae divinae
Christianaeque religioni maxim consentanea sunt, curare necesse est.
Praesentem hujus saeculi faelicitatem principes Christianos ita metiri
convenit, ut hac potestate sua ad Dei cultum dilatandum utantur, and in hoc
incumbant, ut recta doctrina propagetur, orneturque Dei gloria.

Cum igitur a Christianis Regibus justitiam in Imperio, pacis tuendae curam,
pietatem, studium juvandae and ornandae religionis Christianae exigi
animadverterem, nihil mihi potius esse debere judicabam, quam ut omnes inirem
rations, quo minus in hoc meo regno haec a me desiderentur, and quo ad possem,
muneri imposito satisfacerem. Hoc ut facilius, expeditiusque praestare valeam,
non ignoratis vos, quantam curam adhibuerim in illis rebus promovendis
tuendisque, quae huic negotio maxim conducere, atque adjumento esse
videbantur; quae contra impedire atque obesse visa sunt, quanto studio tollere
ac delere conatus s^m, assidueque conor. Abunde enim vobis declaratum hactenus
fuit, quam in hac nostra Britannia, multis retro saeculis, Episcopi Romani vis
injusta, ac non ferenda, sacro sancto divino numini inimica fuit; quantopere
religioni Christianae, verae doctrinae propagandae adversata est, quantum hujus
Reip. pacem ac tranquillitatem saepissime interturbavit, potestatemque Regiam
divinitus constitutam labefactando, debitam omnium obedientiam, a vero ac justo
Principis sui imperio, contra o^ne jus divinum and humanum, ad se transfer
ausus est. Hujus potestatem huic cum divino munere sublatam esse manifestum
est, and nequid superesset, quo non plane fractam illius vim esse constaret,
leges omnes, decreta atque instituta, quae ab authore Episcopo Romano profecto
sunt, prorsus abroganda censuimus. Quorum loco, ut facilius imposterum Dei Opt.
Max. gloria illustretur, and vera Philosophia Christiana regnumque Christi
vigere possit, and quo omnia decenter and ordine in Christi hac ecclesia
gerantur; en Vobis authoritate nostra editas leges damus, quas a Vobis omnibus
suscipi, coli and observari volumus, and sub nostrae indignationis poena
mandamus, ut vestra in Deum pietas, amor erga patriam, principemque Vestrum
obedientia, non sine immensa divini Nominis gloria omnibus conspicua sit, ac
vosmetipsos non minus de vestris rationibus solicitos ostendatis, quam ego
vestra causa de officio fuerim meo, stricte praecipientes, ut his nostris
constitutionibus vos omnes and ^inguli, tam in judicijs, quam in gymnarijs
utamini, severe prohibentes. ne quisquam vestrum alias, praeter has, and regni
nostri leges admittere praesumat. Valete.

NUMBER. XXXV. The Bishop of Winchester to Archbishop Cranmer: relating to the
Reformation of Religion.
AFter my duty remembered to your Grace. Foxij MSS.
Your letters of the third came to my hands the of the same. And, upon the
reading, and advised consideration of the matter in them, have thought
requisite to answer unto them: and at length to open my mind frankly in some
points of them. Tempering my words so, as I shall not be seen to have forgotten
your place and condition ne such familiarite, as has been between your G. and
me. The remembrance of which familiarite makes me speak as freely, as on the
other side your astate brydeleth me to be more moderate in speech, then sum
matier I shall herafter speak of, would else suffer and permit.

It greveth me much to read written from your G. in the beginning of your
lettres, how the King our late Sovereign was seduced, and in that he knew by
whom he was compassed in that I call the Kings Majesty's Book. Which is not his
Book, because I call it so, but because it was indede so acknowledged by the hol
Parliament, and acknowledged so by your G. thenn, and al his life; which, as
you afterward write, ye commanded to be published and red in your Diocese, as
his book: Against which by your G's spech ye commanded Joseph he should not
prech. Al which I think your G. would not have done, if ye had not thought the
book to have contained truth. And in the truth can be no seducyng to it, as the
Kings book conteyneth; but from it. Which if it had been so, I ought to think
your G. would not for all the Princes christened, being so high a Bishop, as ye
be, have y^^^^ed unto. For Obedire oportet D^o, magis quam hominibus. And
therefore after your G. has four year continually lyved in agreement of that
doctrine under our late Sovereign Lord, now so suddenly after his death, to
write to me, that his Highness was seduced, it is, I assure you, a very
strange spech. Which if your G. should bring in to open contention, as I know
your G. of your Wisdom, will not; But in that case will I, as an old servaunt
of my late Soverayne

Much wanting.

it self so many Calamities besides, whereof I have more laysor to think on,
thenn your G. as my chance is now, which I reckon in this respect very good;
After so many years Service and in such trouble without danger passed over, to
aryve in this haven of quyetnes without loss of any notable takel, as the
Marryners say, (Which is a great matier as the wynds has blown) And if the
present astate in this world were to be considered, I have many times alleged
for confirmation of thopinion of some in religion And the Protestants take it
for a great argument, to establish there procedyngs, that themperor was ever
let, when he went about to enterprise any thing against them, as Bucer
declares at great length in a letter written to the World. And whenne Sledanus
was here in England, he told me the like at Windesore: and then Tanquam
praedixit of the effect of certain eclypse: Adding* that I should see magnas
mutationes. And so I have seen, and have heard mervelous chaunges sins that;
but otherwise than Sledanus took it, and to destroy there fancies, if that were
to be regarded. But for my self, I have seen my Sovereign Lord, with whom I
consented in opinion, make the honorable conquest of Bolen, and honorably in
his life mainteyne it. And after in honorable peace made, leave this world over
soon to us: but that was due by him to be paid to nature, discharged it
honora^ly; buried honorably with sorrow and lamentation of his servants and
subgetts; and my self his poor servant, with a litel fl^ebyting of this world,
conveyed to an easy ast^te, without diminution of my reputation. And therefore
whenne I hear fondly alleged, or read more fondly written, the favor toto, that
is by B^l^, Joy and Joseph, or such like, newly called the Word of God, to be
embraced for preservation of the worldly astate, I se the clear contrary in
experience, and conclude with my self, that it proves naught before man; and
take it before God to be abomination. Which causes me to spend some of my
laysor to write so long a letter to your G. who has less laysor: Wyshing that
our laysor, great or litel, may be spent otherwise then to trouble this Realm in
the time of our Sovereign Lords Minority, with any novelte in m^tiers of
religion: being so many other matiers, which, for that I was so late a
Counselor, cannot out of my memory: Requiring the hol endeavor of such as
have charge, and silence in the people, who should serve and obey, without
quarelying among themself for matiers in religion. Specially considering it is
agreed our late Soverain is receyved to gods mercy. And though some would say,
he had [his errors] and saw not perfitely Gods truth: Yet for us, it were
better to go to heven with oon yie after him, then to travayle here for
another yie with daungier to lose both. There was good humanite in him that
said, M^lim errare cum Platone, quam cum alijs vera sentire. Which affection
were to the world plausible towching our Sovereign Lord, that made us: But we
christen men may not teach so, but esteem God above al, and his true divinite.
In which case nevertheles, whenne the divinite pretended is so rejected of
many, and utterly reproved: So doubted of many other, as it is suspected and
confessed among us, it is not necessary. For our Sovereign Lord is gone from us
to heaven, in his way.

It is a mervelous matier what a certain loss it is aforehand to entreprize to
search, which among a very few has the name of Divinite, and of all the rest is
so named Heresy.
as I will not rehearse. And this I write not, because your G. entendeth any such
thing so far. For I may not, and will not so think of you. But this I take to
be true, that the way of error is let in at a little gappe. The vehemence of
novelty will flow further then your G. would admit. And when men hear of new
gere, every man makes his request, sum new hose, sum new robes, sum new
cappes, sum new shirtes. Like as in religion we have seen attempted, where the
people thought they might prevayle. Which caused the commotion in Germany in
bello civili Rusticorum, and has made the same stir there now in bello civili
Nobilium. It was a notable act of our late Soverain Lord, to reform and then
moderate religion, as he did. Which he did not without al trouble. And how safe
we be in religion, when al quietness is acquired you Wisdom can consider. Our
late Sovereign Lord was wont to say, which I never forget, speaking of himself
man had not looked to the Pacification. He saw men d^sirous to set forth their
own fancies, which he thought to have excluded by his Pacification.

If your G. would say to me now, that I wasted much speech in vain, and
declared thereby, I had to much laysor to write so much in this matier, as
though I feared that needs not to be feared: for your G. has commanded our
late Sovereign Lords book The Erudition of a Christian man.
to be read, and minds nothing now, but oonly Omylies, wherein your G. would,
I should write. Which to do were neither great pain, ne hardness to me: and I
might as soon write an Homily, as these letters. As for the facilite of the
matier of writing, or writing by not traverse. But then I consider what
contraversie may arise in writing. As for example (for seeing I have laysor to
write, I will forget what laysor your G. has to read) if I should make an
Homily De vita perfecta, I would note two parts, Oon of life, Another of
perfiteness. For the grownde of the oon, I would take S John, Misit Deus silium
suum, ut vivamus per eum. And for the other, Estote perfecti, sicut pater
vester, etc. In Declaration of Life, I would take occasion to speak of Faith
the gift of enter to life, and of Charity the very gift of Life; which who has
not remains in det^e. And therefore S. James said, Fides sine operibus mortua
est. Not expounding that so, as though Faith without Charity were no Faith, as
we say a dead man is no man. For I would wish the people in any wise to beware
of that fashion of teaching, and such a sophistical understanding of S. James;
and for detection thereof, declare, that death conteyneth not always a denial of
the thing dead not to be, but oonly where the name of the thing noted now dead,
contained before in it a signification of life. As the word man signifies a
body living: and then it is truly said, that a dead man is no man, no more
then a painted man. But Faith signifies not always a Life in it. For Devils
have Faith without life. And when we speak of ded faith, it is like as when ye
speak of a body indeed without life, but apt and mete to receyve life. As
spawne is a body without life, and dead, but mete to receyve life with
convenient circumstance. And then we say not, that a body dead is no body. And
therefore we may not say, that a dead Faith is no Faith. After which
understanding, we should make S. James to treat, whether no faith might justify
a man, or no: Which were a cold matier. And yet so must we say, if we will
expound this saying, that a dead faith is no faith.

And in this point I would, in my Homily De Vita, be most ernest to show, that
in charity is life, whereunto Faith is thentre. Which faith without charity is
not no faith, but dead. And therefore God, that geveth al life, geveth with
faith charity: Whereof I would make the moo words in the Homily, because the
handling of S. James in the other sophistical interpretation is an enter to
unwholesome doctrine. And if your G. would say, What of this, or to what purpose
should it be written to you, that myndeth no such matier: Surely for nothing but
because I have plenty of leasour, and write as though I talked with you. And
that not al in vain, for that I have hertofor hard of other, whom I have
hard much glory in that exposition, to say S. James means, that dead faith
is no faith, even as a dead man is no man. Which, by my say, is overfar out of
the way: and yet mine Omylie might in such an Homiler, and company of Omylies,
encontre with oon of the trade I have spoken of; and bring forth matier of
contention and altercation, without al fruit or edification. And thus much for
example of trouble in Homylies: Which these five years have rested without any
business, and the people well done their duties, I trust, to God in heven, and
know well, to there Soverain Lord in yerth. And our Soverain Lord, that governed
them without these Omylies goen to heven, whether, I trust, we and the people
shall go after, although we trouble them with no Homilies. Which shall hardly be
so accumulate ex diversis tractatibus, with diverse fashion of writing, diverse
phrase of speches, diverse conceits in teachings, diverse ends per case
intended, as some will construe.

The rest is wanting.

NUMBER. XXXVI. Gardener Bishop of Winton to the Duke of Somerset, concerning the
Book of Homilies and Erasmus Paraphrase, englished.
AFter my most humble Commendations unto your Good Lp. with hearty thanks that
it has pleased you to be content to hear from me. Wherein now I have liberty
to write at large to you. Cotton library. Vespas. D. 18.
I cannot find the like gentleness in my body to spend so much time as I would.
And therefore I shall now desire your G. to take in good part, tho I gather my
matter in brief sentences.

The Injunctions in this last Visitation contain a commandment to se taught,
and learned two books. One of Homilies, that must be taught; another of Erasmus
Paraphrasis, that the Priests must learn.

These Books strive one against another directly. The Book of the Homilies
teaches Faith to exclude charity in the office of Justification. Erasmus
Paraphrasis teaches Faith to have charity joined with him in Justification.

The Book of Homilies teaches how men may swear. The Paraphrasis teaches the
contrary very extremely. The Book of Homilies teaches how Subjects owe tribute
to their Prince, and obedience very well. The Book of the Paraphrase in a place
upon S. Poule violently, and against al truth, after it has spoken of duties
to Heathen Princes, knitteth the matter up untruly; that between the Christen
men at Rome, to whom he writes, which is a Lesson to al, there should be no
debt, or right, but mutual charity, But these are not the words of Erasmus, but
S. Paul. Romans XIII.8
Which is a marvailous matter. The Book of Homilies in another place opens
the Gospel one way. The Paraphrase opens it clean contrary. The matter is not
great, but because there is contrariety.

Now to consider each of the aforesaid Books. The Book of H. in the sermon of
Salvation teaches the clean contrary to the doctrine established by the Act of
Parliament In the Book of The Erudition, etc.
; even as contrary as [Includeth] is contray to [Excludeth.] For these be the
words of the Doctrine established by Parliament; where in a certain place Faith
does not exclude. The doctrine of the Parliament speaks how they be joined in
Justification. The Homilies speak the virtues to be present in the man
justified, and how Faith excludes them in the office of Justification. Which
can never be proved; and is in the mean time contrary to the Act.

The Book of H. has in the H. of Salvation, how remission of sins is taken,
accepted and allowed of God for our perfect Justification. The Doctrine of the
Parliament teaches Justification, for the fullness and perfection thereof, to
have more parts then Remission of sins, as in the same appears. And tho
Remission of sins be a justification, yet it is not a full and perfect.

The Book of H. numbreth the hallowing of bread, Palms and Candles among
Papistical superstitions and abuses. The Doctrine of the Parliament wills them
to be reverendly used. And so do the Injunctions now set forth. Which made me
think the Printer might thrust in an Homily of his own devise.

The book of H. has words of S. Chr^s^stom a^ledged untruly, and not after
such a sort, as might escape by over sight, but of purpose. As calling that
Faith which Chrysostom calls Hope. And in place of one Sentence puts
another, which should better serve the purpose of the Maker of the Homilies.
Now if one would reason with me, that Chrysostom meant this, I would deny it
him, as I may. But I may af^^rm, that Chrysostom says Not. It is but a
defamation of the tr^th: And under such a Princes name as our Sovereign Lord
is, whose tongue, in this so pure innocence, has not been defiled with any
untruth; I assure you, I thought there was not so great have in Homilies, but
they might have tarried the printing even for that only cause. Truth is able to
^aintain it self, and needs no help of untrue allegations. It serves only for
enemies to take advantage. All which [ i. e. Enemies] use to be c^rious to know
what they may reprove.

And now all the eyes and ears of the World be turned toward us. And as they
shall have cause to talk honorably of your valiantness in the wars, so they talk
otherwise of that, that is done in your absence, if any thing be amis^.

Now I shall show your Grace what author Er^smus is, to be, by name and special
Commandment, had in credit in this realm. If he be to be believed, the doctrine
of Only Faith justifies, is a very po^son. And he writes by expres terms,
and calls this another po^^on, to d^ny punishment in Purgatory after this
life. And another poison, to deny the Invoc^tion of Saints, and worshipping of
them. And this he call eth a poison, to say, We need no satisfactory works, for
that were to mistrust Christ Erasmus in another place conferring the state of
the Church in the beginning, and now, he concludes, that if S. Paul were alive
at this da^, he would not improve [ i. e. disallow] the present state of the
Church, but cry out of men's faults. This is Erasmus judgment in his Latter
da^es.

His Work, the Paraphrasis, which should be authorized in the Realm: Which he
wrote above six and twenty years ago, when his pen was wanton, the matter is so
hauled, as being abroad in (...) were able to minister occasion to evil men to
subvert, with religi^n, the policy and order of the Realm.

These be the general words, the uttering whereof to your Grace in the place
you occupy, were a great fault, unless I would show ye good ground and truth,
why to say so. And therefore I am glad I do rather write to you, then to have
come and spoke with you, because my words in number might fly away; whereas
written words remain to be read again.

First, as concerning the Policy and state of the Realm, Whersoever Erasmus
might take an occasion to speak his pleasure of Princes, he pays home as
roundly, as Bishops have been of late touched in pleas. And such places of
Scripture as we have used to allege for the state of Princes, he wresteth and
windeth them so, as if the people read them and believed him, they would
afterward sma^ regard that allegation of them. And if Erasmus did truly, and
that the Scripture bound him so to say, it were more tolerable, (For truth must
have place) but when it is done in some place untruly, and in some pl^ce
wantonly, to check that estimate, it can be no good doctrine among people, that
should obey. And this book of Paraphrasis is not like the other expositions of
Scripture, where the Author speaks in his own person. For Erasmus takes upon
him the Evangelists persons and Christ's person, and enterpriseth to fit up
Christ's tale and his words. As for example where the Gospel rehearses Christ's
speech, when he said, Give to the Emperor, that is the Emperors; (By which
speech we gather and truly gather, that Christ confessed the Emperor to have a
duty;) Erasmus writes it with an IF, after this sort. IF there be any thing due
to them. Which condition Christ put not to it, but spoke plainly, Give to Caesar
the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. And I write
the very words of the Paraphrasis, as they be in English, for I have the book
with me. And so shall no man say, that I misreport the book. The words be these.
Render therefore unto Caesar, if any things appertain unto Caesar. But first of
al, render unto God the things, that appertain unto God. Meaning that it is no
hurt unto Godliness, if a man being dedicate unto God, do give tribute unto a
profane prince, although he ought it not. These be the words in the book ordered
to be set forth. Wherein what needs Erasmus to bring in doubt the duty, when
God puts no doubt at al. It were too long to write to your Grace every
fault. This one I put for example, where Erasmus does corrupt Christ's words,
with a condition, which Christ spoke not.

The other places of raylings would encumber your Grace overmuch. But as I
write, your Grace shall find true, that whatsoever might be spoke to defame
Princes government, is not left unspoken. Bishops be more gently handled.
Erasmus makes them very Kings of the Gospel, and calls the true Kings of the
World Profane Kings. Bishops have the sword* he says, of God given, that is to
say, the Gospel. Profane Princes, as he calls them, have a sword committed
unto them, and by Homer, he says, be called Pastors of the people. This matter
is within the compass of the Paraphrasis, if it be not left out; with a
commendation also of Thomas Becket of Canterbury, in excommunicating the King
of the realm, that then was, by implication, for the manor of Oxford, which the
King, as he rehearses, then withheld It may be the Translator would have left
this out. But Erasmus pen in those days was very light.

Moreover them, Erasmus teaches, that between Christen men is no debt, or
right, but Charity. It is a mervailous matter toward the dissolution of laws
and duties. And therein Erasmus does violate Gods scripture, and says not true.

Thus far is the doctrine pernicious for common policy. Nevertheles if he had
said true, let the truth prevail, but the truth is not so.

As touching Religion in this work of Paraphrasis, it is so wantonly, (I
beseech your Grace note my words) and therewith untruly handled, as if we should
use to read it, there should ensue a marvelous confusion. Some specialties I
will note, but not al.

The Sacrament of the Altar is wantonly talked of by him, that as the world is
now, the reading of him were the whole subversion. Erasmus in his latter days,
has for the Sacrament of the Altar spoken as reverently, and said as much for
confirmation of it, as may be, and cries out of them, that would take him
otherwise. But this in the end, when age had tempered him.

In this Paraphrasis, which he wrote in his wanton age, the words and terms
were able to subvert, if it were possible, as Christ says, the elect.

If this Paraphrasis go abroad, people shall be learned to call the Sacrament of
the Altar holy bread, and a Symbol. At which new name many will marvail. And
they be wanton words spoken of Erasmus without necessity.

By the doctrine of the Paraphrasis, whosoever had done away his wife for
advotrie might mary again. By the Paraphrasis al men may mary, Bushops and
Priests. Wherein Erasmus took his pleasure to understand S. Poul, as tho he
should describe, of what quality Priests wives should be, Wherein he forgot
himself. For S. Poul knew, that if a Bushop or Priest were once married, his
Wise must pas with all her faults; and it would be too late to tell what she
should be. For otherwise then she is, she will not be, neither for S. Poul, nor
S. Peter. And if Bushops had that privilege, that they might change til they
found such one, as Erasmus says S. Poul would have them, their estate would be
wonderfully envied. But S. Poul did not speak there of Bushops wives. And so
therein he does violence to the Scriptures undoubtedly. Wherefore I write
somewhat merrily to show the absurdity of the thing.

By the Paraphrasis the keeping of a Concubine is called but a light fault. And
that were good for Lancashire. And Erasmus brings it so prettily, that a
Ruler of a Country, if he be himself the servant of avarice or Ambition, should
not browke with his brother, because being overcome by weakness of flesh he
uses a Concubine. Even thus it is Englished in the book that should go forth.
And when to have a a Concubine, it is called a light fault, methinks if the
maid can read, it may serve well, lightly to persuade her. And yet if the man
does it, overcome by the weakness of his flesh, as the book terms it, is made
matter. Wherein Erasmus speaks over lightly, to call it a light fault. And the
Translator in English wanted speech, when he turned it thus: That a man
overcome with the weakness of his flesh should desire a Concubine. I am bold
with his Grace, to join here Erasmus lightness with the discretion of the
Translator. If to keep a Concubine shall by authority be called a light fault,
the multitude of them may make the fault heavy.

By the doctrine of the Paraphrasis, every man must come to the high prick of
virtue, or to be extremely naught. Which differs far from the teaching of the
Homilies, and from the truth also.

The Paraphrasis teaches thus truly; More glorious it is to die for the Gospels
sake. Which death, tho it shall be violent and sore; yet it shall not come before
the day. Whenever it comes it shall not come without the providence of God.
And by this it comes to pas, that if ye endeavor to avoid it, ye cannot. This
is the doctrine which if it were taken for truth, might engender like obstinacy
in many, as it has of late in some. Erasmus teaches here further, then he
has warrant by Scripture.

The Paraphrasis in another place does clearly violate the Text, and untruly
handle it, in a matter of Tiths, which your Grace desires, as appears by the
Injunctions, to have truly paid. Wherein if Erasmus had said truth, let truth
prevail; but when he handles it untruly, it is pity it should be suffered.

Thus have I here reckoned your Grace some special faults, that be Erasmus own
faults, with a great number, that I have not spoken of.

And further your Grace shall understand, that he which has taken the labors to
translate Erasmus into English, has offended sometimes, as appears plainly,
by ignorance, and sometimes of purpose, to put in, leave out, and change, as
he thought best. Wherewith I will not encumber your Grace, but assure you it is
so. And therein I will grant to your Grace, that for every ly, that I make unto
your Grace, set on an hundred pound fine on my head; and let me ly here like a
beggar, until my revenues pay. My words remain in writing, and be against me
matter of record. And so I yield to have me charged, as the Bp. of London was
with offering the farm of his Bpric. Which matter I do remember, when I wrote
this.

I remit the Reader for the rest of this letter to Winchester's ninth letter in
Foxes Acts: This former part of the letter, which is now exposed to view,
having been by him omitted.

NUMBER. XXXVII. Roger Ascham to Mr. Cecyl, giving him an account of a Disputation
in S. John's College, Whether the Mass and the Lord's Supper be al one.
S.P. in Christo Jesus. Ornatissime Vir. Ante mensem, aut plus eo, disputatum
fuit in hoc Collegio more nostro de Missa, MSS.SrW.H.
ipsane Coena Dominica fuerit, necne. Magna sane eruditione haec Question
tractata fuit a Thoma Levero, and Rog. Hutchinsono, quos opinor nosti. Sunt
profecto docti viri. Quidam in Academia hanc rem aegre tulerunt. Huc tandem res
perducta est, vel ego potius pertractus fui hortatu communi multorum in nostro
collegio, ut hanc ipsam quaestionem e domesticis parietibus in publicas scholas
praeferrem, hoc animo and instituto, ut disceremus libenter and sine rubore a
doctis Viris, quid e fontibus sacrae scripturae libari potuerit ad defendendam
Missam; quae non solum summum locum in religione and conscientijs hominum
occupat, sed omne fidele propemodum ministerium Verbi Dei and Sacramentorum, ex
usu and consuetudine Christianorum, abstulit. Rem quietissime aggressi sumus,
communia studia nos inter nos conferebamus, Scripturam Canonicam nobis
proposuimus, cujus auctoritate totam hanc rem decidi cupiebamus: Veteres
Canones ineuntis Ecclesiae, Concilia Patrum, Decreta Pontificum, Judicia
Doctorum, Quaestionistarum turbam, Recentiores omnes, quos potuimus and
Germanos and Romanos, ad hanc rem adhibuimus. Quidam in Academia publicis
concionibus notabant hoc factum nostrum, and tandem laborarunt, ut D. Madeuus
Vicecancellarius, literis suis hanc Disputationem prohiberet. Nos libenter
paruimus, ut par fuit; sed aegre tulimus disputandi facultatem nobis intercipi,
concionandi vero copiam pro libidine alijs concedi.

Audivimus Cantuariensem nobis iniquiorem fuisse. Nec mirum est, nam adversarij
nostri, cogor invitus acerbiori voce uti, Prudentissime Vir, tragicis
clamoribus hanc rem illi detulerunt. Quod factum illorum majorine malitia, aut
imperitia institutum fuit dubitari potest. Thomas enim Aquinas probat Missam
Dominicam coenam multis praerogativis superasse, and longissime ab ea
discrepasse multis notis; Sexu, Missare enim Mulieres non debent: a Coena tamen
non excludantur: Aetate, Vitio Parentum, Luxatione Membrorum. Nam pueri, Nothi
and Mutilati a Missae dignitate repelluntur, ad Coenae humilitatem recipiuntur:
and multis alijs modis. Ut siquis affirmaret eandem esse Missam and Coenam,
multo magis exclamarent.

Sed quid dicam de hijs nostris? Nihil aliud, nisi quod Herodes turbatus est,
and tota Hierosolyma cum eo. Dicunt nos esse praecipites. Certe nemo tam
praeceps est, quin facile revocari possit; ut calcaribus potius, quam habenis
tota Cantabrigia egeat.

Sed quod institui tibi narrare, quanquam disputatio nostra fuerit prohibita,
studia tamen nostra in eadem re quodammodo aucta sunt. Scripsimus enim fere
justum librum de Missa, quem brevi offerre instituimus D. Protectori, nisi tibi
and magistro Checo aliter visum fuerit.

Quantum ad tractationem rei pertinet, vellem ut judicium tuum, non sermoni
aliorum, sed ipsi rei reservare velis. Neque hoc dicimus, quia de nobis aliquid
polliceri audemus, sed quia veremur, ne certi homines nimis studeant illud
impedire quovis modo, quod ipsi non probant.

Legimus sanctissimas confessiones Reginae nostrae cum tua eloquentissima
epistola. Utinam aliquid temporis tui ad excolendam Anglicanam linguam
impartire velis, ut homines intelligerent and nostram linguam omnes eloquentiae
numeros facile admittere. Literae Magistri Checi ad Collegium nostrum fuerunt
omnibus nobis gratissimae, ubi minimis verbis maxima benevolentia, and ejus and
tua, comprehensa fuit. D. Protectoris literae ad Acad. a te scriptae mirifice
nos omnes delectarunt. Commune votum est apud nos, ut Cantabrigia aliquando,
imo brevissime, sentiat Ioannem Checum Praepositum Regij Collegij. Episcopus
ille Daius Cicestrensis.
nihil prodest studijs, vellem ut non obesset. Et hoc non dico ad aucupium
cujusvis gratiae, sed ad Commodum totius Academiae. Plurima sunt, quae nos sic
sentire cogunt, and plura tua Prudentia videt. Nos sic amici inter nos
communicamus, fortasse non prudentissime, Cautissime tamen: and quod minimum
est, valde amanter. Cogita de hac re quid vis, promove tamen eam quantum potes.
Nimis molestus su^. Vale (...). Quinto Januarij, 1548. E Coll. D. Joan. Cant.

Dignitatis tuae Studiosiss. R. Aschamus.
Ornatissimo Viro Magistro Gulielmo Cicello Supplicum libellorum Magistro.
NUMBER. XXXVIII. The University of Cambridg to the Archbishop.
ALiquid a te suppliciter petere, cum Tu omnia nobis lubenter tribuis,
Doctissime Praesul, non inane and supervacaneum negotium, Aschamij Epp.
sed gratae voluntatis debitum potius officium esse ducimus. Rogamus igitur te,
ut in hoc Senatu vestro, privilegia nostra confirmentur. Quantum Reip.
interest, ut doctrinae ratio haberetur, omnes fere intelligunt: quantum vero
purae Religionis interest, tu unus plus universis alijs animadvertis. Scis enim
tu, quod annis abhinc quingentis, aut plus eo, cognitio literarum, Regum vitio,
a quibus ali debuerat, e conspectu hominum sese abducere, and in tenebras
relabi coepit. In quibus temporibus sic caligine obductis, sic ignorantia
involutis, Aper ille singularis de sylva supra modum depopulatus est vineam
Jesus Christi: non proculcans solum Reges terrae, and imperium sibi collocans
mundi; sed ita invasit erupitque in sanctam sedem, and Templum conscientiae, ut
nulli sere nunc sint mores, nulla institutio vitae, nullus caeremoniarum ritus,
nullum Ecclesiae Sacramentum, nullum Christi vestigium, quod non sit ejus aut
fulmine prostratum, aut halitu foedatum; quod non sit (ut mitius, seu
significantius cum Divo Paulo loquamur) prudentia humanae (...) foedissime
corruptum, and constupratum. Haec nox disciplinarum, and ignoratio vocem Domini
nobis abstulit, and humanae doctrinae imperium in illam libidinem evexit; ut
pro vero cultu Dei, recto divinissimarum rerum usu, integra and pura vitae
consuetudine, Hypocrisis, Idololatria, and Adulterium cervicibus hominum
astutissime imponeretur. Hanc inscientiae pestem libentius commemoramus, quod
nunc in magnam spem ducimur constituendae de integro dignitatis literarum, in
ijs praesertim temporibus, cum omnia ad veram religionem illustrandam, a qua
praeclara doctrina abesse certe non potest, mirifice comparata sunt. Et cum
prudentia tua, ad verbum Dei restituendum, divinitus sit and nunc excitata, and
diu reservata; non dubitamus, quin omnem operam and authoritatem tuam, ad
salutem etiam literarum continendam collaturus sis: Commotus aliquid certe vel
hac ratione, quod nulla hoc tempore literis vel insperata clades, vel expectata
commoditas accidere potest, cujus tu non aut author ad magnam commendationem;
aut particeps ad aliquam reprehensionem, voce ac sermon omnium jactatus eris.
D. Jesus, etc.

NUMBER. XXXIX. Richard Smith D. D. his Recantation of his Books.
Becons Reports.
IN my book of Traditions I said and affirmed, that Christ and his Apostles
taught and left to the Church many things, without writing, which we must both
beleve steadfastly, and also fulfill obediently under pain of Damnation ever to
endure. Among the which I rehearsed by name a great number to be obeyed, kept
and followed: As the observation of Lent from flesh or wine: the keeping of the
Sacrament in the pix: the receiving it at the Priests hands: the hallowing of
the Water in the Font: the thrice dipping of the child in the water at the
chrining: The putting on of the Chrysome: the consecration of the oil: the
anointing of the christened child: the hallowing of the Altars: the praying
toward the East: the censing of the Altar: the washing of the hands: the saying
of Confiteor: the lifting up of the Sacrament at Mass: the making of holy
water: that the twelve Apostles, every man a piece for his portion, made the
Creed; and many mo beside these. And after like sort I spoke of Canons,
Decrees, and Ordinances of Bishops and General Councels. I do now confess the
said doctrine, as concerning the observing of the said Traditions, to be false
and tyrannical, and unjust, unlawful and untrue, burden of men's consciences,
not fit to be taught, preached or defended.

There be many things ascribed to the Apostles, and called Traditions, deduced
from the time of the Apostles, and read in the name of old Authors, and set
forth under the pretensed title of their name, which be both feigned, forged
and nothing true, full of superstition and untrueth, feigned by them, which would
magnify their power and authority; as is the Epistles of Clemens, Anacletus,
Evaristus, and Fabian^s and other, which are set forth by the Bp. of Rome, and
his accomplices, which be forged, feigned and of no authority, nor to be beleved,
but counterfeited by them; who by the color of antiquity would magnify that
usurped power of the Bp. of Rome.

And now concerning another book, which I made of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Where the most chief and principal article of our faith, and most directly
pertaining to the redemption of our sins, and to our Salvation, is; That our
Savior Christ Jesus, by his most precious death, and effusion of his most
precious blood upon the cross, did redeem mankind, taking away our sins,
pacifying the indignation of his Father, and cancelling the obligation, that
was against us. In which Sacrifice-making unto his Father, our said Savior
Jesus Christ, as S. Paul says plainly to the Hebrews, was not a Priest after
the order of Aaron, forasmuch as he was of another tribe: and also, that
Priesthood was imperfect and unprofitable, bringing nothing to perfection. But
our Savior Christ made his Sacrifice upon the Cross perfectly, absolutely, and
with the most highest perfection that could be, so much, that after that one
oblation and sacrifice for sin, made by him but once only, neither he nor any
other creature should at any time after, make any mo oblations for the same.
And for that S. Paul says, he was called an eternal Priest after the order of
Melchizedec, and not of Aaron.

This faith ought every man and woman undoubtedly to beleve, and openly to
profess upon pain of everlasting damnation; and also to die in this profession,
if case shall so require. The which most wholesome and most necessary doctrine of
our Faith, I not diligently considering, as many times to right great Clerks
and learned men in much writing in like matters it has chanced to say too
far, the infirmity and weakness of men being such, that seldom in many words
error has escaped: So in my Book of the Sacrifice of the Mass, I did
incircumspectly and rashly write and set forth to the people, that Christ was
not a Priest after the order of Melchizedec, when he offered himself upon, the
cross to his Father for our sins, but was a Priest after the order of Aaron.
And that when Christ did offer his own body to his father after the order of
Melchizedec, to appease his wrath, it may not be understand of the Sacrifice of
the Cross, but of the Sacrifice, that Christ made at his Maundy in form of bread
and wine. To the which indede S. Paul's doctrine is contrary, both in other
places, and in the Epistle Ad Hebraeos, very manifestly. Against whom, (who
without doubt had the very Spirit of God) neither it becomes, nor I will not
willing^y teach or defend any thing. Wherefore ye shall impute that, Good
Audience, to the frailty of man's nature, and to my negligent marking, having at
that time rather a respect to a fantasy, that I then had in my mind, than to
the true and infallible doctrine of scripture.

And moreover, in the same my book I said not only, that the Sacrifice of the
Mass is the self same substance of Christ, but also the self same oblation or
offering of our Savior Christ's very flesh and blood, which himself once offered
to his Father on the Cross to appease his wrath. And that the Priests do
continually and daily in the Mass offer not only the self same body of Christ,
but also to the same effect, that Christ did offer himself to his Father at his
Maundy. Of the which words and doctrine, if they be not very warily and
circumspectly read, and more favorably taken, then the words as they ly, may
well bear; it might be gathered, that Priests herein be equal with Christ.
Priests of the order of Melchizedec, appeasing the wrath and indignation of the
Father of heaven, crucifying, or offering Christ to the same effect, that
Christ in his own person did upon the cross, is a blasphemy intolerable to be
heard of Christen ears. For Christ, as S. Paul says, was but once offered,
once gave up himself for the Redemption of our sins on Good Friday upon the
Cross; nor never before, nor after was offered for us, but in a Sacrament, and
as a commemoration of the same. And so of the Maundy or Supper of the Lord,
Christ himself says; Haec quotiescunque feceritis, in meam commemorationem
facietis. Once he dyed for our sins, and once again he rose for our
justification. He dies no more. And his Sacrifice was so good, so full, so
pleasant, so precious to God, that her neded no more oblations to appease God,
not only for the sins past, but also for all the sins to the day of doom. There
need no more Sacrifices, no more Offerers, but as having a respect and a
remembrance of that most holy, most perfect, and most entier Lamb, then and for
ever offered up for us.

But these things aforesaid, I cannot deny, but they were spoken of me, and
written. And as I do not now like them; so at ^he example of S. Austin and
other good Doctors, I am not ashamed to retract them, and call them again and
condemn them. For when I followed mine own invention, not directed by
Scripture, I began, as the nature of man is, to wander, and at the last went
clean contrary to Gods Word. wherefore I heartily exhort every man, as touching
matters of Faith, to found the same upon Gods certain, true and infallible
word: lest by doing the contrary, they fall into Superstition, Idolatry, and
other manifold errors, as my self, and many other have done.

Wherefore these my two books, the one of the Sacrifice of the Mas, and the
other of the Traditions unwritten, in those points before rehearsed, and al
other, wherein they be not full consonant to Scripture, I forsake and renounce as
false, erroneous, and against the true word of God; requiring thee, good
Christian Reader, whosoever shall read them, to give no further credence to
them, then I would my self. That is, not to take, as undoubted truth, all that
is therein written, but as written of a man, that some time falls: to be so
far true, as they be consonant to Scripture: where they be not against
Scripture, to be humane persuasion, which may either be so, or not so, as the
greater reason shall lead: where they be not consonant to Scripture, to be
erroneous and false. And that I much lament and am sorry, that I wrote them in
those points. And I desire every man, that has any of the said books to beware
of them, and to give no credence to them in all such things in them written, as
be not consonant to the Scripture, as they will avoid occasion of error, and
tender the truth of Gods word and his glory. To whom be laud, praise and honor.
Amen.

NUMBER. XL. Archbishop Cranmers Answers to the fifteen Articles of the Rebels
Devon. Anno 1549.
MSS.C.C.CC. Miscellan. D.
WHen I first read your Requests, O ignorant men of Devonshire and Cornwall,
straitwayes came to my mind a request, which James and John made unto Christ:
to whom Christ answered, You ask you wot not what. Even so thought I of you
as soon as ever I heard your Articles, that you were deceived by some crafty
Papist, which devised those Articles for you, to make you ask you wist not what.

As for the Devisors of your Articles, if they understand them, I may not call
them ignorant persons, but, as they be indeed, most rank Papists, and wilful
Traitors and Adversaries, both to God and our Sovereign Lord the King, and to
the whole realm. But I cannot be persuaded so to think of you, that in your
hearts willingly you be Papists and Traitors: but that those that be such have
craftily seduced you, being simple and unlearned people, to ask you wot not
what.

Wherefore, my duty unto God, and the pity that I have of your ignorance, move
me now at this time to open plainly and particularly your own Articles unto
you, that you may understand them, and no longer be deceived.

In your first Article you require, that all the General Councels and holy
Decrees of our forefathers, may be observed and kept, and whosoever shall
againsay them to be holden as Heretics.

This you al ask, but what you ask I dare say very few, or none of you
understand. For how many of you, I pray you, do know certainly which be called
the General Councels, and holy Decrees of the Fathers, and what is in them
contained. The holy Decrees as they call them, be nothing else but the Laws and
Ordinances of the Bp. of Rome. Whereof the most part be made for his own
advancement, glory and lucre; and to make him and his Clergy Governors of the
whole world; and to be exempted from al Princes Laws, and to do what they
list. And would you ask, if you knew what you asked, that we should put away
the Laws of our own realm, and be governed by the Bp. of Romes Laws? If you
mean this, then be you Traitors to the King, and enemies to your own realm. And
if you mean it not, consider what persons they be, and how they have deceived
you, that make you ask you wot not what.

And as for the General Councels, you say you will have them al kept: but you be
not so destitute of al reason, that you would have spoken such words, if you
had known what you had said. For a great number of the Councels repugn one
against another. How should they then be al kept, when one is contrary to
another, and the keeping of one is the breaking of another. And among your own
Articles you say, you will have diverse things observed, which be not only
contrary to the General Councels, but also contrary to the Law of this realm,
and also to Gods Laws, as it shall be plainly declared, when we come to the
Articles.

And al reason is contrary that you should have asked such things, if you had
known what you had asked. I have this opinion of the greater number of you,
that you would fain walk in the right way, if you could find it. And forasmuch
as I perceive, that wicked and false guides, under pretense to bring you to the
high way, have brought you clean out of it, my good will shall be, seeing you so
far wandering out of the way, and so blindfolded with il persuasions, that you
cannot see where you go, to open your eyes that you may see, and to set you
again into the right way. And when your eyes be so opened, that you may se, and
the right way showed unto you, wherein you should walk; then if you will still
wink, and not see, and run headlong in error, and not come to the right way,
you may no longer be called simple and ignorant people, but perverse, froward
and wicked Papists and Traitors, Enemies to God and your own realm.

But now I will come to your Articles, particularly opening every one of them by
himself, that you may se the bowels thereof, and what is contained in the same.
That when you shall understand the whole, you may judge whether you knew before
what you asked, or you were deceived by subtle and wily Papistical Traitors.

I. Your first Article is this* WE will have all the General Councels, and holy
Decrees of our forefathers observed, kept and performed: and whosoever shall
againsay them, we hold them as Heretics.
First, to begin with the manner of your phrase. Is this the fashion of
Subjects to speak unto their Prince; We will have? Wa^ this manner of speech at
any time used of the Subjects to their Prince, since the beginning of the
world? Have not al true Subjects ever used to their Sovereign Lord this form of
speaking, Most humbly beseeches your faithful and obedient Subjects. Although the
Papists have abused your ignorance in propounding such Articles, which you
understand not, yet you should not have suffered your selves so much to be led
by the nose, and bridled by them, that you should clearly forget your duty of
Allegiance unto your Sovereign Lord, saying unto him, This we will have; and
that saying with armor upon your backs and swords in your hands. Would any of
you, that be Householders, be content, that your servants should come upon you
with harness unto their backs, and swords in their hands, and say unto you,
This we will have? If then you would abhor and detest this in your servants
toward your selves, how can you allow your fact? With what conscience can you,
being but subjects, do to your King that thing, which you would condemn in
your servants toward your selves? But answer me this, Be you Subjects or no?
If you be Subjects, then I admonish you, as S. Paul taught Titus, saying, Warn
them to be subject to Princes, and Rulers, obeying them at a word. But tell me
again* Pertains this to subjection and obedience to say, This we will have? S.
Peter says, Be subject unto Kings, as unto chief heads, and to other Rulers
sent by them. For so is the Will of God. Gods will is, that you should be ru^ed
by your Princes. But whether is this to be ruled by your King, or to rule your
King, to say, Thus we will have the Realm governed? Your Servants be by the
Scripture commanded, as they fear God, to be obedient to their Masters, whether
their Masters be good or evil. And can you think it meet and lawful for you to
disobey your undoubted King; being a Prince most innocent, most godly, and most
careful for your sorrow and wealth? If any thing can declare disobedience, what
can declare it more then Subjects to come with force of arms to their natural
King and Prince, and say, This we will have?

But now leaving your rude and unhansome manner of speech to your most Sovereign
Lord, I will come to the point, and join with you in the effect of your first
Article. You say, you will have all the holy Decrees observed and kept. But do
you know what they be? The holy Decrees, as I told you before, be called the
Bp. of Romes ordinances and laws. Which how holy and godly soever they be
called, they be indeed so wicked, so ungodly, so ^ul of tyranny and so partial,
that since the beginning of the world, were never devised or invented the like.
I shall rehearse a certain of them, that your selves may see, how holy they be,
and may say your minds, whether you would have them kept or no. And at the
hearing of them, if you shall not think them meet to be kept here in this realm,
then you may see how they deceived you, that moved you to ask this Article. And
if you like them and would have them kept, after you know what they be, then I
say assuredly, that you be not only wicked Papists, but also Heretics, and most
heinous Traitors to the King and this his realm. And yet how an absolute Papist
varieth from an Heretic or Traitor, I know not: but that a Papist is also both
a Heretic and a Traitor withal.

One Decree says, That whosoever does not acknowledge himself to be under the
obedience of the Bp. of Rome is an Heretic. Now answer me to this Question,
Whether be you under the obedience of the Bp. of Rome, or not? If you say, that
you be under his obedience, then be you Traitors by the laws of this realm. And
if you deny it, then be you Heretics by this Decree. And shift is there none to
save you from treason, but to renounce this Decree, that commands you to be
under the Bp. of Rome: and so to confess contrary to your own first Article,
That al Decrees are not to be kept.

Yet a great many other Decrees be as evil, and worse than this. One says,
That al Princes laws, which be against a Decree of the Bp. of Rome, be void,
and of no strength. Another Decree says, That all the Decrees of the Bp. of
Rome ought for ever to be kept of al men, as Gods word. Another Decree there
is, That whosoever receives not the law of the Bp. of Rome, avails neither
him the Catholic faith, nor the four Evangelists. For his sin shall never be
forgiven. Yet is there a worse, and more detestable decree, That al Kings and
Princes that suffer the Bp. of Romes Decrees to be broken in any point, are to
be taken as Infidels. Another is there also, That the Bp. of Rome is bound to
no manner of Decrees, but he may constrain al other persons, both Spiritual and
Temporal, to receive al his Decrees, and Canons. Another is yet more devilish,
then any before rehearsed, That although the Bp. of Rome neither regard his own
Salvation, nor no man's else, but put down with himself headlong innumerable
people by heaps unto hell, yet may no mortal man presume to reprove him
therefore. But what should I tarry, and make you weary in rehersing a number?
For a thousand other like Canons and Decrees there be, to the Advancement of
the Bp. of Rome his usurped power and authority.

I cannot think of you, that you be so far from al godliness, from al wit and
Discretion, that you would have these Decrees observed within this Realm, which
be so blasphemous to God, so injurious to al Princes and Realms, and so far
from al equity and reason. But here you may easily perceive, what wily foxes
you met withal, which persuaded you to arm your selves, to make sedition in
your own Country, to stand against your Princes, and the laws of your Realm,
for such Articles as you understand not, and to ask you wist not what. For I
dare say for you, that the subtle Papists, when they moved you to stand in this
Article, that all the holy Decrees should be observed, they showed you nothing
of these Decrees, that they would have taken for holy Decrees. For if they had,
they knew right well, that you would never have consented unto this Article; but
would have taken them for Traitors, that first moved you thereto.

For now shall I show you, what miserable case you should bring your selves
unto, if the Kings Majesty should assent unto this first Article, that all the
Decrees should be kept and observed. For among other partial Decrees made in
favor of the Clergy, this is one, That none of the Clergy shall be called, or
sued before any Temporal Judge, for any manner of cause, either for debt, suit
of lands, felony, murder, or for any other cause or crime: Nor shall have any
other Judge, but his Bp. only. Another is, That a Spiritual man may sue a
Temporal man before a Temporal or Spiritual Judge at his pleasure: but a
Temporal man cannot sue a Spiritual, but only before his Ordinary. I cannot
deny, but these been good and beneficial laws for the liberty of the Clergy.
But for your own part, I suppose you do not think it any indifferent Law, that
a Priest shall sue you where he list with the license of his Ordinary; and you
shall sue him for no manner of cause, but only before his own Ordinary. Or if a
Priest had slain one of your sons or brether, that you should have no remedy
against him, but only before the Bp. What mean those Papistical priests, that
stirred you to ask, and will, such decrees and laws to be observed in this
realm, but covertly and craftily to bring you under their subjection: And that
you your selves ignorantly asking you wist not what, should put your own heads
under their girdles?

For surely if you had known these Decrees, when you consented to this Article,
you would have torn the Article in pieces, and they that moved you thereto also.
For these Decrees ^e not only partial, and against al equity and reason, made
only for the favor of the Clergy, and the suppression of the Laity; but also
they be, and ever have ^e, clearly contrary to the Laws and customs of this
Realm. And yet by this Article you will have the old ancient Laws and customs
of this realm (which have ever been used in all Kings times hitherto) to be void
and to cease, and these Decrees to come in their place, and be observed of al
men, and againsaid of no man. For whosoever speaks against them, you will hold
them for Heretics. And in so saying, look what sentence you give of your
selves, although your Article say it, yet I am sure you be not so much enemies to
your own Realm, that you would have the old ancient Laws and Customs of this
Realm (for the defense whereof all the Noble Kings of this Realm have so
valiantly and so justly stand against the Bishops of Rome) now to be taken away
and give place unto Romish Decrees. And then by your own Article you hold and
condemn your selves to be Heretics.

How be you bewitched by these false Papists? Why do you suffer them thus to
abuse you by their subtilty, to make you condemn your selves of Heresy? Why do
you not send them unto the Kings Majesty, like errant Traitors, as indeed they
be, Saying unto him, Most mighty Prince, and most drad Sovereign Lord, we
present here unto you most heinous Traitors against your Majesty and realm, and
greatest Dissemblers and falsest Deceivers of us, your Simple and ignorant
people, and yet in our own hearts your true and faithful Subjects. We have
erred, We have grievously offended your Majesty: but by ignorance, being so
seduced, and provoked by the crafty persuasions of these most heinous Traitors,
that we wist not what we did. But pardon us, Sovereign Lord, have pity upon our
Simplicity and ignorance: and these abominable Traitors punish, according to
their deservings. Have mercy, most merciful Prince, of us, your poor flock,
which were ignorantly led out of the way, and strike with the Swords those
malicious guides, that purposely would have led us to our utter destruction.

If you did thus, then would you do the parts of true faithful and loyal
Subjects, and should declare to the world, that all that you have hitherto done
was done by error and ignorance. And I would nothing doubt of the Kings
Majesty his Clemency and Mercy toward you.

But yet, to the intent that you may further know how unreasonable your first
Article is, I will yet rehearse another sort of the holy Laws and Decrees. One
is, That no Lay man may have a Benefice to farm. Another is, That none of the
Clergy may give any thing to the relief of the commonweal, and necessity of
their own realm, without the consent of the Bp. of Rome. Another is, That no
Lay man may meddle with election, or any other thing, that pertains unto any
of the Clergy. Another is, That none of the Clergy ought to give any oath of
fidelity to their Princes, except they have temporal lands of them. Another is,
That Princes ought to obey the Bps, and the Decrees of the Church, and to
submit their Heads unto their Bps, and not to be judges over the Bps. Another
is, Whosoever offends the Liberties of the Church, or does break any
Interdiction that comes from Rome, or conspireth against the Person or Estate
of the Bp. or See of Rome, or by any manner offends, disobeyeth, or rebelleth
against the same Bp. or See, or that kills a Priest, or offends personally
against a Bp. or other Prelate, or invadeth, spoileth, withholdeth, or wastes
Lands belonging to the Church of Rome, or to any other Church, immediately
subject unto Rome, or whosoever invadeth any Pilgrims, that go to Rome, or any
Suitors to the Court of Rome, or that let the devolution of causes unto that
Court, or that put any new charges or impositions, real or personal, upon a
Church, or ecclesiastical person; and generally, All others that offend in the
cases contained in the Bull, which is usually published by the Bps. of Rome upon
Maunday thursday; Al these can be assoiled by no Priest, Bp, Archbp, nor by
none other, but only by the Bp. of Rome, or by his express License. These with
an infinite number of like sort, be the godly and holy Decrees, which you long
so sore for, and so much desire.

Now would I know, whether you think, that these decrees were made for the
common wealth of al realms, or only for the private weal of the Bp. of Rome,
and of his Bps. and Clergy? And whether you like and long for these laws; or
now, at the hearing of them, your longing is done? If you like them, Well, for
my part, I would you had them practiced among you for a while, so that the rest
of the Realm were not troubled, neither with you, nor with your Decrees, unles
you repented your selves of your foolish demands. I think within a year you
would kneel on your knees to the Kings Majesty, desiring him to take from your
necks the yokes and halters, which you had made for your selves.

But to conclude the sum of the first Article in few words. It is nothing else
but a clear subversion of the whole State and Laws of this realm; and to make
this Realm to be whole governed by Romish Laws, and to crown the Idol and
Antichrist of Rome, king of this realm, and to make our most undoubted and
natural King his vile Subject and slave. Oh! what was in your minds to ask such
a thing, and so presumptuously to say, that you will have it? I trust there be
not in you so much malice and devilishness, as the Article contains: but that
you were craftily subornate by subtle Papists to ask and demand you wist not
what.

If you had asked, that the Word of God might be duly observed and kept every
where within this Realm: And whosoever would gainsay Gods word, to be holden as
a Heretic: If you had declared your selves to be godly men; all that be godly
would have commended and furthered your requests. But forasmuch as you ask
Romish Canons and Decrees to be observed and kept here in England, and
whosoever shall againsay them, to be holdon as heretics, there is neither
godly, nor truly English man, that will allow you, or consent to your Articles.
But clean contrary to your Articles, a great number of godly persons within
this realm, for the very love that they have to God, that his Name may be
glorified above al things, be daily humble Suitors to the Kings Majesty, that
he following the steps of his Father, will study, and travail to weed out of
this his Realm, al Popish Decrees, Laws and Canons, and whatsoever else is
contrary to Gods word: and that the speakers against Gods word may be taken, as
they be indeed, for Heretics. And is any of you so far from reason, that he
thinks the Kings Majesty ought to hearken to you, that by force and
stubbornness say, you will have Romish Laws and Decrees kept in this realm, and
to turn his ears from them, that with all humility be suitors for Gods Word?

But now will I come to your other Articles, wherein I will be brief, forasmuch
as in the first I have been long and tedious.

II. Your second Article is this, WE will have the Law of our Sovereign Lord K.
Henry VIII* concerning the six Articles, to be used again, as in his time they
were.
Letting pas your rude style, nothing becoming Subjects, to say, You will have,
First, I examine you of the cause of your wilful will, wherefore you will have
these six Articles, which never were laws in no region, but this: nor in this
realm also, until the 31 st. year of King Henry VIII. And in some things so
enforced by the evil Counsil of certain Papists against the truth, and common
judgment, both of Divines and Lawyers, that if the Kings Majesty himself had
not come personally into the Parliament house, those laws had never passed. And
yet within a year or little more, the same most noble Prince was feign to
temper his said laws, and moderate them in diverse points. So that the statute
of six Articles continued in his force little above the space of one year. Is
this then so great a matter to make these uproars, and to arise against the
whole realm? Will you take away the present laws of this Realm, which be and
ever have been, the laws of al other Countries also, and set up new Laws,
which never were, but in this Realm only, and were here in force not fully
thirteen months? And how chances it, that you be so earnest in this Article,
which is directly contrary to your first Article, but you know not what neither
of the Articles means; but be persuaded by Papists to ask you wot not what?
But now here is the repugnance of the two Articles: By your First you will have
al General Councels and Decrees observed and kept; and by your Second Article
you will have the six Articles used again. Then let us compare the general
Councels and Decrees with the Six Articles; and you shall see them aggree as well
together, as black and white.

First, it is contained in the Canons of the Apostles, that a priest under no
pretense of holiness may put away his wife; and, if he do, he shall be
excommunicate. And the six Articles say, that if any Priest put not away his
wife, he shall be taken for a Felon. If he keep her not ^til, he must be
excommunicate by the Canon of the Apostles. And if he keep her still, he must
suffer death by the six Articles. You be cunning men, if you can set these
together. Also, the Council of Nice, which was the chief of all the General
Councels, and was celebrated more then twelve hundred years past, decreed clean
contrary to the six Articles. For where the six Articles command al Priests to
be separate from their wives, Nicen Council determined clean contrary, that
they should not be separated, confessing such copulation to be holy and godly.
And the Council of Gangrense, which was about the same time, so much allowed
the marriage of priests, that they accursed them that would abstain from the
Ministration of priests, because they were married. These Councels vary so far
from the six Articles, that either you must put the General Councels out of
your Book, or else the six Articles.

Likewise, concerning Private Masses, the law of six Articles far differs
from the Canon of the Apostles, and from the Councels, Nicen and Antioch, as
shall be declared in the next Artic^e.

Other things there be diverse also in the six Articles, which cannot stand with
sundry old Canons, Decrees and Councels. So that if you will stand to the
Canons, Decrees and Councels, you must of force be constrained utterly to put
out of your book your second Article, which requires the usage of the Six
Articles. But now for shortness of time I will come to your third Article: Which
is this,

III. The third Article. WE will have the Mass in Latin, as was before, and
celebrated by the Priest, without any man or woman communicating with him.
Forasmuch as there is nothing with you, but Will, let your will be conferred
with reason and Gods word; and then you shall se how far your Will differs from
them both: First as touching the Latin Masses, Whatsoever the Priest says in
the old Masses, whether he pray and ask any thing of God, or give thanks to
God, or make the true Profession of the Faith, or whatsoever he does besides,
al he does in your persons and in your names; and you answer unto that which he
says, sometimes Amen, sometimes Et cum spiritu tuo; and sometimes other
things, as the matter serves. For all the whole that is done should be the act
of the people, and pertain to the people, as well as to the priest. And stands
it with reason, that the Priest should speak for you, and in your name, and you
answer him again in your own persons; and yet you understand never a word,
neither what he says, nor what you say your selves? The Priest prays to God
for you, and you answer Amen you wot not whereto. Is there any reason herein?
Will you not understand what the Priest prays for you? What thanks he gives
for you, What he asks for you? Will you neither understand what he says, nor
let your hearts understand what your own tongues answer? Then must you needs
confess your selves to be such people as Christ spoke of, When he said, These
people honor me with their lips, but their hearts be far from me. Had you
rather be like Pyes or Parrots, that be taught to speak, and yet understand not
one word what they say, then be true christen men, that pray unto God in heart
and in faith? The Priest is your Proctor and Attorney, to plead your cause, and
to speak for you al; and had you rather not know, then know what he says for
you? I have heard Suitors murmur at the bar, because their Atturneyes have
pleaded their cases in the French tongue, which they understood not. Why then
be you offended, that the Priests, which plead your cause before God, should
speak such language, as you may understand? If you were before the Kings
Highness, and should choose one to speak for you al, I am sure you would not
choose one, that should speak Greek or Hebrew, French or Italian; no, nor one,
that should speak Latin neither. But you would be glad to provide such one, as
should speak your own language, and speak so loud, that you might both hear
him, and understand him: that you might allow or disallow that that he said in
your Names. Why do you then refuse to do the like unto God?

When the Priest desires any thing of God for you, or gives thanks for you,
how can you in your heart confirm his Sayings, when you know not one word what
he says? For the heart is not moved with words, that be not understand.

But if reason will not persuade you, I will prove what Gods word will do unto
you. S. Paul, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, says, that whosoever
shall speak to the people in the Church to their edification, must speak such
language as the people may understand: or else he wills him to hold his
peace, and speak softly to himself and to God. For he which speaks in a
strange language, which the people understand not, does not edify them, as S.
Paul says. And he gives an example of the trumpet in the field, which when it
gives such a sound, that the Soldier understands, it avails much. For
every Soldier thereby knows what to do. But if such a blast be blown, as no
man understands, then the blast is utterly in vain. For no man knows
thereby, whether the horsemen shall make them ready, or leap upon horseback, or
go to their standard. Or whether the footmen shall make them ready, or set
themselves in array, or set upon the enemy, or retire to the standard. Even so
should the Priests be Gods trump in in his Church. So that if he blow such a
certain blast, that the people may understand, they be much edified thereby. But
if he give such a sound, as is to the people unknown, it is clearly in vain,
says S. Paul. For he speaks to the air, but no man is the better or edified
thereby; Nor knows what he should do by that he hears. Furthermore in the
same place S. Paul says, That if a man gives thanks to God in a language to
the people unknown, how can they say Amen to that they understand not? He does
well in giving thanks to God; but that nothing avails or edifieth the people,
that know not what he says. And S Paul in one brief sentence concludes his
whole Disputation of that matter: Saying, I had rather have five words spoken
in the Church to the instruction and edifying of the people, then ten thousand
in a language unknown, that edifieth not. And for this purpose alleges the
Prophet Esaias. Who says, that God will speak to his people in other tongues, and
in other languages. Meaning thereby that he would speak to every country in
their own language. So have the Greeks the Mass in the Greek tongue, the
Syrians in the Syry tongue, the Armenians in their tongue, and the Indians in
their own tongue. And be you so much addict to the Romish tongue, which is the
Latin tongue, that you will have your Mas in none other language, but the
Romish language? Christ himself used among the Jews the Jews language: and
willed his Apostles to do the like in every country, whersoever they came. And
be you such enemies to your own country, that you will not suffer us to laud
God, to thank him, and to use his Sacraments in our own tongue: but will enforce
us contrary, as well to al reason, as to the word of God?

So many as be godly, or have reason, will be satisfied with this. But the mere
Papists will be satisfied with nothing. Wherefore I will no ^onger tarry to satisfy
them, that never will be satisfied, but will proceed to the second part of this
Article, wherein you say, that you will have neither men nor women communicate
with the Priest. Alas! good simple souls, how be you blinded with the Papists?
How contrary be your Articles one to another? You say in your first Article,
that you will have al General Councels and Decrees observed, and now you go from
them your selves. You say, you will have no body to communicate with the Priest.
Hear then what diverse Canons, Decrees and general Councels say clean against
you. There is one Decree which says thus, When the Consecration is done, let
all the people receive the Communion, except they will be put out of the Church.
And in the Canons of the Apostles, in the eighth Chapter, is contained, That
whenever there is any Mas, or Communion, if any Bp., Priest, Deacon, or any
other of the Clergy, being there present, do not communicate, (except he can
show some reasonable cause to the contrary) he shall be put out of the
Communion, as one that gives occasion to the people to think evil of the
Ministers. And in the ninth Chapter of the same Canons of the Apostles, and in
the General Council held at Antioch, is thus written, That al christen people,
that come into the Church, and hear the holy Scriptures read, and after will not
tarry to pray, and to receive the holy Communion, with the rest of the people:
but for some misordering of themselves, will abstain therfrom, let them be put
out of the Church, until by humble knowledging of their fault, and by the
fruits of Penance, and prayers, they obtain pardon and forgivenes. And the
Council Nicene also shows the order, how men should sit in receiving the
Communion, and who should receive first. Al these Decrees and general Councels
utterly condemn your third Article, wherein you will, That the Priest shall
receive the Communion alone without any man or woman communicating with him.
And the whole Church of Christ also, both Greeks and Latins, many hundred
years after Christ, and the Apostles, do al condemn this your Article: Which
ever received the Communion in flocks and numbers together, and not the Priest
alone.

And besides this, the very words of the Mas, as it is called, show plainly,
that it is ordained not only for the Priest, but for others also to communicate
with the Priest. For in the very Canon, which they so much extol, and which is
so holy, that no man may know what it is (and therefore is read so softly, that
no man can hear it) in that same Canon, I say, is a prayer concerning this;
that not only the Priest, but also as many beside, as communicate with him, may
be fulfilled with grace and heavenly benediction. How aggreeth this prayer with
your Article, wherein you say, that neither man nor woman shall communicate with
the priest? In another place also of the said Canon, the priest prays for
himself, and for all that receive the communion with him, that it may be a
preparation for them unto everlasting life. Which prayer were but a very fond
prayer, and a very mocking with God, if no body should communicate with the
priest. And the Communion concludes with two prayers in the name of the priest,
and them that communicate with him, wherein they pray thus: O Lord, that thing
which we have taken in our mouth, let us take it also with pure minds, that
this Communion may purge us from our sins, and make us partakers of heavenly
remedy. And besides all this, there be an infinite sort of postcommons in the
Mas-books. Which al do evidently show, that in the Masses, the people did
communicate with the priest.

And although I would exhort every good christen man often to receive the holy
Communion: yet I do not recite al these things to the intent, that I would in
this corrupt world, (when men live so ungodly as they do) that the old Canons
should be restored again, which command every man present to receive the
Communion with the priest. Which Canons, if they were now used, I fear that
many would receive it unworthily. But I speak them to condemn your Articles,
which would have no body, neither man nor woman, to be communicated with the
priest. Which your Article condemns the old Decrees, Canons and General
Councels, condemns all the old primitive church, all the old, ancient, holy
Doctors, and Martyrs, and all the forms and manner of Masses, that ever were
made, both new and old. Therefore eat again this Article, if you will not be
condemned of the whole world, and of your selves also by your first Article:
Wherein you will al Decrees, and general Councels to be observed. But forasmuch
as I have been so tedious in this Article, I will endeavor my self to be
shorter in the next.

IV. Your fourth Article is this, WE will have the Sacrament hang over the high
Altar, and there to be worshipped, as it was wont to be; and they which will not
thereto consent, we will have them die like Heretics against the holy Catholic
faith.
What say you, O ignorant people in things pertaining to God? Is this the holy
Catholic faith, that the Sacrament should be hanged over the Altar and
worshipped? And be they Heretics, that will not consent thereto? I pray you, who
made this Faith? Any other, but the Bishops of Rome? And that after more then a
thousand years after the Faith of Christ was full and perfect. Innocent III.
about 1215 years after Christ, did ordain, that the Sacrament and Chrism should
be kept under lock and key. But yet no motion he made of hanging the Sacrament
over the high Altar, nor of the worshipping of it. After him came Honorius III.
and he added further, commanding that the Sacrament should be devoutly kept in
a clean place, and sealed, and that the priest should often teach the people
reverendly to bow down to the host, when it is lifted up in the Mass time, and
when the priests should carry it to the sick folks. And although this Honorius
added the worshipping of the Sacrament, yet he made no mention of the hanging
thereof over the high Altar, as your Article proporteth. Nor how long after, or
by what means, that came first up into this realm, I think no man can tell. And
in Italy it is not yet used until this day. And in the beginning of the Church
it was not only not used to be hanged up, but also it was utterly forbid to be
kept.

And will you have al them that will not consent to your Article, to die like
heretics, that hold against the Catholic faith? Were the Apostles and
Evangelists heretics? Were the Martyrs and Confessors heretics? Were all the old
Doctors of the Church heretics? Were al christen people heretics, until within
three or four hundred years last past, that the Bishops of Rome taught them
what they should do and believe? All they before rehearsed neither hanged the
Sacrament over the Altar, nor worshipped it, nor not one of them al spoke any
one word, either of the hanging up, or worshipping of the Sacrament. Mary, they
speak very much of the worshipping of Christ himself, setting in heaven at the
right hand of his Father. And no man does duly receive the Sacrament, except
he so, after that manner, do worship Christ, whom he spiritually receives,
spiritually feeds and nourishes upon, and by whom spiritually he lives, and
continues that life that is toward God. And this the Sacrament teaches us.

Now to knit up this Article shortly. Here is the issue of this matter: that
you must either condemn of heresy the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors,
and all the holy Church of Christ, until the time of Innocentius and Honorius,
because they hanged not the Sacrament over the Altar to be worshipped; or else
you must be condemned your selves by your own Article, to die like heretics
against the holy Catholic faith. Now to your fifth Article.

V. Your fifth Article is this, WE will have the Sacrament of the Altar but at
Easter delivered to the Lay People; and then but in one kind.
Methinks you be like a man, that were brought up in a dark dungeon, that never
saw light, nor knew nothing that is abroad in the world. And if a friend of his
pitying his ignorance and state, would bring him out of his dungeon, that he
might se the light and come to knowledge, he being from his youth used to
darkness, could not abide the light, but would wilfully shut his eyes, and be
offended both with the light, and with his friend also. A most godly Prince of
famous memory K. Henry VIII. our late Sovereign Lord, pitying to se his
Subjects many years so brought up in darkness, and ignorance of God, by the
erroneous doctrines and superstitions of the Bp. of Rome, with the counsil of
al his Nobles and learned men, studied by all means, and that to his no little
danger and charges, to bring you out of your said ignorance and darkness unto
the true light, and knowledge of Gods word. And our most dread Sovereign Lord,
that now is, succeding his father, as well in this godly intent, as in his
realms and dominions, has with no less care and diligence, studied to perform
his fathers godly intent and purpose. And you like men, that wilfully shut
their own eyes, refuse to receive the light, saying you will remain in your
darkness. Or rather you be like men, that be so far wandered out of the right
way, that they can never come to it again without good and expert guides: and
yet when the guides would tell you the truth, they would not be ordered by them,
but would say unto them, We will have, and follow our own ways.

And that you may understand how far you be wandered from the ^ight way in this
one Article, wherein you will have the Sacrament of the Altar delivered to the
Lay People but once in the year, and then but under one kind, be you assured,
that there was never such law, nor such request made among christen people,
until this day. What injury do you to many godly persons, which would devoutly
receive it many times, and you command the priest to deliver it them but at
Easter. Al learned men and godly have exhorted christen people, (although they
have not commanded them) often to receive the Communion. And in the Apostles
time, the people at Jerusalem received it every day, as it appears by the
manifest word of the Scripture. And after, they received it in some places
every day: In some places four times in the week: in some three times: some
twice: commonly every where at the least once in the week. In the beginning,
when men were most godly and fervent in the holy Spirit, then they received the
Communion daily. But when the Spirit of God began to be more cold in men's
hearts, and they waxed more worldly than godly, then their desire was not so
hot to receive the Communion, as it was before. And ever from time to time, as
the world waxed more wicked, the more the people withdrew themselves from the
holy Communion. For it was so holy a thing; and the threatenings of God be so
sore against them, that come thereto unworthily, that an ungodly man abhors
it, and not without cause dare in no wise approach thereunto. But to them that
live godly, it is the greatest comfort, that in this world can be imagined. And
the more godly a man is, the more sweetness and spiritual pleasure and desire he
shall have, often to receive it. And will you be so ungodly, to command the
Priest, that he shall not deliver it to him, but at Easter: and then but only in
one kind? When Christ ordained both the kinds, as well for the Laymen, as for
the Priests: and that to be eaten and drunken at al times.

What enemies be you to al Laymen, and to your selves also, to refuse to drink
of Christ's cup, which he commanded al men to drink upon, saying, Take and
divide this among you; and, Drink ye al of it?

But need any more be brought for the reproving of this Article, then your own
first Article, where you will have kept al Decrees and Councels. Now in the
Decrees De Consecrat. Di. 2. there is one Decree that commands al men to
receive the Communion at the least thrice in the year, at Easter, Whitsuntide,
and Christmas. Another commands every man to receive the same upon
Shere-thursday. The Council Agathense says, that al Laymen which receive not
the Communion at Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide, shall not be taken for
Catholics. And the Decree of Gelasius, that the receiving under one kind is
great Sacrilege. Then by your first Article you do not only condemn your fifth
Article, but also you show your selves not to be Catholics, except you receive
the Communion at the least three times in the year: and that under both kinds.
Which is clean repugnant to this Article. And yet I pray God, you receive it
worthily once in your life; which you shall never do, except you wonderfully
repent this your misbehaviour: and al your life time study to amend and redress
that you have now offended. Now to your sixth Article.

VI. Your Sixth Article is this. WE will that our Curates shall minister the
Sacrament of Baptism at al times, as well in the week day, as on the holy day.
Who lets your Ministers to baptize your child every day, if any case of
necessity so do require? But commonly it is more convenient, that Baptism
should not be ministered, but upon the holy day, when the most number of people
be together. As well for that the whole church there present may rejoice
together of the receiving of new members of Christ into the same church, as
also, that al men, being present, may remember, and the better know what they
promised themselves by their Godfathers and Godmothers in their own baptis^^;
and be the more earnestly stirred in their hearts to perform the same: And
also, may altogether pray for them, that be baptized, that they may have grace
to perform their Profession. S. Greg. Nazienz. as great a Clerk as ever was in
Christ's church, and Master to S. Hierom, counseled, that children should not
be christened, until they came to three years of age, or thereabouts, except
they were in danger of life. And it was thought sufficient to our forefathers
to be done two times in the year, at Easter and Whitsuntide, as it appears by
diverse of their Councels and Decrees. DeCons^er. di 4. Non ratione, Domino
proprie. Siquts. De Catechumenis, Siqui, Vencrabilis, Baptizand.
Which forbid Baptism to be ministered at any other time than Easter and
Whitsuntide, except in case of necessity. And there remained lately diverse
signs and tokens thereof. For every Easter and Whitsun-even, until this time,
the Fonts were hallowed in every church, and many Collects and other prayers
were read for them that were baptized. But alas! in vain, and as it were a
mocking with God. For at those times, except it were by chance, none were
baptized, but al were baptized before. For as Vigils, otherwise called
Watchings, remain in the Calendars upon certain Saints Evens, because in old
times the people watched al those nights; and Vigilantius, because he speaks
against these Watchings, was condemned of heresy; but now these many years
those Vigils remained in vain in the books, for no man did watch; Even so until
this day, the order and form of christening was read and kept every year at
Easter and Whitsuntide, but none was then christened. Wherein it appears how
far we be swerved from our forefathers.

And, to conclude this Article shortly, If you will needs have Baptism ministered
no more at one time than another, then must you needs renounce your first
Article; Which wills the Councels and Decrees of the forefathers to be
observed and kept. And this briefly suffices for the sixth Article.

VII. Your Seventh Article is this. WE will have holy bread and holy water
every Sunday, Palms and ashes at the time accustomed; Images to be set up
again in every Church; and al other ancient, old Ceremonies used heretofore by
our Mother holy Church.
Oh! Superstition and Idolatry, how they prevail among you? The very true,
heavenly bread of life, the food of everlasting life, offered unto you in the
Sacrament of the holy Communion, you refuse to eat, but only at Easter. And the
Cup of the most holy blood, wherewith you were redeemed and washed from your
sins, you refuse utterly to drink of at any time. And yet in the sted o^ these
you will eat often of the unsavory and poisoned bread of the Bishop of Rome,
and drink of his stinking puddles, which he names Holy bread and Holy water.
Consider, oh! ignorant people, the authors and intents of the makers of them
both. The water of Baptism, and the holy bread and wine of the holy Communion,
none other person did ordain, but Christ himse f. The other that is called Holy
bread, Holy water, Holy ashes, Holy Palms, and al other like ceremonies,
ordained the Bps. of Rome; Adversaries to (...), and therefore right^y called
Antichrist. And Christ ordained his Bread and his Wine and his Water to our
great comfort, to instruct us and teach us what things we have only by him. But
Antichrist on the other side has set up his Superstitions, under the name of
Holiness, to none other intent, but as the Devil secketh al means to draw us
from Christ, so does Antichrist avance his holy Superstitions, to the intent
that we should take him in the sted of Christ, and believe that we have by him
such things, as we have only by Christ. That is to say, Spiritual food,
Remission of our sins and Salvation.

First, Our Savior Christ ordained the Water of Baptism to signify unto us,
that as the Water washes our bodies outward y, so be we spiritually within
washed by Christ from al our sins. And as the Water is ca led Water of
Regeneration, or New birth, so it declares unto us, that through Christ we be
born anew, and begin a New life toward God: and that Christ is the beginning
of this New life. And as the body that is new born, although it have life within
it, yet can it not continue in the spiritual life toward God, except we be
continually nourished with spiritual food. And that spiritual food is Christ
also. For as he is the first beginning of our spiritual life, so is he the
Continuance and ending thereof. And for this cause did Christ ordain in the holy
Communion, to be eaten bread, and drunken wine, that we should surely believe,
that as our bodies be fed with bread and wine in these holy mysteries, so be we
out of doubt, that our souls be fed spiritually with the lively food of Christ's
body and blood; whereby we have remission of our sins and salvation. But the Bp.
of Rome invented new devises of his own making, and by them promised remission
of sins and salvation, that he might be set up and honored for a Savior equal
to Christ. And so to be esteemed above al creatures, and to set in the Temple
of God, that is in the Church of Christ, as he were God.

And to bring this to pas he has horribly abused holy Scriptures, altering
them to his purpose in the sted of Christ's most holy blood, putting in his holy
Water. As it appears evidently in this Sentence of S. Paul written in the
ninth Chap. of the Hebrews: If the blood of Oxen and Goats, says S. Paul, and
the ashes of a young Cow purified the unclean, as touching the purifying of the
flesh, how much more the blood of Christ (which through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot unto God) shall purge your consciences from dead
works, for to serve the Living God. And for this cause he is the Mediator of
the New covenant. Consider well this sentence of Paul, and you shall find two
purifyings one of the body, and another of the Soul, or Conscience. You shall
find also two Mediators; One was the Priest of Moses law, and the other is
Christ. The Priests of the old Law, with the blood of Oxen and Goats, and other
their Sacrifices, purged only the bodies of them that were defiled, but the
Soul, or Conscience, they could not help. But our Savior Christ by his own
blood purged both body an^ soul. And for that cause he, and none other, is the
Mediator of the New Covenant. But the Bp. of Rome, to make himself also a
Mediator with Christ, has taken upon him to purify the soul and conscience
with holy water, holy salt, and other his holy creatures of his own devising,
to the intolerable injury of Christ's blood, which only h^th the effect. And to
bring this to pass, he has most shamefully changed the words of the
Scripture, and wrested them to his purpose: Some words putting out, and only in
the sted of Christ's blood, putting in his own holy water and salt. For whereas
S. Paul, if the blood of Oxen and Goats, and the ashes of a Cow purified the
unclean, as touching the purifying of the flesh: here the Bp. of Rome leaves
out these words, As touching the purifying of the flesh. And where S. Paul,
extolling the effect of Christ's blood in comparison of the blood of Oxen and
Goats, says, How much more the blood of Christ, which through the eternal
spirit offered himself, being without spot, unto God, shall purge your
consciences: Here the Bp. of Rome, extolling his water and salt puts out
Christ's blood, and in the place thereof puts his holy water and salt; saying,
How much more water, which is sprinkled with salt, and hallowed with godly
prayers, shall sanctify and purify the people. Oh! intolerable blasphemy against
the most precious blood of Christ! Oh! shameless audacity and boldness, so to
corrupt and pervert Gods holy word! If he by his holy water presume to purify
our souls, as Christ did by his blood, what is that else, but to make himself
equal, and another Mediator with Christ? And what is it, to Tread under foot
the Son of God, and to make the blood of the N. Testament (whereby he was
Sanctified) like other common things, and to dishonor the spirit of grace, if
this be not? And yet not contented with this blaspheming the blood of Christ,
he prefers his holy creatures far above the blood of Christ, promising by
them many benefits, which by the blood of Christ be not promised. For in the
same place he promises by his holy ceremonies to take away from us dearth and
scarcity of al worldly things, and to multiply and increase us with the same.
Also to defend us from the assaults of the Devil, and al his deceits, and to
give us health both of body and soul. But al men se him so shamefully to ly in
these worldly things, that no man, that wise is, will trust him in the rest. Nor
no man, that is godly, will desire such things to remain still, which so much
have deceived simple people, and dishonored God, and been contumelious to the
blood of Christ.

But now to your Images, which, you say, you will have set up again in every
Church. What moved you to require this Article, but only Ignorance? For if you
had known the Laws of God, and the use of godly religion, as well before the
Incarnation of Christ, as four or five hundred years next after, and by whom
Images were at first brought into Christ's church, and how much Idolatry was
every where committed by the means of the same, it could not have been, that
ever you would have desired this Article, except you had more affection to
Idolatry, then to true religion. For Almighty God, among the ten Commandments
rehearsed this for the Second, as one of the chief, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth. Thou shall not bow
to them, nor worship them. This Commandment was diligently kept in the old
Testament, so long as the people pleased God. For in their Tabernacle was not
one image, less nor more, that the people might se. Although upon the
Propitiatory were two Cherubins of gold by the Commandment of God. And that was
in such a place, as the people never came near, nor saw. But when the people
forgetting this Commandment, began to make images, and to set them up in the
place of Adoration, by and by they provoked Gods indignation against them, and
were grievously punished therefore.

The Church of Christ likewise in the N. Testament, for the space of four or
five hundred years after Christ's Ascension, utterly refused to have Images in
the Church, a place of Adoration. As it may plainly appear by all the old,
ancient Authors, that lived and wrote in that time. In so much, that above four
hundred years after Christ, when some Superstitious, and ignorant people, in
some places, began to bring painted images, not into the Church, but to the
Church doors, the great Clerk Epiphanius, Bp. of Cyprus, finding such a
painted Image of Christ, or some other Saint, hanging at the Church door, in a
Town called Anablatha, he cut it in pieces, saying, that it was against the
authority of scripture, that in the Church of Christ should hang the Image of a
man. And the same Epiphanius wrote unto the Bp. of Jerusalem, that he should
command the Priests, that in no wise they should suffer such Images to be
hanged in the church of Christ, which were contrary to our religion.

But peradventure you will mervail, and ask me the question, how it was brought
to pas, that of late years al Churches were so full of Images, and so much
offering, and pilgrimages done unto them, if it were against the Commandment of
God, against the usage of al godly people in the O. Testament, and also against
the custom of Christ's church in the N. Testament, so long as it was pure and
holy, and kept from Idolatry? Who was able to bring this to effect, contrary
both to Gods expres Commandment, and the custom of al godly people from the
beginning of the world, until four or five hundred years after Christ? No man
surely could have wrought this thing so much contrary to God, but Antichrist
himself, that is to say, the Bp. of Rome. To whom God has given great power to
work wonders, to bring into error those that will not believe the truth. But by
what means did he compass this matter? By such means as were most meet for
himself, and as he has commonly practiced in all other matters: that is to say,
by Sedition and Murder, by Confederacies and Persecutions, by raising the Sons
against their Fathers, the children against their mother, and the Subjects
against their Ru^ers; by deposing of Emperors and Princes, and murdering of
learned men, Saints and Martyrs. For thus he wrought against the Emperor of the
East parties from Gregory II. his time, until Gregory III. who at length, after
this condition had endured above five hundred years, in a Council held at
Lions, by feigned promises, persuaded the Emperor of the East to condescend to
his purpose, as well to receive Images into the churches, as to other his
requests. But nevertheles the Bp. of Rome failed of his purpose. For yet to
this day the Christen men in the East do not allow images to stand in their
churches; neither the Greeks; nor the Armenians, nor the Indians, nor none
other christen men. And that more is, Search all the world through out, of what
religion soever they be, whether they be Jews, Turks, Saracens, Tartaries, or
Christen people; and you shall not find an image in none of their churches, but
that was brought in by the Bp. of Rome, and where the Bp. of Rome is, or with
in these forty years was, taken for the head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar
in earth.

And at the beginning the Bps. of Rome, to cloak their Idolatry, pretended to
have Images set up, only for a remembrance to Lay men, and to be, as it were,
Lay men's books. But after, they defined plainly, that these should be
worshipped. And so it increased at length, that Images were kneeled unto,
offered unto, prayed unto, sought unto; Incensed, and Pilgrimages done unto
them, and al manner of superstition and idolatry that could be devised. Almighty
God knows our corrupt nature better, then we do our selves. He knows well
the inclinations of Man, how much he is given to worship creatures, and the
work of his own hands: and especially fond Women, which commonly follow
superstition rather then true religion. And therefore he utterly forbad the
people the use of graven images; especially in places dedicated to the honor of
God, knowing assuredly, that of the having would follow the worshipping them.

Now, thanks be to God, in this Realm, we be clearly delivered from that kind
of idolatry (which most highly offended God,) and we do according to the
Council Elebertyne, which ordained, that no Images should be in Churches. And
this is so ancient, that it was about the same year, that Nicene Council was.
What should ^hen move you to ask again your Images in the Church, being not
only against Gods commandments, and the use of Gods Church evermore, since the
beginning of the world, when it was pure from ido^atry; but also being
chargeable to the realm, and great occasion of heinous idolatry; But that some
Papistical and covetous priests have persuaded you hereto? Which care neither
for Gods honor, nor your damnation: so that they may have any commodity or
profit thereby.

I have been very long in this Article, and yet the matter is so large, that it
requires much more to be spoken therein, which for shortness of time I am
constrained to leave, until a more occasion: and so come to your eigth Article.

VIII. Your Eighth Article is this. WE will not receive the new Service, because
it is but like a Christmas game: but we will have our old Service of Mattins,
Mass, Evensong, and Procession in Latin, as it was before. And so ne the
Cornish men, wh^rof certain of us understand no English, utterly refuse this
new English.
As concerning the having of the Service in the Latin tongue, is sufficiently
spoken of in the answer to the third Article. But I would gladly know the
reason, why the Cornish men refuse utterly the New English, as you call it,
because certain of you understand it not: and yet you will have the Service in
Latin, which almost none of you understand. If this be a sufficient cause for
Cornwall to refuse the English Service, because some of you understand none
English, a much grea^er cause have they, both of Cornwall and Devonshire, to
refuse utterly the late Service; for as much as fewer of them know the Latin
tongue, then they of Cornwall the English tongue. But where you say, that you
will have the old Service, because the new is like a Christmas game, you declare
your selves what spirit you be ^ed withal, or rather what spirit leads them,
that persuaded you, that the Word of God is but like a Christmas game. It is
more like a game and a fond play to be laughed at of al men, to hear the Priest
speak aloud to the people in Latin, and the people listen with their ears to
hear; and some walking up and down in the Church, some saying other prayers in
Latin, and none understands other. Neither the Priest nor his parish wot what
they say. And many times the thing that the Priest says in Latin is so fond
of it self, that it is more like a play, then a godly prayer.

But in the English Service appointed to be read, there is nothing else but the
eternal word of God. The New and the Old Testament is read, that has power to
save your Souls: Which, as S. Paul says, is the power of God to the Salvation
of all that believe: The clear light to our eyes, without the which we cannot
see; and a Lanthorn unto our feet, without which we should tumble in darkness.
It is in it self the Wisdom of God, and yet to the Jews it is a stumb^ing
block, and to the Gentiles it is but foolishnes* But to such as be called of
God, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, it is the Power of God and the Wisdom
of God. Then unto you if it be but foolishness and a Christmas Game, you may
discern your selves what miserable state you be in, and how far you be from
God. For S. Paul says plainly, that the Word of God is foolishnes only to them
that perish: but to them that shall be saved it is Gods might and power. To some
it is a lively savor unto life; and to some it is a deadly savor unto death. If
i^ be to you but a Christmas game, it is then a Savor of death unto death. And
surely persuade your selves, that you be not led by the spirit of God, so long
as the word of God Savoureth no better unto you, but seems unto you a
Christmas pastime, and foolishnes. And therefore the old Service pleases you
better. Which in many things is so foolish and so ungodly, that it seems rather
to be old wives tales and lies, then to sound to any godliness. The Devil is a
liar, and the Author of lies: and they may think themselves governed rather of
his spirit, then of God, when lies delight more, then Gods most true word.

But this I judge rather of your Leaders then of your selves; who by ignorance
be carried away by others, you wot not whether. For when the Service was in the
Latin tongue, which you understood not, they might read to you truth or
fables, godly or ungodly things, as they pleased: But you could not judge that
you understood not. And what was the cause why S. Paul would have such
languages spoken in the Church as that people might understand? That they might
learn and be edified thereby, and judge of that which should be spoken, whether
it were according to Gods word, or not.

But forasmuch as you understand not the old Latin Service, I shall rehearse
some things in English, that were wont to be read in Latin, that when you
understand them, you may judge them, whether they seem to be true tales, or
fables: and whether they, or Gods word seem to be more like plays and
Christmas games. The Devil entered into a certain person; in whose mouth S.
Martin put his finger. And because the Devil could not get out at his mouth,
the man blew him, or cacked him out behind. This was one of the tales, that was
wont to be read in the Latin service, that you will needs have again. As tho
the Devil had a body, and that so crass, that he could not pas out by the small
pores of the flesh, but must needs have a wide hole to go out at. Is this a
grave and godly matter to be read in the Church, or rather a foolish Christmas
tale, or an old wives fable, worthy to be laughed at and scorned of every man,
that has either wit or godly judgment? Yet more foolish, erroneous and
superstitious things be read in the feasts of S. Blase, S. Valentine, S.
Margaret, S. Peter, of the Visitation of our Lady, and the Conception, of the
Transfiguration of Christ, and in the feast of Corpus Christi; and a great
number mo. Whereof some be most vain fables, some very superstitious, some
directly against Gods word, and the Laws of this realm: and altogether be full
of error and superstition. But as Christ commonly excused the simple people,
because of their ignorance, and justly condemned the Scribes and Pharisees,
which, by their crafty persuasions, led the people out of the right way: So I
think not you so much to be blamed, as those Pharisees and Papistical Priests,
which, abusing your simplicity, caused you to ask you wist not what, desiring
rather to drink of the dregs of corrupt error, which you know not, then of the
pure and sweet wine of Gods word, which you may and ought to understand. But
now have I sufficiently spoke of your eighth Article: I will go forward unto the
ninth.

IX. Your ninth Article is this, WE will have every preacher in his Sermon, and
every Priest at the Mass, pray especially by name for the souls in Purgatory,
as our forefathers did.
To reason with you by learning, which be unlearned, it were but folly;
Therefore I will convince your Article with very reason. First, Tell me I pray,
if you can, whether there be a Purgatory, or no: and Where or What it is. And
if you cannot tell, then I may tell you, that you ask you wot not what. The
Scripture makes mention of two places, where the Dead be received after this
life. Viz. of Heaven, and of Hell: but of Purgatory is not one word spoken.
Purgatory was wont to be called a Fire, as hot as Hell, but not so long during.
But now the Defenders of Purgatory within this Realm, be ashamed so to say:
Nevertheles they say, it is a third place. Where or What it is, they confess
themselves they can no tell. And of Gods word they have nothing to show neither,
Where it is, nor What it is, nor That it is. But al is fained of their own
brains without authority of Scripture.

I would ask of them then, Wherefore it is, and to what use it serves. For if
it be to none use, then it is a thing frustrate and in vain. Mary, say they, it
is a place of punishment, whereby they be purged from their sins, that depart
out of this life, not fully purged before. I cannot tell, whether this saying be
more foolish, or more contumelious to Christ. For what can be more foolish,
then to say, that pains can wash sins out of the Soul. I do not deny but that
corrections and punishments in this life, is a calling of men to repentance and
amendment; and so to be purged by the blood of Christ. But correction without
repentance can nothing avail: and they that be dead be past the time of
repentance; and so no correction or torments in Purgatory can avail them. And
what a contumely and injury is this to Christ, to affirm that al have not full
and perfect purgation by his blood, that die in his faith? Is not al our trust
in the blood of Christ, that we be cleansed, purged and washed thereby? And will
you have us now to forsake our faith in Christ, and bring us to the Popes
Purgatory, to be washed theri^: Thinking that Christ's blood is an imperfect Lee
or Soap, that washes not clean? If he shall die without mercy, that treads
Christ's blood under his feet, what is treading of his blood under our feet, if
this be not? But if according to the Catholic faith, which the holy Scripture
teaches, and the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs confirmed with their blood, all the faithful, that die in the Lord, be pardoned of al their offenses by Christ,
and their sins be clearly spunged and washed away by his blood, shall they
after, be cast into another strong and grievous prison of Purgatory, there to
be punished again for that which was pardoned before? God has promised by his
word, that the Souls of the Jews be in Gods hand, and no pain shall touch them:
And again he says, Blessed be they that die in the Lord. For the spirit of God
says, that from henceforth they shall rest from their pains. And Christ himself
says, He that believes in him, that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall
not come to judgment, but shall pas from death unto life. And is God no truer of
his promises, but to punish that, which he promises to pardon? Consider the
matter by your own cases. If the Kings Majesty should pardon your offenses; and
after, would cast you into prison, would you think that he had well observed his
promis? For what is, to pardon your offenses, but to pardon the punishment for
the same? If the King would pardon you, would you take that for a pardon? Would
you not alledg your Pardon, and say, that you ought not to be punished? Who can
then, that has but a crum of reason in his head, imagine of God, that he will,
after our death, punish those things that he pardoned in our life time?

Truth it is, that Scripture makes mention of Paradise and Abraham's bosom
after this life; but those be places of joy and consolation, not of pain and
torments. But yet I know what subtle Sophisters use to mutter in men's ears to
deceive them withal. David, say they, with many other, were pardoned of their
offenses, and yet were they sore punished after, for the same, of God. And some
of them, so long as they lived. Well, be it were so. Yet after their lives, they
were not punished in Purgatory therefore. But the end of their lives was the end
of their punishment. And likewise it is of Original sin after Baptism, which
although it be pardoned, yet after pains thereof continue so long as we live. But
this punishment in this life time is not to revenge our Original sin, which is
pardoned in Baptism; but to make us humble, penitent, obedient to God, fearful
to offend, to know our selves, and ever to stand in fear and aw; as if a
Father, that has beaten a wilful child for his faults, should hang the rod
continually at the child's girdle, it should be no small pain and grief to the
child, ever hanging by his side. And yet the father does it not to beat the
child for that which is past and forgiven; but to make him beware hereafter,
that he offend not again, and to be gentle, tractable, obedient and loath to do
any thing amiss. But after this life there is no such cause of punishment:
Where no rod nor whip can force any man to go any faster or further, being
already at the end of his journey. Likewise a Master, that has an unthrifty
Servant, which out of his Masters sight does nothing but riot and disorder
himself, if he forgive his Servant, and for the love he bears to him, and the
desire he has to se him corrected and reformed, he will command him never to be
out of his sight: This Command, although indeed it be a great pain to the Servant,
yet the Master does it not to punish those faults, which before he had pardoned
and forgiven, but to keep him in stay, that he fall no mo to like disorder. But
these examples and cas^s of punishment here in this life, can in no wise be
wrested and drawn to the life to come. And so in no wise can serve for
Purgatory.

And furthermore, Seeing that the Scriptures so often and so diligently teach
us, almost in every place, to relieve al them that be in necessity, to feed the
hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit the sick and the prisoner, to comfort the
sorrowful; and so to al others that have need of our help: and the same in no
place make mention, either of such pains in Purgatory, or what comfort we may
do them; it is certain that the same is feigned for lucre, and not grounded
upon Gods word. For else the Scripture in some place would have told us plainly
what case they stood in that be in Purgatory, and what relief and help we might
do unto them. But as for such as Gods word speaks not one word of neither of
them both, my counsil shall be, that you keep not the Bp. of Romes Decrees, that
you may come to Purgatory, but keep Gods laws, that you may come to heaven. Or
else I promise you assured y, that you shall never escape Hell. Now to your next
Article.

X. Your tenth Article is this. WE will have the Bible, and al Books of
Scripture in English, to be called in again. For we be informed, that otherwise
the Clergy shall not of long time confound the Heretics.
Alas! it grieveth me to hear your Articles: and much I rue and lament your
ignorance: praying God most earnestly once to lighten your eyes, that you may
see the truth. What christen heart would not be grieved to se you so ignorant,
(for willingly and wilfully, I trust, you do it not) that you refuse Christ,
and join your selves with Antichrist. You refuse the holy Bible, and al holy
Scriptures so much, that you will have them called in again; and the Bp. of
Romes Decrees you will have advanced and observed. I may well say to you as
Christ said to Peter, Turn back again, for you savor not godly things. As many
of you as understand no Latin cannot know Gods word, but in English, except it
be the Cornish men, which cannot understand likewise none, but their own
speech. Then you must be content to have it in English, which you know, or else
you must confess, that you refuse utterly the knowledge thereof. And wherefore did
the Holy Ghost come down in fiery tongues, and gave them knowledge of al
languages, but that al Nations might hear, speak and learn Gods word in their
Mother tongue? And can you name me any Christens in all the world, but they
have, and ever had Gods word in their own tongue? and the Jews, to whom God
gave his Scriptures in the Hebrew tongue, after their long captivity among the
Chaldees, so that mo of them knew the Chaldee rather then the Hebrew tongue,
they caused the Scripture to be turned into the Chaldee tongue, that they might
understand it: Which until this day is called Targum. And Ptolomy, King of
Egypt caused Sixty [Seventy] of the greatest Clerks, that might be gotten, to
translate the Scripture out of Hebrew into Greek. And until this day the Greeks
have it in the Greek tongue; the Latins in the Latin tongue, and al other
Nations in their own tongue. And will you have God further from us, then from al
other countries: that he shall speak to every man in his own language, that he
understands, and was born in, and to us shall speak a strange language, that
we understand not? And will you, that al other Realms shall la^d God in their
own speech, and we shall say to him we know not what?

Although you savor so little of godliness, that you ^ist not to read his word your
selves, you ought not to be so malicious and envious, to let them that be more
godly, and would gladly read it to their comfort and edification. And if there
be an English Heretic, how will you have him confuted, but in English? And
whereby else, but by Gods word? Then it follows, that to confute English
Heretics, we must have Gods word in English, as al other Nations have it in
their own native language. S. Paul to the Ephesians teaches al men, as well
Laymen, as priests, to arm themselves, and to fight against al Adversaries
with Gods word: Without the which we cannot be able to prevail, neither against
subtle Heretics, puissant Devils, this deceitful world; nor our own sinful
flesh. And therefore until Gods word came to light, the Bp of Rome, under the
Prince of darkness, rained quietly in the world: and his Heresies were received
and allowed for the true Catholic ^ai^h. And it can none otherwise be, but that
Heresies must reign, where the ^ight of Gods word drives not away our darkness.

IX. Your Eleventh Article is this, WE will have Dr. Moreman and Dr. Crispin,
which hold our opinions, to be safely sent unto us; and to them we require the
Kings Majesty to give some certain Livings, to preach among us our Catholic
faith.
If you be of Moremans and Crispins faith, I like you much the worse. For like
Lettice, like lips. And to declare you plainly the qualiti s s of Crispin and
Moreman, and how unmeet men they be to be your Teachers, they be persons very
ignorant in Gods word; and yet thereto very wilful, crafty, and full of
dissimulation. For if they were profoundly learned, and of sincere judgments,
as they be not, they might be godly Teachers of you. Or if they were not toto
wilful, and standing wholly in their own cenceits, they might learn, and be
taught of others. But they be so wilful, that they will not learn, and so
ignorant, that they cannot teach, and so full of craft and hypocrisy, that they
be able to deceive you al, and to lead you into error after themselves. So that
if you ask them, you ask your own poison. Now if a man were in such a sickness,
that he longed for poison (as many diseases desire things most noy^ul unto
them) yet it were not the part of a good Physician to give it unto them. No
more is it the office of a most godly Prince, to give you such Teachers, although
you long never so sore for them, as he knows would corrupt you; feeding you
rather with sower and unwholesome leaven of Romish Pharisaical doctrine, then
with the sweet, pure and wholesome bread of Gods heavenly word. Where you would
have Gods word in English destroyed, and Crispin and Moreman delivered unto
you, you do even as the people of the Jews did; who cried out, that Christ
might be crucified, and that Barabbas, the strong thief, might be delivered
unto them.

XII. Your Twelfth Article is this, WE think it very meet, because the L.
Cardinal Pole is of the Kings blood, that he should not only have his pardon,
but also be sent for to Rome, and promoted to be of the Kings Council.
In this Article I will answer no more but this, if ever any Cardinal or Legate
were beneficial unto this Realm, we may have some hope of some other to follow
his steps. But if all that ever were in this Realm were pernicious and hurtful
unto the same, I know not why we should be with child to long for any mo. For
by the experience of them, that have been heretofore, we may conjecture of
them, that be to come. And I fear me, that Cardinal Pole would follow rather
the old race of the rest, than to begin a better of himself. Surely I have read
a book of his making, which whosoever shall read, if he have a true heart to our
late Sovereign Lord K. Henry VIII. or to this realm, he will judge Cardinal Pole
neither worthy to dwell in this realm, nor yet to live. For he does extend al
his wits and eloquence in that book to persuade the Bp. of Rome, the Emperor,
the French King, and al other Princes, to invade this realm by force. And sure
I am, that if you have him, you must have the Bp. of Rome also. For the
Cardinal cannot be a Subject, but where the other is his Head. This suffices
briefly to this Article.

XIII. Your Thirteenth Article is this, WE will that no Gentleman shall have any
mo servants then one, to wait upon him, except he may dispend one hundred mark
land. And for every hundred mark we think it reasonable he should have a man.
Yet have you not foreseen one thing, You Wise Disposers of the Common wealth.
For if a Gentleman of an hundred mark land* (who by your order must have but
one servant, except he might spend two hundred marks) should send that one
servant to London, you have not provided who shall wait upon him, until his
servant come home again. Nor you have not provided, where every Gentleman may
have one servant, that can do al things necessary for him. I fear me the most
part of you, that devised this Article (whom I take to be Loiterers and idle
unthrifts) if they should serve a gentleman, he should be feign to do al things
himself, for any thing that you could, or would do for him. For one thing
methink very strange; for where much complaint is made of diverse Gentlemen,
because they keep not Houses, you provide by your order, that no Gentleman shall
keep house; but al shall sojourn with other men. For who can keep a household
with one servant, or with two servants, after the rate of two hundred mark, or
with three after the rate of three hundred, and so upward? For here it seems
you be very desirous to make Gentlemen rich. For after this proportion every
Gentleman may lay up clearly in his Coffers at the least one half of his yearly
revenues, and much more.

But it was not for good mind, that you bare to the Gentlemen, that you devised
this Article; but it appears plainly, that you devised it to diminish their
strength, and to take away their friends, that you might command Gentlemen at
your pleasures. But you be much deceived in your account. For although by your
appointment they lacked household servants, yet shall they not lack Tenants and
Farmers. Which, if they do their duties, will be as assured to their Lords, as
their own household servants. For of these lands, which they have or hold of
their Lords, they have their whole Livings for themselves, their wives,
children and servants. And for all these they attend their own business, and wait
not upon their Lords, but when they be called thereto. But the household
servant, leaving al his own business, waits daily and continually upon his
Masters service: and for the same has no more but meat and drink and apparel
for himself only. So that al Tenants and Farmers, which know their duties, and
be kind to their Lords, will die and live with them, no les then their own
Household Servants. Therefore I would wish you to put this fantasy out of your
heads, and this Article out of your book, as well for the unreasonablenes, as
for the ungodlines thereof.

For was it ever seen in any country since the world began, that Commons did
appoint the Nobles, and Gentlemen, the number of their Servants? Stands it
with any reason to turn upside down the good order of the whole world, that is
every where, and ever has been? That is to say, The Commoners to be governed
by the Nobles, and the Servants by their Masters. Will you now have the Subjects
to govern their King, the Vilains to rule the Gentlemen, and the Servants their
Masters? If men would suffer this, God will not; but will take vengeance on al
them, that will break his order; as he did of Dathan and Abiram: although for a
time he be a God of much sufferance, and hides his indignation under his
mercy; That the evil of themselves may repent, and se their own folly.

XIV. Your fourteenth Article is this, WE will that the half part of the Abbey
lands, and Chantry lands in every man's possession, howsoever he came by them,
be given again to two places, where two of the chief Abbeys were within every
County. Where such half part shall be taken out; and there to be established a
place for devout persons, which shall pray for the King and the Common wealth.
And to the same we will have all the Alms of the Church box given for these
seven years.
At the beginning you p^etended, that you meant nothing against the Kings
Majesty, but now you open your selves plainly to the world, that you go about
to pluck the Crown from his head: and against al justice and equity, not only
to take from him such lands as be annexed unto his Crown, and be parcel of the
same: but also against al right and reason, to take from al other men such
lands, as they came to by most just title, by gift, by sale, by exchange, or
otherwise. There is no respect, nor difference had among you, whether they come
to them by right, or by wrong. Be you so blind, that you cannot see how justly
you proceed, to take the sword in your hand against your prince, and to
dispossess just Inheritors without any cause? Christ would not take upon him
to judge the right and title of lands betwixt two brethren; and you arrogantly
presume, not only to judge, but unjustly to take away al men's right titles; yea,
even from the King himself. And do you not tremble for fear, that the Vengeance
of God shall fall upon you, before you have grace to repent? And yet you, not
contented with this your Rebellion, would have your shameful act celebrated
with a perpetual memory; as it were to boast and glory of your iniquity. For in
memory of your fact, you would have established in every country two places to
pray for the King, and the Commonwealth: Whereby your abominable behavior at
this present may never be forgotten, but be remembered unto the worlds end. That
when the Kings Majesty was in Wars with Scotland and France, you, under
pretense of the Common wealth, rebelled, and made so great sedition against him
within his own realm, as never before was heard of. And therefore you must be
prayed for for ever, in every County of this realm.

It were more fit for you to make humble Supplication upon your knees to the
Kings Majesty, desiring him not only to forgive you this fault, but also that
the same may never be put in Chronicle nor writing; and that neither show nor
mention may remain to your posterity, that ever subjects were so unkind to
their Prince, and so ungracious toward God; that contrary to Gods word they
should so use themselves against their Sovereign Lord and King. And this I
assure you of, that if all the whole world should pray for you until Doomsday,
their prayers should no more avail you, then they should avail the Devils in
hell, if they prayed for them; unles you be so penitent and sorry for your
disobedience, that you will ever hereafter, so long as you live, study to
redubbe and recompense the same with all true and faithful obedience: and not
only your selves, but also procuring al other, so much as lies in you. And so
much detesting such uproars and seditions, that if you se any man toward any
such things, you will to your power resist him, and open him unto such Governors
and Rulers, as may straitway repres the same. As for your last Article, thanks
be to God, it needs not to be answered, which is this,

Your last Article is this, FOR the particular griefs of our Country, we will
have them so ordered, as Humfrey Arundel and Henry Bray, the Kings Mayor of
Bodman, shall inform the Kings Majesty, if they may have salve Conduct in the
Kings great Seal to pas und repas with an Herald of Arms.
Who ever heard such arrogance in Subjects, to require and will of their
Princes, that their own particular causes may be ordered, neither according to
reason, nor the laws of the Realm, but according to the Information of two
most heinous Traitors? Was it ever heard before this time, that information
should be a judgment, although the Informers were of never so great credit? And
will you have suffice the information of two villainous Papistical Traitors? You
will deprive the King of his lands, pertaining to his Crown, and other men of
their just possessions and inheritances, and judge your own causes, as you list
your selves. And what can you be called then, but most wicked judges and most
errant Traitors: Except only Ignorance or Force may excuse you^* that either
you were constrained by your Capitains against your wills, or deceived by blind
Priests, and other crafty persuaders, to ask you wist not what. How much then
ought you to detest and abhor such men hereafter, and to beware of al such
like, as long as you live: and to give most humble and hearty thanks unto God,
who has made an end of this Article, and brought Arundel and Bray to that they
have deserved; that is, perpetual shame, confusion, and death? Yet I be^seech
God so to extend his grace unto them, that they may die well, which have lived
il, Amen.

NUMBER. XLI. The Archbishops notes for an Homily against the Rebellion.
Sentences of the Scripture against Sedition.
1 Cor. 3. CUM sit inter vos zelus and contentio, nonne carnales estis, Ex MSS.
C.C.C.C. Miscellan. D.
and sicut homines ambulatis? Et

1 Cor. 6. Quare non magis injuriam accipitis? Quare non magis fraudem patimini?

Iac. 3. Si zelum amarum habetis, and contentiones sint in cordibus vestris,
etc. non est ista Sapientia desursum, descendens a Patre Luminum, sed terrena,
animalis, Diabolica. Ubi enim zelus and contentio, ibi inconstantia, and omne
opus malum, etc. Et

Cap. 4. Unde bella and lites inter vos? Nonne ex concupiscentijs vestris, quae
m ilitant in membris vestris.

How God has plagued Sedition in time past.
Number. 18. Dathan and Abiram, for there sedition against Moses and Aaron, did
miserably perish by Gods just judgment, the earth opening and swallowing them
down quick.

2 Reg. 15. and 18. Absalom moving Sedition against David, did miserably perish
likewise.

2 Reg. 20. Seba for his Sedition against David lost his head.

3 Reg. 1. and 2. Adonias also for his Sedition against Solomon was slain.

Acts 8. Judas and Theudas for their Sedition were justly slain.

Acts 21. An Egyptian likewise, which moved the people of Israel to Sedition,
received that he deserved.

Tumults in England. Jack Cade. Jack Straw.
In Germany for their Sedition were slain almost in one month about two hundred
thousand.

The Sword by Gods word pertains not to Subjects, but only to Magistrates.

Tho the Magistrates be evil, and very tyrants against the Commonwealth, and
enemies to Christ's religion, yet ye Subjects must obey in all worldly things,
as the Christians do under the Turk; and ought so to do as long as he
commands them not to do against God.

How ungodly then is it for our Subjects to take the Sword, where there
reigns a most Christian prince, most desirous to reform al griefs?

Subjects ought to make humble suit to their Prince for Reformation of al
injuries, and not to come with force.

The Sword of the Subjects at this present comes not of God, nor for the
Common wealth of the Realm: but of the Devil, and destroys the Commonweal.

First, For that it is against the word of God.

Secondly, For that they rise so many lies; whereof the Devil is ever the
Author. Quia mendax est, and Pater ejus.

Thirdly, For that they spoil and rob men, and command every man to come to
them, and to send to them what they please.

Fourthly, For that they let the harvest: Which is the chief sustentation of
our life: and God of his goodness has sent it abundantly. And they by their
folly do cause it to be lost and abandoned.

Fifthly, For that they be led by rage and fury, without reason; have no respect
neither of the Kings Authority, nor of the Papists in the West Country: nor of
our affairs in France, nor Scotland. Which by their Sedition is so much
hindered, that there could not be imagined so great a damage to the Realm.

Sixthly, That they give Commandment in the Kings name, and in pain of death,
having none authority so to do.

Ever against God the Devil has raised Sedition. As appears by the Sedition
of Dathan and Abiram; and all the murmurations of the children of Israel against
Moses and Aaron. Also, of the conspiracy against Zorobabel in the reedifying of
the Temple. Also, against Christ and his Apostles, in sundry parts of the
World. Also, In Germany lately: and now among us. For the Devil can abide no
right reformation in religion.

Civil war is the greatest scourge, that can be, and most certain argument of
Gods indignation against us for our ingratitude: that we either will not receive
his true word, or that they, which receive the same, dishonor God in their
living* when they pretend to honor him with their mouths. Which ingratitude and
contumely God can in no wise bear at our hands.

The Remedies to avert Gods Indignation from us is to receive his Word, and to
live according thereunto: Returning unto God with prayer and penance. Or else
surely more grievous afflictions shall follow; if more grievous may be, then
Civil wars among our selves.

The chief Authors of al these tumults be idle and naughty people. Which
nothing have, nor nothing or little will labor to have: that will riot in
expending, but not labor in getting.

And these tumults first were excitated by the Papists, and others, which came
from the Western Camp. To the intent that by sowing division among our selves,
we should not be able to impeach them.

NUMBER. XLII. The Lady Mary to the Council, justifying her self for using the
Mass, in K. Edwards Minority.
IT is no small greyf to me to parceyve, that they, whom the Kings Majesty my
father, Sr. W.H.MSS.
(whose Soul god pardon) made in this world of nothing, in respect of that
they be come to now; and at his last end put in trust to se his Will
performed, whereunto they were al sworn upon a book; it gryeveth me I say, for
the Love I bear to them, to se both how they break his will, and what
usurped power they take upon them, in making (as they call it) laws both
clean contrary to his procedynges and will, and also ageyust the coustome of
al Crystendome, and (in my conscience) against the law of god and his church.
Which passes all the rest. But though you among you have forgotten the King
my father, yet both gods commandment and nature will not suffer me to do so.
Wherefore, with gods help, I will remain an obedyent child to his laws, as
he left them, tylle such time as the Kings majeste my brother, shall have
parfayt yers of discrecyon to order the power that god has sent him, and to be
a Judge in theyse matters himself. And I doubt not but he shall then accept my
so doing better then theyrs, which have taken a piece of his power upon them in
his mynoryte.

I do not a little mervayle, that you can find fawte with me for observing of
that law which was allowed by him, that was a king, not only of power, but
also of knowledge, how to order his power. To which laws al you consented, and
seemed at that time to the outward appearance very well to like the same. And
more immediately when the King reasons to have his proceedyngs observed.
Wherefore I do wonder that you can find fawte with me, and non al this while
with some amongst your selves, for runnyng half a year before that, which you
now call a law: ye, and before the byshopps came together. Wherein me thinks
you do me very myche wrong, if I should not have as much preemynence to
contynew in keeping a full authorysed Law made without parcyalyte, they had,
both to break the law, which at that time your selves must needs confess was
of full power and strength, and to use alteracyons of their own invencyon
contrary both to that, ye, and to your new Law, as you call it.

NUMBER. XLIII. The Archbishops letter to Martin Bucer, inviting him over into
England.
GRatiam and pacem Dei in Christo. Legi tuas literas ad Iohannem Halesium,
Buceri Scripta Angli^.
in quibus tristissimos Germaniae casus commemorans, te in tua urbe verbi
ministerio vix diutius praeesse posse scribis. Gemens igitur Prophetae illud
exclamavi, Mirifica misericordias tuas, qui Salvos facis sperantes in te a
resistentibus dexterae tuae. Nec dubito quin Deus hoc and similes piorum
gemitus exauditurus sit: and veram doctrinam, quae hactenus in vestris
Ecclesijs sincere propagata est, and conservaturus and defensurus sit, adversus
omnes diaboli and mundi furores. Interim Saevientibus fluctuum procellis, in
portus confugiendum est ijs, qui vela in altum tendere non possunt. Tibi
igitur, mi Bucere, portus long tutissimus erit nostrum regnum, in quo Dei
beneficio, semina verae doctrinae feliciter spargi caeperunt, Veni igitur ad
nos; and te nobis operarium praesta in mess Domini. Non minus proderis
Catholicae Dei Ecclesiae cum apud nos fueris, quam si pristinas seeds
retineres. Add, quod adflictae patriae vulnera absens melius sanare poteris,
quam nunc possis praesens. Omni igitur semota cunctatione, quamprimum ad nos
venias. Ostendemus nobis praesentia Buceri nihil gratius aut jucundius esse
posse. Sed cave ne quid ex itinere incommodi accipias. Nosti quos habeas vitae
insectatores* eorum manibus ne te commiseris. Est istic mercator quidam Anglus
Richardus Hills, Vir pius and summa fidelitate praeditus, cum quo de tota
itineris ratione te confer velim. Praeterea, Deum aeternum Patrem Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, toto pectore oro, ut in ira misericordiae recordetur and
afflictae Ecclesiae calamitates respiciat, and lucem verae doctrinae apud nos
magis magisque accendat. Apud vos vero jam multos annos praeclare lucentem, non
extingui patiatur. Is te quoque, mi Bucere, regat, and servet and incolumem ad
nos traducat. Been and feliciter Vale. Londini, 2 October. Anno 1548.

Tui ad nos accessus cupientissimus, Thomas Cranmerus Archiep. Cantuar.

NUMBER. XLIV. A Catalogue of Books published by Paulus Fagius.
In Folio.
LExicon Chaldaicum, authore Elija Levita; quo nullum hactenus a quoquam
absolutius editum est. Omnibus Hebraicae Linguae Studiosis in primis and utile
and necessarium. Cum praefatione triplici, una Hebraica ipsius Authoris Eliae,
a Paulo Fagio Latin reddita. Reliquis duabus Latinis ab eodem praefixis; Una
ad Lectorem. Altera ad D. Wolfg. Capitonem.

Saepher Tehillim: hoc est, Psalterium, cum Commentario R. David Kimhi,
Hebraice excusum Isnae, Anno minoris Supputationis a Creatione mundi.

Commentarium Hebraicum R. David Kimhi in 10 primos Psalmos Davidicos, cum
versione Latina e regione: pro exercitamento omnibus Hebraicae linguae
studiosis: quibus ad legenda Hebraeorum Commentaria animus est. Per Paulum
fagium.

Thargum: Hoc est, Paraphrasis Onkeli Chaldaica in sacra Biblia, ex Chaldaeo in
Latinum versa: additis in singula fere Capita succinctis Annotationibus.
Authore Paulo Fagio. Pentateuchus, sive V. libri Moysis. Consilium and
utilitatem editionis hujus Chaldaicae ex praefatione ad Lectorem intelligere
poteris.

Collatio praecipuarum, quae in usu sunt, Translationum V. Testamenti, in
praecipuos S. Scripturae locos: In quibus cum Interpretum, tum Commentatorum
mira est varietas. Ex qua non tam ipsas variationis causas, quam quis
Interpretum, ac Expositorum, cum Veterum, tum Recentiorum, vel a scopo
veritatis, longius aberrarit, vel ad illum proprius accesserit; ex ipsa
Veritate Hebraica pulchre cognoscere licebit. Authore Paulo Fagio.

Opus inabsolutum, partim propter illorum temporum difficultates; partim
propter exilium, and obitum praematurum optimi atque doctissimi viri paulo post
subsequentem. In Quarto.
OPusculum recens Hebraicum, a Doctissimo Hebraeo Elija Levita Germano,
grammatice elaboratum. Cui titulum fecit, Thisbites. In quo DCCXII. vocum, quae
sunt partim Hebraicae, Chaldaicae, Arabicae, Graecae and Latinae; quaeque in
Dictionarijs non facile inveniuntur; and a Rabbinis tamen Hebraeorum in
scriptis suis passim usurpantur, Origo, E^ymon and verus us^s docte ostenditur,
atque explicatur, Per Paul. Fagium, in gratiam Studiosorum Linguae Sanctae,
Latinitate donatum.

Sententiae vere elegantes, piae mireque cum ad linguam discendam, tum animum
pietate excolendum utiles, veterum Sapientum Hebraeorum, Quas Pirke Avoth, id
est, Capitula, aut, si mavis, Apoththegmata, Patrum nominant; in Latinum
versae, Scholijsque illustratae, Per Paulum Fagium.

Exegesis, sive expositio, dictionum Hebraicarum literalis and simplex, in
quatuor Capita Geneseos, pro Studiosis linguae Hebraicae. Cujusdam Scriptum
Iudaei, ad Christianismum conversi ante annos CC. In quo obiter ostendit causas
aliquot, propter quas multi Iudaei, etiam si veritatem agnoscant, ad fidem
tamen nostram accedere verentur.

Sententiae Morales, ordine Alphabeti, Ben Syrae, Vetustissimi autoris Hebraei,
qui a Iudaeis Nepos Hieremiae Prophetae fuisse creditur: Cum succincto
Commentariolo, Hebraice and Latin.

Tobias Hebraice; ut is adhuc hodie apud Judaeos in venitur. Omnia ex Hebraeo
in Latinum translata, in gratiam studiosorum linguae Sanctae.

Saepher Aemuna, id est, Liber Fidei, Hebraice impressus Isnae, Anno CCCII.
minoris Supputationis a Creatione Mundi.

Liber Fidei, pretiosus, bonus and jucundus, quem edidit Vir quidam Israelites
sapiens and prudens, ante multos annos, ad docendum and comprobandum in ea
argumentis sufficientibus and evidentibus, quod Fides Christianorum, quem
habent in Deum Patrem, Filium and Sp. Sanctum, atque alia, perfecta, recta, and
indubitata sit, Collocata super fundamentum legis, Prophetarum and
Hagiographorum. Ideo vocavit nomen ejus Saepher aemuna, i. e. Liber fidei, seu
veritatis; ad illuminandum in eo oculos caecorum, and ad ducendum in viam
rectam errantes. Translatus ex lingua Hebraea in linguam Latinam. Opera Pauli
Fagij.

Precationes Hebraicae, quibus in Solennioribus festis Judaei cum mensae
accumbunt, adhuc hodie utuntur: and quo modo, ordine and ritu dicant. Ex quo
videre licet vestigia quae^am ritus veteris populi, quem and Christus Salvator
in S S. coena sua, uti eam Evangelistae, praesertim Lucas, describunt, in
quibusdam observavit.

Parvus Tractatulus ex libello Hebraico excerptus, cui nomen est Saepher
aemuna, id est, Liber fidei, Judaei cujusdem ad Christianismum conversi ante
annos CC. In quo obiter ostendit causas aliquot* propter quas multi Iudaei,
etiam si veritatem agnoscant, ad fidem nostram accedere verentur. Per. P.
Fagium translatus.

Saepher Midoth, id est, Liber Virtutum Germanice compositus, Hebraicis tamen
characteribus exaratus.

Grammatica Heliae Levitae Hebraice, excusa Isnae.

Compendiaria Isagoge in Linguam Hebraeam, Autore Paulo Fagio.

Prima quatuor capita Geneseos Hebraice, cum versione Germanica e regione,
Hebraicis tamen characteribus exarata, Eaque juxta usitatam Judaeorum
interpretationem, ad verbum translata, una cum succinctis in fine adjectis
Scholijs, and ratione legendi Hebraeo-germanica.

Tredecim fundamenta fidei Judaeorum: Quae composuit R. Mosche filius Majemon.
Hebraice excusa, absque ulla vel loci vel temporis notatione praefixa, aut
Subscripta.

In Octavo.
NOmenclatura Hebraica, authore Helia Levita Germano Grammatico. In gratiam
omnium Tyronum ac Studiosorum linguae Sanctae.

[NUM. XLIV.] Dr. Cox, the Chancellor of the University of Oxford, his Oration
at the Conclusion of Peter Martyrs Disputation.
VIRI Oxonienses, peregimus quatuor dimidiatos dies in excutiendis duabus
quaestionibus, de Transubstantiatione scilicet, P. Martyri^ Opera.
and Reali Praesentia corporis Christi in Sacramento. Magno fuit nobis
oblectamento haec Disputatio: atque utinam per tempus licuisset omnia quae hic
dicipossent, audivisse. Quod optabamus, id successit; ut quieta esset
Disputatio. Auditores ita etiam Sedati, Spero Veritatis imbibendae avidi. Qui
fabulam peragebant, and utrinque disserebant, suo officio diligentissime
perfuncti sunt, nec meritis laudibus fraudandi. Viri Nostri, hoc est, Angli and
Oxonienses, praeterquam quod Conscientiae suae negotium egerunt, etiam haud
minimum decus huic Academiae attulerunt, quod in tanta causa non
subterfugerint, quo minus palam testarentur, pro eruditionis suae modulo, and
dono a Dei benignitate sibi impartito, and quid animi in hisce controversijs
haberent, and quibus rationibus and authoritatibus huc perpellerentur.
Pulcherrime sane sibi datam provinciam obierunt. Caeteri vero docti and boni
viri, qui in ijs tantis rebus tacuerunt, nescio quo pacto, suo Silentio
negationis notam sibi inusserunt. Petrus autem, and merito Petrus, propter
constantiae suae firmitatem; Martyr and merito Martyr, propter innumera, quae
nunquam non profert, de veritate testimonia, multam apud nos, and apud pios
omnes inire debet hoc tempore gratiam. Primum, quod immensos Labores
exantlarit, in substinendo Disputationum onere. Nam si ne Hercules quidem
contra duos, quid Petrus solus contra quoscunque. Deinde quod Disputationem
instituerit, vanos vano^um hominum sermones repressit, qui de eo invidiosa
atque odiosa sparserant: nimirum aut nolle, aut non audere sua defendere.
Postremo, quod summorum Magistratuum, atque adeo Regiae Majestatis,
expectationi optime responderit, dum non solum Christi doctrinam, ex ipsis
vivis fontibus Dei propinaverit Academiae, sed neque quenquam (quantum in ipso
situm fuit) fontes aut turbare, aut obstruere permiserit.

Auscultavimus nos hanc Christianam velitationem, quae veritatis indagandae
atque investigandae causa, est suscepta. Qui quidem status, in omni
disputatione, tanquam unicus scopus, ad quem omnes colliment, perpetuus esse
debet. Hanc scrutari oportet omnes, quibus sincera religio cordi est. Quid enim
aliud vult, Scrutamini Scripturas, nisi ex scripturis veritatem indagate?
Caeterum de hisce controversijs sententiam far, and litem prorsus dirimere,
modo non decrevimus. Tum autem decernetur, cum Regiae Majestati, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Proceribus visum fuerit.

Quod si ego, quem vestrum Cancellarium pro vestra humanitate adlegistis, aliam
nunc personam non gererem (Aliam enim Regia authoritas jam mihi imposuit)
optatissime vellem in his propositionibus Fidei meae rationem reddere. Non enim
me pudet Evangelij Christi, neque veritatis, quae ex verbo ejus omnibus lucet:
Quod quidem alias, cum dabitur opportunitas, facere non detrectabo. Inter^a
vero, Vos, peregrinos and alienigenas, siqui sunt modo exhortor, ut domum
vestram revertamini. Nolite perpetuo peregrinari in Patribus and Concilijs,
tanquam in patria vestra. Nolite existimare illa esse vestra principia. Nolite
hallucinari in probabilibus humanae sapientiae verbis. Quaenam principia
habuerunt Patres? Quae Concilia? Quam turpiter in multis lapsi sunt Patres?
Quam faede errarunt Concilia? Errorum hic nolo meminisse, nolo hanc movere
camarinam. Et tamen Patres atque Concilia debent esse Principia Disputationum?
Fuerunt antehac Haeretici, qui negarunt, vel partem, vel totam scripturam. Sunt
and hodie Libertini, qui eadem insania laborant* ij nos^ra Christianorum
principia negant, and conculcant. Qui verbum Dei in altissima specula
constituunt, and in summa veneratione habent, hincque tantum vitam and salutem
petunt, principia tenent firmissima, solidissima, atque sanctissima. Interim
tamen Ecclesia^, and piorum Patrum saluberrima testimonia non rejiciunt, imo
amplectuntur, and venerantur, tanquam radios Sp. sancti, caliginem oculorum
nostrorum aliquo pacto illustrantes.

Quare, obsecro, per vestram salutem, and per Dei misericordiam, tam Juvenes,
quam Senes, ut duo praestare velitis. Prius, ut nunc demum ponatis illas
controversias, quae Ecclesiam Christi multis Saeculis inutili concertatione
turbarunt, and dilacerarunt, de Transubstantiatione, and nescio qua carnali
Praesentia. Nullus est rixandi finis. Hae sunt Diaboli paedicae, quibus nos
perpetuo involvit, and a vera pietate remoratur. Nos vero uti pios decet
Christianos, illud imprimis imo in universum spectemus, quid Christus fecerit,
quid nobis faciendum praeceperit. Cogitemus sacrosancta and tremenda illa
Christi mysteria esse, illa subinde ad salutem nostram usurpemus, ad illa cum
timore and tremore accedamus; ne unquam indign^ veniamus, and ad judicium and
condemnationem nostri accipiamus. Alterum est, ut ad Verbi Dei studium
concedatis. Ad hunc scopum omnia Vestra rela dirigatis: huc omnia studia
referatis; sive philosophica, sive Mathematica, sive rations Medicas, sive
quaecunque alia, huic, tanquam Reginae, ancillentur. Hinc omnem fidem petite:
Hinc religio stabiliatur atque solidetur. Coelum and terra transibunt, Verbum
autem Domini manet in aeternum. Hoc, tanquam Lydio lapide, omnes controversiae
examinentur, atque definiantur.

Porro, unum est, quod Vos omnes admonere debemus, nimirum, ut vale dictis
universis nugis Papisticis, superstitionibus, and simulato Dei cultu, veritati
disquirendae diligentem operam detis, aut saltem, ne impedimento sitis, quo
minus veritatis studiosi in negotio pietatis progrediantur. Scimus enim, and
compertum habemus, nonnullos nimis esse inquietos, and turbidos, and
praepostero zelo incitatos, ad remorandum Veritatis progressum. Scimus aliquos
patris sui exemplum perniciose sequi, dum discordiarum semina passim spargunt,
mendacia fingunt. Scimus falsos and odiosos rumores circumferri. Scimus homines
vanos maledictis agere, cum non possint veris promovere causam suam. Ita
irritabilis est mala consuetudo contra Veritatem.

Verum, ut finem faciam, si ullo veritatis amore afficimini, sedatis animis
illam exquirite, ardentibus precibus a Deo Opt. Max. illam postulate; amica and
candida collatione illam eruite; ferveat in vobis Christiana charitas. Infirmum
in fide, assumite. Debent enim, inquit Paulus, sirmiores imbecillitates
infirmorum sustinere, and non sibi placere. Vnusquisque proximo suo placeat in
bonam aedificationem. Cavete Satanae technas, qui vobis insidiatur, ne
acquiescatis Sermonibus Domini nostri Ies^ Christi; ut deliretis circa
quaestiones and pugnas verborum; ex guibus oriuntur invidiae, contentiones,
blasphemiae, suspiciones malae, etc. Possumus ex authoritate vobis imperare,
and pervicacibus meritum supplicium comminari, malumus tamen pro dilectione
nostra erga vos, rogare and exhortari. Quare siqua consolatio in Christo,
siquod solatium dilectionis, siqua societas spiritus, siqua viscera
miserationis, implete gaudium nostrum. Gaudium nostrum est, quod videmus multos
in hac Academia in bonis literis and pietate insigniter adolescere. Gaudium
nostrum est, quod videmus Vos adeo modestos and ad imperium paratos. Implete
ergo gaudium nostrum, hoc est, Veritatem multis jam seculis, veluti in specu
Trophonij, dilitescentem, eruite. Veritatem adeptam, sincera fide, excipite.
Exceptam autem probis moribus exornate. Sic lucebit Lux vestra coram hominibus,
ut videant opera vestra bona, and glorificent Patrem vestrum, qui est in
coelis. Cui omnis gloria in secula. Amen. Dixi.

NUMBER. XLV. Dr. Treshams Epistle to his Relation of the Disputation between
himself and Peter Martyr, at Oxford.
Praeclarissimis Viris and eisdem Heroibus long honoratissimis Regiae
Majestatis Consiliarijs, Gulielmus Treshamus, Theologiae Doctor, Salutem and
faustum rebus regendis successum.
VEritas ut cunctis rebus mira dignitatis eminentia praepollet, Foxij MSS.
(Prudentissimi ac multo excellentissimi viri) utpote quae suos cultores vere
liberos efficit, summaque ac nunquam intermoritura donat ingenuitate, ita nos
illam in omnibus and super omnia praeferre, venerari, sequi, ac integram and
illaesam omni ^empore servare pro virili oportet. Quod cum ita sit, cumque
perspexissem illam a temerario quodam, and plane deploratae salutis homine
indignissime tractatam, ac summis affectam injurijs, non solum ejusdem
defendendam causam libenter (ut par erat) suscepi; sed and machinas adversarij,
quas in ipsam expugnandam paraverat, evertere ac prors^s confringere sedulo
molitus sum: and nisi vehementer fallor, quod in ea part contendebam
praestiti. Verumenimvero, ne vestrae Celsitudini admodum prolixus videar, ut
quem ego hoc loco per veritatis hostem innuo, designem, Senex quidam delirus
est, subversus, impudens, errorum magister insignis, Petrus Martyr Vermilius.
Is e patria sua primum fugam saciens ad Germanos, dum apud illos vigeret
haeretica pravitas, se contulit, certe ut libidini licentius indulgeret, and
suo potiretur adulterio. Caeterum restaurata illic per Carolum Caesarem
religione, ad nos statim transvolavit. Postremo Oxoniam veniens summa vitae
integritate ad tempus simulata, tandem occasionem (ut putabat) nactus
opportunam, virulenta pestilentis doctrinae Seminaria proposuit. A quibus cum
plurimi plurimum abhorrerent, Richardus Smythus, Theologiae apud Oxonienses
Professor, malum hunc Seminatorem public rep^ehendit, and ejusdem impia
dogmata improbaturus audacem hunc Athletam ad concertandum provocavit. Una in
scholis convenerant, tempus dabatur idoneum: ingens Auditorum turba
confluxerat. Urgebat ad luctum Smythus. Non audet Ps^udomartyr congredi. Rem
prorsus rejicere pudui^, disputare vero piguit. Hinc ad cavilla itum astute
est. Ac primum questiones non nisi suo modo proponi voluit; concessit Smythus.
Tum vero Petrus december dies sibi dari petit, quibus se contra Smythum ad
certamen armar^ possit. Quae enim prius ad december menses palam docuerat, and
argumentis confirmare in publicis praelectionibus conatus est, jam respondere
volenti Smytho, and partem adversam etiam imparato defendere cupienti, eadem
disputando tueri veritus denegavit, neque quicquam penitus agi volebat, nisi
december dies, quibus sese pararet concederentur. Dabantur tandem; Sed Smytho, qui
dolum tum olfecerat, rem aegre ferente. Deinde nominantur judices utriusque
consensu. Dies disputationi praescriptus. Interim Petri, aut certe cujuspiam
ejus asseclarum (ut conjicere licet) industria, apud magistratus suggestionibus
minus sinceris actum est, ut ejusmodi disputationes non haberentur. Qua Petri
art totum eludebatur negotium.

Postea vero elapsis jam aliquot mensibus, ubi aberant Praelectores, nec
quisquam de Disputationibus cogitabat, egregius iste pugil prorumpit subito,
and ad certamen provocat. Quaestiones priores palam disputare vult, arbitratus
tum neminem adesse, qui negotium contra eum susciperet. Quo tempore quia
adversus illum stare volui, cum caeteri, me multo validiores, haud idem eo
saltem tempore faciendum putarent, in me prae caeteris excandescit, in me
durius invehitur, mordaxque caninos infigit dentes, ac, quantum potest,
infamat, editoque libello proponit, quasi in multis ab eo inter disputandum
superatum. Quae cum conspicarer, maxim autem, cum causam Dei erroribus and
mendacijs Petri scandalizari viderem; existimavi operae pretium, and perquam
necessarium facturum me, si ab hujusmodi contumelijs and Christi causam and
meipsum pro viribus desenderem, ac scriptis declararem, quam sit hic in
scribendo falsarius, quam male intellectis abutatur scripturis, quam Patres
invitos ad suum institutum trahat, quam suis facile percutiatur and confodiatur
telis, quam debilibus dum sua roborare vult, innitatur principijs, quam absurda
nonnunquam fateri non vereatur, quamque passim peccet omittendo quae dicta, and
quae non erant dicta adjiciendo; quo videlicet lectores Christiani veritatem
sine fucis percipientes ab hac peste caveant, nec quicquam adhibeant fidei,
cernentes illum errorum spiritu impulsum, ut nos Deo permittente, velut
triticum cribraret, utque qui probati sint manifesti fiant.

Quamobrem hic mearum partium esse judicavi, primum, ut rem omnem quo ordine
diebus illis, quibus cum eo agebam, gesta fuerit plane and simpliciter
legentibus ob oculos ponerem, nec quippiam prorsus meis insererem, nisi quod
exemplaribus notariorum, vel ipsius Petri libello express contineretur.
Deinde, quoad illam partem disputationum, quae inter illum and me ultro
citroque habita est, annotationes quasdam elucubravi, quibus ea omnia quae in
illum jam dixi, vera esse contester. Quod siquis roget, Quorsum ista? aut quid
opus nova scribere? Cur non ista inter disceptandum potius deprompta sunt, and
in adversarium congesta? Dicam cum Augustino, neque sum Angelus, neque
Propheta, ut qui omnia ex tempore proferre atque regerere po^teram. Praeterea,
in disputationibus ipsis non erant hujusmodi inversiones, non adjectiones
novae, non omissiones, non tot ab illo insertae, ut nunc sunt, falsae
sententiae. Sed nec ullae prorsus tum erant calumniose annotationes in margin
scriptae. Quae omnia detegere pal^mque facere pernecessarium duxi. Sed and ipse
Petrus antagonistas suos, quos pro libidine vocat Malevolos, ad scribendum
provocat, ac pollicetur hoc si fecerint, quemadmodum tunc ausus fuit viva voce
congredi; ita and nunc se comparare ad ea quae scripserint, ut respondeat.

Has itaque Lucubrationes vobis (insignissimi Heroes) quos Christus praecipuos
sub potentissimo Rege nostro Edovardo Reipub. judices constituit, exhibendas
esse censui; nihil prorsus ambigens eam esse vestram in omnes veritatis
studiosos benignitatem, eam aequitatem, eam very judicij certitudinem, ut sine
omni personarum acceptione justam causae conditionem velitis semper attendere,
and neque ad dextram neque ad sinistram ulla occasion ducti, quovismodo a
veritate declinare: non ignorantes in illum finem vobis concessam esse
potestatem, tum a summo judice Deo, tum ab ipsa Regia majestate, apud quam pro
vestra in C^ristum charitate agere dignemini, quo mihi indigenae, ac genuino
Regis nostri subdito Christi causam, quoad possum, curanti tantum in evulgando
hoc disputationum ac annotationum Volumine efficere liceat, quantum Petro
Martyri, extraneo, veritatis adversario, audere hactenus fuerit impune
permissum. Rem sane justam, ni fallor, postulo. Neque profecto in scriptis his
est, unde pius quispiam offendatur. In impios autem ut durius agamus exposcit
veritatis ratio, quae nequaquam charitati refragatur. Durius enim contra
errones obstinatos egerunt Patres, nec illis unquam pepercerunt, quin veluti
Christi hosts verbis factisque contemnerent, atque acerbissimis
reprehensionibus persequerentur. Johannes Baptista Pharisaeos incredulos
viperarum vocavit progenies. Christus ipse malos illos Iudaeos mendaces
appellavit, and diaboli filios. Sed and Petrum ipsum a morte obeunda
dehortantem, minusque in hoc sapientem quae Dei sunt, Satanam taxando
nuncupavit. Unde certo edocemur nos posse, citra charitatis praejudicium,
adversarios in causis religionis severis ac mordacibus verbis impetere atque
perstringere.

Denique, haud temere hoc quicquid est opusculi evulgo, sed summae vestrae
prudentiae and eximio candori, qui illi, regum omnium pulcherrimo flori jam
sese auspicatissime diffundenti, a consilijs estis, humilis supplexque ipsum
offero, obnixe vos exoratos habens, ut cum privilegio ad Christi honorem ac
multorum utilitatem divulgetur. Id quod vestrae Dominationes ab illa lucis
aurora, nimirum Serenissimo Rege nostro Edovardo, jam a paterno somno orbem
illustri virtutum omnium lumine spargente, facile spero obtinebunt, and cum
gratia consequentur. Hanc auroram splendidissimam felicissime procedere atque
in perfectum diem crescere, optimaque Optimi patris vestigia imitari, faciat
Deus Opt. Max. qui and illum unicum nostrum decus and praesidium, Vosque sub
ipso Moderatores Reip. primarios, aliosque illius studiosos universos
diuturnissime incolumes servet.

NUMBER. XLVI. The sentencious sayings of Master Martin Bucer upon the Lords
Supper.
F^xij MSS.
1. SO plainly, so faithfully, and also so warely, as can be possible, we ought
to speak of the mysteryes of the holy supper, even as we ought to do of all
other Christ's mysteryes; to the end, that the Children of God may most clearly
perseyve what Christ does mean, and the Adversaryes to have as small occasion
as can be, either to pervert or else to dark and make dymme the truth of Christ.

2. These things we cannot better attain, then by the godly and right
expoundyng of the words of the holy ghost, not allowing any false
sygnyfications of them, both certainly affirmyng the things which be
agreeable unto this mystery, and also denying the things which be contrary
there unto.

3. We must certaynely acknowledge that the holy ghost most clearly, most
faithfully and most warely, has dyscrybed all the sacraments of our salvation.

4. But the holy ghost by Christ's own mouth, by the mouth of the Apostles, and
by the scripture, delyvereth unto us the sacrament of the Lords Supper, even
as he does all other Sacraments, by the words and form of delyveryng,
gevying and receyving.

5. And three things acknowledges hearein to be geven and taken, bread and
wine, being the signs of the body and blood of the Lord, and assurance of the
new testament and remyssion of our sins.

6. For when he had taken bread and wine, and geven thanckes, he gave them to
his dyscyples to be eaten and drunken, and said moreover, that by these signs
he gave therein his body that was offered for us, and likewise his blood, which
was shed for us, saying also, that by this blood the new testament of grace
was assured, and the forgeuenes of sins purchased.

7. And he defyneth or describes the right use and receyving of this Sacrament
to be that partaking of the body and blood of Christ, whereby we being many, are
one bread and one body (as many of us as be partakers of one Bread and one Cup
of the Lord.) This body doubtless is that body whereof Christ is the head, and
into the which we are baptized. For by the regeneration we are made members of
his body, flesh of his flesh, bone of his bones, and so we be one flesh with
him, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.

8. That fellowship which we have with the father and the son, and with all
the saints, whereof S. John speaks, 1 John, 1 chap. of his epistle, is geven
and taken in the Lords supper rightly admynistred and receyved. That unity also
which we have with the father, and the son, and with all the saints, for the
which the Lord prayed, John 17. by the which Christ is in us, as the Father is
in him, and we in them, (I mean in the father and the son) is geven and
receyved in the same supper rightly administered, whereof the Lord also speaks:
he that eats my flesh, and drincketh my blood dwells in me, and I in him.
John 6.

9. This is the partaking and the unity of an heavenlye regeneration, of a new
creature, of the high mystery of God, which cannot be understand and known,
but by faith, even as faith is perceyved and felt by his effects, as by
judgment, will, and by the new heavenly and godly works.

10. All sensyble and worldly imagynations, all fansying of joined or
contynuall places, are to be put away from this partycipation and unytie, which
in the word of God is known to be mervelous, and with reverence to be pondered
and dyscussed by the new man's lyvyng, as by his effects.

11. The Holy Ghost thought it not enough to declare unto us, how that we be
endued with the spirit of Christ by his merits, but he does publish also that
we do lyve by his intercession and working. He furthermore assures us that we
have him with us, that he dwells in our hearts, and that we receyve him in
the holy supper. These be the things which we ought to tell openly and to
fortefye.

12. These are Metaphors and borrowed speeches, like as other whereby we expound
the matters of regeneration. For unto such matters as the natural man
perceyveth not, can no proper names by geven, but such translation of wor^les
as the Holy Ghost does use, and there cannot be devysed more proper, more mete
for the purpose, nor more famous words then they are.

13. It is not mete therefore that we should attempt to expound these Metaphors
with our own proper words, whereof we be all together destytute in matters of
regeneration, neither is it convenyent that we should deface their perfection
with more slender Metaphors, and with such gear as be of kindred to our natural
reason.

14. We must beware that with no superstitious, stately eloquence, we do make
dark the brightness of the Lords commandment, unto such as have their eyes
lightened on every side by faith. We must in like manner take heed we demynysh
not the force and majesty of Christ's sacraments set forth by the Holy Ghost,
rather of us to be beleved, then by our natural reason to be out-searched, as
by the exposition rather proceeding of our own imagynations, then of the very
word of God, and of the nature of his sacraments.

15. The Word is made flesh, that their might be both God and man in one
substance, and such as was a very earthely man, which dyed, rose again from
the dead, ascended into heaven, remains in the heavens, and sytteth on the
right hand of the father, which governs and fulfylleth all things, and in the
sight of all the world he shall come again in the clouds to judge the quycke
and the dead. And they all must needs receyve their own bodies again. All
these things truly do so far pass the reach of man's wit, that of necessitye
we must lay hold of them by faith.

16. Faith, because she is practysed and fortyfyed in the daily use of these
things, causes them clearly and manyfestly to appear, even as she does make
all the other mysteries of Christ, to such as does perfectly beleve. Which
things should be made dark unto us, if we would suffer our selves to make
inquirye of them according to the trade of our own reason, following her
natural princyples.

17. Christ our Lord is for ever both God and man, he is the head of all the
saints, and the first begotten among the children of God. Wherefore we must so
mark with our minds, and expres in words the propertyes of the natures, that
by no manner of imagynations we separate the unity of substance.

18. There is nothing better agrees with it self, then does the word of God,
so that what so ever the scripture speaks of Christ's being among us, of the
receyvyng of him, of his aby ding, and dwelling in us, and eating of him,
agrees all together, and is consonant with these evydent scriptures, openly
declaring that he has forsaken the world, that he is in heaven, yea and that
he has a very body, and therefore lymited and bounden in one place.

19. When we therefore entreat of the mystery, either of the supper of the
Lord, or of Christ's plain presence with us (for why should we not say that he
is present, which dwells in us, and is in the mydst of us) it is to no
purpose to lay against the presence of him such places of scripture, as declare
Christ to have departed from this world, to be in heaven, and to be very man,
havyng a very body, and therefore such a body as is bounded in a place, which
may not be placed in all or many places at one time.

20. For Christ's presence, whether it be offered or declared, either in the
word only or else in the sacraments, is no presence of place, neither of
sensies nor of reason, nor yet no yearthly presence, but it is a spiritual
presence, a presence of faith, and an heavenly presence. For as much as we are
conveyde into heaven by faith, being placed in Christ. So that we lay hold upon
him and embrace him in his heavenly majestye, all be it he be here offered and
declared after a sort unto us in the glass, and dark speaking of sensyble
words and sacraments.

21. The Antichrists make the simple people to beleve by these words, that we
receyve and have Christ here present after some worldly fashion, that is to
say, either enclosed with the bread and wine, or else that he is present under
their accydences, so that there he ought to be honored and worshipped.

22. Let them therefore that be apt to learn, be taught that there is no
presence of Christ in the supper, but only in the lawful use thereof, and such
as is obtained and gotten by faith only. As for the other sort, bid them adieu
as the blind guydes of the blind, and that plantyng which our heavenly Father
has not planted. For such as hear not Gods word, are not borne of God.

23. We must turn away from their disceytes and crafts, from which we ought
verily to withdraw our selves, howbeit they cannot be avoided other ways then
by the true expounding of Gods word, yea and that but only of them, whom the
Lord himself has taught by the ministration he has committed to us.

24. The good men moreover hearing, that Christ in the sacrament is presently
geven, receyved and had, do imagyne a certain presence of place, and many
times they fantsye also, that God himself is bounded in a place, havyng a body,
even as he were a man.

25. They must therefore be contynually taught that these heavenly mysteries do
pass all men's capasityes, and that they must be perceyved and known in the
only word of God, so that all worldly fasions must be far from our minds,
because the word of God declares Christ to be a very man, havyng the body of
a man, in the which body he departed this world, and was carried into heaven, he
may not therefore by no worldly manner be sought for in this world, but after
such sort as he offers himself, being in heaven, to be received of us. Which
things are not known by sense and reason, but by faith.

26. As for these heavens, because they be above all the heavens, I dare not by
the predicamente of our reason discuss what they be, but by the words of the
scripture. But the scripture discribeth them not by the distaunce of places,
but by the majestye of God and his blessedness, openly declaring, that such
heavenly blys has not come into the heart of man.

27. I do not perceyve what further knowledge the holy fathers would geve,
writing of the proper place of Christ's body in heaven, but that we should
observe the propertye of both the natures in Christ. So that as it is the
propertye of the godly nature to be in every place, and to fulfill all things,
even by his substance; so it is the propertye of the nature of man, to be
lymited in place and state, not to be spread abroad in many or in all places
at once. These things agree with the scripture, albeit we place not Christ's
body in heaven after the manner of the fourth book of Aristotle's Naturalls.
Yea, let us hardly keep our selves in such things that the scripture do speak
of the heavens, and of Christ's sytting in heaven.

28. I have a conscience in so high mysteries, to allow such kind of speaking
as is not taught in the scripture, though such be much used, yea and that by
the authority of the holy fathers, for to what point, through such speaking,
the devyll and antychrist has brought us, we all lamentably complain.

29. Wherefore with reverence, and in a true meaning, I will understand the
sayings of the holy fathers as touching the mutation of the signs. I will
never grant their sayings so to be taken, as to mutch strange from gods
word, and after such sort as men might now a days be overthrowen with
Antichrists doctrine into the idolatrye, which of all other is most detestable.

30. So likewise if any thing may be found, that the holy fathers have written
of Christ placed in heaven, more then the scripture does certaynely teach, I
will not without reverence refuse it, nor yet with any man contend therein, for
I have nothing to say that such writing is contrary to any place of scripture.
I do but only desire that no necessary doctrine be made thereof, and that I may
be suffered to abide in the playnes of Gods written word.

31. But they will say, that a man well expert in says, when he hears that
Christ is present in the holy supper, and is geven, receyved, and had with the
bread, cannot refrain but imagine such a presence of Christ in the bread as is
there placed, or else like to such a thing as has a place.

32. I cannot se how the words of the Holy Ghost ought to be reformed,
because of the weakness of our understanding, either that we should allow such
utteraunce of words, whereby it might appear that the Holy Ghost had not
uttered the matter circumspectly and strongly enough, yea and that most aptly
and effectually, as well to the edefying of faith, as to the putting away of
all errors.

33. These now be the words of Christ: Where two or three be gathered in my
name, there am I in the mydst of them. In the name of Christ we assemble
together at the Lords Supper rightly ministered. In the world we be, yea and
somewhere placed, and whersoever we be, Christ is among us, which
notwithstanding is not in the world, and also dwells in our hearts. But we
cannot perse^ve nor attain it, neither by our sense nor by reason, but by
faith. For how can the head be away from his body? Wherefore I defyne or
determine Christ's presence, howsoever we perceive it, either by the sacraments
or by the word of the gospel, to be only the attainyng and perceyving of the
commodities we have by Christ both God and man, which is our head reigning in
heaven, dwelling and lyving in us. Which presence we have by no worldly means
but we have it by faith and take the fruit thereof when it is offered us in the
word, and in the sacraments. But the force thereof we feel in all our parties
and powers, what time by the spirit of Christ they be sanctified and renewed
unto obedience and godly life.

34. He is called present by some knowledge of perceyvyng him, even as one may
be called present with an other, and so we do say, that they be here present,
whom we know by hearing or by sight to be present, but now the thing which we
know by faith, is much more certain then any thing we can know by sense or
reason. Why may not we then say that Christ our head is present with his
members, when we know by faith that he both lives and dwells in us?

35. They say, that the holy fathers expound the scriptures recording the Lords
presence, that Christ by his Godhead, by his majesty, and by his providence, is
present with us, yet lyving in this world. Truth it is, but the Lord says: I
am with you unto the worlds end; and Paul affirms, that Christ lyveth and
dwells in our hearts. Yea and the holy fathers themselves declare, that we
have Christ present in the sacrament of baptism, and in the meat and drink of
the altar, which call that presence carnal that is known by our senses, and
is set over against the presence which we have by faith.

36. Faith truly embraces Christ both God and man, and keeps him present:
which by his Godhead is not only present in the congregation of his saints
and in his members, but is also present in every place. But some cannot be
contented, unles we grant that we have his body and blood really, carnally and
substantially present in the supper.

37. Wise and good men will eschew all uncertain words in every talk and
speaking, how much more are they to be avoided in Christ's sacraments?
Moreover, in the treatise of Christ's sacraments we may justly refuse such
strange words as be not used in the scripture, unles they may be perfectly
applied for the declaration of Christ's truth. For such uncertain words does
more darken the true doctrine, and therefore we must not meddle with them, except
there be some consideration of the using of them.

38. I would wysh these words realiter and substantialiter to be altogether
refused, neither to be allowed in reasonyng to or fro, because we shall seem to
grant their contraries, and to say that Christ is receyved counterfe^tlye and
accyden^ly, if we deny him to be received in the supper really and
substantiallye.

39. If the matter so require that these words be brought into re^sonyng, I
would, for the maintenance of Christ's truth against the adversaries, among the
children of God, defyne these words realiter and substantialiter, as if one
would understand by the presence of the Lord really and substantially, that he
is received verily in deed by faith, and his substance is geven in the
sacrament; but if he would enterlace any worldly presence with these words, I
will deny it, because the Lord is departed this world.

40. I can never admyt or allow these words carnally and naturally, because
they bring in a meaning that he is receyved with our senses.

41. Hereby I think it evydent, agreeable to the holy scripture, and according
to the reverence we owe to God and his scripture, and toward the ancient
church, that we should frame our selves to the words of the Lord, of his
Apostles, and of the ancient Church, and to say that there is geven and
receyved the body and blood of the Lord, that is to say, very Christ himself
both God and man, but he is geven with the word and the signs, but received
with true faith, and that he is geven and received to the end that we may move
and lyve more parfectly in him, and he in us.

42. And I think it an easy thing to make answer, when they say that the thing
which is already, cannot be received, and that he which comes to the Lords
supper, and has not Christ in himself, receives not Christ there, but he
receives death. Truly Christ must be geven and received of us, till nothing of
ours be left in us, but he all thing in us, and we wholly in him, and no part
in our self. And we say that the partaking of Christ, which we have in
baptism, is strengthened and augmented in the Lords supper. But ye will say
the same is done, what time the gospel being read, or heard, is received by
faith. So it is indede, neither has the Lords supper, or geveth, any other
thing else, but that he has left therein things visible, for the visible words
of Christ be applied therein. And they are not without force and effect to the
saints, because they be applied by the Lords ordinance, all whose words and
ordinance, have ly^e and spirit.

43. Wherefore I trust, that hereby men may perceive what I beleve as conserning
the gevyng, ministering, receyving, and partaking of the Lords body and blood in
the supper, which does agree right well with the scripture and with the
doctrine of the ancient church. So that after this manner I acknowledge
Christ, that is to say the partaking of his salvation to be geven and taken in
the ho^y supper.

44. If I be enquired, who geveth and ministers the Lords body, I mean the
lyvely participation of these things and of Christ wholly, I say, that Christ
which is in the midst of his, whose words these be, Take and Eat, is the
chief and principal gever of his own self, and the minister does like service
to him herein when he geveth himself, even as he does when he geveth himself
in the preaching of the gospel, and in Baptism. And for this ministration
sake, Paul justly does write, how he by the gospel had begotten the Corinthes
unto the Lord, and had written Christ in their hearts, and that he had traveled
in birth of the Galathians.

45. As touching the use of bread and wine herein, If I be demanded, I will
answer that they be signs exhibityve, that is to say, such signs as do geve
the things signified, by the which signs the Lord does geve himself, being
the celestial bread of everlasting life, after the same manner as he gave his
disciples the Holy Ghost by the sign of breathing of his mouth, and likewise
as by the laying on of his hands, he gave both bodily health and ghostly
health* Like as he gave sight by the clay made of his spittle, and as he did
give circumcicion of the flesh, and in such sort as he geveth regeneration by
baptism.

46. We have an everlasting life through the faith we have in the love that God
the father has toward us. This faith hereunto leans, is preserved and
increased. For as much as Christ, Gods son, gives himself with all his
merits unto us, lyveth in us, delyvering us from our sins, shall raise us
from the dead, and bring us to a parfyt heavenly and blessed life. For this
cause, that is to say, for the nourishment of this faith, it was the Lords
pleasure to use herein the signs of m^ate and drink, and geve his flesh
spiritually to be eaten by the sign of bread, to be eaten bodily; and his
blood spiritually to be drunk, by the sign of wine to be dronken bodily, and
so (as it is before said) he geveth in the supper the same partaking of
himself by the signs, and by his words, which in the sixth of John by words
onley he has set out.

47. If I be demanded, what manner of joynyng may be betwyxt the glorified body
of Christ and there determinately placed, and the corruptible bread here in
earth, contained in a sensyble place; I answer, even such as is betwyxt the
regeneration and the dipping in the water, and as is betwyxt the Holy Ghost,
and the breath of Christ's mouth, which I do call the joining in the covenant.
For so mutch as they that with a true and lyvely faith be partakers of these
signs bodily, spiritually receive in deed an assurance, with an increase of
the partaking of the Lords body and blood. So they be members of Christ, flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and thereby they grow more and more into
the perfection of the same.

48. Whosoever therefore makes these signs of Christ's presence beside the use
that the Lord has appointed them unto, (which is to be eaten and dronken in
this sacrament,) brings men into abominable rage and madness to set up
idolatry. Neither receives he any thing at all of that food which the Lord
geveth to his, that takes in hand to eat and drink these sacraments without
a lyvely faith in Christ, but receyveth death and dampnation to himself.

49. Such as be altogether ungodly, say I, that in the holy supper they receive
nothing of Christ: such as have faith, and yet make no difference of this meat
(as certain of the Corinthes, which were blamed of the Apostle did,) as I
cannot deny them to receive Christ in the supper through the faith which they
have, even so I will not say that they have eaten Christ. If so be that they do
not rightly practyse their faith by the religious dyfference-making of so high
mysteries, which is the special eating of this meat. For such are like unto
them which taking meat in their mouths, either chew it not, or else, let it
not down, or when it is letten down, digest it not, so that in a little while,
or soon after, they vomit it up again.

50. If I be enquired as concerning the Lords words ( This is my body) what
thing is demonstrate or showed here, I say, that to the senses it is bread, but
to the mind or understanding, it is the Lords body, even as in all speeches
wherein insensible things are exhibited or geven by sensible signs. So that the
meaning is, the thing which by this sign I geve unto you, is my body which is
delyvered for you. As the Holy Ghost speaks of the circumcicion, saying, This
is my Covenant, that is to say, Genesis 17.
the thing that by this sign I ordeine unto you, is my covenant to be
observed betwixt me and you, etc. After such sort are we wont to speak of the
signs which do signifye or betoken a thing, albeit they do not exhibit the
thing they betoken, as when we do say of the Emperors image, This is
the emperor that subdued France, that is to say he is represented by this image.

51. I object or say against transubstantiation: This cup is the new testament;
This, that is to say, Circumcicion, is my covenant, and, the word is made
flesh, we may not conclude and determyne either the Cup or the circumcicion to
be changed into a covenant, and the Word to be changed into flesh. We may
not therefore determyne and conclude by these words of the Lord, which in
gevying of bread did say; Take, this is my body, that there is a change of the
bread into the Lords body. For there is no manner of such speaking, no not in
all the scripture, that do show such an alteration called a
Transubstantiation, as the papists do imagine. For without sure authority of
the scripture, no Article of the faith may be ordained.

52. And so I think it evident, that three things are geven and received in
the Lords supper of them that rightly communicate at the Lords table. First
bread and wine, nothing in themself changed, but that they are, by the words
and the ordinance of the Lord, made all only the signs. Secondly, the self
body and blood of the Lord, that by these we may the more parfectly
communicate in the participation of the regeneration, or rather, to have the
more parfyt partaking of these, or else, that they may be of more perfection in
us. Thirdly, the establishing of the new Testament of the forgevenes of sins,
or of us by election to be made the sons of God.

53. I call the signs, after the mind of Ireneus, an earthly thing. The
partaking of the Lord to be as the effect thereof, I call the establishing of
the new testament the heavenly thing, and therefore to be laid hold upon only
by faith, and not to be wrapped in with any worldly imaginations.

54. And forasmuch as in the supper, we be not all only admonished of one
Christ, and of the partaking of him, but also we do receive him, I had leaver
yet say, according to the Lords words: Take and eat, etc. that in the bread
and the wine, the body and blood is geven, and that they signify the Lord. So
that the bread here, is as well a sign of the Lords body exhibitive, I mean,
which geveth the thing signified, as to be but a bare sign. Wherefore certain
of the fathers have well used herein the word of Representing. For truly I
think we must most chiefly expres the thing that is here most principal. For
this word Accipite, is all together a word of gevyng or delyvering.

The Lord geve us grace that we may all speak one thing to the edyfying of the
faith among us. Amen. Subscribed. Martin. Bucerus D. Professor. Theologiae
Cantabrigiae.

NUMBER. XLVII. Bishop Hoper to the Clergy of his Diocese of Gloucester.
To the glory of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
FOrasmuch as of all Charges and Vocations, the Charge of such as be appointed
to the ministry and function of the Church is the greatest; it is to be
provided and foreseen, E MSto. privato.
that such as be called and appointed to such Vocation and Office, be such as
can satisfy the said Office. Which may be done as S. Paul says, two manner of
ways. The one if they be of sound doctrine, apt to teach, and to exhort after
knowledge, and able to withstand, and confute the evil sayers. The other, if
their Life and manners be unculpable, and cannot justly be blamed: Which
consists in this; if the minister be sober, modest, keeping hospitality,
honest, religious, chaste; not dissolute, angry, nor given to much wine, no
fighter, no covetous man, such as governs well his own house, and gives an
example of virtue and honesty unto others. For as the godly life and
conversation of the Parson, or Doctor, does no less avayle in the reformation
of others, then the doctrine it self; so likewise they, who have no respect nor
regard what evil, mischievous and devilish example of life outwardly appears
to be in them, cannot have in them any just authority to reform or correct the
faults of others. For by what just means can thou reprehend and blame any
other in that fault, wherein thou thy self art to be blamed? Or by what occasion
can thou preach chastity, or desire to have the same in another man, when as
thou thy self, despising both God and holy matrimony, do other nourish or
keep a whore, or concubine at home in thy house, or else must defile other men's
beds? Another is he any thing les to be ashamed, that will persuade others to
Live in sobriety, he himself being drunk. Wherefore what authority shall he
obtain or get unto himelf and his ministry, which is daily seen and marked of
men, to be a common haunter of Alehouses and tavernes, of whores, cards, dice
and such like.

Hereby shall you perceive and know, how that the old Priests and pastors of
Christ's church did by their truth and gravity, subjugate and bring under the
hardnecked and stif, stubborn Ethnicks, and caused them to have the same in
fear. In so much that the wicked Emperor Julian caused the priests of the
Pagans to order their lives according to the lives of the others. But look what
authority and reverence the old severity and gravenes of the Pastors and
Priests did bring unto them at that time, even as much shame and contempt (or
else a great deal more, as I fear) does the Letc^ery, Covetousnes, Ambition,
Simony, and such other corrupt manners, bring unto most priests, pastors and
ministers, that be now in our days, of al men. Wherefore I being not forgetful
of my office, and duty toward God, my Prince, and you, do desire and beseech
al you, for Christ's sake, who commanded that your Light should so shine before
men, that they seeing and perceiving the same, might glorify the father, which
is in heaven,

Give your diligence, Welbeloved brethren, together with me, so that the
dignity and majesty of the order of Priests, being fallen in decay, may not
only be be restored again, but that first and principally the true and pure
worshipping of God may be restored; and that so many souls being committed to
my faith and yours, may, by our wholesome doctrine and cleannes of conversation,
be moved unto the true study of perfect charity, and called back from al error
and ignorance; and finally, to be reduced and brought unto the high Bp. and
Pastor of Souls, Jesus Christ, and to the intent ye may the more easily
perform the same, I have, according to the talent and gift given me of the
Lord, collected and gathered out of Gods holy word, a few Articles: Which I
trust shall much profit and do ye good. And if that any thing shall be now
wanting or lacking, I trust by the help of your prayers and good counsil, they
shall be shortly hereafter performed. Let every one of you therefore take good
heed to approve your selves faithful and wise ministers of Christ. So that when
I shall come to visit the Parishioners committed to my Cure, and come from God
and the Kings Majesty, ye be able not only to make answer unto me in that
behalf, but also unto our Lord Jesus Christ, judge both of the quick and the
dead, and a very streit revenger of his church. Thus fare you well unto the day
of my coming unto you.

NUMBER. XLVIII. Hoper, Bishop of Gloucester, to Sr. William Cecyll Secretary of
State.
THE grace of God be with you, Amen. Syns my coming down, I have been at
Worcestre, gentle Mr. Secreatori, Sr. W.H.MSS.
and thought not to have departid thense, til I had set things in a good
order, as nere as I could. But the negligence and ungodly behavior of the
ministers in Gloucestershire compellyd me to return, except I should leave
them behynd as far out of order, as I should find the other, to whom I am going
unto. I have spoken with the greatest part of the Ministers, and I trust within
these six days to end for this time with them al. For the love of God cause
the Articles, that the Kings majesty spoke of, when we took our oaths, to be
set forth by his autorite. I dout not but they shall do mouch good. For I will
cause every minister to confess them openly before there Parisheners. For
subscribing privately in the paper, I perceave, little avaylyeth. For
notwithstanding that, they speak as ivel of godd faith, as ever they did before
they subscribyd. I left not the Ministers of Gloucestershire so far foreward,
when I went to London, but I found the greatist part of them as far backward
at my coming home. I have a great hope of the people. God send good Justices,
and faithful ministers in the Church, and al will be well.

For lack of head Corn so passith from hens by water, that I fere mouch we
shall have great scarsite this year. Doubtless men that be put in trust, do not
there duties.

The Statute of Regrators is so usid, that in many quarters of these parts it
will do little good: and in some parts, where as license by the Justices will not
be grauntyd, the people are mouche offendid, that they should not, as we^ as
other, bag as they were wount to do.

God be praisid yet al things be quiet, and I trust so will contynew. Thus
desiring God to contynew you long in health to his pleasure, fare ye well: and
for gods sake do one y^re, as ye may be hable to do another. Your health is not
the surest: favor i^ as ye may; and charge it not to far. Ye be wise and
comfortable for others; be so for your self also. I pray you let god be the
end, where unto ye mark in all your doyngs. And if they for lack of knowledge
then happen otherwise then ye would, the thing ye sought shall partly excuse
your ignorancie, that may happ to mysse men in weighty afferes. If ye se the
means godd, and yet ivel follow of them, content your self with patience. For
the second cause, when god will, be it never so like to bring forth the effect,
mysseth her purpose: as ye know by Wise men's counsels, that ruled in Commune
wealths before you. God geve his grace to look always upon him, and then with
mercy let him do his holy will. Glouc. 6. Julij, 1552.

Yours with my daily prayer John Hoper, Busshop of Worcestre.
To the Rt. Honorable my singular frynd Sr. William Cecill Knight. one of the Kings
Majesty's chiefest Secretories.

Another of the same Bishop to the same Person.
Sr. W.H.MSS.
THE grace of God be with you for ever, Amen. I have wroten herewith long
letters to the Council; yet not so long as the matter conteynyd in them doothe
require. I trust it will be your chance to read them, that the matter may be the
better understand. Ye know I am but an ivel Secretary, Do the best ye can they
may be well taken. It is truth that I write, and gods cause. Let god do as his
blessid pleasure is with it. I have send the matters, that these two Canons,
Iohnsonne, and Ioyliffe dislyke, in writing. Where by ye may understand what is
said of both par^es. The Disputation Mr. Harley can make true relation of, and
how unreverently and proudely Ioylyffe usyd both him and me.

For as mouch as my jurisdiction cessith until the Letters patent be past for
both churches, these shall be to pray you to obtain the Kings Majesty's
letters for my warrant in the mean time. For in case I do not at this time take
account of the clergy in Worcestre and Glocestreshire, how they have profityd
syns my last examining of them, it will not be well. Also souch as I have made
superintendents in Gloucestreshire, if I commend not my self, presently, there
well doings, and se what is ivel done, I shall not see the goodd I look for. Ah!
Mr. Secretarye, that there were goodd men in the Cathedral churches! god then
should have mouche more honor then he has, the Kings Majesty more obedience,
and the poor people better knowledge. But the realm wantith light in souche
churches, where as of right it owght most to be. I suppose ye had hard, that
there should be a great spoil made of this church hyre. For what can be so well
done, that men of light conscience cannot make, by suggestion, to appear ivel?
Doutles the things done be no more then the express words of the Kings
Majesty's Injunctions, commandyd to be donn. And I darre say, there is not for
a Church to preach Gods word in, and to mynyster his holy Sacraments, more
godly within this realm. But, Mr. Secretary, I see mouche myschefe in men's
hearts by many tokens, and souch as speak very fere meanith crauftely, and
nothing less then they speak. I have to good experience of it.

Thus god geve us wisdom and strength, wyselye and stronglye to serve in our
Vocations. There is none that eatith there bread in the swet of there face, but
souch as serve in public Vocation. Yours is wounderful, but mine passith. Now I
perceave private labors be but plays, nor private trobles but ease and
quietnys. God be our help, Amen. I pray you send me my jurisdiction as soon as
may be. Worcestre, 25 Octobris, 1552.

Yours, and so will be whylles I live, with my prayer John Hoper, bushope of
Worcestre.
Postscript. When that I perceavyd my request for jurisdiction made before unto
you, upon further deliberation I thought it good to unrequest that again;
praying you to make no mention of it: and thereupon wrote the letters to the
Council anew. The cause is, I send for a President, to se the jurisdiction, how
it is gyven in the like state as I am. Which pleasith me not. Therefore, goodd
Mr. Secretarye, let it pass til I write unto you again.



NUMBER. XLIX. A Popish Rhyme fastened upon a Pulpit in K. Edwards reign.
THis pulpit was not here set,
For knaves to prate in and rayl.
But if no man may them let,
Mischef will come of them, no fail.
If God do permit them for a time
To brabble and ly at their will,
Yet I trust or that be prime.
At their fall to laughe my fill.
Two of the knaves already we had,
The third is coming as I understand,
In all the yerth there is none so bad,
I pray God soon ryd them out of this land.
Prowder knaves was there never none, Foxij. M.S.S.

So false they are, that no man may them trust.
But if God do not send help sone,
They will lay al in the dust.
Al christen men at us now laugh and scorn,
To se how they be taking of hie and low,
But the child that is yet unborn
Shall them curse al on a row.
Now God sped thee well,
And I will no more mell.
The Answer to the Enemy.
A rope is a fytt reward for such rysshe repers,
As have strowed this Church against the Kings prechers.
THE Pulpits are now replenished with them that prech the truth,
And Popish traitors banished, which seemed to you great ruthe.
But if you and the Freers were clean out of this land,
This realm to the last years, full firm and sure should stand.
When such as with you trust shall al ly in the dust,
And rise thereout again unto perpetual pain,
With them that laugh and scorn either at hye or low,
Had better not been borne such evil seeds to sow.
Ye pray God speed them well, and ye will no more mell;
Forsothe ye have said well; But if ye may be known,
Ye are like for to be taken, and quartered like a baken,
And of your friends forsaken, for these sedis ye have sown.
Like as the last year Traitors were known,
By standing in the felds with weapon and swords,
So this year their treason is sown,
In traitorous bills and railing words.
Some of their carcases standith on the gates,
And their heads most fyttely on London bridge.
Therefore, ye Traitors, beware your pates,
For if ye be found, the same way must ye tridge.
God save the Kings Majesty long for to reign,
To suppress al rebels, and truth to maynteyne.
An old Song of John Nobody
I.
IN December, when the days draw to be be short, Privati MS.

After November, when the nights wax noisome and Long;
As I past by a place privily at a port,
I saw one sit by himself making a song.
His last talk of trifles, who told with his tongue,
That few were fast in the faith, I feyned that freake,
Whether he wanted wit, or some had done him wrong.
He said, he was little John Nobody, that durst not speak.
II.
John Nobody, quoth I, What news? thou soon note and tell,
What manner men thou mean, that are so mad.
He said, These gay gallants, that will construe the gospel,
As Solomon the sage with semblance full sad,
To discus divinity they naught adread.
More meet it were for them to milk kye at a fleyke.
Thou lie, quoth I, thou Losel, like a lewd lad.
He said, he was little John Nobody, that durst not speak.
III.
Its meet for every man on this matter to talk,
And the glorious gospel ghostly to have in mind,
It is sothe said that Sect, but much unseemly scalk,
As boys babble in books, that in Scripture are blind:
Yet to their fancy soon a cause will find.
As to live in lust, in lechery to leyke.
Such Caitives count to be come of Cains kind.
But that I little John Nobody durst not speak.
IV.
For our Reverend Father has set forth an order,
Our service to be said in our Seignours tongue:
As Solomon the sage set forth the Scripture,
Our suffrages, and service with many a sweet song,
With Homilies and godly books us among.
That no stiff, stubborn stomachs we should freyke.
But wretches nere worse to do poor men wrong.
But that I little John Nobody dare not speak.
V.
For Bribery was never so great, since born was our Lord,
And Whoredom was never les hated, since Christ harrowed Hell:
And poor men are so sore punished commonly through the world.
Thus would it grieve any one, that good is, to hear tell.
For all the homilies and good books, yet their hearts be so quel,
That if a man do amiss with mischefe they will him wreake.
The fashion of these new fellows, it is so vile and fell,
But that I little John Nobody dare not speak.
VI.
Thus to live after their lust, that life would they have,
And in letchery to like al their long life;
For all the preaching of Paul, yet many a proud knave
Will move mischief in their mind both to maid and wife;
To bring them in advoutry, or else they will strife,
And in brawling about baudery, Gods Commandments break.
But of these frantic il fellows few of them do thrife.
Though I little John Nobody dare not speak.
VII.
If thou company with them they will currishly carp, and not care,
According to their foolish fantacy, but fast will they naught.
Prayer with them is but prating; Therefore they it forbear.
Both Alms deeds, and holiness, they hate it in their thought.
Therefore pray we to that Prince, that with his blood us bought:
That he will mend that is amiss. For many a man full freyke
Is sorry for these Sects, though they say little or naught,
And that I little John Nobody dare not once speak.
VIII.
Thus in no place this Nobody in no time I met,
Where no man then naught was, nor nothing did appear;
Though the sound of a Synagogue for sorrow I swett,
That Hercules through the echo did cause me to hear.
Then I drew me down into a dale, whereas the dumb deer,
Did shiver for a shower, but I shunted from a freyke
For I would no wight in this world wist who I were,
But little John Nobody, that dare not once speak.
NUMBER. L. John a Lasco's Letter from Embden, signifying the dangerous condition
they were in, and the Persecutions they expected.
Clarissimo viro Domino Sicilio, a consilijs and libellis s^pplicibus
Illustrissimi Domini Protectoris: Domino and fratri meo observandissimo.
S. Cum mihi ad alios scribendum istuc esset, facere non potui quin ad te
quoque scriberem, Vir Clarissime, memor videlicet illius, Sr. W. H. M.S.S.
quod te mihi istic delegerim, cui mea omnia nota prae alijs esse velim. Volui
itaque tibi de meo huc reditu significare: nempe me felicissimo itinere, gratia
Domino, usum: and me ex Anglia in Frisiam Orientalem, intra triduum,
trajecisse. Navis praesectum a Domino Protectore nobis additum habebamus, virum
optimum and fidelissimum: qui Dominum Comitem Bremam usque est sequutus, ut
certi aliquid, opinor, ab illo vobis adferat. Ego quae scio ad Dominum
Cantuariensem omnia perscripsi, ut Illustri^^imo Domino Protectori exponat:
quae tibi quoque incognita non fore puto. Scripturus alioqui eadem ad te omnia,
si non id parum necessarium, adeoque and supervacaneum esse judicarem. Nos hic
crucem certissimam expectamus, and ad eam perferendam mutuo nos in Domino
cohortamur, cum invocatione nominis sancti sui: ut per patientiam and fidem,
ferendo, superemus omnia, quae^unque in nos permittere ille volet, ad nominis
sui gloriam, and nostri probationem. Certi illum curam nostri habere, and ita
potentem esse, ut ^mnes omnium hostium phalanges, quicunque sint tandem illi,
unico oris sui verbo sternat momento uno: and rursum ita bon^m, ut ne pilum
quidem temere e nostro capite detrahi patiatur, etiamsi nos totus mundus
impetere conetur. Tamque nobis male velle non possit unquam, quam matter infanti
suo, quam denique oculi quisque sui pupillae mal^ velle non potest: imo vero,
quam non potest non esse perpetuo Deus, Laudandus in omnibus quaecunque in nos
permittit: cum nihil in nos alioqui nisi nostro ipsorum bono, inque nostram
adeo salutem, permittat. Huic igitur nos totos committimus, and cum omni
tolerantia expectamus quicquid in nos permittere ille velit. Si nos ^inc pelli
contingat, scis quinam sit animus meus. Quod si quid tu interea de mea istic
vocatione intellexisti, quemadmodum ad te ex Iermouth scripseram, aut siquid te
adhuc intelligere posse putas, quaeso te, Vir integerrime, ut mihi per amicum
hunc and fratrem meum, Robertum Legatum, gentilem vestrum, civem nostrum,
significare velis. Germania fere tota, praeter Saxonicas, (quas vocant) and
Maritimas civitates, ac Principes aliquot, Interimizat. Helvetij legatos
Caesaris, qui ad repetendum Ducatum Sabaudiae venerant, finibus suis non
auditos, ut dicitur, excedere jusserunt. De me plura hic Robertus noster, Vale.
Uxorem tuam, Dominum Czechum nostrum, Dominum Morosinum diligenter salvere
jubeo: meque vobis omnibus totum ex animo commendo. Raptim. Aemdae, nona
Aprilis, Anno 1549.

Tui studiosissimus, Joannes a Lasco, manu propria.
Cuperem scire number fructus aliquid attulerit, mea illa nondum absoluta ad herum
tuum admonitio, quam tibi a Domino Florentio nomine meo traditum esse non
diffido: and number putes illam mihi porro absolvendam esse. Doctori Turn^ro
multam ex me salutem dicito, quaeso.
NUMBER. LI. A Lasco's request, that those of his church might have a Warrant from
the Kings Council, that they might not be disturbed for not coming to their
parish churches.
Clarissimo Viro Domino Guilhelmo Cecilio, Secretario Regio dignissimo ad
manus.
RUrsum perturbantur quidam e nostra Ecclesia tam in majore, Sr. W. H. MSS.
quam in minore Sudwerk, Vir clarissime, and carceres illis intentantur, nisi
ad suas paroecias veniant. Faciunt autem id non Pastores ipsi, s^d aediles; qui
Praefecti Ecclesiarum vocantur. Qua de re cum Domino Reverendissimo Cancellario
heri egi. Et ille jussit, ut cum tua humanitate agerem, ut ipso praesente in
Senatu hodie a prandio res per tuam humanitatem proponeretur: pollicitusque
est, se nobis adjumento esse futurum in Senatu, ut mandatum in scripto ad omnes
Paroecos and Ecclesiarum praefectos in Sudwerk and sancta Catharina obtineamus,
ne nostri ab illis deinceps, hac in part, molestentur. Sed ejusmodi mandatum
obtineri oporteret, quod per nos illis offerri, qui nostros molestant, and
demum per nos etiam adservari possit: ne deinceps novis rursum mandatis
impetrandis (si forte ita incidat) molesti semper and Senatui ipsi Regio, and
tuae humanitati esse cogamur. Venturus eram ipse ad tuam humanitatem, sed per
gravissimum capitis dolorem profecto non licuit. Mitto tamen ad tuam
humanitatem hunc fratrem nostrum, qui est unus e Senioribus nostrae Ecclesiae.
Oroque ut illum benign audiat and absolvat. Commendo me diligentissime
humanitati tuae.

Tuae prestantiae addictissimus, Joannes a Lasco, manu propria.
[ November. 1552.]
NUMBER. LII. Michael Angelo, Preacher to the Italian Congregation, his complaint
against some of his flock, with a list of their Names.
Clarissimo Domino Sycilio, Serenissimi Regis Angliae, etc. a Secretis; Michael
Angelus Florius Florentinus, Italorum Concionator. S. D.
CUM die^us elapsis meam tibi enarrarem inopiam and necessitatem, Sr. W. H. MSS.
ac meorum Italorum impietatem, mihi imposuisti, ut eorum Italorum nomina, quos
opus erat ut convenires, tibi significarem, and idcirco in calce harum mearum
reperies, and cum absque interturbatione seriorum negotiorum tuorum hos omnes,
una vel separatim, convenire poteris, mihi non exiguum praestabis favorem, ut
te facturum spero. Hi omnes polliciti sunt Reverendissimo Cantuariensi, mihi
omnia necessaria providere, and ab eis de mense Ianuarij accepi tantum, quinque
libras. At postquam viderunt and audierunt me tam aperto Mart adversus Papae
dogmata, hypocrisim and tyrannidem concionantem, ac eorum incredulitatem and
duritiam cordis arguentem, me omnino deseruerunt. Sed hoc fere nihil est. Non
enim ipsi impudentes erubescunt ore vipereo mihi and evangelio Christi (quod
sincere annuntio) detrahere; Et, quo ausu nescio, (cum omnes habeant privilegia
Libertatis, quemadmodum very and naturales Angli, and juraverint eamet servare
mandata, quae servare tenentur Angli omnes,) quotidie audiunt Missas; quas si
audirent Angli, paenas luerent. Et cur isti, ut merentur, non corriguntur? Et
si ipsi quotidie nova privilegia, and novas immunitates a Serenissimo Rege
petere non verentur, and nonnunquam obtinent, cur illis non praecipitur, ut
faveant Evangelio, and abrenuntient Papae, and dogmatibus ejus? In Scriptura
divina jubentur rebels Deo, legibus, and judicibus sanctis, interfici sine
misericordia: ut patet Deuteronomy. 13. and 17. Eliseus ille tam Deo gratus Propheta,
jubente ipso Deo, inunxit Iehu in regem ad hoc, ut and domum Achabi prorsus
extirparet, ac Sacerdotes omnes Baal interficeret. Jure igitur optimo possunt
and debent hii omnes, cum adversentur and Evangelio, and hujus tam Sancti Regis
sanctionibus, nempe pijs. Tuae prudentiae and pietati hoc meum negotium
committendum jure existimavi, cum sis vere unus ex his, quibus ait Dominus and
Servator noster Christus, Elegi vos de mundo, ut eatis, and fructum afferatis,
and fructus vester maneat. Certus igitur sum, quod nihil eorum omittes, quae ad
Dei gloriam, Evangelij laudem, and meam Salutem pertinere agnosces. Vale.

Italorum Nomina,
D. Carolus Rinuccinus. Florentini omnes. D. Guido Cavalcanti. Florentini
omnes. D. Batista Cavalcanti. Florentini omnes. D. Bartholomeus Fortini.
Florentini omnes. D. Azalinus Selvagus. Ianuens. D. Benedictus Spinola.
Ianuens. D. Antonius Bruschetto. Ianuens. D. Christoforus Mediolanensis. D.
Batista Burrone, Mediolanensis. D. Marcus Antonius Erizo. Veneti. D.
Evangelista Font. Veneti. D. Petrus Ciampante. Lucensis. D. Nicolaus de Nale.
Ragusienses. D. Andreas de Resti. Ragusienses.
NUMBER. LIII. Michael Angelo endeavors to appease the Secretary, greatly
offended with him for a gross miscarriage.
Clarissimo Viro, ordinis equestris, Domino Gulielmo Sycilio, Serenissimi Regis
Angliae, etc. a Secretis, Michael Angelus Florius, S. P. D.

SUbodoratus hisce diebus elapsis miram illam tuam charltatem, Sr. W. H. MSS.
qua me pie complecti solebas, magnitudine Labis, qua nunc me commaculari
contingit, victam fuisse; teque adversus me ita excanduisse, ut me scelerosis
omnibus indignitate excellere judicares. Quae cum animo mecum volutare
cepissem, arbitrabar consultum fore, si ad te scriberem, remque omnem, ut se
habet, non ut quorunque impudentium lutulenta ora evomere ausa sunt, panderem.
Sed pendebat animus, and in diversa trahebatur. Nam verebar ne vehementius in
me sevires, audito meo nomine, quod tam paeminosum apud te factum est. Verum
cum rem altius mecum perpenderim, prorsus mutavi Sententiam, tum quia
misantropos non es, tum etiam quia ea opinio, quam de tua pietate, prudentia,
doctrina and mansuetudine concepi hactenus, falsa non me Lactavit spe. Iccirco
his meis ad te litteris provolare audeo, faterique te non injuria me scelerosum
vocitasse, quia exsurgentibus quibusdam nebulis de limosa concupiscentia carnis
meae, and obnubilantibus cor meum, per abrupta cupiditatum cecidi, ac praeceps
cecidi in caenum, voraginem and gurgitem libidinis and immunditiae carnis,
relicto deo, cujus ira invaluit super me. Sed ut memineris, obsecro, Amplissime
Domine, me ex eodem Adamo genitum, ex quo David, ac plerique electi Dei, qui
ejusdem criminibus obnoxij fuere. Ex humo, non ex suamet substantia, ut quidam
falso opinati sunt, Deus hominem condidit, non ex durissimo Lapide aut chalybe.
Quod quidem si perspectabis illum procliviorem aptioremque ad malum reddidit.
Si enim naturam nostram humanam sic Deus condidisset (quod impossible est) ut
nunquam peccasset, melior ipso Deo fuisset, (quod absit:) quia natura quae
potest peccare, sicut and non peccare, si semper vinceret, illi naturae
preponenda esset, quae ideo non peccat, quia impassibilis est. Age dic, ex
terrae limo conditus quis non peccat? Et si bonos omnes suos esse velit Deus,
non tamen illis potestatem peccandi adimit. Et quisquis naturam nostram quam
diligentissime inspexerit, cum Christo filio dei fatebitur, Neminem praeter
unum Deum bonum. In me igitur in hujus criminis f^ecem prolapso naturam,
Amplissime Domine, attend, in te vero, and in alijs ab hac peccati sorde
mundis, gratiam Dei, non naturae virtutem, Laudato. Qui peccantes omnes odisse
quaerit, neque profecto seipsum diligit. Et si quoscunque reos mortis damnari
contendit, neminem vivere patietur. Quis unquam electorum dei tam mundus ab
omni Labecula criminis fuit, cui non opus fuerit quotidie rogare patrem, ut
illi sua remittat debita? Nonne omnes habent, quod plangant, and reprehensione
conscientiae, and mobilitate peccatricis naturae? Et sicut unicuique propter
sua peccata Dei misericordia est necessaria, ita uniuscujusque proprium est
errantium omnium misereri.

Haec perspicua comperies in unigeniti filij dei illo recto sanctoque judicio,
ab eo a Phariseis petito adversus mulierem in adulterio deprehensam; qui and
legem adulteram damnantem comprobavit, and judices caeterosque omnes terrendo
ad misericordiam revocavit. Quaerit Deus Opt. Max., ut regna subvertantur
erroris, non errantes ipsi, and eos ubique jubet spiritu mansuetudinis
instaurendos esse, non odio and persecutione perdendos. Qui igitur vehementi
errantes prosequitur odio, eos perdere, non sanare conatur. Sed video hic te
corrugare frontem audioque dicere, Number frustra instituta sunt potestas regis,
vis gladij cognitoris, ungulae carnificis, arma militis, disciplina dominantis,
and severitas boni patris? Non utique, sed habent ista omnia modos suos causas,
rations and utilitates. Non enim ordinationibus hisce humanarum rerum
adversatur remissio, nec contrariatur indulgentia. Quod si fieri contingeret,
nobis non attulisset Christus suae dulcedinem gratiae, nec tam pijs elogijs
mansuetudinem commendasse^, sed veteris Testamenti severiorem legis vindictam
comprobasset. Sed quid audeo docere Minervam, and noctuas far Athenaes? Nonne
haec omnia in sacris didicisti litteris? Nonne fides, nonne pietas, non haec
tandem ipse te deus edocuit, cum te viti, quae est vita nostra, Christo Jesus
Servatori nostro inseruit? Moses, cui legitur facie ad faciem dominus esse
locutus, missus ad gentes, and ad fratres suos, ire nolebat, and ad aquas
contradictionis quam graviter deum offenderit, Dei ipsius testimonio, novimus
omnes. Aaron, Dei Altissimi Sacerdos idololatriae Israelitarum consentiens, ex
auro and monilibus faeminarum eorum vitulum fabricavit; illi aram extruxit, ac
holocausta immolavit: cui sane facinori simile nec oculus mortalium vidit, nec
auris audivit. Jonas propheta praeceptum sibi, ut Ninivitis praedicaret,
irrupit, ut ad alium locum pergeret, quo missus non fuerat. David rex and
propheta, vir utique secundum cor dei, plus aequo Veneri indulgens, uxorem
rapuit alienam, and virum illius interfici curavit. Simon Petrus, cui Dominus
pollicitus erat claves regni coelorum, cum juramento ipsum dominum suum
negavit. Nec tamen ille pijssimus Deus terrae chasmata aperiri jussit, ut vivi
absorberentur hi qui legem suam violaverunt: ut suo exemplo doceret omnes,
rigorem judicij pietate and clementia frangere.

De fervescat igitur minax tua illa indignatio and formidabilis ira adversus
me, demitte furorem, Vir integerrime, misericorditer me prolapsum corripe, and
cum dilectione saluti meae consule, and prospice. Cujus auxilio, consilio, and
favore nitar, si tu, qui omnium sacra anchora es, (and numinis loco te habent
omnes,) me prorsus tuo destituas auxilio? Quo fugiam extra regnum istud, ut
vitare possim, quia aut carne mea and sanguine meo satientur hostium evangelij
dentes and ora, aut veritatem illius ipse negare cogar? Non veluti primi
parentis Adami est hoc peccatum meum, ut non vetustate, prudentia and pietate
sanctorum dei deleri possit. Cave, obsecro, ne Satanas, per imaginem quasi
justae severitatis, crudelem hanc tibi adversus me suadeat saevitiam. Clamabis
fortassis, me indignum esse hoc tuo favore and auxilio. Fateor, sed recorderis,
rogo, Deum indignos justificare and servare. Pietas igitur commoveat te, ut
velis mihi famulo tuo pereunti opitulari, cujus salus tibi in manu est. Vale,
and been fortunet Christus opt. Max. quod in manibus est, X Kal. Februarij.

NUMBER. LIVE. That the Secretary would p^ocure the Kings letters Patents for a
French protestant, to set up a French printing press.
Clarissimo Viro Domino Guilhelmo Cecilio, Regiae Majestatis Secretario
dignissimo, Domino and fautori observantissimo.
TAmetsi ejusmodi nunc sit valetudo mea in eo luctu meo, Sir W. H. M.SS.
in quo me Dominus, adempta mihi altera mei part, uxore inquam mea,
constituit, ut neque mihi liceat, neque etiam magnopere libeat multa ad multos
scribere, Vir Clarissime; tamen fratribus and amicis id a me postulantibus
negare non potui, ut in fratris hujus gratiam, qui has perfert, paucis te, pro
tua in me benevolentia, meaque in te observantia, interpellarem. Est vir pius
and verae religionis studiosus totius Ecclesiae nostrae Gallicae testimonio;
cuperetque instituere typographicam Gallicam, in usum earum insularum, quae
subsunt Majestati Regiae. Ut Anglica, quae ad religionem pertinent, omnia,
Gallice versa, pro insulis illis excudat. Hac itaque in part tuo patrocinio
juvari postulat; and a me petijt, ut se tuae humanitati commendarem, ut tuis
auspicijs diploma Regium in eum usum obtinere possit. Te igitur oro, Vir
praestantissime, ut illi hac in part tua autoritate adesse velis; cum mea, tum
vero multo magis promovendae religionis causa. Plura non permittit valetudo.
Commendo me tuae humanitati officiosissime. Londini, 24 Augusti. 1552.

Tuae humanitati addictissimus, Joannes a Lasco.

NUMBER. LV. Valerandus Pollanus Superintendent of the Strangers church at
Glastenbury, concerning the state of the strangers Weavers, fixed there.
Vere Nobili Viro ac D. D. Gulielmo Cecilio, Equiti aur ato, Regij Consilij
Secretario, D. ac patrono suo colendissimo.
S. P. Cum his Petrus Wolfus, vir honestus ad vos proficisceretur, Sir W. H.
M.S.S.
putavi non aegre laturam D. T. si de rebus nostris pauca significarem. Alteras
literas, quae ad Cornishium and reliquos procuratores pertinebant, hodie
propter absentiam Cornishij tradidi Regio ministro M. Poais cum Fermario Hyeto,
praefecto hujus oppidi, and alijs Officiarijs, praesente D. Clerc, generoso,
qui est unus ex ijs, qui praesunt (ut dicunt) Justices of paix. Atque hic
generosus, cum Latin and Gallice nosset, pro sua humanitate interpretem egit,
tum mei libelli supplicis exhibiti DD. Consiliarijs; tum nostri pacti cum D.
Duce Somerseti. Viderunt itaque consentire per omnia; and id D D. Consiliarijs
significant per literas; atque illud etiam, quantas commoditates ex his
hominibus sperent. Has literas ipse mecum feram, cum literis eorum qui praesunt
rationibus hujus oppidi, quos expectamus ad proximum diem Iovis. Interea id te
scire volui, ut pro tua pietate memor sis horum hominum, quibus non video qua
ratione impresentiarum possit prospici, quod pascua attinet, nisi Damarium
nobis concedatur utendum fruendum, cum hortorum part aliqua, tantisper dum
alia pascua tradantur. Atque ita decreverat D. Dux, imo etiam fecisset jam,
nisi Cornisbius ille nobis praeripuisset turpissima fraud, cum sciret D. Ducem
aliter decrevisse ante mortem D. Spelt.

Rogamus igitur T. D. per Christum, ut hujus memor, si quisquam agat apud D D.
Consiliarios de pascuis aut de hoc Damario, imprimis horum hominum rationem
haberi cures. Quod si feceris, dignum tua pietate facies, and nos tibi aeternum
devinxeris. Praeterea id T. D. scire cupio, quam turpiter Cornishius nostris
insidiatus sit statim post meum hinc discessum, cujus tamen hortatu ego istuc
profectus eram. Venit, atque affirmans se habere literas a DD. Consiliarijs,
primum blandis verbis, deinde minis nostros cogebat, ut sibi pannos, quos
haberent confectos, darent. Ipse vero ex me audierat oppigneratos omnes. Et ut
non fuissent mihi quod hic moliebatur. Rogamus itaque ne huic quidquam posthac
committatur nostrarum rerum: cum neque nos, nec quod justum est, aut aequum,
amare possit. Haec vera esse ex hoc homine, and ipso M. Poais melius possit T.
D. cognoscere.

Hic Petrus Wolfus, Brabantus, multa passus est, and est homo dignus, cui boni
faveant. Puto eum T. D. quoque notum. Rogo illum adjuvares. Condonabit T. D.
quod tam familiariter agam, tamque inornate. Sed ornare res ipsa negat, nec
fert festinus nuncij abitus. Ego T. D. me and meae ecclesiae causam commendo.
Dominus Jesus T. D. servet, ac augeat. Glasconij, 3 November. 1551.

T. D. observantissimus Valerandus Pollanus, Superintendens peregrinorum
ecclesiae Glascon.

NUMBER. LVI. The Superintendent earnestly desires, that one Cornish might not be
set over the Strangers there, who had already dealt so illy with them.
Vere nobili Viro ac Domino D. Gulielmo Cecillo, Equiti aurato meritissimo,
Supremi Consilij Regij Secretario, Domino, ac patrono colendissimo. In Aula.
S. P. Etsi mihi non dubium est. Sr. W. H. MSS.
T. D. probe memorem esse sermonis nostri postremi de Cornishio, ac deinceps
ejusdem per literas commonefecerim: de eadem re tamen iterum and tertio
appellare nec pudet, nec piget, quoniam ita res exigit. Obsecro, per Christum,
nec id moleste feras, neque rem istam parve estimes.

Cum enim, qui praeesse debent alijs, ipsos integros ac justos imprimis esse
oporteat; tum qui hominibus istis optimis, ac propter Christum tantum
extorribus praefuturi sunt, eos ipsos sane quam integerrimos ac justissimos
esse oportet: ni perire honestissimos viros velitis, atque alio avertere maxima
commoda, quae ab ipsis ad Rempub perventura erant. In Cornishio porr^, nunquam
hi nostri homines, textores, inquam, illi peregrini, vel hilum integritatis and
justitiae, vel candoris deprehenderunt, aut experti sunt* Quapropter illorum
precibus solicitatus, T. D. supplex oro, Velis ita causam ipsorum D D.
Consiliarijs exponere ac commendare, ne Cornishius, quod jam ab ipsis
contendit, assequatur, ut hominibus istis praeficiatur. Mirari satis non
possumus, quanam front id jam audeat, posteaquam adeo nuper turpissimam suam
perfidiam ac malevolentiam prodiderit: nec ignorent, quam aegre illum feramus
omnes, qui etiam idem quod nunc petimus, a D. Duce postulaturi eramus. Causam
autem, and caetera, quae ad hanc rem pertinebunt, ne diutius T. D. meis literis
obtundam, ex hoc tabellario, M. Stephano Le Provost, qui est Diaconus meus in
ministerio Ecclesiae, before cognosces. Obsecro per Christum ut id velis,
atque illi fidem habeas.

Omnes nostri, qui T. D. pietatem ac fidem saepius laudari audierunt, se totos
ac sua omnia tibi commendant. Nec dubito fore commendatissimos, quos Christus
ipse commendat. Itaque desino. Dominus Jesus T. D. suo spiritu semper magis
magisque augeat, ac bonis omnibus exornat* Glasconij Somerset. 9 November. Anno
1551.

T. D. observantissimus Clientulus, Valerandus Pollanus, Superintendens
ecclesiae peregr. Glascon.

NUMBER. LVII. Some account of the present settlement of their affairs.
Ornatissimo Viro, ac D. D. Gulielmo Cicello, equiti aurato, Senatus Regij
Secretioris Secretario, Domino and patrono Colendissimo.
Sr. W. H. MSS.
S. P. Quid in negotio bonorum virorum decreverint rationum praesides, etsi ab
ipsis non dubito te intellecturum; nolui tamen committere, ut hac in part
dignam tua benevolentia observantiam in me desiderares. Res porro sic habet.
Optimus hic Vir ac vere generosus D. Dyer, ut est verae pietatis amantissimus,
ita sane nostram causam, quantum potuit, juvit and promovit. Nihil tamen
impetratum est, praeterquam quod nostrisfacta est potestas in Damarium ducendi
vaccas, donec de pascuis satis sit factum D. Ducis pacto. Triginta etiam domos
jusserunt quamprimum instaurari; ac pecuniam numerarunt, qua aes alienum
dissolveremus, contractum hoc toto tempore, quo tam parce a D. Ducis ministris
numeratum fuit. Sed in tempus futurum parum liberaliter prospectum est. Vix
enim ad bimestre tantum constituerunt, quantum satis sit ad quinque hebdomadas.
Omitto quod cum jam lanae desint, nec quidquam numerarunt hac causa, in brevi
nostris hominibus ne cessandum sit, non parum metuendum sit. Crowchius obtulit
suas: Sed pretio iniquiore, quam possimus sustinere. Nam multo aequiore
possumus a nostris vicinis emere, puta 24 s. quod ille 32 s. aestimat. Ita nos
affligit, and hactenus afflixit penuria pecuniae. Unica spes reliqua est in D.
Dyer, quem long aequiorem expectamus, modo ad nostrorum usum Lanae ipsius sint
accommodae. Nam praeter pretij moderationem; illud etiam addit, quod longum
Solutionis tempus nullo foenore compensari velit. Dominus illi rependat. Utinam
huic bono and pio viro D D. Consiliarij pios homines potius commendas^ent.
Nimis enim metuo, ne cupiditas Cornishij insatiabilis nostris fraudi sit. Nam
quod Damarij partem retinet, ac usum communem cum nostris, id nullo jure ac
nulla causa, vel in speciem honesta, facit: cum sciat vix satis esse ad alenda
30 paria vaccarum. Et cum sibi peteret a D. Duce, non ignoraverit antea D.
Ducem nostris decrevisse, id quod tamen (parum religiose) negavit. Sed testati
sunt Crowchius, Robertus Hyet, and Richardus Pouais ita habere. Proinde non
possumus in eo acquiescere, nisi totum Damarium nostris hominibus liberum sit,
tandiu fruendum, donec singulis tradantur quinque Acrae prati, vel quantum
satis erit ad alendam duas vaccas per integrum annum, sicuti pacto D. Ducis
constat.

Sed de hoc and alijs plura and certiora, cum venero. Tantum hoc oro T. D. ne
sinas offendi D D. Consiliarios magnitudine sumptuum in domuum instaurationem.
Nam ea res nihil hactenus ad me pertinebat. Certe magnae erant hic ruinae. Sed
mirari satis non possum tantos sumptus esse, cum tam parum sit praestitum, id
quod ipsi D. Praesides suis oculis viderunt. Nostri hinc multum damni
acceperunt. Nam cum angustissime habitarent, non poterant Anglas ad nendum,
Anglos ad alia sua artificia, commode ad se recipere. Ipsimet non poterant
tantum operae praestare, quantum alioqui fecissent. Hincque adeo cum vivendum
interea esset, contraxerunt aes alienum Ducis, super quam sperassent, majus. In
quo sane opus erit V. aequitate, ne istis hominibus tam multa debita
imputentur, quandoquidem non ipsorum culpa factum est, sed negligentia
Ministrorum D. Ducis. Boni enim viri nihil magis metuunt quam aes alienum. Quod
si semel, cum domibus and pratis promissis, numeraretur quantum opus est ad
hanc susceptionem totam, extra omnem metum esset, quin facile possent omni aere
alieno Ducis sese liberare.

De me etiam nihil est constitutum, qui 15 mensibus sumptus incredibiles, and
labores incomparabiles pertuli, nec obolum accepi. Est enim mihi familia ampla,
quae vix etiam satisfacit negotijs istorum hominum; quorum causa multae ac
variae profectiones hoc anno suscipiendae fuerunt. Si possem impetrare
quinquaginta libras stipendij, ego pro omnibus sumptibus, and laboribus
praeteritis, contentus essem. Nam ne parum esset negotij, jam etiam imposuerunt
inspectionem operarum in domuum instaurationem. Sed spero T. D. hac in part
favorem suum non denegaturam apud D D. Consiliarios. Quod si sentiam, nihil
vereor quin totum hoc institutum nobis sit futurum Laudi, propter maximas
commoditates, quas huic regno sentient evenisse intra triennium, Domino Jesus
been secundante, uti hactenus caepit. Is T. D. omni felicitate sua beet.
Glasconij 27. November. 1551.

T. D. addictissimus Clientulus, Valerandus Pollanus.
Condonet mihi T. D. quod tam incondite scribam. Non vacat aliter, per tam
multas occupationes; uti testis erit hic generosus Dom. meae diligentiae and
sedulitatis, tum in Ecclesiasticis, tum in oeconomicis nostrorum rebus
procurandis.
NUMBER. LVIII. Mr. Calvin's advise for the rectifying some abuses in our Church*
and University, relating to the alienation and misuse of their Revenues.
A Monseigneur, Monseigneur Le Duc de Sommerset.
MOnseigneur, Je ne vous scaurois assez remercier du receueil tant humain, que
mon homme a trouve envers vous: Sr. W. H. MSS.
non seulement a ce qu'il vous a pleu prendre la poine d'offrir mes Livres au
Roy; mais de tout le rest, en quoy vous pouviez declairer une singuliere
affection d'amitie, que de vostre grace vous aviez desia assez monstree cy
devant. Quant a L'enfant que vous avez receu a vostre Service, je n'eusse point
prins la hardiesse de vous en escrire; si non que j'eusse pense, qu'il avoit
adresse de plus grand bien comme a ussion s'y attendoit. Mais d'aultant plus en
suis je blige a vous, quant je voy que ma faveur a valu quelque chose en cest
endroict. Mais pource que tout ce, que j'eu scaurois esc^ire seroit bien maigre
au pris de ce que est en mon coeur, and aussi que vos bienfaictz meritent
j'ayme mieulx me depporter de vous en fair plus long propos. Seulement je vous
pry, Monseigneur, de me tenir tellement du tout vostre, que si j'avois moien
de vousfaire de bons Services, il ne tiendroit pas a m'y employer, que vous
n'eussiez approbation d'un meilleur v^uloir, que je ne le puis exprimer. Je
vous eusse faict ces excuses plus tossed* ou bien remerciemens, s^il vous plaist
les tenir pour telz: n'eust este le desir que ce gentilhomme avoit de vous
presenter mes letteres. En quoy aussi j'appercois l'amitie que vous plaist
monstrer envers moy, quant ceux qui meritent bien d'avoir acces envers vous,
esperent estre tres bien venus par le moien de mes lettrez

Cependant, Monseigneur, je ne cesseray de vous recommander ce qui vous est de
soy assez cher and precieux: cest que vous procuriez tous jours, and mettiez
poine, que Dieu soit droictement honor and servy. Sur tout qu'il se dress
meilleur order en l'eglise, qu'il ny est pas encore. Car a ce qu'on dit, il a
graud fault de doctrine pour le simple peuple. Combien qu'il ne soit pas ayse
de recouvrer gens propres and idoines pour f ire ceste o^fice; toutefois a ce
que j'entens, il y a deux grandz empeschemens, ausquelz il seroit necessaire de
proveoir. L'un est, que les revenus des Universitez, qui ont este fondez pour
nourrir les escholiers, sont mal d stribuez en party. Car plusieurs sont
nourris de bourses, qui font profession manifest de resister a l'evangile.
Tant s'en fault, quilz donnent esperance de maintenir ce qui aura este la
edify a grande poine and travail.

Le second mal est, que le revenu des Cures est distraict, and dissipe: en
sort qu'il n'y a point pour nourris gens de bien, qui seroient propres a fair
l'office de vrays pasteurs. Et par ce moien on y mest prestres ignorans, qui
emp^rte une grande confusion. Car la qualite des persons engendre un grand
mespris de la parole de Dieu. Et puis quant ilz auroient toute l'authorite du
monde, il ne leur chault guere de s'acquiter. Je vous pry doncque,
Monseigneur, pour fair tousiours advancer en mieulx la reformation, and luy
donner fermite permanente a ce qu'elle tienne: qu'il vous plaise employer
toutes vos forces a la correction de cest abus. Je croy bien, qu'il n'a pas
tenu a Vous, que les chooses n'ayent este mieux reglees de prime face. Mais puis
qu'il est bien difficile d'avoir du primier coup, un estat si bien dress qu'il
seroit a desirer, il rest de tousiours insister pour parfaire avec le temps ce
que est bien commence.

Il ne doit pas fair mal a ceux qui tirent aujourdhuy profit du bien des
eglises, que les pasteurs ayent nourriture su^fisante: veu que chascun se doit
efforcer de les nourrir du sien propre, quant ilz n'auroient poin de quoy du
publicq. Mesme ce sera leur profit de s'en acquiter. Car ilz ne peuvent pas
prosperer en fraudant le peuple de Dieu de la pasture spirituelle, en ce qu'ilz
privent les eglises de bons pasteurs. Et de vostre part, Monseigneur, je ne
doubt pas, quant vous aurez fidelement traivaille a reduire ces chooses en
order, que Dieu ne multiply d'aultant p^us ses benedictions en vous. Mais pour
ce que je me tiens asseure, que vous estes si bien affectionne de vous mesme,
qu'il nest ja besoing en fair plus longue exhortation, je feray fin: apres
avoir supply nostre bon Dieu, qu'il luy plaise vous conduire tousiours par son
esprit, vous augmenter en tout bien, and fair que son nom soit de plus en plus
glorify par vous.

Ainsi, Monseigneur, je me recommande bien humblement a vostre bonne grace. De
Genesve, ce 25 de Juillet, 1551.

Vostre tres humble Serviteur, Jehan Calvin.

NUMBER. LIX. Sir John Cheke to Dr. Parker, upon the Death of Martin Bucer.
I Have delivered the Universities Letters to the Kings Majesty, MSS. C.C.C.C,
Vol. intit. Epist. Viror. illustr.
and spoken with the Lords of the Council, and with my L. of Cant. for Mrs.
Bucer. I doubt not but she shall be well and worthily considered. The University
has not done so great honor to Mr. Bucer, as credit and worship to themselves.
The which if they would continue in, as they cease not to complain, they might
be a great deal better provided for, then they think they be. But now
complaining outright of al other men, and mending little in themselves, make
their friends rather for duty toward learning, then for a deser^ of the
Students, show their good wills to the University. Howbeit if they would have
sought either to recover, or to increase the good opinion of men, they could
not have devised wherein by more duty they might worthily be commended, then in
following so noble a man with such testimony of honor, as the child ought to
his father, and the Lower to his Superior. And although I doubt not, but the Kings
Majesty will provide some grave learned man to maintain Gods true learning in
his University, yet I think not of al learned men, in all points, ye shall
receive Mr. Bucers like; whether we consider his deepnes of knowledge, his
earnestnes in religion, his fatherliness in life, his authority in knowledge.
But what do I commend you to Mr. Bucer, who knew him better, and can praise,
whom ye knew, trulier?

I would wish, that that is wanting now by Mr. Bucers death, they would by
diligence and wisdom fulfill in themselves: and that they herein praised in
others labor to obtain themselves. Whereof I think ye be a good stay to some
unbrideled young men, who have more knowledge in the tongues, then experience
what is comely, or fit for their life to come.

I pray you, let Mr. Bucers books and scroles unwritten be sent up and saved
for the Kings Majesty: that he choosing such as shall like him best, may return
the other without delay: Except Mrs. Bucer think some other better thing to be
done with them, or she should think she should have loss by them, if they
should not be in her ordering.

I do not, Mr. Parker, forget your friendship showed to me aforetime; and am
sorry no occasion serves me to show my good will. But assure your self, that
as it lies long and takes deep root in me, so shall the time come, I trust,
wherein ye shall understand the fruit thereof the better to endure and surelier to
take place. Which may as well shortly be, as be deferred. But good occasion is
al. The Lord keep you, and grant the University so much increase of godliness
and learning, as these causes may compel unwilling men to be ashamed not to do
for them. From Westmester, 1551. Mar. 9.

Your assured, Joan Cheke.

NUMBER. LX. Peter Martyr to Bucer, concerning the Oxford Act, Anno 1550.
Quibus artibus instituerint Disputationem Theologicam in Comitiis Oxoniensibus.
S. D.
AD tuas prolixas literas, mihique eo nomine suavissimas, brevi hac mea
Epistola rescribo: Ex Bibliothe^. C.C.C.C.
partim, quod Tabellarius citius reditum aggressus est, quam ego speraveram;
partim, quod res, de qua me vis cogitare, non est praecipitanda, sed potius
quam diligentissimo examine opus habet. Curabo itaque ut quam primum, si certus
homo, cui recte possim literas dare, se offerret, quid ea de re sentio,
rescribam. Gaudeo itaque vehementer Disputationes istas hunc habuisse
successum, quem sua Providentia Deus illas habere voluit. Vix enim mihi
polliceor, cum non adessent Visitatores, aut ulli graves Judices potuisse
magnum fructum, ex illis, vel ad Scholam, vel ad Ecclesiam redire. Non quasi de
viribus, donisque tibi divinitus collatis, quicquam dubitem, aut bonitati
causae diffidem, sed quod istorum consilium videam. Satis est illis pugnasse.
Qui postea mendacia spargunt. Nunquam desunt. Et Diabolus omnia curat efferri,
and per sua membra honorificentissime amplificari. Quare non miror, si Christus
ab initio disputationes Apostolicas miraculis confirmavit. Utinam quandoque
dignet istos obfirmatos, suaque cordis duritie gehennae addictos, eadem
potentia coercere, qua per Paulum Elymam Magum repressit: quando non possunt
alia ratione adduci, ut veritatem, instar Magorum Pharaonis, non oppugnent, and
suis praestigijs offuscare nitantur.

Quid mihi acciderit, in nostris Comitijs, paucis accipe. Sunt creati
Baccalaurei Theologioe, quos ego de more* praesentavi: Cumque illis, ut fit,
disputandum esset public, Respondentem Papistam constituerunt. Opponentes item
Papistas, quaestionemque disputandam, maximo silentio suppresserunt: cum soli
eam inter se communicassent. Totamque id fiebat, ne illam ego possim
cognoscere. Cumque ad eam publicandam exstimularentur, dicebant, ad me non
pertinere: Satis esse, ut eam disputaturi inter se nossent. Denique pridie ejus
diei, quo disputandum erat post meridiem secunda hora, ut arbitror, questionem
publicarunt, and ad valvas Templi affixerunt. Volebant autem defendere suam
beatam Transubstantiationem, atque corporis Christi impanationem. Utque me
Arbitrum recluderent, alium, ut loquuntur, patrem sibi deligunt Doctorem
Chedzeum. Ibi Opponentes omnia mea produxissent argumenta. Respondens, ut visum
esset, diluisse^. Opponentes se dixissent esse contentos allata solutione.
Pater loco meo suppositus omnia vehementer approbasset. Mihi vero ea die aut
nullus locus dicendi datus esset: (Nam postremae omnium ad noctem istae
disputationes habendae erant, postquam Jurisperiti suas parts egissent: Nam
illi Doctorem ea die inaugurabant:) Aut siquid mihi dicere licuisset, in ipsa
ferme nocte dicendum erat, omnibus jam Auditoribus, and fessis and abeuntibus.
Comitia soluta fuissent, and undique victoriam conclamassent, quasi suam causam
Oxonij pulcherrime defendissent. Fu^tque tanta hominum turba in his Comitijs,
ut vix credi possit. Quotquot enim poterant, undique literis acciverant.
Aderant inter alios Capellanus, ut vocant, Wintoniensis, Doctor Seton, and
Capellanus Episcopi Dunelmensis.

Istae sunt Adversariorum technae. His fraudibus pugnare volunt. Sed nescio quo
modo, ex insperato noster Vicecancellarius, sive quod timuerit aliquam turbam
sive aliqua alia de causa, quae me latet, interdixit, ne illa die Theologi
disputarent. Ego aderam paratus in arena consilium capere, fretus Domini
auxilio, quod in eo articulo maximae necessitatis, and os and linguam esset
daturus.

Haec ideo scripsi, ut nostrorum Antagonistarum arts intelligas, and nequid ab
ijs simplici animo fieri credas.

Fuit eo tempore hic mecum vester Vicecancellarius afflicta valetudine: visus
tamen est nonnihil recreari. De te multum locuti sumus: G. Haddon.
and ille inter alia sibi pollicebatur, quod si per valetudinem ei licuisset
Cantabrigiae esse, cum illa inter te and Yungum acciderunt, potuisset illum
hominem facile ad modestius agendum adducere. Cupio illum restitutum, cum tibi,
ut video, optime velit, and Religionem candide amplectatur. Uxor mea, Deo
gratia, convaluit, quod mihi and commodum est and jucundissimum; and quod ita
tibi sit gratum, ut scribis, ingentes ago gratias. Agnetem tuam, Nicolaumque
salutes, and tuum illum Socium, qui nobiscum fuit, meo, uxoris, and Iulij
nomine, qui omnes, una cum Domino Subdecano, and Domino Carowo, te cumprimis
magna salute impertiunt. 20 Septembr. 1550. Oxonij.

Tuus in Christo, Petrus Martyr.

NUMBER. LXI. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning their review of the book of
Common Prayer.
Censura a libri Communium Precum.
Ex Bibliothec. C.C.C C.
S. D. Hoc tempore nil mihi potuit, aut optatius aut jucundius, evenire, quam ut
censuram tuam viderem librorum sacrorum. Quare, quod eam ad me dignatus sis
mittere, gratias immortales ago. Jam rogatus sueram, ut ipse quoque annotarem,
quodnam mihi de eo videretur. Et cum, propter ignotam mihi linguam, fuisset
data Versio D. Cheeki legenda, ut potui de ea colligere, annotavi quae digna
correctione visa erant. Sed quia in versione mihi tradita, complura deerant,
ideo multa praeterij, de quibus in meis Annotationibus nihil dixi. Haec deinde
cum de tuo scripto deprehendissem, in ejusmodi libro contineri, mihi doluit;
quod jam ante duos aut tres dies meam Censuram Reverendissimo, qui me pro ea
urgebat, attulissem. Caeterum hoc demum remedium adhibui: Quae de tuo scripto
cognovi defuisse in meo libro, summatim collegi: and cum eadem, quae tu
reprehendisti, mihi quoque non ferenda viderentur, ea in breves articulos
redegi: exposuique Reverendissimo, qui jam sciebat haec ad D. Episcopum
Eliensem te scripsisse, me in his omnibus capitibus, quae illi offerebam, in
articulis notata, consentire tecum, ut mutarentur.

In prioribus autem Adnotationibus omnia ferme, quae te offenderunt, a me
fuerant adnotata. Exemplum quidem ad te nunc mitterem: sed non habeo ita
descriptum, ut illud possis legere. Tantum sum miratus, quomodo praeterieris de
Communione aegrotorum id reprehendere, quod statutum est, si eo die fiat, quo
in Dominico habetur coena Domini, tum Minister partem ciborum secum deferat.
Atque ita Communionem in domo Aegrotantis administret. Qua in re id me
offendit, quod ibi non repetunt, quae praecipue ad coenam Domini pertinent;
cumque, ut tu quoque sentis, arbitror, verba coenae magis ad homines, quam aut
ad panem, aut ad vinum pertinere. Monui omnino mihi videri, ut coram aegroto,
and simul cum eo communicantibus, omnia, quae ad coenam Domini necessario
requiruntur, and dicantur, and agantur. Et sane mirandum est, quomodo ea,
conspectu aegroti, verba dicere graventur, cui maxim utilia sunt, cum
inutiliter eadem repetere velint, quando inter communicandum in Templo vinum in
poculo deficere contigerit, cum homines qui adsunt, and sacramenta sumunt, illa
jam audiverint. Haec sunt, quae putavi alicujus momenti, and cur omiseris, non
satis intelligo. In omnibus autem, quae censuisti emendanda, tuae sententiae
scripsi. Et gratias Deo ago, qui occasionem suppeditavit, ut de his omnibus
Episcopi per nos admonerentur. Conclusum jam est in hoc eorum Colloquio,
quemadmodum mihi retulit Reverendissimus, ut multa immutentur. Sed quaenam illa
sint, quae consenserint emendanda, neque ipse mihi exposuit, neque ego de illo
quaerere ausus sum. Verum hoc non me parum recreat, quod mihi, D. Checus
indicavit; si noluerint ipsi, ait, efficere, ut quae mutanda sint mutentur, Rex
per seipsum id saciet; and cum ad Parliamentum ventum suerit, ipse suae
Majestatis authoritatem interponet.

De Wintoniensi jam actio quarta in judicio habita est; neque dum respondet,
alio spectat, quam ut se a Contumacia purget. Verba ejus a Papisticis
hominibus, ut docta and acuta praedicantur: a veris autem and sanis judicibus,
vafra, subdola, alien^ a causa, and, ut uno verbo dicam, sophistica. Quod mihi
etiam ^it verisimile, cum illum in rebus Theologicis non aliter agere
animadverterim. Verum quicquld sit, causa omnino existimatur casurus.

Quae de Hoppero ad me scribis, non potuerunt non videri mira. Certe illis
auditis obstupui Sed been habet, quod Episcopi meas literas viderunt, unde
invidia ego quidem sum liberatus. Et illius causa sic jacet, ut me ioribus and
pijs nequaquam probetur. Dolet, dolet inquam, mihi gravissime talia inter
Evangelij professores contingere. Ille toto hoc tempore, cum illi sit
interdicta concio, non videtur posse quiescere; suae sidei confessionem edidit,
qua rursus multorum animos exacerbavit. Deinde queritur de Consiliarijs, and
fortasse, quod mihi non refertur, de nobis. Deus selicem Catastrophen non
laetis actibus imponat.

Doctor Smithus, quondam Oxonij Professor* qui me de votis Monasticis
praeterita jam aestate lacessivit, nunc librum, Anglice scrip^um, contra
Dominum Cantuariensem edidi^ de re Sacramentari^. De quo, cum lingua mihi sit
ignota, nequeo judicare. Sed tamen sensum ejus, and ineptias, brevi cognoscam.
Nam scribit se etiam sub prelo habere, qua^ contra me de eadem re composuit.
Quanquam haec ego vel parum vel nih^^ mo^or, cum a Satanae atque Papae
Mancipijs nihil nisi mendacia expectem. Peccata nostra me terrent, atque
pertenuis Evangelij fructus: Necnon ex altera part Caesaris Successus, quem
Severissimam Dei virgam esse video. Et inter haec mala nostris Peregrinorum
ecclesijs vacat nugari.

Est enim inter illas de Templo a Rege concesso exorta magna contentio: adeoque
sunt animi eorum implacabiles, and eo exarserunt, ut eorum dissidium per
Concilium Regium sit dirimendum. Precor Deu^ ut res non male juxta merita cadat.

Multo antea voluissem discedere: sed hodie tandem abeundi facultatem
impetravi. Scriptum tuum Petro Alexandro tradam, ut id tibi, cum ipsum
perlegerit, remittat. Tibi vero interim, and omnibus tuis, cuncta salutaria and
felicia precor, una cum Iulio, qui vos plurimum salvere jubet. 10 Jan. 1551. Ad
Lambeth.

Tuus in Christo, Petrus Martyr.
Clarissimo and eruditissimo D.D. Martino Bucero, Theolog^ae Professori regio,
mihi plurimum observando, Cantabrigiae.
NUMBER. LXII. The Archbishops letter to procure Wolf, the Printer, a license to
publish his Book.
Sr. W. H. MSS.
AFter my very hertie commendations. Thies be to signify unto you, that Rayner
Wolf, at my desire, has fully fynyshed the printing of my Book, for answer to
the late Bishop of Winchesters, written against mine of the Doctrine of the
Sacrament. And forasmuch as both printing and selling of any matiers in
thenglishe tongue is prohibited by a Proclamation set furthe, onles the same
matier be first allowed by the Kings Majesty, or vi. of his Majesty's privey
Counsel, as you shall more plainly perceyve by the Proclamation, which herewith
I send unto you: Therefore I hertily pray you to be a Suitor to the kings
Majesty, or to the privye Counsel, that Mr. Rayner may have license for the
printing and selling of my said Book accordingly. And the same so obtained to
send me with convenient speed. For in the beginning of the Term I thinck it
were very necessary to be set furthe, for the contentation of many, which have
had long expectation of the same. As Soon as I shall receyve advertisement, when
the Kings Majesty will be at Hampton court, I will come thither to see his
Grace, and do my duty toward the same. Thus fare ye hertily well. From my
Manor at Croydon, the xxix. of September, 1551.

Your Lovynge Friend, T. Cant.
To my very lovynge friends, Mr. Cecill, one of the Kings Majesty's two
principal Secretaries. Or to Mr. Cheek.
NUMBER. LXIII. Articles, whereunto Wylliam Phelps, Pastor and Curate of Ceciter,
upon good advisement and deliberation, after better knowledge geven by Gods
grace and goodness unto him, has subscribed, consented and aggreed, willingly
without force, compulsion, and all manner of impulsion; and is willing and
desirous to set forth the same to his parishoners, for the better edifying of
them, and declaration of his new aggreement to Gods verite and holy word.
Foxij MSS.
FIrst, That the holy word of God does acknowledge, confess, maintain, avouch,
hold and defend, that in the holy Sacrament and Communion of Christ's precious
body and blood, the very substance, matter, nature and condition of bread and
wine, do remain after the words (as they be commonly called) of Consecration,
as verily and truly as they were in substance and matter bread and wine before:
Although that the use of the bread and wine in the Sacrament be changed* For
whereas before it was common bread and common wine, n^w by the virtue of Gods
word it is made the Sacrament of the precious body and blood of Christ, and a
Seal, confirmation, and augmentation of Gods mercy and gracious promise to al
men, that receive it in the Faith of Christ Jesu, with hatred of sin, and
intent, purpose and mind to live always a virtuous life. And that is the very
Transubstantiation and change* that God delights in, in the use of the
Sacraments, most, that we should earnestly and from the bottom of our hearts,
be converted into Christ, and Christ's holy commandments, to live a christen
life, and to die from sin, as he gave us example, both by his life and doctrine;
and means not, that the bread and wine should in substance be turned or
converted into the substance of his body and blood, or that the substance of
the bread should be taken away, and in the place thereof to be the substance,
matter, and corporal presence of Christ's corporal, holy, humane and natural
body.

Item, That the same holy word of God does confess, hold, defend, acknowledge
and maintain, that the very natural, substantial, real and corporal body of
Christ, concerning his humanity, is only and soly in heaven, and not in the
Sacrament and Communion of his precious body and blood. But whosoever worthily
with true repentance, and lively faith in the promise of God, receives that
holy Sacrament, receives Sacramentally by faith all the mercies, riches, merits
and deservings, that Christ has deserved and paid for, in his holy blood and
passion. And that is to eat Christ and to drink Christ in the holy Sacrament,
to confirm and Seal Sacramentally, in our Souls, Gods promises of eternal
Salvation: that Christ deserved for us, not in, or by, his body eaten, but by,
and for, his body slain and killed upon the Cross for our Sins: as S. Paul
says Col. 1. Ephesians. 1.3. Ebru. 2.7, 8, 9, 10.

As for eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, really, corporally,
materially and substantially, it is but a carnal and gross opinion of man,
besides and contrary to the word of God, and the articles of our faith, and
christen religion: that affirms his corporal departure from thearth, places
it in heaven above at the right hand of God the father Almighty, and keeps,
retains, holds and preserves the same corporal body of Christ there, til
the general day of judgment, as the word declares: From thence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

And that heretofore I have been in the contrary opinion, and believed my self,
and also have taught other to believe the same, that there remained no
substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament, but the very self same body and
blood of Christ Jesu, that was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, and hanged upon
the Cross, I am with all my heart sorry for mine error, and false opinion,
detesting and forsaking the same from the bottom of my heart, and desire God
most heartily in, and for, the merits of his dear sons passion, to forgive me,
and al them that have erred in the same false opinion by and through my means:
Praying them in the tender compassion and great mercies of God, now to follow
me in truth, verite and singleness of Gods most true word, as they were
contented to follow me in error, superstition and blindness, and be no more
ashamed to turn to the truth, then they were ready to be corrupted by falsehood.
If the holy Apostle S. Paul, and the great Clerk, S. Augustine, with many mo
Noble and virtuous members of Christ's church, were not ashamed to return,
acknowledge and confess, their error and evil opinions; what am I, miserable
creature of the world, inferior unto them both in knowledge, holiness and
learning, that should be ashamed to do the same? Nay I do in this part thank
God, and rejoice from the bottom of my heart, that God has revealed unto me
the truth of his word, and geven me leave to live so long to acknowledge my
fault, and error: and do here before you protest, that from henceforth I will,
with all diligence and labor, study to set forth this mine amended knowledge, and
reconciled truth, as long as I live, by the help of God in the holy Ghost,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Advocate. To whom be
al honor for ever and ever, Amen.

Subscribed and confirmed 29 of April 1551. in the presence of John Bp. of
Gloucester, and diverse other there present.
NUMBER. LXIV. The Archbishop to the Lords of the Council concerning the Book of
Articles of Religion.
AFter my very humble recommendations unto your good Lordeships: Sr. W. H. MSS.
I have sent unto the same the book of Articles, which yesterday I receyved
from your Lordeships. I have sent also a Cedule enclosed, declarynge briefly my
mind upon the said book: besechynge your Lordeshipps to be means unto the
Kings Majesty, that all the Bushops may have authority from him, to cause all
their Prechers, Archdecons, Deans, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, with all their Clergy, to subscribe to the said articles. And than I trust, that
such a concord and quyetness in religion shall shortly follow thereof, as else
is not to be looked for many years. God shall thereby be glorified, his truth shall
be avaunced, and your Lordeships shall be rewarded of him, as the setters
forward of his true word and gospel. Unto whom is my daily prayer, without
ceasynge, to preserve the Kings Majesty, with all your honorable Lordeships.
From my house at Forde the 24 of this present month of November.

Your Lordeshipps ever to command T. Cant.
To my very good Lords of the Kings Majesty his most honor able Council.
NUMBER. LXV. The Archbishop nominates certain persons for an Irish Archbishopric.
To my very Lovinge friend Sir William Cecyl Knight, one of the Kings
Majesty's principal Secretaries.
THough in England there be many meet men for the Archbushopricks of Ireland,
yet I know veraye few, Sir W. H. MSS.
that will gladly be persuaded to go thither. Nevertheless I have sent unto you
the names of iiij. Viz. Mr. Whiteheade of Hadley, Mr. Tourner of Caunturbury,
Sir Thomas Rosse, and Sir Robert Wisdom. Which being ordinarily called, I
think for conscience sake, will not refuse to bestow the talent committed
unto them, wheresoever it shall please the Kings Majesty to appoincte them.
Among whom I take Mr. Whiteheade for his good knowledge, special honesty,
fervent zeal, and politic wisdom, to be most meet. And next him Mr.
Tourner, who, besides that he is merry and witty withal, nihil appetit, nihil
ardet, nihil somniat, nisi Iesum Christum; and in the lively preaching of him
and his wourde declares such diligence, faithfulness and wisdom, as for the
same deservithe much commendation. There is also one Mr. Whitacre, a man both
wise and well learned, Chaplain to the Bushopp of Winchester, very meet for
that office, if he might be persuaded to take it upon him.

I pray you commend me unto Mr. Cheke, and declare unto him, that mine ague,
whither it were a quotidian, or a double tertian (whereof my Physicians doubted)
has left me these two days, and so I trust I am quite thereof:
Notwithstanding my water keapithe still an high color. Now the most danger is,
that if it come again this night, it is like to turn to a quartane. However
the matter chance, the most grief to me is, that I cannot proceade in such
matters as I have in hand, according to my will and desire. This Terrenum
Domicilium is such an obstacle to all good purposes. Forasmuch as I perceave
that the Kings Majesty's progress is altered, I pray you send me the gests of
the latter end of his Progress, from this time unto the end, that I may from
time to time know where his Majesty shall be; whom I beseech Almighty god to
preserve and prosper in all his affairs, with his most honorable Council, and al
his court. From my manor of Croydon, the xxvth. of August 1552.

Your own assured T. Cant.

NUMBER. LXVI. That Mr. Turner, intended for the Archbishopric of Armagh, was come
up to court.
To my lovynge friend Sir William Cecyl Knight, one of the Kings Majesty his
principal Secretary.
Sir W. H. MSS.
AFter my very hearty recommendations, Now at the last against his will, Turner
is come up unto the court. He preched twice in the camp, that was by
Canterbury: for the which the rebels would have hanged him; and he seemed than
more glad to go to hanging, than he does now to go to Armachane, he alleged so
many excuses, but the chief is this, that he shall prech to the walls and
stalls, for the people understande no English. I bear him in hand Yes; and yet
I dowte whether they speak English in the dioces of Armachane. But if they do
not, then I say, that if he will take the pain to learn the Irish tongue (which
with diligence he may do in a year or two) than both his person and doctrine
shall be more acceptable not only unto his dioces, but also through out al
Ireland. I commytt him to your cure praying you to help him to have as ready a
dispach as may be, for he has but a little money.

I have sent the book of Articles for Religion unto Mr. Cheke, set in a bettre
order, than it was, and the titles upon every matier, adding thereto that which
lacked. I pray you considre well the articles with Mr. Cheke, and whether you
think best to move the kings majesty therein before my coming; I refer
that unto your two wisdoms.

I pray you let me have your advise unto whom I might best write concerning
Rayner Wolf; for I wot not to whom I might write, but to my Lord of
Northumberlande. The everlyvynge god ever preserve you in this life, and in the
life to come. From Croydon the xix th. of September. [Anno 1552.]

Your assured friend, T. Cant.

NUMBER. LXVII. Wherein the Archbishop justifies himself and the rest of the
Bishops against the charge of Covetousnes.
To my Loving friend Sir William Cycil, one of the Kings Majesty's principal
Secretaries.
AFter my most hearty commendations and thanks, Sr. W.H.MSS.
as well for your gentyl Letters, as for the copy of the Pacification, and for
your good remembrance of the two matters, which I desiered you not to forget,
the one concerning the B. of Colens lettres, and the other, Mr. Mowse: for
whom eft-sonnes I gyve you my most hearty thanks.

As for your Admonition, I take it most thankfully, as I have ever been most
glad to be admonished by my friends, accomptynge no man so folish as he that
will not hear frendely admonishments. But as for the saying of S. Paul, Qui
volunt ditescere, incidunt in tentationem, I fear it not half so much, as I
do stark beggary. For I took not half so much care for my lyvynge, when I
was a Scholar of Cambrige, as I do at this present. For although I have now much
more revenewe, yet I have much more to do withal; and have more care to lyve
now as an Archbuschope, than I had at that time to lyve like a scholar. I have
not so much as I had within ten years passed by CL l. of certain rent, beside
casualties. I pay duble for every thing that I bye. If a good Auditor have
this accoumpt, he shall find no great surplusage to wax rich upon.

And if I knew any B. that were covetous, I would surely admonyshe him, but I
know none, but al beggars, except it be one, and yet I dare well say, he is
not very rich. If you know any, I beseech you to advertise me, for peradventure
I may advertise him bettre than you. To be short, I am not so doted, to set my
mind upon things here, which neither I can carry away with me, nor tarry long
with them. If time would have served, I would have written of other things unto
you, but your servant making have, compels me hear to cut of the threde;
besechynge almighty god to preserve the Kings Majesty with all his council and
family, and send him well to return from his progress. From my Manor of
Croydon the xxj. of July.

Your own ever, T. Cant.

NUMB. LXVIII. Purchases made by the Archbishop. Extracted out of K. Edwards
Book of Sales. Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Sexti primo.
The name of the Purchaser. The some of Money for the purchase. The Lands. The
yearly value of the lands. The rent reserved. The time of the issues. The
Test of the Patent. Thomas Archiepiscopus Cantuar. In consider. promis. Dom.
R. H. VIII. and perform. Test. sui, ac in escamb. Manner. and Parc. de Mayfeld
in Com. Sussex. ac diverse. al terr. and ten. in Com. Midd. Hertf. Kant. Buck.
and Ebor. ac pro summa Rect. de Whalley, Blackborne and Rachdale in Com. Lanc.
nuper Monastio sive Abbie de Whalley in eodem Com. Lancastr. modo dissolut.
dudum spectan. and pertinent. ac diverse. al. terr. and ten. in Com. Lanc. Kant.
Surr. London, Bangor, etc. CCCClxxix1. 2d. ob. lv1. xiiijs. vj d. q. A festo S.
Michael. Arch. Ao. xxxvijo. H. viijui. Test. xxxjo. die Augusti. Thomas Cranmer
Archiepiscopus Cantuar. v c. iiijl. viij s. iiijd. Manner. de Sleford in Com.
Lincoln, and manner. de Middleton Cheny in Com. Northam. ac diverse. al. terr.
and ten. in Com. Northam. and Lincoln. xl. vjs. iiij d. xv l. Nichil. A festo
Annunc. B. Marie Virgin. ultimo praedicto. iiij l. xvs. viij d. Thomas
Archiepiscopus Cantuar. iiijc. xxixl. xiiijs.ijd. Et in complement. Testi Dom.
Regis H. VIII. and in consider. Servicij. Scit. nuper Prioratus de Arthington
in Com. Ebor. ac diversa alia Maneria terr. and ten. in Com. Ebor. Not. and
Kant. v l. viijs. iiij d. lj l. xvijs. iiij d. xv l. vijl. xs. x l. xvj s. j d.
ob. xijs. vj l. j d. xxxiij s. iiij d. xvjs. viijd. A festo S. Michaelis Arch.
ultimo praeterito. Test. vjto. die Junij.

[NUM. LXVIII.] An Instrument of the Council, swearing and subscribing to the
Succession, as limited by the King.
EDWARD.
WE whose Names be underwritten, MSS. D. Will. Petyt.
having heretofore manitimes heard the Kings Majesty, our most gracious
Sovereign Lords earnest desire and express Commandment, touching the Limitation
of the Succession in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and others his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions; and having seen his Majesty's own Devise touching the
said Succession, first wholly written with his most Gracious hand, and after
Copied out in his Majesty's presence, by his most high Commandment, and
Confirmed with the Subscription of his Majesty's own Hand: and by his Highness
delivered to certain Judges, and other learned men to be written in sul Order:
DO, by his Majesty's special and absolute Commandment, eftsoons given us,
aggree, and by these Presents signed with our hands, and sealed with our
Seals, promise by our Oaths and Honors to observe, fully perform and keep al
and every Article, Branch and Matter contained in the said Writing, delivered
to the Judges and others, and subscribed with his Majesty's hand in six several
places; and al such other matters, as his Majesty by his Last Will shall appoint,
declare, or command, touching, or concerning the Limitation of the Succession
of his said Imperial Crown. And WE do further promise, by his Majesty's said
Commandment, never to vary or swarve, during our lives, from his said
Limitation of his Succession: But the same shall to the uttermost of our powers
Defend and Maintain. And if any of us, or any other, shall at any time
hereafter (which God forbid) vary from this Aggrement or any part thereof, We
and Every of us, do assent to ^ake, use and repute him for a Breaker of the
common Concord, Peace and Unity of this Realm, and to do our utmost to se him
or them so varying or swerving, punished with most sharp punishment, according
to their deserts.

T. Cant. T. Ely. Wynchester. Northumberland. I. Bedford. I. Suffolk. W.
Northampt. F. Shrewsbury. F. Huntyngdon. PEMBROKE. E. Clynton. T. Darcy. G.
Cobham. T. Cheyne. R. Rich.
John Gate. William Petres. Joan Cheek. W. Cecyll. Edward Mountagu. John
Bakere. Edward Gryffyn. John Lucas. John Gosnald.
These are the Names, with which this Instrument is signed: but there be no
Seals.




The Kings own Writing, directing the Succession. My Devise for the Succession.
MSS. D. Will. Petyt.
FOR lack of issue for my Body, to the L. Fraunceses heir Masles, if she have
any such issue before my Death. To the Lady Jane, and her Heir Masles. To the
Lady Katerins Heir Masles. To the Lady Maryes heir Masles. To the Heirs Masles
of the Daughters, which she shall have hereafter. Then to the Lady Margarets
heirs Masles. For lack of such issue to the Heir Masles of the Lady Ianes
Daughters. To the heir masles of the Lady Katerins Daughters, and so forth til
you come to the Lady Margarets daughters heirs masles.

If after my Death, their Masle be entered into eighteen years old, then he to
have the whole Rule and Governance thereof.

But if he be under 18, then his Mother to be Governess, til he enter 18 years
old.

But to do nothing without the Advice and Aggrement of Six, Parcel of a Council
to be pointed by my last Will, to the number of Twenty.

If their Mother die before their Entry into Eighteen, the Realm to be governed
by the Council. Provided, that after he be 14 years, al great matters of
Importance be opened to him.

NUMBER. LXIX. A Letter of Q. Jane's Council to the Lord Rich, L. Lieutenant of
the County of Essex.
AFter our right hearty commendations to your Lp. Although the matter contained
in your letters of therle of Oxfords departing to the Ladi Mari, Sr. W.H.MSS.
be grevous unto us for diverse respects, yet we must neades give your Lp. our
hearty thanks for your redi advertisement thereof. Requiring your Lp.
nevertheless like a Noble man to remain in that promise and steedfastnes to our
Sovereign Lady Queen Ianes Service, as ye shall find us redi and firm with all
our force to the same. Which neither with honor, nor with saftie, nor yet with
duty we may now forsaake. From the Toure of London, the xix th. of Iulie, 1553.

Your L. assured loving friends, T. Cant. T. Ely, Canc. I. Suffolk. Pembroke.
William Paget. Winchester. Arundel. T. Darcy. T. Cheyne. W. Petre S. Io.
Bakere. I. Bedford. F. Shrewsbury. Rychard Cotton. Io. Cheek. Robert Bows.


NUMBER. LXX. Queen Jane to Sir John Bridges, and Sir Nicolas Poyntz, to raise
forces against a rising in Bucks.
JANE the Queen,

TRusty and Welbeloved, we great you well. Foxij. MSS.
Because we doubt not, but this our most lawful possession of the Crown, with
the free consent of the Nobility of our realm, and other the States of the
same, is both plainly known and accepted of you, as our most loving subjects:
Therefore we do not reiterate the same, but now most earnestly will and require,
and by authority hereof warrant you, to assemble, muster and levy all the power
that you can possible make, either of your servants, Tenants, officers or
friends, as well horsemen as footmen, reserving to our trusty and right well
beloved Cousins, the Earls of Arundel and Penbroke, their tenants, servants,
and officers: and with the same to repair with all possible speed toward
Buckinghamshire, for the repression and subduing of certain tumults and
rebellions moved there against us and our Crown, by certain seditious men. For
the r^pression whereof we have given order to diverse others our good subjects,
and gentlemen of such degree as you are, to repair in like manner to the ^ame
parties. So as we nothing doubt but upon the access of such our loving subjects
as be appointed for that purpose, to the place where this Seditious people yet
remain, the same shall either lack hearts to abide in their malicious purpose,
or else receive such punishment and execution, as they deserve, seking the
destruction of their native country, and the subversion of al men in their
degrees by rebellion of the base multitude. Whose rage being stirred, as of
late years has been seen, must needs be the confusion of thole common weal.
Wherefore our special trust is, in your courage, wisdom and fidelities in this
matter to advaunce your self both with power and speed to this enterprise in
such sort, as by our Nobility and Council shall be also prescribed unto you. And
for the sustentation of your charges in this behalf, our said Council by our
Commandment do furthwith give order, to your satisfaction: as by their letters
also shall appear unto you. And besides that, we do assure you of our special
consideration of this your service to us, our Crown, and expressly to the
preservation of this our Realm and commonweal. Yeven under our signet at our
Toure of London, the xviij. day of July, the first year of our reign.

NUMBER. LXXI. The Counselors of Q. Jane, their letter to the Lady Mary,
acknowledging her Queen.
Sir W.H.MSS.
OUR bownden duties most humbly remembered to your most excellent Majesty. It may
like the same to understand, that We, your most humble, faithful and obedient
Subjects, having always (God we take to witness) remained your Highness true and
humble Subjects in our hearts, ever sythens the death of our late Sovereign Lord
and Master, your Highness brother, whom God pardon; And seeing hitherto no
possibilite to utter our determination herein, without great destruction and
bludshed, both of our selves and others, t^l this time; Have this day
proclaimed, in your city of London, your Majesty to be our true natural
Sovereign Liege Lady, and Queen, Most humbly beseeching your Majesty to pardon
and remit our former infirmities, and most graciously taccept our meanings;
which have been ever to serve your Highness truly: And so shall remain in all our
powers and forces to theffusion of our bludds: as thies bearers, our very good
Lords, therle of Arundel, and L. Paget can, and be ready more particularly to
declare. To whom it may please your Excellent Majesty to give firm credence.
And thus we do, and shall daily pray to Almighty God for the preservation of
your most royal person long to reign over us. From your Majesty's city of
London this day of July, the first year of your most prosperous Reygne.

Thus endorsed by the hand of Sir Will. Cecyl. Copy of the letter to the Queen
from Baynards Castle, 20 July 1553.
NUMBER. LXXII. The Archbishop to Mrs. Wilkinson, persuading her to fly.
Foxes Acts.
THE true Comforter in all distress is only God, through his son Jesus Christ.
And whosoever has him, has compa^y enough, although he were in a wilderness al
alone. And he that has twenty thousand in his company, if God be absent, is in
a miserable wilderness and desolation. In him is al comfort* and without him is
none. Wherefore I beseech you, seek your dwelling there, whereas you may truly
and rightly serve God, and dwell in him, and have him ever dwelling in you. What
can be so heavy a burden as an unquiet conscience, to be in such a place as a
man cannot be suffered to serve God in Christ's religion? If you be loath to
depart from your kin and friends, remember, Mar. 3:
that Christ calls them his mother, sisters and brothers, that do his fathers
will. Where we find therefore God truly honored according to his will, there we
can lack neither friend, nor kin.

If you be loath to depart for slandering Gods word, remember, that Christ, when
his hour was not yet come, Joh. 4.
departed out of his country into Samaria, to avoid the malice of the Scribes
and Pharisees; and commanded his Apostles, that if they were pursued in one
place, Mat. 10.
they should fly to another. And was not Paul let down by a basket out at a
window, to avoid the persecution of Aretas? 2 Cor. 1^.
And what wisdom and policy he used from time to time to escape the malice of
his enemies, the Acts of the Apostles do declare. And after the same sort did
the other Apostles. Albeit, when it came to such a point, that they could no
longer escape danger of the persecutors of Gods true religion, then they showed
themselves, that their flying before came not of fear, but of godly wisdom, to
do more good, and that they would not rashly, without urgent necessity offer
themselves to death: Which had been but a temptation of God. Yea, when they
were apprehended, and could no longer avoid, then they stood boldly to the
profession of Christ: Then they showed, how little they passed of death: How
much they feared God more then men: How much they loved and preferred the
eternal life to come, above this short and miserable life.

Wherefore I exhort you as well by Christ's commandment, as by the example of him
and his Apostles, to withdraw your self from the malice of yours and Gods
enemies, into some place where God is most purely served. Which is no
slandering of the truth, but a preserving of your self to God and the truth,
and to the society and comfort of Christ's little flock. And that you will do, do
it with speed, lest by your own folly you fall into the persecutors hands. And
the Lord send his holy spirit to lead and guide you, whersoever you go. And all that be godly will say, Amen.

NUMBER. LXXIII. The words and sayings of John Duke of Northumberland, spoken by
him unto the people at the Towerhill of London, on Tuesday in the forenoon,
being the 22d. day of August immediately before his death; as hereafter
follows.
GOod people, I am come hither for to die this day; for the which al you are
come hither to see. Titus. B. ^*
And that although this is most horrible and detestable* yet justly have I
deserved the same; for that I have been most grievous sinner unto Almighty God,
and to all the whole world, and to the Queens grace: In as much as I did presume
of my self in the plain field to bear armor against her Grace. Wherefore I do
acknowledge that I have offended her laws; and that justly she might have put
me to death, without any Law, had she so pleased. But of her most clemency has
weighed my death by a law, which justly has condemned me. But the more, I
trust, for my Salvation, and the more better for me; to consider the greatness
of my sins. And therefore the better for my Salvation.

And forasmuch as I am permitted to speak my conscience, this I do protest
before God, the World, and al you, that this my death has not been altogether
of mine own procuring, but has been incensed by others; Whom I pray God to
pardon, For I will not name, nor accuse any man here.

And now I shall show how I have been of a long time led by false Teachers,
somewhat before the death of K. Henry VIII. and ever since: Which is a great
part of this my death. Wherefore, good people, beware, and take heed, that you
be not led and deceived by these seditious and lewd Preachers, that have opened
the Book, and know not how to shut it. But return home again to your true
religion, and Catholic faith, which has been taught you of old. For since the
time, that this new teaching has come among us, God has given us over unto
our selves, and has plagued us sundry and many ways, with wars, commotions,
tumults, rebellions, pestilence and famine: besides many more great and
grievous p^agues; to the great decay of our common wealth. Wherefore, Good
people, be obedient unto the Queen her laws, and be content to receive again
the true Catholic faith; from which of long time you have been led. Examples we
have of Germany: Which in like manner being led and seduced, how are they now
brought to ruin, as well it is known to the world. And also we are taught by
our Creed, in the latter part of the same: Where it is said, We believe in the
holy Ghost, the holy Catholic faith, the Communion of Saints. Thus you may see
the Articles of our belief do teach us the true faith Catholic. This is my very
faith and belief. And these were in my heart, as my Lord Bp. [ Hethe of
Worcester] can testify. Neither was I commanded thus to speak, but even of mine
own free will.

And then he went to his prayers, and dyed.

NUMBER. LXXIV. Archbishop Cranmers Letter to the Queen, sueing for his pardon in
the Lady Janes business.
MOst Lamentably mourning and moaning himself unto your Highness, Thomas
Cranmer, Letters of the Martyrs.
although unworthy either to write or speak unto your Highness, yet having no
person, that I know to be mediator for me, and knowing your pitiful ears ready
to hear al pitiful complaints, and seeing so many to have felt your abundant
clemency in like case, Am now constrained most lamentably, and with most
penitent and sorrowful heart, to ask mercy and pardon for my heinous folly and
offense, in consenting and following the Testament and last Will of our late
Sovereign Lord K. Edward VI. your Graces brother; Which, well God he knows, I
never liked; nor any thing grieved me so much that your Graces brother did. And
if by any means it had been in me to have let the making of that Will, I
would have done it. And what I said therein, as well to the Council, as to
himself, diverse of your Majesty's Council can report: but none so well as the
Marquess of Northampton, and the L. Darcy, then Lord Chamberlain to the Kings
Majesty. Which two were present at the Communication between the Kings Majesty
and me. I desired to talk with the Kings Majesty alone, but I could not be
suffered: and so I failed of my purpose. For if I might have commoned with the
King alone, and at good leisure, my trust was, that I should have altered him
from his purpose, but they being present my labor was in vain.

Then, when I could not dissuade him from the said Will; and both he and his
Privy Council also, informed me that the Judges, and his learned Counsil said,
that the Act of entayling the Crown, made by his Father, could not be
prejudicial to him: but that he being in possession of the Crown, might make
his Will thereof; This seemed very strange unto me. But being the sentence of the
Judges, and other his learned Counsil in the Laws of this realm, (as both he
and his Counsil informed me) methought it became not me, being unlearned in the
Law to stand against my Prince therein. And so at length I was required by the
Kings Majesty himself to set to my hand to his Will; Saying, that he trusted,
that I alone would not be more repugnant to his Will then the rest of the
Council were. Which words surely grieved my heart very sore: And so I granted
him to subscribe his Will, and to follow the same. Which when I had set my hand
unto, I did it unfainedly and without dissimulation.

For the which I submit my self most humbly unto your Majesty, acknowledging
mine offense with most grievous and sorrowful heart, and beseeching your mercy
and pardon. Which my heart gives me shall not be denied unto me, being granted
before to so many; Which travailed not so much to dissuade both the King and
his Council, as I did.

And whereas it is contained in two Acts of Parliament, as I understand, that I
with the Duke of Northumberland, should devise and compass the deprivation of
your Majesty from your royal Crown, surely it is untrue. For the Duke never
opened his mouth to me, to move me any such matter. Nor his heart was not such
toward me, (seeking long time my destruction) that he would ever trust me in
such a matter, or think that I would be persuaded by him. It was other of the
Council that moved me, and the King himself, the Duke of Northumberland not
being present. Neither before, neither after, had I ever any privy
communication with the Duke of that matter, saving that openly at the Council
table, the Duke said unto me, that it became not me to say to the King, as I
did, when I went about to dissuade him from his said Will.

Now as concerning the state of religion, as it is used in this realm of
England at this present, if it please your Highness to license me, I would
gladly write my mind unto your Majesty. I will never, God willing, be author of
Sedition, to move Subjects from the obedience of their Heads and Rulers: Which
is an offense most detestable. If I have uttered my mind to your Majesty, being
a Christian Queen and Governor of this Realm, (of whom I am most assuredly
persuaded, that your gracious intent is, above al other regards, to prefer Gods
true word, his honor and glory) if I have uttered, I say, my mind unto your
Majesty, then I shall think my self discharged. For it lies not in me, but in
your Grace only, to se the Reformation of things, that be amiss. To private
subjects it appertains not to reform things, but quietly to suffer that they
cannot amend. Yet nevertheles to show your Majesty my mind in things
appertaining unto God, methink it my duty, knowing that I do, and considering
the place which in time past I have occupied. Yet will I not presume thereunto
without your Graces pleasure first known, and your License obtained. Whereof I
most humbly prostrate to the ground, do beseech your Majesty, and I shall not
cease daily to pray to Almighty God for the good preservation of your Majesty
from al Enemies bodily and ghostly, and for the increase of al goodness heavenly
and earthly, during my life, as I do and will do, whatsoever become of me.

NUMBER. LXXV. Cardinal Poles Instructions for his Messenger to the Queen.
Instructions for Master Thomas Goldwel.
Cotton Library, Titus B. 2.
MAster Goldwel. After ye have made my most humble Salutations, with all due
reverence to the Queens Highness on my behalf, and presented my Letters to the
same, then pleasing her Grace to hear your Commission given by me, and to
understand the cause why I do send you to her, ye may expound the same in that
form that follows.

First of al, Seeing that the whole cause of my sending you to her Highness at
this time is grounded upon the request, that her Grace makes unto me in her
letters sent me these days past from the Emperors court, dated in London the
xxviij. of October, in the Latin tongue: Whereunto her G. does demand answer of
me in two points: One is, touching the difficulty she fears, by signs she
sees already, touching the renouncing of the title of the Supremacy of the
Church in her Realms, when it shall be put forth in the Parliament: Which signs
be, that whereas her Majesty already has caused to be put forth to the
Parliament the abolishing of those laws, which concerned the annullation of the
Legitimate matrimony of the gracious Lady, the Queen Mother to her G. the same
passing the Upper house, and put forth to the Lower, albeit in the effect they
would not refuse to aggree to all that might make to the establishing of the
right of her G. to the Crown, yet they did not gladly hear of the abolishing
especially of that law, that gave that title, of the Supremacy of the Church in
the Realm, to the Crown: Suspecting that to be an introduction of the Popes
authority into the Realm: Which they cannot gladly hear of. And for this cause
cannot gladly hear of my Legation in the Popes Name: Whereupon her G. in the
same letters does exhort me to stay my voyage until a more opportune time: And
asks my counsil, in case the lower House make resistance in the renouncing of
the title of Supremacy, what her G. were best to do, and what course she had
best to take:

One other point is, that her G. desires in the same letter to be certified by
me, how it came to pass, that a Commission given by her to Mr. Francisco
Commendone in secret, was published in the Consistory; as her Graces Ambassador
resident in Venice, does certify her:

These be the two points, wherein her G. requires my answer: And for to obey
her demand, which to me is a Commandment, I do send you, not only to present my
letters, but also my mouth, and with these present Instructions, for more
satisfaction of her G. in all points.

As touching the first point, which is of most weight, and so great touching
the honor and wealth of her G. both spiritual and temporal, as none can be
more; ye shall show her G. that my first advise and counsil shall be, to obtain
of God by prayer, that which I pray him to give me writing this; Which is, to
have Spiritum Consilij and Fortitudinis. And this her G. must now pray for;
that as in the attaining the Crown, his high providence showed by manifest
tokens to have given her these two graces; so in the maintaining thereof, he will
confirm these two gifts in her mind. Her Highness knows, if she had relented at
that time for any peril, when that both man's counsil and force were against
her, she had lost. So if she for any fear do relent, and do not renounce the
title of Supremacy, which took the name of Princess and Right heir from her;
she cannot maintain that she has gotten already by the spirit of Council and
Fortitude. So that my first counsil is this, that obtaining by prayer these two
gifts, which her G. had at that time, to show her self no less ardent in the
leaving of the title of Supremity, for to maintain her right, then the King her
father was in the acquisition thereof, to the privation of her right. Which so
much more she ought to do, and be more fervent in this, then her Father was in
that; Because that was done against al law both of God and man; and this that
her Majesty does now, showing her self most fervent herein, does fulfill both
Gods law and man's. And that is her very duty, if she should loose both state
and life withal. As she has known she ought to do, by the example of the best
men of her realm. Which for this cause, resisting the Kings unlawful laws,
lost both.

And now the goodness of God putting no such hard conditions to her G. nor
laying before her eyes only Praemia futura with loss of temporal, as he did to
those men, but praemia coelestia with terrena joined together: That serving to
the honor of God, which is in this point to render the title of Supremacy of
the church in earth, to whom God has given it, she does establish her own
Crown withal: If now she should relent herein for any fear of men, being
brought to that state, that other men should rather fear her then she them,
especially in so good a cause; this before God and men were most perpetually to
be blamed. Wherefore what my Counsil is herein, on this manner now rehearsed, you
may inform her Highness.

Now to come to the execution of the thing. After her G. is determined to have
it done, casting away al fear, the same stondeth to have it put forth, and
causing it to pass by the Parliament; this is another council necessarily to be
pondered; Consisting the whole after my opinion in the proponement of the
person, that has to put forth the same, that with les difficulty, and more
favor it may pass.

Here ye may say, that I much pondering the same, and considering, that it must
be a person of Authority, that should propone the same, if it should take
effect; When I look in my mind upon al them I know of the Lords both Spiritual
and Temporal, and persons of the Lower House, that might have authority; I do
see none, but that other he has defended the contrary cause by his Sentence
and writing, as the Spiritual men have done; which takes away a great part of
authority to persuade others, when men hears them accepting that matter, that
aforetime they have oppugned: Or else to speak of the Temporal Lords, or
others, being al entangled with private profit, enjoying goods of the Church by
rejecting the authority of the same, they cannot speak with that freenes of
spirit, as such a matter requires. Wherefore ye may conclude with her G. mine
opinion herein; that after long consideration hereof, I see no person but one,
that is able, with authority and also favor, to propone this matter. And that
person is her G. her self. God having brought it to her hand alone: She being
in this matter, and al other immaculate, and without blot, ordered of God to
defend his cause, and her own withal.

And this, ye may say, the Counsil that it pleased God to put in my mind is,
that her G. do in this case as I remember the Emperor did in his own case,
passing by Rome, whereas his mind was to justify his quarrel touching the war
betwixt him and the French king before the Pope and the Cardinals. When doubting
if onye other person should propose the same, it might have contradiction of
that party that did favor France, he determined without any conference either
with his Council or others, to put forth the matter himself. And so when another
the Pope, nor no other looked for any such thing, his Holiness and the Cardinals
being now congregate, he entered in among them in the Consistory, and made a
long Oration, in justifying his cause, and obtained that he would without any
resistance.

Underneath this manner my poor advise should be, that her Majesty should
personally come into the Parliament, and put forth the same her self, and I dare
be bold to say, what for her authority, and the justnes and the equity of the
cause it self, she shall have no contradiction. And if need were also to show
her self to the Lower house, the thing it self so near touches her wealth,
both godly and temporally, that it would be taken rather cum applausu, then
otherwise.

Further, and jointly with this, it shall be necessary her highness make mention
of the Popes Legate, in my person, to be admitted and sent for. Wherein her G.
has this first to entreat, that the law of my banishment may be abolished, and
I restored to name and blood. And herein her G. does know what extreme
injustice has been done to me, and al our house: And touching my person, what
ever was done that could be laid against me, why I should be ashamed, which
never thought nor did in that cause I was banished for: but that whereby I
deserved rather great reward then any pain, being so given with heart and mind
to the Kings honor, and wealth both of him and his realm, that with no reward
that was offered me great, the King himself could not persuade me to do, or
sentence any thing against his honor and the wealth of the realm, and to his
damnation. Here is all the cause why I suffered banishment, with so great loss
of those kinsfolks, that were dearer to me then my life. And this being done by
consent of the Parliament, though, I doubt not, against their mind, the
Parliament is bound before God and man, to revoke me again, and especially now
coming with extraordinary Commission, that brings the establishment of your
Graces Crown, to the comfort of the whole realm, both temporally and
spiritually.

And this her G. may boldly say of all the time of my exile, wherein God has
given me honor more then I did require, or would have had, if it had layn in my
own choice, and goods sufficient to maintain my state, if ever it should be
found, that for any respect of persons, for ambition, pleasure or lucre, I
swarved from that I judged the honor of God, and, in matters of my Country,
from the wealth thereof; I am content not only to be excepted at this time, but
perpetually to be banished. But if they prove all the contrary, and that with
the King your Father, not only as a faithful subject, but with that love also,
that no servant could show to his master more, nor son to his father, I showed
ever to exteame more his honor and wealth, then mine own goods or Country, and
never procured other then the wealth of the same; then let them believe now,
that I never would come unto them after so many years absence, your G. bearing
the crown, with other Commission than that I know surely should be to the
honor, comfort and wealth of your G. and the whole Country.

And so touching this point of my counsil, that her G. requires of me, here ye
have explicated how the whole matter, wherein my counsil is required, may be
concluded. For otherwise at this time I se not what might be taken, nor can
imagine no other so good* as this way; Which me seems God has ordered should
be taken and preferred above al other.

After this, ye shall show her G. if this way be not followed, or deferred, what
I most fear: And this is first, that the Popes Holiness being already persuaded
to grant to the stay of my journey, contrary to his first Commission, when her
G. showed more fervency to receive the obedience of the Church, that the next
Commission I shall have shall be to return back into Italy again. And the cause
why I fear this is, that the Pope shall think by offering to her G. and the
Realm, al those graces, that do pertain to the reconciliation of both to the
church, when he sees it is not accepted with that promptnes it is offered, he
shall think that both before God and man, he has satisfied all that could be
required of him, touching the demonstration of his paternal affection to her G.
and the realm. In the which the College of Cardinals peradventure will judge,
that his Sanctity has been over much bountiful, especially when they hear of
this my staying being made without their consent: Which they will ever take for
a great indignity, hearing no greater, nor more urgent cause thereof, then
hitherto has been showed; and knowing how her G. cannot maintain her Right,
nether before God nor man, without having recourse to his Holiness, and to the Sea Apostolic, and of whose Authority and Dispensation the whole right of her
cause does depend: as some of them then would have had his Holiness at the
beginning not to have sent his Legate, until he had been required, and much
more now, after he has sent, and he not accepted, they will al be of opinion,
that he shall be revoked. And then what peril both her G. and the whole realm
stands in, by the reason of the Schism yet remaining, it is manifest of it
self.

And yet this is not al my fear of my revocation, but that which may follow,
that I fear more. Which is this: that whereas now if I had been accepted with
that promptnes and sincere affect, as I was sent of the Popes Holiness, and that
I brought with me, my Person I trust should have brought more comfort to her
Highness, and the rest of the Country then any stranger; as the Popes Holiness
thought, when he made me Legate; so now on the contrary, for the self same
circumstances and causes, that pertain to my Person, not being accepted, it
shall more aggravate the cause, at all times, that the Realm hereafter should
require to be absolved of the Schism, and al other that would seek to prevail
against her Graces title, by the reason of the Schism, for the self cause, that
I was not accepted, returning again to Rome, would take this for a great proof
of the obstinate enduring in the same, which al divine laws does most condemn.
So that my Person, I desiring nothing more then to bring comfort to her and the
realm, not accepted, shall be cause of more discomfort, which as I say God of
his mercy forbid. Expounded under this manner my fear, which stondeth in my
revocation, not for my self, but for the damage that may come to her Majesty
and the realm thereby; (the same being very likely, if my stay be deferred any
longer space; knowing that his Holiness and the College will not suffer such
indignity:) then you may declare withal the remedies, that I thought best to be
used at this time to avoid this inconveniency.

And herein you may show, how the first Remedy is, that the Pope and the
College of Cardinals be well persuaded, that my stay here is but for a small
time, and for to bring a more sure conclusion, and to make the way more plain,
as I have caused the Popes Holiness to be informed by a servant of mine sent by
post, showing the tenor of the bil her G. wrote Herrye my servant. Wherein was
contained that her Highness shortly trusted that the matters of the Parliament
should have that conclusion, that I most desired. And upon this hope that
messenger had to show his Holiness, that I had sent my stuf before, toward
Flaunders: and now also for confirmation of that hope I have sent a part of my
company before to tarry me there. So that this you may say is the first remedy I
can find to keep the Pope and the College in hope of a brave and good
resolution.

One other chief Remedy is, because I perceive the Emperors Majestyes Counsil
has ever been, that her G. in matters of religion, and in the renouncing the
title of the Supremacy, should proceed with great moderation, and not to be
hasty therein, until other matters temporal were better settled; for this cause,
beside that what I could do by letters, if it were possible, as much as was in
me, to remove his Majesty from the opinion, that dilation in this matter would
be profitable to her Highness, or the realm; as she may perceive by the copy of
my letters, written to the Emperor, sent by H^rry Pyninge: I have likewise
persuaded his Majesty's Confessor, whom I found here a man of great sanctity,
and learning, that for the love he bears toward his Majesty touching his
souls wealth, and honor of the world beside, and affection to her G. that he
would personally repair himself to his Majesty, and by all means possible
attempt to remove this worldly fear. And herein I have given him Instructions,
whereof you have the Copy with you, that you may show the same to her Highness.

The third Remedy is, that I attempt now, by sending you to her Majesty, that
she may be well informed of the peril; which in mine opinion is now more great,
then when the Duke of Northumberland did set against her. And the same must be
overcome with the means that her G then had the victory. Which was by putting
her hope and trust wholly in God, and in the justice of her cause, casting away
al fear worldly. Which doing, her Highness may be sure her cause pertaining to
the honor of God, and wealth of his Church, for the which his Son dyed for,
that is Lord of al, she shall find les difficulty, and much readier help, then
she can now imagine. And this now shall be sufficient you inform her G. touching
the matter, wherein it has pleased her to ask my advise and counsil.

Touching the other matter, wherein her Highness seems to be offended for the
relation made openly in the Consistory by Master Francesco Commendone, of those
things, which her Majesty had told him in secret. Of this you may say, her G.
being informed of the truth has more cause to accept that which was done most
gratefully, then in any part to be offended therewith. And the truth is this,
he did not open any thing that was told him in secret, nor did not make his
relation as I thought my self he had done at the beginning, as of things heard
of her G.'s mouth, but that he had heard of other Catholics and devout persons,
that knew her G.'s mind. Which was in general of the devout mind that her
Majesty bore to God and the Church; and of that particular point, that she
would have had showed only the Popes Holiness, nothing was spoken. And all this
done to confirm the Cardinals minds touching the approbation of that the Pope
had done, in making so suddenly his Legate, before any information was given
what mind her G. bore to the obedience of the Church: Which some did not
approve at the first. And after this relation made by Master Francesco, that
had been in England, al were well satisfied. So that al turned to the honor of
her M. and to corroborate all that was done to her service. And that she may the
surelier be advertised how all things passed in this matter, I have caused to
be copied one part of a letter, which the Popes Holiness wrote unto me upon this
Act; and the same you may show unto her Grace.

And because I do know what great service it might be to her G. to be truly
informed in all parts that pertains to the return of true obedience to the
Church, both touching the time and manner, and the consequence thereof; and to
discern the crafts and wiles, that the enemy of mankind ever uses to make it
seem true obedience, when it is not: whereupon depends the whole ground of the
maintenance of the State, that God has given her G.: And how few there be in
the realm, (al being maculate therein,) that can or will endeavor themself, to
explicate the peril, and show the remedy: therefore considering that I in person
cannot come so soon to give her Highness information, as I know the necessity of
the matters to be concluded does require; you may show her M. that among those
Gentlemen of my company, whom I have sent before to Flaunders, there to remain,
there be two, of whom if it will please the same to take information of, and as
her G. finds it, to the honor of God and wealth of the realm, in this first
settling of the obedience of the church, so to execute the same; I would think
that her G. should be well satisfied, and satisfy al good men withal; these
being men of that quality that ye know; which have godly prudence, and humane,
joined both together. Of the which one I know by long experience, that has bin
many years so conversant with me, as no man more familiar. Of whom I have ever
judged my self to have that treasure, that few great Princes has the like. And
of the other to have as great pleasure for the time he is content to serve me.
But whether her Highness will serve her self to be informed of them in this first
settling of her State, this is in her G.'s pleasure.

This only I would desire her M. willing the same, if they should come, that
they might come to be known to come from me, for the causes that I have showed
you.

Further, your Commission here be to expound to her Highness my whole mind and
sentence, touching the demand it pleased her G. to make in her gracious Letters
dated the xxviij. of January, concerning those persons, whom for the good
opinion her G. had of their Virtue, Learning, and Catholic good mind, she
intended to make Bps, how that they may be provided for, without derogation to
the authority of the Sea Apostolic, her G. not intending further to extend the
powers of the Crown regal, then it was customable in use before the Schism
entered. In this point, wherein her G. demands mine answer, you shall make the
same conformable to that which, by long and often conference with me, ye know
to be mine utter sentence. Wherein ye need not to have any further explication
by writing.

Besides this, touching the two Acts of Parliament; one of the legitimation of
the Matrimony betwixt the most gracious Queen her Mother, and the King her
Father; the other of the Sacraments to be used under the manner, that they were
used the last year of K. Henry VIII. her G.'s father: Which both it pleased her
M. of her goodness to send unto me, for my satisfaction of mind, to know how
they were passed by consent of the Parliament; you may show her G. that these
two, perfectly inacted and concluded, be those in truth, that of al Acts that
could be made to my comfort, none could bring me more satisfaction. Whereof the
only cause is, that I know nothing can pass by the Parliament more to the
establishment of her Highness State, both before God and man, then the sure
establishing of these two. And for this cause whatsoever lacks to the
establishing thereof, me seems, I am bound to utter plainly to her G. and
truly to say what does not satisfy me in those Acts; my whole satisfaction
depending of the fruit, that may redound to her G. and the realm, when they
shall be perfectly concluded.

And therefore herein you shall not let pass to enform her G. pleasing the same
to give you benign audience, as well wherein they were not to my utter
satisfaction, as also wherein they satisfied me, and brought me some comfort.

And first of al, how the former Act of the ratifying of the Matrimony seemed
unto me much defectuous; in that the Parliament, taking for chief ground, the
Wisdom and Goodness of the Parents of both parties in making the Matrimony,
does not follow that wisdom in the conclusion and establishing of the same.
Their wisdom in making it was* that they thought not sufficient to conclude
the Matrimony, notwithstanding the consent of the parties, unles by the Popes
dispensation and authority of the Sea Apostolic, the impediments of
conjunction, named in the laws of the Church, were taken away, and it so made
legitimate. And hereof the Act of Parliament, that would justify the same, with
derogation of another Act, made to the condemnation of that Matrimony, makes
no mention. Which me seems as great a defect, as if one should take a cause
to defend, which has diverse causes al concurrent to one effect, whereof the one
depends upon the other, and one being principal of all the other, and would in
defense thereof name the other causes, and leave out the principal. For so it is
in the case of the Matrimony: the consent of the parties and parents depended
upon the Dispensation of the church, and the Sea of Rome: Without the which the
wisdom of the Parents did not think it could be well justified, as the effect
did show, in demanding the same: and this is that which now is left out in the
justification, that the Parents have made, alleging the wisdom of the two
Parents, the Kings of England and of Spain.

And if it be here said, as I understand some do say, that the Dispensation was
asked of those Princes, not because it was so necessary, that the marriage
could not be justified without that, but as they say ad majorem cautelam: how
this answer cannot stand to that effect, I have so sufficiently informed you,
that you of your self I doubt not, without further declaration by writing can
expound the same. Therefore leaving that to your memory and capacity, to fly
multiplication o^ writing, this only I will put you in remembrance of, that if
the Dispensation of the Pope in that matter was asked of those two Princes ad
majorem cautelam, which was to stop al men's mouths, making pretense of justice,
that might have been brought forth, or objected, against the Matrimony, unles
this Dispensation had been obtained; at the least for this cause in this Act
should also have been made mention of the Dispensation, following the wisdom
of those Princes ad majorem cautelam; being now more fear of pretenced justice
against the Matrimony, as the effect has, and does show, then ever could be
imagined by the wit of those Princes, when they obtained first the Dispensation.

As touching the other Act of the Confirmation of the Sacraments, ye shall show
also wherein it seems to me defective. Which is, that whereas the ground of the
making thereof, as the Act does express, is taken to redress the temerity of
them, who, being affected to nuelty of opinion, did other take them away, or
abuse the administration of them, against the ancient and laudable custom of
the Catholic church; This being a very necessary and pious cause to make that
Act; in the prosecuting and concluding of the same I find this great defect,
that never being approbate by the Church, that those persons which remain in
Schisma, should have the right use of the Sacraments; but rather to such is
interdict the use of them. This Act makes the gate open to them, that be not
yet entered into the Unity of the Church; to the use of the Sacraments,
declaring it self how they should be m^nistred, with relation to the time and
year of that King; and nameing him; that is known to be the chief author of the
Schism. What defect this is it seems manifest of it self.

This showed, wherein both these Acts were defectuous, and thereby not bringing
me full comfort, ye shall then expound wherein, at the reading of them, I took
some comfort. Which was that the conclusion of both was passed, granted and
inacted by the Parliament. So that touching the effect, there could be no
difficulty hereafter in the Parliament, the same being now bound to the
approving and observance of their own Act. And wherein they were defectuous,
this ought to be supplied by the Princes Authority, that is to say, by her G.'s
authority, as right Queen. To whom it appertains, as chief head of the
Parliament, and of the whole realm withal, in all Acts, that the Parliament does
determe, both to interpret that that is obscure, and to supply and make perfect
that which is defectuous, as well in the time of the Parl^ment, as when it is
dissolved. So that now these both Acts, being past by the Parliament, they are
brought to her G.'s hand to interpret and supply, as it shall be judged by her
G.'s wisdom, how they may best take effect. And to do the same other out of the
time of Parliament, or in another Parliament, binding them, by their own decre,
ratifying the marriage, and the use of the Sacraments, according to the form of
the Catholic church, to admit the authority of the Sea of Rome. Which not
admitted, another the one Act, nor the other can take effect: And admitting and
establishing of the same both those Acts, by this one reason, (wherein is
comprised the reduction of the realm to the unity of the Church) shall be
established and made perfect.

For conclusion of all this, ye shall inform her G. that as I consider daily the
wonderful goodness of God to her Highness with all paternal care of her soul,
person and estate, and his so manifest protection every day, and by so many
ways calling her G. to establish this unity of the Church in the realm, whereof
the breaking has been cause of so great misery, in the realm, both spiritual
and temporal, with travail temporal of her M. and utter jeopardy of loosing her
State: So also I do consider what ways the enemy of mankind Satan, Qui
expetivit cribrare ^cclesiam tanquam triticum, has used, and continually us^th
to let, that her G. cannot put in execution that whereunto God continually does
call her. I dare be bold to say in this particular case, that that the Apostle
says generally, speaking of Satan's malice, Non ignoramus cogitationes ejus.

And so herein I do se how by all means he does tempt to make her G. fall from
that simplicity, Quae est in Christo Jesus, the which God has ever hitherto
maintained in her. And this I having noted of the special goodness of God
toward her, how all the rest falling from the unity of the church at the time
of her Fathers reign, when she was in most trouble and travail, yet her Highness
never committed any thing that was prejudice to the same, being protected of
God in that simplicity, and bringing that mind with her to the Crown: Satan
knowing that by open tempting her to do against that, by way of commission, he
should not prevail to make her to fall by this other way of omission; whereby his
malice trusts, that commission shall follow. Against the which, albeit my
very trust is, the prayer of the Church at this time for his grace shall defend
her; yet until I se by herG.'s goodness so necessary and godly Act of the
reduction of the Realm to the perfect obedience of the Church concluded, I
cannot be without some fear: and therefore be more solicitous in advertiseing
her M. of the great peril, whereof few or none do, or will, speak unto her. And
not only to advertise her G. but withal to show the remedy; whereof you being
sufficiently informed, this shall be the end of my Commission by writing:
Praying Almighty God to inspire her Highness to accept your sayings on my
behalf, as he has inspired me with all sincere affection by such means to utter
the same.

NUMBER. LXXV. The Form of the Restitution of a married Priest.
DECIMO octavo die mensis Octobr. Anno Dom. 1554. in Aedibus solitae
Residentiae Magistri Anthonij Huse, Armigeri, Regist. Eccles. Christ. Ca^t.
in Occidentali angulo Vici nuncupati Pater Noster Row, Civitatis London.
notorie situatis* Coram venerabili viro Magistro Henrico Harvy, LL. D. Vicario
in Spiritualibus Generali, etc. in presentia mei Ioannis Incent, Notarij
publici propter absentiam Magistri Anthonij Huse, Registrarij, etc. assumpti,
etc. comparuit personaliter Robertus Vevian Presbyter, nuper Rector Ecclesiae
parochialis de Hever, Decanat. de Shoreham, Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariensis
jurisdictionis immediatae, ac quandam professionem in Scriptis redactam and
conceptam fecit, and public legebat, sub eo qui sequitur Verborum tenore.

Whereas I Robert V^vian, Clerk, late Parson of H^ver in the County of Kent,
being of the peculiar jurisdiction of the Church of Cant^rbury, being ordered a
Pressed about xxvij years past, having ministered as a Pressed in all kind of Prestly
function and ministration of (...) and Sacramentalls, as to the office of a
Pressed appertains; have i^ (...) that time, contrary to the State of mine
Orders, Decrees of the Church, and laudable Customs of the same, married one
Agnes Stanton, being a single or solute Woman, and with her in one House, as
man and wie^* have cohabited and dwellid, to the offense of my Christen
brethren, and bre^h of the Unity of Christ's said Church: I the said Robert do
now lament and bewail my lief past, and thoffence by me committed: Intending
firmly by Godds grace hereafter to lead a pure, chaste and continent lief,
according to such grace as Al^ighty God of his mercy, upon my humble petition
and prayer, shall grant me: And do here before you, my competent Judge and
Ordinary, most humbly require absolution of and from al such Censures and pains
of the Laws, as by my said offense, and ungodly behavior I have incurrid and
deservid; Promising firmly, and solemnly professing before you in this present
Writing never to return to the said Agnes Stanton, as to my wief or Concubyne:
but from hensefourth to absteyne from her, and to keep miself sole, pure and
chaste from al carnal affections and copulations; especially from her, and also
from al other women, according to the Laws and Constitutions of our Mo^her, the
Catholic church, and as my order also requires. In witness of this mine
advised and deliberate mind, promise and profession I have to the same in this
writing subscribed my name ^ith mine own hand. Yeven the 18 th. day of October
in the year of our Lord God ^554, etc.

Per me Robertum Vevian.

Qua quidem Professione per praenominatum Robertum Vevian public lecta, and
manu sua propria subscripta, ac praestito juramento, etc. de parendo juri, and
stando mandatis Ecclesiae, Dominus ad humilem ejus petitionem, absolvit eum a
sententia Excommunicationis and alijs Censuris and poenis juris per ipsum, ex
causis superius expressatis, incursis, and eum Sacramentis Ecclesiae, ac
Officio suo Presbyterali, and integrae functioni ejusdem restituit and
redintegravit; and decrevit sibi literas Testimoniales, etc.

Restitutio Ioannis Brown, Rectoris de Wymbaldowne in Decanata de Croyden.
Restitutio H^nrici William, Presbyteri. Restitutio Petri Williamson,
Presbyteri.
These are al in the same Form with the above written, only Mutatis mutandis.
And no more are Registered but these.

NUMBER. LXXVI. John Fox his letter to the Parliament, against reviving the Act of
the six Articles.
FRequens hic per omnium ora ac aures jactatur non suspicio modo, Foxij. MSS.
sed co^^ans certissimaq^e praedicatio, id Vos Summi, sanctissimique Patres,
moliri* u^ sanguinariae leges illae sex Articulorum titulo inscriptae* quondam
been sopitae, nunc demum, velut ex Orco revocentur ad Superos. Quod si verum
sit, quam vobis plausibile, ac quibu^dam sit gra^um, ignoro, cer^e quam Reip*
sunestum ac ominosum sit futu^um, (...) jam pridem declara^ publicus maeror,
tristissima rerum ^ere humanarum, ac Luctuos^ facies, optimi cujusque gemitus;
ne^ tacita solum suspiria, sed ubertim ex doloris acerbitate prorumpentes
Lachrymae, quotidiana bonorum fuga, totius deniqu^ Re^p. (si tamen Resp. aliqua
sit) squalor: ut interim taceam Conscientia^^m occul^a judicia ac vulnera, in
omnibus fere horror, in nonnullis etiam funera ac mortes ex rerum perturbatione
contractae. Quae si calami^ates, tot tantaeque quidem illae, quantas vix in
ulla unquam Rep. conspeximus, ex concepta rerum imagine a^que recordatione
duntaxat ipsa, cives adeo perstringunt vestros, quid vos futurum tandem
existimati^, suspiciendi Domini, exhibitis jam rebus ipsis, ubi ^n exhibendis
tanta sit trepidatio; Ubi into erabilis ipse Legum rigor* and acutissima acies
cervicibus jam incumbit civium: Ubi tot millia hominu^ non vitae libertatem,
quam jam amiserunt, sed vitam ipsam cogentur deserere? Nec jam vita, sed and
conscientia etiam erepta hom^nibus: nec Deo quidem supplicare licebit pro
arbitratu suo, sed ad libidinem p^ucorum.

Quae quum ita sint, vel deteriora etiam, quam a me referri queant,
considerabit prudentia vestra, quae docum^ntis nostris non eget, sed pro
communi salute rerum, consilia vestra potissimum flectenda sunt. Haec etenim
jam ipsa agun^ur tempora, quibus vobis jam in manu situm est* felices nos
velitis, an perditos. Si tam vilem habeatis civium vestrorum Sanguinem, si
nihil vos moveant tot hominum gemitus, quer^lae, l^crymae, bonorum miseriae, si
parum sit vobis una ab ijsdem legibus accepta clades; Age d^nuo, revoc^tur
Trojanus equus in ur^em, quo soli, ve cum pauc^s, r^gnum hoc possideatis. Sin
vero ulla subit animos vestros Reip. charitas, si quod patriae studium maneat,
siquid preces nostrae siquid bonorum supplices manus, siquid denique Reip,
siquid ecclesiae Christianae (quam advolutam genubus vestris existimetis) fle
ilis q^erela va^eat; efficite modo, pii Proceres, pro summa pietate, ut pluris
(...) apud vos salutis publicae conservatio, quam privata quorundam
^^licita^io; Nec quid possi^ pro imperio authoritas, sed quid aq^itas potius
Civibus de^eat vestra, velitis considerare.

Nihil enim in ^mni officiorum genere fieri aequius arbit^or, quam ut quorum
^os Pa^ri^ Patr^s conscripsit ipsa, eos in filiorum loco ascitos tue^ mini:
quique s^am ad Vos omnem reverentiam, ac dignitatis authoritatem transferunt,
ijdem a Vobis salutis ac tranquillitatis vicissim accipiant suae incolumitatem.
Quod si communis Patriae respectus vos minus attingat, at quod vobis ipsis
dignum, quod generosa ac heroica sanguinis vestri nobilitas, tacito quodam
sensu vobis suggerat, attendite. Nam quum inter humanos omnes affectus, nil sit
tam hominis proprium, quam clementia, qua divinae Naturae imaginem maxim
refer vel infimi etiam videntur homines; quid tum a vobis expectari convenit,
Illustrissimi Heroes, qui quo sublimiorem honoris in his terris gradum sortiti
estis, hoc expressius supremo huic imaginis divinae archetypo respondere
omnibus modis decet?

Porro, habetis ad hoc Reginam, ut Nobilissimam, ita ad sana and salubria
quaeque obsequacem Principem. Habetis and Cancellarium, ut doctrina
praestabilem, ita natura non improbum, siquorum absint consilia. Verum ut inter
Animantium genera, quaedam noxia, alia ad hominis usum, creata existunt: rursus
sunt, quae in hoc tantum dicas nata, ut reliquis molestiam ac perniciem
moliantur: Sic in humanis rebus, nulla Resp. nec vitae genus est, quod suas non
habet vomicas, and (...). Atque hi sunt potissimum, qui religione praeposteri,
natura saevi, alteri Ecclesiae, alteri Reip. exitiales existunt. Quibus cum
been esse non possit, nisi perturbatis rebus, turbam, quantum queant, intendunt
ad saevitiam. Mitissimos Principum animos, hoc est. Reip. fontes, vitiant,
consilia instillant, non quae honesto, sed quae ventri suo, ac quaestui
serviant: Simile quiddam exercentes in humanis rebus, quale Ate tribuit
Homerica narratio. Deinde quum tutius laedunt sub umbra Nobilitatis, ac se
occultant, quo siquid adveniat adversi, illos postremo feriat: siquid boni sit,
ipsi primi sint ad carpendam messem. Et quoniam juxta imperitorum legem, nihil
his recte fieri videtur, nisi quod ipsi faciunt, ad arbitratum suum universam
religionem, cum ipsa Scriptura, corrigendam putant, Quicquid ipsis non placet
haereticum est. Nil sibi placere potest, quod non illico alba amussis sit
quantum libet a scopo alienum.

NUMBER. LXXVII. An instrument of the University of Cambridg, appointing certain
of their members to repair to Oxford, to dispute with Cranmer, Ridley and
Latimer there.
Procuratorium Academiae Cantabrig.
Foxij MSS.
UNiversis Christi fidelibus praesentes literas visuris, lecturis and audituris,
and quos infrascripta tangunt, seu quovis modo tangere poterunt; Nos
Vicecancellarius Senatusque tam Regentium quam non Regentium almae Academiae
Cantabrigien. Salutem, and dilectionem in Christo Ihesu. Cum jampridem ex part
Sacrae Synodi, sive Convocationis praelatorum and cleri Cant. provinciae,
aucthoritate and mandato Sereniss. and religiosiss. Dominae nostrae Reginae
Mariae convocatae, Nobis in Senatu nostro ad effectum infrascriptum in simul
congregatis exhibiti fuerint quidam Articuli tenoris infrascripti, Viz.

In Sacramento Altaris virtute verbi divini a sacerdote prolati praesens est
realiter, sub speciebus panis and vini, natural corpus Christi, conceptum de
Virgin Maria: Item, naturalis ejusdem Sanguis.

Post Consecrationem non remanet Substantia panis and vini, neque alia ulla
Substantia, nisi Substantia Christi, Dei and hominis.

In Missa est vivisicum ecclesiae Sacrificium, pro peccatis tam vivorum quam
mortuorum propitiabile:

Simulque requisiti fuerimus, eosdem Articulos matura deliberatione legere,
expendere and considerare: Et si sanam, veram and Catholicam doctrinam
contineant, eosdem approbare velimus: Nos in Senatu nostro, sic ut praefertur,
convenientes, perlectosque nobis Articulos, and contenta in ijsdem, quanta
decebat in re tam gravi maturitate and deliberatione, perpendentes and
librantes, quandoquidem ipsos, and contenta in ijsdem, cum Catholica virtute
and fide orthodoxa per omnia convenire animadvertimus, eosdem unanimi consensu
nostro atque assensu, ut veros, catholicos, orthodoxos, ac veritati and
doctrinae catholicae, ac aperto Dei verbo consentientibus, veterum orthodoxorum
patrum testimonijs, Generaliumque Consiliorum authoritatibus per omnia
innitentes and congruentes, tam consentientibus animis comprobavimus, ut nostra
plurimum interesse arbitrati sumus doctrinam articulorum hujusmodi contra omnes
illius oppugnatores defendere and tueri.

Intelligentes itaque tam facti notorietate, quam famae publicae relatione,
esse nonnullos perditionis and iniquitatis filios, seditiosos errorum
innovatores, and ecclesiae Christi hosts, qui hujusmodi sacram, Catholicam and
orthodoxam doctrinam, ac ecclesiae unitatem modis omnibus perturbare,
dilacerare, infestare, affligere and evertere satagunt, and conantur, quorum
praecipui authors and Antisignani nominatim sunt, D. Thomas Cranmerus, nuper
Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, Nicolaus Ridleius, nuper Roffensis, and Hugo
Latimerus, jam olim Wigorn. Episcopi, Aca^emiae nostrae Cantabrig. quondam
alumni, modo apud inclytam Universitatem Oxoniensem existentes, nostrarum
partium esse duximus, non modo veritatem Catholicam praedictam verbo and
scriptis comprobare, ac mundo palam facere, verum etiam eandem nedum contra
eosdem principales adversarios, sed and contra omnes alios ecclesiae hosts and
veritatis Christi oppugnatores, pro virili nostra, manifesto Dei verbo,
Sanctorumque patrum testimonijs, defendere, tueri and propugnare. Ac proinde
quo veritas magis elucescat, quosdam pios and eruditos viros ex eadem nostra
Universitate ad hoc muneris publico omnium nostrum nomine obeundum, Viz. D.
Iohannem Young, Vicecancellarium nostrum, Gulielmum Glyn, Richardum Atkynson,
Cuthbertum Scot, Thomam Watson, Albanum Langdale, and Thomam Sedgwyke,
Theologiae Professores, conjunctim and divisim selegimus, nominavimus, and
deputavimus: Dantes and concedentes eisdem, prout, and tenore praesentium sic
damus and concedimus, conjunctim, ut praefertur, and divisim, plenariam
potestatem, aucthoritatem and facultatem, vice and nominibus omnium nostrum,
Almam academiam Oxon. quibuscunque diebus eis visum fuerit, petendi and
proficiscendi. Ac si quidem libera eis, pro more, aucthoritate Universitatis
Oxon. in hac part dabitur venia and facultas, cum dictis dominis, Cranmero,
Ridleio, and Latimero, caeterisque ejusdem farinae monstris palam and public,
sive privatim, congrediendi, hijsque de rebus disserendi, disputandi and
argumentandi, sanamque doctrinam praedictam contra eos patrocinandi, and
propugnandi, adversariosque praedictos, and eorum perversas opiniones, and
sententias, atque haeretica dogmata refellendi, refutandi, and convincendi,
Eosque ad resipiscentiam modis omnibus quibus poterint, hortandi, reducendi and
persuadendi: Caeteraque omnia and singula faciendi, exercendi and expediendi;
quo hujusmodi negotij qualitas and natura de se exigunt and requirunt,
Promittentes nos ratum, gratum, and firmum perpetuo habituros totum id, and
quicquid ab eisdem eruditis viris nomine and vice nominis in praemissis, aut
eorum aliquo actum aut gestum fuerit. In quorum omnium and singulorum fidem and
testimonium praemissorum, has nostras Commissionis, and Deputationis literas
nostro communi sigillo communiri fecimus. Datum e Senatu nostro Cant. x die
mensis Aprilis, anno verbi incarnati supra Millesimum quingentesimum
quinquagesimo quarto.

NUMBER. LXXVIII. The University of Cambridg to that of Oxford, relating to the
former matter.
Reverendis in Christo viris D. Vicecancellario Oxoniensi, and universis
Doctoribus illius Academiae, atque Magistris Regentibus and non Regentibus.
GRavi nuper and turbulenta tempestate, sicut vos scitis and experti estis,
Foxij. MSS.
Reverendi in Christo fratres, Ecclesiae nostr^ horribiliter jactatae sunt.
Tetra etenim sedit^osi erroris, and protervae atque obstinatae haeresios pestis
ac lues omnes Angliae oras perg^as^ata, ipsas etiam Academias corripuit, atque
gravissime and periculosissime insestavit. Christi pura and orthodoxa religio,
mendacibus Sectariorum commentis and prodigiosis subinde pullulantium falsarum
doctrinarum monstris misere deformata and dilacerata, jacuit. Jam tamen
singulari Numinis beneficio, and D. nostri Jesus Christi atque illius Sacri
Spiritus afflatu, serenior aura and placida atque amaena amabilis concordiae
tranquillitas affulgere occaepit. Gratias proinde indesinenter agere debemus
coelesti patri, qui propter suam misericordiam Ecclesijs nostris, magna
persecutionis violentia afflictatis, optabilem and serenum statum restituerit.
Qui per optimam and religiosissimam Reginam religionis Catholicae integritatem,
quae corruptorum maliciosa improbitate paene extincta fuerat, restauravit,
atque Academijs nostris antiquam suam libertatem, quae nephandorum tyrannide
opprimebatur, reddidit. Nostrarum vero partium esse ducimus tantam and tam
illustrem Dei erga nos beneficentia agnoscere and confiteri; atque etiam eundem
Deum and propitium nostrum Dominum, assiduis precibus interpellare, ut haec
quae jam restaurata est religionis orthodoxa and pura integritas, in dies magis
ac magis augeatur; atque ea quae jam conciliata est pax and concordia firmius
and solidius coalescat. Hoc etenim est quod vas electionis, and Christi
Apostolus Paulus, hortatur, and admonet, dicens, Cum patientia supportate Vos
invicem, soliciti servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis. Vnum corpus, Vnus
spiritus; sicut and vocati estis in una spe Vocationis vestrae. Vnus dominus,
Vna fides, Vnum baptisma, Vnus Deus and pater omnium; qui est per omnia, and
super omnia, and in omnibus vobis.

Nos p^oinde eandem spiritus unitatem, cum Catholica Christi ecclesia,
retinentes articulos, de quibus postrema Synodo Londoniensi inter ecclesiarum
nostrarum proceres conveniebat, unanimi consensu comprobantes, atque veram,
sanam, and Catholicam doctrinam ijsdem exprimi and explicari agnoscentes,
optamus lupos omnes, qui Christi ovile dissipare, and simplices oviculas
seducere conantur, ab ecclesiae castris procul abarceri. Dilectos itaque nobis,
and eruditos viros D. Io. Young, Vicecancellarium nostrum, D. Gulielmum Glyn,
Richardum Atkynson, Cuthbertum Scot, Thomam Watson, Albanum Langdale, and
Thomam Segiswyck, Theologioe Professores, atque Catholicae fidei and Academiae
nostrae Alumnos, ad vos legare destinavimus: Non quod doctrinam articulorum, in
questionem and disputationem vocent, quam nos omni ambiguitate seposita, veram
and orthodoxam esse agnoscimus; utpote quae and aperto Dei verbo and
consentientibus patrum testimonijs, and generalium Conciliorum aucthoritate,
fulciatur and confirmata sit; sed ut nostro omnium nomine sanae doctrinae una
vobiscum patrocinentur, atque orthodoxam fidem propugnent, and eos qui eidem
adversantur, convincant, and hereticae atque perversae sententiae authors
refellant and refutent. Quales apud vos esse credimus Thomam Cranmerum, N.
Ridley, and Hug. Latimerum, nuper Episcopos, and Academiae nostrae, atque
Christi ecclesiae filios obedientes; nunc vero, sicut quidam referunt; quod nos
dolentes scribimus, falsae and corruptae doctrinae contumaces patronos. Quorum
Nos miserandum statum multum deploramus, mentem illis meliorem precantes, quo
mutata sententia per resipiscentiam in matris Ecclesiae sinum simul sese
recipiant. Quam quisquis non habuerit suam Matrem, is Deum Patrem habere non
poterit. Ut ergo vos intelligeretis, quae nostra esset his de causis sententia,
pios and eruditos hos viros ad vos publica authoritate nostra mittimus, atque
has literas communi nostro sigillo sigillari fecimus. Christus Jesus vos
vestramque illustrem Academiam pietate and bonis literis florentem, ad verae
religionis augmentum, and corruptae errorum profligationem perpetuo conservet,
E senatu nostro 10 Aprilis 1554.

Vestrum omnium in Christo amantissimi, Vicecancellarius and Regent. and non
Regent. Senatus Cantabr.
Concordat cum originalibus literis missivis and procuratorijs.



NUMBER. LXXIX. Cranmer's Letter to the Queens Council after his Disputation at
Oxon.
^oxes Acts.
IN right humble wise shows unto your honorable Lordships, Thomas Cranmer,
late Archbishop of Canterbury, Beseeching the same to be a means for me unto
the Queens highness for her mercy and pardon. Some of you know by what means I
was brought and trained unto the Will of our late Sovereign Lord K. Edward VI.
and what I spoke against the same; Wherein I refer me to the reports of your
Honors and Worships. Furthermore, this is to signify to your Lordships, that
upon Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday last past, were open Disputations here in
Oxford, against me, Mr. Ridley, and Mr. Latimer, in three matters concerning
the Sacrament. First, of the Real presence. Secondly, Of Transubstantiation.
And thirdly, Of the Sacrifice of the Mas. Upon Monday against me: Upon Tuesday
against D. Ridley; and upon Wednesday against Mr. Latimer. How the other two
were ordered I know not; for we were separated: So that none of us knows what
the other said; nor how they were ordered. But as concerning my self I can
report. D. Chadsey was appointed to dispute against me. But the Disputation was
so confused, that I never knew the like: every man bringing forth what him
liked, without order. And such have was made, that no answer could be suffered
to be taken fully to any argument, before another brought a new argument. And
in such weighty matters, the Disputation must needs be ended in one day, which
can scantly be ended in three months. And when we had answered them, they would
not appoint us one day to bring sorth our proofs, that they might answer us:
being required by me thereunto. Whereas I my self have more to say, then can be
well discussed, as I suppose, in twenty days. The means to resolve the truth
had been to have suffered us to answer fully to all that they could say; and
then they again to answer us fully to al, that we can say. But why they would
not answer us, what other cause can there be, but that either they feared their
matter, or that they were not able to answer us? Or else for some consideration
they made such have, not to seek the truth, but to condemn us: That it must be
don in post have, before the matters could be thoroughly heard. For in all have
we were al three condemned of heresy. Thus much I thought good to signify to
your Lordships, that you may know the indifferent handling of matters: Leaving
the judgment thereof unto your Wisdoms. And I beseech your Lordships to
remember me, a poor prisoner, unto the Queens Majesty; and I shall pray, as I do
daily, unto God, for the long preservation of your good Lordships in all
godliness and felicity. April 23.

NUMBER. LXXX. The Lord Legates Commission to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
deputing them to Absolve and Dispense with the Clergy, in his stead; and
absolve the Laity.
Commissio Domini Reginaldi Poli Legati de Latere.
REginaldus miseratione divina Sanctae Mariae de Cosmeden Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Diaconus Cardinalis Polus nuncupatus Sanctissimi D. N. Papae and
Sedis Apostolicae, Registr Eccles. Cant.
ad Serenissimos Philippum and Mariam Angliae Reges, and universum Angliae
regnum, de Latere Legatus, Venerabilibus ac nobis in Christo dilectis DECANO
and CAPITULO Ecclesiae Metropolitices Christi Cant. ad quos omnis and omnimoda
jurisdictio Spiritualis and Ecclesiastica, quae ad Archiepiscopum Cant. sede
plena pertinuit, ipsa Sede jam vacant, notorie dinoscitur pertinere, seu eorum
in Spiritualibus Vicario Generali, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum
Sanctissimus in Christo Pater Dominus noster Dominus JULIUS providentia divina
Papa tertius, inter alias facultates, pro hujus regni omniumque personarum in
ea existentium Sanctae Ecclesiae reconciliatione facienda, necessarias nobis in
hac nostra Legatione concessas, hanc specialiter indulserit, ut quoscumque in
haeresium and schismatis errores lapsos, ab eis and a quibuscunque censuris and
poenis propterea incursis, absolvere, and cum eis super irregularitate
praemissorum occasion contracta Dispensare, and alia multa adhaec necessaria
seu quomodolibet opportuna facere: Et hoc idem munus Catholicis locorum
Ordinarijs and alijs personis Deum timentibus, fide insignibus, and literarum
scientia praeditis demandare possumus, prout in ejus literis tam sub plumbo,
quam in forma Brevis, expeditis before continetur:

CUMque de benignitate, and Serenissimorum Regum pietate, Regnum hoc
universaliter, and omnes Domini Spirituales and Temporales, aliaeque personae
Communitatum in eo, quod proxime celebratum est, Parliamento congregatae,
singulariter primum, and deinde universum corpus Cleri provinciae
Cantuariensis, and omnes fere personae singulares dictum corpus
repraesentantes, coram nobis existentes, aliaeque pleraeque fuerint sanctae
ecclesiae Catholicae per nos ipsos reconciliatae: Speremusque fore, ut omnes
aliae, quae reconciliatae adhuc non sunt, reconciliatae fuerint: Difficileque
and potius impossible sit, ut tam numerosa multitudo per manus nostras
reconcilietur: Ideo vices nostras in hoc, locorum Ordinarijs and alijs
Personis, ut supra qualificatis delegandas duximus:

CIRCUMSPECTIONI igitur vestrae, de cujus probitate and charitatis zelo plenam
in Domino fiduciam obtinemus, Authoritate Apostolica nobis per Literas ejusdem
Sanctissimi D. N. Papae, and per nos vobis nunc impensa, omnes and singulas
utriusque Sexus, tam laicas quam ecclesiasticas singulares, and quorumvis
ordinum Regulares vestrae civitatis, and Dioceseos, personas, in quibusvis
etiam sacris ordinibus constitutas, cujuscumque etiam status and qualitatis
existant, etiamsi Capitulum, Collegium, Universitas, seu Communitas fuerit,
quarumvis haeresium and novarum Sectarum professores, aut in eis culpabiles,
vel suspectas, ac credentes, receptatores and fautores ipsorum, suos errores
agnoscentes, ac de illis dolentes, and ad orthodoxam fidem recipi humiliter
postulantes, cognita in ipsis vera and non ficta aut simulata poenitentia, ab
omnibus and singulis haeresium and schismatis, and ab orthodoxa fide
Apostasiarum and blasphemiarum and aliorum quorumcunque similium errorum, etiam
sub generali sermon non venientium, peccatis, criminibus, excessibus and
delictis, (de quibus tamen inquisiti vel accusati seu condemnati non fuerint)
and quibusvis excommunicationis, suspensionis, and interdictionum, and alijs
ecclesiasticis and temporalibus sententijs, censuris and poenis in eas
praemissorum and infra scriptorum occasion ac jure, vel ab homine latis, vel
promulgatis, etiamsi eis pluribus annis insorduerint, and earum Absolutio
dictae Sedi, etiam per literas in die coenae Domini legi consuetas, reservata
existat; In utroque Conscientiae scil. and contentioso foro, eos vero qui jam
inquisiti vel accusati aut condemnati fuerint, vel ut praefertur ad cor
revertentes, in foro conscientiae tantum, plenarie absolventes and Liberantes.

NECNON cum eis super irregularitate per eos occasion praemissorum contracta,
etiam quia sic Legati. Missas and alia divina officia, etiam contra ritus and
ceremonias hactenus probatas and usitatas, cel^braverint, aut illis alias se
immiscuerint, contracta: Quodque irregularitate and alijs praemissis non
obstantibus in suis ordinibus, etiam ab haereticis and schismaticis Episcopis,
etiam minus rite, dummodo in eorum collatione Ecclesiastica forma and intentio
sit servata, per eos susceptis, and in eorum susceptione etiam juramentum
contra Papatum Romanum praestiterint, etiam in Altaris ministerio ministrare,
ac quaecunque quotcunque ac qualiacunque etiam curata, invicem tamen se
compatientia beneficia Secularia vel Regularia (dignitatibus in Collegiatis
eccle^^js principalibus and in Cathedralibus, etiam Metropolitanis post
Pontificalem majoribus exceptis) etiam Schismaticis Episcopis, seu al^js
Collatoribus, etiam laicalis potestatis praetextu habita, authoritate
Apostolica retinere, dummodo alteri jus quaesitum non sit, and non promotos ad
omnes etiam sacros and presbyteratus ordines a suis Ordinarijs, si digni and
idonei reperti fuerint; rite and legitime promoveri, ac beneficia
ecclesiastica, etiam curata, si eis alias canonice conferantur, recipere and
retinere valiant, qualitate temporis, ministrorum defectu, and ecclesiae
necessitatibus utilitatibusque ita poscentibus, DISPENSANDI and indulgendi, and
omnem inhabilitatis and infamiae maculam sive notam ex praemissis quomodolibet
insurgentem, penitus and omnino abolendi, necnon in pristinum, and eum, in quo
ante praemissa quomodolibet erant, statum; ita ut and omnibus and singulis
gratijs, privilegijs, favoribus and indultis, quibus caeteri Christi fideles
gaudent, and gaudere quomodolibet possunt, uti and gaudere valiant; in omnibus,
and p^r omnia, perinde ac si a fide Catholica nunquam in aliquo defecissent,
restituendi, reponendi, and redintegrandi, ac eis (dummodo cord contriti) sua
errata and excessus circumspectioni vestrae, seu alicui alteri per eos eligendo
Catholico Confessori sacramentaliter confiteantur, and paenitentiam Salutarem
eis pro praemissis injungendam omnino adimpleant, omnem publicam confessionem,
abjuratio nem, reconciliationem, and paenitentiam juxta debitas arbitrio vestro
moderandi, and in totum remittendi: Necnon quoscunque REGULARES and Religiosos,
extra eorum regularia loca, absque sedis Apostolicae licentia, vagantes, ab
Apostasiae reatu, alijsque censuris, and paenis ecclesiasticis per eos
propterea, etiam juxta suorum ordinum instituta, incursis, injuncta eis pro
modo culpae paenitentia salutari, pariter absolvendi, and super quacunque
irregularitate propterea per eos contracta, aut cum eis, ut alicui curato
beneficio de illius obtinentis consensu, in habitu clerici saecularis, habitum
suum regularem sub honesta toga Presbyteri saecularis deferendo, deservire, and
extra eadem loca regularia remanere, ad beneplacitum nostrum, libere and licite
possunt, eadem autoritate Apostolica, ob defectum ministrorum, and alias
praedictas causas, Dispensandi;

AC QUOSCUNque qui in sacris ordinibus constituti, Matrimonia, etiam cum viduis
and corruptis mulieribus de facto contraxerint, postquam mulieres sic copulatas
rejecerint, illisque abjuraverint, ab hujusmodi excessibus and
excommunicationis sententia interposita, eos pro modo culpae paenitentia
salutari in forma ecclesiae consueta, absolvendi, ac cum eis, postquam
paenitentiam peregerint, and continenter and laudabiliter vivere cogniti
fuerint, super bigamia propterea per eos contracta, ita ut ea non obstante, in
quibusvis susceptis and suscipiendis ordinibus, etiam in Altaris ministerio
ministrare, ac alicui beneficio ecclesiastico, de illius obtinentis consensu,
deservire, extra tamen Diocesin, in qua fuerint copulati, eisdem de causis
dispensando. Necnon paroch^alium Ecclesiarum tuae Diocesios Rectores sive
Curatos, de quorum fide, probitate, circumspectione, and charitatis zelo plena
fiducia conspici potest, ad quarumcunque utriusque sexus suae parochiae,
personarum laicarum tantum, absolutionem, and ecclesiae Catholicae
reconciliationem (ut praefertur) autoritate Apostolica faciendam: Et siqui ex
Curatis praedictis ad id idonei non fuerint, in eorum defectum alias idoneas
and sufficientes personas, quae eorum vices suppleant, nominandi and deputandi:
Quos sic per vos nominatos and deputatos in locum nostrum, in praemissis
absolutionibus and reconciliationibus, substituimus: Praemissis, ac Regula de
insordescentibus edita, and quibusvis alijs constitutionibus and ordinationibus
Apostolicis, and omnibus illis, quae in literis praedictis Sanctitas sua voluit
non obstare, contrarijs non obstantibus quibuscunque praesentibus in
praeteritis casibus locum habentibus, and ad beneplacitum nostrum duraturis.
Datum Lambethi prope Londinum, Wintoniensis Diocaesis, Anno a Nativitate Domini
MDLV. idibus Februarij, Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris and Domini
nostri Domini Iulij divina providentia Papae tertij anno 5 to.

Reg. Car. Polus Leg.

NUMBER. LXXXI. The Lord Legates Instructions to the Bishops, in the performing of
his orders about absolving their Clergy and Laity.
SInguli Domini Episcopi, necnon Officiales Ecclesiarum, quae nunc vacant,
Registr. Eccles. Cant.
pro executione eorum, quae a Reverendissimo Domino Legato sunt eis demandata,
ordinem qui infrascriptus est, poterunt observare.

Primum, Vocatum ad se totum singularum civitatum, quibus singuli praesunt,
Clerum, de h ijs quae sequuntur, instruere procurabunt.

De paterno amore and charitate, quam Sanctissimus D. N. Julius Papa tertius
erga Nationem Anglicam declaravit, qui ut primum cognovit Serenissimam Mariam
Reginam fuisse declaratam, Reverendissimum Dominum Reginaldum Cardinalem Polum
de suo Latere, ad has parts Legatum misit, ut Regnum hoc, tot jam annos ab
Ecclesia Catholica separatum, ad ejus unionem reducere, and in errores lapsos
consolari, atque in Dei gratiam restituere studeret.

De ejusdem Domini Legati adventu; quanta laetitia atque honor is acceptus
fuit, tum a Sereniss. Regibus, tum ab alijs omnibus.

De hijs quae in proximo Parliamento acta and conclusa sunt. Scil. De omnibus
Dominis de Parliamento, and universo regno a schismate and censuris incursis
absolutis, and Ecclesiae Catholicae reconciliatis. De dam legibus, quae contra
authoritatem Sedis Apostolicae and Romani Pontificis fuerunt per Henricum VIII.
and Edwardum VI. latae and promulgatae, revocatis and abolitis. De restituta
Sanctiss. N. D. Papae and Ecclesiae Romanae eadem obedientia, quae ante hoc
perniciosissimum schisma praestabatur.

De authoritate Episcopis restituta; and maxim ut possint contra haereticos
and schismaticos procedere, and eos juxt a canonicos Sanctiones coercere and
punire.

Hijs ita expositis, veniant ad facultates sibi ab eodem Reverendiss. D. Legato
concessas, quae recitentur: Et hic omnes, qui in schisma and alios errores
lapsi sunt, invitentur ad Absolutionem and conciliationem humiliter ex toto
cord petendam, necnon and Dispensationes, tam super ordinibus, quam super
beneficijs necessarias and opportunas postulandas. Praefigatur Dies, intra quem
dicti de clero humiles and paenitentes compareant ad petendam suppliciter
absolutionem, reconciliationem and dispensationes praedictas.

Idem vero Domini Episcopi, postquam illi omnibus erroribus suis
renunciaverint, and promiserint sacramentaliter ipsis, aut alteri Sacerdoti
Catholico, confessuros esse errores suos and paenitentiam sibi adinjungendam
impleturos eos, absolvent, and Ecclesiae reconciliabunt, and cum ipsis juxta
formam facultatum, pro petentium necessitatibus, prout sibi visum fuerit,
dispensabunt: adhibendo semper convenientem distinctionem inter eos, qui solum
in schisma and hereses inciderunt, and eos, qui etiam eos public docuerunt,
and alios ad peccandum adduxerunt.

Eodem die constituetur dies festus and solennis, in quo, adstante in Ecclesia
populi multitudine, Domini Episcopi, and omnes Curati in ecclesijs suis omnia
eadem, quae clero jam exposita fuerunt, Populo quoque insinuabunt, and omnes
invitabunt, pattern and cum omni affectu, ut agnitis erroribus suis ad
Ecclesiae Catholicae gremium revertantur, promittendo fore, ut omnibus
praeterita crimina omnia condonentur, and remittantur, modo eos ex animo
illorum paeniteat, and illis renuncient.

Praesigatur autem terminus, ut puta tota Pascatis Octava, intra quem terminum
omnes Ecclesiae reconcilientur. Alioqui eo lapso contra ipsos, and eos etiam,
qui post reconciliationem ad vomitum reversi fuerint, severissime procederetur.
Dicatur de facultate concessa a Reverendiss. Domino Legato Episcopis and alijs,
ut absolvere possint omnes quicunque ad cor reversi fuerint.

Iidem Domini Episcopi and Officiales nominabunt and deputabunt Ecclesiarum
parochialium Rectores, seu alias Personas idoneas, quae Laicos ab haeresi and
Schismate, and quibuscunque censuris absolvant juxta facultatum formam and
tenorem, data per Episcopos formula, qua in absolutione and reconciliatione uti
debeant.

Eadem poterunt cum Clero totius Diocesios observari prout commodius visum
fuerit.

Domini Episcopi and Officiales praefati, necnon omnes Curati seu alij ad id
deputati, habeant librum, in quo nomen and cognomen, and parochia omnium
reconciliatorum inscribantur, ut postea sciatur, qui fuerint reconciliati, and
qui non.

Idem Domini Episcopi and Officiales Octava Pascatis elapsa, poterint facere
Visitationem Civitatis primo, dein Dioceseos; Et siqui non fuerint
reconciliati, poterint ad se eos vocare, and cognoscere causas, propter quas ab
erroribus suis nolunt recedere. Et si in eis obstinate perseverarint, tum
contra eos procedent.

In hac facienda Visitatione attendant diligenter, quae in hoc brevi compendio
sunt notata, and maxim faciant, ut omnes Ecclesiasticae personae ostendant
titulos suorum Ordinum and Beneficiorum; ut si in ijs aliquis alius defectus
notetur, illis provideant, and omni studio procurent, ut errores, quibus
Dioceses eorum sint infectae, extirpentur, and veritas fidei tum in
concionibus, tum in confessionibus doceatur, deputando personas idoneas ad
conciones faciendas, and confessiones audiendas. Id etiam curent, ut sacrorum
Canonum instituta in omnibus observentur, and nomen Divi Thomae Martyris,
necnon sanctiss. Domini nostri Papae ex libris dispunctum, in illis
restituatur, and pro eo secundum morem ecclesiae, ut ante Schisma fiebat,
oretur.

In publicationibus hujusmodi erit ante omnia commemoratio miseriarum, and
infelicitatis praeteritorum temporum; and magnae Gratiae, quam nunc Deus pro
misericordia populo huic exhibuit: hortando omnes ad haec grato animo
cognoscenda, and infinitas gratias Divinae ipsius bonitati assidue agendas.

Hortandi sunt etiam omnes, ut devote orent Deum pro salute and felici statu
horum Serenissimorum and de hoc regno optime meritorum, ac merentium Regum, and
specialiter pro felici partu Sereniss. and pijssimae reginae.

Formula Absolutionis.
Dominus noster Jhesus Christus, summus Pontifex per suam pijssimam
misericordiam, and clementiam Vos cruore suo preciosissimo redemptos, de
ineffabili sua pietate, ab omnibus peccatis per vos commissis, misericorditer
absolvat. Et ego authoritate Apostolorum Divi Petri and Pauli, ac Sedis
Apostolicae mihi commissa, Vos and Vestrum quemlibet ab omnibus peccatis,
criminibus, excessibus, and delictis, atque ab omni Haeresi, Schismate,
Apostasia, irregularitate, and quocunque errore vestris; necnon a juramento
contra Papatum Romanum per vos praestito; and a quibuscunque excommunicationis,
suspensionis, and interdictionum and alijs sententijs, censuris and poenis
ecclesiasticis a jure vel ab homine latis, per vos ratione praemissorum
incursis and contractis, absolvo, ac communioni fidelium, and S. Sanctis Dei
ecclesiae Sacramentis restituo, reduco and redintegro. In nomine Patris and
Filij and Sp. Sancti. Amen.

NUMBER. LXXXII. An Italian to his friend, concerning Car. Pole.
NOnne solitus fuisti affirmare, Cardinalem illum tuum Polum optime nosse
justificationem sola fide in Christum? Ex Balaei Cent^^^ijs.
mirifice cupere promotam doctrinam nostram, quam mundus odit? Expectare autem
tempus atque occasionem, qua se patefaciat? Certe audivi ego te centies omnia
haec affirmantem, atque audierunt quotquot erant tibi aliqua necessitate
conjuncti, and gustarunt bonum Dei verbum. Quum aliquis eorum aliquando
quereretur, diceretque se non posse far Polum ita esse addictum Papis, atque
ita palam, and tam malo exemplo consentire quotidie Missis, atque alijs
illicitis cultibus, tu solebas prodire and affirmare, illam esse
dissimulationem ad tempus, sed patefacturum se brevi, magno cum fructu
Ecclesiarum Dei. Annon desines nunc ita de illo sentire ac loqui? Non objicies
patrocinium tam injustae causae? Non fateberis una nobiscum, Polum tuum aut
veritatis and pietatis studium abjecisse, and peccare in Sp. Sanctum ad mortem,
aut nunquam serio in religione egisse? Ea vero colloquia, quae apud eum
aliquando instituebantur de Christo, de Evangelio, de viva fide and de
justificatione, huc spectasse, ut nobis tandem pulchre imponeret? O miserum
illum, and infelicem! Proh! quam atrociter laesit aeternam Dei, Christi and Sp.
Sancti majestatem, atque omnes piorum Ecclesias? Nam in regno Angliae
docebatur, and summa cum laetitia audiebatur, Justificatio sola fide in
Christum* satisfactio peccatorum per Christum, certitudo salutis nostrae per
Christum, vera paenitentia, vera absolutio, verus ac legitimus usus
Sacramentorum, atque aliae hujusmodi doctrinae, omnino conformes propheticis,
Evangelicis, Apostolicisque oraculis, atque usui veteris Catholicae ecclesiae,
ita ut essent inde sublati, extirpatique illi soedissimi abusus,
abominabilesque superstitiones atque idolomaniae, quae scatent, regnantque in
Papatu. Cum vero ageretur de his faecibus rursus in illud regnum invehendis,
divinis vero doctrinis abolendis, Polus tuus obtulit hic suam operam, quia
speravit se autoritate and gratia plurimum illic valiturum. Ac statim regnum
ingressus est, praecedente scilicet idolo crucis and cum omni illa pompa atque
abominatione, qua Legati Antichristi uti solent. Populo vero imperavit in
palatium convenire, genua flectere ante se. (quin and Rex and Regina una
procubuerunt in genua, nec puduit illum Antichristi Vicarium id sustinere.) Ubi
autem populum admonuit hactenus a vera fide deviasse, atque haereticum suisse,
addidit se absolutionem Papalem velle impartiri, eumque Sanctae Romans Ecclesiae
reconciliare: and confestim erecta manu, cruceque illata, populum ipsum
absolvit, id est, arripuit atque avulsit, (quantum in se quidem fuit) a studio
verae pietatis, ac ipsiusmet veritatis. Arripuit, inquam, atque avulsit e sinu
atque custodia ipsius very pastoris Dom. nostri Jesus Christi, projecitque recte
in sentinam pristinorum abusuum atque errorum, and sub meram tyrannidem
Antichristi insigni proditione posuit. Quid potest sceleratius, quid
horribilius excogitari? Praesertim de homine, qui favere nostrae causae
aliquando visus est. Annon agnosces nunc, quem virum tandiu and tantopere,
colueris, and paene ut divinum aliquod numen adoraveris? Annon desines tandem?

Quum tuus ille amicus nuper sub nomine Athanasij edidisset scholia in
orationem ipsius Poli, in qua Evangelium vocaret Semen Turcicum, Principes vero
Germaniae Turcas, tu mire tergiversationibus Cardinalem desendebas;
indignissimum putabas, qui ita vexaretur: quin jurabas, eum long aliter nunc
sentire, quicquid aliquando sensisse visus fuerit. At quo pacto poteris
excusare, quod nunc in Anglia gessit? Add multorum literis nuntiari,
restitutam illic fuisse statuam divo (ut ipsi inquiunt) Thomae Cantuariensi,
proditori olim sui regis pessimo. Proh Deum immortalem! hocne etiam tuus Polus
potest pati? Sed Dei beneficio factum esse audio, ut nunc caput illi imagini
amputatum sit, and corpus in parts disceptum.

Quin add, agi nunc in misera illa Anglia de lupanaribus etiam restituendis.
Sed quidni? Quemadmodum enim umbra corpus, sic prostibula ac reliquae
faeditates ac vitia, in primis vero idola, Papatum consequuntur. Sed audi
reliqua, audi quae filius Dei non poterat legere, quin adhuc magis
perhorrescat, ac intimis medullis contremiscat. Thomas Archiepiscopus
Cantuariae, una cum tribus quatuorve alijs Episcopis vere pijs ac Sanctis, qui
justificationem vera fide in Christum, gratuitamque peccatorum remissionem
docuerat, exutus archiepiscopatu, and deterrimos carceres conjectus, vitam
degens in tenebris, in squallore, in egestate, singulis horis gladium
carnificis expectans, tum demum igne absumptus est, tyrannide certe in audita.
Ioannes Hopperus Vuigorniensis Episcopus, and D. Ioannes Rogers, and Doctor
Rolandus Taylerus, ueri martyrs Christi, passi sunt ignes constantissime.

Contra Stephanus Gardinerus falso episcopus Vuintoniensis (nam Ioannes Ponetus
verus illius ecclesiae pastor, and verus Servus Jesus Christi exulat) cum octo
aut december alijs Episcopis impijs and sanguinarijs, qui Evangelium atque
ipsissimum Christum fuerant acerrime insectati, nunc sub Cardinali tuo Polo, in
summo splendore, summisque divitijs and luxibus illic regnant. Ecce itaque
Christum in vinculis, omni infamiae ac tormentorum genere confectum, exutum
vestibus, and tanquam ovem ductam ad macellum. Et vicissim ecce Barabbam
latronem, alijsque tragicis facinoribus coopertum, liberatum, exultantem, and
ferocientem. Atque ecce milites dividentes inter se spolia Christi. Ecce,
inquam, ecce, ut videmus, accidere membris eademmet, quae capiti nostro Christo
acciderunt. Necesse enim est ut simus conformes imagini ejus.

In summa. Tuus Cardinalis regnat and triumphat, fruiturque honoribus fere
Papalibus, fruitur action gratiarum, gratulatione ac gloria ex tota Romans
curia, atque ex omni regno hypocritarum: denique fruitur spe potiundi
Pontificatus. Verum ^go illi vicissim nuntio, omnes eos qui spiritum Dei
sentiunt, (atque hi sunt nostra aetate plures, quam ille forte putet, and
quotidie crescit numerus) cogi pejus de illo sentire, ac loqui, quam aut de
ipso Iulio III. aut de quovis alio dissolutiore and sceleratiore Cardinale.
Quandoquidem tum Antichristus ille, tum reliqui ex Cardinalium grege, aut
potius armento, palam a^que aperte nobiscum pugnarunt: and nunc imprimis
pugnant; Quia victoria Poli eos reddit insolentiores. Polus vero insidijs, ac
sub praetextu pietatis: Quamobrem cum hac aetate, ac in reliqua posteritate,
rasi and uncti, atque id genus hypocritarum encomijs ac laudi^us illum
onerabunt, celebrabuntque, omnes piorum ecclesiae non poterunt non queri, se
tam indigne suisse delusas ab eo. Quamquam esset id Polo utcunque serendum, si
nullam aliam poenam experturus esset, praeter dedecoris atque infamiae
sempiternae. Alia enim eum manet multo gravior. O! iterum illum miserum,
infelicemque: Nam non multo post justissimi Dei nostri ita and vindicta aget,
aget illum praecipitem in prof^ndum abyssi; ubi cum Dia^olo atque angelis ejus,
sempiterno igne cruciabitur.

Illud vero hic addere opus est. Nam seeds illa Romans stulte sibi persuasit
fore, ut nunc tota Germania redeat ad ejus obedientiam; scilicet, quia videt
Anglian^ utcunque redijsse: partim circumventam multis fallacijs dolisque,
partim aperte vi coactam. Quare cum audierit Comitia Augustae celebrari, ex
toto Cardinalium grege selegit Moronum, quem mitteret eo legatum, hominem, qui
in agnoscenda and persequenda veritate persimilis est Card. Polo. Ab eo itaque
expectandae ^unt similes fallaciae, similis hypocrisis, atque impietas: ut non
lac lacti magis simile sit: qui unum videt, alterum videt.

NUMBER. LXXXIII. Bradford to Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, concerning the
Freewillers, about 1554.
To my dear Fathers, Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, Dr. Latimer, Prisoners in Oxford,
for the testimony of the Lord Jesus, and his holy gospel.
ALmighty God, our heavenly father more and more kindle your hearts and
affections with his love: Martyrs Letters.
that our greatest cross may be to be absent from him, and strangers from our
home, and that we may godly contend more and more to please him, Amen, etc.

As for your parts, in that it is commonly thought, your staff stands next
the door, ^ee have the more cause to rejoice, and be glad, as they which shall
come to their fellows under the Altar. To the which Society God with you bring
me also, in his mercy, when it shall be his good pleasure.

I have received many good things from you, my good Lord, Master and dear
Father, N. Ridley; Fruits I mean, of your good labors. Al which I send unto
you again by this bringer [ Augustine Benher] one thing except, which he can
tell, I do keep upon your further pleasure to be known therein. And herewithal I
send unto you a little treatise, which I have made, that you might peruse the
same: and not only you, but also ye, my other most dear and reverend Fathers in
the Lord for ever, to give your Approbation, as ye may think good. All the
prisoners here about in manner have seen it, and read it: and as therein they
aggre with me, nay rather with the truth, so they are ready and will be, to
signify it, as they shall se you give them example. The matter may be thought
not so necessary, as I seem to make it. But yet if ye knew the great evil, that
is like hereafter to come to the posterity by these men, as partly this bringer
can signify unto you; Surely then could ye not but be most willing to put
hereto your helping hands. The which thing that I might the more occasion you
to perceive, I have sent you here a writing of Harry Hearts own hand: Whereby ye
may see, how Christ's glory and grace is like to loose much light, if your sheep
quondam be not something helped by them that love God, and are able to prove,
that al good is to be attributed only and wholly to Gods grace and mercy in
Christ without other respects of worthiness then Christ's merits. The effects of
salvation they so mingle and confound with the cause, that if it be not seen
to, more hurt will come by them, than ever came by the Papists: in as much as
their life commends them to the world more then the Papists. God is my
witness, that I write not this, but because I would Gods glory, and the good of
his people. In Free will they are plain Papists, yea, Pelagians. And ye know
that Modicum fermenti totam Massam corrumpit. They utterly contemn al learning.
But hereof shall this bringer show you more. As to the chief captains therefore
of Christ's church here, I complain of it unto you: as truly I must do of you
even unto God in the last day, if ye will not, as ye can, help something, Vt
veritas doctrinae maneat apud posteros, in this behalf; as ye have done on the
behalf of matters expugned by the Papists. God for his mercy in Christ guide
you, Most dearly beloved Fathers, with his holy Spirit here, and in all other
things, as most may make to his glory, and the commodity of the Church, Amen.

Al here, God therefore be praised, prepare themselves willingly to pledge our
Captain Christ, even when he will, and how he will. By your good prayers we shall
al fare the better; and therefore we al pray you to cry to God for us, as we,
God willing, do and will remember you. My brethren here with me have thought it
their duty to signify this need to be no less, then I make it, to prevent the
plantations, which may take root by these men.

Yours in the Lord, Robert Ferrar
Rowland Tailor
John Bradford.
John Philpot.

NUMBER. LXXXIV. The Prisoners for the Gospel, their Declaration concerning K.
Edward his Reformation.
To the King and Queens most excellent Majesty's, with their most honorable
high court of Parliament.
WE poor Prisoners for Christ's religion, require your Honors, in our dear
Savior Christ's name, Foxij MSS.
earnestly now to repent, for that you have consented of late to the unplaceing
of so many godly laws, set forth touching the true religion of Christ before,
by two most Noble Kings, being Father and brother to the Queens Highness, and
aggreed upon by all your consents; not without your great and many
deliberations, free and open disputations, costs and pains taking in that
behalf, neither without great Consultations, and conclusions, had by the
greatest learned men in the realm, at Windsor, Cambridg and Oxford, neither
without the most willing consent, and allowing of the same by the whole Realm
thoroughly: So that there was not one Parish in all England, that ever desired
again to have the Romish Superstitions and vain Service, which is now by the
Popish, proud, covetous clergy placed again, in contempt not only of God, al
Heaven, and all the holy ghostes lessons in the blessed Bible: but also against
the honors of the said two most noble Kings, against your own Country, fore
aggreements, and against all the godly consciences within this realm of England,
and elsewhere. By reason whereof Gods great plagues must needs follow, and great
unquietnes of consciences; besides al other persecutions and vexations of
bodies and goods, must needs ensue. Moreover we certify your honors, that
since your said unplaceing of Christ's true religion, and true service, and
placing in the room thereof Antichrist^ Romish Superstition, heresy and
idolatry, all the true preachers have been removed, and punished, and that with
such open robbery, and cruelty, as in Turkey was never used, either to their own
Countrymen, or to their mortal enemies.

This therefore our humble suit is now to your honorable estates, to desire the
same, for all the mercies sake of our dear and only Savior Jesus Christ, and for
the duty you owe to your native Country, and to your own souls, earnestly to
consider from what light to what darkness this realm is now brought, and that in
the weightiest, chief and principal matter of Salvation, of al our souls and
bodies everlasting, and for ever more. And even so we desire you at this your
assembly, to seek some effectual reformation for the before written most
horrible deformation in this church of England. And touching your selves we
desire you in like manner, that we may be called before your Honors; and if we
be not able both to prove and approve by the Catholic and Canonical rules of
Christ's true religion, the church Homilies and Service set forth in the most
innocent K. Edwards days; and also to disallow and reprove, by the same
authorities, the Service now set forth, since his departing; then we offer our
bodies, either to be immediately burned, or else to suffer whatsoever other
painful and shameful death, that it shall please the King and Queens Majesty's
to appoint. And we think this trial and probation may be now best, either in
the plain English tongue by Writing, or otherwise by disputation in the same
tongue. Our Lord for his great mercy sake grant unto you all the continual
assistance of his good and holy Spirit. Amen.

NUMBER. LXXXV. John Fox to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Queen Mary's time:
relating to the persecution.
UT singularis vigilantia vestra cum pari conjuncta prudentia, neutiquam eget
consilijs aut documentis meis, Foxij. MSS.
Proceres and Patres inspiciendi, ita nihil vicissim a pudore ac verecundia mea
alienius esse possit, quam summates viros ulla in re interpellare literis.
Atutinam hunc naturae affectum, ut hactenus, perpetuo tueri liceret. Nunc vero
ubi in eas difficultates, ceu inter Symplegadas, incidimus, ut neque
obticescere sine impietate, nec loqui sine periculo liceat, considerabit,
opinor, prudentia vestra non tam quid me deceat, quam quid officij exigat
ratio. Quoque gravior sit ad scribendum causa, hoc faciliorem spero impetrabit
veniam audacia. Equidem nihil addubito, quin eximia authoritas vestra divinae
cujusdam potentiae vicariam nobis imaginem representat in terris, semper and
egit sedulo, and actura est, ut cum dignitate vestra, simul publica totius
ditionis vestrae tranquillitas salusque contineatur. Quid enim aliud vel ab
amplissimo hoc loco expectare, vel de singulari vigilantia vestra suspicari
convenit, quam a vobis, qui Patres sitis Re^p. paratissim^ fore omnia, sicubi
vel auxilij fidem, vel juvandi voluntatem res communis desiderabit, ut neque
facultati vestrae quicquam adjici, nec in voluntate quicquam desiderari poterit
Atque enimvero si in ijs duntaxat sita esset Reip. administratio, quae per se
satis possent humanae prudentiae praesidia moderari, ni^is insanire videretur,
qui vos monendo instituere, hoc est Solemn meridianum luce ascititia illustrare
speraret. Quanquam n^ id quidem sapientia, opinor, vestra postulabit sibi,
hujusmodi censeri vos, qui non communi condition nati cum caeteris* pariter
cum reliquis mortalibus, etsi minus fortasse, at nonnunquam tamen, labi atque
exorbitare possitis: Etiamsi humana forent maxim, atque intra proprij ingenij
vires clausa, quae ageretis.

Nunc vero cum omnis Reip. gubernatio divine sit, magnaque ejus pars in
religionis versetur tractatione, long supra humanum captum ardua, ut alteram
partem vobis lubenter tribuimus, ita in altera societatem aliquam consilij haud
omnino estis, opinor, aspernaturi: praesertim cum id non tam siducia
arrogantiae aliqua sacimus, quam temporis atque officij necessitate impulsi.
Quis enim, vos obtestor, Gravissimi Patres, ferat; quis non deploret; Quem non
ad gemitus, ad lacrymas pertrahat, tametsi Angliam nunquam viderit, tantum in
Anglia fundi Christiani Sanguinis; tot cives ingenuos, tot liberales and
innocents promiscue cum soeminis viros, capite ac fortunis quotidie
periclitari, caedi, exu^i, laniari; prope sine modo and numero? Quod si Barbari
ex ultima Turcia barbarosa, aut exterae nationis ferus hostis aliunde irrumpens
in Angliam, tantam hanc gentis nostrae stragem designasset, haud minor fortasse
calamitas, aut minor prosecto esset queremonia. Saevitiam etsi omnino per se
grave^n, nationis tamen minueret distinctio. Nunc quorum saluti apud vos
potissimum esse perfugium conveniebat, ^osdem vos ipsi capi, exagitari,
discerpi, dilacerari, Angli Anglos, Magistratus subditos, Christiani
Christianos, cernitis and toleratis. Quique nuper sub Edwardi auspicatissimi
Principis divino imperio florentissima tranquillitate, cum domum vitae non
securitate modo, sed voluptate etiam utebantur, nunc ijdem invertente se rerum
humanarum scena, miseris cruciatibus vitam, quam tueri nequeunt, deserere
coguntur; non quia vita aut mores mutati ipsorum, sed quia duntaxat tempora
mutata sunt.

Et ubi interim (...) illa Paulina, ubi Clementia vestra, Mitissimi proceres,
ubi inveterata illa semperque laudata etiam erga hosts, Anglorum pietas, si in
vestros tam esseri tamque exitiales esse velitis? Scio ingeniorum immensam ac
infinitam prope varietatem esse in mundo; apud homines haud secus quam apud
belluas. Quidam natura mitiores. Contra sunt, quos natos saevitiae dixeris, ac
truculentiae. Alij consuetudine prava hoc vitio delectantur, Nonnulli rursus ab
alijs, ceu contagium, accipiunt. Verum utcunq^e alijs aliud natura insevit,
certe nihil viris generosis tam proprium ac genuinum, nihil naturae ipsorum (si
naturae tueri velint) quadrans magis, quam generosa quaedam indoles ac morum
ingenuitas: Quae prosit omnibus, officiat nemini, nisi lacessita forte. Ac ne
tum quidem, nisi coacta magis, quam sua sponte: idque magis Reip. ratione, quam
sua saevitia: ac ne tum quidem sui oblivisci potest generosa pietas, semper ad
salutem miserorum, quam perniciem intentior; excusans, patrocinans, sublevans,
relinquens, quo misericordiae cognoscentiae esse locus possit.

Ecquae haec nunc tanta hominum, ne dicam, an temporum degeneratio, in viros,
non improbos modo, sed innocenti ac inculpata vita, a quibus nemo unquam laesus
vestrum, aut lacessitus sit, public simul ac privatim bonos, sic inardescere
saevitiam quorundam, ut nulla sit hostium natio tam barbara, ubi non tutius
conquiescant, quam apud suos? Quondam apud priscos Romanos plusquam sontium
censebatur, quod civem in discrimen adduceret capitis; ubi and octo erant
suppliciarum genera* quorum mors, ut ultima, ita nisi clarissima, non
indicebatur: Q^id quod ne tum quidem deerant etiam vitae defensores, ac libera
apud populum actio. Ex quo effectum est, ut eloquentiae studium tanto in honor
ac usu apud omnes esse, ut urbem prope universam ad sui conten^ionem excitaret.
Tantus in gentilitio populo patriae amor, ac salutis cura, apud patricios
vigebat viros, quorum omnis fere laus in conservandis quamplurimis cerneretur.
Atque istos nondum ulla religionis inbuerat gratia, tantum natura ipsa, ac
literarum humani^as ad tantam excolere potuit civilitatem. Et o brutorum
jamdudum in Anglia extinctum genus, quod apud Ethnicos natura, quod literae
valuerunt civiles, non idem valebit pietas, non Evangelij vig r, non a Christo
inculcata toties impetrabit charitas; quin ob quamlibet levem causam, aut
nullam potius, ad paenas rapiuntur, adeo frigescente ubique charitate, ut haud
sciam, an hoc ipsum capitale futurum sit, quod pro afflictis fratribus mutire
audeam; i^^mque in hac re eveniat mihi, quod Iustino olim, pro Christianis
(...), qui dum pro Martyribus deprecatur, fit and ipse Martyr.

NUMBER. LXXXVI. Dr. Ridley late Bishop of London to West, formerly his Steward,
who had complied with the Romish religion.
Foxij. MSS.
I Wish you grace in God, and love of the truth. Without the which truly
established in man's heart by the mighty hand of Almighty God, it is no more
possible to stand by the truth in Christ's cause, in the time of tribulation,
then it is for wax to abide the heat of the fire.

Sir, know you this, that I am (blessed be God) persuaded that this world is
but transitory, as S. John says, Mundus transit and concupiscentia ejus. 1
I^an. 2.
I am persuaded Christ's words to be true, Qui me confessus fuerit coram
hominibus, I will confess him before my father, which is in heaven. Matt. 10.
And I believe that no earthly creature shall be saved, whom the Redeemer and
Savior of the world shall before his Father deny. This the Lord grant that it
may be so grafted, established, and fixed in my heart, that neither things
present, or to come, high or low, life or death, be able to remove.

It is a godly wish that ye wish me depely to considre things perteinyng to
Gods honor and glory. But if ye had wished also, that neither fear of death, or
hope of worldly prosperity should let me to maintein gods word, and his truth,
which is his glory and true honor, it would have liked me very well.

You desire me for Gods sake to remember my self. Indeed, Sir, now it is time
for me so to do. For so far as I can perceyve, it stands me of no les
danger, then of the los both of body and soul: And I trow, then it is time
for a man to awake, if any thing will awake him. He that will not fear him, that
threatens to cast body and soul into everlasting fire, whom will he fear? Oh
Lord, fasten thou together our frayl flesh, that we never swarve from thy Laws.

You say, you have made much suit for me. Sir, God g^aunt, that you have not,
in sueing for my worldly delivera^ce, empaired or hindered the furtheraunce of
Gods word and his truth.

You have known me long indede, in the which time it has chanced me to
mislyke some things. It is true, I grant. For sodeine chaunges without
substantial and necessary causes, and the heady setting forth of extremities, I
did never love. Confession to the minister, which is able to instruct, correct,
comfort, and enform the weak and ignorant consciences, I have ever thought
might do much good in Christ's Congregation. And so I assure you I do think,
even at this day.

My doctrine and my preaching, you say, you have heard often: and after your
judgment, have thought it godly, saving of the Sacrament. Which thing, although
it was of me reverendly handled, and a great deal better than of the rest, as
you say, yet in the margent you write (warily, and in this world wisely) thus:
And yet methought, not al soundly. Well, Sir, but I see so many chaunges in the
world, and so much alteration, or else at this your saying, I would not a little
mervayl. I have taken you for my trusty freynd, and a man, whom I fantasied
for plainness and faithfulness, as much, I ensure you, as for your learning. And
have you kept this so close in your heart from me unto this day? Sir, I
considre mo things than one; and will not say all that I think. But what need you
to care what I think, for any thing that I shall be able to do unto you either
good or harm?

You geve me good lessons, to stand in nothing against my learning, and to
beware of vain glory. Truly, Sir, herein I like your counsel very well; and by
Gods grace I intend to follow it unto my lyves end.

To write to them whom you name, I cannot se what it will avayle me. For this I
would now have you know it, I esteem nothing avaylab^e for me, which also will
not set forth the glory of God.

And now because I perceive you have an entyre zeal and desire of my
deliverance out of this captivity, and worldly misery; if I should not bear you
a good heart in God again, methynk I were to blame. Sir, how nigh the day of my
dissolution and departure hence out of this world is at hand, I cannot tell. The
Lords will be fulfilled. How soon soever it shall come, I know the Lords words
must be verified on me, that I shall appear before the incorrupt Judge, and be
countable to him of al my former life. Although the hope of his mercy is my
shote ankor of eternal Salvation; yet am I persuaded, that whosoever wittingly
neglects and regards not to clear his conscience, he cannot have peace with
God, nor a lyvely faith in his mercy. Conscience moves me, considering you
were one of my family and of my household, (of whom then I think I had a
special cure, and of all them which were in my house, which indede ought to
have been an example of godliness to all the rest of my cure, not only in godly
life, but also in promoting of Gods word, to thuttermost of their power: But
now alas! when the trial does separate the corn from the chaff, how small a deyl
it is God knows, which the wind does not blow away:) This conscience, I say,
does move me to have fear, lest the lightness of my family shall be laid unto me,
for lack of more earnest and diligent instructions, which should have been done.
But blessed be God, which has geven me grace to se my default, and to lament
it from the bottom of my heart, before my departure hence. This Conscience
also does move me now to require both you, and my freynd Dr. Harvy, to remember
your promises made to me in time past, of the pure setting forth and preaching
of Gods word and his truth. These promises, although you shall not need to fear
to be charged with them of me hereafter before the world; Yet look for none
other, I exhort you as my freynds, but to be charged with them at Gods hand.

This Conscience, and the love that I bear unto you, byddeth me now say to you
both in Gods name; Fear God, and love not the world; for God is able to cast
both body and soul into hell fire. Cum exarserit in brevi ira ejus, beati omnes,
says the Psalm, qui confidunt in eo. And the saying of S. John is true,
Quicquid est in mundo, Psalm. 2.
veluti concupiscentia carnis, and concupiscentia oculorum, and fastus vitae, 1
Joan. 2.
non ex patre, sed ex mundo est. Et mundus transit, and concupiscentia ejus.
Qui autem facit voluntatem Dei manet in aeternum. If these gifts of grace,
which undoubtedly are necessarily required unto eternal salvation, were truly
and unfeignedly grafted, and firmly stablished in men's hearts, they would not
be so light, so suddenly to shrink from the maintenance and confession of the
truth, as it is now, alas! seen so manifestly, of so many in these days.

But here peradventure ye would know of me, what is the truth. Sir, Gods word is
the truth, as S. John says, and it is even the same that was heretofore. For
albeit man does vary and change, as the Moon, yet Gods word is stable and
abides for evermore. And of Christ it is truly said, Heb. 13.
Christus heri and hodie, idem etiam in secula.

When I was in office, al, that were esteemed for learned men in Gods word,
aggreed this to be a truth in Gods word written: that the Common prayers of the
Church should be had in the common tongue. You know I have conferred with many,
and I ensure you, I never found man, so far as I do remember, neither old nor
new* Gospeller or Papist, of what judgm^nt soever he was, in this thing to be
of a contrary opinion. If then it were a truth of Gods word, think you, that
the Alteration of the world can make it now an untruth? If it cannot, why do
men, so many, shrink from the confession and maintenance of this truth, once
received of us al? For what is it, I pray you, else to confess or deny Christ in
this world, but to confess and maintain the truth taught in Gods word, nor for
any worldly respect to shrynke from the same? This one have I brought but for
an example. Other things be in like case, which now particularly I need not to
rehearse. For he that will forsake wittingly, either for fear or gain of the
world, any one open truth of Gods word, if he be strayned, he will assuredly
forsake God and al his truth, rather then he will endaunger himself either to
loose, or to leave that he loves indede better, then he does God and the truth
of his word.

I like therein very well, your plain speaking, wherein you say, I must either
aggree or die: and I thynk you mean of the bodily death, which is common both to
good and bad. Sir, I know I must die, whether I aggree, or no. But what folly
were it then to make such an aggreement, by the which I could never escape this
death; which is so common to al; and also I might incur the guilt of eternal
death and damnation?

Lord grant, that I may utterly abhor and detest this damnable aggreement so
long as I lyve.

And because I dare say, you wrote of friendship to me this short ernest
advertisement, and I think verily wyshing me to lyve, and not to die: Therefore
bearing you in my hear no less love in God, then you do me in the world; I say
to you In verbo Domini, that except you, (and this I say to you I say to al my
friends and lovers in God) except ye confess and mainteyn, to your power and
knowledge, things which be grounded upon Gods word, but will either for fear, or
gayn of the world, shrynke and play the Apostata, indede you shall die the death.
You understand what I mean. And I beseech you, and al my true freynds and
lovers in God, remember what I say. For this peradventure may be the last time,
that ever I shall write to you. From Bocardo in Oxenford, theighth day of April,
Anno 1554.

Yours in Christ, Nicolas Rydley.

NUMBER. LXXXVII. John Hopton Bishop of Norwich, to the Earl of Sussex, giving
account of the joy conceived, and Te Deum sung, for the news of the Queens
being brought to bed of a Noble Prince.
RIght honorable, and my singular good Lord. After mine humble commendations,
Cotton Library, Titus. B. 2.
with like thanks for your honorable and gentle letters sent to me, touching
the behavior of the Curate of Bokenham, and the reformation of other
enormities there; It may please you to understand, that I did send immediately
for the said Curate, and the Churchwardens and the Quest-men there. And upon
their appearance with twelve or fourteen of the most substantial men of the
parish, and upon due examination, I could perceive none other thing, but al
things to be well, and decently ordered, and provided for at this holy time of
Easter, contrary to the information given to your good Lordship. And if there
had been any thing amiss, they should have been punished according to their
demerits. Beseeching your good Lordship, if any further knowledge come to you,
either for that Town, or any other, concerning the Reformation of my
jurisdiction, or the negligence of mine Officers, that I may be advertised
thereof, and have your favorable aid and assistance. And I shall do the best I
can for my discharge.

And where it pleased your honorable Lordship to will me to take a dinner, or a
supper with you in the time of my Visitation, I humbly thank you therefore most
heartily. Beseeching your Lordship, when occasion shall serve you to visit this
city, that ye will vouchsafe to take this my poor house at your commandment;
whereunto your Lordship shall be as welcome as unto your own.

Further, I understand that Mr. Mayor here has certified your Lordship of the
sudden good news brought to us by one of the city, of the Queens highness most
joyful deliverance of a Noble Prince. Whereupon to laud God Te Deum was solemnly
songen in the Cathedral church, and other places of the city, with wonderful
joy and much gladness of al people throughout the whole city, and the country
therabouts. And if ye have any further knowledge thereof, I beseech your
honorable Lordship, that I may be partaker of the same by this bringer, my
servant, whom I send purposely therefore, as knows the Holy Ghost; who
preserve your Lordship in continual health and honor. At Norwich, the thread of
May 1555.

Your Lordships assuredly, John Norwich.
Postscripta. I received even now knowledge from a friend of mine of two
witnesses more of the good and joyful news above written, as this said bringer
can declare to your good Lordship.

John Norwich.



NUMBER. LXXXVIII. A Proposition in the Convocation against Residence. With
Reasons for the said Proposition; and Remedies against Non-residence.
Decretum perpetuae Residentiae juxta Canonum Sanctiones optant pij, sed multa
sunt, C. C. C C. Libr. Synodalia.
quae hodie impediunt, quo minus suum effectum juxta bonorum virorum vota
consequatur.
The Reasons.
I. THE Statutes of the Kingdom, not disallowed, as we hear, by the Pope, do
permit to the Barons, and other great men of the kingdom, a certain number of
Priests, having cure of souls.

II. Not only the Statutes of the kingdom, but the Canons do permit Bishops a
certain number of fellow workers, to assist them.

III. Bishops and Prelates, who by reason of their great learning, prudence,
integrity of life, and high faith, are chosen to be the Kings Counsillors, and
whose counsils are very necessary for the restoring of religion, ought not, as
it seems, to be compelled to perpetual Residence.

IV. When the Barons and other great men may be retained in the orthodox faith,
by the doctrine, honesty, age and frequent exhortations of Reverend men, it
seems not convenient, that such men should be driven from them; provided they
do reside a good part of the year upon their Churches.

V. Since the Dispensation of two or three benefices has been granted by
former Princes to some Priests, for the merit of their life and manners, they
cannot without injury be deprived of them; Nor yet can they in all respects
reside personally and perpetually.

VI. When many have designed their sons for the Universities, and have been at
no small charges to give them learning, because they have entertained good hope,
that they might hereafter be assistant to their friends and relations: this
hope being gone, their care about this matter will also grow cold, otherwise of
it self cold enough. For as he said, Where there is no honor, there is no Art.

VII. The houses of the Rectories in many places are either ruined, or none at
al, or let out by Indentures.

Going to the Court of Rome. Going to a General Council. Going to a Synod, or
Parliament. Violent detaining.
Remedies.
That there be a les number of those that follow the Court, who heap up
benefices upon benefices.

That they who have many Benefices, reside a certain time upon each.

That a way be found, whereby such as live in Towns and Cities may be forced to
pay Personal tiths. Which being now almost quite taken a way, the Benefices in
such places are in a great part lessened.

When some of the Bishops, by reason of the slendernes of their possessions,
cannot afford Stipends to the Priests, their fellow laborers, that they who
serve them reside for a certain time of the year in their own parishes.

That Rectors, who heretofore have paid pensions to Monasteries in ready money,
be not now compelled to pay the same in bread-corn to Lay-proprietors.

That in Woody places, where the custom has always obtained, tith may be
paid of Sylvae caeduae [that is, Wood that is cut to grow again,] especially
when there is a great scarcity of corn in such places.

Parishes are not divided jure divino. Whence follows, that as many Benefices
may be laid into one, so one, by reason of the greatness of it, may be divided
into two.

NUMBER. LXXXIX. Pole Cardinal Legate, to Archbishop Cranmer, in answer to the
Letter he had sent to the Queen.
ALmighty God the Father, by the grace of his only son, god and man, Foxij MSS.
that dyed for our sins, may geve you true and perfect repentance. This I
daily pray for my self being a Sinner: but I thank God never obstinate sinner.
And the same grace the more earnestly I do pray for to be geven to them that be
obstinate, the more neade they have thereof, being otherwise past al man's
cure, and admonition to save them. As your open sayings, in open audience,
doyth show of you. Which has cawsed, that those judges, that has sit upon the
examination of your greviouse fautes, seeing no lykelod of any repentance in
you, has utterlie cast away al hope of your recoverie: Whereof doith follow
the most horrible sentence of condempnation, both of your body and soul, both
your temporal death and eternal. Which is to me so great an horror to here,
that if there were any way, or mean, or fashion, that I might find to remove
you from error, bryngeng you to the knowledge of the truth, for your
Salvation: This I testify to you before God, upon the Salvation of mine own
soul, that I would rather choose to be that mean, that you might receive this
benefyt by me, then to receive the greatest benefyt for my self, that can be
geven under heaven in this world: I easteme so much the salvation of one soul.

And becawse it happened to me to see your private lettres directed to the
Qwenes Highness, sent by the same unto me, wherein you utter and express such
appearaunt reasons, that cause you to swarve from the rest of the Church, in
these Articles of the authority of the Pope, and of the Sacrament of the
altar, Concluding with these words, That if any man can show you by reason,
that the authority of the Pope be not prejudicyal to the wealth of the realm,
or that your doctrine in the Sacrement be erroneous, then you would never be so
perverse to stond wylfullie in your own opinion: but shall with all humility
submytt your self to the truth in all things, and gladly embrace the same:
Thise your words, written in that lettre, geveth me some occasion, desyring
your wealth, not utterly to dispayr thereof; but to attempt to recover you by
the same way, that you open unto me: Which is, by reason to show you the error
of your opinion, and withal the light of the treuthe in both causes. But
whither this may healp you indede, or bring you to revoke the same, with true
repentance, this I know not; and I fear much the contrary. For that I see
the ground and beginning, how you fell into error in both thise articles, not
to be of that sort, that makes men commonly to fall into errors and heresies.
Which sort and way is by meddling with your wit and discourse natural, to examen
the Articles of the faith* Making your reason judge thereof, which ought to
be judged and ruled by the tradition of the faith. Which abuse causes men
daily to fall into errors and heresies. And the same also is in you, and is
joined with that you have done. But here stands not the grownde of your
error, nor yet in this other common manner of faulling from the truth, which
S. Paul notes in the Gentiles, and is in all me^ commonly that follows their
sensual appetites, Qui veritatem D^i in injustitia detinent: Which thing also
has been occasion of your ^rrour. But yet not this is the very grownde
thereof, but a further sawte: that you geveng your oath to the truth, you
mocked with the same, as the Jews mocked with Christ, when they saluted him
saing, Ave Rex Iudaeorum, and afterward did crucify him. For so did you to
the Vicar of Christ, Knowledgeng the Pope of Rome by the words of your oath, to
be so, and in mind entendeng to crucify the same authority. Whereof came the
plague of deape ignorance and blyndnes unto you. Which is now that brings
you to this grievous peril, to perish both body and soul. From which peril no
reason can deliver you.

But you discovereng your self, touching the entry, when you should make the
customable oath of al legitimate Busshops in Christendom, which is the door for
you to enter to the service of God, in the highest spiritual office withyn this
realm, and seeing you made the same but for a countenance, nothing meaneng to
observe that you promised by the oath; this is a door, that every thieffe may
enter bye. This is not the door that they enter by, that mean earnestly the
service of God. Wherein the Prophets sentence is plain, askeng this question,
Quis ascendet in montem Domini? aut quis stabit in loco sancto ejus? And then
answering to the same saying, Innocens manibus, and mundo cord, qui non
accepit in vano animam suam, nec juravit in dolo proximo suo. Haec est
generatio quaerentium Dominum, quaerentium faciem Dei Jacob. So that you now
entryng to the mownteyne of God, which was to that high Archbushoprick, and to
the Primacie in the realm, by a clean contrary way, which is, as you confess
your self by a feigned oath, by fraud, and dissimulation, what more plain
sentence can be against you, if you have a thousand reformations in your mind,
then that all this doith not make, that this should be the way to the true
service of god, nor that you, useng a false oath, should be of that generation,
which with their heart sought god, but utterlye concludes against you, that if
those that abstain from al deceit with their neighbor, specially in oath, be
blessed of God, he that confesses to have used such dissimulation in his oath,
not with one neighbor or twain, but with the hole realm, with the hole
church, what can he receve, but the malediction of god? What can more
evidentlie show that man to be none of that generation that seeks god? As if
there were none other proffe, that followed in your acts, such a deceitful and
shameful entry, doith manifestly declare; and most of al, one of the furst
acts you did after this. Which was to pluck the rest of the realm (of whom you
had chief cure) out of the House of God, bryngeng them furthwyth into the
Schism.

And that we see now, that the hole realm by the high mercy of God, being
brought into the House of God again, there to receive his grace and
benediction: and this to be done by those princes, and those ministers, Qui non
acceperunt in vano animam suam, nec jur averunt in dolo proximo suo: your
person yet remayneng without, deprived of the grace granted to them, what
doith this show, but that it is the just sentence of god against you, for your
deceitful entry into his service; and the mercy of God toward them, that not
wyllenglie went forth; but by your traitorous means were thrust out?

So that here now I have told you, whither you hear me, or no, the very cause
of your blyndnes and ignorance: Which is the vengeance of god against you,
for your dissimulation and perjurie, to him and to the hole church, at your
ent^eng to the high service thereof. Whereby you have deserved to be cast out of
the house of god, which is the church, in tenebras exteriores, ubi est fletus,
and stridor dentium. Which is the place and state, wherein I see ^ow now lie;
and the same I saw so evidently in your lettres, from the begynneng to the
eand, as nothing can be more plain: you showeng your self in the same to be so
ignorant, that you know not those things, which be evident to every man: which
every man, that has any exterior light, by experience and knowledge of
things past, doith know -- Here much is wanting. that be once of the church as
dead bodies, when the spirit is out. But to all that be within the body of the
Church, this geveth comfort and liffe, as the spirit doith to the body. And
this shall be sufficient to say for every man's information of the truth in
this matter, that will beleave, other that old or late experience, or the
contynual doctrine of the hole church, has taught in everye christen realm.
Whereof none ever found this fawte, that the Popes Laws Spiritual were not to
be exercised, because the same could not aggree with their politic laws: but
rather found fawte, when the Pope himself, or his Ministers* did let the course
of those laws, which aggreed with every politic body, as the Soul of man
with all complexions, and form of body. And when they were stopped, then seemed
to be stopped the breath and liffe of justice, as no realm can gyve, as I said
before, greater or surer testimonye than ours. For when the authority and laws
of the Pope did flourish in the realm, al justice flourished wythal; and that
stopped and cast out, as it was thise latter years, al good justice, and civil
manner of lyvyng was stopped and cast forth withal.

So that when you came furst to mervayle of a thing never seen, nor hard of
before in this realm that a Busshop, made by the Popes authority, should not be
deposed, without his authority, what doith this show, but a deap blyndnes and
ignorance of the use of the law in this realm, ever continual, and never
broken of any just prince, untyl you your self were made Busshop: Which healped
them to break al good laws and customs of the realm; and then afterward to
make this for a great reason, that the Popes laws should not be now again
admytted, for then you say, all the hole realm that cast out his authority,
must needs knowledge themself accursed: Which god, you say, forefend. And this
you show you cannot abide, for nothing by any manner that the realm should
knowledge themself accursed: Which they cannot, you say, avoid, if they admyt
the Popes law, as good. This word you should have said before the realm had cast
forth the Pope's authority, for to have let^ed them from their faull into the
curse; and this had been the very part of a good Busshop. But after that they
were faullen from the laws, which they had admytted before, and thereby run
into the curse, (which you say cannot be avoyed of them that has ones admytted
them) Then I with all good and catholic men, do say, god ^ore^end, they after
this should not knowledge their state to be accursed. Which if they did not, they
could never be absolved from the curse. And he that forbeddeth now the
knowledge of the same* doith in effect procure, that being accursed indede,
they remain ever accursed. This is your monstrous and blind love you pretend
to bear to the realm, being accursed your self, and blinded in the knowledge of
your state, to have the hole realm remain still accursed. But the true
affection thise two Catholic princes bear to the realm, with the blood of
those that resisted the swarveng from the Popes authority, has obtained of
the high mercy of God, that the hole realm has with repentance knowledged
their evel state they stood in, syneth the leaveng of the authority of the
Pope in the realm, and with repealing of those laws, made contrary, have
asked absolution, and received it, and be delivered of al curse, received into
the grace of go^, and brought into the churches lapp again: they only left
out, that doith refuse this grace, and has not so much grace to accept it.
Whereof if any should be deprived, none has deserved it more by the just wrath
of God to be deprived, then he that was chief doer, to make the realm lose it,
as you; by showeng your self in this to be the very membre of Satan, both
then, but most of al now. Which deprived of grace of repentance himself, would
draw al other to his dampnation, and dissuadeth al return to grace.

This your charity you now show to your contrie, which, as I said hitherto, is
very vengeance of God toward you. Of the which this great blyndnes gyveth a
great testimony, that you show in your lettre, writeng of thise things, as
though you had never knowledge what had been done in the realm before your
time, nor what was the state of your time, nor yet what is the state of the
realm at this present, bryngeng for a great inconvenient, that if the Parliament
should accept the laws of the Pope, they should be constrained to repeal those
that were done against his laws and authority: As though this were not so
done already. And showeng so great ignorance, both touching the doctrine of
the church, and in this ^oyncte touching the Popes authority, and the
experience of the custom of the realm, yet you conclude, that ignorance might
excuse other men, how prejudicyal the canon laws be to the wealth of the
realm, if they would accept the same. But you cannot be excused by ignorance.
And seeing in this the very truth, that ignorance cannot excuse you, as in
truth it cannot, being of that kind it is. But if that do not excuse you,
then malice doith condemn you: Which is the very cause to bring you to
ignorance inexcusable, both in this poincte of the authority of the Pope, as
in the doctrine of the Sacrement: Wherein it is no less monstrous. And this you
show most, where you think to speak with less obstinacy. As where you say,
that if they that follow the Popes doctrine herei^, could bring in but one old
ancient Doctor of the Church of their opinion, you have offered before, as you
offer yet, to g^ve place unto them, and to consent to the same. What a proffe
is this to show your profound blyndnes? If there be no let but this, because
you see not of the old Doctors, at the least one, that were against yowr
opinion, in the defense of the Popes doctrine, other men seeing so many, and
not one ancient approved doctor that ever dissented, what a wonderful blyndnes
is this, not to see one against you? For this is plain, when the Pope shows
his sense and doctrine in this Article, he doith not speak thereof, as of an
Article, that he himself has newly found, nor yet any of his predecessors,
but that al has uniformally received one of another of their fathers, unto the
Apostles time, and they of Christ. Which argument is so strong, so evident to
the condempnation of your opinion, and confirmatyon of the Popes, that many
sage and learned men writing against the opinion you follow, being diverse
sorts of arguments to confound the same, set apart al form of reasoneng, and
only stick upon the testimony and uniforme consent of all the old Doctors of
the Church to this day. Which testimonies be so meny, that they fill up great
books; as amongst other, my Lord of Durham at this present, in his book written
of this matter, takes this way, to ground himself most upon, the perpetual
consent of the old Doctors, continuing unto this age: and al against your
opinion. Which book is abroad, and has been seen of you.

Then if ye will think him of so small judgment or knowledge, that in such a
nombre as he brings, there is not one, that makes to his purpose, but al for
your purpose, whom he entendeth to oppugn, other this must prove a wonderful
blyndnes in him, and not in him alone, but in so menie learned men, that takes
the same way; or else in you* that amongst so menye testimonies, some more
clerer then some, not to see so much as one alone: this is an evydent proff,
that ye be stark blind. For if ye were not, if it were but one brought forth
unto you, as is mentioned in that book, the condempnation of Berengarius, that
was of your opinion; and that done by a General Council of all the Nations in
Chrystendom; growndeng it self upon the uniform doctrine of their forefathers;
Were not this enough, if you had yies to see, to show that more then one old
Doctor were of the Popes doctrine? And if this be not sufficyent proff unto you,
the same being enough to Berengarius himself, which was converted thereby, and
persuaded to recant his opinion; what does this show, but that he was not
utterly blinded, but that he saw some testimony against him, you utterly to
have lost al sight, that se not so much as one.

But of this your monstrous blyndnes I mervell the less, the more I see the
same to proceed of the very justice and wrath of God against you; with whom you
mocking on that manner as you showed in coming in such a high place, in service
of the church, as was to be Archbishop and Primate of the Realm, as to swear in
dolo, not only Proximo, but Vniversae Ecclesiae: Wylleng afterward to pervert
the old order of the church, which you called a Reformation, me seems to here
the very words and curse of S. Paul, that lighted upon the false Prophet
Bariesu, letting the coorse of the doctrine Evangelical preached by him, when
he then curseng him, said, O! plene omni malo, and omni fallacia, fili diaboli,
inimice omnis justitiae, non desinis pervertere vias Domini rectas? Et ecce
nunc manus Domini super te, and eris caecus, non videns solemn, usque ad tempus.
The effect of this I do see has lighted upon you; for entreng by deceit to be
a chieff Doctor in the church, perverteng Vias Domini rectas, to be blinded, I
pray God it be but ad tempus. But hitherto I have not known a more deaper
blyndnes. And if that was ponnyshment of that false prophet, to lose his
corporal sight for a time, that being an infidelle, for very ignorance did put
obstacle to the very true doctrine of the faith never hard of before, to be
blinded corporally for a time, you that first knew the doctrine, and preached
the same, which afterward you do pervert, if you were stricken with a gretter,
and more notable blyndnes, the which you show now, this is evident to come of
the very hond of god, which man's hond cannot heal, but only the hond of god,
that justly ponnyshed you therewithal. And the sorer and more desperate cure
is of this your blyndnes, the more you acquyett your self therein: as though
you had a great gift of light above al other. For so you show in your lettres,
persuadeng your self to have found a way in teacheng the doctrine of the
Sacrament of the altar, that other has not seen: Which is to take away the
absurdity both to the sense and reason of man, that is in the catholic
doctrine, toucheng the Sacrement of the altar, as you say, in that form of
bread and wine, to be the very true real presence of the body of Christ, and
that it is his body and blood that is showed in the form of bread and wine,
what reason will admytt this? What sense? And how much probable were this, if
this doctrine were taught, as you teach it, to say, that you see in the form
of bread and wine, is a figure only of the body of Christ that is in heaven;
whom in spirit in that figure you do honor. This manner no doubt were more
probable saying to the ears of men that judge things, other by reason or by
sense. But the more probable it is, the more false it is, the great Sophister
and father of al lies ever deceaving us by probability of reason, proponyng
ever that which is more aggreable to the sense, But the true doctrine of Christ
is taught by another way. Here is another deficiency. being faullen therein not
so much for fawte or abuse of reason, as by malice against reason And such, I
say, no hand can cure, no reason, no discourse; but only that it please the
high mercy of god, that doith chastise your malicious handleng of the truth,
with such ignorance and darkness, to withdraw his hond of vengeance upon you:
for otherwise you heareng reason, and seeing some light thereof, yet you have
not so much grace, as to receive it, nor follow it.

This is the thing I greatly fear in you, haveng knowledge of your procedyng
syneth your furst notable error in rejecteng the doctrine of the Popes
Supremi^ie, and afterward of the Sacrement; which as I said before, was not
after the common manner of faulleng, as other did, by curiosity, or by
frailty, but by deliberate malice, to forsake the truth in both poinctes, to
satisfy your carnal appetites, to the which you dissembleng furst, and mockeng
with the treuthe, and afterward openly forsakeng the same, did serve you.
Which as yet you do not knowledge: and this must be the first things, that you
should knowledge, makeng open confession with repentance thereof, if you shall
ever come to receive any fructe of the mercy of god.

So that if I now, that desire your recover, should go about by way of
discourse, or argument, to bring you from your error to the truth, this must
be the furst poyncte, to show how you fell into the same darkness, to the
intent that God so much remytteng his hond of justice, that you may se your
abomination in abuseng the truth, you might knowledge by fear the justice of
god, in letteng you faul into so great darkness; and by the hope of his
infinite mercy caull to him for grace to be restored to some light of his
infallible verity. And this I with all my heart prayeng for you, in the mean
season, untyl God give you the grace to do the same for your self, shall withal
open unto you the manner of your faulle.

Touching your furst Article of the Popes authority, which I need not open any
further then you have opened your self, nor cannot better express it, then you
have set it forth, I haveng no knowledge thereof, but by your own sayng and
writing, for defense of perjurie objected to you. And now mark you well, if you
have any sense of knowledge left unto you to see your self and your own deeds,
if ever there were hard such kind of a defense, in any perjurie of onie man,
that had left him onye light of reason, or knowledge of justice. Which for to
know, furst you must be put in remembrance of the kind of your oath, and the
manner of makeng thereof. The kind was such, that it was no new oath, but the
very same, that al Archbusshops of Canterbury, which be Primates of this
realm, al Archbusshops, and Busshops, in every christen realm, doith
accustomable make to the Popes holiness, as to the Vicar of Christ in earth,
swearing to him obedience: Such was your oath. And as touching the manner of
makeng of it, none could be more solemn; being made in the hond of a Busshop,
with the testimonye and assistence of other Busshops, openly in the Church, in
the presence of as much people as the church could hold; at such time as you
arraid with the sacred vesture of a Busshop, came before the aultre to be
consecrated Archbusshop. All this you cannott, nor do not deny; nor yet that
after all this solemn and open oath, you did directly and openly against the
same. Which must necessarily condemn you of perjurie.

But this necessary consequence you deny; granteng notwithstondyng to have
done contrary to the oath. But you say for your defense, that where you went to
make the oath, even then you never thought to observe it. And least this should
be an inconvenient, and a thing much dommagious unto your fame and
eastimation* if it were not well known, that you swore one thing in the most
solemn f^shion you could, and meant another, here you bring such a testimony
by writing, you bring forth a previe Protestation, made with previe witnesses,
haveng the hond and sign of the Notarie, to prove that when you went to make
that solemn oath you were nothing minded to observe it. Which former
Protestation, whereto doith it serve, but to testify a doble perjurie, which is
to be forsworn before you did swear. Other perjurers be wont to break their oath
after they have sworn, you brake it before. Quis sapiens and intelliget haec,
and intelliget malitiam Satanae? And a wonderful aggravation of the wrath of
God toward you.

But let the malice of Satan be furst considered, in deludeng you, when you
thought to delude other. This delusion was this: That because it had been hard
some Protestations to be made, also of some good men, in a case, when they not
being at their own choice and liberty, when per vim and metum, qui aliquando
cadit in constantem virum, they be made to swear to that, which afterward they
have done contrary to their former oath: In which case a Protestation, excuseng
the Will, and alledgeng the fear, has some color of defense: This, I say, you
hearing, and S^than puttyng you in remembrance hereof, with the similitude of
this deluded you; Makeng you beleve, that such a kind of Protestation might
serve for a premeditate perjurie. Whereunto you were not driven, another vi, nor
metu, as you were not in this your case: except you caul that a just fear, that
you did s^e, if you did not swear, you could not satisfy your ambition and
covetousnes, in haveng the Busshoprick. For so it was, Leave you thise two
affections, care ye not for to be made Busshop, and who did constrayne you to
swear? Were ye not by that refuse quite delivered of al necessity to swear?
This also ye cannot deny. Whereunto therefore serves your Protestation made
by the hand of a Notarie, but to make your previe perjurie more notoriously
known, but to make it known to the world, that you entreng to the rule of a
part of the flock of Christ, you entered not in by the door; and not entreng by
the door, but aliunde, what comfort could your flock look for to have by you?
But that which Christ says to follow of those, Qui non intrant per ostium, ^ed
aliunde, to be stealers and thieffs, Qui non intrant nisi ut mactent, and
perdant; as the effect has showed by you.

But here you deceive your self again, and would deceive other, makeng your
defense of your simulate oath, that you did the same so, for the more service of
God, haveng in your mind then to reform the church, to the which being no way,
but to make that oath for a countenance; this you thought for such a purpose
might be acceptable before god: and also entreng by the authority of the Pope,
called by him, that had authority to name you: then you think it cannot be
justly of onie man objected unto you, that you did not enter by the door. And
this truly if you could have kept your own counsil, toucheng me, I durst not
object the same unto you, seeing nothing outwardly, but as that you were
lawfully called and institute Busshop. And of your inward I wo^d not make my
self judge. More wanting here. and see, as is the furst poyncte in your
lettres; Where you make a great mervayle, sayng it to be a thing, that was
never seen in the realm, that to condemn any subject thereof, justice should
be sought of a forreyn power, as is the Popes. How this is to be called a
Forreyn power, I will declare afterward. For this I do not mervel, if you do not
well know, not being so open to them that lacks spiritual doctrine, nor of
that ignorance I do not speak now, but of that outward light and knowledge,
which is open to every man by experience. The which you not knoweng, it may be
well said, you be cast In tenebras exteriores, and that you have lost both
interior and exterior knowledge of things. For so you show in this case,
where you say, it was never seen in the realm, that to condemn any subject
thereof to death, should be required any other sentence, then that comyth from
the Imperial Crown of the realm, and their temporal laws. Wherein that which
I note furst is this, that in that place you seem to lament, that being
condemned alredie, as you say, by the laws of the realm, of high treason,
this dilation is geven to your death, not to suffer, before al such things as be
laid to your charge, were furst known at Rome, this being natural unto all that
be in jeopardie of liffe, if they cannot hope by any just de^eance to extue the
same, at the least to have time al desire: followeng that proverb, In space
comyth grace. The which natural affect being extinct in you, this follows
withal, natural knowledge to be extinct, as in the proheme of your lettre is
more declared.

And now to come nearer to that you say was never seen, that onye subject to be
condemned, had need of any outward Justice, calleng owtward justice, the Canon
laws, that come from the Pope. To this I say, the experience and use of the
laws, and justice in this realm, doith show clean contrary to your mervel,
that it was never seen in the realm, before the time of your malicious oath, that
there was ever any man condemned for the crime of heresies, by the mere
justice that comyth from the temporal laws, but al were first declared to be
such by the spiritual laws of the Canons, which you call forreyne laws. And
this beside I say, before that same time, of al other crimes, as treason and
other, there was never spiritual man put to execution, accordeng to the order
of the laws of the realm, but he were furst by the Canon Laws condemned,
disgraded, and then gyven to the temporal hondes. Whereof there be as menye
examples, before the time of breakeng the old order of the realm thise last
years, as has been delinquents. Let all the records be seen; and specially
this is notable of the Busshop of -- which being emprisoned here for high
treason, the king would not proceed to his condempnation and ponnishment, before
he had the Popes bull geveng him.

And this is the trade of justice, which the King and Qwene use with you at
this time, being condemned of treason, being consecrate Busshop, to have the
Popes sentence from Rome before you suffer: Which manner of proceeding, you say,
was never before in the Realm: and the practice and experience in like cases
doith show never to have been otherwise, before the time of your notable
perjurie. And so Catholic Kings, as it pertayneth to the privilege of the Sea
of Rome, when they be crowned, doith swear.

And now look what ignorance is this, to think that the like was never seen in
the realm, when it was never seen otherwise, amongst those princes, that were
counted to be in the obedience of the Laws of Christ, and of the Church.

But now to come to that you speak of, the Popes law and power: Which after a
seditious manner of speakeng, you call A forreyne power, this stondeth under
such a fashion, if God leave you so much sense to understond what I say, that
the Popes power can no more be called Forreyn power, coming not of man alone,
but of him that is god and man, that was secundus hom^, de coelo coelestis,
then may be called a Forreyn power, that the soul of man coming from heaven,
has in the body generate in earth. And so it is in the po^itick body of this
realm, ruled with politic laws, founded by m^ns reason, that be called
Temporal laws: To them coming the Popes laws spiritual doith no other, but
that the soul in the body, to gyve liffe to the same; to confirm and
strengthen the same. And this is it the Aungel speakeng in Christ's conception,
and declareng what his authority should be, signified, saing, he should sytt
Super Domum Davyd, which was a temporal reign, ut confirmet illud and
corroboret. And so doith the spiritual laws, procedynge of his Spirit: As be
the laws of the Church, and canon laws. Which wheresoever they be well
observed, doith this effect, ever to confirm and stablish the temporal laws
of the realm, as no realm has had more experience then this, ever s^neth the
time they received the faith, and obedience of the Pope; from whom came their
doctrine of the faith. There was never notable trouble in the realm of any
kind, if it dured any space, but it was ever lightly eased, and the realm
established by some Legate sent from the Pope and the Sea of Rome, following
the prescript of the Canons, and the Spiritual Law: Without the which no realm
can well be governed, but al be like to the Thornbush: Whereof it is written In
libro Iudicum, when the Sichimites had chosen a Tyranny over them, against the
law of God, then it was prophesied unto them, what should come thereof, which
was that fire should come forth of that thorn, which was their King, that should
devour the people, and from the people, to burn him, as it was, and ever shall
be, where mere temporal laws, without spiritual, doith rule. Which state may
be compared to be like such a thorn, whereof fire doith come forth, to the
destruction, both of the governor and the people. And how the laws of the
realm might be well likened to such a thorn, after that the spiritual
authority was cast forth, the destruction of such a sort of men, of al
degrees, both great and small, the great spoils that were taken, may geve
sufficient proff to al them, that has any sense, or remembrance of things so
lately done.

And now coming again to the spiritual authority and Law, to join it self with
the Temporal, this is like to the fire that Moyes saw In rubo: which gave
li^ht, and did not burn, nor never doith, when it is well used. And if it be
not well used, the fault is in the persons, and not in the thing; as the fault
is not in the Temporal laws, when the Prince doith abuse them; howbeit of
their nature they be tanquam s^inae, as was also Moyes law, sharp to which was
mitigate^; and so shall be in every when they be joined with the spiritual
ought not to be called Forreyne Laws More here wanting. Non in probabilibus
humanae sapientiae verbis, ne evacuetur crux Christi: As it should be in this
case. For if this probability were followed, the sklaunder of the cross should
be void. For this were no sklaunder to the Jews to hear Christ honored in a
figure, they being ever used to the same. Nor it would seem so much folyshe to
the Gentiles and infidelles, after we had accepted Christ for God, to honor
him in a figurative manner. But this being the counsel of Christ to utter his
great mystery in form that he should have it sklander to both the Jews, that
seek signs, and were used to be taught by figures; and also the Gentiles, that
styck upon the judgment of reason; The more probable you make it, the further
you swarve from the true doctrine of Christ, and very true manner to teach it.
And here may no new manner be taught. What a heinous pride is this, this
doctrine passeng a thousand year, and as menye hundred beside, as has been
syneth this Sacrement was instituted, by the myddest of the Jews and Gentiles,
with this sklaunder and appearaunce of folyshnes, never being foun^ fawtie in
any one of the Busshops and preachers of the word of God, that they confessed
the real presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrement of the altar: but al
found fautie and condemned of heresy, which denied the same. And ever the
doctrine of the presence prevayling and triumpheng above man's reason, or sense,
may be capace of the same. Which both God will have mortified and dye utterlie,
when this mystery and meat of li^se is spoken and taken. For as that was the
beginneng of the destruction of man, when followeng the probability of reason,
he would feade himself with meat prohibit unto him; So the counsil of God has
ordained, this to be the begynneng of the liffe of man, to take a sensible
meat, wherein another reason nor sense can find any probability, or make any
judgment thereof.

But because I have entreated this part more largely in another epistle, that I
send unto you, wherein I show that stondeng, as you do, without repentance of
the manner of your entry to the service of the church, you could never be
another good scho^ar of this doctrine, and much less a Master, I will now
proceed no further to reason with you herein, knoweng al to be in vain, and no
healp nor mean to recover you, but only prayer. Which with all my heart, as I
would for mine own soul, I will not fail to use for you, to him, whom you have
so greatly offended, as I never redd of any Busshop, that ever was in the
church. But the founteyne of his mercy is never closed to them that will call
for it; as mine own entier prayer is to the infinite mercy of God, that you may
have the grace so to do: sendeng you for obteynyng of that, his holy Spirit,
Qui condemnat mundum de peccato, de judicio, and de justitia: that seeing furst
your sore condempnation, you may therewith be sturred, with all humility and
contrite heart, to demand some comfort: Which cannot be hoped of without your
former condempnation of your self. Whereunto to bring you, it has cawsed me by
writing to set forth so earnestly some part of your grievous offenses before
you: Wylleng you no less comfort, then I would to mine own soul.

And the same I say, concludeng and eandeng, as I began: It may please the
paternal love, that God bears unto al sinners, for his sake, that being his
only Son, God and man, dyed to pay their ransom, for to forgeve you, and to
deliver you ex Ore Leonis, which has so devowred you, that if you be not
plucked out as theProphet Amos says of Israel, Quomodo si eruat Pastor duo
crura, aut extremum auriculae: I say if you be not plucked out by the ear, you
be utterlie undone both body and soul. Which yet again, and ever, the infinite
mercy of God may defeande you from. Written in the coorte at St. James, the vj.
of Novembre. 1555.

Yowr very true coumfortore in God, you not refuseng his grace, R. Pole. Car.
Leg.

NUMBER. XC. Archbishop Parker to the Secretary, desiring the Councels letters, in
order to his discovering of certain Writings of Archbishop Cranmer.
SIR, Being here, and would be loath to be idle; Sir W. H. MSS.
and thereupon havyng consideration as well of these quarters, for the common
quiet among the people, as respecting the common service of the better sort
toward the Q. Highness, and her affairs; I find them al in so good order, that I
do rejoice therein. As for my ecclesiastical persons, I deal with them
indifferently, that I find also obedience in them.

Now, Sir, with spying and serching, I have found out by very credible
enformation, among other things, in whose hondes the great notable written books
of my predecessor, Dr. Cranmer, should remain: the parties yet denying the
same; and thereupon despair to discover them, except I may be aided by the
Counsels letters, to obtain them. I pray your honor to procure there letters,
to authorize me to enquire and search for such Monuments by all ways, as by mi
pore discretion shall be thought good: whether it be by deferryng an oath to the
parties, or veweng there studies, etc. This opportunytie of enformation being
such, I would wyshe, I coud recover these books to be afterward at the Q.
Commandment. I would as much rejoice, while I am in the countreye, to win
them, as I would to restore an old Chancel to reparation. Because I am not
acqueynted with the style of the Councels letters in this case, I send you no
minute: trusting that your goodness will think the lauber well bestowed, to cause
the clarke of the Council to devise the form. And thus hearing of the
liklywood of the plage to be in beginning in some placys hereabout; and yet mine
own house, thanks be to God, in good quiet, I wyshe the Q. famylye to be
defended by gods hand. At my house from Bekesborne this 22. of August. An.
1563.


Your honors assured, Matthue Cant.
To the Right honorable Sir William Cecyl, Knight, Principal Secretary to the
Q. Majesty. At the Court.
NUMBER. XCI. Dr. William Mowse, Master of Trinity Hal in Cambridg, his letter of
thanks to Secretary Cecyl.
Ornatissimo Equiti G^lielmo Cecillio, R^gio S^cretario.
QUOD nullam adhuc grati animi significationem ob acceptum benesicium fecerim,
Sr. W. H. MSS.
vereor nequid de me mali suspiceris. N^m cum ^anta ^u in me fuit benevolentia,
quantam in nemine ad^uc sensi, valde dubito, ne magnitudo tuorum in me meri
orum, id quod negligentiae crimen vix effugere possit, in majoris sceleris
periculum volet. Nam ut in omnibus rebus naturaliter evenire videmus. ut
quaeque res sit affecta, ita pleru^que se statim ostendat* sic a gratis animis,
beneficij accepti aliqua significatio haud mul^o post s^bsequi debeat.
Pra^sertim si hujusmodi sit, in quo singularis benevolentiae insigne argumentum
extitit. Nam cujus animus in rece^^i beneficio languescit, illum d^^turnam
beneficij memoriam retin^re no^ est verisimi^e. Haec me valde perturbant, and
eo magis, quod ab hoc vitio q^am longissime abesse desidero, cujus suspicione
mea culpa non omnino careo. Ut enim aliae meae res sese habeant, optimorum
virorum gratia multum adjutus sum: ut omittam singularem Cantuariensis
munificentiam, quam in me multis annis sine ullo meo merito exercuit. Chaeci
vero tam egregius animus and constans voluntas in me suit, cum id nec ulla
officiorum necessitudine, nec familiaritatis conjunctione effectum sit, an ejus
virtuti and singulari humanitati id tribuere debe^m, aut deorum voluntati, and
meae fortunae, non facile dicere possum. Sed de tua benevolentia quid dicam,
qua omnes meas fortunas and amicorum studia complexus es? Nam quod illi mihi
cupieban^, id tu solus, reluctantibus inimicis, confecisti. Quare sicut in
beneficio conserendo princeps fuisti, ita and ego illud totum tibi praecipue
acceptum refer deberem. Et licet id proprio quoque tempore pro beneficij
magnitudine significatum non sit, jucundam tamen tui ^ecordationem semper
habui. Nec minus laboravi qua potissimum ratione meipsum saltem voluntate ipsa,
gratum ostenderem. Nam liberum amoris and officij mei iter conditionis
humilitas and exiguae facultates interrumpunt. Tum ipsa scholasticorum officia,
quae in crebris literis consistere solent, nec isti meae aetati, nec huic
studiorum rationi satis convenient, cum illae gratiores esse soleant, quae a
pueris, atque ijs eloquentibus, perveniunt. Ut ne addam tuas gravissimas
occupationes, quas meis nugis perturbare plusquam scelestum ducerem. Quare quod
tua integritas pro tot beneficijs a me exigebat, id sedulo praestabo, ut quibus
muneribus tua opera praesum, in his me probe exercendo tuae de me opinioni
satisfaciam. Vale, 20 februarij. Cantabrigiae.

Tuae humanitati devinctissimus, Gulielmus Mowseus.

NUMBER. XCII. Justus Jonas to Secretary Cecyl concerning the Miseries of Germany,
occasioned by the Interim: and that he might receive the kings intended
munificence.
Clarissimo Viro Domino Sycilio, etc. domino meo observando ad manus proprias
dentur.
S. D. P. Quanta sit tua erga miseros, in omni genere officij, pietas, equidem
ante hoc tempus non ignorabam: Sed certe, SirW.H.MSS.
ut quemadmodum sentio, Loquar, nunquam tantam esse putavi, quantam hodie
expertus sum. Me enim miseris annumerare non vereor, siquidem varij fortunae
casus graviter me afflixerint. Hoc intelligere si voles, audias quaeso pauca
quaedam verba ex Parentis ad me epistola bona fide recitata. Vtinam, inquit,
coram tibi, mi fili, exponere possem afflictum staetum rerum cum publicarum,
tum privatarum (...). Mallem tibi tam magno spatio montium and marium a nobis
dissito scribere laeta (...), sed difficultates assidue adhuc crescunt; and
propter non receptum Librum Interim, cogar forsan iterum aliquo migrare. Potes
cogitare quam difficile and mol^stum futurum sit (...), etc. Hactenus Pater.
Hoc tam triste exordium qualis secuta sit narratio ipse cogitare poteris.
Equidem haec scribens chartam lacrymis madefeci. Subibat enim long tristissima
paternarum calamitatum recordatio; quarum siqua pars in filium redundat, ut
certe redundat, quis miretur, si me miserum dixero? Apud te praesertim, cui
tanquam medico causam morbi reticere vix been possum. Cum itaque illis vel
asperiratibus rerum, vel injurijs temporum, eo usque dejectus sim, ut aliorum
benignitate casus meos sustentare cogar; non putavi Regiae Majestatis
munificentiam, qua nescio quos meos Labores benign potius, quam merito
remunerari constituit, hoc tempore negligendam esse.

Si forte eam spem avidius prosequi videor, non cupiditati, sed necessitati id
ascribes me^e. Festino enim ut ante hyemem in Galliam revertar, ea^umque rerum
cognitione me instruam, quarum mihi olim in Anglia usus esse posset. Hanc enim
patriam non minus diligo, quam s^in ea natus essem. Cumque de studiorum meorum
fine cogito, non minus Angliam, quam Germaniam, mihi propono. Quidquid igitur
Regia Majestas hoc tempore in me contulerit, id mihi loco arctissimi vinculi
erit, quo me in totam reliquam vitam huic regno obligatum arbitrabor. Been and
faeliciter Vale.

Tuae dominationis d^ditissimus, Justus Jonas Junior.

NUMBER. XCIII. Miles Wilson to Secretary Cecyl, Lamenting the Spoils of the
Revenues of Schools, Benefices, and Hospitals. To which are added his
Arguments against this Sacrilege.
Ornatissimo, Clarissimoque Viro, Gulielmo Cecilio, Regio Consiliario
prude^tissimo, and Literarum Patrono maximo.
Sr. W. H. MSS.
CUM in Aula nuper essem, Vir Ornatissime, and Sermones cum tua Dominatione
sererem de multis varijsque rebus, partim ad Christi religionem propagandam,
partim ad Remp. conservandam ac augendam, imprimis pertinentibus; tradidi (ut
scis) tibi lectitandam Orationem quandam de rebus ecclesiae non diripiendis, a
me superioribus hisce diebus confectam, and in publicis Academiae Scholis
recitatam, in praesentem causae defensionem, quae jam tum tractabatur in
publica disceptatione. Sed cum animadverterem te hominem in gravissimis Reip.
negotijs semper occupatissimum, nec tum satis quietum fuisse ad meum
perlegendum opus, paulo longius quam pro tantillo spacio temporis cumque te
percupidum esse intelligebam audiendi and videndi quid de tam inusitato
argumento ex sacris scripturis proferri potuisset; existimabam me and te tuo
paululum posse levare onere; and etiam ea tecum communicare, quorum particeps
fieri vehementer cupidus mihi videbare, si ea in angustas, and concisas
argumentandi formas conjicerem, quae ibi fusius, ac liberiore Orationis cursu
jam tum prosequebar. Itaque ex eo tempore ratiocinia nonnulla and syllogismos
contexui, qui and ad urgendum aptiores, and ad recordandum faciliores, and ad
permovendum commodiores existunt, quam laxum quoddam and solutum illud
Orationis genus: Ut si illa superiora, propter eorum longitudinem, and
infinitas tuas occupationes legere non liceret, saltem haec brevia
dialecticorum consectaria, quae sequuntur, cum vac^r, inspectares. Cujus mei
laboris me fructum satis magnum per^epi^se arbitrabor, si tantum apud T. D.
effecerint, ut quae Scholae percelebres sint nuper dirutae, in Academiae ruinam
maximam, hae tuo labor extrui mandentur: Ut quae Sacerdotia sunt misere
despoliata per avaros patronos, ad acerbissimum ecclesiae vulnus, ea
restituantur in integ^um ad incredibile Reip. decus; Ut quae Hospitia delumbata
f^erint perdite, ac ex^irpata funditus, per importunitatem non ferendam
cupidorum hominum, ea, quantum fieri potest, per te adjuventur apud Concilium
Regium, quo ad pristinum redeant st^tum, nempe in subsid^um vere pauperum.

Valiant enim, valiant Academiae, per exigu^e nunc certe, sed brevi futu^ae
nullae, si earum nutrices, Scholae, negligantur, Seminarium and seges florentis
Academiae. Ut enim mare cito exarescit non influenti us undiquaque rivulis ac
s^uminibus; sic absorbebuntur statim Academiae, and in nihilum recident, si ex
scholis aditus illis praecludantur, sic ut il^inc ad Academias nullus, aut quam
paucissimi commeant. Doctrina omnis generis conticescet, Papismi ^egnum, and
plusquam Gothicus barbarism^s omnia pervadet loca; si non eruditis m^lius, quam
jam est, consulatur, si proemia eruditionis, Rectoriae, Prae bendae, and omnia
auserantur. An dimicabit miles, stipendium si negetur? An tellurem proscindet
aut bos* aut arator, si pabulum illis non satis abunde praebeatur? An trajiciet
mare mercator spe questus omni s^blata? An terra profundet herbas, imbribus non
depluta? An molendinum molare possit, si alveum interturbes, and aliorsum
cursum ejus vertas? Nequaquam certe. Sic neque quisquam acrioribus studijs
doctrinae operam navabit, nisi ager suus aliquo quasi rore amoeno irrigetur and
proemijs ac muneribus con^ignis feriatur.

Si exempla quaeras S^holarum eversarum, Rectoriarum delumbatarum, Hospitiorum
excisorum, petas exempl^ licet affatim horum nefandorum sacrilegiorum, vel a
summo Angliae Cance^lario; cui, te absente, consarcinata multa obtuli; vel ab
Episcopo Eboracensi, apud quem etiam ista omnia diligentissime explorata
deposui. T. D. novit oppidum, hand procul a nobis dissitum, nomine Childerl^y;
hic una generos^ Domu^, sed hic multum degener, (quae est Magistri Cuttes)
exedit universum oppidum, ne una quidem domuncula relicta, excepta sua Domo;
hic q^ia desunt homines, quos Templum capiat, recipiuntur ^qui, quos pro
hominibus Templum pro Stabulo contineat: Et qu^a triricum Domini non est quod
in tectum recipiatur, i. Homines Christiani, recipitur hordeum and avena, and
stramentum omnis generis. Sic oves Christi minuuntur, sic pecudes augentur, sic
perit bonus pastor, and pastoris Virtus: sic Templum partim fit horreum pro
frugibus condendis, partim vero stabulum pro custodiendis equis.

Argumenta hic subjungo, quae prius pollicitus fueram. Longior sum quam vellem;
sed magnitudo causarum, and zelus huc me vel invitum produxit. Quare ignoscet,
spero, T. D. cui omnia prosperrima in Domino precor. 3 Februarij 1552.

Tuae dignitatis studiosissimu^, Milo Wilsonus.


Argumenta, quibus ostenditur; Impium esse Bona ecclesiae ab ecclesijs divelli.
I. Quicquid Domino consecratum est in usum sacratissimi sui ministerij, sive
homo, sive animal, sive ager fuerit, nec vendi potest, nec redimi a quoquam.
Levit. 27.
27. Levitici.

Bona ecclesiastica, ut aurum, argentum, aedes, praedia, Domino consecrantur in
usum sacri ministerij.

Ergo bona ecclesiastica nec vendi, nec coemi possunt. Et per consequens, nec
auferri, nec mutari debent.

Minor Liquet. Nunquam enim agrorum possessores agris suis and bonis ecclesias
dotassent, suos exhaeredando, nisi ut ministris Dei abunde prospiceretur, in
ministerium suum probe incumbentibus. Ac 2 do, communia facientes omnia.

II. Quod nostrum non est abripere, nefas est, and contra justitiam omnem, quae
est virtus sua cuique tribuens.

Bona ecclesiae, nostra non sunt: nullius sunt, quia Christi, cui dicata and
donata sunt.

Ergo iniquum est bona ecclesiae diripere quovis modo.

Levit. 27.
Probatur Minor tum lege divina, tum Imperatoria. Quicquid enim fuerit
consecratum sanctum sanctorum erit Domino. Domino dicabitur, and non redimetur.
Et jure civili, Quae domini juris sunt, ea in nullius bonis computanda sunt.

III. Quod cum lege naturae pugnat, Legitimum non est.

Divellere terras Sacerdotum cum lege naturae pugnat.

Ergo eas divellere Legitimum non est. Minoris probatio.

Genesis 47.
Pharao, sub lege naturali vivens, non patiebatur terras and possessiones suis
adimi sacerdotibus, aut allevari pretio ullo: Sentiens, secundum naturam, id
maxim esse, ut inde viverent unde laborarent. Praeterea, ex horreis publicis
gratuito aluit sacerdotes, cum suae res parum sufficerent sibi. Et cum omnem
terram Aegypti quintas pendere coegit Joseph, unicas Sacerdotum terras exemit,
quas liberandas censuit omni dura condition.

IV. Nemo civis bonus est, qui ex communibus privata facit, qui non magis
communitati studet, quam proprijs adaugendis commodis.

Qui opes ecclesiasticas, and praedia sacra distrahunt, ex communibus privata
faciunt, sua commoda quaerunt, publicum negligunt bonum.

Ergo qui ecclesiae bona abstrahunt civium bonorum numero ponendi non sunt, sed
civitatis eversores, and Reip. putandi sunt.

V. In omni been administrata Rep. semper summa cura fuit religionis
conservandae, and bonarum artium.

Direptio bonorum ecclesiae, and religionem quatefacit, imo demolitur, and
arts bonas vigere impedit.

Ergo direptio opum ecclesiasticarum in been temperata Rep. consistere nequit.

Minor ostenditur. Quod nullus in vinea Domini opus faciet, portans pondus and
aestum diei, nec in praemijs hujuscemodi aetatem suam conteret, nisi praemio ad
laborem aliquo concitetur: Nullus arts consectabitur ingenuas, sublatis illis
praesidijs unde sustentarentur: Honos enim alit arts. Nec triturabit bos, si
obligetur os; nec pastor pascet oves, si de lacte non bibat; nec militabit
miles, si stipendium subtraxeris; nec in vinea faciet opus, qui de denario non
conducitur.

VI. Si conferatur nostra Resp. cum Iudaeorum, quae per Dominum nostrum
instituta est, minus reperietur nostris ministris dari, quam V. Testamenti
Levitis fuerat deputatum. Nam Numerorum 3. Levitarum Viginti duo millia tantum
recensentur, qui Tabernaculo Domini tum temporis inserviebant. Et hic exiguus
numerus vniversas per omnem Iudaeam decimas, primitias, oblationes recepit in
viaticum and victum suum, cum 48 urbibus, atque suis suburbanis Locis ad tria
circumcirca milliaria.

At nostrorum ministrorum numerus quadruplo major est, ut apparet ex
parochiarum limitatione and numero. Quid per hanc notam, Quaere.
So enim cum duobus Templa vulgariter connumerantur hic in A^glia, and duo ad
minimum in singulis sacerdotes sunt, omnibus simul collatis.

Ergo cum solum decimas recipiant sacerdotes Anglicani, idque imminutas, and
delumbatas valde, non detractio, sed additio potius facienda esset, si par
ratio utrobique retineretur.

VII. Nulla pauperum bona eripienda sunt. Pauperibus enim Paulus ubique
Collectiones facit.

Bona ecclesiae sunt bona Pauperum.

Ergo bona ecclesiae eripienda non sunt.

VIII. Si diripere aliquid privato sit impium, si commune civitatis aerarium
expilare sit nefarium, unde robur and praesidium urbis pendeat; quanto magis
scelestum and iniquum erit Capitis nostri Christi bona divellere, and ministris
ecclesiae opes despoliare, quae sunt nervi religionis, and spiritualis regni
Chr^sti.

At privato detrahere, impium est, and gazas urbis exinanire sceleratum,
morteque plectendum in omni ben^ temperata Republica.

Ergo scelere carere non potest, publica ecclesiae and Christi Capitis bona ad
istum modum misere dilacerare.

IX. Qui vendentes in templo and ementes ejecit, ipsum Templum, and omnia in
Templo ad vendendum proponentes, impunitos, opinor, nunquam permitter.

At cum flagello in Templo vendentes and ementes ejecit Christus, magno
percitus furore.

Ergo non connivebit ad eos, qui omnia diruunt, and ex domo Orationis speluncam
Latronum faciunt.

X. Quaecunque ad Sabbatum rite sanctificandum and celebrandum spectant,
conservanda and retinenda sunt. Est enim pars Decalogi Sabbati Sanctificatio.

Bona ecclesiae ad Sabbatum rite sanctificandum pertinent.

Ergo bona ecclesiae integra conservanda sunt. Minor sic probatur.

Sabbatum rite celebratur Evangelij praedicatione, Sacramentorum
administratione, Precum profusione, and pro pauperibus diligenti provisione.

Sed ecclesiastica bona and verbi praedicationem fovent, and sacramentorum
administrationem alunt, and pauperes in ecclesia sublevant: dum eos sustentent
ministros, qui and haec peragunt officia, and indigentibus necessaria
subministrent.

Ergo bona ecclesiae pernecessaria sunt ad festum rite sanctificandum.

XI. Unicuique ad perfectionem contendendum est. Estote enim perfecti, sicut
pater Vester coelestis perfectus est.

At Christianae perfectionis est vendere quae habemus omnia, and pauperibus
dispertire. Nam, si vis perfectus esse, Vade and vende omnia, quae habes, and
pauperibus dato.

Ergo de Christo and ecclesia nihil detrahendum, sed pauperibus potius indies
adjiciendum erit.

XII. Bonum quo communius, eo melius. Quo multiplicatius eo laudatius.

Sed pastores ecclesiae and Episcopi, bonum est.

Ergo augendus eorum numerus, non minuendus existit. Ergo, quo plures Episcopi
eo rectius est; and per consequens plures constituendi, potius quam deponendi,
and abjiciendi, qui nunc constituti sunt.

Major Liquet, Minor sole clarior est. Nam siquis episcopatum appetit, bonum
opus desiderat. Certe episcopus esse non potest non esse bonum.

XIII. Balthazar graviter punctus est ob vasorum Deo consecratorum direptionem
and profanum eorum usum. Dan. 5.


Achan insigniter plectebatur ob sacrilegam distractionem.

Josue 7. 2 Macch. 5.
Antiochus horribili mortis genere perit, ob impiam sacrorum diripiendi
voluntatem, and conatum.

Lysimachus Lapidibus obruitur propter consimile facinus.

3 Macch. 9. 3 Macch. 4.
Heliodorus gravissimis vulneribus conficitur a Deo, quod sacra templi vasa
abducere conaretur. Et sic de universo numero Sacrilegorum dici potest.

Ergo omnes, qui Sacrata Deo divellunt, gravissimas paenas expectent oportet.

XIV. Sic Divus Paulus ratiocinatur. Sub spe debet is, qui arat, arare; and qui
triturat sub spe, 1 Cor. 9.
spei suae particeps esse debebit.

Ergo qui in agro Evangelico arat, and qui in area Domini sedulo triturat, sub
spe percipiendorum fructuum, and arare and triturare debent.

At quae relinquitur spes, cum aufertur res?

XV. Quin on seminant spiritualia, carnalia ne metant.

Laici Spiritualia non seminant. Quippe quia nec verbum annunciant, nec
Sacramenta administrant.

Ergo Laici non debent metere carnalia. Iniquum est, ut inde quis vivar, unde
non Laboret. Et Panlus dicit, Qui non laborat, non manducet.

XVI. Dignus est operarius mercede sua. Ergo qui non operatur, dignus non est.
Et per consequens, Mat. 10.
neganda esset merces non omnino operanti. Sic pellantur omnes inutiles ^uci,
sive Laici sive Clerici extiterint, qui alienis insidiantur Laboribus; quique
mel exugunt omne, parum aut nihil mellis relinquentes hijs, qui vere apes sunt,
valdeque laboriosae.

XVII. Dominus ordinavit, ut qui Evangelium annuntiant, ex Evangelio vivant.

Ergo e contrario, de Evangelio ne victitent, qui Evangelium aut nolunt, aut
non possunt denu^tiare.

XVIII. Paulus inter Ecclesiasticos ita se gerebat, ut gratis panem a nemine
acciperet: sed cum labor and sudore nocte dieque faciebat opus, ne cuiquam
eorum oneri foret. Praecepit item illis, Vt siquis nollet operari, is nec
ederet.

Ergo qua conscientia de ecclesiasticis bonis vivere illi possunt, de
Prebendarum fructibus, de Rectorijs, de hospitijs, de Episcoporum patrimonijs,
and reliquis ecclesiae proventibus, qui nullo ministerio ecclesiastico
inserviunt, nec praedicando evangelium, nec sacramenta exhibendo, nec
ecclesiasticam disciplinam, ut par est, exercendo?

XIX, Qui praesunt Presbyteri, duplici honor digni sunt; maxim qui Laborant
in verbo and doctrina. Qui duplex honos duplicatum designat subsidium; and ut
putavit Theophilactus, abundans, praeter stipendium commune

Ergo tribuatur hic duplex honos sedulis ministris; nec ita minuantur quotidie
victus eorum, ut sibi and suis parum sufficiant in propria vocatione, and
munijs obeundis.

XX. Quae sunt militibus stipendia, ea sunt bona ecclesiae and earum ministris.

Sed militibus stipendia detrahere iniquum est. Ergo iniquum bona ecclesiae.

XXI. Vinitori fructum and vinum, Opilioni lac, Agricolae fruges, eripere non
licet. Sed quod Vinitori vinum, Opilioni Lac, Agricolae fruges, id ecclesijs
opes suae.

Eas ergo subducere, and hijs vitae adjumentis fraudare Verbi ministros, nullam
profecto habet aequitatem.

XXII. Ministris ecclesiae omnia ad vivendum necessaria suppeditanda sunt.

Necessaria autem definio, quae sibi, uxori, liberis, Deuteronomy. 25. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Timothy 3.
familiae satis sunt; quaeque hospitalitati servandae and exhibendae sufficient
peregrinis, egentibus, mancis, claudis, coecis, decrepitis, orphanis and viduis.

Ergo bona ecclesijs aliquando deputata, adimenda non sunt: ne forte his
singulis satis relinquatur, and ita necessarijs vitae praesidijs despolientur
hi, quos Spiritus Sanctus praecepit, ut de ecclesia viverent.

XXIII. Qui ecclesiae bona spoliant, hij ministros verbi and Dei spoliant.

Qui ministros Dei spoliant, hij Christum ipsum despoliant. Nam quod uni horum
feceritis, and mihi feceritis.

Ergo ecclesiae bona diripere est Christum ipsum, and ejus ministros victu suo
defraudare; and Christi tunicam ac patrimonium in parts dissecare. Quod quam
horribile sit sacrilegij genus, omnes pij norunt.

XXIV. Irritum esse non debet, quod testator pie, and secundum scripturas
testamento suo condidit. Gal. 4.
At multi pij morientes testamentis legaverunt sua bona ecclesijs, in ea rum
necessarios usus.

Ergo impium est, hoc spernere testamentum, vel frustrari quovis modo, sic ut
surripiatur avare, quod munifice, quod sancte praebitum fuerat.

XXV. In nascenti ecclesia Christi, Apostolorum in temporibus, pij terras and
possessiones and omnia vendiderant, Acts 2.
ut pauperibus, and publicantibus evangelium abunde prospiceretur.

Ergo jamdiu donata, and ad longum tempus confirmata ecclesijs, in hos ipsos
usus, nec vi nec dolo rapienda sunt; ut conferantur in eos, qui nec paupertate
ulla premuntur, nec ullo ministerio sacro ecclesijs deserviunt.

XXVI. Quod vel promittitur, vel destinatur in usum ecclesiae, subtrahendum non
est, Act. 5.
nec callide submovendum. Id quod probatur ex Anania and Sapphira. Duo horrenda
exempla.

At bona ecclesiarum destinantur in maxim necessarios usus, in sustentationem
pauperum, and in subsidium Ministrorum.

Ergo, non astu, non vi avellenda sunt dicta ecclesiae bona: ne forte id
avellentibus accidat, quod Ananiae and Sapphirae supra eveniebat.

XXVII. Qui templum Ierosolymitanum spoliebant, poenas Sacrilegij gravissimas
luebant: 2 Macc. 1.3, 9.
Certe qui Christianorum templa diruunt, ac despoliant, and ex illis, ut
scopis, omnia everrunt, impune nunquam, opinor, ferent.

XXVIII. Est in hijs abusus. Reformentur ergo. Alunt Superstitionem. Nutrian
tergo exin veram and sinceram Christi religionem. Indignis tribuuntur ecclesiae
praedia. Ergo dignioribus concedantur. Fuci pellantur, telluris inutile pondus.

XXIX. Homicidae putantur, qui violentas manus injiciunt in alienum corpus, and
illi vitam corporis eripiunt.

Ergo erunt multo magis, qui pabulo coelestis doctrinae animas piorum orbant,
atque destituunt, sic ut aeternum pereant. Quod Laici faciunt, qui victus
ministrorum sibi rapiunt, qui soli illos rore coelestis verbi pascerent. Et ita
impediunt, ne possint hoc facere.

XXX. Sacerdotes Iudaeorum impij, qui in nece domini consenserant, pretium
Sanguinis recipere nolebant, in eos per Iudam rejectum; Sed eo mercandum
decernunt agrum in sepulturam peregrinorum.

Ergo Nostri Scribis and Pharisaeis deteriores sunt, qui patrimonium Crucifixi,
i. Christi tunicam, etiam non oblatam, sibi auferunt, and quoque jure quaque
injuria sibi attrahant.

Nullum Sacrilegum impunitum sinet Deus.

XXXI. Bona ecclesijs divellere Sacrilegum est.

Ergo haec ecclesiae bona diripere, ultionem Dei gravem commeretur.

Minoris probatio. Omnis ablatio Sacri de Sacro Sacrilegum est. A definitione.

Diripere bona ecclesiae est rem Sacram de Sacro auferre.

Ergo bona ecclesiae divellere Sacrilegum est.


NUMBER XCIV. Peter Martyr to procure a license from the Court for one of his
Auditors, who desired to preach.
Vere fidelissimo Christi Ministro Domino Jacobo Haddono, has tradas, Londini.
S. D. In Collegio Magdalenae, Haddone in Christo charissime, SirW.H.MSS.
cui frater tuus praesidet, est pius and probus Vir, qui Hugo Kirk appellatur,
Magister artium, inter suos bonae famae, atque studio Evangelij Christi
(quantum judicare licet) vehementer incensus. Proinde incitatur (ut mihi
persuadeo) spiritu Dei, ad praedicandum; quo sanam doctrinam, cujus est
Sectator non ignavus, ovibus ecclesiae communicet; quae in nostris his
regionibus, raro, and paucis in locis, quemadmodum oporteret, pascuntur. De
universo autem isto negotio, puto illum egisse tecum, quantum ex ejus verbis
colligo. Cum itaque me rogaverit, ut ad te scriberem, id libenti animo facio.
Et ei, quod possum, fero testimonium; quoad mores been audit, sacrarum
litterarum est admodum studiosus, mihi docenti semper adest, and sacram
profitetur doctrinam. Quae de eo bona fide possum dicere, haec habeo. De quo
etiam potes, si visum fuerit, fratrem interrogare, qui jam hinc discessit, and
ad negotia sui Collegij procuranda est profectus. Quod mihi (ut verum fatear)
parum est gratum. Nam illius conversatione pia, jucunda and erudita, plurimum
delector. Sperabam fore, ut te hic quandoque, vel saltem ad aliquot dies,
haberemus: at nunc quod sperandum sit non video. Equidem licet adversa
valetudine aliquandiu laboraverim, nunc tamen dei gratia sum restitutus. Piam
vero, and mihi nunc maxim necessariam conjugem (ut audivisse te non dubito,)
ad Dominum praemisi. Quod ideo scribo, ut deum roges, quod mihi nunc, dum vivo
solus, ac tali adjutorio destitutus, suum conduplicet auxilium. Vale and
Christo faelix vivito. 18 Aprilis. Oxonij. An. 1553.


Tuus in Domino, P. Martyr.

NUMBER. XCV. That one who officiated in Dr. Weston's place, might receive the
Stipend detained from him.
Clarissimo Viro Domino Guglielmo Sicello, Majestatis Regiae Secretario, ac
Equiti Honestissimo. In Aula.
sr. W.H. MSS.
S. D. Quoniam, Vir Clarissime, cum tuam pietatem, tum eruditionem habeo
compertissimam, ideo ad te de hoc pio and erudito Christi Ministro, quo
familiarissime utor, scribendum esse censui. Ita sane res ejus habet: Sacras
litteras a duobus propemodum annis, Oxonij, pomeridiano tempore public
profitetur, eo plane loco, quo Doctor Westonus olim docere, magno religionis
dispendio, con^ueverat. Cumque is religiose atque accurate commisso sibi
fungatur munere, stipendium, quod sibi pro universo tempore, quo laboravit in
vinea domini debetur, nunquam adipisci potuit: Siquidem id Westonus conatur
sibi vendicare. Quod ut sit justum vel aequum, tu quaeso apud quem justitia and
aequitas plurimum valent, apud temetipsum expendito. Ille hic non est, officio
suo non fungitur; neque si adesset, and doceret, posset auditoribus nisi quam
pessime consulere, cum religioni puriori tantopere adversetur. Iste vero loco
ejus est legitime surrogatus, adest, susceptum munus obit sedulo; atque cum
meus discipulus and adhuc sit, and fuerit, veraeque religionis studiossimus,
quoad piam doctrinam mecum omnino consentit. Haec, scio, si apud te
cogitaveris, facile adducent, ut quem tibi commendo, and favore and auxilio non
indignum putes. Cui existimationi justissimae, ipse meas addo preces, quibus
etiam atque etiam rogo, ut in ejus negotio ipsum juves. Quod si feceris, non
modo erit acceptum Deo, sed ecclesiae quoque non parum conducet. Etenim illi
vehementer expedit, ut and laborantibus in verbo evangelij stipendia non
negentur; and juvenes aliqui tandem excitentur, qui loco Seniorum juventutem
sana doctrina imbuant.

De meis autem rebus non scribam multis, cum te audivisse non dubitem, piam
dulcissimamque conjugem in Domino quievisse, quae sanctissime atque incredibili
pietate migrando ad Dominum, ut me in luctu reliquit, quem doctrina coelesti
and mitigo, and indies magis leniam, ita oppressum gravissimo corporis morbo
deseruit. Quare tum corpus, tum animus codem tempore vexatus est acerbissime:
cumque adhuc non convaluerim, sed tamen aliquanto melius habeam; non tamen
quantum satis esse possit ad meum obeundum munus, te rogo, Vir Optime, ut
precibus tuis coneris impetrare mihi a Deo, vel absolutionem ab hujus vitae
molestijs, vel saltem Vitam, qua scholae and ecclesiae prodesse valeam;
quandoquidem ita vivere, ut sim utilis nemini, propemodum intolerabile judico.
Idemque oro, ut tua lectissima conjux, quam plurimum abs te salutari mihi
cupio, suis castissimis votis a Christo mihi concedi postulet. Vale atque deo
vivas faelix, meque in Christo, ut facis, ama. Oxonij, Martij 7. 1552.

Tuus ex animo quantus est, Pet. Martyr.

NUMBER. XCVI. John Sleidan to Cecyl. Advises of the state of affairs in Germany.
Magnifico Viro, Domino Caecilio, Equiti, and Serenissimi Regis Angliae
Secretario.
QUAS Aprili mense tibi scripsi, Vir ornatissime, Sir W. H. MSS.
(...) te pridem accepisse puto. Vellem quidem ex tuis hoc ipsum certo
cognoscere. Fuit hic nobiscum superioribus diebus Serenissimi vestri Regis
orator, D. Picorinus, expatiatus huc e vicinis castris cum Veneto and Ferrar,
legatis. Galliae Rex, post occupatam Lotharingiam and Metim urbem venit
Zaberniam, quod est quatuor hinc milliaribus, Episcopi ditionis oppidum. Ibi
habito delectu, petivit Haganoam, illinc Weissenburgum; quo in oppido litteris
acceptis a Mauritio, castra movit ad xiii diem hujus mensis, and partitis
copijs retrocessit. Ejus rei quae sit causa nondum constat. Electores etiam
principes quatuor, ij qui Rhenum accolunt, Wormacia suos ad ipsum miserunt
legatos, deprecandi opinor causa. Basilienses quoque nuper ipsum adierunt
Zaberniae, and pro finitimis locis intercesserunt. Nunc autem omnes Helvetiorum
pagi, communi missa legatione, idem faciunt. Nam haec nostra regio frumentum
eis abunde subministrat quotannis; eaque co^moditate nolunt se spoliari: and
hoc ipso die, opinor, eos compellare Regem: Nam ante biduum hac transierunt. A
nostra civitate Rex alimoniam flagitavit; bis fuimus ea de re in castris,
primum apud Sarburgum, dein Zaburniae. Pabulatores multum sane incommodarunt
agricolis, qui prope omnes tamen in urbem confugerant. Cujusmodi sint urbis
nostrae muni^iones, audisse vos non dubito. Veruntamen hoc ipso tempore novum
opus instituimus, utilissimum Reip. futurum. Vlmam frustra obsederunt
principes, ac misere vastatis circum agris, alia quoque loca tentarunt.
Mauritius fuit cum rege Ferdinando. Redijt quidem ad castra Sociorum; sed ad
xxvi diem hujus mensis erit rursus cum Ferdinando. Nam is intercedit, and ad
Caesarem profectus esse dicitur, Aenipontem, ut certi aliquid statui posset.
Quod si fiat, magna pars consiliorum regis mutabitur and intercidet. Caesar
comparat exercitum, and erit bellum haud dubie valde atrox. Concilij nulla jam
fit mentio, and silent inter arma leges. Pacem Julius ter^ius fecit cum Gallo,
and Mirandulae solvit obsidionem, and arctius quoque soedus cum eo fecisse
dicitur. Per Neapolim quoque gravis est proregi simultas cum Salernitano, qui
and Venetias confugit. Ferdinandum aiunt ratas habere, quas cum Mauritio
tractavit pacis conditiones; ideoque profectum ad sratrem, ut and ipsi
persuadeat. Conditiones autem illae cujusmodi sint, nondum plane constat. Hoc
solum fertur, eas ad Germaniam tum dignitatem, tum libertatem pristinam omnino
spectare. Deus been fortunet. Albertus Marchio bellum facit Norenburgensibus.
De rebus Turcicis nihil habemus comperti. Gallus in Lotharingiam redit, ut
exercitum Belgicum retundat.

Haec sunt, de quibus ad vestram Magnif. in hoc tempore scribendum duxi, tum
meo, tum Soceri nomine, Quaeso, ut tandem de meo negotio aliquid cognoscam;
quod ut commendatum habeas, and Rever. Domino Primati commendes, plurimum oro.
Vale, Argent. 18 Maij, 1552.

Tuae Magn. deditissimus, Jo. Sleid.
Sal. Literas hucusque distuli, expectans occasionem mittendi. Rex benign
respondet Helveticis legatis, and Lucemburgum dicitur petere. Expectamus quae
sit futura actio ad 26 hujus mensis. Gallus respondet Electorum principum
legatis, perfecisse jam se quod voluit: nempe captivos principes liberatum iri,
and se, qui jam satis gloriae consecutus sit, redire domum. Ita respondet xiii
hujus, quo die castra movit. Iterum vale. Dat. 24 Maij, 1552.



NUMBER. XCVII. More advices from Germany. Desires a Patent for his stipend
granted him by K. Edward VI.
Domino Gulielmo Caecilio, Regio Secretario, etc.
Sr. W. H. MSS.
SAL. Literae meae diutius hic haeserunt, quam putaram. Ecce, dum omnes erecti
sumus, and avide expectamus vicesimum sextum diem Maij, quo die alter erat
futurus conventus Ferdinandi and Mauritij, nuncius adfertur, Mauritium
profligasse quasdam copias Caesaris. Id autem accidit in Alpibus. Est oppidum
ijs locis, Rutam vocant; ibi futurus erat delectus militum, qui pro Caesare
cogebantur. Mauritius autem antevertit, and novem signa profligavit: deinde
celeriter progressus, aditum quendam in angustijs Alpium, and arcem ibi
positam, Erenburgum cepit. ^uit hoc decima nona die Maij. Caesar eo accepto
nuncio statim Aeniponte discessit; quod oppidum ab arce illa distat iter bidui.
Erat cum eo Ferdinandus, qui transactionis futurae causa illuc venerat, ut
alteris literis significavi. Simul ergo discesserunt, ingressi iter Tridentum
versus: nam in Italiam Caesar cogitabat. Sed aiunt eum monitu fratris
Ferdinandi, mutato consilio profectum esse in Austriam. An Mauritius eum
insequatur, nondum plane constat. Est infra Aenipontem alter aditus, positus in
augustijs, Kopfsteinum vocant. Hunc quoque si teneat ille, vix ullum ex Italia
militem sit habiturus Caesar. Hic nunc est rerum status: caetera brevi
cognoscemus. Tunc ad te, plura. Sed, oro, cognoscam ex tuis literis, number meas
accipias; and de meo stipendio fac aliquid boni cognoscam. Vale. dat. xxx Maij,
1552.

Io. Sleid.
Reverendissimo D. Cantuariensi cup^o imprimis commendari. Facito, quaeso, ut
Diploma mihi conficiatur ejus, quod Sereniss. Rex mihi constituit, stipendij,
and ut solvatur quod jam praeterijt. Per Richardum Hills mercatorem vestratem
recte curabitis. D. Checum, oro, plurimum ex me salutes.

Haec ubi scripsi, literae mihi adferuntur a Socero. Commendat se vobis omnibus
plurimum. Jubet ut ego vobis subinde scribam, eo quod ipsi non sit integrum ex
ijs locis. Est autem in finibus Lotharingiae. Exercitus Gallicus tripartitus,
Walderfingi, oppidi Lotharingiae, ad Saram flumen, convenit omnis 23 die Maij;
and quatriduo post ingressus iter petijt recta Lucemburgicam regionem, trajecto
flumine Mosella. Quacunque eunt ijs locis, omnia devastantur incendijs and
direptionibus. Is fuit ibi rerum status 28 die Maij, quo die Socer mihi
scripsit.



NUMBER. XCVIII. Intelligences concerning the motions of the Emperor, and the
state of the Protestant Princes.
Magnifico Viro, D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Sereniss. Angliae Regis Secretario.
SAL. Motum hujus anni perscripsi, Magnifice Domine, SirW. H. MSS.
ad initium usque September. and Serenissimum Regem paucos intra dies accepturum
spero. Fortasse priusquam hae tibi reddantur, acceperit. Postremum est, de
capto rursum Lantgravio: sed is denuo dimissus, jam est domi. Calendis
Septembris Caesar Augusta discedens, Ioannem Fridericum, Saxoniae Ducem,
amplissimis verbis and amanter admodum dimisit, prolixe de sua benevolentia
illi pollicitus; and religionem ei suam permisit. Ille postridie domum redijt.
Mauritius in Hungariam iturus ex pacto, copias suas Doneverda misit Ratisbonam,
xxii. die Augusti; ipse domum recurrit, paulo post rediturus ad exercitum. An
redierit, adhuc quidem ignoratur. Albertus Marchio Brandeburg. 28 Augusti
Trevirim urbem ad M^s^llam flumen occupavit. Mansit ibi dies octo; post,
Lotharingiam petivit, relictis Treviri praesidio xii signis: and xiii die
Septembr. prope Sircum oppidum trajecit Mosellam, and in Lucemburgicum agrum
invasit. Caesar Augustae treis quidem concionatores abrogavit, ob singularia
quaedam dogmata, sicut fertur: sed reliquis tamen permisit, ut secundum
Augusta^ae Confessionis, quondam exhibitae, formulam doceant, and Sacramentis
utantur.xv die Septembr. Caesar cum exercitu venit in nostros fines, and in
vico quodam, milliare unum ab urbe, permansit in quintum diem: tunc demum
impedimentis omnibus Rheno transmissis, in quo magna fuit difficultas,
plurimumque laboris and exercitu jusso progredi praeter urbem, ipse cum paucis
quibusdam heri ingressus est, and sumpto prandio discessit. Sunt in ejus
exercitu praeter G^rmanos, Itali, Hispani* Bohemi, qui sane plurimum damni
dederunt miseris agricolis. Caesar omnino putatur iturus Metim, ut recuperet;
Galli strenu^ illam muniunt, and alimoniam omnem totius agri convehunt eo. His
rebus omnibus pracest Guisius.

Fuit hic nobiscum D. Morissinus, and Aschamus. Oratores omnes Caesar jussit
ire Spiram. De Hungaria nihil habemus. Haec sunt, Magnifice D. quae tibi
scribenda putavi: Quanquam fortassis aliunde habeo. Quod reliquum est, ut per
eum, quem Socer meus ad vos mittit, de mea condition certi quid cognoscam, and
ut causam ipse promoveas meam, plurimum oro. Videlicet ut Diploma conficiatur,
mittatur, and anni jam exacti, vel sesquianni potius, solvatur pensio. Quicquid
unquam in tui gratia potero, faciam. Jamdiu Saxum hoc volvo. Vale. Argent. xx.
September. 1552.

Io. Sleidanus.
Ioannes Marchio Brandeburgicus adducit Caesari ad duo millia equitum,
religioni est addictissimus. Nec aliter etiam militat, quam ut hoc ei sit
liberum.
NUMBER. XCIX. Advises of the State of the Empire.
Magnifico and spectabili viro D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Equiti, Sereniss. Regis
Angliae Secretario, Domino suo multum colendo.
Sir W. H. MSS.
SAL. xx die September. ad te scripsi, Vir ornatissime. Quod Albertus egerit apud
Treviros, jampridem audistis. Octobris die xxii reconciliatus est Caesari per
Ducem Albanum. Impune fecerit omnia, and militabit Caesari, quocunque loco
jusserit. Pacta, cum Bambergico and W^rcibergensi Episcopo sacta, erunt rata.
Caesar in gratiam recipit Aetingenses Comites, and Mansfeldios, patrem atque
filium. Novembris die quart^ cepit Aumalium Albertus, Guisij fratrem, caeso
illius atque fugato equitatu. Curatum ipsum ex vulnere nuper misit in suam
quandam arcem, ad Bohemiae fines. Caesar in castra venit xx November. Interea
muri pars magna dejecta, sed oppositum est Vallum, and praesidiarij crebras
faciunt eruptiones. Caesarem aiunt nolle obsidionem solvere, neque discedere
priusquam urbem receperit. Guisius fuit hactenus in urbe cum N^morensi
principe, cum Roschsurio, and Petro Stroza; number adhuc sint, ignoramus. Nar^
superioribus diebus eruptione facta in Alberti castra, qui tum forte quosdam ad
prandium invitaverat, xviii equites dicuntur ex urbe evasisse in Galliam.
Tormentorum and oppugnationis fragor non solum hic exauditur, quod trid^i via
distat, verum quatuor etiam trans Rhenum milliaribus and eo amplius. Cuniculis
opinor jam tentari urbem. Mauritius ex Hungaria domum redijt* dimissis copijs;
Turcae domum and ipsi reverterunt: si non impetrentur induciae, magnus inde
motus expectatur. Castaldus dicitur bonam operam ijs locis navare Ferdinando
Regi. Nostrates Episcopi sollicitant nova foedera, quandoquidem vident, and
experiuntur, quid sit periculi. E Saxonia mittuntur aliquot verbi doctores
Augustam. Mansfeldicus bellum fecerat Henrico Brunsvicensi: number sit composita
res, ignoramus. Is nunc est rerum status, nec aliud habeo quod scribam.

A vobis nihil responderi mihi miror, neque scio quid expectare debeam. Oro te,
Magnifice Domine, age causam cum Reverendissimo Cantuariensi. Equidem totus
pergo in opere illo, and diligenter omnia conquiro. Dedi vobis occasiones and
ansas, quibus apprehensis negotium nostrum conficeretis apud Sereniss. Regem.
Haec autem mora valde me coquit. Utinam aliquid saltem rescriberetis. Vale.
xvii Decembr. M. D. LII. Argent.

Magnificentiae tuae deditiss. Jo. Sleid.
Commendes me velim D. Rever. Cant. and D. Checo. Cuperem habere Seriem
actionis, quae Regi Henrico fuit cum Clemente Septimo, priusquam ab eo se
suumque regnum in libertatem asseruit. Nam and haec erunt inserenda suo loco.



NUMBER. C. Concerning his Commentaries, which he had sent to K. Edward. Desires
Sr. William Cecyl to send him an exact information of the business between K.
Henry and Pope Clement. His resolution of continuing his Commentaries, and of
writing the History of the Council of Trent.
Magnificis and spectatissimis Viris, D. D. Joanni Chaeco, and Gulielmo
Caecilio, Dominis suis plurimum observandis.
SAL. Autumno superiori misi Sereniss. Regi belli Germanici Commentarios, Sr.
W.H.MSS.
ad illud usque tempus conscriptos; and perjucundum mihi fuit, ex tuis literis,
D. Caecili, cognoscere, non ei displicere genus hoc scribendi: vobis etiam
illud probari, gaudeo, Viris doctissimis, and acri judicio praeditis. Itaque
recte me facturum putavi, si Concilij Tridentini totam actionem, cujus etiam
ego pars aliqua fui, regis causa potissimum conscriberem; ut cujusmodi sit
Conciliorum forma perspiciat; deinde, ut de reliqua historia restauratae
religionis, quam conscribo, judicium faciat. Nam inde ab anno salutis M.D.XVII.
quo quidem anno fecit doctrinae suae Lutherus initium, rem omnem ordine deduxi
ad annum usque M.D.XXXVI. and quod superest, eodem filo contexam, Dei
beneficio. Sum autem in eo jam totus, and huic me rei soli trado, neque
desistam, adjuvante Deo, priusquam perfecero. Quale sit au^em futurum opus, and
quam utile non huic aetati modo, sed etiam toti posteritati, malo vos judicare,
vestrique similes, quam me prolixius de eo loqui.

Mense Decembri petebam abs te, D. Caecili, per literas, ut actionem omnem,
quae fuit Henrico Regi piae memoriae cum Clemente VII. quando se suumque regnum
in libertatem asseruit, mihi curares. Habeo quidem ejus rei quaedam, sed non
tam exact, neque certo, quam velim. Cupio en^m proprie and quam verissime
omnia describere. Quod quidem in ijs Commentarijs, quos jam mitto, quique sunt
futuri pars operis, animadvertere vos posse puto. Magni ergo benesicij loco
mihi erit, si in eo mihi gratificaberis. Est enim locus illustris atque
memorabilis, and omnino dignus de quo posteri cognoscant. Siquid praeterea sit
apud vos hujus generis, una velim transmitti. Quod superest, notum est vobis,
Magnifici and Clarissimi Viri, tibi cumprimis, D. Chaece, quemadmodum Sereniss.
Rex, ante biennium, nempe anno M. D. LI. sub finem Martij, stipendium mihi
constituit annuum absenti, Coron. aureos ducentos; uti Reverendissimus D.
Cantuariensis, tunc temporis abituro Socero meo, domumque redituro, Doctori
Brunoni, nomine regis confirmavit. Et quoniam ejus pecuniae nihil adhuc accepi,
plurimum vos oro, quod antehac quoque seci non semel, de^is operam, ut tandem
solvatur. Possem equidem alia facere negotia magno meo cum emolumento, sicut
alij plaerique, sed ad hunc laborem divinitus me vocatum esse judico, nec animo
possum esse quieto, donec ad hoc usque tempus perduxero. Quo magis etiam spero,
Vos, qui pro vestra humanitate atque prudentia recte omnia intelligitis, in ^oc
esse elaboraturos, ut de biennio jam exacto, mihi nunc satisfi^t, and in
posterum caveatur, quo videlicet tanto commodius atque liberius huic rei vacare
possim. Quanti enim hic labor mihi constet, vobis aestimandum relinquo.
Pertinet autem ad reges, ut ejusmodi labores, qui sunt and literis ornamento
and religioni, and utiles Reipfoueant. Siquid est omnium rerum, in quo vicissim
ego vobis inservire queam, and gratificari, paratum me semper habebitis.

Veruntamen, ut hoc meum scriptum de Concilio, diligenter asservetur in
bibliotheca regis, nec in aliorum manus perveniat, nec ulli detur ejus
exemplum, vehementer vos oro. Nam mea plurimum refert, ne spargatur: and est
solum, ut ante quoque dixi, particula quaedam operis futuri.

De statu rerum nostratium, scire vos arbitror. Galli, sub finem Januarij,
libros de religione scriptos a nostris hominibus, ubi per monachos
conquisivissent in aedibus, public per Carnificem exusserunt Meti. Postridie
discessit Guisius, inque Galliam redijt. Luneburgi fuit multorum principum
atque civitatum Saxoniae Conventus. Nuper etiam Palatinus Elector, Bavarus,
Clivensis, atque Wirtembergicus convenerunt Wimpffae. Brevi cognoscemus quid
sit. Princeps Vrbinas dicitur esse factus minister Iulij tertij. Transylvani
pacem feceruut cum Turca, de voluntate Ferdinandi Regis, ut scribitur, and
annuum ei pendunt vectigal. Augusta Vindelicorum tenetur adhuc praesidio, quod
Caesar ante sextum mensem ibi reliquit. Videtur aliquis ibi motus impendere:
Nec enim omnes praesentem statum far possunt. Volratus Comes Mansfeldius
habet adhuc exercitum, neque certo scitur, in quem usum. Sed non diu latere
potest quicquid est. Quod reliquum est, ut laetum atque jucundum a vobis
nuncium accipiam, imprimis opto. Deus vos servet. Argentorati. Idibus Martij.
M. D. LIII.

Oro vos plurimum, ut has meas literas atque scriptum Sereniss. Regi exhibeatis
cum nostri commendatione. Habetis opportunissimam negotij mei conficiundi
occasionem. Obsecro, perficite, ne mihi sit opus in posterum eadem de re
scribere.

Vestri observantissimus, Joan. Sleidanus. Li.
Richardo Hills, mercatori Londinensi, qui nobiscum aliquando habitavit, licebit
dare quicquid mihi debetur. Cupio autem, atque etiam oro, ut per eum, qui has
reddit, Soceri mei famulum, mihi respondeatis. Conjunctim vobis scribo, quia
summam inter vos esse animorum conjunctionem accipio, ut judicij similitudinem

Mauritius Elector dicitur sollicitare, ut exercitum Mansfeldicum ad se
traducat, and coquere nova consilia.



NUMBER. CI. Concerning the Affairs of Germany; and particularly of the Council of
Trent.
Ornatissimo Viro D. Gulielmo Caecilio, Serenissimi Regis Angliae Secretario.
SirW.H.MSS.
SAL. De rebus actis Tridenti, non dubito quin ex Aschami Rogeri literis, ad
quem scripsi, cognoris, Vir Ornatiss. Post impetratam fidem publicam, quod fuit
sub finem Januarij, Dux Mauricius putabatur omnino missurus esse Philippum and
alios. Norenbergam enim usque praemiserat. Sed cum aliquandiu fuissent ibi
commorati, sub finem Februarij revocavit eos, ad maturitatem jam prope deductis
belli consilijs and apparatu. Dux Christophorus autem Wirtembergicus, qui
doctrinae Confessionem exhibuerat antea per Legatos Tridenti, Brentium eo misit
cum tribus collegis, quibus se conjunxerant duo nostrae civitatis Theologi; and
hi quidem Tridentum venerunt, ad xviii diem Martij. In alterum diem fuerat
indicta, quam vocant, sessio. Sed nihil tum fuit actum: eaque sessio fuit ad
Calend. usque Maij prorogata. Postquam ergo Legati Wirtembergici, qui nuper eo
venerant recentes, and ego, nostrae Reip. nomine, Theologos nostros, apud
Caesaris treis Oratores ibi, certis legibus, ad futuram actionem obtulimus and
admisimus: Ego, qui jam in quintum mensem ibi fueram, sub finem Martij
discessi, and ad xii Aprilis huc redij. Priusquam abirem, de voluntate Sociorum
egeram diligenter apud alterum Caesaris Oratorem, de modo processus, and
urgebam ut Theologi nostri public audirentur, aut super articulis ibi
definitis, aut super capitibus doctrinae, juxta seriem Confessionis exhibitae.
Hoc autem invitissimi faciunt; neque publicum ipsis auditorium, opinor, facile
concedent. In quo quidem si perseverent, tum nostri discedent. Et hic quidem
fuit, me discedente, rerum status. Qui sunt ibi doctiores, Brentium norunt ex
scriptis, and ipsius expetunt colloquia. Sunt ibi Hispani Episcopi xxv, Itali
totidem aut plures: and hi quidem actionis atque morae pertaesi, spectabant
abitionem; illi vero, Caesaris authoritate, qui caetum illum dissolvi non
temere patitur, continentur. Jam Episcopi nostrates omnes abierant, praeter
Curiensem and Constantiensem, qui tamen and ipse paucis post me diebus
dicebatur esse discessurus.

Videt Caesar, quam non facile recolligi possit ejusmodi caetus posthac, si
nunc eum dissip^ri contingat: ideoque tantopere studuit hactenus eum continere.
Digressus, cum venissem Aenipontem, D. Legatum Morisinum Halae conveni Calendis
Aprilis. Postridie continuato itinere intelligebam obsideri Augustam
Vindelicorum ab duce Mauricio, filijsque Lantgravij, and Alberto Brandeburgico.
Biduo post occurrit mihi in via D. Morisini Conjux, quae per Augustam huc
profectura, cum difficilem fore transitum audisset, ad maritum redibat. Eodem
die deditionem fecerunt Augustani, qui fuit hujus mensis dies quartus. Erant in
urbe tria peditum signa, ductore Walthero Hir^beincio: qui omnes liberaliter,
nulla devincti lege dimissi fuerunt. Postridie sunt urbem ingressi principes,
qui veteri restituto Senatu and tribubus, uti in reliquis etiam oppidis
fecerant, and constituta nova Rep* and tormentis tum Civitatis, tum Caesaris,
quae sunt ibi plurima, perquisitis, die Aprilis septimo discesserunt. Quibus
autem conditionibus pacti sunt cum Oppidanis, adhuc quidem ignoro. Fuggerus
Antonius pridie deditionis excesserat urbe, and quatuor ab Aeniponte
milliaribus, mane mihi occurrit, tribus tantum comitatus. Vlma post iter feci,
qui tun^ praesidium habebant, tria signa peditum, and videbantur ad defensionem
omnino spectare. Postridie quam illinc abij, nempe octava hujus mensis die,
Principes, Mauricius, Lantgravij filius, and Megelburgins, datis ad eos
literis, commeatum and alimoniam, and alia quaedam, ab ipsis petebant. Eas ad
literas cum nihil illi responderent, Principes undecima hujus denuo
scripserunt, seque ipsos appropinquaturos nunciabant; and hoc ipso tempore
oppidum obsident. Est autem ea civitas valde locuples, and quia magnam obtinent
circum ditionem, arces, castella, oppidula, praedia, vix opinor tolerabunt
obsidionem. Proximus est impressioni Dux Wirtembergicus, qui sane pacem
libenter coleret, si per tempora liceret: ab eo rectum est iter ad nos. Altera
ipsorum pars exercitus petit Alps, credo, ut aditus occupent, nequis externus
miles egredi possit. His copijs, opinor, praeest Albertus Brandeburgicus una
cum Hedeckio.

Quid Caesar agat, aut ubi sit, nescimus. Ego cum essem Aeniponti, nihil
quicquam vidi apparatus; maguumque tum erat ibi silentium in aula, magnaque
solitudo, nisi quod eo ipso die nonnullis fuit datum negotium conscribendi
copias. Dubium tamen non est, quin Italum and Hispanum militem Caesar evocarit.
Electores Rhenani suos habent apud principes Legatos de pace: sed plaerique
putant difficillimam esse futuram tractationem. Aeniponte mihi dicebatur,
Caesarem in hoc esse totum, ut Mauricium placaret. Et hic quidem paroxysmus
nobis imminet ab orient sole: jam vero ab occidente multo fere terribilior
instat. Nam Metim urbem Gallus tenet, and per vicinum nobis agrum iter faciens,
volet etiam hanc nostram urbem fortassis videre, multumque hoc ad suam gloriam
pertinere putabit, eousque signa promovisse. Quod si alter exercitus, occupata
Vlma, caeterisque domitis, ad nos etiam propius accedet, vides in quantis simus
augustijs. O! quis erit hujus tragediae tandem exitus? Gorziam oppidum and
Abbatiam praedivitem Galli, ante diem octavum, vi ceperunt, diripuerunt,
incenderunt, opinor, praefecto Hispano, cum 38 militibus, suspenso. Theonis
villa, Luc^mburgic^e ditionis oppidum munitum, quatuor a Meti milliaribus, ad
Mosellam flumen^ habet equitum peditumque praesidia, and nuper emissis faeminis
atque pueris, obsidionem tolerabit. Eo enim capto oppido, nihil fere est ijs
locis, quod vim ullam majorem diu sustinere possit.

Haec est rerum apud nos facies. Vos multo faeliciores, qui festinam pacem
colitis in pulcherrima regione. Socer meus, quem nosti, datis ad me literis
(nam est in agro Metensibus vicino) multam tibi salutem nunciat, seque
diligenter vobis omnibus commendat, and jussit ut haec, tam suo quam meo etiam
nomine, tibi scriberem, quandoquidem ex ijs locis, ubi nunc est, and in hac
temporum asperitate, non ita commode potest ipse ad vos dare literas. Quod cum
ita sit, nolui hoc officium praetermittere, ut de ipsius apud vos observantia
studioque perpetuo cognosci posset. Quanquam and ipse, pro meo in vos affectu,
mea sponte scripturus eram: and spero vos in optimam partem haec accepturos
esse, quae fortasse jam aliunde etiam accepistis. Attamen quia rebus ipsemet
tractandis interfui Tridenti, puto vobis tanto futuram esse gratiorem hanc
qualemcunque narrationem. Quod superest, ut meum negotium, quod aliquot nunc
annis agitatur, and de quo Reverendiss. D. Cantuariensis, anno superiori,
Socero meo certum quid dixit, promoveas, Vir ornatissime, etiam atque etiam
rogo. Sereniss. Rex constituit mihi, sicut Cantuariensis dixit Socero, annuos
ducentos absenti. Ut ejus rei conficiatur Diploma magnopere pe^o, sicut
hactenus, eamque mihi pecuniam dependi flagito. Scis rem omnem haud dubie,
a^ioqui prolixior essem: and priusquam irem Tridentum, scripsi ea de re D.
Chaeco, sicut etiam Reverendiss. D. Cantuariensi. Nihil hactenus mihi responsum
est a vobis: quo magis peto, ut per te certi aliquid cognoscam. In eo feceris
and Socero mihique gratissimum. Vale. Argent. xviii. April. 1552.

Joan. Sleidanus, Licent.
Has literas oro communices Reverendissimo D. Cantuar. Nam sic scribo ad ipsum.
Per Richardum Hillis mercatorem vestratem recte poteritis ad nos, nisi alia sit
ratio commodior. Clarissimo Viro D. Checo plurimum and officiose me commendo.



NUMBER. CII. Martin Bucer to the Secretary, for the speeding of Sleidan's
business.
Summa dignitate viro, and pietate praecellenti D. Sicilio, Regiae Majestatis a
Secretis, Domino ac Patrono suo summopere colendo.
S. P. Vir Clarissime, Accipies hic meas literas, quamlibet aegre dictatas, Sr.
W. H. MSS.
ad sum doctum and pium Medicum D. Ioannem Quercetanum. Sed te per Christum
rogo, nosti supplicationem nostram pro Sleydano, si possis ulla ratione
impetrare, dari responsum, in utram placeat partem. Nosti hoc decere
administrationem Regni, and ceteris, and Religionis beneficio tantopere
ornatam. Dominus prosequatur te, tuosque omnes beneficentia cumulatissima.
Cantabrigiae, 18 Feb. M.D.LI.

Clarissimae Dominationi tuae deditissimus in Domino, M. Bucerus.

NUMBER. CIII. Ralph Morice, the Archbishops Secretary, his Supplication to Queen
Elizabeth, for Prior Wilbore's Pension, lately deceased.
To the Quenys most excellent Majesty.
IN his most humble wise, Sr. W.H.MSS.
shewith and declarith unto your most ex^ellent Majesty your highness humble
subject and Orator Raphe Morice, sometime servant unto that worthy Prelate of
godly memory, Tho. Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterburye. That whereas your
highness said Orator for the space of 20 years and above, being reteynid in
service with the said most Reverend father, in the rowme of a Secretary,
bestowed and spent both his time, youth and prosperitye of his life, not so
much in writing of the private busynes of the said most Reverend father* as in
travailing with his pen aboughte the serious affairs of the Prince and the
Realm, commyted unto him by those most noble and wurthie princes, K. Henry the
eighth, and K. Edward the Sixth, your M^jesties dear father and brother,
concerning as well the writing of those great and weighty Matrimonyal causes of
your highness said dear Father, (the good effect, success and benefit whereof
to Godds g^ory, this hole realm with the Subjects thereof, in your highness most
noble and royal personage, do now most happily enjoye,) As also about
thexstirpation of the Bishop of Rome his usurped power and authority, the
reformation of corrupt religion, and Ecclesiastical Laws, thalteration of
Divine Service, and of diverse and sundry conferences of lern^d men, for
thestablishing and advancement of sincere religion, with such like. Wherein your
highness said Orator most painfully was occupied in writing of no small
Volumes, from time to time. As in that behalf diverse lernid men now lyving can
testi^ie; namely Dr. Hethe, Dr. Thirleby, the Bishopes of Elie, Chichester and
Heriford. And for that the said most Reverend Father was myndeful and desirous
some deal to recompense the payneful service of your said Orator, he of his
own mere motion and good disposition procurid for your highness said Orator, a
lease of the parsonage of Ospringe within the Count of Kent, ympropriated unto
the College of S. John's in Cambridge: which toward the mayntenance of your
said Orators lyving was better than 40 marks by the year de claro, when Wheat
was but a Noble the quarter. Which lease of the said parsonage being so
grauntid, and ready to be sealid by the Master and fellows of the same
College, one H^^kyns of the Guard, by his y mportunate suit, made unto your
highness said dear father the Kings Majesty, so wan his highness favou^ therein,
that his Majesty obteynyd the said Lease to be sealid to the use of the said
H^^kyns. His Majesty nevertheles promising unto D. Day, then Master of the
said College, and sone after unto the said most Reverend, that his highness
would otherwise recompense your said Orator for the same with like valewe or
better: as the said Hawkyns now lyving can testify the same. This
notwithstanding, most dear Sovereign Lady, Almighty God preventing the time of
any such recompense by calling your highness said father unto his mercy, your
highness said Orator remains as yet unrecompenced to his great hinderaunce,
and ympoverishmente. For now being declyned unto age, and having 4 daughters
left by their mother marriageable, your said Orator is neither of ability to
bestow them according to his vocation, as he might have done, if that small
lyving so pr^pared for him might have remained to his use; Nor himself to lyve
withouten danger, onles your Majesty, of your benign great goodness, do
extend your highness liberality, aid and succor unto him. And for that your
highness said Orator does understand, that one Mr. Wilbore, sometime Prior of
the Monastery of S. Austens, departed this transitory life before Mighilmas
last past, who has a yerelie pension of your Majesty of now by reason of his
death in your gracious disposition, It may please your highness in
consideration of the premises, and for that it is reported, that your said
most noble, and dear father provided and willed in his last testamente, that
such of his subjects, as by his highness did sustain any manner of damage or
hinderaunce should be satisfied for the same; to be so good and gracious
Sovereign Lady unto your said Orator, in the furtheraunce of his said poor
daughters marieges, as to grant unto him the said pension during his life,
with tharrerages of this last half year deu at the said feast of S. Michel
tharchangel last past. In accomplishing whereof your highness shall not only do a
right charitable and a meritorious deed, but also therbie thoroughly satisfy
and recompense your said Orator for the said lease so surrendered at the request
of your highness said dear father. Although the said Orator has lost in
forbearing of the same above M. mark for the space of these eighteen years and
above, corn being at such a price as it has been: And finally bind both him
and al his, during their lyves, daily to pray unto Almighty God for the most
prosperous estate of your Majesty in much honor and felicity to endure.

NUMBER. CIV. A Prologue or Preface, made by THOMAS CRANMER, Late Archbishop of
Canterbury, to the holy Bible.
COncerning two sundry sorts of people, it seems much necessary, that
something be said in the entry of this Book, by way of a Preface or Prologue:
Whereby hereafter it may be both the better accepted of th m, which hitherto
could not well bear it, and also the better used of them, which heretofore have
misused it. For truly some there are, that be too slow, and need the spurr;
some other seem too q^ick, and need more of the bridle. Some loose their game
by shor^ shooting, some by overshooting. Some walk too much on the left hand:
some too much on the right. In the former sort be al they, that refuse to read,
or to hear read the Scripture in the vulgar tongue, much worse they that let
also, or discourage the other from the reading, or hearing thereof. In the
Latter sort be they, which by their inordinate reading, undiscrete speaking,
contentious disputing, or otherwise by their licentious Living, slander and
hinder the word of God most of al other, whereof they would seem to be gre^test
furtherers. These two sorts, albeit they be most far unlike the one to the
other, yet they both deserve in effect like reproach. Neither can I well te^l,
whether of them I may judge the more offender, him that does obstinately refuse
so godly and goodly knowledge, or him, that so ungodly, and so ungoodly does
abuse the same.

And as touching the former, I would mervail much that any man should be so
mad, as to refuse in darkness, Light; in hunger, Food; in cold, Fire. For the
word of God is Light. Lucerna pedibus meis Verbum tuum. Thy Word is a Lanthorn
unto my feet. It is food. Psalm. 119. a.
Non in solo p^ne vivit homo, sed in omni verbo Dei. Mat. 4. a.
Man shall not live by bread only, b^t by ever^ word of God. It is fire. Ignem
veni mittere in terram, and quid v^lo, nisi ut ardeat. I am come to send fire
on the earth, Luke 12. ^.
and what is my desire, but that it be kindled? I would mervail, I say, at
this, save that I cons^der, how much custom and usage may do. So that if there
were a people as some write De Cymmerijs, which never saw the sun, by reason
that they be si^uated far toward the North Pole, and be enclosed and
overshadowed with high mountains; it is credible and like enough, that if by
the power and will of God the mountains should sink down and give place, that
the light of the Sun might have entrance to them, at the first some of them
would be offended therewith. And the old Proverb affirms, that after tillage
of corn was first found, many delighted more to feed of mast and acornes.
wherewith they had been accustomed, then to eat bread made of good corn. Such
is the nature of custom, that it causes us to bear all things well and
easily, wherewith we have been accustomed and to be offended with all things
thereunto contrary. And therefore I can well think them worthy pardon, which at
the coming abroad of Scripture doubted and drew back. But such as will persist
still in their wilfulness, I must needs judge not only foolish, froward and
obstinate, but also peevish, perverse and indurate.

And yet if the matter should be tried by Custom, we might also too allege
custom for the reading of the Scripture in the Vulgar tongue, and prescribe
the more ancient custom. For it is not much above one hundred years ago,
since Scripture has not been accustomed to be read in the vulgar tongue
within this realm: and many hundred years before that, it was translated and
read in the Saxons tongue, which at that time was our mother tongue: whereof
there remain yet diverse copies, found lately in old Abbeys, of such antique
manner of writing, and speaking, that few men now been able to read and
understand them. And when this language waned old, and out of common usage
because folk should not lack the fruit of reading, it was again translated into
the newer Language, whereof yet also many copies remain, and be daily found.

But now to let pass custom, and to weigh, as wise men ever should, the thing
in his own nature. Let us here discuss, what it avails, Scriptu^e to be had
and read of the Lay and Vulgar people. And to this question I intend here to
say nothing, but that was spoken and written by the noble Doctor, and most
moral Divine, S. John Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom.
in his third Sermon De Lazaro; albeit I will be something shorter, and gather
the matter into fewer words, and less room then he does there, because I would
not be tedious. He exhorts there his Audience, that every men should read
by himself at home in the mean days and time, between Sermon and Sermon, to
the intent they might both more profoundly fix in their minds and memories that
he had said before upon such texts, whereupon he had already preached; and
also that they might have their minds the more ready and better prepared to
receive and perceive that which he should say from thenceforth in his Sermons,
upon such texts as he had not yet declared and preached upon. Therefore, says
he there, My common usage is to give you warning before, what matter I intend
after to entreat upon, that you your selves, in the mean days, may take the
book in hand* read, weigh and perceive the sum and effect of the matter, and
mark what has been declared, and what remains yet to be declared: So that
thereby your mind may be the more furnished to hear the rest that shall be said.
And that I exhort you, says he, and ever have and will exhort you, that you
not only here in the Church, give ear to that that is said by the Preacher; but
that also, when ye be at home in your houses, ye apply your selves, from
time to time, to the reading of holy Scriptures. Which thing also I never li^
to beat into the ears of them that be my familiars, and with whom I have
private acquaintance and conversation. Let no man make excuse and say, says
he, I am busied about matters of the commonwealth, I bear this office or that;
I am a crafts man, I must apply mine occupation: I have a wife, my children
must be fed, my household must be provided for. Briefly, I am a man of the
world, it is not for me to read the Scriptures, that belongs to them that
have bidden the world farewell, which live in solitarines and contemplation, and
have been brought up and continually nursilled in Learning and religion.

To this answering, What say thou Man, says he, is it not for thee to
study and to read the Scripture, because thou art encumbred and distract with
cares and business? So much the more is it behoofful for thee to have defense
of Scriptures, how much thou art the more distressed in worldly dangers. They,
that be free and far from trouble and intermedling of worldly things, Live in
safeguard, and tranquillity, and in the calm, and within a sure haven. Thou art
in the midst of the Sea of worldly wickedness, and therefore thou need the
more of ghostly succor and comfort. They sit far from the strokes of battle,
and far out of gunshot, and therefore they be but seldom wounded. Thou that
stand in the forefront of the Host, and nighest to thine enemies, must needs
take now and then many strokes, and be grievously wounded, and therefore thou
have most need to have thy remedies and medicines at hand. Thy Wife provokes
thee to anger, thy Child gives thee occasion to take sorrowand pensiveness,
thine enemies ly in wait for thee, thy friend as thou take him, Sometime
envieth thee, thy neighbor misreporteth thee, or piketh quarrels against thee,
thy Mate or partner undermineth thee; thy Lord, Judge or Justice, threatens
thee; Poverty is painful unto thee; the loss of thy dear and welbeloved causes
thee to mourn; Prosperity exalts thee, Adversity brings thee low: Briefly,
so diverse and so manifold occasions of cares, tribulations and temptations,
beset thee and besiege thee round about. Where can thou have armor, or
fortress, against thine assaults? Where can thou have salves for thy sores,
but of holy Scripture? Thy flesh must needs be prone and subject to fleshly
lusts, which daily walk and art conversant among women, see their beautyes
set forth to the ey, hear their nice and wanton words, smellest their balm,
civet and musk, with other like provocations and stirrings; Except thou have in
a readiness, wherewith to suppress and avoid them, which cannot elsewhere be
had, but only out of the holy Scriptures. Let us read and seek all remedies
that we can, and all shall be little enough. How shall we then do, if we
suffer and take daily wounds, and when we have done, will sit still and search
for no medicines? Do thou not mark and consider how the Smith, Mason or
Carpenter, or any other handy crafts man, what need soever he be in, what
other shift he make, he will not sell nor lay to pledge the tools of his
occupation. For then how should he work his feat, or get his living thereby?
Of like mind and affection ought we to be toward holy Scripture. For as
mallets, hammers, sawes, chesells, axes and hatchets be the tools of their
occupation; So be the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, and all holy Writers
inspired by the holy Ghost, the instruments of our Salvation. Wherefore let us
not stick to buy and provide us the Bible, that is to say, the Books of holy
Scripture, and let us think that to be a better jewel in our house, then
either gold or silver. For like as thieves be loath to assault an house, where
they know to be good armor and artillery, so wheresoever these holy and
ghostly books be occupied, there neither the Devil, nor none of his Angels dare
come near. And they that occupy them be in much safeguard, and have a great
consolation, and be the readier unto all goodness, the slower unto all evil.
And if they have done any thing amiss, anon, even by the sight of the books,
their consciences be admonished, and they wax sorry and ashamed of the fact.
Peradventure they will say unto me, How and if we understand not that we
read, that is contained in the Books? What then? suppose thou understand not
the deep and profound Mysteries of Scripture, yet can it not be, but that much
fruit and holiness must come and grow unto thee by the reading. For it cannot
be, that thou should be ignorant in all things alike. For the holy Ghost
has so ordered and attempered the Scriptures, that in them, as well Publicans,
fishers and sheepherds may find their edification, as great Doctors their
erudition. For those books were not made to vain glory, like as were the
Writings of the Gentile Philosophers, and Rhetoricians, to the intent the
makers should be had in admiration for their high styles, and obscure manner
of writing; whereof nothing can be understanded without a Master, or an
Expositor. But the Apostles and Prophets wrote their books so, that their
special intent and purpose might be understanded and perceived of every
reader: which was nothing but the edification or amendment of the life of them
that read or hear it. Who is it, that reading, or hearing read in the Gospel,
Blessed are they, that be meek; Blessed are they, that be merciful: Blessed
are they, that be of clean heart, and such other like places, can perceive
nothing, except he have a Master to teach him what it means? Likewise the
signs and miracles with all other histories of the doings of Christ, or his
Apostles, who is there of so simple wit and capacity, but he may be able to
perceive and understand them? These be but excuses and clokes for the rain,
and coverings of their own idle slothfulnes. But still ye will say, I cannot
understand it. What mervail? How should thou understand, if thou will not
read nor look upon it? Take the books into thine hands, read the whole story,
and that thou understandest, keep it well in memory: that thou understandest
not, read it again and again. If thou can neither so come by it, counsel with
some other that is better Learned. Go to thy Curate and Preacher, show thy self
to be desirous to know and learn. And I doubt not but God seeing thy diligence
and readiness, if no man else teach thee, will himself vouchsafe with his holy
Spirit to illuminate thee, and to open unto thee that which was locked from
thee. Remember the Eunuch of Candace Queen of Ethiopia: which albeit he was a
man of a wild and barbarous country, and one occupied with worldly cares and
business, yet riding in his charet, he was reading the Scripture. Now consider,
if this man, passing in his journey, was so diligent as to read the Scripture,
what think thou of like was he wont to do sitting at home? Again, he
lets not to read, albeit he did not understand: What did he then trowest
thou after that, when he had learned and gotten understanding? For that thou
may well know that he understood not what he read, harken what Philip says
there unto him. Understand thou what thou read? And he nothing ashamed
to confess his ignor^nce, answered, How should I understand, having no body to
show me the^way? Lo! when he lacked one to show him the way, and to expound
to him the scripture, yet did he read. And therefore God the rather provided
for him a guide of the way, that taught him to understand it. God perceived his
willing and toward mind, and therefore he sent him a Teacher by and by.
Therefore let no man be neg^igent about his own health and salvation. Though
thou have not Philip always, when thou would, the holy Ghost, which then
moved and sti^red up Philip, will be ready and not fail thee, if thou do thy
diligence accordingly. All these things be written for us, for our edification
and amendment, which be born toward the latter end of the world. The reading
of the Scriptures is a great and strong bulwark or fortress against sin: the
ignorance of the same is a greater ruin and destruction of them that will not
know it. That is the thing that brings in heresy; that is it that causes
all corrupt and perverse Living; that is it, that brings all things out of
good order.

Hitherto all that I have said, I have taken and gathered out of the foresaid
sermon of this holy Doctor S. John Ch^ysostom. Now if I should in like manner
bring sorth what the self same Doctor speaks in other places, and what other
Doctors and Writers say concerning the same purpose, I might seem to you to
write another Bible, rather then to make a Preface to the Bible. Wherefore in
few words to comprehend the largeness and utility of the Scripture, how it
contains fruitful instruction and erudition for every man, if any thing be
necessary to be Learned, of the holy Scripture we may learn it. If falsehood
shall be reproved, thereof we may gather wherewithal. If any thing be to be
corrected and amended; if there need any exhortation or consolation, of the
Scripture we may well learn. In the Scriptures be the fat pastures of the
Soul; therein is no venomous meat, no unwholesome thing: they be the very
dainty and pure feeding. He that is ignorant, shall find there what he should
learn. He that is a perverse sinner, shall there find his Damnation to make him
to tremble for fear. He that labors to serve God, shall find there his
Glory, and the promissions of eternal life, exhorting him more diligently to
labor. Herein may Princes learn how to govern their Subjects: Subjects
obedience, Love and dread to their Princes. Husbands how they should behave
them unto their Wives, how to educate their Children and Servants. And contrary
the Wives, Children and Servants, may know their duty to their Husbands,
Parents, and Masters. Here may al manner of persons, men, women, young, old,
learned, unlearned, rich, poor, priests, Laymen, Lords, La^ies, officers,
tenants, and mean men, Virgins, Wives, Widows, Lawiers, Merchants,
Artificers, Husbandmen, and al manner of persons of what estate or condition
soever they be, may in this book learn all things what they ought to believe,
what they ought to do, and what they should not do, as well concerning Almighty
God, as also concerning themselves and al other. Briefly, to the reading of the
Scripture none can be enemy, but that either be so sick, that they Love not
to hear of any medicine; or else that be so ignorant, that they know not
Scripture to be the most healthful medicine.

Therefore as touching this former part, I will hear conclude, and take it for
conclusion, sufficiently determined and appointed, The conclusion of the former
part.
that it is convenient and good the Scriptures to be read of al sorts and
kinds of people, and in the vulgar tongue, without further allegations and
probations for the same; which shall not need, since that this one place of John
Chrysostom is enough, and sufficient to persuade al them, that be not
frowardly and perversely set in their own wilful opinion. Specially now that
the Kings Highness, being Supreme Head next under Christ of this church of
England, The Kings Highness has allowed the Scripture as necessary for us.
has approved with his Royal assent the setting forth hereof. Which only to
al true and obedient. Subjects ought to be a sufficient reason for the
allowance of the same, without further delay, reclamation or resistance,
although there were no preface, or other reason herein expressed.

Therefore now to come to the second, and latter part of my purpose. Here is
nothing so good in this world, but it may be abused, and turned from
unhurtfull and wholesome, to hurtful and noisome. What is there above better
then the Sun, the Moon and the Stars? Yet was there, that took occasion, by the
great beauty and virtue of them, to dishonor God, and to defile themselves
with idolatry, giving the honor of the Living God, and Creator of al things,
to such things as he had created. What is there here beneath better then fire,
Water, meats, drinks, metals of gold, silver, iron and steel? Yet we see
daily great harm and much mischief done by every one of these, as well for lack
of wisdom and providence of them that suffer evil, as by the malice of them
that work the evil. Thus to them that be evil of themselves, every thing
sets forward, and increases their evil: be it of his own nature a thing
never so good. Like as contrarily, to them that study and endeavor themselves
to goodness, every thing prevails them, and profits unto good; be it of his
own nature a thing never so bad. As S. Paul says, Hijs, qui diligunt Deum,
omnia cooperantur in bonum. All things do bring good success to such as do love
God. Even as out of most venomous worms is made Triacle, the most sovereign
medicine for the preservation of man's health in time of danger. Wherefore I
would advise you all, that come to the reading or hearing of this Book, which
is the word of God, the most precious jewel, and most holy Relic, that
remains upon earth, that ye bring with you the fear of God, and that ye do
it with all reverence, and use your knowledge thereof not to vain glory of
frivolous disputation; but to the honor of God, increase of virtue, and
edification both of your selves and other.

And to the intent that my words may be the more regarded, I will use in this
part the authority of S. Gregory Nazienzen, like as in the other I did of S.
John Chr^sostom. It appears, that in his time there were some, as I fear me
there be also now at these days a great number, which were idle bablers and
talkers of the Scripture out of season, and all good order, and without any
increase of virtue, or example of good living. To them he writes al his first
book De Theologia. Where^ore I shall briefly gather the whole effect, and reci^e
it here unto you.

There be some, says he, whose not only ears and tongues, but also their
fists be whetted, and ready bent al to contention and unprofitable
disputation, whom I would wish, as they be vehement and earnest to reason the
matter with tongue, so they were al Ready and practive to do good deeds. But
forasmuch as they, subverting the order of al godliness, have respect only to
this thing, how they may bind and loose subtle questions, so that now every
ma^ketplace, every alehouse and tavern, every feasthouse, briefly, every
company of men, every assembly of women, is filled with such talk: Since the
matter is so, says he, and that our says and holy religion of Christ
begins to wax nothing else, but as it were a Sophistry, or a talking craft,
I can no less do, but say something thereunto. It is not fit, says he, for
every man to dispute the high questions of di^vinity* neither is it to be done
at al times, neither in every audience must we discuss every doubt: but we
must know When, to Whom, and How far we ought to enter into such matters.

First it is not for every man, but it is for such as be of exact, and
exqu^site judgments, and such as have spent their time before in study and
contemplation; and such as before have cleansed themselves as well in soul as
body, or at the least endeavored themselves to be made clean. For it is
dangerous, says he, for the unclean to touch that which is most clean: like
as the sore ey takes harm by looking upon the Sun.

Secondarily, Not at al times, but when we be reposed, and at rest from al
outward dreggs and trouble; and when that our heads be not encumbred with
other worldly and wandering imaginations. As if a man should mingle balm and
dirt together. For he that shall judge and determine such matters and doubts of
Scriptures, must take his time, when he may apply his wits thereunto, that he
may thereby the better see and discern what is truth.

Thirdly, When and in what audience? There, and among those, that have been
studious to Learn. And not among such as have pleasure to trifle with such
matters, as with other things of pastime. Which repute for their chief
delicates the disputation of high questions, to show their Wits, Learning and
eloquence in reasoning of high matters.

Fourthly, It is to be considered how far to wade in such matters of
difficulty. No further, says he, but as every man's own capacity will serve
him; and again no further, then the weakness or intelligence of the other
audience may bear. For like as too great noise hurts the ear, too much meat
hurts the man's body, heavy burdens hurt the bearers of them, too much rain
does more hurt then good to the ground; Briefly, in all things, too much is
noyous: even so weak wits and weak consciences may soon be oppressed with over
hard questions. I say not this to dissuade men from the knowledge of God, and
reading, or studying of the Scripture. For I say, that it is as necessary for
the life of man's Soul, as for the body to breath. And if it were possible so to
Live, I would think it good for a man to spend al his life in that, and to do
none other thing. I commend the Law, which bids to meditate and study the
Scriptures always, both night and day; and sermons and preachings to be made,
both morning, noon and eventide; and God to be lauded and blessed in all times,
to bedward, from bed, in our journeyes and all our other works. I forbid not to
read, but I forbid to reason. Neither forbid I to reason so far as is good and
godly: but I allow not that is done out of season, and out of mesure and good
order. A man may eat too much of honey, be it never so sweet; and there is time
for every thing; and that thing, that is good, is not good, if it be ungodly
don. Even as a flower in winter is out of season; and as a woman's apparel
becomes not a man, neither contrarily, the man's the woman: neither is weeping
convenient at a Bridal, neither laughing at a Burial. Now if we can observe
and keep that is comely and timely in all other things, shall we not then the
rather do the same in the holy Scriptures? Let us not run forth, as it were
wild horses, that can suffer neither bridle in their mouths, nor sitter on
their backs Let us keep us in our bounds, and neither let us go too far on the
one side, lest we return into Egypt, neither too far over the other, lest we
be carried a way to Babylon. Let us not sing the song of our Lord in a strange
land: that is to say, Let us not dispute the word of God at al adventures, as
well where it is not to be reasoned, as where it is: and as well in the ears of
them that be not fit therefore, as of them that be. If we can in no wise
forbear, but that we must needs dispute, let us forbear thus much at the least,
to do it out of time and place convenient. And let us entreat of those things,
which be holy, holily; and upon those things that be mystical, mystically,
and not to utter the divine Mysteries in the ears unworthy to hear them: but
let us know what is comely, as well in our silence and talking, as in our
garments wearing, in our feeding, in our gesture, in our going, in all our other
behaving. This contention and debate about Scripture and doubts thereof
(specially when such as do pretend to ^ee the savourers and students thereof,
cannot agree within themselves,) does most hurt to our selves, and to the
furthering of the cause and quarre^ls, that we would not have furthered above
al other things. And we in this, says he, be not unlike to them that being
mad set their own houses on fire, and tha^ slay their own children, or beat
their own parents. I mervail much says he, to recount whereof comes all this
desire of vain glory whereof comes all this tongue-itch, that we have so much
delight to talk and clatter? And wherein is our communication? Not in the
commendation of virtuous and good deeds, of hospitalit^, of love between
Christian brother and brother, of love between man and wife, of Virginity and
chastity, and of alms toward the poor: not in Psalms and godly songs, not in
lamenting for our sins, no^ in the repressing the affections of the bo^y, not
in prayers to God. We talk of Scripture, but in the mean time we subdue not our
flesh by fasting, watching and weeping: we make not this life a meditation of
death: we do not strive to be Lords over our appetites and affections: we go
not about to put down our proud and high minds, to abate our fumish and
rancorous stomachs, to restrain our lusts and bodily delectations, our
undiscrete sorrows, our lascivious mirth, our inordinate looking, our
insatiable hearing of vanities, our spe^king without mesure, our inconvenient
thoughts; and briefly, to reform our life and manners. But al our holiness
consists in Talking. And we pardon each other from al good living,, so that
we may stick fast together in argumentation; as though there were no mo ways
to heaven but this alone, the way of speculation and knowledge, (as they take
it,) but in very deed it is rather the way of superfluous contention and
sophistication.

Hitherto have I recited the mind of Gregory Nazianzen in that book, which I
spoke of before. The same Aucthor says also in another place, that the
Learning of a Christian man ought to begin of the fear of God, to end in
matters of high speculation: and not contrarily to begin with speculation, and
to end in fear. For Speculation, says he, either high cunning or knowledge, if
it be not stayed with the bridle of ^ea: to o^^end God, is dangerous, and
enough to tumble a man (...) down the hill. Therefore, says he, the fear of
God must be the first beginning, and as it were an A. B. C. or an introduction
to all them, that shall enter into the very true and most fruitful knowledge of
holy Scriptures. Whereas is the fear of God, there is, says ^ee, the keeping
of the Commandments, there is the cleansing of the flesh. Which flesh is a
cloud before the Souls ey, and suffers i^ not purely to see the beam of
heavenly light. Whereas is the cleansing of the flesh, there is the
illumination of the holy Ghost, the end of al our d^^ires and the very light,
whereby the verity of Scriptures is se^n and perceived. This is the mind and
almost the words of Gregory N^zia^zen, Doctor of the Gre^k Church; of whom S.
Jerome says, that unto his time the L^tine church had no Writer able to be
compared, and to make an even match with him.

Therefore to conclude this Latter part, Every man, The conclusion of the
latter part.
that comes to the reading of this hol^ book, ought to bring with him first
and foremost this feat of Almighty God: and then next, a firm and stable
purpose to reform his own self according thereunto: and so to continue, proceed
and prosper from t^^e to time; showing himself to be a sober and fruitful
hearer and learner. Which if he do, he shall prove at length well able to
teach, though not with his mouth, yet with his Living and good example: which
is sure the most lively and affectuous form and manner of teaching. He that
otherwise intermedleth with this book, ^et him be assured, that once he shall
make account therefore, when he shall have said to him, as it is written in the
Prophet David, Peccatori dicit Deus, etc. Unto the ungodly said God, Psalm. 50.
why do thou preach my La^es, and take my Testament in thy mouth? Whereas
(...) to be reformed, and have been partakers with adulterers. Tho^ have let
thy mouth speak wickedness, and with thy tongue thou have set forth dec^^pt.
Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, and have slandered thine own
Mothers son. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such an one as thee self, but I will reprove
thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done. O consider this ye
that forget God, lest I pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you.
Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honoure^^ me, and to him that
orders his conversation right, will I show the Salvation of God.

Praise be to God.
NUMBER. CV. Bucer and others Learned strangers from Lambeth to Cecyl, to prefer
the Petition of some poor French Protestants to the Protector.
Clarissimo Viro, Domino Sicilio, illustrissimi Principis Protectoris Angliae,
a Secretis, Domino and amico summopere Colendo, and Charissimo.
GRatiam and benedictionem Domini nostri Jesus Christi, augeri tibi precamur,
Sir W. H. MSS.
Vir ornatissime and religiosissime. Cum summa fide and studio ministrare
oporteat Christo Domino nostro afflicto in membris suis, and nostris, non
debuimus officium nostrum negare ijs captivis Domini, quorum caussam exponent
hi Ecclesiae Gallicanae Ministri, Collegae nostri, and his ipsis fratribus and
collegis nostris, ut utrosque tuae charitati comm^ndaremus, id T.D. a nobis
boni consulet. Veniunt vero ad te hi Collegae nostri, jussu Reverendissimi
Domini, ac Patroni nostri, Arch^^piscopi Cantuariensis, rogatum, ut Captivorum
illorum Supplicatione^n velis offerre Illustrissimo Principi, D. Protectori,
adjuncta tua commendatione; fidemque faci^nt, eos, quorum offerunt
Supplicationem, nulla alia, quam Religionis c^ussa, patriam suam deserere
coactos, in hoc regnum venisse, tanquam ad Christi asylum. Quod cum ita habere
propter testium sanctiratem, nihil dubitemus, D. T. quantum licet oramus, ut
caussam horum Captivorum Christi apud Illustriss. Principem, D Protectorem,
diligenter agas, and nostras quoque illius Celsitudini supplices preces, ad eam
caussam offerre non graveris. Quod Christus Dominus tibi cumulate rependet. Cui
Illustrissimum Principem D. Protectorem, teque and tuos omnes etiam atque etiam
commendamus. Lambethi XIII Augusti, Anno MDXLIX.

Tui in Domino
Martinus Bucerus.
Pet. Martyr.
Petrus Alexander.
Paulus Fagius.

These Letters following, tho they have no particular Reference, yet being made
use of in the former Memorials, I have thought fit to publish them with the
rest.

NUMBER. CVI. The Archbishop to the Secretary, concerning a French man, that
desired a Patent to translate the Common prayer into French, and print it.
To my very lovinge freunde Sir William Cecill, Knight, one of the Kings
Majesty's principal Secretaries.
AFter my verai hearty commendations. I thancke you for your news, Sir
W.H.MSS.
but specially for that ye advertise me, that the Kings Majesty is in good
health, wherein I beseech God long to continue his highness, as he has twice
(as I trust) restored me to the same.

It seamithe by your letters, that a peace should be concluded betwixt
themperor and Duke Morrise, which whither it be according to tha^ticles, that
before ye sent unto me, or otherwise, I would gladly understande. The
commodity that might arrise by printinge the book of Common prayer, and
administration of Sacraments in the French tongue, (if any be) I reckon it
were meet that it should come to them, which have already taken pains in
translatinge the same. Which was first done by Sir Hugh Paullets commandment,
and overseen by my L. Chauncellor, and other at his appoinitement: an^ now
altered according to that which must be put in execution at the feast of All
Saints next, at the appoinctment of my L. Chauncellor, by a learned French
man, a Doctor in Divinity. And therefore needless of anny other to be
travailed in. Aug. 26. 1552.

NUMBER. CVII. Mention of Letters sent by him to the Duke of Northumberland,
excusing his not proceeding in a Commission. His reflection upon the News.
To my Lovenge friend Sir William Cecil, Knight, and Secretary to the kings
Majesty.
AFter my very hearty recommendations, Sr. W.H.MSS.
and no less thanks for your friendly letters, and advertisements Be you
assured that I take the same in such part, and to proceed of such a friendly
mind, as I have ever looked for at your hands. Whereof I shall not be unmyndeful,
if occasion hereafter, shall serve to requite the same. I have written lettres
unto my Lord of Northumberlande, declarynge unto him the cause of my stay in
the Commission; which is because, that all the gentylmen and Justices of the
peace of Kent, which be in commission with me, be now at London. Before whose
coming home, if I should proceed without them, I might perchance travel in
vain, and take more pain, than I should do good. I have written also unto him
in the favor of Michael Angelo: whose cause I pray you to help so much as
lies in you.

The Sophy and the Turk, themperor and the French king (not much better in
religion than they) rollynge the stone, or turnynge the whele of fortune up and
down, I pray God send us peace, and quyetnes with all realms, as well as among
our selfs; and to preserve the Kings majesty with all his council. Thus fare
you well. From my house of Forde the xx day of November, Anno 1552.

Your assured. T. Cant.

NUMBER. CVIII. Signifying his desire to have the good will of the Lord Warden,
his neighbor.
To my loving friend Sir William Cecill Knight, Secretary to the Kings
Majesty. Yeve thies,
AFter my hearty commendations and thanks for your letters; there is no man more
loath to be in contention with any man, Sr. W. H. MSS.
than I am, specially with my Lord Warden, my nere neighbor, dwelling both
in one contray, and whose familier and entier frendeshippe I most desire, for
the quyetnes of the hole contray. For the example of the rulers and heads will
the people and members follow And as towchynge learned men, I shall send you
my mind with as much expedition as I can, which by this post I can not do,
evyn in the cold snow sittynge opon coals untyl he be gone. But heartily fare
you well in the Lord Jesus. From Forde, the last day of November.

Your Lovynge friend T. Cant.

NUMBER. CIX. Desiring Cecyl to enform him of the cause of Chekes indictment.
To my very Lovynge friend Sir William Cecyl Knight.
AFter my very hearty recommend^tions; Yester night I hard reported, Sir W. H.
MSS.
that Mr. Cheke is indicted: I pray you heartily, if you know any thing thereof,
to send me knowledge, and wheruppon he is indicted. I had great trust, that he
should be one of them, that should feel the Queens great mercy and pardon, as
one who has been none of the great doers in this matier against her: and my
trust is not yet gone, except it be for his ernestnes in religion. For the
which if he suffer, bl^ssed is he of god, that suffers for his sake, howsoever
the world juge of him. For what ought we to care for the jugement of the
world, when god absolveth us? But alas, if any means cowde be made for him, or
for my Lord Russel, it were not to be omitted, nor in any wise neglected. But
I am utterly destitute both of counseil in this matter, and of power, being in
the same condemnation that they be. But that only thing which I can do, I
shall not cease to do, and that is only to pray from them, and for my self,
with all other, that be now in adversity. When I saw you at the cour^e, I would
feign have talked with you, but I durst not: nevertheless if you cowde find a
time to come over to me, I would gladly commen with you. Thus fare you heartily
well, with my Lady your wife. From Lamhith this 14 day of this month of August.

Your own assured T. Cant.

FINIS.
READER,
MY Reverend Friend Mr. Wharton, as he formerly Encouraged and Assisted me in
the Foregoing History, has also further obliged me by the Perusal of it, and
by communicating to me his Ingenious and Learned Observations and
Animadversions thereupon; which do highly deserve to be made more Public; and
therefore are here gladly added by me (together with his Letter) as a
Supplement to my Book for the Reader's Benefit.

To the Reverend Mr. STRYPE.
SIR,
AT the Desire of Mr. Chiswell, our Common Friend, I have perused your
Memorials of Archbishop Cranmer, not without great Satisfaction; being much
pleased to see the Actions of that Excellent Prelate, and the Affairs of the
Reformation of our Church, happily begun and carried on in his Time, and by his
Conduct, disposed in so clear a Method. I have not been able to make my
Observations upon it with that Exactness and Fullness which I desired, and you
may perhaps expect; being at this time placed at a very great distance from all
my Papers and Collections, and not enjoying the use even of such Printed Books,
as would be necessary to this Design: So that I have been forced to pass by
very many Places of your History, wherein I have suspected some Error to have
been committed, but could not either confirm or remove my Suspicion, for want
of farther present Evidence. However, I have noted several Places, which at
first Reading appeared Suspicious, and after farther Consideration, were judged
Erroneous by me; although even in some of those Places I have only Pointed at the
Error, not being able always to rectify it, without the Assistance of Books and
Papers, whereof I am now wholly destitute. Be pleased to accept of my
Performance herein with that Candor, wherewith I read your Book, and made the
following Observations; since I willingly profess, That the commission of
Errors in writing any History, especially of times past, being altogether
unavoidable, ought not to detract from the Credit of the History, or Merit of
the Historian; unless it be accompanied with Immoderate Ostentation, or
Unhandsome Reflections upon the Errors of others; from which Imputation, that
Indifference and Candor which appear throughout your whole Work, wholly exempt
you; although no History of those Matters or Times, which I have seen, be wrote
with equal Exactness.


PAGE 16. Line 4. It is the sense of an Ingenious and Learned Friend of mine,
That the pretended Martyr Thomas Becket, tho he died in Vindication of the
Privileges of the Church, yet he was the First Betrayer of the Rights of his
See; viz. of Canterbury. He made the greatest Breach upon the Authority of the
Primacy of Canterbury, by resigning the Archbishopric into the Pope's hands,
and receiving it again from him as the Pope's Donation.] Thomas Becket was not
the First nor the Chief Betrayer of the Rights of the Sea of Canterbury. The
first and greatest Breach upon the Authority of the Primacy of that See, was
made by his Predecessor William de Corboil, Thirty seven years before; who
after he had been fully Invested in the Archbishopric of Canterbury by due
Authority, solicited and accepted the Bulls of Pope Honorius, conferring it
upon him as by Papal Gift, and other Bulls constituting him the Pope's Legate
in England; whereby he subjected his own See, and the Church of England, to the
Authority of the Sea of Rome, which were before wholly independent of it.

Page 21. line 21. The Twelfth Article of Cranmer's Judgment of the
Unlawfulness of K. Henry's Marriage, is this, We think that the pretended
Matrimony of K. Henry, etc. has been and is none at all.] You will please to
consider, whether the Latin words, fuisse and esse nullum, should not have been
rather translated, has been and is null; which is the Canonical Term
expressing Voidance in Law.

Page 23. line 44. Licenses were granted this year, 1533, to the Lady Guilford,
and the Marchioness of Dorset, to have the Eucharist, etc. ministered to them in
their private Chapels; whether indulged to them by the Archbishop, the rather
to free them from danger for not frequenting their Parish-Churches, and for the
avoiding the Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship there performed, etc. or only
for the Convenience of those Ladies, the Reader has liberty to judge.] The
Archbishop cannot be hence supposed to have countenanced any Separation from
the Parochial Worship of that time, or to have insinuated his Judgment of the
Danger, Superstition, or Idolatry of the Public Worship then used; since such
Licenses were customary acts, very frequent before and at that time. Many
hundreds of them may be found among the Faculties granted by the Predecessors
of this Archbishop more than Two hundred years upwards. Private Oratories were
then more used, and Domestic Chaplains entertained in much greater number than
in latter times: Yet none then presumed to make use of either, without License
first obtained of their Diocesans: Which Discipline was formerly observed by
all strictly, and continued in great measure till the time of Archbishop Abbot,
although now little regarded. So that hereby Archbishop Cranmer gave no occasion
for any such Conjecture as is here made, any more than Archbishop Parker did,
when he granted a like License to his own Wife, although she was no Puritan, or
Separatist from the Established Worship.

Page 25. line 40. This year, 1534, all the Learned and Spiritual men in
England, subscribed to it with their Hands, That the Pope has no Jurisdiction
in this Kingdom. The Archbishop's Church in Canterbury began; for the Prior and
Convent thereof solemnly subscribed an Instrument for abolishing the Pope's
Supremacy, etc. The Original whereof is in a Volume of the Cotton Library] The
Right Reverend the Bishop of Salisbury in his History of the Reformation,
gives two or three such Instruments of the Subscription of so many particular
Convents, and supposes that no more remain, but that all the rest were in the
Reign of Queen Mary destroyed by Bp. Bonner, by Virtue of a Commission granted
to him for razing of Scandalous Records. In truth, all those Instruments do yet
remain, and are a most Authentic Justification of the Proceedings of the King
in abolishing the Papal Supremacy. The Originals of them do yet remain in their
proper place, the King's Exchequer, into which they were at first returned, and
where they have been hitherto kept. There are in my hands no less than One
hundred seventy five such Instruments, transcribed long since from thence,
containing the Subscriptions of all the Bishops, Chapters, Monastries,
Colleges, Hospitals, etc. of Thirteen Diocesses. The Subscriptions of those of
the other Nine Diocesses are to my certain knowledge yet remaining in another
place, but I have not yet gained Copies of them: Some of these Instruments have
been transcribed into the Volume of the Cotton Library here mentioned; but that
is only a Transcript, contains not the Originals, as is here supposed. Nor
did the Church of Canterbury begin the Subscription; for however the Instrument
of that Church may be placed first, upon account of the Preeminence of it, the
Instruments of several Religious Houses, even in that Diocese, are dated before
it.

Page 29. line 31. Nix Bishop of Norwich died two years after, September 1534.
and came in to be Bishop in the year 1500.] He died in the middle of January,
1535/6; and was Consecrated Bishop in April, 1501.

Page 32. line 6. ab imo. The Archbishop began his Provincial Visitation Iure
Metropolitico, the last year, 1534. It was somewhat extraordinary, for such a
Visitation had not been in an hundred years before. -- The Diocese of
Winchester having been visited but five years ago* by his Predecessor Warham.]
The Archbishop in his Letter in answer to the Bishop of Winchester, in the
Appendix, Page 21. says truly, That the Diocese of Winchester was visited by
his Predecessor Warham the third year before this. But when he adds, That
else it had not been visited by any of his Predecessors these forty years, he
is to be understood cautiously. For although perhaps it had not been visited by
any Archbishop since the death of Bishop Langton, which was in the year 1493,
yet it had been visited Metropolitico by the Chapter of Canterbury, in the
beginning of the year 1501. Again, when it is said from Bishop Stok^sly's
Letter in the Appendix, page 22. That such a Provincial Visitation had not been
held by any of the Archbishop's Predecessors in an hundred years before; this
also is to be understood dexterously. For men in their Juridical Answers are
wont to allege any thing which may seem to make for their Cause, little
regarding whether it be exactly true or no. It is true, the Archbishops of
Canterbury had not for so long a time undertaken or performed a Metropolitical
Visitation of their whole Province at one time; but they had often within that
time visited particular Diocesses Iure Metropolitico; which was a sufficient
President to the Cause then in hand.

Page 36. line 32. Suffragan Bishops were not unusual in the Realm. -- To give
some Instances of them. -- Certain bearing the Title of Bishops of Sidon,
assisted the Archbishops of Canterbury; one of these was named Thomas Wellys,
Prior of St. Gregory's by Canterbury; he being Archbishop Warham's Chaplain,
was sent by him, etc. -- There was afterward one Christopher, that bore that
Title, and assisted Archbishop Cranmer about these times (1535.) in
Ordinations. And another Thomas, entitled of Sidon, succeeded.] It should seem
to be here supposed, That the Suffragans of the Diocese of Canterbury did then
commonly take their Titles from Sidon; whereas indeed none of them, (save that
Thomas Wellys here mentioned) was entitled from thence. As for Christopher, he
was not Suffragan to the Archbishops of Canterbury; and that other Thomas of
Sidon was in Cranmer's time Suffragan to the Bishops of London. That Thomas
Wellys moreover, who was Prior of St. Gregory's, and Titular Bishop of Sidon,
was not Chaplain to Archbishop Warham; for Archbishops never entertained
Regulars in the quality of Chaplains. Archbishop Warham had indeed a Chaplain
of that name, but he was neither Prior nor Bishop, but a Secular, Doctor of
Divinity, and Rector of Chartham near Canterbury.

Ibid. line 47. Long before these, I find one William Botlesham Episcopus
Navatensis, Anno 1382. at the Convocation in London, summoned against the
Wicklivites.] If this were a Titular Bishop only, he had nothing to do in the
Convocation, nor any Right to be summoned to it. That Willelmus Botlesham,
Episcopus Navatensis, was in truth no other than Willelmus Episcopus
Landavensis, Bishop of Landaff, whose Title of Landavensis the Ignorance or
Mistake of the Scribe changed into Navatensis. By a like mistake, very frequent
in our Ancient Records, the Bishop of Lincoln, Lincolniensis, is corruptly
styled Nicoliensis.

Page 37. line 6. John Thornden, who was often Commissary of Oxon, while
Archbishop Warham was Chancellor of that University, was styled Episcopus
Syrinensis.] His Name was John Thornton. Many years after him, Richard Thornden
was Suffragan Bishop in the Diocese of Canterbury. In Thornton ends the
Catalogue of Suffragan Bishops, which you could find, Consecrated before the
time of Archbishop Cranmer, being in all seven. If it pleases God to permit me
to to finish my Angli^ Sacra, I shall exhibit a perfect Succession of Suffragan
Bishops in almost all the Diocesses of England, for about Two hundred years
before the Reformation.

Ibid. line 8. And hereafter we shall meet with a Bishop of Hippolitanum, who
assisted Archbishop Cranmer at his Ordinations.] It will be hard to find such a
City as Hyppolitanum in the world. We had in England many Suffragan Bishops,
who successively assumed the Title of Bishops of Hippo, the Sea of the Great
St. Austin. These were wont to style themselves Hipponenses; but some of them,
not being so good Grammarians, took the Style of Ypolitanenses, and
Hippolitanenses* which latter Appellation might give occasion to the mistake
concerning a Bishop of Hippolitanum.

Page 38. line 3. ab imo. The King sent to the Archbishop to make Thomas
Mannyng Suffragan of Gipwich, who was accordingly Consecrated by the
Archbishop.] This Gipwich is no other than Ipswich, the chief Town of Suffolk,
in Latin called Gip^svicum, and Gipwicum; from which place Mannyng at his
Pr^motion to the Office of a Suffragan Bishop, took his Title.

Page 41. line 3. This choice Treasure (the Original Book, containing the
Subscription of the Members of the Convocation to certain Articles of Religion)
Sir Robert Cotton afterward procured. -- And at the bottom of the first Page
is written Robertus Cotton Bruce^s, by Sir Robert's own hand, signifying his
Value of this Monument.] Sir Robert did not by that Subscription of his Name
testify any extraordinary Value of this Volume; for he wrote the same words at
the bottom of the first Page of all, or almost all, the Manuscript Volumes of
his Library.

Page 50. line 26. June -- Anno 1536. William Rugg was Consecrated Bishop of
Norwich. His Consecration is omitted in the Register. Probably he was
consecrated with Sampson Bishop of Chic^ester, who was Confirmed June 10 th.]
Rugg could not be Consecrated in June, for he was not Confirmed till the 28 th.
of that Month; and the first Sunday after that day, was July 2 d. Bishops were
wont to be Consecrated on the next Sunday after their Confirmation. So that it
is most likely Sampson was Consecrated June 11 th*; and Rugg, together with
Warton of St. Asaph, on July 2 d.

Page 61. line 18. ab imo. June 24. Anno 1537. John Bird was Consecrated
Suffragan of the Sea of Penrith in Landaff Diocese; and Lewis Thomas Suffragan
Bishop of the Sea of Salop.] It should have been said, that Bird was
Consecrated Suffragan of the Diocese of Landaff, with the Title of Bishop of
Penrith; Bishop of Shrewsbury (not Salop); for Penrith is no more in Landaff
Diocese, than Shrewsbury is in that of St. Asaph. But it may be observed, That
in the first Act of Parliament made in this Reign touching Suffragan Bishops,
certain Titles were appointed, to which the said Suffragans should be
Consecrated, taken from several of the chief Towns in England; but it was not
required, that the Suffragan of any particular Diocese should take his Title
from some Town in that Diocese, but was left at liberty to take it from any
Town mentioned in that Act. Which was accordingly practiced indifferently till
the Promulgation of the second Act concerning Suffragans.

Ibid. line 2. It was now forbidden by the Parliament, that the Feast of St.
Thomas a Becket, the pretended Martyr, should be celebrated any more. He is
also styled Thomas a Becket, Page 70. line 21. and 28. Page 92. line 4. etc.]
This is a small Error; but being so often repeated, deserves to be observed
and corrected. The Name of that Archbishop was Thomas Becket; nor can it
otherwise be found to have been written in any Authentic History, Record,
Calendar, or other Book. If the Vulgar did formerly, as it does now, call him
Thomas a Becket, their Mistake is not to be followed by Learned men.

Page 62. line 8. The Reason why Archbishop Cranmer all this while, that is
from the first making the Act concerning Suffragans in the year 1534, to this
time (1537.) had nominated none for Suffragan to this See ( Dover) till now
(when he nominated and consecrated Richard Yngworth in December) might be,
because there seemed to be a Suffragan already, even the same that had been in
the time of Archbishop Warham, namely, John Thornton* Prior of Dover, who was
one of the Witnesses appointed by that Archbishop to certify what was found and
seen at the opening of St. Dunstan's Tomb. Richard Thornden seems to have
succeeded Yngworth in this Office.] St. Dunstan's Tomb was opened in April
1508, and Thornden died not till the last year of Queen Mary: So that if to
Thernton succeeded Yngworth, and to Yngworth succeeded Thornden* there will be
no room for any of those three Bishops of Sidon, who were before in this
History ( page 36.) said to have assisted the Archbishops Warham and Cranmer in
the Quality of Suffragan Bishops. For the very first of them, Thomas Wellys,
was Suffragan Bishop after the year 1508. I know not when he was made
Suffragan, or when he died, but I am certain that he survived the year 1511. As
for Christopher, and the other, Thomas, Bishops of Sidon, they indeed were not
the peculiar Suffragans of the Archbishops of Canterbury, as I before said.

Page 63. line 28. March 24. 1537. Henry Holbeach was Consecrated Suffragan
Bishop of Bristow in the Bishop of London's Chapel in the said Bishop's House,
situate in Lambeth-Marsh, by the said Bishop, etc.] The Bishops of London
never had any House situate in Lambeth-Marsh, but the Bishops of Rochester at
that time had; which House was soon after conveyed from the Sea of Rochester to
the Crown; and afterward from the Crown by exchange to the Sea of Carlisle, to
which it now belongs.

Page 86. line 22. ab imo. In this Consecration (of Bonner Bishop of London,
Anno 1540.) the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury insisted, it seems, upon an
Ancient Privilege of their Church, which I do not find in this Register (that
of Archbishop Cranmer) they had at other Consecrations done; namely, that the
Consecration should be celebrated at the Church of Canterbury, and at no other
Church or Oratory, without their allowance. And so in a formal Instrument they
gave their License and Consent. -- The renewing of this their old pretended
Privilege, looked like some Check to the Archbishop, and as tho they required
of him a sort of Dependence on them now more than before; and it showed some
secret Ill Will toward him.] This Privilege was first granted to the Prior and
Chapter of Canterbury by Thomas Becket, but afterward more amply confirmed to
them by St. Edmund the Archbishop, in the year 1235; from which time to the
present year 1540* I dare confidently ^ver* That no Bishop of the Province of
Canterbury had been Consecrated by the Archbishops or by any other by their
Commission, in any Church or Place without the Metropolitical Church of
Canterbury, without License first desired and obtained in writing from the
Chapter of Canterbury under their Seal; if we except only two or three Cases
between the years 1235, and 1300; which were the occasions of great
Controversies between the Archbishops Consecrating, and the Bishops
Consecrated, on the one part, and the Chapter of Canterbury on the other part;
which yet always ended to the advantage of the Chapter, and the farther
Confirmation of their Privilege herein. If these Licenses be not registered in
the Archbishops Registers, it is not to be wondered at; it being not their
concern to cause those things to be enregistred, which were not essential to
the Confirmation or Consecration of the Bishops of their Province, but related
merely to the Privileges of the Chapter of Canterbury. But they are all
enregistred, and may be found in the Registers of that Chapter. If therefore
the Prior and Convent of Canterbury did at this time require Boner to take out
such a License before his Consecration, they thereby gave no more evidence of
any sinister Design or Ill Will against the Archbishop, than they had done at
any time before to him or any of his Predecessors for 300 years, whenever any
Bishop of the Province was to be Consecrated out of their Church.

Page 95. line 18. Robert King, Titular Bishop Reonen, Suffragan to the Bishop
of Lincoln, was this year (1541.) Consecrated Bishop of Oxford. The Date, or
his Consecrators, I cannot assign, the Act being omitted in the Archbishop's
Register.] Whenever a Suffragan Bishop was promoted to any real Bishopric,
he had no need of any new Consecration, the Character and Order of Bishop
having been all along as full, valid, and effectual in him, as in any Bishop
whatsoever. So that in such a Promotion no other Form was observed, than in the
Translation of any Bishop from one Diocese to another; viz. Election and
Confirmation. But in this case not so much as that was necessary; for the
Bishopric of Oxford being then newly erected, King the first Bishop of it was
to be put in Possession of it, not by any Act of the Archbishop's, but by
Letters Patents of the King the Founder of it; which Letters were not issued
out until the first day of September in the following year.

Page 111. line 13. The names of the chief Actors (of a Conspiracy against the
Archbishop) were Thornden, who lived in the Archbishop's Family, and eat at his
Table, and with whom he used to converse most familiarly. So also Page 121.
line 12. Thornton who was Suffragan of Dover, the Archbishop made Prebendary of
his Church, and whom he always set at his own Mess. Page 120. line 5. Dr.
Thornton, who was very great with the Archbishop, but secretly false to him.
Page 304. line 7. ab imo. This had the Suffragan of Dover, Dr. Thornton done.]
In these and other Passages of this History, the Names and Persons of Dr.
Thornton and Dr. Thornden, both Suffragans of the Diocese of Canterbury, are
confounded. John Thornton, Prior of Dover, was Suffragan to Archbishop Warham,
and died in his time. Richard Thornden was Monk of Christ-Church, Canterbury,
and at the dissolution of that Monastery in 1539, or 1540, and Conversion of it
into a College of Secular Canons, was constituted the first Prebendary of it,
and soon after made Suffragan of the Diocese, with the Title of Bishop of
Dover; in which Office he continued till his death, ultimo Mari^. He never
lived in the Archbishop's Family, but in the Monastery till the Dissolution of
it; and after that constantly resided upon his Prebend and other Benefices
which he held in the Diocese. You might perhaps find it noted, That the
Archbishop always set him at his own Mess; which might give you occasion to
think that he sometimes lived in the Archbishop's Family; whereas indeed no
more was meant thereby, than that the Archbishop was wont to show to him
extraordinary Respect, whenever he attended him; for in those days Suffragan
Bishops, however usual, were treated with Contempt enough, not wont to be
admitted to dine at the Archbishops own Table in the Hall of the Archbishop's
Palace. There were generally three Tables spread in the Archbishops Hall, and
served at the same time: The Archbishops Table, at which ordinarily sat none
but Peers of the Realm, Privy-Counsellors, and Gentlemen of the greatest
Quality. The Almoners Table, at which sat the Chaplains, and all Guests of the
Clergy beneath Diocesan Bishops, and Abbots. The Stewards Table, at which sat
all other Gentlemen. The Suffragan Bishops then were wont to fit at the
Almoners Table; and the Archbishop in admitting his Suffragan Thornden to his
own Table, did him an unusual Honor; which was therefore noted to aggravate
the Ingratitude of the man, conspiring against the Archbishop.

Page 126. line 13. About this time (1544.) it was, I conjecture, that the King
changed the Archbishop's Coat of Arms; for unto the year 1543, he bore his
Paternal Coat of Three Cranes Sable, as I find by a Date set under his Arms,
yet remaining in a Window in Lambeth-House.] Those Arms of Archbishop Cranmer,
here mentioned to remain in a Window in Lambeth-House, together with the Arms
of the other Archbishops succeeding to him since the Reformation, and placed in
the same Window, were painted at the cost of, and set up by my Lord Archbishop
Sancroft, not many years since.

Page 141. med. One of the very first things that was done in K. Edward's
Reign, in relation to the Church, was, That the Bishops, etc. should be made to
depend entirely upon the King and his Council, etc.; and should take
Commissions from him for the exercise of their Office and Jurisdiction, and
those to last only during the King's Pleasure. -- In this I suppose the
Archbishop had his hand. -- And therefore he began this Matter with himself, --
Petitioning for such a Commission, -- which was granted to him, Feb. 7. 1546.]
This Matter was not now first begun or done. The Archbishop and all the Bishops
of England had taken Commissions from K. Henry in the very same Form, mutatis
mutandis, in the year 1535.

Page 161. med. An English Exile, naming himself E. P. in Q. Mary's days
published again the Archbishop's Book against Unwritten Verities, and prefixed
to it a Preface of his own, -- I will add one Passage taken out of this Book,
about the middle, whereby it may be seen what a Clergy was now in England. He
makes a heavy Complaint against the frequent practice of beastly sins in the
Priests, Adultery, Sodomy, etc. and that they never were punished. And in my
memory, (as he proceeds) which is above thirty years, and also by the
information of others that be twenty years older than I, I could never learn
that one Priest was punished] These Exiles are a sort of men who generally
write with Passion and Prejudice against their own Country; so that ordinarily
little more credit is to be given to their Information, than to the
Intelligence of Deserters from an Army. I am sure he has shamefully belied the
Clergy of England in accusing them of the frequent practice of such beastly
sins, and then affirming that he could never learn that one Priest was punished
for it in the space of fifty years before that time. It is true, that Crimes of
Incontinence, as such, especially in the Clergy, were then cognoscible and
punishable only by the Ecclesiastical Law, and in the Spiritual Courts; but
Rapes were, then as well as now, in Clergymen as well as Laymen, tryable and
punishable at Common Law. And of this the Laity took such malicious advantage,
immediately before the Reformation, that they were wont to pretend all Acts,
and even Indications of Incontinence in Clergymen, to be so many Rapes, and to
Indict them as such: Insomuch, that scarce any Assizes or Sessions passed at
that time, wherein several Clergymen were not Indicted of Rapes, and a Jury of
Laymen Impannell'd to Try them, who would be sure not to be guilty of showing
overmuch favor to them in their Verdicts. Neither was the Ecclesiastical
Authority then so remiss (as is pretended) as not to have punished any one
Priest for Incontinence within the space of fifty years before: If I had my
Papers by me, I could produce Examples of many Incontinent Clergymen punished
and deprived by their Ordinaries within that time. About this very time wherein
this Preface was wrote, Dr. Weston, although otherwise a man of great Note and
Interest among the Popish Party, was deprived of the Deanery of Windsor, for a
single Act of Incontinence, and about twenty years before this, Stokesly Bishop
of London is by John Bale reported to have deprived John Lord Abbot of
Colchester for an horrible Act of Incontinence. Indeed I know Bale to have been
so great a Liar, that I am not willing to take any thing of that kind upon his
Credit; however, his Testimony may serve well enough against such another
foul-mouthed Writer as this E. P. seems to have been.

Ibid. line 11. ab imo. The Archbishop supplied the City of Canterbury with
store of Excellent Learned Preachers, Turner, the two Ridleys, Becon, etc.]
Turner never was Preacher in Ordinary at Canterbury, but at Chartham near
Canterbury. He is said indeed afterward in this History to have been one of
the Six Preachers of the Church of Canterbury; which may be true; yet to Preach
there three or four Sermons in a year upon so many Holidays, is not a
sufficient ground to say, that that City was supplied with such or such
Preachers.

Page 164. in imo. The University of Cambridge labored under great suspicions
of being spoiled of its Revenues; she having observed how those of her Sister
the Church were daily invaded by Secular hands.] The University has ever been
so dutiful, as to own the Church to be her Mother.

Page 183. line 10. ab imo. Farrar was Consecrated Bishop of St. David's, by
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, endued with his Pontificals. The latter words
are a Translation of Pontificalibus indutus, which signifies no other than
being Invested or Attired in his Episcopal Habit.

Page 184. med. Bishop Farrar hearing of great Corruption among those belonging
to the Chapter of the Church of Carmarthen, and chiefly Thomas Young, Chanter,
after Archbishop of York, etc.] I suppose the Chapter of the Church of St.
David's is here meant; for there was no such Church at Carmarthen; and Young was
at this time Precentor of St. David's.

Page 208. line 13. ab imo. Bishop Ridley, at his entrance upon the Sea of
London, was exceeding wary not to do his Predecessor Bonner the least injury,
but rather did many kindnesses to his Mother, Servants, and Relations; he
continued Bonner's Receiver, one Staunton, in his Place.] In this last case
Ridley could not give any evidence of Kindness or Unkindness; for Staunton held
his Place of Receiver by Patent for life.

Page 224. med. The Council sitting at Greenwich, the Bishop's ( Gardener of
Winchester) Servants came, and desired that certain of them might be sworn upon
certain Articles for Witness on his behalf. And if they might not be sworn,
etc. And they were allowed.] From this relation any Reader would imagine, That
the Bishop's Servants desired that themselves might be sworn in behalf of their
Lord and Master; whereas in the Council-Book (from whence this Matter is
reported) it is plain, that they desired that some of the Privy-Counsellors
might be sworn, or at least be obliged to declare upon their Honor what they
knew of the matter then in question, in favor of the Bishop.

Page 267. line 21. This Scory (Bishop Elect of Rochester) was at first
preferred by the Archbishop to be one of the Six Preachers at Canterbury, and
always continued firm for the Purity of Religion, and endured Trouble for it.
-- He was a Married man, and so deprived at the beginning of Queen Mary's
Reign, fled beyond Sea, etc.] Scory was so far from continuing always firm to
the Purity of Religion, that in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign he
reconciled himself to the Sea of Rome, submitted himself to Bishop Bonner, made
a formal Recantation, and did open Penance for his Marriage; however,
afterward he resumed his former Principles, when he had got beyond Sea.

Page 270. line 17. ab imo. All this I have related of this Divine (Dr. John
Redman, who died in 1551.) that I may in some measure preserve the Memory of
one of the Learnedest men of his time; and lay up the Dying Words of a Papist,
signifying so plainly his dislike and disallowance of many of their Doctrines.]
I cannot imagine why Dr. Redman should be accounted or called a Papist at the
time of his Death, who had all along lived and then died in the Communion of
the Established Church, and had but little before joined with the Archbishop
and other Bishops and Divines, in compiling the Book of Common Prayer. If
because he had once held the Popish Doctrines concerning Justification, the
Sacrament of the Altar, etc. with equal and for the same reason Cranmer
himself, and all the Bishops and Eminent Divines of that time may be called
Papists: Or if it was because he judged it unlawful for any Priest to marry a
second time (as is related page 157.) he therein followed the Canons and
received Doctrines of the Ancient Church, and has many Learned and Worthy
Divines of our own Time and Church concurring with him in the same Opinion.

Page 274. line 5. ab imo. The other was Richard Turner, in former time Curate
of Chartham in Kent, and commonly called Turner of Canterbury, living in the
Family of Mr. Morice the Archbishop's Secretary, who held the Impropriation of
that Parsonage, and had presented this man to the Vicarage.] It would be very
ill for me, if the Parsonage of Chartham were Impropriate: It never yet was,
and, as I hope, never shall be in the Possession of any Layman, Mr. Morice
only held it at that time by Lease of Richardson, the Rector of it, with
obligation to provide and pay a Curate, which was this Turner.

Page 275. med. And this I judge to be that Turner whom the Archbishop
nominated for Ireland (to the Archbishopric of Armagh), having lived long in
his Diocese, and so well known to him, and whom he had, I suppose, removed to
Canterbury, to a Prebend, or some other Preferment there.] He never was
Prebendary of Canterbury.

Page 279. line 5. ab imo. While King Edward was in his Progress, 1552. some
about his Person, to make the better way for their Sacrilegious Designs, and to
make the King the more inclinable to lay hands on the Episcopal Demeans, or at
least to clip and pare them, buzzed about Rumors. etc. -- This Sir William
Cecyl, the Secretary, who was now with the King, labored to hinder; for he was
a very great Favourer, as of the Reformed Clergy, so of their Estate and
Honors.] He gave but bad evidence of such Favor to the Clergy and Estate of
the Church, when many years after this (the Revenue of the Church being then
also much more diminished than it was at the time of this Design) he tore away
from the Bishopric of Peterborough the far better part of the Lands and
Revenues wherewith it had been endowed; which he effected by procuring Bishop
Scamler to be translated from thence to Norwich; which Translation, by the
baseness of that Bishop, conspiring with the sacrilegious greediness of two
Potent Courtiers, was the ruin of both those Bishoprics.

Page 307. line 10. So on the day appointed, Aug. 27. 1553. the Archbishop,
together with Sir Thomas Smith, K. Edward's Secretary, and Dr. May, came before
the Queen's Commissioners; and the Archbishop brought in his Inventory. We are
le^t to guess what he was now cited for. I suppose it was to lay to his change
Heresy and his Marriage.] It was undoubtedly to charge him with Treason, for
what he had done in the business of Queen Ia^; which the appearance o^ Smith
and May at the same time with him confirms. It was too early yet ^o object to
him either Heresy or Marriage.

Page 310. line 7. Cuthhert Bishop of Durham, formerly d^prived, was restored.
Edmond Boner Bishop of London restored, Nicolas Ridley being removed from the
said See, and cast into Prison, etc.] These words are said to be verbatim
described out of the Register of the Church of Canterbury. I know not, Sir,
whether you inspected that Register with your own eyes; but I assure you, that
Register relates the matter otherwise; viz. that Boner was restored to the Sea
of London, then Canonically void by the Translation of Ridley the Bishop of it
to the Sea of Durham (made in the very end of K. Edward's Reign); and that
Tunstall was restored to Durham, void by the Deprivation of Ridley, deprived
thereof for Heresy and Sedition.

Ibid. line 13. How they proceeded with the Clergy in general for being
married, may be measured, etc. -- Some were deprived, never convict nor called
(I use the words of an Author that then lived, Dr. Parker.) -- Some induced to
resign upon promise of Pension; and the Promise as yet never performed.]
Over Against these latter words, are placed in the Margent the Names of Dr.
Ponet, Tailor, Parker. Of Ponet and Tailor it had been said immediately before,
in this and the foregoing Page, that they were deprived of their Bishoprics.
If then they were deprived, they were not induced to resign upon Promise of
Pension. Of Poinet particularly it was related from the Register of Canterbury,
that he was ejected, and imprisoned, and deprived of Episcopacy for being
Married. I suppose the words of the Register are privatus Episcopatu, which
ought to be rendered, deprived of his Bishopric (viz. of Winchester), not of
Episcopacy; for the Order is indelible, and so allowed to be by those who
deprived him. The Causes of Tayler's Deprivation are reported from the same
Register; but Marriage is not mentioned among them. Nay, we are assured by
undoubted Testimony ( vide supra, Page 156.) That he never was married.
Farther, this Account, said to be taken from the Words of Dr. Parker, is not
his, but they are the words of the Anonymous Large Defense of Priests Marriage,
published by him.

Page 318. med. In the first year of Queen Mary* a very soul Scandal was blown
about of her, That she was with Child by Bishop Gardener; however it was
raised, whether of her Enemies, to render her odicus; or of some Zealots of
Popish Religion, to show the desire they had of her matching with him.] It will
be very difficult to persuade the world, that any Zealots of the Popish
Religion, who are so prejudiced against the Marriage of the Clergy, should
desire the Marriage of a Queen, whom they loved so much, with a Bishop of their
own Communion, whom they no less admired.

Page 324. line 2. Cardinal Pole, in answer to both Queen Mary's Letters,
thought fit to send his mind at large by his Messenger Thomas Goldwell, who was
once, if I mistake not, Prior of the Church of Canterbury, but long since fled
out of England, and lived with Pole, and by the Queen afterward preferred to
the Bishopric of S. Asaph.] The Prior of Canterbury, and Bishop of St. Asaph,
had nothing common but their Names. The one was a Regular, the other a Secular.
The first, Doctor of Divinity before the other was born, and dead before the
other was made Bishop.

Page 328. line 4. ab imo. This is some account of the Church of Canterbury's
doings, in pursuance of the Queen's Instructions beforementioned, viz. against
the Married Clergy.] This account relates only the Proceedings of that Chapter
against the Married Clergy, Members of the Cathedral Church, or Incumbents
within the Deanery of the Arches. The same Register of that Church (from whence
this account is taken) relates at large their Proceedings against all the
Married Clergy within the whole Diocese of Canterbury, and in the other
D^anries of the peculiar Jurisdiction of that See.

Page 329. line 11. Bernard Ochin, Preb^ndary of Canterbury. So also page 400,
etc.] His Name was Bernardinus; a man sufficiently known.

Page 331. line 9. ab imo. The other thing thought hard concerning these Orders
taken with the Married Clergy, was, that after these poor men had thus done
their Penances, the Imposers of these Penalties were not so good as they
pretended they would be, etc. toward them, not restoring them to their
Ministration.] This is not universally true. All Secular Married Clergymen,
who desired it, were restored after such Penance undergone, unless some other
great Demerit intervened. But no Regulars could obtain that favor; Marriage in
them being accounted Apostasy from their Vow and Order.

Page 331. line 12. The said Poinet, late Bishop of Winchester, but now an
Exile, very learnedly answered this Book ( of Dr. Martin against Priests
Marriage) in two several Treatises. -- The second Treatise he lived not to
finish; but the Copy falling into the hands of Matthew Parker, Archbishop of
Canterbury, he published it in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, with
very large and excellent Additions of his own. The same Book is ascribed to
Poinet, infra, lin. 39. with some doubt, page 330. med. page 53, 69, etc.] This
Book was most certainly none of Poinet's; for the Author of it says of himself
more than once, that he was a Layman; had designed indeed to enter into Holy
Orders, but was prevented by the Death of K. Edward, and the Iniquity of the
Times succeeding to it. He lived in or about either Norwich or Lincoln; and
died before the end of Q. Mary's Reign. Archbishop Parker in Publishing it, did
not adjoin his own Additions to all the Printed Copies, but only to a few of
them.

Page 369. line 3. etc. Latimer 's Character is best taken from them who best
knew him, and lived in his time. One of these (Thomas Becon) thus speaks of
him, while he was yet alive, in the beginning of K. Edward. -- Latimer was very
famous for the Sincerity and Goodness of his Evangelical Doctrine; which since
the beginning of his Preaching had in all points been so conformable to the
teaching of Christ and his Apostles. -- His Fame began to grow apace, while he
was at Cambridge, some years before 1530. doing abundance of good there among
the Student^ by his Sermons. -- Before them he did by invincible Arguments,
etc. prove, That the Holy Screptures ought to be read in the English Tongue of
all Christen People, whether they were Priests or Laymen, etc.] Good Mr. Becon
did herein either want true information, or has imposed upon his Readers.
Latimer was so far from maintaining this Doctrine ever since the beginning of
his Preaching, that he was one of those Divines, who (being deputed by the
University of Cambridge) joined with Archbishop Warham, and other Bishops and
Divines, in Condemning all English Translations of the Scripture; and solemnly
subscribed this Determination, The Publication of the H. Scripture in the
Vulgar Tongue, is not necessary to Christians; and the King's Majesty and the
Bishops do well in forbidding to the people the common use of the H. Scripture
in the English Tongue. This was done in the year 1530.

Page 383. line 16. ab imo. The Queen would not alter her Determination to have
Archbishop Cranmer burnt, by the Instigation, as I suppose, of Pole the
Legate.] I would not have remittted you to so obscure an Author as Anthony
Harmer, if your self had not mentioned him in your Preface. He has offered
some Reasons (in his Specimen, page 144.) not altogether contemptible, to clear
Cardinal Pole from this Imputation. I am so charitable, as to be willing at
least to assent to his Reasons; your self can better judge of the Validity of
them.

Page 398. line 9. Among Archbishop Cranmer's Writings are reckoned (from Bale)
Letters to Learned Men, one Book; and thereto is added, This I cannot hear any
tidings of.] The Archbishop's Letters to Learned men never were either by
himself or others collected into one or more Books, especially at that time.
But it was Bale's foolish way, to account to every great man whom he has
placed in his Rhapsody of Writers, One Book of Epistles.

Epist. Dedicat. page 3. The Judgment of Archbishop Arundel was for the
Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue, and for the Laity's use
thereof. For he preaching the Funeral Sermon of Queen Anne in 1392. commended
her particularly for her Study of the Holy Scriptures, -- as I find by an
Ancient MS. Fragment, formerly belonging to the Church of Worcester, etc.] This
MS. Fragment has been often published. And Arundel, when he preached this
Sermon, was not Archbishop of Canterbury, nor one of Cranmer's Predecessors, as
is here supposed. But after all, the Judgment of Archbishop Arundel in this
Case is better declared by an Authentic Decree, than by a Rhetorical Passage
in a Sermon, wherein he was obliged to commend the Deceased Queen. He was so
far then from favoring the Translation of the Scriptures into the Vulgar
Tongue, or the use of them by the Laity, that in the year 1408, he made this
famous Decree in the Synod of Oxford, Periculosa res est, etc. It is a
dangerous thing to translate the H. Scripture. -- We decree therefore and
ordain, That henceforth no man by his own authority translate any Book of H.
Scripture into the English or any other Tongue, by way of Book, Libel, or
Treatise; and that no such Book or Translation be read by any one, upon pain of
the higher Excommunication. I might also observe to you, That the Case of
Archbishop Chichely, which you had mentioned immediately before this, is
mistaken, he doing therein nothing more than what was usual; as also the Case
of Archbishop Islip, who decreed in the Case by you mentioned, nothing but what
was consonant to the Rules of Canon Law, and the Papal Definitions; it being a
Rule in both, that Simplex Votum impedit matrimonium contrahendum, sed non
dirimit contractum. But I fear I have been too long already. I will only put
you farther in mind, that when in the following Pages you compare the
Archbishops of Canterbury preceding to, and succeeding the Reformation, and
accuse the former to have minded chiefly great Worldly Pomp and Appearance; but
praise the latter for regarding little or nothing the vain shows of exterior
Grandeur and Glory; the Comparison is not altogether just: For Parker and
Whitgift (whom you choose to instance in) lived in as great State, Pomp, and
Magnificence, and were attended with as large a Retinue, as most of their
Predecessors. And that in your Preface, page 7. instead of an Augustine Monk of
Canterbury, should be substituted, a Monk of St. Augustines in Canterbury. And
lastly, That Page 11. Edward Howes should (if I mistake not) be changed into
Edmund Howes.

These, Sir, are the only Errors which I have discovered in your History. That
the Observation of them may in any measure contribute to the Illustration of
your Work, (as I doubt not but your Work will highly contribute to the
Information of the Curious, and the Justification of our Reformation) is the
Hearty Desire of,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, HEN. WHARTON.
November. 13. 1693.
A TABLE OF THE Letters, Instruments, Records, etc.
Made use of in this History, and contained in the Appendix to the Memorials of
Archbishop CRANMER.
With the NUMBER and PAGE under which each may be found, and the PLACE whence
Transcribed.

Number. Page. Place. AN Account of Mr. Pole's Book by Dr. Cranmer. I. 3 Sir
W.H.MSS. Dr. Cranmer, Ambassador with the Emperor, his letter to the King. II.
6 Ibid. A Parcel of Jewels sent from Greenwich to Hampton court to the King.
To the receipt of which he set his hand. III. 7 Ibid. The King to Dr. Boner,
his Majesty's Agent, to declare to the Pope his Appeal from him and his
Sentence. IV. 8 Ibid. Cranmer's Protestation at his Consecration. V. 9 Cranm.
Reg. Cranmer's Oath taken to the Pope at his Consecration VI. ib. Ibid.
Cranmer's Oath to the King for his Temporalties. VII. 10 Cleop. E. 6. The
King's Proclamation for bringing in Seditious Books. VIII. ib. Cleop. E. 5.
Bishop Fisher to Secretary Crumwel, declaring his willingness to swear to the
Succession. IX. 13 Cleop. E. 6. Lee Bishop Elect of Litchfield and Coventry, to
secretary Crumwel, concerning Bishop Fisher. X. ib. Ibid. The Archbishop to
Secretary Crumwel, in behalf of Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas More. XI. 14
Ibid. Nix Bishop of Norwich, to Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, for
suppressing such as read books brought from beyond Sea. XII. 15 Cleop. E. 5.
Archbishop Cranmer to K. Henry, complaining of a Prior in Canterbury, that had
preached against him. XIII. 16 Cleop. E. 6. Cleop. F. 1. The Archbishop to Mr.
Secretary Crumwel, concerning his stiling himself Primate of all England. XIV.
19 Cleop. F. 2. The Appeal of Stokesly Bishop of London to the King, against
the Archbishop's Visitation. XV. 21 MSS.C.C.C.C. An Inventory of the Cathedral
Church of St. Swithins in Winchester, as it was given in by the Prior and
Convent, to Crumwel, Secretary of State, and the King's Vicar General. XVI. 24
Cleop. F. 1. A Reply to the Archbishop, against his Court of Audience. XVII. 28
Ibid. Archbishop Cranmer's Order concerning the Proctors of the Court of
Arches, shown to be inconvenient, by a Paper presented to the Parliament. XVIII.
30 Cleop. E. 5. The Archbishop to the L. Crumwel, giving him some account of
his Visitation of his Diocese. XIX. 37 Ibid. Richard Grafton, the Printer of
the Bible, to the L. Crumwel, complaining of some that intended to Print the
Bible, and thereby to spoil his Impression. XX. 38 Cranm. Reg. Archbishop
Cranmer to the King, for a Suffragan of Dover. XXI. 40 Ibid. The Archbishop's
Letters of Commission to Richard Suffragan of Dover. XXII. 41 Cleop. E. 5. A
Declaration to be read by all Curates upon the Publishing of the Bible in
English. XXIII. 42 Ibid. The Answer, or Declaration of Richard Bishop of
Chichester, in the presence of the Kings Majesty, against the sixth Reason or
Argument of John Lambert, concerning the most holy and blessed Sacrament of the
Altar. XXIV. 43 Ex Dudith Or. and Opuse. Tho. Cranmeri Archiep. Cant. Epistola,
super Controversiam de coena Domini ortam. XXV. 45 Cleop. E. 5. Part of a
Letter from a Member of Parliament, concerning the Transactions of the House,
about p^ssing the Act of the Six Articles. XXVI. 47 Ibid. The Solution of some
Bishop to certain Questions about the Sacraments. XXVII. 48 Ibid. The Judgment
of another Bishop upon the aforesaid Questions. XXVIII. 52 Ibid* Archbishop
Cranmer to Osiander, concerning some abuses in Matrimony among the Germans.
XXIX. 54 Ibid. The French Kings License to print the English Bible in Paris.
XXX. 56 MSS.C C C.C. Three Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer, occasioned upon
his review of the Kings Book, entitled, The Erudition of a Christian man. XXXI.
57 Ibid* Other Discourses of Archbishop Cranmer. XXXII. 62 Ibid.
Interrogatories for Dr. London. Dr. Willoughbies Confession, etc. XXXIII. 63 A
Letter prepared for the King to sign, to ratify certain Ecclesiastical Laws.
XXXIV. 72 The Bishop of Winchester to Archbishop Cranmer, relating to the
Reformation of Religion. XXXV. 73 Foxij MSS. The said Bishop to the Duke of
Somerset, concerning the Book of Homilies, and Erasmus Paraphrase Englished.
XXXVI. 77 Vespas. D. 18. Roger Ascham to Mr. Cecyl, Giving him an acount of a
Disputation in S. John's College, Whether the Mass and the Lords Supper be al
one. XXXVII. 81 MSS. SirW.H. The University of Cambridg to the Archbishop.
XXXVIII. 83 Ascham. Ep. Richard Smith D. D. his Recantation of his Books.
XXXIX. 84 Becon 's Rep. Archbishop Cranmer's Answers to the fifteen Articles of
the Rebels in Devon, Anno 1549. XL. 86 MSS.C.C.C.C. The Archbishops Notes for
an Homily against the Rebellion. XLI. 113 Ibid. The Lady Mary to the Council;
Justifying her self for using the Mass in K. Edwards Minority. XLII. 115 Sir
W.H.MSS. The Archbishops Letter to Martin Bucer; Inviting him over into
England. XLIII. 116 Buceri Script. Aug. A Catalogue of Books published by
Paulus Fagius. XLIV. 117 Dr. Cox, the Chancellor of the University of Oxford,
his Oration at the Conclusion of Peter Martyr's Disputation. [XLIV.] 119 P.
Mart. Opera. Dr. Treshams Epistle before his Relation of the Disputation
between himself and Peter Martyr, at Oxford. XLV. 121 Foxij MSS. The
Sententious Sayings of Master Martin Bucer upon the Lords Supper. XLVI. 124
Ibid. Bishop Hoper to the Clergy of his Diocese of Gloucester. XLVII. 133 MS.
Private. Hoper Bishop of Gloucester to Sir William Cecyl, Secretary of State.
XLVIII. 135 MSS.SirW.H. Another of the same Bishop to the same Person. 136
Ibid. A Popish Rhyme fastened upon a Pulpit in K. Edwards reign. XLIX. 137
Foxij MSS. An Answer to it. Ibid. Ibid. An old Song of John Nobody. 138 Private.
MS. John a Lasco's Letter from Embden, signifying the dangerous condition they
were in, and the Persecutions they expected. L. 139 Sir W.H.MSS. A Lasco's
request, that those of his Church might have a Warrant from the Kings Council,
that they might not be disturbed for not coming to their Parish-churches. LI.
141 Ibid. Michael Angelo, Preacher to the Italian Congregation, his complaint
against some of his Flock. With a List of their Names. LII. Ibid. Ibid. Place.
Number. Page. Sir W.H. MSS. Michael Angelo endeavors to appease the Secretary,
greatly offended with him for a gross miscarriage. LIII. 143 Ibid. A Lasco to
the Secretary to procure the Kings Letters Patents for a French Protestant, to
set up a French Printing Press. LIVE. 145 Ibid. Valerandus Pollanus,
Superintendent of the Strangers Church at Glastenbury, to the Secretary,
concerning the State of the Strangers Weavers fixed there. LV. 145 Ibid. The
Superintendent to the same, earnestly desiring, that one Cornish might not be
set over the strangers there, who had already dealt illy with them. LVI. 147
Ibid. The Superintendent to the same. Giving some account of the present
settlement of their affairs. LVII. 148 Ibid. Mr. John Calvin to the Duke of
Somerset, His advise for the rectifying some Abuses in our Church and
University; Relating to the Alienation or Misuse of their Revenues. LVIII. 149
MSS. CC.CC. Sir John Cheke to Dr. Parker, Upon the death of Martin Bucer. LIX.
151 Ibid. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning the Oxford Act, Anno 1550. LX. 152
Ibid. Peter Martyr to Bucer, Concerning their Review of the Book of Common
Pray^r. LXI. 154 MSS. SirW.H. The Archbishops Letter, to procure Wolf, the
Printer, a license to publish his ^ook. LXII. 156 Foxij MSS. Articles,
whereunto William Phelps, Pastor and Curate of Ciciter, upon good advisement
and deliberation, after better knowledge given by Gods grace, has subscribed.
LXIII. Ibid. MSS. SirW.H. The Archbishop to the Lords of the Council,
concerning the Book of Articles of Religion. LXIV. 158 Ibid. The Archbishop
nominates certain Persons for an Irish Archbishopric. LXV. 159 Ibid. The
Archbishop to Sir Will. Cecyl, that Mr. Turner, intended for the Archbishopric
of Armagh, was come up to Court. LXVI. 160 Ibid. The Archbishop to the same.
Wherein he justifies himself and the rest of the Bishops against the charge of
Covetousness. LXVII. 161 Ibid. Purchases made by the Archbishop. Extracted out
of K. Edwards Book of Sales. LXVIII. 162 MSS. D. Will. Petyt. An Instrument of
the Council, Swearing and subscribing to the Succession, as limited by the
King. [LXVIII.] 163 Ibid. The Kings own Writing, directing the Succession. 164
MSS. SirW.H. A Letter of Q. Janes Council to the L. Rich, L. Lieutenant of the
County of Essex. LXIX. 164 Foxij MSS. Q. Jane to Sir John Bridges, and Sir
Nicolas Poyntz, to raise forces against a Rising in Bucks. LXX. 165 Number.
Page. Place. The Counsillors of Q. Jane their Letter to the Lady Mary,
acknowledging her Queen. LXXI. 166 MSS. Sir W.H. The Archbishop to Mrs.
Wilkinson, persuading her to flee. LXXII. Ibid. Foxes Acts. The Words and
Sayings of John Duke of Northumberland, spoken by him unto the people at the
Tower Hill of London, on Tuesday in the forenoon, being 22th. of August,
immediately before his Death. LXXIII. 167 Titus B. 2. Archbishop Cranmers
Letter to the Queen, suing for his Pardon in the Lady Janes business. LXXIV.
169 Letters of the M^rt. Cardinal Poles Instructions for his Messenger to Queen
Mary. LXXV. 170 Titus B. 2. The Form of the Restitution of a married Priest.
LXXV. 179 Regist. Eccl. Christ. Cant. John Foxes Letter to the Parliament,
against reviving the Act of the Six Articles. LXXVI. 181 Foxij MSS. An
Instrument of the University of Cambridg, appointing certain of their Members
to repair to Oxford, to dispute with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer there.
LXXVII. 182 Ibid. The University of Cambridge to that of Oxford, relating to
the former matter. LXXVIII. 184 Ibid. Cranmers Letter to the Queens Council
after his Disputation at Oxon. LXXIX. 186 Foxes Acts. The Lord Legates
Commission to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, Deputing them to Absolve and
Dispense with the Clergy in his stead; and Absolve the Laity. LXXX. 187
Registr. Eccl. Cant. The Lord Legates Instructions to the Bishops, in the
performing of his Orders about Absolving their Clergy and Laity. LXXXI. 190
Ibid. An Italian to his Friend concerning Cardinal Pole. LXXXII. 192 Balci
Cent. Bradford to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, concerning the Freewillers,
about 1554. LXXXIII. 195 Martyrs Letters. The Prisoners for the Gospel, their
Declaration concerning K Edward his Reformation. LXXXIV. 196 Foxij MSS. John
Fox to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Q. Mary's time, relating to the
Persecution. LXXXV. 197 Ibid. Dr. Ridley, late Bi^hop of London, to West,
formerly his Steward; who had complied with the Romish Religion. LXXXVI. 200
Ibid. John Hopton, Bishop of Norwich, to the Earl of Sussex; giving account of
the joy conceived, and Te Deum sung, for the News of the Queens being brought
to bed of a Noble Prince. LXXXVII. 203 Tit. B. 2. A Proposition in the
Convocation against Residence. With reasons for the said Propositions, and
Remedies against Non-Residence. LXXXVIII. 204 C. C. C. C. MSS. Pole Cardinal
Legate, to Archbishop Cranmer; in answer to the Letter he had sent to the
Queen. LXXXIX. 206 Foxij MSS. Place. Number. Page. MSS Sir W H Archbishop
Parker to the Secretary, desiring the Councels Letters, in order to his
discovering certain Writings of Archbishop Cranmer. XC. 217 Ibid. Dr. William
Mouse, Master of Trinity Hal in Cambridg, his Letter of Thanks to Secretary
Cecyl. XCI. 218 Ibid. Justus Jonas to Secretary Cecyl, Concerning the Miseries
of Germany, occasioned by the Interim; and that he might receive the Kings
intended Muni^icence. XCII. 2^9 Ibid. Miles Wilson to Secretary Cecyl,
lamenting the Spoils of Schools, Benefices and Hospitals. To which are added
his Arguments against this Sacrilege. XCIII. 220 Ibid. Peter Martyr to James
Haddon, To procure a License from the Court for one of his Audit^rs, named Hugh
Kirk of Magdalen College Oxon, to preach. XCIV. 227 Ibid. Peter Martyr to
Secretary Cecyl, That one who officiated in Dr. Westons place, might receive
the Stipend detained from him. XCV. 228 Ibid. John Sleidan to Secretary Cecyl.
Advices of the State of Affairs in Germany. XCVI. 229 Ibid. Sleidan to the
same. More Advices from Germany. Desires a Patent for his Stipend granted him
by K. Edward VI. XCVII. 230 Ibid. Sleidan to the same. Intelligences concerning
the Motions of the Emperor, and the State of the Protestant Princes. XCVIII.
231 Ibid. Sleidan to the same. Advices of the State of the Empire. XCIX. 232
Ibid. Sleidan to Sir John Cheke and Sir William Cecyl; Concerning his
Commentaries, which he had sent to K. Edward. Desires them to send him an exact
Information of the Business between K. Henry and Pope Clement. His resolution
of continuing his Commentaries, and of Writing the History of the Council of
Trent. C. 234 Ibid. Sleidan to Sir William Cecyl; Concerning the Affairs of
Germany, and particularly of the Council of Trent. CI. 236 Ibid. ^artin Bucer
to the Secretary, for the speeding of Sleidans business. CII. 238 Ibid. Ralph
Morice, the Archbishops Secretary, his supplication to Q. Elizabeth for Prior
Wilbore's Pension, lately deceased. CIII. 239 A Prologue or Preface made by
Thomas Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, to the Holy Bible. CIV. 241
Number. Page. Place. Bucer, and other Learned Strangers from Lambeth, to Cecyl;
To prefer the Petition of some poor French Protestants to the Protector. CV.
250 MSS. Sir W.H. The Archbishop to the Secretary, Concerning a French man,
that desired a Patent to translate the Common prayer into French, and print it.
CVI. Ibid. Ibid. The Archbishop to the same. Mention of Letters sent by the
Archbishop to the Duke of Northumberland, Excusing his not proceeding in a
Commission. His Reflection upon the News. CVII. 251 Ibid. The Archbishop to the
same: Signifying his Desire to have the good Will of the Lord Warden, his
Neighbor. CVIII. 252 Ibid. The Archbishop to the same: Desiring Cecyl to
enform him of the Cause of Chekes Indictment. CIX. Ibid. Ibid.

The End of the Table of Letters, etc.
BOOKS Printed for RICHARD CHISWELL.
CEnsura Celebriorum Authorum; sive Tractatus in quo Varia Virorum Doctorum de
Claris. Cujusque Seculi Scriptoribus Iudicia Traduntur. Unde Facilimo Negotio
Lector Dignoscere qucat quid in singulis quibusque Istorum Authorum Maxim
Memorabile sit and quonam in pretio apud Eruditos seniper Habiti Fuerunt. Opera
Thomae Pope-Blunt, Baron^iti. Fol. V. Cl. Gulielmi Camdeni, and Illustrium
V^rorum ad G. Camdenum Epistol^e, cum Appendice Varii Argumenti. Accesserunt
Annalitita Regni Regis Jacobi I. Apparatus. and Commentarius de Antiquitate,
Dignitate, and Officio Comitis Marescali Angliae. Praemittitur G Camdeni Vita.
Scriptore Thoma ^mitho, S.T.D. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero. 4to. Some
Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont. By
Peter Allix, D D Treasurer of Sarum. 4to. -- his Remarks upon the
Ecclesiastical ^istory of the Ancient Churches of the Albigenses. 4to. A
Vindication of Their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the Deprived
Bishops, in a Letter occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New
Separation on Account of the O^ths to the Present Government. With an Answer to
the History of Passive Obedience, so far as relates to them. 4to. A Vindication
of the said Discourse concerning the Unre^^^nablen^ss of a New Separation, from
the Exceptions made against it in a Tract called, [A Brief Answer to the said
Discourse, etc] 4to. Geologia: Or ^ Discourse concerning the Earth before the
Deluge; wherein the Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book, entitled
[The Theory of the Earth], are expected against; and it is made appear, That
the Dissolution of that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a
new Explication of that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of
Worlington in Suffolk. 4to. The Present State of Germany. By a Person of
Quality. 8vo. Memoirs relating to the Royal Navy of England for Ten Years,
determined December 1688. By Samuel P^pys, Esquire 8vo. Memoirs of what past in
Christendom, from the War begun 1672. to the Peace concluded, 1679. 8vo.
Disquisitiones Critic^ de Variis per Diversa Lo^a and tempora Bibliorum
Editionibus. Quibus Acced^^t Castigati^nes Theologi Cujusdam Parificusis ad
Opasculum Is. Vossii de Sybillinis Oraculis, and Ejusd^m Responsi^^em ad
Objectiones n^per^e Critica Sacra. 4to. A^gl^a Sacra, sive Collectio
Historiarum Au^^quit^s Scriptarum de Archicpiscopis and Episcopis Angliae a
prima Fid^i Christianae susceptione ad Annum 1540. in Duobus Volamin^bus per
Henricum Whartonum Fol. Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archipiscopi Historia
Dogmatica Controversiae inter Orthodoxos and Pontificios de scripturis and
Socris Vernaculis; nunc Prim^^n Edita Acc^sserunt ^j^sdem Dissertationes du^e
de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, and de Epistola ad Lacdic^os ant^^ac medi^ae.
Discripsis, Dig^ssit, and noris atq^e A^^lavio Lo^^ple^avit Henricus Wharton,
A. M. Rev in Christo Pat. ac Dom. Archiepisc. Can(...) a sacris Domestic^s.
4to. 1690. S^^iptorum E^clesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato u^que
ad s^^ndran xiv. facili methodo (...) de Vito Illor^^^^ as Re^us G. siis, de
(...), Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis Ge^^^^is, (...) Supposit^tiis,
meditis, Deperduis, Fragmentis; Deque Varsis Op^rion Editimubus persp^eue
Agitur. Acc^dunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christ^^ae Religionis Oppugnatores; and
Cujusvis S^eculi Brev^arian, Inserusit^r sais Lo is V^t^v^m aliquot Opuscula
and Fragmenta, tum Graec^ ^an Lativa (...). Praenussa demque Prolegomena,
q^^bu^ plurima ad Antiq^^tatis Ecclesiasticae Studium (...). Opu^ indicibus
neces^arus I^structum, Authore Gulielmo Cave, SS. Theol Proj. ^. Canoni^o
Windeso^ensi Accedit ab Alia manu App^ndix ab meunte Secula xiv. ad Annum usque
MDXVII. Fol. Rus^worth 's Historical Collections. The Third Part in Two
Volumes. Containing the Principal M^tters which happened from the Meeting of
the Parliament, Nov. 3. 1640. to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a
particular Account of the Rise and Progress of the Civil War to that Period.
Fol. A Discourse of the Pastoral C^re. By Gilbert Burn^t, Lord Bishop of Sarum,
1692. Dr. (...) Conant 's Sermons. 1693. A Discourse of the Government of the
Though^^ By Geo. Tully Sub-Dean of. York, 8vo, 1694. Origo (...): Or a Treatise
of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power; as also o^ their great
Variety; and why some Laws are immutable, and some not, but may suffer change,
or cease to be, or be suspended or abrogated. In Seven Books. By George Dawson.
Fol. 1694.

