THe favorable Censure of the Reader is craved for what Errors have happened in
Printing, which the Authors leisure has neither permitted him to prevent nor
correct: However I am to desire that these two may be thus read, viz. In the 2
Page of the Dedication, line the 11. for ( your Supporters) read ( their
Supporters) and page 105. lin. ult. read Libavius.

N. H.

Legends no Histories: OR, A SPECIMEN Of some ANIMADVERSIONS Upon the HISTORY
of the Royal Society.

Wherein, besides the several Errors against Common Literature, sundry mistakes
about the making of Saltpeter and Gunpowder are detected, and rectified:
whereunto are added two Discourses, one of Pietro Sardi, and another of Nicolas
Tartaglia relating to that Subject. Translated out of Italian.

WITH A brief Account of those passages of the Authors Life, which the Virtuosi
intended most to censure, and expatiate upon: Written to save them the trouble
of doing any thing besides defending themselves.

TOGETHER With the PLUS ULTRA of Mr. Joseph Glanvill reduced to a NONPLUS, etc.

BY Henry Stubbe, Physician at Warwick.

At vos interea venite ad ignem
Annals Volusi, cacata charta.
Catullus. Printed at London, and are to be sold by the Booksellers there.
1670.

The Preface to the Judicious READER.
IT may perhaps, and that not unjustly, be wondered, that I should appear in
behalf of the Ancient and Aristotelian Philosophy, who have always been thought
averse from it, and inclined to that which is more Novel. And it is true, that
I have not such a veneration for the Peripatetical Physics, as some others
have, nor do I think they so satisfactorily explicate the Phoenomena in
sublunary things, as that an inquisitive brain can acquiesce therein: but this
is not so mnch the deficiency of that Learning, as of humane Nature; the
attempt if self being so little feasible, that whosoever shall design any such
thing, shall involve himself in the like miscarriages, as appears from what
Gassendus, Des Carts and others have done, from whose performances the
greatest advantages we have yet derived is, that it seems manifest how easy a
thing it is to find defaults, and how difficult to amend them; and how the Man
of Stagira was not singular in his faylors.

If the Cartesian Hypothesis seem to be demonstrated sufficiently in this, How
false that Cartesian assertion is, the learned and pious Dr. More has in
sundry pieces demonstrated.
that it is agreeable to the general occurrents of Nature, and solves the
difficulties emergent, as if it were absolutely true: If this, I say, may pass
for sufficient proof, I know not why a Physician may not submit unto the like
conviction, who daily experiments that the Aristotelian Philosophy (which with
some little discrepancie of opinions, and diversity of explications has been
transmitted from the Asclepiadae, Anton. van der Linden. de circuitu sanguin.
Exercit. 5. Sect. 221. Hieron. Mercurialis de hom. generat. c. 2. Andr.
Laurent. anatom. l. 2. q. 17.
Hippocrates, and Aristotle to their Alexandrine, Grecian, Sarracenical, and
Christian Physicians through so many ages, revolutions, and different Climates)
is most conformable to the Subject about which his Faculty is employed, the
explanation of Diseases, their Nature, their Symptoms, their tendency, and
Cure? Not only the Chyrurgical, but Medicinal part of Physic has been carried
on and stated upon those general grounds, and that with such assurance, that
where any learned and solid practitioner of that way shall happen to be at a
loss, those which are enemies to it, the admirers of the Virtuosi and of
Odowde, have not been able to make any considerable advantage thereby. Most
that the Novellists have done, is to find out new reasons for an ancient
practice, and to show how the old Medicaments wrought to their effects in
another way than was supposed: but they have neither discredited the Medicines,
nor Method with any understanding men: Whatever superlative discoveries have
been made of late, a short time and trial has convinced us of the i^utility of
the most famed inventions and Theorems; and the tedious, costly, new
Medicaments have scarce continued to be nine days wonder. I speak not this out
of contradiction I carry to these Virtuosi; it is the result of my thoughts
after twelve years of deliberation, after observations accurately made in my
own practice, and in that of other ancient men: and as it is known how I never
desired any thing so much as the benefit of my Patients; so I hope I may be
bel^eved when I protest that my Ambition and Interest both suggested unto me a
desire of atchieving Miracles in Physic, if it had been possible. But, since
whatever repute I have required I owe it to that Physic which has descended
down unto this age by the means of such as have been of the Aristotelian and
Galenical way, I am but just unto those Worthies in thus declaring against
their puny Adversaries, who deserve all that contempt wherewith we depreciate
the illiterate and fools, when they tell us that the Ancient M^thod will not
qualify us to work, Mr. Gl^^vil in his plus ul^ra page 7.
or enable us TO CURE A CUT FINGER, may less discover the nature, and course of
Diseases, Mr. Sprat. page ^17. and 327.
the operation of Druggs, and the righ^ compounding of them for the benefit of
the sick.

Although that this Reason might sufficiently justify me for what I have done,
yet I had more powerful inducements which pressed me unto this design; and
those are the exigences of the English Monarchy; whereunto since the good
Providence of God has subjected us once again, it is the prudence of every
particular person to contribute all he can to the support of it, against all
such intendments as may either introduce Popery on the one side, (which renders
the Title of our King, and his power precarious, and will subvert the whole
Commonalty of England in their Estates, Whosoever would be satisfied about the
imprudence v^nity, and perniciousness of all attempts to subvert the M^^archy
of Eng^and now, and introduce a Democracy; I would advise him to read over the
Political discourses of Mal^^zzi in Tacitus, disc. 3. Boccalini advert. cent.
2. advert. 30. Paolo Paruta disc. polit. c. 8. Chr. Fo^stuer. in Tacit. l. 1.
p. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ut verissime dixerit Cosmus Me^ices Cardinali Salviato, in tanta
^pum inaequalitate, morumque corruptione, Floren^inam Rempub. non esse amplius
lib^rtatis capacem, quae optari potius quam sperari debeat. The reas^ns why the
last Brutus miscarried in his design, will convince any man.
not to mention the concern of our Souls, and that intellectual slavery whereto
we must submit)^ and against all Ana^chical projects, or Democratical
contrivances, whereof a debauched and ungenerous Nation is not capable, and
which cannot take effect without such variety of changes, as no sober man will
think upon without horror, nor any that is wise pursue as feasible. I do avow
therefore that the desire I had to contribute what I could to uphold the
Fundamental Policy of these Kingdoms, was the prin^ipal motive I had to write
this Treatise: and that how willing soever I was otherwise to discharge all
intelligent persons from the insupportable prating of these Comical ^its, and
to avenge my own faculty upon ^hese insolents, yet the circumstances which I
saw might create me future troubles and vexations were such, that nothing less
than a generous and necessary inclination to serve my Country could have made
me despise them. I have so small a regard for deep and subtle inquiries into
Natural Philosophy, and the intricate Mechanismes by which this World is said
to be governed, that could Physic be unconcerned in their debates, could
Religion remain unshaken amidst the writings of these Vertuosi, could that
Education be carried on happily whereby the Subjects are qualified to serve
their Prince in all Negotiations and Employments, and their Country in
Parliament, I should not entermeddle: but, if we look de facto upon these
Experimental Philosophers, and from too fatal trials judge how little they are
fitted for those trusts^ and management of business by that so famed Mechanical
Education: and if we con^ider how much this Nation owes to Burleigh, Walsingham
Jewel, Abbot, Perkins, Whitaker, Usher, Davenant, Casaubon, etc. and that by
complying with these Novel projects for the breeding up of Youth, we deprive
our selves of all our hopes to see such persons either in Church or State; we
must rise as high in our resentments against the Authors of this History, and
Mr. Glanvils Books (where more than ^n^ or two Virtuosi that contributed unto
it) as the concerns of the present Age and of our posterity can animate us. The
Art of reasoning by which the prudent are discriminated from fools, Mr. S^rat.
page 324.
which methodizeth and facilitates our discourses, which informs us of the
validity of Consequences, and the probability of Arguments, See Mr. Glanvill's
^lus ultra page ^23. and page 118, 119.
and manifests the fallacies of Impos^ors and Comical Wits; that Art which
gives life to solid Eloquence, and which renders States men, Divines,
Physicians and Lawyers accomplished, how is this cried down and vilified by the
Ignoramus's of these days? Mr. Sprat page 341, 342.
What contempt is there raised upon the disputative Ethics of Aristotle, and
the Stoiques? And those Moral instructions which have produced the Alexanders
and the Ptolomeys, the Pompeys and the Ciceroes, are now slighted in comparison
of day-labouring! Did we live at Sparta, where the daily employments were the
exercises of substantial virtue and Gallantry, and men, like setting-dogs, were
rather bred up unto than taught reason and worth, it were a more tolerable
proposal (though the different policy of these times would not admit it) but
this working so recommended is but the feeding of Carps in the Air, the
weighing of a pike in water, the cooling of Wine with Sal Ammoniac, (published
long ago by Berigiardus) the guilt varnish (no secret to some Tradesmen in
London) or the inventing of an Ambling^saddle. As for the study of Politics,
and all Critical Learning together with Church History, these are either
pedantical, or tedious to those who have a shorter way of studying Men? Mr.
Sprat page 32^.
Those Metaphysics which the constant po^icy of Christendom has found so
advan^ageous, that wit^out a Miracle we could not have born up against the
Heathen-Philosophers, Arrians, Sarracens, and Socinians, and out of which we do
so confound the Papists, these must be laid aside; and are we not then in a ^it
posture to encounter Bellarmine, and Baronius? I remit these things to the
consideration of all serious patriots, and do earnestly desire that they would
with attention read over Campanella concerning the Spanish Monarchy, I follow
the English Edition of Campan^lla, and do recommend these places, especially
the last Citation, to every serious Patriot his consideration.
Chapter 23^ page 142. chapter 25. page 157. ch: 27. page 177, 182. and the last part
of the History of the Royal Society, and maturely whether the projects of the
one be not put in execution by the other.

I doubt not but this attempt of theirs was no part of the intentions of their
Royal Founder: I am sure the public utility is more dear unto Him than the
giving of some men an opportunity to entertain their Melancholy, and divert
their idle hours, or to acquire the reputation of Airy wits and Drolls: if He
be their patron, it is certain that He is the Father of his Country, and the
Head of the Church; the obligations he has to these are so great and so near
unto him, that these little Engagements must give place thereunto: Nay, He has
herein been Exemplary to his Subjects, by withdrawing much of his
Encouragements, and testifying frequently his disesteem of these Experimental
Philosophers. Thus many of the Nobility, most of the Physicians, and other
understanding and serious persons have either totally deserted the Society, or
discontinued their presence at their Assemblies. And I could wish they would
not abuse the World with ^alse Catalogues, but give us a true one of such men
as do now frequent their meetings, keep correspondence with them, and pay the
usual contribution.

Having so great Presidents to justify my contempt of them, methinks I need
not apprehend the censure of those Illustrious and Honorable personages who
might otherwise seem concerned in this Quarrel. The same motives which prompted
them to advance the Royal Society, must now excite their indignation against
them: the desire of advancing of the Glory, and the trading of this Nation, and
of understanding natural curiosities engaged them in this Society; but now that
these men have no way answered their expectation, since their relations and
Experiments, are so trivial, defective, and false, since that the Authors of
this fatal History have more in them of Campanella, than of Mr. Boil; since
they have relinquished the original designs, and deviated so notoriously from
the intention of the Royal Founder, and what those Eminent persons purposed,
who first closed with them. I will not think them any more involved in this
contest, than patrons are where their favors are abused. And I protest that I
bring with me all the respect and Honor in the world for those persons of
Honor, who in so dissolute an Age gave the world that testimony of their
generous intentions, which was to design the improvement of useful knowledge by
these men: And I am concerned to see their Gallantry so abused, so that nothing
exasperated my peace more than a resentment for their Honor: Had the
Experimental Philosophers acquitted th^mselves in their trust better, yet ought
I to have been commended for animadverting upon these Books: the notorious
unt^u^hs and Errors against common Literature were such, that Foreiners, who
inquire into the Writings and transactions of these Comical Wits, would have
concluded that we were universally degenerated into the old British ignorance,
and that the Baras once more swayed in this Land: But I have taken off from the
generality of this imputation; and dare presume that those that were no more
than Honorary Members (and consequently not concerned in the private contests
and suits of the Corporations they so stand related unto) will express a
kindness for my performance.

Having thus excused my self to the persons of Honor, I shall bri^fly say
something to those of unquestionable Learning that reside amongst the Society:
I am sorry to find them there, and that I must accommodate to their worth that
Ancient saying, Ingenium Galbae male habitat: their number, and interest seems
so small there, that this History could pass with applause, notwith^tanding
them, and Mr. Glanvil be commended: with what credit can they r^sort unto the
meetings of these Comical Wits, whose ridiculous actions reflect upon them, and
upon which Assembly to bestow the El^gies of the Learned, or Virtuous, 't would
be as improp^r in an Aristotelian, as to denomina^e an Ethiopian to be white
because of his Teeth? He must be insensible of ^ll merit that can derogate from
Sir Robert Murray, Dr. Wren, or Dr. Wallis: and to suspect that the truly
Honorable and inquisitive Mr. Boil would abet a design that should subvert
pi^ty, and the Protestant Religion, does not become any that knows him, or his
Writings. But since good men are oftentimes made use of to pernicious ends,
and unwittingly become instruments of the basest frauds; since none are to
judge of Affairs by their tendencie, and not by the persons that openly manage
them, I doubt not but even these persons and others of integrity and solid
worth will not imagine themselves concer^ed in the maintenance of those Errors,
which they cannot approve of, and every one knows they could not commit, nor
^inder.

I have been thus large in the Preface to remove all umbrages and
misconstructions to which this undertaking might subject me: the Preface also
against Mr. Glanvill may seem a little prolix in comparison of the subsequent
Discourse; but the Specimen being lodged at London, partly in transcribing, and
partly because that the distance of the Term made the Edition less seasonable,
I thought fit to enlarge that Preface much during my stay at Bathe, and to
annex those other Observations made there, and what else is taken out of the
Disputations of Vander Linden about the Circulation of Blood, which Book I
could not procure the sight of before.

There be many defaults in the Language, and connection of ^assages which may be
liable to some ce^sure: But whilst the ^^dy of my Discourse stands firm, the
advantages which the ^^mical Wits shall derive from those peccadilloes will not
be ^uch: especially when I shall plead that the work was written amidst the
heat of my practice: that the papers were not written, nor any discourse
finished at one time, but with fre^^ent interruptions: that the several parcels
and fragments were sent to sundry Learned persons to experiment their judgment;
that they were joined together with some alterations and new ^^nexions, without
any review of mine, at London: several ad^^tions being to be inserted, as they
came into my mind, in di^^^s places, and so transmitted by the post: which
occasioned great trouble: in fine, had not some public spirited Gentlemen
there undertook to translate the Italian pieces, and to see the work
transcribed, and the insertions made, and the connection in some measure
supplied, I could never had leisure to finish my intendments.

After this piece there shall follow the next Term (if God give me leave to
perfect what is almost finished now) A Vindication of Aristotle from the
calumnies with which Mr. Glanvill has aspersed his person^ in his Letter which
is joined to the Edition of his Scepsis Scientifica, which bears the Arms and
is dedicated to the Royal Society,: as as he repeats again and again the same
things, so he is still the same illiterate person: having never so much as read
over Diogenes Laertius.

There are also three Letters of mine which may at some time or other become
public. The first, to a person of Honor and Member of the Royal Society,
showing how my writing against these Comical Wits does not derogate from the
persons of Qua^lity who are Honorary Members of the same Assembly: especially
since they have acted so much contrary to the intentions o^ those illustrious
Patriots that at first encouraged them; ther^ are the passages of Campanella
set down, and commented ^on^ and the third part of the History of the Royal
Society animadver^e upon, as being directly subservient to his Propoposals for
the r^^storation of Popery, with some occ^ssional Characters, which Mr. Sprat,
and Mr. Glanvil bestow upon the useful Universit^ Learning.

The second, to a person of Honor, no Member of the Roy^^ Society, shows, that
it is impossible to arrive at any exact Scien^^ in Natural Philosophy; that if
it were possible, yet th^se Com^^cal Wits and their Method could never atchieve
it: I show he^ their negligence in making observations; their falsehood in
relat^^^ them: (...) I further pursue Mr. S^^^t for the mistakes against common
(...), with which the Histo^y abounds
that they either are ignorant of what is published Ancient and Modern Writers,
or most egregious plagiaries: (...) the Aristotelians and Galenists were never
enemies to Expe^^^ments, but cautious about concluding any thing rashly fr^^
them, or making such as were unsafe and inconsistent with good conscience: and
that the Experiments recorded by the ^enical Physicians infinitely surpass as
to Physic, and even Natural Philosophy, what ever th^se Comical Wits can
pretend unto. I add, that the deep study of Natural Philosophy is not
requisite, but rather destructive to all Polities, (as appears by History)
neither is that or the Mathematics necessary to the improvement of Manual
Trades and Arts, since those Countries where Philosophy and Mathematics, have
been generally ignored, (as in Asia, and during the times of the Romans luxury)
Mechanical Artisans, and such Manufactures have most flourished: that the
Luxury which is now in fashion has nothing in it that may compare with the
ingenuity of the Ancient Vertuosi: that those of old Rome did make an Icarus to
fly, and in his flight to fall down and besprinkle Nero with his Blood; whereas
our Fopps have been these many years studying how to fly, yet have not so much
as effected the most facile part of ^he attempt, which is, to break their necks.

The third is to a learned Physician, showing the damages our Faculty has
sustained by these impertinents: the condition of Physic and Chyrurgery as it
is at present by reason that the Divines, Mountebanks, Quacksalvers,
Apothecaries, and every ^ude Experimentator countenanced by the principles and
repute of these Virtuosi, all practice it: the inconveniences to the Monarchy
thereby are considered; and the unreasonableness of what the Virtuosi allege,
as also the vanity of sundry of their Experiments (besides what are old, and
impudently obtruded on us for new) is demonstrated.

And if there be any person worthy of my indignation that will justify the
Rhetoricalness of the History of the Royal Society, I will write a fourth about
that, showing that choice of words, and ^ smooth and numerous period is not
complete Eloquence; but if ^he Subjec^-matter be foolish and irrational, it is a
sort of mad^ess in the judgment of Tully: and that if all the instances of
pu^^ile and jejune Eloquence were lost, which are recorded by Sene^^ and
Quintilian, I protest I could supply a great part of that d^mage out of this
famed History: and if any fitting Adversary declare hereupon, I will make these
Comical Wits as much ^enounce the A^tient Orators, as they do now the
Philosophers.

I should here put an end to this Introductory discourse, but tha^ it is fitting
the world should know how not only illiterate, but mean-spirited these Vertuosi
are: when I declared that I would animadvert upon Mr. Sprat, and Mr. Glanvill,
these Comical Wits not only intimated to me, but in all places divulged that if
I attempted any such thing, they would appoint some ingenious men of their
number to write my Life, thinking hereby to terrify me, and make me fear their
Satyrs, who despised their Lea^ning and other abilities. The effect of this
their project was such, that I found all persons of Honor and ingennity to
condemn it universally: pitiful Mechanics, that being so ridiculous already,
multiply occasions of further contempt! The course is usual amongst the
Papists, and therefore less to be admired or strange in these Virtuosi. When
the Bishop of Spalato writ his excellent Books against the Romanists, they
answered him by calumniating his life: when Padre Paolo writ the History of the
Council of Trent, the Jesuit Palavicini begins his Anti-History, with a long
debate, wherein he attempts to prove that the Author of the said History was an
Heretic, and Atheist. This procedure of his has been laughed at every where,
and Caesar Aquilinius a Papist, thus censures it.

^aesar Aquili^us de tribus Historicis Concilii Trid^n^ini^ p. 18, 19, 20.
An Petrus Soave suerit Haereticus an Atheus? Questionem hanc proponit Henricus
initio praefationis ad suam Censuram, loquens enim de Petro Soave, haec addit,
Scriptor Haereticus an Ath^ista? nihil oportet inquirere: quare ipse
Quaestionem hanc ut superfluam contemnendam potius quam examinandam and
determinandam judicat. Palavicinus vero existimans statim uno ictu adversarium,
atque ejus Historiae sternere autoritatem, Quaestionem i^tam proponit, and
solvit, asserens in primo introductionis suae limine Petrum Soave fuisse
Haereticum, and quod pejus est, Atheum: hoc etiam addit secundi voluminis
initio in epistola quam tribuit sui operis Bibliopo^ae. Probat hoc ex quibusdam
verbis Manu scriptarum epistolarum, quae juxta ejus sententiam Petro Soave
tribuun^ur^ Ve^um satis stulte videtur incedere, and a^^imulatur ei, qui umbram
insequitur relicto corpore: habet prae manibus Historiam Concil^i Tridentini
scriptam ab^illo and typis datam, in qua tanquam in speculo posset cognoscere,
quaenam sit Petri Soave Religio. An Catholicus, an Haereticus? An fortasse
Atheus? and laborat apud nonnulla privata manu scripta, qua vel vera non sunt,
vel certe ancipitis expositionis. -- Primus igitur Palavicini ictus satis vanus
and inutilis est, and ipse videtur assimilari homini, qui cum non valeat suis
viribus inimicum vincere, utitur clarioribus, and maledicis vocibus: debuisset
solum respondere ad opposita, quae in illius Historia inveniuntur, and non
lacessere hostem injuriis and imitari prudentiores, ac Sanctos Scriptores
adversus Haereticos, qui relictis injuriis tantum eorum doctrinam confutant ac
damnant. --

In fine, I was so far from being daunted at those rumors and threats, that I
enlarged much this Book thereupon, and resolved to charge the Enemy home, when
I saw how weak resistance I should meet with. I knew that recriminations were
no answers; and that a sober virtue needed not to stand in fear of any
aspersions. I understood well that the passages of a life like mine, spent in
different places with much privacie and obscuririty, was unknown to them; It Is
a kind of Impiety to disturb the buried: and oftentimes the exposing of things
to the Air that have been long kept close, or the opening of Tombs, has raised
vapors so pestilential thas they have almost ruined flourishing Kingdoms and
Seigniories.
that even those actions they would fix their greatest calumnies upon, were
such as that they understood not their grounds, nor had they learning enough
and skill in casuistical Divinity to condemn: that it would be imprudent in
them to look beyond the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, which was more necessary
to many of the Royal Society than to me; nor can their deportment be justified,
as mine, who joined with no party, frequented no Conventicles, writ very
honorably concerning the Episcoparians, and pleaded for their See my preface to
the Good Old Cause.
Toleration: I was at Westminster-School when the late King was beheaded: I
never took Covenant, nor Engagement. In sum, I SERVED MY PATRON; I endeavored
to express my Gratitude unto him who had relieved me being a Child, and in
great poverty (the Rebellion in Ireland having deprived my Parents of all means
wherewith to educate me) who made me a King's Scholar, preferred me to Chapter Chapter
C. in Oxon. who often supplied me with money, when my tender years gave him
little hopes of any return, and who protected me amidst the Presbyterians and
Independant^, and other Se^ts, with no^e thereof did I contract any relation or
acquaintance: my familiarity never engaged me with ten of that party, and my
genius and humor inclined me to fewer. I neither enriched, nor otherwise
advanced my self during the late troubles, and shared the common odium, and
dangers, not prosperity with my Benefactor. I believe no generous man, who has
the least sense of bravery will condemn me; and I profess, I am ashamed rather
to have done so little, than that I have done so much for him that so frankly
obliged a stranger, and a child. When Gracchus was put to death for sedition,
that faithful friend and complice of his was dismissed and mentioned with
honor by all Posterity; who when he was impeached, justified his Treason by
the avowing a Friendship so great, that whatever Gracchus had commanded him, he
would not have declined it: and being further Ques^ioned, Whether he would have
burned the Capitol at his bidding? He replied again, That he should have done
it; but Gracchus would not bid such a thing. They that knew me heretofore, know
I have a thousand times thus apologized for my self: adding, that in Vassals
and Slaves, and persons transcendently obliged, their Fidelity exempted them
from all ignominy, though the principal Lords, Masters, and Patrons might be
accounted Traitors. And I am so far from dreading the Censure of the world
(especially from Cavaliers) that I believe most men wish their favors so well
placed, and that in their exigencies they might meet with as brave
acknowledgments. My Youth and other circumstances incapacitated me from
rendering him any great Services; but all that I did, and all that I writ, had
no other aim than his interest; nor do I care how much any man can inodiate my
former Writings, as long as that they were sul^ervient to him.

I think this defense to be the most proper and seasonable that I can now make;
and I will not suffer my self to be engaged in any Disputes that may contribute
to the dissettlement of this Nation, and Monarchy; it will therefore be but
meanly done to assault what I now abandon; and to revive the mention, nay,
perhaps to contrive any answer (after so many years omitting it) is scarce
prudential. I have been confirmed by the Right Reverend father in God the Lord
Bishop of Winchester, and they that would write my life well, must consult that
excellent Prelate, and a Letter which He has of mine: I have lived in
Communion with the Church of England hitherto, as standing upon the foundations
laid by Qu. Elizabeth; and my neighboring Diocesans of Worcester and Lichfiel^
can certify with how much respect I have demeaned my self to them upon
occasion; and I abhor all thoughts but such as shall contribute to the support
of the Monarchy, the Protestant Religion, the Honor and welfare of th^se
Kingdoms. Having made this Declaration, let them (or more able men than they)
write against any piece of mine which has been published since his Majesty's
restoration, and consider the manner of my assertions; and let them write the
life of a man who has some virtues of the most celebrated times, and has
reserved himself free from the Vices of these, I shall not regard their malice,
nor value the indulgence of a sort of people whose credit (since the Answer to
Mr. Sorbier, the History of the R. S. the Calumnies against Aristotle, and the
Plus Ultra of Mr. Glanvill) cannot equal that of Amadis de Gaul, King Arthur,
Timaeus, or Schioppius. All that they shall say of this nature will be
notorious, and illiterate malice; and my Reply shall be a scornful silence.

I shall add now, that in such times as I thought it our interest to subvert
the Monarchy of England, and the repute of the Clergy, I was passionately
addicted to the new Philosophy, and motioned several ways for the introducing
it amongst the Gentry and youth in this Nation; I was confident that it would
render all the Clergy contemptible, and take from their esteem and reverence in
the Church, whilst they must seem egregious fools in matters of common
discourse; nor did I question but the Authority of all Antiquity in spiritual
affairs would vanish when it appeared how much they were mistaken in the common
occurrences and Histories of Nature. How rational this opinion of mine was, and
how it is verified in these days, let the Hierarchy and Universities judge.

To the two famous Universities of this Land, Oxford and Cambridge, the
Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, Heads of Colleges and Halls, Professors,
Fellows, and Students in the same.
Reverend Fathers and Gentlemen,
THe goodness of the Quarrel I am engaged in makes me fear no Judges; but yet
to choose the most competent: I am secure of the honest and true; but submit the
decision to the learned and prudent. All that are sensible of those studies by
which the Morality, Religion, and Civil Policy of this Nation has been carried
on happily before these Impertinents and Innovators; and how this Nation is
declined and debauched from every thing that is serious and sober now, are
convinced of the justice of my complaints, and how necessary it was that some
body should attacque them; but it is for you to determine of the validity of my
charge, and of those proofs with which I come to implead them. I am not
troubled at the glorious Titles with which these Comical Wits boast themselves;
Of the Lions which they bear, they have only this faint resemblance, that they
are not so brave as they are painted I have stooped the Talbots (your
Supporters) for them, and if they ever hunt well hereafter, this Age knows whom
they are obliged unto. The name of Virtuoso signifies as little with me, as it
does in Italy, where they will bestow on a Pastry-Cook or M^llener, even with
that fair accessional of molto Illostre; But it seems a little too open and
palpable to fetch the project of the Society from Italy, and their name too:
though Campanella contrived the former, yet would He not have advised them unto
the latter; and if their invention were so barren as not to suggest unto them a
fitting denomination, they might without robbing meaner Artizans, have borrowed
one from the Academy of Perugia, or some where else there, and styled
themselves the INSENSATI, etc. It is manifest now that the Ancient Learning
(and not only the Natural Philosophy) is the Rubbish they would remove; Mr.
Gla^vi^^ page 91.
This work they have so diligently pursued, as if they had forgot Their first
and chief Employment, carefully to seek, and faithfully to report how things
are de facto -- This Specimen acquaints you with what integrity they perform
their undertakings; and if the Ensamples they exhibit to the world, whilst
They are yet probationers for the glory of Natural Philosophers, if they be so
faulty^ what estimate may we rationally make of those that are laid up in the
Treasury of their Archives? Mr. Glanvill tells us, page 90.
that They have done more than all the Philosophers of the notional way, I
shall hereafter give the world an examen of the rest of the (...): and I,
design to try them by that piece.
since Aristotle opened his shop in Greece: which saying (he adds) may perhaps
look to some like a bold and fond sentence; but whosoever compares the
Repository of this Society, with all the volumes of the Disputers, will find
it neither immodest nor unjust; and their History has given us instances
sufficient of their Experiments and Observations, and Instruments to justify a
bolder affirmation. -- I am indeed apt to believe that all the Philosophers of
the notional way in Greece, Alexandria, Arabia, Spain, and the rest of Europe,
neither have, nor would have attempted anything like to what they have done;
and when I reflect upon the lamentable narratives and proposals which their
History, the Transactions and other Books of theirs represent unto us, I think
they purpose to grow famous, as the Turks do to gain Paradise, by treasuring up
all the waste paper they meet with. But I shall not anticipate your censure,
nor endeavor to prepossess you against them by the sense of your interest, nor
exasperate your passion any way: Be as unbyassed as it is possible; Be as Loyal
and Monarchical, as any Englishman imaginable; Be as great friends as you can
to the Protestant Religion, sober virtue, and the real Honor and utility of
these Kingdoms; I wish for such Arbitrators; and your Sentence shall never be
declined upon those accounts, by

Your affectionate humble Servant. Hen. Stubbe.
Warwick October. 6. 1669.
A Specimen of the Animadversions upon the History of the Royal Society.
EPicurus and those of his followers which declined the Vide Diog^n. La^rt. l.
x. and notas Menagii page 275.
entermedling with such employments as related unto the Government of their
Country and Civil Policy, did agreeably to their inclinations and principles,
slight and vilify all that (...) or Vid. Diog. Laert. ubi supra. Menagii notas
page 260. 274. and Vos. de Phil. Sect. c. 8^ Sect. 2, 3, 7.
course of studies consisting of Grammar (which in its extent included all
Critical Learning, History and Chronology) and Rhetoric, and Logic, and even
Mathematics. That great Epicurean Philosopher Metrodorus had the confidence to
Plutarch. in libello quod non potest suaviter vivi secundum Epicurum.
write unto one, that whereas he was ignorant of the first Verses in Homer, and
understood not whether Hector were a Trojan or a Grecian Commander, nor any of
those things almost which were the subject of common discourse and knowledge,
yet he should not be troubled thereat. We have seen in this Age not only the
Philosophy, but the Ignorance of that Sect revived, but with this disparity,
that whereas the former Epicureans did own and avow their being unacquainted
with that sort of Literature, our Modern Insolents pretend to understand it in
such perfection, that the Empire of Learning as well as of Wit, and solid
Philosophy should seem included in the same walls. But how vain such their
pretensions are, and how justly I charge them with the imputation of ignorance,
is apparent to any that are conversant with the Books that wear their Name, and
by their ordinary Discourses. I shall vindicate my Censure by instancing in
those pieces which had more than one C^mical Wit to pen them, and which if they
be not the most elaborate and substantial that it is possible for that sort of
men to produce, the world must suspect henceforward their discretion, as much
as now their abilities. The History was many years in writing, and the Author
assures us, he had no mean assistants in that work: Mr. Glanvill wanted not a
convenient space of time to perfect his Plus ultra; he consulted with several
of the Virtuosi for materials wherewith to advance their Renown, and si^ence
not only his opponent, but all opposites against the Royal Society. I know some
that he writ unto about it^ and others saw his papers as they were remitted
unto him, blotted and altered. The result of all which their care and pains is,
that whereas some only imagined that these men were a company of talkative and
superficial -- now it is become past denial by any body. page 170.
Who can with any patience read how this famous Society sent to the Governor of
Batavia in the East Indies to know what grows in Mexico in the West Indies? How
poor and mean are their inquiries, not such as serious men design to erect a
Natural Philosophy upon, but to yield empty fellows, and the Impertinents
matter for Table-talk! Just so when I went to Iamaica and desired that
Honorable Personage Mr. Robert Boil to procure me some directions for
Philosophical inquiries in that Country; He, with blushing and disorder,
tendered me from them a ridiculous paper which concerned most some
particularities of China, and those Oriental parts: Had not that paper been
lost, I would have printed it; but if they please to remember it, it is about
half a sheet of Instructions given to an East India Captain, and beyond any
Almanac were to serve for all Meridians, Page 7.
and Countries, though the enquiries were specialties. I can scarce endure to
hear Mr. Sprat tell us, that the graver and more reserved Egyptians did
confine their Philosophy to their Temples. There is a great noise made by some
concerning the ancient Hieroglyphical Learning of the Egyptians; but I never
heard that it was confined to their priests by the graver Authority; but rather
that a company of cheating lying Rogues did make fools of the people, and by
pretenses of a sacred and mysterious Character amused them: they had little of
Natural Philosophy; somewhat more of Geometry and Astronomy: all their
Knowledge amounted not to much, as Conringius has Conringius de Medicin.
Hermetica.
demonstrated; and after that the Sucessors of Alexander had settled themselves
in Egypt, that foppery decayed, and the grave Egyptians at Alexandria endowed
the professors of Physic and sundry Philosophies there, (the place or College
was called Museum, Strabo lib. 17.) and erected Libraries, and furnished the
Roman Empire with Physicians to the days of Valen^inian, and Domitianus --
misitque Alexandriam qui examplaria describerent; emendarent. Ita discimus
tempore Do^^tiani non caruisse Bibliotheca Alexandriam; nam semper Urbs illa
professores plurimos a luit. Pag^in. Ga^du^t. de Philos. apud Roman. c. 168. p.
456. page 7.
Domitian with Books. But it were unpardonable in a common Schoolboy to pass
by the Ionique and Italique Philosophers un-mentioned; and to tell us, That in
Greece the most considerable (and indeed the only successful) trials were made
at Athens? Whereas, if we regard Natural Philosophy, I believe the Cyrenaic
Philosophers in the Court of Dionysi^s made v^ry succesful Exp^rimen^s: and
their number is parallelled by Lypsius (if my memory fail me not) in his
Stoical Manuduction, to any that Ath^ns ever saw.
and abstract from the Experiments of the Aristotelians, there was never any
thing in Athens could compare with the discovery that Thales, Anaximander,
Anaximenes and Anaxagoras made, which were of the Ionique Sect: and since the
Dialect in which he writ (not the place of his Nativity) authorizeth me to do
it, I shall reckon Hippocrates amongst the Ionian Philosophers, and Mr. Sprat
may be certain he is not to be accounted for in Athens. And as to the Italique
and Eleatique Sects, dare any man say they, that they were inferior to Athens,
or that their trials were un-successful; who knows the performances of
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Acron, Parmenides, Melissus, Leucippus, Democritus,
Ocellus, Lucanus, Archytas, Archimedes, etc? At Alexandria (a place we may not
improperly reckon in Greece, since not only Mr. Sprat omits the mention of
those Professors as Egyptians; but they writ in Greek, followed the Grecian
Con^ing. de Med. Hermet. c. 12. page 152.
account and customs, not Egyptian; and as Athenaeus shows ( lib. 4.) taught
Greece it self Philosophy and the Liberal Arts) if we remember that it was the
seat of Euclides Mathematicus florui^ temporibus P^olomaei Lagidae, eoque
regnante primus Alexandriae docuit Mathesia: ut ex Proclo diadoch^ videre est.
Voss. de Phil. Sect. c. 11. Sect. 1.
Euclid the Mathematician, and there is scarce one Mathematician recorded but
was related to Alexandria as Vossius shows. Valde autem illud commendat Scholam
ab Euclide erectam Alexandriae, quod non solum multos reliquerit discipulos; de
quo auctor Pappus in septimo collectionum Mathematicarum; sed ab ejus tempore,
usque ad tempora Sarracenica vix ullum invenire sit nobilem Mathematicum; quin
vel patria fuit Alexandrinus; vel saltem Alexandriae dederit operam Mathesi.
Voss. de Scient. Mathemat. c. 1^. page 52. The same is avowed by Sir Henry
Savil in his second Lecture. Post Euclidem enituit Archimedes -- and
Eratosthenes. Hos insecuti Apollonius Pergaeus, Geminus, Theodosius, Menelaus
Geometra dictus, and alii ex Schola fere Alexandrin^ profecti omnes, usque ad
tempora Sarracenorum. There flourished Herophilus and Themison, and
Dioscorides, and many other Professors of Physic, Anatomy, and Philosophy
(even Chemistry, and the Philosophers-stone) it is extreme imprudence to mention
Athens thus! But, to gratify him further than he deserves or can expect; to
yield that up to Aristo^le and his Peripatetick followers in Athens which
cannot seem due to such as Mr. S^rat. page 327, 817.
spent their time in idle talking and wandering under the fruitless shadows of
nature, in their first institution, (as their successors have done ever since)
and were utterly useless in respect of the good of mankind. To grant our
Virtuoso more than the walks, porches, and gardens he prates of, do merit, what
a stranger is he in the History of Philosophy, and how ignorant of the Subject
he discourses about, not to know what Dialects the Grecian Philosophers writ
in, nor how elegant was their style? Some used the Ionique, others the Dorique
dialect, and those embased several ways according as their humors, their
Countries, or the novelty of the Subject put them upon it: And even at Athens,
neither the Stoiques, not Epicureans were so solicitous about Rhetoric, as to
choose that for Philosophy which they could most eloquently express. And since
Plato had his (...), and Aristotle his (...) and other terms and expressions,
it is hard to think that they did so regulate their Philosophy by their regards
to the ornaments of speech, as Mr. Sprat imagines. How comes it to p^ss then
that our Historian intimates to us ('it is a new invention! to give the Comical
Wits their due, though foole^ies) that the Athenians were the Did the Athenians
teach Hip^ocrates, or Democritus to write? did these two show so great a care
of eloquent language that they chose their Philosophy accordingly? Or did not
the one in the Ionique, the other in the Dorique phrase join many words and
expres^ions thereby to describe their Philosophical sentiments. Read over, Oh!
tres-^aute and tres-agre^able virtuose Diogenes Laertius, and Foesius before
you tell these Stories.
Masters of the Arts of speaking to all their Neighbors [which is fal^e
concerning the Ionians, and probably of some others] and so might well be
inclined, rather to choose such opini^^s of Nature, which they might most
elegantly express, than such which were more useful, but could not so well be
illustrated by the ornaments of Speech.

Mr. Sprat further informs us, (and who can deny him to glory of being the
first discoverer?) that in the City of Athens the knowledge of Nature had its
Original before either that of Discourse, or of humane Actions. page 8.
-- This is notoriously false; for it is manifest that Anaxagoras Clazomenius
first brought from Miletum news of Natural Philosophy to Athens, Vossius de
Phil. Sect. c. ^. Sect. 7.
teaching it to Pericles and Euripides: and before that time there were
Orators, and Moral Philosophers, as certainly as ever there was a Solon, or
Isocrat. in orat. (...).
the Sophist^ at Athens.

I must profess here in the Introduction that it is an hard thing to write
against men that understand nothing: and that it is not my present intention to
manifest all those mistakes against common reading and Literature, which are in
that History. I shall insist now but on some, but such as are so gross as to
justify the most harsh of my censures, and to gain a belief from my Reader,
that those who could not prevent these faylors may be guilty of an infinite
more. I appeal unto my Reverend and Learned Schoolmaster Dr. Busby at
Westminster, whether he, or any other Learned man, would have admitted of, much
less have applauded such an Exercise as Mr. Sprat offers to his Majesty by way
of Dedication? Do a few empty though smooth-placed words make up all
Rhetorique? Is this Nation sunk so low, that nonsense and ignorance can be
voiced for the most Exemplary Eloquence that late years have published? Cicero
de orato^. l. 1.
Oration, si res non subest ab oratore percept^ and cognita, aut nulla sit
necesse est, aut omnium irrisione ludatur. Quid enim tam furiosum, quam
verborum vel optimorum atque ornatissimorum sonitus inanis, nulla subjecta
sententia ^ut scientia? The Epistle follows, and is this.

The Dedication of the History of the Royal Society unto his Majesty. To the
King.
SIR,
OF all the Kings of Europe, Your Majesty was the first, who confirmed this
Noble Design of Experiments, by Your own Example, and by public Establishment.
An Enterprise equal to the most renowned Actions of the best Princ^s. For, to
increase the Powers of all Mankind, and to free them from the Bondage of
Errors, is greater Glory than to enlarge Empire, or to put Chains on the Necks
of Conquered Nations.

What Reverence all Antiquity had for the Authors of Natural Discoveries, is
Evident by the Diviner sort of Honor they conferred on them. Their Founders of
Philosophical Opinions were only admired by their own Sects. Their Valiant Men
and Gen^rals did seldom rise higher than to Demy-Gods and Heroes. But the Gods
they Worshipped with Temples and Altars, were those who instructed the world to
Plow, to Sow, to Plant, to Spin, to build Houses, and to find out New
Countries. This Zeal indeed, by which they expressed their Gratitude to such
Benefactors, degenerated into Superstition: yet has it taught us, that an
higher degre^ of Reputation is due to Discoverers, than to the Teachers of
Sp^culative Doctrines, nay, even to Conquerors themselves.

Nor has the True God himself omitted to show his value of Vulgar Arts. In the
whole History of the First Monarchs of the world from Adam to Noah, there is no
mention of their Wars, or their Victories: All that is recorded is this, they
lived so many years, and taught their Posterity to keep Sheep, to till the
Grounds, to plant Vineyards, to dwell in Tents, to build Cities, to play on the
Harp and Organs, and to work in Brass and Iron. And if they deserved a Sacred
Remembrance for one Natural or Mechanical Invention, Your Majesty will
certainly obtain Immortal Fame, for having established a perpetual Succession
of Inventors.

I am, etc. THO. SPRAT.

Animadversions upon the Epistle aforesaid.
IT is a sign that our Virtuoso is little acquainted with the condition of
Europe, and that the Intelligence of these Curieus^ is as bad or worse than
ever deceived the Man of Stagyra, in that he says, that of all the Kings of
Europe his Majesty was the first, who confirmed this Noble design of
Experiments by his own example. -- Had not the Emperor Rudolphus a College of
Chemists to promote Natural and useful Experiments in Physic and Philosophy,
Mr. de Silhon in the second part of h^^ Minister of State, disc. 7. observes,
but commends not the Emperor Rudolphus, in that he made a Shop and Forge of his
Cabinet, and reduced all his Imperial thoughts into the search of the
Philosophers-stone, and to make Watches and Dyals.
did he not oftentimes work himself in those Laboratories where they had
Rulandus and others for his assistents? take the testimony of one that was
present with him. Martin. Ruland. in dedic. ad progynanasm. Alchemiae.
Nec attinet superiorum annorum Imperatores, Principes, and totam Nobilium
familiam citare; cum manifestissimum sit, multum studii, laboris, diligentiae
atque sumptuum in nobilissimam hanc artem [Chemiae] collocasse Augustissimum
nostrum Caesarem Rudolphum adducere licebit, quem publica fama passim constat,
artem hanc Alchemiae impense amare, artificiumque studiose de ^is exquirere,
non raro ipsa Chymi^a aggredi, tractandaque nec dedignari. -- Did not Alphonso
the last King of that name in Naples try many Experiments in his Gardens? and
when he poorly abandoned his Country and Riches to the French, did he not
(admire him, O ye Comical Wits!) did he not with several choice Seeds remember
to ship some excellent Bottles of Wine, and so retired to Sicily? Did not King
Charles the First encourage and assist Dr. Harvey in the Disquisitions about
the Circulation of the Blood, and Generation of Animals? Has not there been at
Florence an Academy for Experiments in all manner of Philosophy promoted and
kept on foot by the Ducal Family? Is there not, by the encouragement of the
Popes, a Laboratory and College of Jesuits at Rome, whose great work has been
for many years to enquire into all natural Curiosities? is it not there that
Schoinerus, Kircherus, Ricciolus and others have flourished before ever this
Royal Society was thought upon? How long has the Duke of Holstein kept up his
Laboratory and Chemical College at Gottorp? If all these be not Crowned heads;
yet there are enough of them to take off from the generality of the assertion
made by our Virtuoso; and the rest serve to extenuate the complement: But if I
had gone about to reckon the Cyrenaic Academy under Aristippus at Sicily, and
the College of Virtuosi under Petronius Arbiter in Rome, as the establishments
of European Princes; Dionisius and Nero had quite spoiled the flattery of this
saying: Read the life of Nero in Su^^ouius, and reflect upon it.
yet any one that has read Plutarch, Suetonius, or Martial, can tell the
exploits of those Mechanic Philosophers, and how they depraved one of the best
Emperors in the world.

As for the public Establishment of these experimental Philosophers, I do
grant that our King was the first that did such a thing: but the formality of a
Charter, their President and Mace, and other such circumstances make more for
their Grandeur, than the King's glory, except that the usefulness of the design
appear: the ignorance and folly of these Comical Wits, the Members of it has
more of disgrace in it, than there is honor in the whole foundation; it being
more for his prejudice that it should be proclaimed abroad (as it is by this
Historian and Mr. Glanvills writings) that our Nation are a generation of
illiterate fools and Coxcombs, than it is for his credit that they have inutile
and insignificant desires after knowledge.

" An enterprise equal to the most renowned actions of the best Princes. -- I
have oftentimes reflected upon those Actions whereby Princes have acquired the
fame of great, and good, but I never found any that gained either of those
Elogies, by any knick-knacks of Experimental or Mechanical Philosophy alone:
there have been some that making some of these inquiries of their innocent
divertisement, and by doing all those actions which gain a repute of political
wisdom, courage, justice, piety, etc. have transmitted an honorable memory of
themselves: but these tranghams as they are contra-distinct to sober and
substantial virtue, are so far from being Actions equal to the most renowned
enterprises of the best Princes, that they do not expiate for other their
faults: as any man may learn from the lives of those unfortunate Princes,
Dionysius and Nero. What writer advances the repute of Alphonso, or justifies
him for murdering and oppressing his Subjects, and losing his own, whilst he
kept his Garden? Is Dio^letian more famous for those ingenuities, or infamous
for his persecution of the Christians? I do not think that the establishment of
this Society, (had all things answered men's wishes, and outdone their hopes)
would have been mentioned with so much honor as the most renowned actions of
the best Princes: since the actions that relate to goodness and piety admit of
no comparison, (being of different Natures and kinds) but when a foo^, (as here
a Virtuoso) holds the Scales. I should not pardon my self, should I oppose the
Heroicalness of this enterprise, with the actions of Constantine raising
Christianity; with those of Justinian or Theodosius in compiling their Codes:
with the actions of our Black Prince, or Henry the Fifth: or with Henry the
Eighth in demolishing Abbeys, and rejecting the Papal Authority; or Queen
Elizabeth's exploits against Spain: or her restoring the Protestant Religion,
putting the Bible into English, and supporting the Protestants beyond Sea: I
Would fain know whether the making of a Golden-Chain of 43 Links to the chain,
the Lock and Key being fastened and put about a fleas nec^, she drew the same,
all which, Lock, Key, and Chain weighed but one grain and an h^lf; as How
relates in his Chronicles of Queen Eliz^beth. Ann. Regn. 18. 1576. yet whether
did his inven^ion (surpassing all ever heard of the R. S.) render Mark Scaliot
(the author) equal in glory or renown to his Sovereign Princes^ and her best or
most famed actions; neither is it voyc^d as the most important achievement of
her Reign, though it were an u^usual improvement of the Powers of Mankind, our
Rebellious and vexatious Fleas.
It is not for any man that pretends to be an Aristotelian, to make such
comparisons; much less to to infer as Mr. Sprat does. But the reason which he
gives why the establishment of the Royal Society of Experimentators equalleth
the most renowned actions of the best Princes, is such a pitiful one as Guzman
de Alfarache never met with in the whole extent of the Hospital of Fools.

For, to increase the Powers of Mankind, and to free them from the bondage of
Errors, is greater glory than to enlarge Empire, or to put Chains on the necks
of Conquered Nations. --

These Consequences are twisted like the cordage of O^nus (the God of sloth) in
Hell, which are fit for nothing but to fodder Asses with. If our Historian mean
by every little invention to increase the Powers of all Mankind, as an
enterprise of such renown; he is deceived: this glory is not due to such as go
about with a dog and ^ hoop: not to them which keep dancing Horses and Bears;
not to the practisers of Leger-de-main, or upon the high or low rope, not to
every Mountebank and his man Andrew: all which with many other Mechanical and
Experimental Philosophers, do in some sort increase the Powers of Mankind; and
differ no more from some of the Virtuosi, than a Cat in a hole does from a Cat
out of an hole; betwixt which that inquisitive person As dry as dust
Tossoffacan, found a very great resemblance. Neither is it worth the while to
go about to dis-abuse Mankind about every little error: to rectify every
vulgar mistake about natural Phoenomena, this is an enterprise God never
delegated any man unto; Moses who was faithful in all his Reiglement omitted
the contrivance of our illustrious Society: Christ and his Apostles mentioned
it not, but were content by their Language to countenance those Vulgar
Locutions, the Refutation whereof is now so Renowned and Important. It is the
Utility of Inventions that acquires a Value to them. It Is not the increasing of
the Powers of Mankind by the project of a Diving-bell, which our Nation holds
Equivalent to the ending of a War, at the first Battle. It Is not a Pendulum
Watch, nor Spectacles wherely diverse may see under water, nor the new Ingenuity
of Apple-Roasters, nor every Petty discovery or Instrument of Ingenious Luxury
must be put in comparison, much less be pr^ferred before the Protection, and
Enlargement of Empires.

; That all Antiquity had such a Reverence for the Authors of Natural
discoveries, as to bestow a Diviner sort of Honor upon them, that the Gods
were Worshipped with Temples and Altars, were those that instructed the World
to Plow, to Sow, to Plant, to Spin, to build Houses, and to find out New
Countries. -- This is a tale has so much of Ignorance in it, that I believe no
Schoolboy ever uttered the like. The Task is difficult, if not impossible to
state the several distinctions of the Paynim Gods, and to adjust unto them
their Honors, The Dii Majorum Gentium, or those whom Tully reckons upon as
having gained a worship general^y before the world was aware, and he opposes
them to such as by their merits gained adoration: so that they we^e not
worshipped as Inventors.
according as they are distinguished into Dii Longentes or Majorum Gentium: and
the Semi-Dei and Heroes and the Semones: It is true that amongst the principal
Gods these are recounted, Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus,
Mercurius, Iovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
and although it be true that most of these were Autors of Natural discoveries,
yet it is first observable how all Antiquity had such a Reverence for them that
were eminent for Moral virtue, civil Prudence, and those Qualifications that
enable a Prince to Govern well, that they made Jupiter to be the chief of all
the Gods, and the most powerful of them all, whose Fame lay in the Arts of
Government, in his Governing his Subjects in Crete with due admiration of
Justice, in preserving his Land and Naval-Forces, in advancing of Commerce and
all those Sciences that are useful in a Society. They made Jove the Father of
Pallas, and Mercury the Deities of Artisans and Mechanical Philosophers. It is
false that the Gods they worshipped with Temples and Altars, were those that
instructed the world to plow, to sow, etc. For it is evident that all these
Honors were conferred on such as were not Inventors, so that he makes an
Antithesis where there is none. For the deified Emperors, the Heroes and
Semi-Dei shared all these Honors with the greatest Gods, and some of them in as
eminent a manner as most of the others; which any man knows that understands
what veneration Hercules was in, If you read the Dedications of Altars to
Augustus, and other Heroes, you will see the Laws of them were the same with
those of Diana in mount Av^ntine. See Ro^inus Antiquit. l. 2.
and what Tenth^ were vowed to him, and what Priests he had. Every Writer
almost tells us of Temples or Fanes, called (...) erected for the Honor and the
Worship of the Heroes; Thucid. l. 5. vid. Hen. Steph. in vocibus (...).
also of their (...)^ of their Sacrifices and Festivals, (...). He was not
deified for his Natural Philosophy, of whom Virgil says, Eclog. 1.
Nempe erit ille mihi semper Deus; illius aram
Saepe ^ener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet Agnus.


It was the same person to whom Horace relates: Viventi tibi maturos largimur
honores,
Iurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras.


It was not for such curiosities that Julius Caesar had his place amongst the
Gods, and how he was worshipped learn from Maro thus: Ipsa sonant arbusta,
Deus, Deus, ille, Menalca.
Eclog. 5.
Sis bonus o foelixque tuis. En quatuor aras,
Ecce duas tibi, Daphni, duoque altaria Phoebo:
Pocula bina novo spumantia lacte quotannis,
Craterasque duos statuam tibi pinguis olivi.
Haec tibi semper crunt, and cum solennia vot^
Reddemus Nymphis, and cum lustrabimus agros.
Ut Baccho, Cererique, tibi sic vota quotannis
Agricolae facient? damnabis tu quoque votis.


It is manifest then to any man of common reading, that the Gods, the Ancients
worshipped with Temples and Altars, were not only those that did teach them to
plant, etc. And it is observable, that such as were deified upon any such
account gained such Honors in the most ignorant times and Nations: the more
prudent generations, which deified the virtuous, the wise, the valiant,
conferred no such respects upon every trivial Inventor of Mechanisms. Even Rome
did so contrive the Temples of Vert^e and Honor, that there was no ingress for
a Virtuoso there: no coming at the Temple of Honor but through that of Virtue.
And Tully when he recites those ^erits which advanced men to Heaven, Rosin.
Antiq. Romans l. 2. c. 19. Cicero de leg. l. 2.
he names them thus. Ast olla, praeter quae datur adscensus in coelum mentem,
virtutem, pietatem, fidem, earumque landum delubra sunto^ Even when the
deifying humor possessed ignorant Mortals, I can frame no other judgment of
things, than that there was much of chance in their advancement: for oftentimes
the greatest Inventions did not gain one those Honors which were paid to
inferior discoveries. These discoveries are greater than what our Royal Society
have produced: so that they might have missed o^ T^mples and Alt^rs
notwithstanding that they contrived the royal Catherines's first Mo^el, and
built the double ke^l'd Exp^riment; which how she carried her self upon a
tacque, how she would bear up against the wind, how she would live in a great
Sea, their Historia^ tells not, but puts us off with a fob.
I do not find that Tiphys who first built a Ship, or Triptolemus, who was
unci monstrator or atri, had the honors of Demy-Gods: nor that Perdix who
invented a Saw was deified, but when his Master cast him headlong from
Minervas Tower in Athens, they feined that he was turned into a Patridge, not a
God: so that for ought I can perceive by this Story, had any man found out an
Ambling-Saddle, he might have been thought converted into an Owl, in stead of
being worshipped with Temples and Altars. Neither was Daedalus so deified for
his ingenious way of pimping for Pasiphae; nor Perillus for the Mechanical
contrivance of the of the Bull of Phalaris the Tyrant. In fine, from the days
that Sparta flourished to the Empire of the Mancha under the ingenious Author
of the Experimental History of Don Quixote, I do not find that the little
inventors of trivial and useless toys, though improvements of real knowledge,
and of the powers of all mankind, have had that honor which Mr. Sprat
intimates. I shall recommend unto my Reader the description of a most
accomplished Virtuoso in Maximus Tyrius, Sermon ^.
his name was Mithecus, one not famous for ancient Learning, no Orator,
Sophister, or notional Philosopher, but a man that was for the improvement of
useful knowledge in Cookery, viz. Hujus Sophistae studium eo tendebat ut
conficeret opus quod, Maximus Tyrius Sermon. ^. citant^ Jacob. Mazonio de comp.
Arist. and Platon. Sect. ^. page 25^.
quod voluptatem haberet una cum utilitate ipsa temperatum. Quippe qui
concinnandis dapibus ita operam daret, ut escas acceptas ratione condimentorum
temperamento, vari^tateque, atque ignis ministerio vescentibus jucunditatem
praebe^^^s meliores multo quam pro natura propri^ efficeret. None can deny this
person the repute of an eminent Virtuoso, an improver of the powers of man, and
a discoverer of vulgar Errors, (I know a Member of the Royal Society who has
nothing in him but the skill to dress a Carp well) this man was admired by all
Greec^ almost, but not deified: he met with no Temples, nor Altars, but coming
to Sparta, he offered to reclaim them from their Black Broth, and wretched
Cookery, and to instruct them in those dishes which might be called (in the
phrase of our Historian) the useful Arts of life. But the Magistrates of
Lacedamon did summon Mithecus before them, (...). Spta. p. 119
and banished him immediately out of their Territories. I find in Michael
Cerrantes in the Preface to the second part of the Manchegal Experiments, a
narration concerning an ingenious person in Spain, who was esteemed as mad by
his Neighbors, though he did those feats that that might have rendered him
considerable to some of the Society, and gained him an immortal fame in
Philosophical transactions. Preface to the second part of (...) History (...)
Quixote.
The passage runs thus. There was a Madman in Sevil which hit upon one of the
prettiest absurd tricks that ever Madman in the world lighted on; which was:
he made him a Cane sharp at one end, and then catching a Dog in the Street or
elsewhere, he held fast one of the Dogs legs under his Foot, and the other he
held up with his hand. Then fitting his Cane as well as he could behind, he
fell a blowing till he made the Dog as round as a Ball: and then^ holding him
still in the same manner, he gave him two claps with his hand on his Belly, and
so let him go, saying to those that stood by (which always were many) how think
you my Masters? Is it a small matter to blow up a Dog like a Bladder? However
in this the most Dull Members of the Society are redevable to their Historian.
He has showed that the Ancient Paynims did worship such Blocks as some are
now; and that those heretofore would have passed for Heathen Gods, whom all
sober and Serious Protestants look upon as Heathens. Their Founders of
Philosophical Opinions, he says were only admired by their own Sects. But
although Mr. Sprat say it, I am assured that Plato, Pythagoras and Anacharsis
were admired by more than ever saw them, or were their particular Scholars, and
^^^^^wers. That Aristotle might admire his Master, and Pythagor^s, and
Dem^critus, and Socrates; that a Stoique might pay very great respect to
Epicurus, is as credible, as that Tully should esteem the Friendship of
Attic^^; or Brutus revere Cass^us; or Sen^ca expatiate in commendation of the
Tutor of Metrodarus: or that the Seven Wise men should so admire the wisdom of
(...) another, as to transmit the Golden Tripos from themselves and followers,
each to the other. But that those Ancients he so much talks of, did confer
those Diviner sort of Honors upon the Founders of Philosophical Opinions and
built some of them Temples and Altars, De (...)
Mr. Sprat might have learned from Tertullian, who says, Plerosque Autores
etiam Deos existimavit Antiquita^, nedum Divos, ut Mercurium Aegyptium cui
praecipue Plato adsuev^^: ut Silenum Phrygium cui a pastoribus perducto
ingentes aures suas Midas tradidit, ut Hermotimum, ^ui Clazomenii mortuo
Templum contulerunt; ut Orpheum, ut Musaeum, ut Pherecyden Pythagorae
Magistrum. But it is too much to expect that our Virtuoso and Divine should
have read Tertullian. These are not times wherein men have will or leisure to
look into those Antiquated Studies; to be Wits and agreeable company, to be
Poets, to see, and understand and write Plays; to talk of and pretend to
certain To^ish Experiments; these are Cares of such high concernment, that all
Philology is but Pedantry; and Polemical Divinity, Controversies with which we
are Satiated. Howsoever one would have thought the ordinary stock of
School-learning might have instru^ted Mr. Sprat in the Mythology of the
Ancients, better than to have ignored these things. He might there have learned
that the Thracians, and particularly the Getes (the most Just, and most Valiant
Nation amongs^ them) did deifie and offer Sacrifice, and pay all those Honor^,
which were held to be most Divine unto Zamolxis, Vid. (...) Laert. lib. ^. cum
(...) Casa^^o^i, Aldobra^di^^^ and M^nagi^.
who, whether the Servant, or Predecessor of Pythagoras, it matters not, since
Herodotus, Strabo, Laertius, and the Author of the Etymologicon, all agree that
he was reputed and worshipped for a ^od (...). So says Strabo of him: (...),
says Laertius; He was the Founder of Philosophical Opinions, if Pythagoras was
a follower of his; and if ^^^hagoras taught him; he was the Promulgator of
Philosophical Opinions in Thrace, and having taught them the Immortality, and
Transmigration of Souls, and instructed them in their ways of worshipping God,
without any mention of his Experimental Philosophy, it i^ averred that he
gained the esteem and wor^hip of a God. Tha^ Hercules was a Philosopher and
disciple of Atlas who instructed him in the Do^trine of the Spheres, and
Astronomy, is as confidently avowed, as it is He was Deified. So Schrevelius.
Con^^at^ enim Herculem Philosophum fuisse. Et ratio est, cur omnia illa monstra
vicisse dicatur. Vid. Shrevelium in Virgin. Aeneid. l. 1. ^^sc. 745.
It is manifest that Hercules was a Philosopher; and for that reason he is said
to have overcome so many Monsters (which were but Monstrous Opinions) and it is
as notorious that for the subduing of those Monsters, he was reckoned a God,
honored with Tithes, Temples, Priests, and Sacrifices; That Plato derived all
his repute from the Inventive and Experimental Philosophy, is a thing I yet
understand not, but that there wanted not such as reckon him amongst the
Demy-Gods, in a time when men had given over the Deifying of Rat-catchers, is
certain. Hunc Platonem Labeo inter Semi-deos Commemorandum putavit: Semi-deos
autem Heroibus anteponit, and utrosque inter Numina collocat. Veruntamen istum
quem Semideum appellat, non Heroibus tantum, sed etiam Diis ipsis praeferendum
esse, non dubito, so says August. de civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 14. And that man of
Stagyra, that Idol of Disputers is termed an Hero by Iul. Scaliger, a man of
as inquisitive and Experimental a Spirit, as any of this age or Mechanical
Society ever produced. Read his Character, and despair of the like that it will
ever be given to any of the Virtuosi, viz. de subtle. exercit. 194. Sect. 4.
Barbara ingenia levissimis momentis impelluntur ad Divini atque incomparabilis
Herois Obtrectationem. Duae namque sunt Aquilae solae, in natura rerum: altera
bellicae laudis, altera literarariae; Illa potentiae, haec Sapientiae: Caesar
and Aristoteles. I am ashamed to be put upon the Proof of those things, which
their Country Schoolmasters should have taught them, and so should have
prevented me this trouble, which I find not yet to be at an end.

Their Valiant men and Generals, did seldom rise highe^ than to Demy-Gods and
Heroes. But the Gods they Worshipped with Temples and Altars, were those who
instructed the world to Plowe, etc. -- By this Antithesis any one will
conjecture that the Heroes and Demigods had no Temples and Altars, which is a
childish and unpardonable Error, as any Boy conversant in the Roman Antiquities
will tell him, and I have showed before: Evander propter summam Sapientiam and
Iruditionem, D^mst^r Antiquit. Romans l. 2^ c. 17. de dii^ Indigetibus.
pro Deo cultus est ab Aboriginibus: imo Romani Divinos ei honores tribuentes
aram Condiderunt, and quotannis Sacrificia obtulerunt, sicut and aliis Heroibus
iidem fecerunt, ut testatur Dionysius H^licarnassaeus, lib. Primo. Ara Evandri
erat in colle Aventino. No man ever took Hercules or Zamolxis, or ^astor and
Pollux and Quirinus, or those Roman Emperors that were Deified, as Julius
Caesar, Augustus and others for mo^e than Demy-Gods and Heroes, yet had they
Temples and Altars, Priests and Sacrifices, as every Schoolboy knows. Let any
man enquire into the Ethnic Theology, and see if the Authors of Natural
Discoveries either exceed in number or dignity the Heroes and Demigods who
gained an (...) by their worth, by being Legislators, Generals, or Kings and
Emperors: If they do not, (as it is certain they do not) what truth is there in
what Mr. Sprat tells his Majesty, that a diviner sort of honor was conferred on
them, than on the founders of Philosophical Opinions? And how far will they be
to seek, that go to search Antiquity for proofs that an higher degree of
Reputation is due to Discoverers, than to the Teachers of Speculative
Doctrines, nay even to Conquerors themselves?

Nor has the true God himself omitted to show his value of Vulgar Arts; In the
whole History of the first Monarchs of the World from Adam to Noah, there is no
mention of their Wars, or their Victories. All that is Recorded is this, they
lived so many years, and taught their Posterity to keep Sheep, to till the
Ground, to plant Vineyards, to dwell in Tents, to build Citie^, to play on the
Harp and Organs, and to work in Brass and Iron, etc. I have already
demonstrated the Ignorance of Mr. Sprat in Philology and humane Learning. Here
he discovers himself to be as little acquainted with the Bible; and seems to
have as little of Divinity, as other Scholar^ship in him. It is more than the
Text warrants him, to say, That God Almighty mentioned those Discoveries out of
his Value of those Vulgar Arts. Who made him Privy to the Secret Counsels of
Heaven? or who empowered him to add to the Scripture? Does he not fear lest God
should add unto him the plagues that are written in that Book? Revel. 2^.18^
It was good advice which Agur gives. Prove. 30^6.
Add not to his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar. Any
man else who had considered how the thoughts of God are not as ou^ thoughts; or
have imagined that God took notice of those Vulgar Arts, out of a Value he
placed on them, whereas he no where shows such an esteem for them, nor takes
notice of more important discoveries, which happened within the compass of
Mose's writing, ^uch is the pulverising of Gold, when Moses burnt the Golden
Calf to powder; A thing not to be performed in these days, without the help of
Chy^istry.
and might have merited his regard, as well as these. He takes no notice who
first discovered Minerals; whose Inventions were Gold and Silver, and precious
stones; whose project it was to make Linen, and Silks, and the like. If these
Vulgar Arts deserved his sacred Remembrance, as they were Arts, it is certain
then that all Arts deserved his Remembrance, and he would have been Just unto
them. I suppose him to have forgot his Logic, and therefore needs to have that
old rule suggested to him, Aquatenus ad De omni valet consequentia. But let us
leave this Secret unto him to whom it appertains.

I desire to know by what right he calls those Inventors of the said Vulgar
Arts, by the Title of Monarchs? Surely they were not such: for neither paternal
right, nor Primo-geniture (if they create any Sovereignty, as I am confident
they do not) could intervene here so as to justify him: for Adam lived to see
Lamech, which was the ninth Generation: where then could be their Monarchy? or,
who were their Subjects? Can any man imagine that Abel was ever a Monarch? or
that Cain, at the time when he tilled the Ground (as his Brother kept Sheep)
was capable of such a Title? or, that Iabal, Iubal and Tubal-Cain were Monarchs
during the life of old Lamech their Father? this is not amongst the things
Recorded of them. -- For there is no more said of them (if we believe Mr.
Sprats great Reading) than that they lived so many years, and taught their
posterity to keep sheep, etc. But is this all that is recorded of them? Dare
you avow the saying in verbo Sacerdotis? Is the History of the Creation, of
Paradise, the fall of man, the punishments of his sin, the promise of a
Messiah, the acceptableness of Piety, the odiousness of impiety, specified in
the accounts of Cain and Abel, together with the ^xamples of God's Vengeance
pursuing sinners in ^his life, and the terrors of a guilty Conscience; Is the
History of Enoch's walking with God, and his Translation; the Relation of the
wickedness of the World, and of the Deluge ensuing thereupon; the severe
prohibition of Murder; the preservation of Noah; the Sacrifice he offered at
his coming forth; God's promise thereupon; His Covenant with Noah: Are all
these insignificant passages not worth the regard, not so co^siderable as that
Noah (subsequent to all these) planted a Vineyard? whereas he says, there is
no mention of their Wars or their Victories; How can he reconcile this with the
Battle of those two mighty Monarchs Cain and Abel, in the which the one was
slain, the other remained Victorious? Did not that puissant Prince Lamech kill
a man to his wounding? But, above all, who could have imagined that a Virtuoso
of this age should not have taken special notice of that part of the all which
is recorded of those Monarchs, that relates to Lamech his having two wives? and
that the rest begat Sons and Daughters most of them? As to the Discoverers of
those useful Arts recorded in Scripture; it is usually observed by Divines upon
the place, that the greatest Inventors, and the most ingenious at Experimental
Philosophy, were the brood of Cain; and to pretend with so much ado to be the
imitators of that wicked progeny, puts me in mind of a sort of Heretics in
Epiphanius, Genesis ^. 4.2^^
who derived their pedigree from Cain, and claimed Kin with Core, Dathan, and
Abiram. Thus the Teufels a Family in Almain, are said to give as the Arms of
their House, a Devil ^ules, in a Field Or. The conclusion of that Chapter in
which God is pleased to Record those authors of Natural Discoveries, is very
remarkable, intimating as if the rise of Experimental Philosophy, were the
Ruin of Piety, and that whiles men were so busy about Earthly concerns they
had forgot to Worship God. Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord.
Which words admit of various Expositions, but such as all carry a reflection
upon the Inventors. Some read it to this purpose; Then profaneness began in
calling on the Name of Jehovah. See (...) upon the pla^^^
With which accords the Chaldee Paraphrase, Then the Sons of man left off
praying (or, became profane, so that they prayed not) in the Name of the Lord.
Others Expound it thus; that when the Holy Seed Enoch, Mathuselah, Noah, etc.
saw impi^^ty to increase, and that men laid aside all fear and worship of God,
to prosecute Inventions delightful and profitable, they began to be troubled,
and to call upon God in a peculiar manner, and to preach Repentance. A third
party thus senseth it, that when the Sons of Cain busied themselves in the
discoveries of Nature, and the divertisements of Luxury, and were called
perhaps, the ingenious, and the Curieuse, the Saints and Holy ^ace did not seek
to be denominated from their Carvings or their Music; but the fear of the
Lord, which is the beginning of all solid Wisdom: and by their calling upon the
Name of Jehovah were contra distinguished from t^ose Experimentators. Had I
been as Mr. Sprat, I would have declined this part of the Rhetorical Address,
by reason of this severe reflection, which he must needs see was obvious to
every Adversary.

And if they deserved a Sacred Remembrance for one Natural or Mechanical
Invention, your Majesty will certainly obtain Immortal Fame for having
Established a perpetual Succession of Inventors. -- In the first place Mr.
Sprat, I am to seek, How these persons could by their Inventions deserve at the
hands of God? What Doctrine of Merit is this you would introduce? Is not the
Plowing of the wicked, Sin? Are not the best of men to ask pardon for the
defaults that att^nd their best actions? Is it not true, Deus coronat in nobis
sua opera? What have we that we have not received? Where then is any desert or
boasting? In the Antapodosis of this Period, I exp^cted an inf^rence, that God
Almighty would have s^nt some new Prophet or Holy Penman ^o Record the Natural
and Mechanical Inventions of this Age, to perpetuate their Glory, and the
Establishing of the Succession of Inventors: But he promises no such thing:
only he assures the King of Immortal Fame for Establishing this Society of
Inventors: whether they invent any thing material or no.

When I consider the Falsehood of their Natural Relations^ the many ^ntruths
which He and Mr. Glanvil and other Virtuosi obtrude upon us, as to the Ancient
Wr^ters and the^^ ^^^rance; and as to Modern Writers and their Discoveri^s; I
fear the Fame his Majesty will acquire hereafter will be, that He (out of his
sincere and Generous Intentions to advance the Knowledge and Honor and Welfare
of his people) Established a Society of such Experimental Philosophers and
Inventors (I believe and hope it will not last to a Succession) that he will
become for ever an Instance and Example how much the Goodness and Ingenuity of
a Prince may be abused, and the most specious pretenses accommodated to mean
design^. But what Posterity will think of us, how much their estimate for these
Studies may vary, I know not. I know that a few years have changed Extremely
the Sentiments of this Age, and the Opinion of Honorable, Judicious, and Sober
persons (such as are and were Members of the Royal Society) is very different
now from what it has been: and that Ancient Poet Virgil has more abettors
than Pindarical Mr. Sprat, since he prefers those studies which instruct men in
the Arts of Government, that is, that Learning which our Universities intend,
before the Mechanical Education of the Virtuosi.

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
Credo equid^m, vivos ducent de marmore vultus, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6.

Orabunt causas melius, coelique meatus
Describant radio, and surgentia sydera dicent.
Tu regere imperio populos, Roman, memento;
(Hae tibi erunt arts) pacisque imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.
Others, I grant, shall ^ould respiring Brass, Mr. Ogleby's Translation.

And grave on Marble a more lively Face;
Some better plead; and some Astronomers
Better describe Heavens motion, and the Stars:
Be thou ambitious how to Govern best,
In these Arts Roman, thou must be professed,
That we a Peace well-grounded may enjoy,
Subjects to spare, and Rebels to destroy.
While the Bishops of Rome, did assume an Infallibility, and a Sovereign
Dominion over our Faith: the Reformed Churches did not only justly refuse to
grant them that, but some of them thought themselves obliged to forbear all
Communion with them, and would not give them that respect which possibly might
belong unto so Ancient and so Famous a Church: and which might still have been
allowed it, without any danger of Superstition. -- Having represented to the
World how little Mr. Sprat is versed in Grammar-Learning, and the Bible: Here
he gives me an occasion to show his Ignorance in Church History. It is false
and notoriously known to be so, by any man that is conversant in the Writings
of our Divines against the Papists, that the Grand Motive and Reason why the
Reformed Churches did Separate from the Bishops of Rome, was because they
assumed an Infallibility and Sovereign Dominion over our Faith. Had the Popes
taught the sincere Truths of the Gospel, had they not depraved them with
heathenish and Superstitious Follies, Blasphemies, and Idolatry, the Point of
Infallibility had never come into Question amongst those who were in possession
of Truth and Peace: but when the gross Usurpations, Errors, and Damnable
Blasphemies and Idolatries of the Sea of Rome came into Dispute, and to be
refuted by the means of that Critical Learning and Philosophy (assisted by the
peculiar Grace and concurrence of God) which our Virtuosi deny; then was this
Question started about the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church, whether
that could Err? That the Bishops of Rome either are Infallible, or have any
Sovereign Dominion over our Faith, was no Question on which Protestancy was
introduced and Communion with Papists refused. The Papists themselves did avow
it: they held that the Church Catholic could not Err, and that they, that is
the Christians in Communion with them were the Church Catholic. If the Popes
Infallibility came to be asserted, it was by the Canonists (impious and indeed
Blasphemous Parasites) Sic omnes Apostolicae sedis Sanctiones accipiendae sunt,
tanquam ipsius Divini Petri voce firmatae sint. So says Gratian. Distinct: 19.
Canon: 2. But the General Counsels of Pisa, Constance and Basil have
sufficiently damned this Doctrine. Leo the Tenth in the Lateran Counsel said
indeed, that none of his Predecessors had erred (but he evidently erred in
saying so) yet he neither did nor durst say they were infallible. The Jesuits
of late do (I confess) assert the Popes infallibility, but I well know the
Sorbon and the Arr^st de la Cour de Parliament portant que les propositions
Contenues en la Declaration de la Faculte de Theology de Paris. etc. Da. 30.
May. 1663.
Parliament of Paris, and the Declaration du Roy pour l'Enr^gisttrement des six
propositions de la Facult^ de Sorbonne, etc. A Paris. 4. d'Aoust 1663.
French King too have lately damned this Doctrine (of the Popes sworn
Janissaries.) Nay so ridiculous is this assertion of theirs, that they neither
tell us, nor know themselves, how he is infallible: whether by himself, or with
his Consistory of Cardinals or a General Counsel? and then, what is a true
General Counsel? who must call it? who have decisive Votes? and whether all or
the Major part may be enough to make a Canon? Concerning these (and many such
Questions more) they are not agreed, and so cannot assure us of what they are
not assured themselves. If any Pope ever did assume a personal infallibility
and Sovereignty in matters of Faith, any man might have rejected the bold
Assertor without being an Heretic, or being guilty of Apostasy from the
Roman Catholic Church, for the Gallican Church keep Communion, and yet ever
denied the Popes infallibility. In fine, the Point of Infallibility of the
Roman Catholic Church (I am not such a Fool as to say the Infallibility of the
Bishops of Rome, for they are confessed to have Erred and that damnably some
times) was not the occasion of the rupture betwixt the Papists and the
Protestants at first; nor does it now continue it otherwise then by accident,
in as much as it hind^rs the Reformation of those Idolatrous Tenets and
practices with which that man of Sin has filled his adherents, and without the
profession whereof no Protestant can be admitted to their Church Membership and
Communion. Let any man but comply with them in these Solemnities, and I dare
engage that he shall never be pressed Authoritatively to own that personal
Infallibility of the Pope or his Sovereign Dominion in matters of Faith: So
that there must be more Important grounds than Mr. Sprat imtimates for that
great Action of ^he Reformed Churches; or the imputation of Maleper^ness and
horrid Schism must be fixed on them: But the Truth is, they were infallibly
certain Certitudine fidei, as assured as they were of the Truth of the Bible,
and Gods word; and as Morally certain as Metaphysics, natural (That is
Aristotelian) Philosophy, and Skill of Tongues could make them, that the
Papi^ts did hold such Errors, as none could know, and Communicate with, without
hazard of damnation; Nor any Ignorantly profess and be saved, without the
benefit of an hearty though General repentance, and the boundless (but not to
be presumed upon) Effects of that mercy of God in Christ, which the
Antichristanisme of that Satanicall Synagogue otherwise would frustrate. It Is
not dispu^ed betwixt Church and Church whether the Pope can add new Articles of
Faith, or vary the old Creed: the current of Popish writers ascribe unto him no
such Dominion over our Faith, no nor to their Counsels. They are to enquire
Quid traditum est? What there is of Ecclesiastical Tradition in the Scripture
and the Church Doctrine and Practice, and to determine this or that to be de
fide, because it has always been de fide: Every Point that comes short of
this declaration, is so far short of its Catholicisme, and the Obligation to
believe it. And now let any man Judge whether Mr. Sprat were of the number of
those that were Satiated (to use his own expression page 152) with Religious
disputes, Nec modus ullus esse debet investi gandi ve^i: Et quaerendi turpis
defatigatio, cum id ipsum quod quaeritur sit pulcherrimum.
or of those that never looked into them; how necessary soever they be to the
support of the English Monarchy, the Church, of which he is a Member, and the
Salvation of his Soul, which is of more importance, then these Natural
Experiments. I could have with more confidence cried out, How beautiful are his
Feet^ and Hands, had I found him employed in the Gospel-work, than in this
Society. But he gives me no cause for this Exclamation: that which follows is
of so pernicious consequence. -- Some of the Reformed Churches thought
themselves obliged to fo^bear all communion with them, and would not give them
that respect which possibly might belong to so Ancient and so Famous a Church.
-- I am much to seek which of those that wear the name of Reformed Churches did
ever hold it lawful to hold Communion with the Bishops of Rome, and their
adherents. For since the Question is not concerning Civil Commerce and Actions
of General humanity, Though Mr. Sprat teach us in this History that 't^s
u^civil to cond^mn the Religion of other Countries: Yet the Apostles were not
bred up to that civility.
but concerning Church-Worship, and joining with them in the Sacrifice,
Prayers, and Ceremonies of their most superstitious Mass (to be present at and
bear a part in the Service, and to receive the Sacrament are with them, as with
the Church of England, tokens of the Church Communion, and not the hearing of
Sermons) and at other times owning them as a Church of Christ: Since this is
the Question, I would willingly learn of our Historian, which of the Reformed
Churches has not forborne all Communion with them and taught it to be necessary
to do so? It is true the Church of England has upon very ^asy terms made way
for the Papist to come to us, to communicate with us: The Hierarchy, the
Ceremonies retained, the very Liturgy word for word being so framed, that
whatever they hear or see at our Service is not repugnant to what their Church
follows; as Mr. Hales in one of his Sermons does show: And indeed they differ
no more than a Bible with the Apochrypha from one which wants it. And this in
great part is the foundation of our Penal Laws against the Papists, because
they do refuse to come to hear and assist in the same Prayers and service which
their Church uses, Mr. Chillingworth teaches, that it is imp^ssible for any
to hold External Communion with the Church of Rome and not to Communicate with
her Errors: and declares he never met with any Protestants that held it
lawful, but he lived not to see our Inventors nor this History.
or only condemns because it is not of the Pontifical approbation. If the
Papists should comply in the manner demanded with the Church of England, it
might then be said indeed that they Communicated with us; But not that we held
Communion with them, except we likewise resorted to Mass, joined with them in
their prayers, and participated there; which is a thing our Homilies, 1 Cor:
cap. 10. ver. 20, 21. 1 Cor: cap. 6. ver. 15, 16.
the Articles of our Church, nor (I think) any of our Church men ever taught,
nor could it be done without danger of strengthening them in their
Superstitious and Idolatrous ways, and the hazarding of the whole in er^st of
the Kingdom of Christ as it is lodged in the Protestants, they being apt
thereby to be ensnared, and from a mixing Fellowship with God and Belial come
at last to fall into Popish Idolatry.

Certainly neither the Antiquity nor the Fame (Arguments so powerful with Mr.
Sprat, but so ridiculous, so extrinsecal to truth, and Baffled by all
Protestant Divines!) can warrant this procedure. This the Papists are aware of,
who show no such regard to the Ancient and Famous Church of England. And it is
evident that Errors are not the more tolerable, but the more dangerous for
being Ancient. Could antiquity or Fame give Credit to impious Communion or
Civilities, how ought we to Reverence that old Serpent, whose Antiquity, whose
renown, whose extent of Dominion is such, that all which Mr. Sprat so much
admires, and Pleads for, is but a part of it. Mr. Sprat, Mr. Sprat let me tell
you and some of your fellow- Virtuosi, that there is a tenderness for those
without which is Cruelty to those within: and that you must have a care how you
destroy those who profess the Gospel and for whom Christ dyed, to gratify such
as live in opposition to him in all the Offices of his Mediatorship, and to
whom he will say at the last day, I know you not, be gone you workers of
iniquity. But I show too much of the Divine, whilst our Historian shows so
little: but I could not dispense with this Passage: and I wonder how it ever
could be permitted in such a piece: lest it should be thought to be the
Judgment of that Illustrious Society, and that they were making way for the
Introducing of som^thing else besides a New Philosophy. It is a Caution which
the Apostle Suggests unto me, Take he^d least by any means this liberty of
yours become a Stumbling block to them that are weak. For if any man see thee
which have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple: shall not the Conscience
of him that is weak, be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to
Idols? And through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother Perish, for whom Christ
dyed? But when ye ^in so, against the brethren and wound their weak
Conscience, ye sin against Christ, 1 Cor: cap. 8. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12.

I can only apply my self to that good Nature, which a Great Man has observed
to be so peculiar to our Nation, Hist: of the R. S. Page 61.
that there is scarce an Expression to signify it in any other Language. --
This Notion about Good Nature has so delighted Mr. Sprat that in his Discourse
against Mr. Sorbier, he thought fit to propose it to the world, and here to
repeat it again. In that Discourse he makes this Observa^ion to be an Instance
of the profound Criticisme of the Earl of Clarendon But certainly never was a
great Minister of State so abused by an ill defense as that Honorable person
was, when such poor things were alleged in his Commendation, he seemed more
depreciated by his Apologist, than by his Adversary. I am apt to believe that
the Great-man (yet whose Greatness, did scarce surpass that of Sir. Tho:
Moore, or the Lord Bacon, to whom Mr. Sprat compares him) had other
Excellencies then a Critical knowledge of Ancient or Modern Languages. But Mr.
Sprat says this of him -- There is Scarce any Language in the world, which can
properly signify one English expression, and that is Goodnature. Though
Monsieur Sorbier will not allow the Noble Author of this Note to have any Skill
in Grammar learning, yet He must pardon me, if I still believe the observation
to be true. -- I know not how kind Monsieur Sorbier may be unto him, and how he
may practice a quality which is so hard to be Expressed: But I am sure, I
cannot indulge him in this Conceit: for if the French do not signify the same
by un homme de bonne Nature et homme d'un bon naturel: I am sure that one shall
find that the Greeks do equal the Emphasis of our English in that of (...), and
transcend it in the word (...). What other Languages may do, it is for M^.
Sprat, and others to determine, without understanding them; If any be not so
good a Grecian as to be convinced of the Signification of (...) let him but
read what Hen. Stephanus in his Thesaurus Ling. Graec. says of it and he will
no longer doubt.
I care not to render at present such testimony of my folly.

Mistakes about the SWEATING-SICKNES, and its Cure.
TO show the great Utility of the Royal Society, Hist: of the R. S. Page 75.
he says They will be able by degrees to purchase such Extraordinary
Inventions, which a^e now close locked up in Cabine^s; and then to bring them
unto one Common Stock, which shall be upon all occasions exposed to all men's
use. This is a most Heroic Invention; For by such concealments, there may come
very much hurt to mankind. If any certain remedy should be found out against an
Epidemicall disease, if it were suffered to be engrossed by one man, there
would be great Swarms swept away, which otherwise might be easily saved. I
shall instance in the Sweating-Sickness. The Medicine for it was almost
Infallible:
But, before that could be generally published, it had almost dispeopled whole
Towns. If the same disease should have returned, it might again have been as
destructive,
had not the Lord Bacon ta-ken care to set down the particular course of
Physic for it in his History of Henry the Seventh, and so put it beyond the
possibility of any private man's invading it. This ou^ht to be imitated in all
other Sovereign Cures of the like nature to avoid such dreadful casualties.

One would think by the words of our Historian, That the Cure of the
Sweating-Sickness, were recorded by no Body but the Lord Bacon that it was
almost Infallible; that the Sweating-Sickness did not return again; And that
the C^re was rather concealed (and needed to be generally published) at first,
then to be discovered by Observation and Experiments of those that first fell
sick. But there is no such thing: for the same cure is related by Polydore
Virgil, and Holinshed in their Histories of Henry the Seventh. And the same
sickness did rage in the twenty second year of the said King his Reign, as well
as the first. And the Cure related was so far from being almost Infallible,
that my Lord Bacon only says it commonly recovered the sick: and after it was
so g^n^rally known, yet the twenty second year of that Kings R^ign, many dyed
of it (as Holi^shed says) howbeit not in the same number, by reason of the
remedy found out at the beginning of it. To convince the Reader of the truth of
what I ^ay, and to show how unacquainted this Virtuoso is in our English
Chronicles, I shall set down the words of the Lord Bacon, of Holinshed, and of
Polydore Virgil.

Lord Bacon Hist: of H. 7. page 9.
It appeared by Experience, that this disease was rather a surprise of nature,
then obstinate to remedies, if it were in time looked unto. For, if the patient
were kept in an equal temper, both for clothes, fire, and drink, moderatly
warm, with temperate Cordialls, whereby natures work were neither irritated by
Heat, nor turned back by Cold, he commonly recovered. But infinite persons dyed
suddenly of it, before the manner of the Cure, and attendance was known.

Hollinshed Hist: of H. 7. in the beginning.
At length by the diligent observation of those that escaped (which marking
what things had done them good, and helped to their deliverance, used the like
again. When they fell into the same disease a second or third time, as to
diverse it chanced) a remedy was found for that mortal Malady, which was this.
If a man on the daytime were taken with the Sweat, then he should Straight lie
down with all his clothes and Garments, and continue in his Sweat twenty four
hours, after so moderate a sort as might be. If in the night he chanced to be
taken, then should he not rise out of his bed for the space of twenty four
hours, so casting the cloths that he might in no wise provoke the Sweat, but
lie so temperatly that the water might distill out softly of the own accord,
and to abstain from all meat, if he might so long suffer hunger, and to take no
more drnk (neither hot, nor cold) then would moderatly quench and assuage his
thirsty appetite. Thus with lukewarm drink,
temperate heat, and measurable clothes many Escaped, Few which used this order
(after it was found out) dyed of the Sweat: marry, one point diligently above
all other in this Cure is to be observed, that he never did put his hands or
Feet out of the bed to refresh or cool himself, which to do is no less jeopardy
than death.

Polydor. Virgil. Hist. l. 26. Henrici Septimi.
Eodem anno novum morbi genus pervasit totum regnum, sub primum Henrici in
insulam descensum, dira quidem lues, and quam nulla sit aetas antea, quod
constet, perpessa: subito enim sudor mortifer corpus tentabat, ac simul dolor
caput Stomachumque vehementi caloris ardore affectum angebat. Quo in morbo
homines qui a principio erant, quia alii aestus minus patientes, si in lecto
erant, Stragula dimovebant, si vestiti, vestes deponebant; alii sitientes
frigidum potum sumebant, alii dem^m patientes caloris foetorisque nam sudor
grave olebat, additis stragulis, sudorem provocabant, aeque omnes aut illico,
aut non multo post quam sudare coepissent, moriebantur, ita, ut ex omni
aegrotantium numero, vix centesimus quisque evaderet. Neque ulla interim
medicorum ars aut scientia quicquam opitulabatur, quin morbi novitas omnem
illorum excluderet peritiam. Verum post viginti quatuor horas (tanto temporis
Spacio vis ejus morbi durabat) abeunte sudore, nonnulli confirmabantur: non eo
tamen ita expurgati erant, quin iterum atque iterum in morbum reciderent,
multique inde perirent. Sed ea (...) remedium tanto malo ad ultimum monstravit:
nam quisemel primo sudarant, cum deinde rursum aegrotarent, observabant ea quae
in prima curatione, profuissent, et illis pro remedio utentes, addebant semper
aliquid ad curationem utile. Item et illi iidem cum iterum in idem valetudinis
genus inciderent, ex priore observatione earum rerum, per quas se
confirmassent, ita se curare didicerunt, ut vim sudoris illius facile
tolerarent. Quibus rebus ita usu venit, ut post ingentem mortalium s^ragem
remedium vnicuique promptissimum inventum sit, quod hujusmodi est, Siquis
interdiu sudore corripiatur, cum vestitu protinus cubatum eat: sin noctu, et in
lecto, tum quiescat, nec se e loco moveat, usque ad viginti quatuor horas
exactas: interim ita se stragulis oneret, quo non provocetur Sudor, sed sua
sponte molliter stillet, cibi nihil capiat, si tam diu famem tolerare possit,
neque plus potionis consuetae ac calefactae hauriat, quam modice satis sit ad
sitim extinguendam; inter hanc curationem inprimis caveat, ne manum quidem aut
pedem sui refrigerandi, recreandique causa, extra stragula proferat, quod
facere letale est. Hoc remedium est novo morbo inventum, qui tantum Angliam id
temporis pervasit et posthac saep^ graviter afflixit.

Those of the R. S. that understand no more than English may compare the
account of Hollinshed (or Hall in his Chronicles) with that of the Lord Bacon;
the more learned may consult Polydore Virgil, and if they please Fracastorius
de contag. l. 2. c. 5. Pareus de pest. l. 25. c. 5. Hollerius de morbis intern.
l. 2. c. de sudore. Langius Ep. l. 1. Ep. 19. Beverovicius de. med. veter.
part. 3. c. 3. page: 222. Tho. Cogans haven of health. page: 272. and Senertus de
Febrib. l. 4. c. 15. All of them will be presently satisfied how little the
Physicians are beholden to the Lord Bacon, as if he alone had recorded that
Cure, which so many besides have committed to writing. Nay it will appear that
the account he delivers of that Cure is very imperfect, and such as none but
some such inconsiderate Virtuoso, would have acquiesced in, much less have
recommended. For whereas the others direct that the sick party if dressed in
his clothes, should immediately lie down, without so much as adventuring to put
of his clothes: They were not to sleep during the twenty four hours, as Tho.
Cogan observes in the place aforecited: and so does Caius.
This Circumstance, of how great importance soever is totally omitted: and I
think that great caution of putting the Hand or Foot, or any part of the body
out of bed, or into any cool place (which they all so severely inculcate) is
not sufficiently intimated in that expression, of keeping themselves in an
equal temper, both for clothes and fire. And whereas they say the Patient, must
refrain from all meats, if possible, for 24 hours, which leaves the party at
liberty, to comply with the vital indication, in case of extremity, Some having
had it twice, died the third time of it, as Cogan relates.
otherwise not; of this our renowned Lord makes no mention, nor that the same
person might have it twice, or thrice; which is a material observation; nor
mentions he the stench of the Sweat, and other Symptoms.

But concerning the Nature and times of the increase, State and decrease of the
disease: and the manner of feeding, and giving drink to the sick (they gave
them Beer, Ale, Wine, as well as other Iuleps) according to several exigencies
and occasions (upon the observation whereof depended their recovery) it would
be too long to transcribe the passages in Caius; and yet without the knowledge
thereof this almost Infallible medicine would signify nothing, or as little as
we see good medicaments now do, when they fall into the Hands of a little
dabler in Physic, who boasts himself a Virtuoso, or an admirer of them. But in
those days when Caius himself attended, and more particular directions were
published in English for the instruction of the people, yet an infinite number
of Rich (most of them) and poor were swept away. Quoquo te vertisses, cadaver
conspexisses. Continuus undique nolarum aenearum pulsus, confusus sonus erat.
So Caius. Whose Book I do recommend to all inquisitive persons, as containing
several Curious as well as necessary observations: nor will I doubt to ^ay that
if all that ever my Lord Bacon writ, were put into the Scales, (and the History
of the R. S. and all their discoveries cast in) that single treatise of Caius
for Utility would outweigh them all, and deserves to be secured from Oblivion
by public Authority, least what afflicted this Nation so miserably at sundry
times for fifty years space, should return again, and produce as
direfull-effects as ever.

When I reflect upon this remedy as it is recommended to our admiration, and
imitation by this Historian, methinks I begin to doubt that those persons will
hardly be punctual in their own Relations, who have the confidence to obtrude
upon us such an imperfect one from another. I question not but we are more
secured by Holinshed's having set it down, than by its being inserted into the
History of the Lord Bacon, the works of the former will be so much more valued
then the latter by our Nation, as long as they have any Judgment. The truth is
the Lord Bacon is like great piles, when the Sun is not high, they cast an
extraordinary shadow over the Earth, which lesseneth as the Sun grows
vertical. In the account of the Sweating-Si^kness, what understanding
Physician can read without laughter the Character he gives of the disease. It
was a pestilent Fever, but (as it seems) not seated in the veins or humors,
for that there followed, no Carbuncle, no purple or livid Spots, or the like,
the mass of the body not being tainted: only a malign vapor flew to the
Heart, and seized the vital Spirits, which stirred nature to strive to send it
forth by an extreme Sweat. But Polydor Virgil and Holinshed prudently decline
the controversy about the nature of a Pestilential Fever, and only tell us
that A deadly burning Sweat so assailed their bodies, and distempered their
blood with a most ardent heat (they being sick in head and stomach) that scarce
one amongst a hundred that sickned did escape with life. He that tells me the
disease is a Pestilent Fever, and the Sweat is an effect of nature
endeavoring to expel the Malignity: puts me upon some thoughts that I should
not have, if I took the Sweating to be the primary disease, or a Symptom
consequential to its Malignity. And whereas our Lord says Nature did strive to
send forth its virulency by an extreme Sweat: I find not any such thing, for
all that recovered were recovered by the continuance of a moderate Sweat: This
experience and observation taught them; and the Physicians, imitating those
operations of nature, did advise them unto it. All Ex^ream Sweats either
Spontaneously happening, or procured by Art, were Mortal. As to the Seat of
the pestilential venom, it seemed not to that Lord to be in the Mass of blood
and humors, but only in the vital Spirits. And why? because there followed no
Carbuncle, no purple or livid Spots or the like. Is it then necessary that
whenever there is a Pestilential Fever, which affects the Mass of blood,
that then there must be some cutaneous eruption, by botch, Carbuncle or Spots?
No Physician will say it. Nonnunquam evenit, ut in febre manifest Pestilenti,
ac forte caeteris maligniore, neque papulae, neque tumores, neque ulla naturae
depulsio conspicia Massarius de febrib. c. 24. But that the Seat of this
disease was Principally or solely to be placed in the Mass of blood and humors
appears, first from the occasional external cause of it, a moist season
preceding, which multiplied the like humors in the people; Next it is evident
from the Symptoms that attended it, particularly the horrid stench of the
Sweat, which issued from them that were sick of it: of which Polydor Virgil
takes notice. Sudor Britanicus est quidem Diarius, quia Spatio viginti quatuor
horarum perficitur; Ephemera benigna est, Anglica febris maligna et pessima, et
symptoma^a habet horrenda, sudorem perpetuum, lipothymiam, cordis palpitationem
pulsus frequentiam, et inaequalitatem: add quod tanta sudoris copia, tam longa
convalescentia in ^is qui ev^dunt, humores infectos in ea febre indicant esse.
Rodericus a Fons^ca method. cur. febr.
ut tamen non ob id sub vera febre diaria, quae ex Spiritibus calefactis et
putridis Fiat, collocari potest. Nam referunt Britanni medici, et proximi
Belgae, quod non solum aegrotantes sudant, multoque sudore perfundantur,
verumetiam quod sudor iste est faetentissimus: ad haec urinae lividae apparent,
ac valde corruptae, sanguisque alias per vesicam excernitur plurimus, alias
effluit per nares, quin et per aures, quandoque etiam per oculos stillat, Ex
quibus colligitur putrifactionem esse in ipsis humoribus, alioqui laborantibus
solis spiritibus urina non mutaretur, nec sanguis adeo copiose efflueret.
Septalius de peste l. 1. c. 21. I have have been thus particular about this
disease, thereby to take of the repute a little of my Lord Bacon, as he fell in
my way, whose steps our Society pretend to tread in; and that so exactly as
even to mistake where he did. If any shall reply in behalf of that Lord, that
He was no Physician, and that in an History, we are not to expect an accurate
relation of any disease and its Cure; I shall willingly allow of the Answer;
but I must not al^ow Mr. Sprat that excuse, who (not owning the prescription to
^e any where else) remits us to the Lord Bacon for a Cure for the
Sweating-Sickness, which is almost Infallible, and the pr^servation whereof in
that book, secures the world from incurring the like hazard again: which it
might have done, had the receipt fallen into the hands of some avaricious
Doctor of Physic. Because here is such ado about a receipt, and that the
Society promise us to record many more, (fully as good as this!) I shall
inquire into the success of this almost Infallible Medicine a little further.
It is observed by Dr. Caius who lived and writ during the last
Sweating-Sickness, that it raged five times in this Nation. First in the year
1485. from the beginning of August to the last of October. This is the time Mr.
Sprat relates unto. A second time in 1506. during the Summer. A third time in
1517. from July to the middle of December. A fourth time in 1528. during all
the Summer. A fifth time in 1551. when it lasted above five months, beginning
in Shropshire about May.
That the Sweating Sickness did rage again in the twenty second year of the
Reign of Henry the seventh, I have already showed out of Hollinshed, and of the
success that Method had in curing it, which was indeed such as might give a
reputation unto it, though not so great as our Historian fixes on it. About
nine years after. An. D. 1517. in the Reign of Henry the eighth, the
Sweating-Sickness did much infect the Kingdom again: and since it cannot be
imagined that in so short a time the people should have forgot a Medicine,
which they are observed to have remembered twice as long before, let us see what
effect this almost Infallible Cure produced. Truly the disease
(notwithstanding this Course!) was of that malignity, as within the space of
three hours it killed! Herbert in H. 8. A^. Dom. 1517.
This caused the King to leave London, and adjourning three Terms, 1517. to
remove Trinity- Term, 1518. to Oxford where it yet continued but one day and
was adjourned again to Westminster. Nevertheless diverse Knights, Gentlemen and
Officers of the Kings Court died thereof, as the Lord Clinton, the Lord Gray of
Wilton, and others of quality; the Vulgar sort so commonly perishing, as in
some towns it took away half the people, in others the third part. The same
disease again brake out under Ed. 6. 1550. It raged extremely through the land,
Io. Speed in Ed. 6. Sect. 65.
wherein died the two Sons of Charles Brandon, both of Dukes of Suffolk,
besides an infinite number of men in their best strength; it followed only
English men in Foreign Countries, no other people being infected therewith,
whereby they were both feared and shunned in all places where they came.

What Speed says concerning the Sweating-Sickness, that it at that time
pursued the English abroad, without infecting the Forraigners where they
sojourned; this is confirmed unto us by the learned and accurate Dr. Caius, who
says that it pursued (in the days of Ed. 6.) the English every where, into
Scotland, Holland and France. So that it was in vain for any of them to fly
their Country. As to the Forraigners, even the Scots were not infected with it
though living in England at that time: nor did the disease then spread abroad
so as that the diseased English should infect the Nations they fled into, or
conversed with. He observes also that in 1529. When the German air became
infected with a peculiar sort of malignity (which yet did not difference the
disease in its Symptoms or Cure) the same Sickness did seize the Dutch, and not
the English, viz. Hi nostro a^re and contagione non laeduntur, sed suo: nos non
suus illorum sed noster inficit.

It were easy to prosecute this argument further, and to show the vanity of
this almost Infallible remedy (though amplified with all the circumstances any
Physician, except Dr. Caius, sets down) especially when it falls into the hands
of Empiricks, and men of little reading; But I think such labor altogether
needless to my present purpose; and it is a Supererogation of my kindness to
the Vertuosi, that I give them this ensuing caution.
He that would cure this disease as becomes a Physician, must not rely upon one
method always especially in malignant diseases, but attend to the differences
of humane bodies, different seasons of the years, and other accidents which
alter men's bodies; and where humane search fails us in the discerning of the
Causes of that sensible difference that is observed to be in the same disease
at sundry times, he must, with Hypocrates, have recourse to the (...), in other
cases to Dis-Syncrasies. Thus in some years the small Pox is fatal,
notwithstanding the best Methods: In other times so gentle, that any Nurse can
cure it. Some years the Plague and Pestilentiall Fevers are cured by Vomiting,
bleeding, purging, and Sweating; In other years Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding;
and Sweating, have proved pernicious: I shall Illustrate this out of the two
great Plagues which happened at Leyden, in the Netherlands, one in 1624, the
other in 1635. In the First Plague, all that had botches behind their Ears,
under their Armepits, or in their Gro^ne, upon the applying of a vesicatory in
a convenient place, and the botch being suppurated, and the matter evacuated by
the adjoining vesicatory, the botches vanished without breaking, the malignity
and ma^ter contained in the botch^ venting it self by that other passage. In
the latter Plague, although upon the applying of blisters, the sick amended,
and the malignity seemed exhausted, yet did all the botches suppurate and
break. In the first Plague all Women that during their being sick of the
Plague, happened either orderly or accidentally to have their Menstrua, and all
that had the Plague, and did miscarry there, these general^y died: But in the
second Plague, it was quite otherwise, many women recovered notwithstanding
their abortion; and most women escaped that had those Menstrua, though it were
Symptomatically. In the First Plague, all that had purple, livid, or black
Spots dyed, almost. But in the second, many escaped who had those Marks. This
Henricus Florentius relates upon his own knowledge in his additaments to P.
Paaw. de peste. c. 2. page 47. and with this passage I shall close up this
Animadversion, referring all inquisitive persons to Forrestus and Schenkius in
their observations upon this disease; whose Cure is so laid down by them out
of Caius, Tyengius, Vissenacus and by Tho. Cogan, by Pareus, Sennertus,
Langius, Claudinus, Hollerius, Langham in his Garden of health and others, that
any one that is Master of a General and diffused method of Physic, acquainted
with the general rules and cautions and who by a variety of reading is
acquainted with the Multiplicity of malignan^ and Pestilential Fevers, and
that infinite discrepancy that is observed in them, in their Types, Beginning,
Progress, Event, and Cure, shall not be at any loss in that disease, should it
return again, otherwise then what human i^becillity and the intricacy of the
thing subjects him unto. But his Method I doubt will not be almost Infallible.
But! what is all this to the Historian?

Hist. of the R.S. Page 77.
It was the fear of being circumvented, that made one of our wisest Kings d^lay
Columbus too long, when he came with the promise of a new world: whereas a
little more confidence in his Art, and a small charge in furnishing out some
few ships would have yearly brought all the Silver of the West Indies to
London, which now arrives at Sevill,

I do not wonder that our Historian has not read Holinshed and Polydor Virgil;
but how can he be excused for not being conversant in the Lord Bacon's History
of H. 7. whose words are these page 189. It is certain that the Kings fortune
had a Tender of that great Empire of the West Indies. Neither was it a refusal
on the Kings part,
but a delay by accident, that put by so great an Acquest. For Christophorus
Columbus refused by the King of Portugal (who would not embrace at once both
East and West) employed his Brother, Bartholomaeus Columbus unto King Henry to
negotiate for his discovery, And it so fortuned that he was taken by Pirates at
Sea, by which accidental impediment,
he was long ere he came to the King; So long that before he had obtained a
Capitulation with the King for his Brother, the enterprise by him was
achieved, and so the West Indies by Providence were then reserved, for the
Crown of Castilia. Yet this sharpened the King so, that (not only in the voyage
of Sebastian Gabato, but) again in the Sixteenth and Eighteenth year of his
Reign he granted forth new Commissions for the discovery and investing of
unknown Lands.

I do not find by this History that the King did suspect Columbus for a Cheat,
or put any delays upon him because he was not satisfied with his Art. His
Brother having been taken and detained by the Pirates, this Columbus applied
himself to the King of Spain, and had Transacted with him and finished his
voyage, and first discoveries, before Bartholomaeus Columbus could arrive and
finish his Capitulation with H. 7. But had that prudent King doubted of his Art
in a Case not yet tried, where the Discovery seemed as uncertain as were the
length and incommodities of the voyage: and where the grounds upon which He
went, seemed merely conjectural, how could he be blamed? For whatever private
Intelligence Columbus had from a Spanish Pilot (that dyed in his house) or
otherwise, he (being more desirous to make his Enterprise the Child of his
Science and Fortune, then the follower of a former discovery) represented no
other assurances that all was not Sea from the West of Europe and Africa unto
Asia but Seneca's prophe^y, or Plato's antiquity, or the nature of Tides and
Land winds and the like. The Lord Bacon terms them only Conjectures, and these
Gentlemen who hold that in those days there was no Philosophy about the Winds
and Tides whereupon one would rely, and those antiquities of Seneca and Plato,
being but the dotages of two Fools credulous and apt to conclude too soon,
should not condemn the deliberate procedure of that King. Especially since the
discovery of the North West though grounded upon better conjectures (as my Lord
Bacon says) then those of Columbus, proved uneff^ctuall in the voyage of
Sebastian Gabato whom the King did furnish out with a ship not long after: and
so has the prosecution of the North-West passage since that. I think I could
evince further out of the condition that England was then in, not being so
populous as of late years, the Scots being un-assured, France, Spain and the
House of Burgundy emulating, if not hating him, and the Fleets and Navall power
of England being nothing to what it has lately ri^en unto, that (considering
our Situation in comparison of Spain) it was not so easy a thing as he
imagines, to have possessed the West Indies, and effected that trade and
commerce which the Castilian is now master of: but I shall not digress so far.

Animadversions upon the History of making SALTPETER, which was Penned by Mr.
Henshaw.
THis History of Saltpeter has so many defects in it, Hist. R. S. Page 260.
that I wonder any one should offer such an account to them, and am more
surprised to see it approved by them and inserted into their History as a
Specimen of their Narrations for the world to Judge how accurate and inquisitive
the Society, and its Members are. The Narration is not only imperfect; but in
many parts false, so that for ought I can discern, the History of Nature which
they propose to themselves, will not merit any more Credit (if so much) then
that of Pliny: and these Experimental Philosophers instead of undeceiving the
age as to inveterate Errors will multiply new ones. We are told in their
History with what caution they proceed in their Experiments, Hist. R. S. Page
99.
in the making of them, and in the repeating them: they observe all the Chances
and the regularities of the proceeding; what nature does willingly, what
Constrained; what with its own power, what by the succors of Art; what in a
Constant rode, and what with some kind of Sport and extravagance; industriously
marking all the various shapes into which it turns it self when it is pursued,
and by how many secret passages it at last attaines its end; never giving it
over till the whole Company has been fully certified of the certainty, and
constancy, or on the other side of the absolute impossibility of the effect.
This Critical and reiterated Scrutiny of those things which are the plain
object of their Eyes, must needs put out of all reasonable dispute the reality
of those operations, which the Society shall positively determine to have
succeeded. Page: 100.
-- Nay, they tell us that there is not any one thing which is now approved and
practiced in the world, that is confirmed by stronger evidence than this which
the Society requires; except only the Holy Mysteries of our Religion. Whether
he intend to present the Holy Mysteries of our Religion as fabulous and
ridiculous I cannot tell: but whosoever shall reflect upon this Similitude and
examine the realty of their Experiments, and particularly of this concerning
Saltpeter, which is a common thing, and the Instance of their care and
exactness, will hardly entertain any kind thoughts of these Projectors. Just as
I was writing this, Mr. Bagnall had his workmen employed about the making
Saltpeter at Warwick and Coventry, whereupon I consulted with the Operators
and received the subject of these following Animadversions from them.

As to that Q^estion which he first proposes, whether the Saltpeter which we
use ^ow, and that of the Ancients, be of the same Species? He might have
increased the Catalogue of such as deny it, by adding Quercetan in his
discourse of Gunshot-wounds, and Brassavolus in his Treatise of Purging
medicines: Joel in his discourse of poisons. As for Scaliger, he distinguishes
betwixt Nitre and Saltpeter. De subtle. exe^cit. 104. Sect 15.
He says and proves it that the Nitre of the Ancients, is not a thing lost
totally, but common to be had in Asia and Egypt and even in Tuscany. Pharm^cop.
Spagy^ic. l. 1.7.
And Poterius says, he gathered it in several places about Bononia, and
particularly in Monte Paderna. And if Langius be the Author Mr. Henshaw cites
(I never heard of any writer called Longius, and am apt to believe it to be a
mistake of the Printer) it is plain that he reckons our Saltpeter as a
distinct Species, Epist. l. 2. Ep. ^2.
and not as the same with that other of the Ancients. Est et alia Nitri Species
(mark that!) artis industria parata, quae ex stirijs frigore in lapidibus
parietum aut testudinum concretis, sensim distillantibus, saxis et caemento
accrescit, aut ex putrida et salsuginosa in stabulis terra, veterinariorum
urina conspersa decoquitur. Novum inventum, veteribus Medicis ignotum. The
distinction that Scaliger makes betwixt Saltpeter and the Nitre consists in
the tenuity of their parts, and upon the same ground he distinguishes
Saltpeter from the number of Salia Fossilia, or Salts dug out of the Earth.
Tantum abest, ut sal petrae sit sal Fossile, ut et a Sale et a Nitro distet
partium tenuitate. ubi supr^.
Tam enim sal quam Nitrum ita uritur, ut cineris quippiam relinquatur. Sal
petrae universum absumitur ab igni. What the judgment of Cardan may be, I know
not; But Untzerus does give his reasons why our Nitre and theirs should not be
of the same Species. Because that theirs was such as might be eaten with meats,
and commonly drunk with wines; it was of a rosy color, de Sal. c. 1^.
bitter, light, Spungy, and of an Earthy Nature. Whereas our Saltpeter has
none of these qualities. As for those that hold the Affirmative, their number
is not so great as he represents them to be, nor is the general vote of learned
men so favorable to that opinion. But the controversy is laid aside, because
we have none of that Nitre brought over unto us. Should it happen once to be
so, or that we should meet with any Veins of it or Nitrous Waters in Europe
where it were to be dug or made without Lixiviating, it is not to be doubted
but there would arise several disputes about the Mineral it self and the
bodies, that separate from it upon refining. Since there is a great difference
in the Saltpeter of several grounds in England, and some having a greater
proportion of Common Salt than others have, Poterius Pharmac. Spagir. l. 1. c.
7.
and some abounding much more with Sal Armoniack than others, as the
Barbary-Petre, or that which is cast out of the Earth in Italy, or hangs upon
old Stone walls in England: whereas that which is made by boiling, participates
not at all of the nature of Sal Armoniack. And that many little differnces in
the Petre besides these, might have been offered to the consideration of the
Society, and found out by them in order to the improving of Gunpowder, is
certain: but they are not so serious, as they pretend. The Peter of
House-^loors and the like which abounds with Common Salt, can never be so
refined as to burn, or be so effectual, as that of better Soil. The common Salt
being in part inseparable.
And whereas Mr. Henshaw says that the reason why the general vote of learned
men has been most favorable to that opinion of their being but one Species,
was because that in all Latin Relations and, prescriptions, the word Nitrum,
or Halinitrum is most commonly used for Saltpeter. I do not believe any man
ever gave that reason: For the word Nitrum is of Greekish original, (...) and
(...). The Greeks and Latins called that peculiar ^ort of Mineral, Nitre, which
was in some places dug out of the Earth, Avicen con. med. l. 2. t^. 2. ^dit.
Plemp^ii p. 71.
in others made by the Sun operating upon little Canales made ou^ of the Nile,
and oftentimes it was cast up of it self out of the Earth (or bred there) in
manner of a hoar frost, as it is now in the Indies, and Barbary; the Arabians
called it Bauraekh and mention two sorts, that of Armenia, and that of Africa.
When the use of Gunpowder had rendered Saltpeter so advantageous a commodity,
I here argue as if our Saltpeter which is Extracted out of Earth by
Elixiviation, were unknown to the Ancients. And I con^ess that notwithstan^ing
what Tartaglia and Semi^^o^^z say (whose words I shall rel^te anon I can not
persuade my self but that if they had been acquainted with so strange ^
Ph^nomenon i^ nature, they would at one time or other have taken notice of this
as well as of other ways of gaining Nitre. That none should either directly or
casually let fall a word that might convince us that they knew it, is a strong
presumption they were ignorant of it: and though there be no records that tell
us when or by whom it was invented, yet it is more easy to comprehend how it
should be a mode^ne discovery, and yet the Auth^r unknown (a common accident!)
then how it should have been known so long and yet never spoken of by those who
have even in the making of Salt^ and Nitre taken notice of as minute
circumstances.
and that modern Artists had found out this way of extracting it out of Earth
by Elixiviating it, they gave it the same appellation that the Ancients did to
their Nitre, and came to use promiscuously the Names of Nitre and Saltpeter,
both sorts of Nitre being equally subservient to their ends, and being in a
manner all one after refining; although Curiosity might be able to multiply
distinctions from the different manner of productions, and different
constitutive principles that occur daily in the making Saltpeter. They were
the more induced to give ou^ Saltpeter the same name with the Ancient Nitre,
because that they had continued the name of Nitre to the same sort of Mineral,
though sometimes occurring in a white color, sometimes Black, sometimes red:
sometimes they had it naturally produced; sometimes it was artificially
generated in their Pooles or Canales: Sometimes it was of so hard a consistence
as not to dissolve easily in water; sometimes it was soft, of a loose texture,
and as it were froathy. From this consideration the moderns thought it no
incongruity if they gave the same name to their Saltpeter, which the Ancients
had given to a Mineral of so resembling a nature. So Botallus says. Quanquam
adhuc sub judice lis est, number hoc nostrum Nitrum idem sit quod veterum, sensus
tamen indicat hoc facultate illi haud absimile esse. So Quercetan says,
Salpetrae nostrum a Nitro diversum est, nisi quod qualitatum communionem forte
quandam cum illo habet, quemadmodum sales omnes inter se communionem quandam
habent. de vulner. Sclopet. Sect. 10. vide Laurenbergium in aphor. Sal, c. 18.
We see in common Salt how great a variety is comprehended under the same
appellation. Some is white, some black, some bay, some red, some purple, some
dug out of the Earth, some made by the Sun; Some is boild to its
consistence; in the taste there is great difference; some more pleasantly Salt
than others, some bitter and ill tasted. Some Salt has a rank smell; some none
at all; and in the effects and uses to which Salt is applied, there is so great
a variety and discrepancy that we may justify our calling the Common
Saltpeter by the name of Nitre. In the mean while it is apparent that the
Latins could not use the word Nitrum or Halinitrum for that Saltpeter which
we commonly make; and they must be very ignorant persons that could avow our
Saltpeter and the Nitre of the Ancients to be of the same Species, because
that in all Latin Relations and prescriptions the word Nitrum or Halinitrum is
commonly used for (ours? or another kind?) Saltpeter. If ever they had any
such it was called Aphronitrum et Spuma Nitri: and no^ Nitrum^

But however Mr. Henshaw has done less then one would have expected in the
foregoing discourse; Hist. of the R.S. Page 261.
he would have done more than I, or any other, toward the determining the
Question concerning Saltpeter, whether it were the same or no, with that which
the Ancients used and called Nitre. Let us listen to our Vertuoso, and mark
how much the Members of the Royal Society surpass all others of the number of
Literati. If, says he, I could have got any Egyptian Nitre at the Drugsters, I
doubt not but I should have been able to have put an end to that Question, by a
Demonstration, that is by turning the greatest part of it into Saltpeter. Here
I must first inform our Experimental Philosopher, that the Ancients had more
sorts of Nitre besides that of Egypt, U^tzer. de Sale. c. 1^.
as the Armenian, African, Roman, Babylonian and Macedonian; and as to that of
Egypt, perhaps besides that fouleness which is likely to adhere unto it by
reason of the muddiness of the Nile, there might be so much of common Salt in
it, as would render that part of his assertion ^alse, wherein he seems not to
doubt but to turn the greatest part of it into Saltpeter, His own Citation out
of Pliny ( page 263) evidenceth that the Nitre of Egypt was the wrost, and most
remote from our Saltpeter. And when he should have done all this, Yet would
his DEMONSTRATION be ridiculous, and be laughed at by every young Sophister.
Pliny and Ki^cher mund. subterran. l. 6. Sect. 2. c. 1. say that the Egyptian
Nitre is so solid that it is cut out into Vessels. So the latter. Nitrum juxta
Cairum ^alo^e Solis tostum in lapide^, vasis consicien^is aptissimum
conver^itur.
I shall shape the Argument for him by which the Question is to be decided.

Egyptian Nitre may be turned into such Saltpeter as ours is Ergo, That
Saltpeter which is now in use, and that which the Ancients used, is the same.
TO parallel this Argument; is not this as good an inference, I can turn
Sublimate into Mercurius currens or Quicksilver; so as that the most part of it
be such: Ergo, there is no difference betwixt Mercurius Sublimatus and
Quicksilver; and Ergo, whosoever makes use of crude Quicksilver makes use of
Sublimate. Or, is not this as good a Demonstration, I can turn the greatest
part of Salt Water into fresh: Ergo, Salt Water, and fresh are the same: and
they that drink the former, and they that drink the latter, use one and the
same drink. Or may I not demonstrate that the Ancients did season their wines,
and Eat that which our workmen call their raw liquor, and put the Question out
of doubt thus. I can turn Egyptian; Armenian, or Macedonian Nitre into
Saltpeter: I can turn the raw liquor into Saltpeter: Ergo, the raw liquor and
the other Nitre are all one, and they did eat (not drink!) this raw liquor. I
am so well pleased with these kind of Demonstrations, that I cannot but suggest
more of them viz. I can turn Gunpowder, the greatest part of it into
Saltpeter: Ergo Gunpowder is no new invention: and the Nitre of the ancients
and our Gunpowder were the same. Or, I can turn native Cinnabar even far the
greatest part, 13 ounces of sixteen) into running Mercury or Quicksilver: Ergo,
the Cinnabar and Mercury are all one, and whosoever uses or diggeth up the
one, does in Specie, use and dig up the other. But, what if Mr. Henshaw had
lighted upon such impure Egyptian Nitre, as upon refining had yielded more of
common Salt, th^n of Saltpeter (which I shall show to be possible enough) had
he then Demonstrated the point? Or would it not have been made evident that the
Nitre of the Ancients, and our Common Salt, had been all one? and that when
they used the one, they used indeed, nay in Specie the other?

But Mr. Henshaw though he could not get any Egyptian Nitre, is apt to think
that the Ancients did not understand the way of refining their Nitre, as we do:
and that hence arise the different descriptions of their Nitre and our
Saltpeter: To show the differences betwixt these natural productions of Nitre,
and what Art generates, consider that passage of Kircher: in mund. subt^rran.
l. 6. Sect. 2. c. 3. Nitrum no^ purg^t^m contin^t ut plurimum tres substantias,
Alumen, Salem Crepita^tem, et Nitrum essentiale, quae ex ejus distillation^
reperiuntur: Alumen quippe calci^^tur cum servore quodam et ^bullitione: Nitrum
purum inflammatur consumit^rque Sal crepat, exilitque probat id gustus
Aluminosus Salsus, nitrosus -- and a little after. Non est Mi^eralium mixto^um
sodina, a^t vena m^talliea, cui nescio sanc qua insita ambitione non associatur
Nitrum. I^ter Caetera Sali, Alumini Ammoniaco, caeterisque Salibus, veluti,
cognatione, proximis sibi non tan^u^ adnascitur, ^ed ta suis divitiis implet.
which I grant to be true; but yet those accessionall Corpuscles of so many
different natures, participating of the natures of Earth, common Salt, Allom,
and Salt Armeniack (and God knows what else) make a very great difference
betwixt the one and other, such, as in the common naming of things (even by
Philosophers) may well serve to rank them as different. They will not have the
same color, nor the same taste, nor burn in the same manner, nor appear in the
same figures; they will not serve for the same uses, being Chymically Analised,
they will not yield the same consti^uent principles. In fine, and upon which
the controversy most depends, It will never appear that they were both made
the same way. So that Mr. Henshaw by his Demonstration, had no way ended the
controversy.

To show his Ignorance a little more, I would have him to know that the
Ancients had not only dark colored and stony Nitre (which he informs us of
out of Pliny) but white, and of those other colors I mentioned out of Hofman,
and he out of Galen. And that the Armenian and African Nitre would have made
more for his purpose, such as Avicenna and the Moors did use. And that the
Moors, did either refine their Nitre, or Nature in Barbary was kind to them in
producing better than yet we receive thence, will appear from the account of
Nitre or Baurakh, which the Prince gives.

Nitrum probatissimum est Armeniacum, leve, crustosum, friabile, spongiosum,
Avic^n: Cano^ med. lib. 2. ^^. 2. page 17. Edit. Plempij.
albo, aut roseo, aut purpureo color, mordax: et Africanum quidem Nitrum cum
caeteris Nitri generibus comparatum habet se veluti Nitrum ad Salem. Non estur
autem Nitrum nisi magnam gravemque ob caus^m. Nitri spuma est tenuior Nitro,
ejusdemque est potestatis. Laudatissima est vitrea (some read it molliuscula)
ac fractu Comminatuque perfacilis.

Insigniter abstergit, et abluit, praesertim Africanum, et abradit, et purgat,
crassos humores incidit. Atque omnibus aliis Nitri Speciebus modica inest
astrictoria vis simul et abstersoria^, levis propter salsuginem, quam habent,
praeter quam Africano, hoc enim nullius adstrictionis est particeps, sed purum
putam abstergens est et validum: Sali autem adstrictoria inest potestas, sed
abstertorica non nisi levis et modica.

Out of which it is evident that the African Nitre, was free from the mixture
of common Salt, and came very near to our Saltpeter (especially the Spuma
Nitri, which perhaps was Cristalls of Nitre) in resemblance and operation; but
the Armenian Nitre was mixed with common Salt. But that they did Elixivi^te it
out of the Earth I do not find.

In the end of this page he tell us that in the refining of Saltpeter there is
besides common-Salt, Page: 261.262.

Hist. of the R. S.


a certain greasy Oil attending it, which does by nature so wonderfully adhere
to every part of the Petre, In that other way which is followed by Pietr^ Sardi
Casimirus Semien^wicz and Agric^la and other Foreigners, there is not that
trouble in the making ^or those Mothers that occur in ours.
that the separation of it is the sole cause of the great charge and labor
that is required to the refining of Petre. This is true, but I cannot find that
our Saltpeter men do call that Oil the Mother of Saltpeter, but quite another
thing, which I shall explain hereafter.

I cannot but take notice of that citation which Mr. Henshaw makes use of out
of the Exercitations of Scaliger. De subtle: exer c. 104. Sect. 15.
Sublustris purpurae quasi Splendour quidem in Salis-Petrae terris saepenumero
est a nobis observatus. This is perfect falsification of the text in Scaliger,
and occasioned by Mr. Henshaw his not understanding well the Latin-tongue:
Scaliger does not hold that Saltpeter is a fossile Salt as he reputes the
Nitre of the Ancients to be; but to be a more subtle Efflorescence sticking
upon the rocks, and dried by the Sun, and therefore called Sal Petrae,
diff^ring from the other in subtility of parts, (as I related before) and
hanging upon the stones like Icicles which are in Latin called Stiriae, and
Cirri: but Mr. Henshaw, not knowing how to English the word Cirri, nor having
Patience to learn, Substitutes terris for Cirris, the text running thus. -- Sal
fossile Sale marino Crassius est, tum propter coctionem, tum pro^er materiam:
^uic enim aquae, illi terrae plus. Utrunque autem ipso est Sale-Petrae minus
tenue. Sudor enim est a Nitri quibusdam principiis secundum aliquam
proportionem, sed adeo tenuis, totus ut Spuma sit, totusque abeat in ignem. --
Quod haeret rupibus, in quibus insolatur, ac propterea Sal petrae dicitur,
analogiam habet, atque affinitatis naturam cum ipso Nitro sed aereum magis est,
atque ad Aphronitri potius veterum speciem vergens. Etenim sublustris purpurae
quasi splendour quidem in Salis Petrae Cirris soepenumero est a nobis
observatus. Out of which it is manifest that Mr. Henshaw altered the text
grossly, and that Scaliger meant no more than to compare those Cirri or Stiriae
or Icicles of Nitre with the Aphronit^um of the Ancients. And however those
Crystalls are white with us in our houses, yet to evince that they may be as
well of another color, as the Aphronitrum described by the Ancients, he says,
he had often observed in the Saltpeter as it Chrystallised on the rocks a
color inclining to purple.

Hist. R S Page: 262.
And he that shall boil a Lixivi^m past through a Salt-Petre-Earth, up to a
consistence without filtring it through ashes, or giving the Salt leave to
Chrystalize, may perhaps find something not unlike the Nitre of the Ancients.

I never though^ hi^hly of the observations of these men, and Mr. Henshaw here
s^rves me with an instance so pregnant that I cannot pass it by. He pretended
in the foregoing page to much converse with the makers and refiners of
Saltpeter, and to some curiosity in his own Experimen^s about it, but (alas)
how vain are his pretensions! how superficial his enquiries and observations!
how little of accura^eness is there in those Scrutinies which ought to be so
Critical and Severe? where is that Certainty which we are to have from them,
inferior to no proofs, but what convey unto us the Holy Mysteries of our
Religion! He observed before that there was a certain greasy Oil in the
Mineral; That Oil is of such a nature, that if it be not separa^ed from Petre
it will never Coagulate into any Crystalls, or imbody: (I speak of our Petre to
which he referrs us) and it is his own own observation ( page 273) that after
the Saltpeter Liquor is Crystallized, there will remain some part of it that
will not coagulate, being greasy and it must again pass the ashes before it be
boiled, or it will never generate any Salt. The truth is Saltpeter is one of
the most odd Concretes in the world, exceeding Sugar: And howsoever Nature,
and the Sun in the Earth, or Nitrepanns at Nile, may transcend our Art in the
production of it, (the peculiar Air of the Climate concurring) yet with us it
is not made with that facility Mr. Henshaw here insinuates. After the Workmen
have extracted their Lixivium out of the Earth in such manner as Mr. Henshaw
describes; afterward they boil that raw Liquor according to what he says, two
days and a night: and when it is boiled to the height, though it stand never
so long in the cool, it will not Chrystallize or Coagulate into any Lumps or
Mass, notwithstanding that it is impregnated with a vast quantity of Saltpeter
and common Salt, by reason of that greasy Oil: To evince this, there needs no
more but this Experiment, which is well known to the Salt-Petre-men; if any one
will cast a little grease, or tallow into the boiler, when the liquor is past
the ashes and depurated, and boiled to the height, it will ^inder the
co^gulation of it, nor will it ever become Petre. This Experiment of casting in
the gre^se will not succeed in the refining, but in the first generating of the
S^lt-P^t^e. Besides it will boil over with that violence that they know no way
to allay it: This happ^ns more if Soap be cast in.
This Liquor thus boiled up, and as yet impure is kept by them for the Mother
of Saltpeter. Having prepared this impure Liquor and boiled it up as to a
proof as they call it, they put it into a Tubb, which they call the Mother
Tubb. And this will never coagulate, nor Crystallize, but is called the Mother
of Saltpeter. And that for this reason, because that to make Saltpeter, they
boil another Copper-full to the just height, and when it is come to that, they
put into it some of this Mother, and (as soon as it begins to boil) they lade
away as fast as they can the whole liquor into their Ash-tubbs, which when it
is passed through, it will at the second boiling, let fall the common Salt and
Saltpeter, as he and I shall declare presently. At Warwick they boiled nine
tun of raw liquor at once, and when this proportion was boiled to an height,
they put in about half a tun of the Mother, and so made it. This is the way to
produce the Mother when they are destitute: But when they have once made Petre,
they keep that Liquor which remains after the Crystallizing in the panns, that
is kept in Tubbs, and is called the Mother of Saltpeter, and this they carry
about with them wheresoever they go, thereby to save them the trouble of making
new in the manner I described. Having declared thus much in order to the
generating of Saltpeter amongst us, This Moth^r of Salt-Pe^re is not so
called, as if the Elixiviated Liquor having been boiled and passed the ashes
and after boiled to a proof, would not let fall the common S^lt and coagulate
into Petre at all: but because by these means it generateth a great quantity
of Petre and the work is made much more easy. And it is observable that the
Mother which remains after the generating of Petre is much more Efficacious
then what is made otherwise. If the raw Liquor be, by negligence boiled too
high it will become ex^ream Oily or greasi^ nor can it be cleared of it by
ashes, except it be put in as Mother, to other boilings, and so pass the ashes.
If the Mother be put in too soon it spoils the boiling; and if it b^il i^ after
it is at the height, it will over the furnace.
I leave my reader to judge how much Mr. Henshaw clears up the matter by his
imperfect accounts from Barbary and Pegu about the natural productions of
Nitre. In which I observe that there is no account given of the nature of the
soil, nor of those corpuscles that impregnate the Air there, nor of the times
of the year in which it is generated, nor of the influence that change of winds
and weather has upon it. Nor how deep the veins of it lie, whether it be only
generated in the surface of the Earth, and propagate downwards or whether it
generate lower and propagate upwards. Whosoever shall make these reflections
with me (and they are but necessary: I remember that where the Sun makes Salt
in Iamaica at the Salt-pa^ns, the times of the year and seasons of weather made
a great alteration) he will think that it is not for this Vertuoso to blame the
Ancients: And let any man consider the account which Pliny gives, as Mr.
Henshaw cites him, and he will find even that man (as much, and as justly as he
is condemned) was more accurate then our Historian. And if the learned
Theodorus Collado passed this Censure upon his natural History; viz. Opus
recreandis curiosorum animis, non Erudiendis Scientiae cupidis, idoneum: nec
Philosophicum, nec medicum, sed Historicum. Vir equidem fuit Studiosissimus;
sed aliis in rebu^ occupatissimus ( assiduitatem autem in Studiis artis
requirit in medico Hypocrates) Aliquamdiu causas actitavit, ut de ipso Plinius
alter ad Caecilium ( at necessaria est in medico, in append. adv. Laurentium de
Error practic. c. 78 Sect. 6.
ait Hypocrates, (...), didicisse artem a pueritia) tantum 56. Annos vixit,
breve tempus: Junior Erat quum Scriberet; (at ars longa) Totum illud tempus
distentus impeditusque qua ^fficiis maximis, qua amicitia principum egit, in
Germania mili^avit. Itaque horis succisivis, ex variis collegit authoribus
pulcherrima quaeque suo arbitrio, Iectuque grata in unum digessit, per capita,
nihil ex suo attulit: sed non potuit per otii angustias res exact ponderare,
et elimare: Saepe au^ores aut Iinguarum imperitia, aut sensus sermonum
ignoratione, non intellexit, ut optime in materia simplicium, Ruellius
Dalechampiusque annotarunt: in aliis partibus alii. I say if this Character be
Justly fixed on Pliny; what credit will some deserve who are far inferior in
parts, in Iudgment^ in learning, and in curiosity to Pliny.

How will they be abused by Artisans, as Pliny by his authors? how much
knowledge and Skill is requisite to enquire into the circumstances of
Mechanical productions? how much more to relate them? I could not avoid this
digr^ssion, which any one will pardon, who considers what Just cause Mr.
Henshaw gave me.

But I pray, which sort of the Ancient Nitre does he think ou^ impure liquor
(if it were coagulated) would resemble? Since they had sundry sorts: as there
be several kinds of Salt, some dug out of the Earth; some made by the Sun
out of Seawater in the Salt-panns; some boiled out of Salt-springs; some made
out of plants calcined: so there were several sorts of Petre very much
differenced in taste, color, weight, shape; as I have showed. The African was
the best, and comes nearest of all to the Aphronitrum of the Ancients. Of this
Aphronitrum I shall add as little to what Mr. Henshaw says, as he does to
Pliny; they that have seen it can Judge better of it, then they who have not;
but that which they found upon the rocks, and which Scaliger speaks of, was
much different from what we observe in England in Vaults, and Arched Cellars or
Walls. For that with us seems to be but the transudation of the Saline
particles of the Lime and coagulating with some corpuscles in the air, into an
hoare, or Chrystalls; Nor did I ever see any but what was White: nor could I
observe it to stick naturally to the Wall but in dry weather or when I made
constant fires in my Chamber at Oxford, where it grew on the Walls near the
ground, the Earth being higher much on the outer sides, then the floor within.
At other times I supposed it too much diluted with moisture to stick on the
Wall. But their Aphronitrum was of other colors, and grew out of natural
rocks and Vaults, and such was that which Scaliger saw. It is no strange news
that Mr. Henshaw dr^w very good Rock-Petre out of those Stiriae: nor is it any
thing remarkable that a Physician in Shrop-shire should frame a Sal prunellae
out of them, except he had given us an account of the differences betwixt that
sort of Petre, and the common sort: As to the Cures he did with it, I would
feign know whether they were such as could not have been done without it? and
whether they were effected by that alone? or with the concurrence of other
medicines? If the last, how comes the Cure to be ascribed to that Sal
prunellae? perhaps it was not Effected by it at all or in part only. If the
Cures were such as might have been effected by other me^nes, or by other
preparations of common Nitre, what singular news did his Shrop-shire Physician
tell him? Every man of understanding knows that crude Petre is as good, or
better than that which is prepared by that calcination, with Brim-stone. And it
is an usual way of cheat with the Chemists by some little alteration in a
Medicine, to pretend unto Miraculous discoveries in Physic and such Cures as
never man performed besides, or before; and sometimes their medicines are but
old ones though boasted for new. Such was that Arcanum of Ivy-berries which was
whispered into Mr. Boyle's Ear for a secret against the Plague: which yet was
not only the secret of Helmont (as he observes) but was commonly used in
England in a Plague which happened Anno Domini. 1540. As my old receipts say.
It is in the Garden of Health, and other English receipt-books that are in
Print. It is in Alexius Pedemontius's secrets lib. 1. and out of him
transcribed by Antonius Schneebergerus in his Catalogue of Euporista against
the Plague. It is not easy to be imagined what a pudder some men make about a
small matter; and certainly much learning and knowledge were a thing very
desirable in this age, when a little goes so far (being set off with
impudence) and acquires a man so great repute.

In the torrid Zone and barren deserts of Africa, the sands are visibly full of
Nitre, Hist. of the R. S. Page 264.
and those few Springs and Wells that are to be found there, are by that reason
so bitter, that the Moors and their Camells are forced to make an hard shift
with them in their long journies. -- I do not understand the force of the
Argument for the bitterness of the Springs from the Nitrosity of the ground;
since Springs commonly participate not of the nature of the adjacent soil, nor
have their Original where they discover themselves: So Salt-Springs, and
Hot-springs are found in places where the cause cannot be ascribed to the
Soil, by reason of the many other Springs thereabouts that are of a different
nature. And although Baccius be of his opinion, that the bitterness of these
Springs is from Nitre: plures inter Rubrum mare et Nilum amarae aquae
inveniuntur, ob substantiam Nitri quod in illis maxim partibus abundat,
saporis exact amari. Yet I cannot assent to it, for this reason, that neither
the lake in Macedonia, nor Nile (in which Nitre does naturally coagulate)
neither of them are said to be bitter: particularly the Nile is esteemed the
best water in the world Suavissima illius fluminis aqua, quae alijs omnibus
videtur praeferenda. Alpin. de med. Egypt. l. 1. c, 10. Yet this Nile, (Mr.
Henshaw says) washes the Nitre out of those deserts, and so becomes
impregnated in such manner, as is related. Besides, Saltpeter it self has no
such taste; nor the boiled liquor of it: and Fallopius says, that Saltpeter is
rather to be discovered in waters by it is effects, ^ab^. ^allop. de ^he^mis c.
9.
than taste; For if it ever show it self to the taste, it is by a certain Saline
purging, and as it were a gently corroding acrimony, which affects the tongue,
and with a quickness diffuseth the fresh sense of it, as Saltpeter it self
does. If Nitre ever makes water bitter, it is by reason of some heterogeneous
mixture.

Hist, of the R. S Page 265.
He observes that Lime does strongly attract the corpuscles ou^ of the air,
which either are Saltpeter, or make it. -- I wonder how this passage came to
be approved of, since that when I made use of the like principles, in an
account of some natural Phenomenon, relating to Iamaica, the publisher of the
Philosophical transactions, fixed a Marginall reflection upon me as not solving
the thing Mechanically.

He tells us that Saltpeter is the life of Vegetables, and that the face of
the Earth could not produce them, if it were not for this Salt. Yet ( page
266.) he tells us that in clay, or Sandy Earth little of it is to be found: and
it is certain that our clay-grounds (that are of a very Stiff clay, as in
Northamton-shire) yield as good Corn as any in the world; and as good pasture
ground, and feed as large sheep, and as large a breed of Hors^s, as this Nation
boasts of. And I have seen in places in Iamaica, where there is nothing of
Earth or mould, but immediate rocks under the sand, I have seen prickled
pears, Mangraves, and other trees grow, and Melons also. So all grounds that
are Gravelly, or full of Springs yield no Sa^t-Petre, yet do they abound in
Plants: and even in pure water Mints will grow very rank, in which the
proportion of Saltpeter is very small, as he confesses.

Hist. of the R. S. Page 266.
Husbandmen might make double or treble the profit they usually do of their
muck, if they would lay it up under an Hovell or some covered place until they
carry it out upon their Land. -- I would not have any man think that this
improvement of a muck heap is the particular observation of a Member of the
Society, for which all Farmers are redevable to him. It was a thing known long
ago, and published by the Writers of French and English Husbandry. Not to
mention others, take the words of Sir Hugh Plat, who lived in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, in his Jewel House of Art and nature, page 94. All those
simple Sorts that leave their muck-heaps abroad, and subject to the weather,
show themselves to be but mean Husbandmen, and that they never tasted of any
true natural Philosophy. For the Rain that falls upon those Dung-hills flowing
down into the Valleys, does also carry with it the Salt of the Dung, which
dissolveth it self with the moisture: whereby the soil being afterward laid
abroad upon the land, does little or no good upon it. But if thou will not give
credit to my Speech, yet mark how the laboring Hind, when he carries his Dung
to the Field, how in discharging of his loads he leaves it in certain heaps
together, and a while after he comes to spread it all over the ground, and
lays the same in equal level, and afterward when the field happens to be
sowed with Corn, thou sha^t always find the Corn to be more green and rank in
those places where the same heaps were first laid, (after they have lain there
some reasonable time) then in any other place in all the ground besides: and
this comes to pass by reason that the Rain which fell upon them has carried
even the Salt through them, and conveyed it into the Earth that was under them.

I have been told by an experienced work man, Hist. of the R. S. Page 266. At
Coven^ty in a Floor where they couched Malt, there was so much P^tre that it
was visible to the Eye in great-plenty: and the men came to desire the
Salt-Petre-men to work it, because he found it prejudicial to his Malt which
was not so good as when the Earth was less Nitrous.
that no place yields Petre so plentifully as the Earth in Churches. -- This
was told Mr. Henshaw; but as Experienced a man told me, that it was false; and
particularly at Coventry lately. Pigeon-houses yield much more; and even here
we must distinguish: for if a Pigeon-house be built on Springs or Gravel,
either there will be none at all, or little Petre: The like distinction is to
be used in reference to the Situation of Churches: Saltpeter is begot in the
Earth by a kind of fermentation. Stiff Clay hinders that, and gravel is
either of nature that imbibes, and destroies Salt, or elfe it is too open, and
so gives a vent for those particle^ to exhale, that should ferment, and by
fermentation transmute or Combine themselves into Petre, as also derive some
principles out of the air, which contribute thereunto.

Hist of the R.S. Page 266
Let the Earth be never so good, if it be laid on a brick Floor, or that is
boarded, it will not be so rich in Petre as if it have free communication with
the Exhalations of the lower parts of the Earth. -- I am not satisfied that the
streams arising from beneath concur to the production of it, because that the
generation of Saltpeter begins at the top, and from the surface of the Earth
multiplies it self by fermentation downwards, which is the reason that the
lower you descend, the ^ess you find; Mr. Henshaw confesses that if the ground
be good, it seldom exceeds ten Foot in depth; commonly but six, or eight Foot:
In Warwick (which stands on a gravel) it descends not above one Foot, as they
assured me, though it be rich in Mineral at the surface. Besides in
Warwickshire there were Pigeon-houses that were floored with stone and with
pebbles which yielded as much Petre in proportion as any others.

He might have observed that the more Southward you work for Petre, and upon
the Sun (as they Phrase it) the richer the ground is in Petre. And how old
Mud-walls gather so much Petre, that it has countervaild the cost to pull some
of them down, and after rebuild them. The Elixiviated Ashes laid in the Sun
impregnated with the Oil and filth only, will in a short time breed Petre in
the top, if no Rain fall.

If the Earth taste bitter, he is sure to have good store of Mineral. -- This
is not true, for the Earth has not any bitter taste, but Saltish and pungent,
with a quickness, such as is in Saltpeter, Especially if you imagine in it a
mixture of common Salt more or less, according as the Earth is.

He that shall cast Water upon a Ground fit to dig for Petre, Hist. of the R.S.
Page 267.
will only sink the Mineral deeper into the Earth; but he that throws
Soap-sudds on it, will qui^e destroy the Petre (as the Workmen have a
Tradition) and it very well deserves a further enquiry. -- It is impossible for
Mr. Henshaw to mind what he says, I think. If any man cast on much water into
a rich Earth, the water will not wash it only deep (water descends not very
deep) but dissolves the Petre, and Soaks quite away with it, for that time. As
for the casting Soap-Suds on the ground, that it destroys the Petre either for
ever, or for that time, any more then much water Spilled would do; it is but a
foolish^surmise: for should one cast Soap-Suds into the Tubbs as the ^raw
liquor is extracting, it would do no harm; the grease thereof not descending
with the liquor, but lodging in the remaining Earth. But should any one cast
Soap or the Suds into the boiling liquor, it would not only boil over
irresistably, but never coagulate. So Soap (or Sugar) cast into the Churm^ is
observed by Mr. Scot to hinder the butter to come.

That Saltpeter, Hist. of the R.S. Page 267.268.
and the way of drawing it out of the Earth, now in use, was a modern
invention; is generally concluded by all Authors; but whether we owe it to
chance, or the sagacity of some great Wit, is as unknown, as the time when it
was first discovered.

It seems to have many years preceded the Invention of Gunpowder, which by the
Germans is ascribed to Constantine Autlitzer, or Berthold Schwertz a Monk of
Friburgh, and was, in all probability, not long discovered, when the Inventor
(as Polydor Virgil tells us) taught the use of Guns to the Venetians, at the
Battle of Fossa Claudia, when they obtained that notable Victory over the
Genoveses Anno 1380. For there is mention made, both of Saltpeter and Aqua
fortis, in the writings of Geber, a Spanish Moore, and an Alchymist; but at
what time he lived, is unknown, though it be certain, some hundreds of years
before Raymund Lully, who lived about the year 1333. and published some of his
Books wherein he treats of Saltpeter and Aqua fortis.

Vide Casimirum Semi^^owicz Art: m^g^n: Ar^^ll, l. 2. c. 1. Page 61
It is apparently false even out of Mr. Henshaw, that Saltpeter is no modern
Invention. Nor can any man say so who knows that it is mentioned in the
Scripture, in Pliny, Aristotle, Seneca, Dios^crides^ Galen, Vitruvius,
Philostratus in the life of Appollonius Tyanaeus, Avicenna and many others, too
tedious to recount. Nor is it less impertinent, that a Wit should speak it as
a strange thing that Geber (who by the way, was no Spanish Moor, but an
Apostate Grecian, as I show Mr. Glanvill, and I believe never in Spain, but in
the Kingdom of ^ez; and living one hundred years after Mahomet, could not
precede Raymund Lully but by very few hundreds of years) that He should mention
Saltpeter: though the mention of Aquafortis in him carry something of
remarque. I demand of our Vertuoso whether Geber says that the Saltpeter in
his days was extracted and made as now? If he do not (as I am confident He
used the African-Nitre mentioned by Avicenna and others) what needed he tell us
that Saltpeter is spoken of by Geber, whereas he had before demonstrated it
out of Pliny, and showed himself inclined to their Judgment who taught that our
Nitre and that of the Ancients were all one?

A more Logical head would have thus delivered the thing here proposed by Mr.
Henshaw.

There are several Mineralls that are called by the name of Nitre, or
Saltpeter: betwixt which the more accurate (that is the Ancients) did
distinguish; so that one, the more impure was called Nitrum and Halinitrum; the
more pure Aphronitrum; the most pure Spuma Nitri, Pli^^. 31. c. 1^. lit. H.
or (...), as Da^echampius observes. The Nitre or Halini^re was in Lapideous
bodies sometimes dug out of the Earth, sometimes made by the Sun in the
Nitraria or Canals of Nitrous waters. Vi^e G^le^. de Simpl. medic. l. 9.
Of this last some being a better sort than others was called Aphronitrum, and
was more freed from common Salt, and was gathered (as I may say) in the Nitre
pannes, as it shot there in Lumps. Besides this there was a third sort of Spuma
Nitri, Pliny l. 31. c. 30.
which was the best of all: Quae maxim laudatur: antiqui negabant fieri, nisi
cum ros cecidisset praegnantibus nitrariis, sed nondum parientibus. So that it
seems they took the first small loose concretions ^or the Spuma Nitri before
they came to larger Chrystalls, or lumps and stones: upon which account Galen
says it is like to Wheat Flower. Of this fine Spuma Nitri (which I confess is
sometimes Aphronitrum; but not with Acribology) it was found afterward that it
might be had in Vaults, distilling from the stones in Ice-ickles. And from
hence, as also because it was found trans-suding and coagulating on rocks, it
came to be called by the Barbarous Latins after the Moors had taught them
Physic, and the Materia Medica, by the name of Sal-Petrae. Besides these ways
of finding Nitre there is another way of making Nitre out of Elixiviated Earth,
which upon refining is brought to that purity as to equal the best Spuma Nitri
and Salpetrae, the Earthy particles and heterogeneous mixtures of common Salt,
and other corpuscles that diversified the taste and color and qualities of the
former Nitres, ^ide Semi^nowicz. ubi supr^ Page 63.
being generally separated from this: Art equalling, if not exceeding the
productions herein of Nature. How much the Saltpeter of the Ancients differed
from ours, is not now to be discussed anew: certain it is that the Invention of
Saltpeter (in it self) nor of any of those natural productions of the Spuma
Nitri, is not modern. N^^ did any Author in the world, till these appeared,
conclude so. But as ^o this Elixiviated Saltpeter whether it be the same with
that which the Ancients commonly speak of, has been questioned; and I have
already illustrated the point. And whether the Ancients were acquainted with
the present manner of Extracting and refining it out of the Earth? this has
been disputed by many; and it is affirmed by most to be a modern Invention,
See his judgment hereafter, in his discours^.
yet so as that Tartaglia says they knew it as plainly as they did Betony. And
the already mentioned and most diligent writer about Gunpowder says. Quod
autem existiment nonnulli ^unc Salem nostrum Pyrotechnic^^ esse recenter
a^inventum illud maxime^alsum esse, vel hoc unicum argumento est, quod
historici ^ide digni inventorem Pyrii p^lveris vel summis ^audum depraedicent
encomiis, Casimir. Semi^n^wicz ar^. magn. a^^iller. part. 1. l. 2. c. 1. page
63.
vet tot convitiorum execration^^mque nominibus proscindant, non quod Salis
Nitri nov^^ aliq^am invenerit Speciem ad perniciem Extirpationemque humani
generis, sed quod novum, necdum antehac usitatum pulveris nitrati, ex certis
Ni^ri (jam tunc optime noti) Sulphuris carbonumque portionibus mixti commentus
fuerit compositionem. This Book was Printed at Leyden in 1650. and from hence
any man may Judge how true that general expression of Mr. Henshawe's is, that
generally all Authors conclude it to be a modern Invention: and how impertinent
that allegation of his ou^ of Geber, and that ostentation of learning, is, in
computing the time of Geber and Lullie's life's: wherein he mistakes too, for if
we abstract from the authority of Leo A^er (to which I submit) it is not
certain (or rather it is manifest to the contrary) that there did scarce
intercede two Centuries betwixt Geber and Lully, vide Eras^um de m^tall. Page
111.
if so much.

As to that he says about the Invention of Gunpowder, it might have become our
Vertuoso to have completed his History, by taking notice of what our
Countryman D^. Read says of it before that German Monk. I will endeavor
herein to supply his omission of a passage that has something of curiosity in
it.

Dr. Alexander Read of wounds Sect. 15 Page 107.
Bertholdus Niger, Schwarth, or Black by Surname. Anno 1380 (...) Franciscan
Friar, and an Alchymist, found out the making of Gunpowder, and Ordnance which
are now in use: He only perfected this mischief: for the use of Guns, although
rude, was before: For in the time of Carolus Magnus, Gamoscus, King of
Frisland, killed the Count of Holland, and two of his Sons with a piece, and
Roger Bacon who died about the year of our Lord 1284. makes mention of
Gunpowder. Nauclerus affirms powder and Ordnance, to have been Invented in
the days of Otho the Fourth, Innocentius the third, in the year of the
Redemption of mankind, 1213. Froissard Anno 1340 and 1353. makes mention of
Guns. Petrarcha who died Anno 1374. does the like. Sethus Calvisius Chronolog.
Page 752. Co. 2.
You may read in the History of Alphonsus King of Castile, when he besieged
Algezira, a famous town of the Moors, 3 Aug. Anno 1342. that they in the town
shot out of it bullets of Iron out of Ordnance according to Mariana. Yea Petrus
Matterus affirms that Brass Ordnance have been used by the Chinoies many ages
ago. So that the Friar was not the Inventor, but Perfecter of Guns and Powder.
I have not opportunity to inquire into the citations of Dr. Read, but if I had
been to write the History of Saltpeter and of Gunpowder, I should have
thought my self obliged to this inquiry, as much as to that which Mr. Henshaw
begins with concerning the Nitre of the Ancients.

Here I must make a Protestation about the making of Saltpeter, Page 268.
that I will not be understood to oppose Mr. Henshaw in any way, That of
Agricola does agree with that of Petro Sardi, which I have added in the end of
this discourse.
but such as is commonly followed in England; there is another manner of
ordering it in Agricola de Re metallica lib. 12. page 454. which if it produce
and Phenomenon different from my observations, I do transfer all the
discrepancies upon the variety of the process, and profess my own integrity and
Candor in what I suggest. It ought to suffice that the men Mr. Henshaw
conversed with all, and those that made it at Warwick did take the same course.

If you are curious to know how rich your Liquor is before boiling, Hist. of
the R. S. Page 269
you may take a glass-viall, containing a quart, fill it with the common Water
you use, then weigh it exactly; next fill the same glass with your liquor, and
find the difference of weight which compared with the quantity of all your
liquors, will give you a very near guess, how much Saltpeter you are like to
make by that boiling. -- This is a very vain Experiment, and at best can hold
true only in the richest mould that is found in Pigeon-houses in which there is
little of the Cubique or Common-Salt. It seldom happens that their raw liquor
contains nothing but Petre. They have oftentimes as much of common Salt as
Petre, sometimes more, as in the raw liquor drawn from the floores of some
houses. But besides the common Salt there is the mixture of other filth, If the
raw liquor be made with the two parts extracted from Pigeons Earth, and one out
of floores and the last contain much common Salt, the Pigeon-houses liquor cuts
out (as they ca^l it) or transmutes even that Salt, so as that there will be
little or none in the end.
and the greasy Oil, which will render the weight uncertain: except we think
that the Salt in the Ashes supplies all that is lost in the percolation. It had
certainly become our Vertuoso to enquire what became of that greasy Oil; and
what happens to the Alcalisate Salt in the ashes, since it is turned into
Saltpeter in the operation; at least it is certain that as it is totally drawn
out in the percolation, so it does not turn into Cubique Salt except the raw
liquor be of a peculiar sort; as I have said.

Hist. of the R.S. Page 270.
When you have boiled it up to that height, that a little of it flirted off the
finger upon a live Charcoal, will flash like Gunpowder (which for the most
part falls out to be after two days, and a nights boiling.) -- It is strange
that any man should write such a thing as this: first, let the liquor be never
so rich of the Mineral which seldom happens, and void of common Salt, yet will
not that (no no^ the most refined Petre) flash like to Gunpowder. Secondly,
where the Cubique or common Salt abounds in it (be it more, or be it less) it
burns more slowly, and will certainly Sputter in the burning. In fine, this
only Sparcles, being flirted into the fire: the other trial, by seeing that
it is boiled high enough, if it hang like Oil on the sides of the brazen
Skummer, is false: for if it be boiled so high, it is too fat to be recovered
by passing the Ashes, and must be used as Mothers.

At what time upon trial an hundred weight the of liquor contains about
thirty five pound weight of Petre. -- This is often times false, if ever true:
for if the liquor has more or less of common Salt, the product of Saltpeter
varies accordingly. And I say, it is seldom (if ever) true, because that in
Warwick, they seldom had two hundred weight of Petre, out of Nine Tun of raw
liquor, yet did they never boil it near to that proportion in the copper which
would agree with his computation.

"Fill up your Tubs with any sort of wood ashes. -- He forgets here the putting
in of the Mother of Saltpeter: of which I have spoken already. And in his
prescription of any sort of wood ashes, there is an omission of a considerable
circumstance: for those ashes are best which abound most in Salt, of which
there is a great difference: I remember in Iamaica to have tasted the ashes of
several woods, and found scarce any Salt in them; Zwelfer. in Pharmacop:
August^n: de Sale Lig^i Sancti.
and the Ashes of oak only the Petre-men termed a dead ashes: and Chemists
generally observe that Lignum-vitae yields little of the fixed Salt. If the
places where the Salt-Petre-men do work, do not yield them ashes of wood that
may serve their turn; they use then either the ashes of Broom burnt as it is
green; or (which is no wood!) the ashes of green fern, or bean-straw or
pease-straw, which need not be burnt green; the older the better: they are
better then wood-ashes: Concerning the reason of their burning the Broom, All
woods say our Petre-men if burned green, yield a Salter ashes then otherwise.
But for ashes, the Ash is best^ the young thorn^, Second; the Elm, third; Firrs
and Fern burnt green (the younger the better) yield a Salt-ashes; if dry, not
so. Hence those ashes are not used in bucking of Linen. The S^lter the ashes,
the lighter. If they lie dry a while, or till they be old they are the better
for Petre, They gather Saltness by lying.
and Fern green, I could suggest some remarkable observations, as to the
different quantities of Salt, (and consequently of virtues) in plants before
their coming to maturity, or full growth; but I shall Satifie my self now with
showing the mistakes and omissions of Mr. Henshaw, whereof this is one, of
which I should have spoken (living in a place where the much use of the ashes
of green Fern, in washing, gives people occasion to observe the difference of
Fern at several growths, and the difference betwixt those ashes and others)
but he gives me no occasion.

Note that toward the end of your boiling, Hist. of the R.S Page 271.
there will arise great store of Scumme and froth, which must carefully be
taken off. -- He might have told us what use this is good for: if this Scumme,
and the ashes through which the liquor is percolated ( insipid, but impregnated
with the greasy Oil) be put into any convenient ground, they will generate
there Saltpeter in a shorter time, and much greater quantity then otherwise
would be found there. Besides, if there rise such great store of Scumme and
Froth, (which must needs vary as the raw liquor is more or less foul) how
shall any man conjecture, by weighing his raw liquor against common water, at
the quantity of Saltpeter h^ is to receive?

Usually about that time it lets fall some common Salt to Ibid.
the bottom which you must take up with the said Scummer. -- If there be a
great quantity of common Salt in it, it falls almost all to the bottom, during
the boiling: what remains of common Salt in it, granulates against the sides as
it cooles, which at Warwick they suffered to be done in the Cauldron, without
any distinct Tubb; what an observation did our Vertuoso loose here concerning
the discovery of two so different Salts, at first swimming and mixing
indiscernably in the liquor; and af^erwards parting in this manner, the one
Chrystallizing whilst the liquor is hot and boiling and remaining in great
quantities: When the liquor is suffered to cool in the Copper, and begins to
granulate, my artists laded it out into the shooting-pannes, leav^ng the turbid
and faeculent settling at the bottom: which (though Mr. H^nshaw omit it) they
put in again ^o the raw liquor, at any time, as it boile^: and it is their
Judgment, that it increases the Petre though much of it be common Salt; the
liquor yiedling a sensible quantity of Petre thereupon more then otherwise.
the other coagulating into Sexangular, not Cubique shapes, and that when it is
cold and divided into Shallow pannes? Here are Twenty pages lost, that might
have been Expended in Luciferous Experiments.

Hist. of the R.S. Page 272.
When the Liquor is brought to this pass, every hundred weight of it contains
about threesco^e and ten pound weight of Petre. -- Any one may Judge how true
this is by what I have said before: it may happen that half of it is common
Salt.

When you find the Cubiq^e Salt to granulate and stick to the sides. -- Why did
not he disgress to tell us why it granulates at the sides when it cooles, and
falls to the bottom when hot?

"Draw of your Liquor into deep wooden Traies. -- Which if you do, it is ten to
one but the weight of the Liquor will break out the sides of them: wherefore
our men think it good Husbandry to use Brass-pannes.

That part of the Liquor which is not coagulated but Swims upon the Petre,
Hist. of the R.S. Page 273.
must be carefully powered off, and being mingled with new liquors, must again
pass the ashes, before it be boiled, else it will grow so greasy it will never
generate any Salt. -- This is the Mother of Saltpeter, of which I spoke
before. And if it (or the raw liquor, being boiled too long) grow so greasy, as
not to be able to coagulate by any means, what must we think of his design to
counterfeit the Nitre of the Ancients?

Then cast in by degrees a pint of the strongest Wine-vinegar, Hist. of the R.S
Page 273.
or else four ounces of Allom beaten to powder (some choose burt Allom and you
shall observe a black Scumme to rise on the top of the liguor. -- I saw as good
Petre made at Warwick as any in the world, without this cautelous refining:
they cast in nothing but good Scowring water, such as would bear Soap well,
continued the pouring of it, as long as any Scumme would arise. Nor did they
lade the Liquor out into any Settling Tub, (as he proposes) but suffered it to
stand in the Copper till it began to Chystall against the sides in such manner
as the common Salt does Chrystallize in the first boiling: then did they take
out the liquor, leaving the faeces and all that is foul at the bottom.

Here I must take notice of an omission of Mr. Henshaw's, in that having
brought his refined Petre to crystal and rock in the pannes, He then slightly
transfers it into a Tub with an hole in the bottom to drain, and when it is
dry, it is fit for use. But I found that our workmen took more care: For they
took the large fragments of the Nitrous rocks and placed them in Live-ashes
upright, and so the ashes did drain from the rocks that greasy and Motherish
substance which adheres to the Petre extrinsecally as it shootes, and which (if
not separated this way) vitiates the color, and takes of so much from the
Efficacy and goodness of the Petre as there adheres of Grease. As for the
smaller Chrystalls and pieces, which are too little to be so ranked, they are
placed upon a sheet spread upon the said ashes, and so that Motherish humidity
draines from them, and they become clear and white as Snow. The ashes being
impregnated with this Oil are enriched in order to the generating of more
Petre, when the liquor comes to be passed through them.

The Figure of the Chrystalls is Sexangular, Hist. of the R.S. Page 374.
and if it has rightly shot, is fistulous and hollow like a Pipe. -- He should
have done well to have told us, Th^s di^scourse concerni^g the figures of Nitre
C^ystallized proceeds upon the supposition that ^he Crystalls are of that
shape, which is a thing I never yet saw, at the making of S^lt-P^tre, not
Gl^ub^r de Signa^ Sal: nor I believe Mr. H^nsh^w. The shapes of the C^yst^lls
are very i^regul^r. I found no^e f^^tu^ous: and the Rocks of Petre do not seem
to be made up of sexangula: concretions at all. I h^ve seen elsewhere some
shaped s^xingularly, but not fi^tulous, no more did Glauber. I observed, and so
do the workmen, that in the coagulation in the panns there i^ comm^nly some
protuberant concr^tio^s, which with the Crystalls distinctly composing them
have some resemblance of a rose, and were so called by our Artists. Why did not
our Mechanicier take n^t^ce and Explain that? The Crystalls are the worst
Petre, and shoot last, they burn as if there were res^^^itat^d A^lom in them;
they make worse powder, and leave more faeces upon burning; and our workmen
will not allow them to be the best sort of Petre: whether there be some
interceptions of Air and w^^e^ incorporating with the Nitre in shooting; or
whether there be any r^suscitation of All^m, which makes them burn with that
Spumeous Ebullition, let such consider as magnify Crystalls of Ni^re in
Physi^k; for my part I am satisfied that all preparations (how laborious and
curio^s soever) are ^ot i^proveme^ts. Upon a solution of Petre in water, where
the Liquor is not impregnated so high, as at the worke^, one may see such
Crystalls as Mr. H^nshaw speaks of, if he proceeds carefully, and (as my
wo^kmen say) I have not had leisure to try since the intimation) use Ba^bary
Petre, which is that which is usualy sold. But I never visited the works, but I
thought of a passage some where Mr. B^yl^ has, that he could never observe
such a regularity in the Crystalls of Nitre, as is spoken of: insomuch as he
seems to do^b^ the assertion; if my Memory deceive me not. But that sometimes
it happens, is certain; and that there are always beautiful figures and
compli^ations above (...).
how this Mine^al comes to be thus figured? and evidenced it unto us that it
was performed Mechanically: This had been a much more generous undertaking,
then the suggestion of an impertinent conceit of his, which I shall speak of
presently; He should have showed the configuration of the particles, what it is
that gives them Motion; what it is that Sizeth them, and preserves them
fistulous: This had been a curiosity worthy a Philosopher, that understands
something more than common Forms. To tell us that nature acts the
Geometrician, or that it is done by the agitation of any subtle Spirits, or
matter, acting in a determinate manner upon particles of one configuration,
whilst the others are agitated and cast off by a different Motion: I say this
is no satisfactory discourse, nor v^ry comprehensible, when we reflect upon the
Liquor of the Saltpeter how thick it is crowded, and into what fistulous
Crystalls it coagulates. For all this while, a man does not understand how
Ingenious nature does particularly and distinctly figure out those Crystalls,
nor the manner of that Special Geometry which she practices in this case.
Should an Indian or other Ignorant person, ask concerning the making of a
watch, or other piece of Clock-work, what was the reason that the hand did so
exactly discriminate the hours; what was the reason of its so slow and equable
motion bearing such an unerring correspondence with that great revolution of
the Sun? and should any man answer that it was a peculiar conformation of parts
(which consist of several me^talls) differently shaped, and placed in order to
the composing of that machine, which the ingenious Artist had achieved: though
this answer carry much of truth in it, yet does it not solve the doubt, or
satisfy a speculative inquirer: Nor if he continue his question further, will
he be satisfied with a narration that those very materials are apparently
Sand, Lead, Steel, Iron, Brass, etc. differently agitated according to
determine rules of motion, whereby it happens that it keeps so certain and
constant a course, in declaring of Time. This kind of general knowledge may
content such as have not leisure to engage in more accurate Theories; but he
deserves not the name of a Mechanic Philosopher, who does not perspicuously
declare the matter, and configuration of each part, the Size and Use of each
Wheel, the effect of each Spring and weight, and this either Mathematically to
the understanding, or by ocular demonstration to the Eye. This had been an
undertaking that would have ennobled Mr. Henshaw, had he gone through with it:
and if he and his fellows despair of bringing things to this perspicuity, they
had as good suffer us to be content, with our old Forms, and combinations of
Elements, with which the world has subsisted so long, and Mechanical
ingenuity been so far advanced, that whosoever is acquainted with the
delicious Luxury of Asia, Greece, and Rome, will easily think all our
performances, nay, pretenses not to equal their real Enjoyments^ and if there
be any one thing in the improvement whereof our present Artists (I must not say
Philosophers; the Inventions we boast of, being not theirs, but the discoveries
of more common and thick Skulls) Glory, it is over balanced by the multitude
of excellent things in which they surpassed us.

Mr Henshaw declines all these Speculations, I^^d.
to acquaint us with some other that he has of this Salt, Which if he could
clearly make out, would lead us into the knowledge of many noble secrets in
nature; as also to a great improvement in the Art of making Saltpeter. -- I am
so great a well-wisher to the public good, that I shall be willing to enquire
into any thing, that may advance so great and Staple a commodity as Saltpeter
is, and always will be as long as the use of Guns continues: and since it is
the most plausible pretense for the establishment of the Royal Society, that
they may and will meliorate and improve the Manufactures and trading of our
Nation, let us with some heedfulness observe this public Essay and trial of
their Skill and Utility.

Hist. of the R.S Page. 275.
First then you are to observe, that though Petre go all away in Gunpowder yet
if you fulminate it in a Crucible, and burn of the volatile part with powder of
Coal, Brimstone, Antimony or Meal, there will remain a Salt, and yet so fixed
(very unlike common-Salt) that it will endure the force of almost the strongest
Fire you can give it; which being dissolved into water and Spirit of Nitre
dropped into it, till it give over hissing (which is the same with the volatile
part that was separated from it in the fulmination) it will be again reduced to
Crystalls of Petre, as it was at first.

This Curiosity was the Invention of that Honorable personage Mr. Robert
Boil, and a treatise writ upon the subject, which he was pleased to impart
unto me long before Glauber writ any thing of that nature, and I translated it
into Latin: It has been made use of by Dr. Willis as an instance whereby to
show that Chymicall Fires do not generate new substances, (...). c. 3.
but only divide asunder the first constitutive parts, and exhibit them.
Angelus Sala did reproduce Vitriol out of the parts which he had separated
Chymically, (...) tract. 1. ^. 10.
by remixing them together. But neither do these few instances in the behalf of
the Chemists out of Materials of a Slight texture, serve to any other purpose
then to make us more doubfull, not more intelligent: For there are so many
demonstrations, that those furnaces do generate new substances and that
according to the different regimen of the Fire, and the difference of i^,
(being open or close) and the different Vessels and the different processes: it
being also evident that by other means quite discrepant parts are disclosed,
than what those vexatious Fires could ever reveal. that I think it impossible
for any to submit his Judgment to such Convictions: And that the observations
which Mr. Boil raised from that Experiment were of such importance as Mr.
Henshaw thinks, is a point which such as measure speculations by their Utility,
will hardly grant.

First you are to observe that though Petre go all away in Gunpowder, Mr.
Sprat ubi supra,
yet if you fulminate it in a Crucible, and burn off the volatile part with
powder of Coal. -- There will remain a Salt, and yet so fixed, In this
reproduction of Petre, it is observable which Glauber suggest^: viz. that
though the acid and alcalisate Salts mortify Each other presently; non tamen e
vestigio fit Sal Hermaphroditicus, sed necesse est ut aliquamdin in a^re
collocati vitam et naturam ardentem quaignis ipsos nudavit, recipiant. Haec
illis inicamus qui sales sine atris opera, amimari posse forsan opinarentur.
Prosp. Germ. par. 1 Page 101.
that it will endure the force of almost the strongest fire etc. -- This same
to me does not seem so extraordinary a phenomenon, so as to merit an unusual
regard: for that Gold is as fixed a body as this Salt, is undeniable; and yet
in the de^lagration of Aurum fulminans, its particles fly away, though they
may be catched under the form of a purple powder, if the fulmination be
performed in a close Vessel, as Dr. Willis observes, De fermentat. c. 10. so
in Salt Ammoniac,, the common Salt will undergo many sublimations, without
deserting the concrete: and yet it is an easy thing to reduce it to such a
state of fixedness as amazeth our Virtuoso. Many other instances might be
alleged: and therefore I proceed to tell the world, that though Mr. Henshaw
entitle Mr. Boil to this Noble Experiment, yet what he repeats of it, is taken
from Glauber out of a book of his printed in 1659. de signatura Salium etc. --
page 28. whom yet he names not. This is manifest from this that Mr. Boil uses
live pieces of coal to calcine the Nitre with: Glauber in his Pharmacop:
Spagyric. part. 2. p. 28 and Mr. Henshaw cast in the powder of coal. Mr. Boil
Speaks nothing of calcining it with Brimstone, or Antimony, De Ferment, c. 10.
which Glauber does: and so does Dr. Willis: But the former prescribes the
Regulus Antimonij Stellatus Concerning the Experiment as it is performed with
coal, I have this Scruple; That I am not satisfied by any observations I can
make, that Saltpeter, if it be rightly purified, will upon deflagration leave
any such Salt behind it at all. But that wheresoever any such thing remains,
it is the product of a common Salt, and other heterogeneous mixtures
incorporated with the Petre: I am moved to this doubt, by the saying of
Scaliger concerning the best-sort of Nitre which he terms Sal-Petrae: viz. Tam
enim Sal quam Nitrum ita uritur, ut cineris quippiam relinquatur: De subtle.
exercit. 104.15.
Sal-Petrae universum absumitur ab igni. And in the trials of Saltpeter which
are made by the best Artists Pietro Sardi and Casimirus Semienowicz, See the
proof of this in the account of Pietro Sardi which follows.
it is required of good Saltpeter, that it burn all away upon the Table,
leaving no impurity or foeculency behind. I have taken of the best Saltpeter
at Warwick oftentimes to make this Essay, and also to compare the Crystalls,
and White-rock-nitre: I put the pieces upon a broad Pit-coal red-hot, and could
see a difference in the burning of Each; If the coal be not broad the Petre as
it burns will run ^ver it.
and a different quantity of that incombustible matter remain according to the
different purifications; insomuch that as far^ as my Eye could guide my
Judgment, out of an ounce of the best Rock-Petre there could not remain half a
dram if a scruple of that fixed Salt which Mr. Henshaw speaks of. In the
Crucible indeed upon burning with coal there did remain about a third part,
when I burnd the best Petre: and more, according as it is more impure. Mr.
Thibaut in his Art of Chemistry observes, that a spoonful of Nitre cast into a
pot red-hot, will presently be in a flame and vanish all away in Smoke Page 58.
See him al^o Page 53. Where he prepares Salt of Tarta^. So Glauber. Nitrum
prunae ardenti im^^sit^m totum co^flagrat et in auras Evan^scit. P^arma^. Spag,
p. 2. p. 95.
Dr. Ed: I^r^en of natural Bathes. c. 7. page 35. ^dit. in 40.
Dr. Jorden observes that the difference betwixt Saltpeter and the Ancient
Nitre, appears in this, that a pound of Nitre being burned, will leave four
ounces of Ashes; Saltpeter will leave None. Io: Roberts in his complete
Canonier, page 49.
And the common assertion of our English Gunners about the Goodness of Petre,
is, If it be laid on a board, and a coal put to it, and it burn into the
board, and leave nothing but a black color, and rise with a long flamed
ventosity and exhalation, it is well refined. But since the observations of
Scaliger, and those other Artists of unquestionable credit, and my own
Experience teach me that the quantity of what remains after the deflagration
of Nitre depends upon its impure and Saline mixtures, Mr. T^ibaut says that in
a Cr^cible it consumes almost quite away. page 34.
and that pure Nitre burnt openly leaves nothing behind it; I am apt to believe
that either there is something in the nature of the Crucible, or in the manner
of burning^ it in those Vessels, that causes that Phenomenon. And perhaps
there is not so much of untruth (upon this ground) in that saying of Beguinus,
that he that operates well shall draw a pound of Spirit from a pound of Nitre.
Tyrocin. Chym. l. 2. c. 4.


But let us suppose that there does remain, otherwise than by accident, this
fixed Salt, our Philosopher says it is very unlike common Salt. A doughty
remarque! It is very like any Alcali; if it be not common Salt reduced to an
Alcali: though the mixtures of Allom and Vitriol may give it a little
diversification sometimes. But where is the improvement he promised us all this
while of Manufacture of Saltpeter? Why it amounts to this! Take a pound of the
best purified Nitre that you can buy, such as is already fit to make
Gunpowder, distill it with three, four or five times as much potters Earth
prepared in a Glass retort well luted in a close reverberatory furnace; giving
fire by degrees till you come to the highest, which continue twenty four
hours. Out of one pound of Nitre thus distilled, you may have four ounces of
Spirit says Mr. Art of Chemistry. page 33.
Thibaut. But Mr. De Spirit. Sal. Nitri page 133.
Hartman upon Crollius, says there will come out of those red Spirits, but an
ounce and an half or two ounces at most. Having gained this Spirit, let him
take a pound more of as good Petre and burn it with a Coal in a Crucible
according to the process of Mr. Boil, or Glauber: and let him get as much
fixed Salt as he can: breaking his Crucible into the bargain: I find that Mr.
Boil in his account of the redintegration of Nitre says not what quantity of
fixed Salt he had: See Mr. Boyl^'s Experiment About the parts of Nitre Sect. 4.
only that he reproduced the Petre by pouring the Spirit upon the Alcali; and
that he did not affuse so much of Spirit upon it, as the Alcali seemed to have
lost in the burning: and yet not much less. In another place about subordinate
forms page 350 he says that Nitre upon calcination leaves only a third part,
or perhaps more. But let him get wh^t he can (I assure him that the ^owler his
Petre is, the more he will get) and having dissolved it in rainewater, and
filtrated it, let him power upon it the Spirit of Nitre drop by drop until the
abullition cease: Glauber de ^ignat. Sal. p. 28.^9.
Then let him with patience expect for some days, the redintegration of the
Nitre: or if he be hasty, let him evaporate the liquor away till it come to a
cuticle, then place it in a cool place, and in one night he shall find his
Petre to Crystallize: Then power off the liquor, and evaporate it to a Cuticle
again, and so a third time till he have gotten all the Petre. Having allowed
this Experiment all the advantages imaginable, which is, that our Operatour
shall have such a quantity of fixed Salt as will redintegrate exactly his Petre
(which may not happen: as I have demonstrated) so that having calcined one
pound, and distilled another into Spirit he has reproduced now one complete
pound of Petre: And that this Petre is as effectual for Gunpowder, as our
common Saltpeter: (which yet is an Experiment our Inventors and Improvers give
no account of: Mr, Boil says his was more acid, then Saltpeter is usually;
Ubi supra Sect. 17.
and what alteration that Superfluous Spirit adhering is to the Crystalls may
produce, I know not. Glauber proceeds to dissolve again and filtrate his
regenerate Nitre: De signat. Sal. ubi supra.
and then says Quicquid post operationem Superfuerit in arena per
evaporationem, donec cuticula appareat, rursus distillandum, et in ^rigore in
Crystallos redigendum est, quae, ut vulgaris Sal-Petre in usum adhiberi
possunt. And says that if you will again calcine one part, and distill
another, and reproduce Petre, you shall have more pure Petre than ever, and
which will perform admirable effects in Physic and Alchymistry.) Granting, I
say, our Operator all this happiness, I desire to know where is the great
improvement in the Art of making Saltpeter? How much Cheaper will this be
afforded, then that which is usually sold? How much more Effectual will the
powder be which is to be made out of it? Will a Thimblefull serve to charge a
Culverin? Or, if there be requisite as much to the charge as of common powder:
will the force be such that Each Bullet of a Culverin, or Canon shall do
execution at the Tex^l, Algiers or Candia? Can you dispatch with a
pocket-pistoll from Arundell house the boldest pyr^te within the Straights? Or,
in fine, will this Powder last for ever without any decay, and by its
durableness countervaile the charge and Extraordinary trouble in the making? I
cannot find a word of all this; nor any thing but what will convince any man
that to make Saltpeter, is but to loose his time instead of improving the
Manufacture. I heard that Some of the Society had a great mind to work Silk
into Hats: which project though the Hatters laughed at, yet to satisfy them,
trial was made: and for twenty shillings they had a Hat made, but it proved so
bad, that any one might have bought a better for Eighteen pence. I shall do Mr.
Henshaw a courtesy, and tell people (besides the pretty curiosities observed by
Mr. Boil) that will all this trouble, and cost, though they got never the
better Petre, yet Glauber tells you, this is the only way for any man to see
the true signature and rightly-shaped crystalls of Nitre: they will be all as
white as Snow, long, slender, Sexangular, and so smooth that nothing can seem
more polished. and so discover that signature which God and Nature endowed
Saltpeter with. de signat. Sal. Page 29.30
Si recte operatus fueris, omnes Crystalli nullis exceptis erunt in
longitudinem aequalem directae, et Sexangulae sine ulla asperitate et
Scabritie, quae vera et genuina Salispetrae recte et probe purgati Signatura
exis^it. And is not this a considerable improvement in the Art of making
Saltpeter, to produce such beautiful Crystalls, to show the true figure into
which that Salt naturally does Crystallize? Some have represented the natural
figure of that Salt to be Cylindricall: and I have by me some exact and large
Cylinders into which it did Crystallize, but not from the Saltpeter works:
some have ascribed to it other shapes; Mr. Boil found it to be Sexangular, but
the sides not of equal breadth, and, each two whereof as they were opposite to
each other, Experiment of Nitre Sect. 5.
seemed parallel. Glauber says that their shape will be such as I have
described in English above, if you follow his way in making them. And is not
this a notable discovery for such men as raise their Glory upon the showing of
Sights! Especially, if Mr. Henshaw Exhibit them also fistulous! which neither
Glauber nor Mr. Boil did!

The other way of burning Saltpeter to an Alcali with Brimstone is ridiculous,
and such as any man that ever made Sal prunellae will laugh at. For the
Brimstone does not burn the Nitre to any Alcaly at all, nor inflames it at all,
but serves to purify it by consuming the Sal-Armoniacall parts or greasy
heterogeneities, and precipitating its faeces to the bottom of the pot till it
become so transparent, that after those projections, Se^e^t. de cons. C^ym. c.
19. M^. Thibaut Page 59.
and flagrations you may see the bottom of the pot through the melted Nitre.
And this is so evident a thing that Senertus and Monsieur Thibaut are positive
therein. Pietro Sardi (as you may see hereafter) and Casimirus Semien^wicz in
his Ars mag. Artiller. p. 1. l. 2. c. 3. do prescribe this very way of burning
it with Sulphur, instead of the more tedious re^ining which is usually
practiced, in order to the making of Gunpowder. Imponatur Sal-nitri in vas
aliquod cupreum vel ferreum, aut fictile vitreatum, et igne vasi supposito,
perque solitos gradus aucto exuratur, donec Sal liquefiat et fervendo bulliat.
Iam sumatur aliquantulum Sulphuris communis subtilissime pulverisati, et
Salinitri liquefacto superinspergatur: et concipiet subito flammam, et quicquid
pinguedinis vel noxij terrestris Salis non sufficienter purgatus Sal-Nitri
habuerit, exuret et multum clarificabit: injectio autem Sulphuris aliquoties
reiterari poterit. Denique liquefactum et purificatum Salemnitri Effundito in
marmor politum vel laminas ferreas aut cupreas, vel vascula aliqua metallica
vel figulnea vitreata, et frigescere ibidem sinito. Habebis jam Salemnitri
congelatum, Parium lapidem vel Alabastritem color et duritie quam proxime
referentem. If that excellent Lithuanian found this to be as good a way to
refine the Nitre, as that other by new solution, affusion of Lixiviated
liquors, and new coagulation: If it be evident that Sal prunellae will
Crystalize, and burn as other Petre: if it be certain that Brimstone cannot
burn Saltpeter (as Senertus, Tartaglia and Semienowicz avow) How shall we do
for this fixed Salt or Alcali wherewith to make Nitre by affusion of the Spirit?

His calcining of it with Antimony has as little of sense as the former: for
besides that there is more trouble in the process, because that the Alcalisate
Salt must be washed from the Antimony: which takes off from the improvement. If
there be any Alcali in those preparations of Diaphoretick Antimony (wherein
every Apo^hecary tries the Experiment) it is from the common or other Salts
mixed with the Nitre, and not from the Nitre, part of which flies away with the
Sulphur of Antimony as it deflagrates: the rest stays behind, and may be
extracted with water, and reduced into Crystalls of Nitre, as a friend of mine
tried, of which he keeps some by him. This Schroder and Rolfincius speaking of
Diaphoretick Antimony, and its edulcoration confess, Aqua post primam
edulcorationem nitro gravida ad medietatem evaporata praebet egregiam Aquam
Anodynam. Ralfine c. C^ym. in art. red act. l. 5. Sect. 7 c. 2. page 377.
Eadem justa evaporatione praegressa in cella subterranea locata concrescit in
Crystallos, qui Nitrum Anodinum vocatur. A Schrodero LAPIS PRUNELLAE
ANTIMONIALIS indigitatur.

The vanity of Some men not knowing when they are well must be trying new
conclusions although it be for the worse: and obtruding them upon others. What
(if at all,) was to be done with plain coal, must for Ostentation-sake, be
tried with Brimstone and Antimony. And it had been a more genuine observation
to have acquainted the world how; after Mr. Boil had found out a way to
reproduce Nitre by affusing the Spirit to the Alcali of Nitre burnt with coal:
Mr. Henshaw had found out a method how to reduce the Alcali of Nitre burnt with
Brimstone and Antimony to Nitre without any new Spirit affused. Had he
pretended this, it had been but an ingenious imposture for vulgar capacities:
but now there is more of weakness than of knavery in the performance.

Had he told us out of Mr. Boyle's Essay, and especially out of Glauber, that
the manufacture of Saltpeter might be improved by affunding Aqua Fortis or the
Spirit of Nitre upon the solution of Potashes, or any Alcalisate-Salt; Nay
upon Sal Gemmae, Bay Salt, common table Salt, or Lyme water, and that thereby
any one might gain Crystalls of Nitre, proceeding according to Glauber.
Prosper: German. part. 2. page 66. Et habebis purum putum Salempetrae, instar
alius Salis-Petrae ex pecorum aut pecudum Stabulis petiti, flammam
concipientem. If he had hold us this, though the advantage would have been
greater than by the Alcali of Nitre; yet would it not have been considerable,
because of the expense and Trouble, Ibid page 67.
and that it must be performed with the brittle materials of Glasses, as
Glauber observes. But it would have illustrated a little what I mentioned about
the Lixiviate^Salt in the Ashes through which the Salt-Petre-liquor is
filtrated, showing how the Alcali and common Salt are turned into Petre by
virtue of that Liquor, which yet has nothing of the Acid Spirit, whereby the
Chemists generate theirs. Let us learn from thence how obscure the procedures
of Nature are^ and how different from those of Art! And let us leave off to
say, that things are always generated of those principles into which they are
Analised.

That which I aim at then is, that if the Spirit of the volatile Salt of Soot,
Hist. of the R. S. Page 275.276.
or of the Urine, blood hoofes, hair, excrements or indeed any part of Animals
(for all abound with such a volatile Salt fixed and Oil, as Petre does) could
by the same way, or any like it, be reduced to Petre or some Nitrous Salt, not
much differing it from it: it would excellently make out a Theory that I am
much delighted with till I am convinced in it; which is, that the Salt which is
found in vegetables and Animals, is but the Nitre which is so universally
diffused through all the Elements (and must therefore make a chief ingredient
in their nutriment, and by consequence of their Generation) a little altered
from its first complexion. And that the reason why Animals that feed on
Vegetables are obliged by nature, to longer meals, than those that feed on
other Animals; is, because Animals are fuller of that Salt then Vegetables: And
indeed such Animals are but Caterers of it for Man; and others whom natures
bounty gratifies with a more delicious and lusty Diet.

In confess I have been the more confirmed in this fancy, since I have often
seen a friend of mine with a natural and facile (...) convert the greater part
of Petre into a Salt so like the volatile Salt of Urine, that they are scarcely
to be distinguished in smell or taste; and yet he adds nothing to it that can
possibly be suspected to participate of that nature. But indeed all volatile
Salts are so alike, that it is not easy to distinguish them in any respect.

I have been careful not to dismember this last Paragraph, that the Reader
might with one view survey this strange fancy: and Judge better how little I
impose upon him in the sequel of my discourse.

And first I ask our Orator -- how he applies this Speculation to what he
promised us in the introduction to it? How does this improve the Art of making
Saltpeter? If an ill Memory, and a proportionate mixture of something else, be
demonstrations of a great Wit, no man has given greater testimonies of his
abilities than Mr. Henshaw. Secondly, I demand why He is so Solicitous to
transform the Spirit of the volatile Salt of Soot or Urine etc into Petre:
whereas any man that considered what he went about would employ his care rather
to coagulate the volatile Salt with which the Spirit of Soot and Urine abounds
with Spirit of Nitre, Aquafortis or the like into Petre; or some such Nitrous
Salt? But, behold the Happiness of Mr. Henshawe's Fansy and the unhappiness of
his judgment: That which he Fansied possible about the coagulation of the
volatile Salt abounding in Spirit of Urine with Spirit of Nitre into a kind of
Petre, this Experiment has happily succeeded under the trial of the
Honorable and inquisitive Mr. Boil: but yet that Theory which he goes about
to deduce thence is as far from being established thereby, as the Artifice of
Salt Petre-making is from being thereby advanced! From Spirit of Urine (says
M^. R. B.) and Spirit of Nitre^ Mr. R. B Origi^e of forms Page 125.
when I have suffered them to remain long together before coagulation, and
freed the mixture from the Superfluous moisture very slowly, I have sometimes
obtained fine long Crystalls, so shaped, that most beholders took them for
Crystalls of Saltpeter. But whosoever shall consider how much more trouble and
cost there is in distilling those other volatile Spirits than there is in the
drawing of the Spirit of Nitre: and how small quantities are like to be made
this way, and those perhaps not serviceable in Gunpowder, will easily see that
this project is as inutile as the former was in order to the improvement of the
making Saltpeter.

Oh! But it will excellently make out a Theory, that the Salt which is found in
vegetables and Animals, is but the Nitre which is so universally diffused
through all the Elements, a little altered from its first complexion. I
remember that Sc^liger taking occasion to complain of Cardan for some
illogicall inferences, uses these words: De subtle. Exerc. 153 Sect. 9.
Dij benefecerunt, quod te faeminam non fecerunt. Ad primam quamque speciem
promissorum exiluisses. I must apply this Sarcasme to Mr. Henshaw, who could be
deluded by such weak appearances of reason. Let us but shape an Hypotheticall
Syllogism for him, and consider the consequence.

If the Spirit of Nitre being poured upon the Spirit of the Volatile Salt of
Urine, Soot etc. does reduce the Volatile Salt to Petre or some Nitrous Salt
not much differing from it; then does it follow that the Salt which is found in
Vegetables and Animalls, is but the Nitre, which is so Universally diffused
through all Elements (and must therefore make a chief ingredient in their
nutrition and generation) a little altered from its first complexion. But the
Antecedent is true Ergo,

In the first place it is evident by the Experiment of Mr. Boil, that even
Sea Salt by the affusion of Spirit of Nitre may be turned into Petre. Origin
of Forms Page 216.
Nay Glauber teaches us how Allom, Vitriol, Miner^lls and Stones may be with
more or less trouble converted into Nitre; why did not he extend his
consideration about the Nitre in all the Elements, to them? Is it because that
they abound not in Oil and volatile Salt, upon which he so wisely builds his
Argument?

Secondly, since it is made evident by Glauber in many places of his works, In
Append. ad quint. part. Prosper. Germ^n. Page 20.23, 25, 49. etc.
that the Spirit of Nitre is as it were the Seed of Nitre by which it
propagates it self and assumes a body, as plants do, where it finds one
agreeable: and such are not only (nay not principally: which he should have
noted) the votatile but fixed Salts of any Creature? Aqua fortis, aut Spiritus
Nitri, Chymista Scepticus, p. 240^
est quasi Semen Salis-Petrae, atque hanc naturam habet, quando alijs Salibus,
sicut semen aliquod vegetabile terrae, mandatur, ut ex ipsis augmentum
capiendo, multiplicetur, quemadmodum herbarum semina faciunt. This Seminall
principle in Nitre seems to have the approbation of Mr. Boil: and if it be
thus, as undoubtedly it is, and that those Salts (whither volatile or fixed)
are but the material principle, I do not see any more validity in the
consequence, than if I should say, because sundry plants grow in the Earth or
Water, therefore the Earth or Water were but those plants a little disguised in
their complexion.

In fine, it is so far from following hereupon, that Saltpeter disguised is
the Chief ingredient of the nutrition and geration of Animals; that it does not
follow, that it is any ingredient at all; but that there is something in those
substances mentioned that may be converted into Petre, and is, as an
Aristotelian would say, disposed fitly to be the Subject matter of that Form.
For as this Argument is shaped, what I say is as manifest, as that the
constitutive parts of the Nitre, are to be the volatile Salt and the Spirit of
Nitre: The one thing indifferent to sundry combinations and transmutations, and
which has nothing of the nature of Saltpeter; but is palpably transmuted;
since in the distillation of good Nitre there appears no such thing as volatile
Salt: The other it is, that Specificates the predisposed matter, and generates
P^^re out of it; so much altering the complexion, that the affinity betwixt
that volatile Salt and Saltpeter is no more than betwixt a man and a pumpion.
He talks of the complexion of the Nitre being a little altered: but I would
feign know how little that is. Let me see the like Crystalls: a resembling
flame, and other effects that result from the being and Specification of
Saltpeter. If Saltpeter be a chief ingredient in the generation and nutrition
of vegetables, It Is either because of its bulk or Efficacy that it is chief;
but neither of these is true: For the quantity is not so great in vegetables or
Animalls, should we allow the volatile Salt and Nitre to be all one. Not for
Efficacy, because it is not made out that there is Nitre in the Sea, in
clay-grounds or Springs, or in Countries remote from the Sun, yet here fishes
and other Creatures feed, and plants grow: and consequently that cannot be a
chief ingredient in nutrition, which may be wanting.

There is something else in Mr He^shaw that looks like an Argument by the
introduction FOR. -- For all abound with such a volatile Salt fixed, and Oil,
as Petre does. I cannot tell how to form this Argument, and yet convince the
world that I do not injure him, this passage is so extremely ridiculous. Yet I
will endeavor it, if it be but to show the Logic of Ant'- Aristotelians, and
how much we owe to that providence which has educated us better than to argue
so. The proposition he aims at, and would prove is, That the Salt which is in
vegetables, and Animals, is but the Nitre which is universally diffused through
the Elements. The medium or Argument by which he would prove it is -- is -- is
-- harder to be found out than the meaning of Aristotle in his Acromaticks. Let
us consider it again.

That which I aim at then is, That if the Spirit of the volatile Salt of Soot,
or of the Urin, blood, horns, hoofes, hair, excrements, or indeed any part of
Animals (for all abound with such a volatile Salt fixed, and Oil as Petre
does) could by the same way (viz: as the redintegrated Nitre) be reduced to
Petre, or some Nitrous Salt, it would Excellently make out a Theory that I am
much delighted with, till I am convinced in it: which is, that the Salt which
is found in vegetables and Animals, is but the Nitre which is so universally
diffused through all the El^ments (and must therefore make a chief ingredient
in their nutrition, By his Favor there is no consequence in that passage: if
it be the chief ingredient in nut^ition, it is so in generation: ^or though
nutritio^ be commonly by a new generation of parts: yet in that which is
properly generation^ the S^minall pri^ciples and active are chief in ^utrition;
the mate^iall and passive principles are more regarded.
and by consequence of their generation) a little altered from its first
complexion.

Here is the Spirit of the volatile Salt of the parts of vegetables and
Animals, to be coagulated and transformed into Petre by the Spirit of Nitre. --
Here is a volatile Salt fixed, and Oil such as is in Petre! mentioned to what
purpose! -- Here is a Salt spoken of to be found in Vegetables, and Animals:
yet it is not expressed whether it be the volatile or fixed Salt: yet these two
are different, and those that abound with volatile Salt are more the Physic,
than the food of man. -- Well I have spent half an hour to frame a Sorites, or
any tolerable Argument out of these words: but I cannot do it: but I will
adventure to give our Philosophers this advise that they would take our English
word FOR into their serious consideration, and abolish the use of it, as the
French Academy at Paris did Car. Before I have done with this History, I shall
show that this Intimation was but necessary for them.

To proceed: How does it appear that Saltpeter abounds with a volatile Salt
fixed and Oil? In the regenerated Nitre (which Glauber makes to be the best)
there is nothing but Alcali and the Spirit of Nitre: in the Nitre which is
generated by the mixture of the Spirit of Urin and Spirit of Nitre there is no
such thing. In the distillation of Nitre there is nothing but Spirit
(inseperate from Phlegm) and its Alcali: and as there is no Oil there, so I
hope he would not have us take the Alcali for a volatile Salt fixed. In the
making of Saltpeter there is found indeed something that seems Oily and
greasy: but that is Excrementitious, and so far from being a constitutive part
of it, that it must be Separated from it (as Mr. Henshaw knows) before
Saltpeter can be made: and the great contrivance is how to separate it. So
Glauber in Prosper German. part. 3. page 43. alias enim pinguedinem nimiam
contrahit lixivium, nec ullum Salgenerabitur.

From the mention of this Oil, I must take an occasion to tell the world how
superficially our Virtuoso writes the History of Nitre: I could suggest many
curiosities from the several liquors in the making of Saltpeter: But I have
not time to discourse of the Mothers of Petre, not how that grease being lodged
in the ashes, those ashes being exposed to the Sun at Warwick did in one or two
days produce visible Nitre on the top of the ashes, so that in few days those
ashes become fit to be Elixiviated into raw liquors, which were before but to
make a Lixivium to purge the liquors that had boiled. I shall only touch at an
Experiment which may not be unwelcome to the Honorable Mr. Boil. I took of
the Mothers that had stood long and were exceeding Oily: I powered four
spoonfulls of them into a large Venice-glass, half full of water: This greasy
liquor sunk to the bottom instantly without altering the taste or color of the
water at all: so that the top was clear water; the bottom of a reddish color
as bilious Urin: only on the surface of the water, and in the middle, there did
flote several very small bubbles of the color of water: having let this stand
a day: I took a Solution of the Alcali of Saltpeter (which, though of a
greenish blew, yielded a lympid liquor upon filtration) and poured two or three
spoonfulls into the mixture of Mothers and water: immediately the whole liquor
turned Lacteous or White; but the color presently contracted it self into a
white en^orema, or suspensum, such as is to be seen in healthful Urin, and so
floted above the surface of the Mothers: the next morning I found as it were a
powder fallen to the bottom, which I stirred up to the top, whereupon the whole
liquor up to the top of the water was turbid. After the Glass had stood some
days, the l^quor lost its Oili^ess, no Crystalls did shoot at all, but it
became a little turbid, on the top there s^o^ed something here and there, like
to a thin cremor, and on every side of the Glass from the top to the bottom
thereof fixed themselves certain mol^culae which a credulous Chemist would as
firmly have believed to have been the rudiments of some pl^nts, as that the
Salt of Harts-hornes in distillation represents the horns of St^ggs; If you
will imagine any Plant growing on the side of a ^all, and that instead of the
leaves of the pl^nt, there were nothing but white filaments issuing from a
roo^, such we^e these: all of them were of one bigness, and were ranked in some
orde^. A chance hindered me from making further inquiries: nor indeed am I much
sollicitous about them.

The Phenomenon appears not if you look down rig^t on it, but standing on one
side at a distance.


I let it stand all night, and this morning the whole liquor from top to bottom
is of one color; and that exactly of a Limon-colour, or like old
Hoccomar-wine; on the top there seems to float thin coagulations of fat with
some variety of colors, such as one may often see on small waters that stand
in Moorish grounds: the liquor is nothing ^igh so acrimonious and purigent as
the Mothers were: and all of it is as greasy as the Mothers were, when
Separate: hanging on the finger, as Oil, and not like water at all; at the
bottom of the Glass there lies a Yellow-sediment as 'twere powder, which upon
agitation will not rise of it self, but must be stirred up with something, and
then resembles the white Hypostasis of Urin, with capillary filaments
enterveaving each other.

And, How does it appear that Urin does abound with a volatile Salt fixed, and
Oil? I do not understand what he means by his volatile Salt fixed: Zwelfer.
in Phrm^cop: Aug: page 486. Edit. in 8.
by what is it fixed? to what degree? volatile Salts are sometimes so fixed, as
only to abate, not alter the volatility: as the volatile Salt of vipers, in
Zwelfer: and the volatile Salt of Hartshorn (of which I keep some) with
rectified Spirit of Salt: Sometimes they are so fixed as to loose the nature of
Salt and to become insipid, and indissoluble: Ibid. page 234.
as when volatile Salts are mixed with Limewater: There are a sort of Salts
which Zwelfer calls Salia Essentialia, which are not to be called properly
fixed, nor volatile, being mediae quasi naturae inter utraque Salia, volatilia
scilicet, (quae instar Spirituum levi ignis calore concitata sublime petunt) et
fixa.

And there are Salts so fixed naturally that they will endure the Fire without
evaporating: Zwelfer. in Append. page 99. Salia pu^^ Salsa fixa. Salia,
accino-Salsa fixa.
such are Alcalisate Salts, being purely Salt fixed: other fixed Salts having
of acidity in them, and upon distillation yield an acid Spirit: how far these
may be volatilised, is not the question; but whether there be in Urin a
volatile Salt fixed: which any man will deny, who considers with how much ease
the volatile Salt of Urin is procured. As for the Oil wherewith Urin is said
to abound, Vid. Zwelfer in Append. page 99.
surely Mr Henshaw converses with men of a strange ^idney that make such water;
Or that feed much upon green Tortoyses. In some morbid persons Physicians Speak
of Urines that are oleaginous, (...). But I shall favor the Virtuoso so much
as to understand what he says about Urin, as relating to persons in health,
and not sick; least I should be to seek as much for the volatile Salt as I am
for the Oil, which is not to be distilled from it by any Chymicall process,
that I meet with in Dr. Willis, or any else: nor to be seen, but in such as
feed on green Turtle in the West Indies: or are not well in their bodies: not
be spoken of, but by such as are not well in their Wits. If by Oil he means
that which gives a color to the Urin, and is by Dr. Willis, called the
Sulphurous part of the Urin: I shall not now dispute whether that be Oil: or,
no since that same learned and inquisitiv^ person assures us he found no great
quantity of it in his Analysis. Urinae Anatome ostendit quod Eleme^ta e quibus
liquor eius conflatur sunt plurimum aquae et Salis, aliquantulum Sulphuris et
terrae, Willis de Uri^^s c. 1.
atque Spiritus tantillum.

Yet a word, or two: How does it appear that Nitre is so Universally diffused
through all the Elements? If he mean the Aristorelian Elements, did he ever
find it so universally lodged in that Fire: is it so diffused through Water?
how many foot deep is it found in the Earth? How does it appear to be in the
Air? Let Mr. Henshaw recollect himself. Let him give what Notion he will to
his Elements, the Assertion is false: although it be true that in this
Terr-aqueous Globe of ours there is nothing occurrs but what contains in it
Saltpeter, or somewhat that may first or last, after greater or lesser pains
and time be Animated into Saltpeter viz. (...). G^^man. pa^^. 1. Page 98.99.
Exemplum hoc esto. Sal Vegetabilium, Animalium, et Mineralium Essentialis vel
Universalis su^ nature quidem nitrosus est, sed prius flammam non concipit,
quam ex aere vitam et flammam attraxerit. Salium autem etiam unus citius et
libentius altero, vitam illam attrabit, prout a Natura formatus est. Quo
fugaciores et magis urinosi sunt sales, eo citius in Nitrum se commutant: quo
mordaciores et magis corrosivi, eo difficilius et tardius Salispetrae naturam
induunt. Sed quia Nitrum Sal est utriusque naturae particeps, urinosae nimirum
et corrosivae, et quasi exutroque Sale urinoso nempe et corrosivo compositus,
It is to be n^ted, that although he say S^a-Sal^ and some othe^s do require
much time to be converted into Petre: ^e me^ns when it is to be as it were
sowed and planted, and generated by a (...); oth^rwi^e, he kn^w, and ^e^che^h
speedy ways of generating Nitr^ out of the fixed-Salt of Ly^e-sto^e as does
Mr. (...) out of B^y-Salt in his Origin of sons page: 216.
ejus open peritus Naturae Salibus facile succurret, et ex iis faciet quicquid
voluerit. Nec Sal ullus est in rerum nature qui artis adjumento in Nitrum
mutari nequeat: Inprimis vero sales illi, qui igne sublimantur et ejus vi
eleva^i ascendunt: ut illi qui in urin^ et excrementis animalium omnium sunt:
Imo animalia, vegetabilia, et Mineralia ipsa, facile admodum Nitri naturam
a^ripiunt. Hic primus Salium gradus esto. Al^er gradus est Salium, qui
aliquanto fixiores sunt, ut artis filii nuncupant, et in igne a vegetabilibus,
animalibus et mineralibus relinquuntur. Hi difficilius in Nitri naturam
transeunt. Omnium difficillime illi, qui in tertio gradu sunt, ut Sal communis,
marinus, montanus seu fossilis, alumen et vitriolum. Nam hos ars etiam eo
deducit, ut in verum Nitrum abeant, sed difficilius, cum longiore ad eos
mutandos tempore indigeat, quam ad supranominatos Sales fugaces, volatiles et
urinosos. Quare nemo ea opinione esto, quando in Scriptis meis dico quod hic
aut ille Sal, in Salem-petrae converti queat; quamprimum lixivio extractus, aut
saltem ignis calcinatione elicitus fuerit, quod Sal-petrae verus et ardens
futurus sit: Tempus adh^c requititur, quo ex aere vitam et animam, alliciat et
ardens evadat.

Lippis et to^soribus notum est, maximam Salis-petrae antehac confecti partem,
ex lixivio terrae, ex ovilibus, aliarumque bestiarum Stabulis antiquis petitae,
exccctam fuisse. Quare ex antiquis jumentorum, pecudum et pecorum Stabulis, et
non etiam novis? Ideo quia non solum vetera Stabula longo temporis progressu
plus ex excrementis et urina Salis imbibunt, e^que de caus^ plus Salis-Petrae
confer possunt. Sed etiam Sales ipsi Excrementorum ex animalibus, quod
potissimum est, longo temporis progressu exaere animam suam acceperunt, qua
recentes nondum imbutisunt. Nam, coquat quis, torreat et vexet stercora, et
urinam animalium, ut voluerit, Nitrum nunquam evadent, nisi ex aere vitam suam
hauserint.

Whereas he says, That the reason why Animals that feed on Vegetables are
obliged by Nature to longer meals than those that feed on other Animalls; is
because that Animals are fulle^ of that Salt than Vegetables: and indeed such
Animals are but Ca^erers of it for man and others whom nature gratifies with a
more lusty and delicious diet. -- To begin with the last passage, I observe
that our Inventor has such a Pique against Antiquity, that he transgresses
the old proverb De gustibus non est disputandum. It does not appear to me
certain that the feeding upon Flesh, as most do now: or on Fish, as most did
heretofore; is more delicious than to feed on vegetables, and some of their
productions. Not yet that it is the more lusty food, Z^^chi^s i^ quaest.
medico-legal. l. 5. Tit. 1. qu. 2. D^^i^l. 1. v. 5^
give the word what sense you will. The story of Daniel's pulse: of St John
Baptist, of the Negro's in the West Indies, of the Bannyans in the East Indies.
They will not grant it who hold (I think most truly) that before the flood men
lived on Vegetables: In the Golden age they are not fansied to have had this
delicious and lusty food.

^vid. m^tamo^ ph. l. 15.
At vetus illa aetas cui secimus Aurea nomen
Faetibus arboreis, et quas humus educat herbis
Fortunata fuit, nec polluit ora cruore.
How many of the Ancient Philosophers did dec ^ine and decr this admired diet?
but our Virtuoso will as little approve of their Palats, as their judgments.
How many of the primitive Christians were of the same judgment, and lived
accordingly? They were so universally inclined to it (I do not mention the
Tatiani and Encratitae, and other Heretics) that in the Examination of such as
were to be admitted into Holy Orders it was one Q^ery, Renatus Mor^an in anim
^dv. ad^ Schol. Sal^r^it. page 590.
Si nuptias Secundas non improbarent, e^ carnes non haberent Execratas. Quin
cogebantur praegustare carnes, alioquin Excommunicabantur, et de ordine sui
Clericatus deponebantur, ut habes expositum in Can: 50 51. Apostolorum. 1 Can.
14. Carthaginensi, canone primo. Bracharensi primo, et refertur de consecrati
did. 23. cap. qui Episcop. The order of the Carthusian Monks at present eat no
Flesh: Arn: de villa-Nova de ^su carnium p^o Su^t^nt (...). Cartu^^e^s.
yet does Arnoldus Villanovanus demand, Quis audet asserere quod nemo vitae
longitudinem consequatur sine carnium usu, cum in Monasteriis Cartusienses
octogenarii et centenarii mundorum sensuum crebro inveniantur. When David found
the Egyptian in the field, who had eaten no bread, nor drank any water three
days and three nights: they gave him bread and he did eat, 3 Sam: 30.11.12.
and they made him drink water: And they gave him a piece of a cake of Figgs,
and two clusters of Raysins: and when he had eaten, his Spirit came again unto
him. And it seems as if the general food of the Romans had been Herbs: So
Zacchias imagines, Zatchias, quaest medico-legal. l. 5. tit 1. qu. 2.
Quibus ego addam Claudii Edictum, de quo apud Suetonium in ejus vita cap. 22.
quo cavebatur ne in propinis quicquam cocti vaeniret, praeter olera et
legumina: quae quidem non contemnendam conjecturam praebent antiquiores, haec
pr^ caeteris cibariis in familiarissimo usu habuisse; Est et apud Horatium
locus ex quo similis conjectura desumi potest, cum suum victum familiarem ac
quotidianum narrat: l. 1. Sermon. Sat. 6.

-- Inde domum me
Ad Porri, et Ciceris refero, Lagamque catinum.
I neither find that these people disrelished their diet, or wanted of that
lustiness which the eaters of flesh pretend unto. That such as feed on
Vegetables should be Caterers of Nitre for those that feed upon Animals, it is
either false, or they are very bad Caterers, since they seldom do their duty
in procuring that Salt: and when by chance they may have fed upon any, I am
confident it is transmuted into an Urinous Salt in their bodies, so that those
other Animals never get any other than that universal Salt which is the radix
Nitri as Glauber calls it, but is really no more Saltpeter than it is Salt
Armoniack; Salt of Wormwood, or Salt of Scurvy Grass. No complexion was ever so
altered by being Sunburnt, or by the Small Pox, as the complexion of Saltpeter
is in Plants and Animals, from what it is at the Workhouse.

The reason why Animals that feed on Vegetables are obliged by Nature to longer
meals than those that feed on other Animals; is because Animals are fuller of
that Salt then Vegetables. -- This Reason puts me in mind of a problem in
Aristotle, Why Colts that have seen a Wolf, are Swifter than those that have
not? (I think it is to that purpose.) After sundry reasons given, he adds; But
purhaps there is no such thing. I profess I do imagine it is so in this Case.
And waving the question How nature obliges them to it? I never heard that
those Encrati^es and such as Daniel, or St. John Baptist etc. had Stomachs and
did eat like Horses: I never read of the long meals of the Bannyans, or
Pythagoreans. Any planter in Barbados, will assure you that a pint of a kind of
bean which they call Bonavist with a little Salt, boyld, will nourish and
support a servant more than flesh. The like we observe with Cacao in Iamaica.
The Hunte^s in Iamaica that live on Flesh and Salt when they are abroad in the
Woods, eat much more in quantity than when they eat bread^ Cassavi, or Patata's
with their meat. Besides, there is a bird in Iamaica, and the adjacent Islands
almost as big as a Turkey and like one, they call it a Carrion Crow, these
devour all the offall of the beasts that are slain by the Hunters: they are
never fat, nor satiated: I have seen some of them feed on Carrion from morning
to night without any considerable intermission.

The facile (...) by which his friend did convert the greatest part o^ Petre
into a Salt so like the volatile Salt of Urine that they are scarce to be
distinguished by smell or taste: yet adding nothing that can possiibly be
suspected of that nature. If it be true, and that Mr. Henshaw was not imposed
upon; if this Nitre was so changed as that it lost its inflammability and way
of burning, its way of Crystallising and those other qualities which are proper
to Nitre: how facile soever the Operation were, it was a transmutation, and the
change was greater than when the Complexion of Saltpeter is only altered a
little.

I am tired with multiplying reflections upon such a discourse: any one will
apprehend that this great and useful Speculation of Mr. Henshaw's amounts to
no more than wast Paper. All that I have benefited by it, is to remember a
proposition made in Mr. Hartlib, Hartlibs legacy Page 180.
concerning the improvement of Houses of Office, which I will set down as being
more material to the public, and indeed more conducing to illustrate his
Speculations than any thing he has alleged. -- I have seen Fifty pounds worth
of Salt Petre extracted out of a vault at Dowgate, not very Spacious, which was
formerly an House of O^fice, and not emptyed till the matter was thoroughly
rotten. Why may not the same thing be done by Art, which was formerly done by
Nature and Accident? I have been credibly informed that such a work is
ordinarily done in the Kingdom of China and also at the City of Paris in
France: and I see no reason why Englishmen should not have as much wit as
they. If any man has convenient Room to build two Houses of Office, and to
close up the one whilst he uses the other, then there can be no question but
that instead of the charge of emptying, and no^someness of smell, he may have
it emptied for nothing, and feel the sweet smell of money very grateful to
most m^n, and that in as great or greater quantity than he receives for his
ordinary edifices: besides that, he will show himself to be a good member of
the body politic in which he lives: but he must beware that the matter lie
dry, and that no adventitious moisture come to it from beneath or above; which
will be something more chargeable in moist grounds than where the Earth is very
dry by its own nature. Agreeable to this is the practice of our Salt-Petre-men,
who as often as they meet with any old vault of this kind, they make use of it
to extract their Mineral, as being inferior to no Earths. Andras ^accius de
therm. l. 5 cap. 7.
And Baccius relates that near a certain town, which he calls Oppidum
Fabrianum, there was a deep and close Grott under the Appennine, in which
Millions of Owls did lodge themselves, their dung had been accumulated there
for many centuries of years: So Kircher. Mun^. Subter. l. 6. Sect. 2. cap. 4.
out of this the Salt-Petre-men extracted so much of Nitre as amounted to an
inestimable summ^ of money.

And not long ago, whereas in the Wars betwixt the Crim Tartar and Polonians
toward Muscovy, Gla^be^ P^osper. Germ. part. per^ page 96.
great numbers of people being slain in battails were buried for have
togegether in great cavernes in the Mountains, and so rotted there: out of that
Earth in the Cavernes there was extracted a great quantity of Saltpeter.
Casimir S^micnowicz. art mag. artiller. p. 1. l. 2. c. 2.
From these premises, and from the consideration of the dung of Kine, Horses,
Goats, Swine, Sheep; out of all which Saltpeter is extracted in great
quantities, it seems as if one might with some Speciousness argue, that the
Salt in Animals (which is a great ingredient in their nutrition) were nothing
but Nitre altered a little from its first complexion. But whosoever shall
consider with Gla^ber that circumstance of a long putrifacti^n, and how
necessary it is the Earth be Animated and impregnated by the Air (so that in
Churches where it is paved, they look not for Petre but in open floores or
Seats that are loosly boarded) and by what degrees and rudiments it proceeds to
common Salt (as I suppose in this cas^ the immature Earth abounds with that
which is afterward turned into Nitre, and the Northern Countries tha^ y^ild
little Petre are impregnated with that Salt) to common Salt first (except a
powerful Seminality intervene as in ^shes impregnated with Mothers; in Earth
mixed with the Scumme or ashes aforesaid) and after into Saltpeter. Whosoever
shall consider this will be apt to reject that conclusion, and think that since
no Chemistry, nor other Artific^ can discover any Petre in Animals at first,
that whatever Salt there is in Animals and their excrements, it more differs
from Saltpeter than the change of its Complexion amounts unto, and that it is
a kind of Seminall principle derived from the Air, or some other way, that
generates by real transmutation the Saltpeter out of the volatile and fixed
Salts, and (perhaps) other particles of their bodies and Excrements.

I should here conclude my Animadversions upon this History of Saltpeter, but
that I think it necessary to show the world what a Plagiary this Virtuoso is:
This Theory of his with which he seems so much delighted, is but a disguise of
what Glauber has publish^d in his works, and inculca^ed more than once. That
inquisitive person tell us, that there is a certain universal Salt diffused
through all parts of our Globe, and that the three Kingdoms, Vegetable,
Animal, and Mineral are impregnated therewith: and that this Universal Salt is
of such a nature that if it be animated ('it is his own word) by a certain
Nitrous principle, Spirit or Seminality, it will become true and inflameable
Petre. That this Nitrous Spirit can never be incorporated or coagulated of it
self: but that it must be Sociated with some Saline bodies and then it becomes
perfect Nitre. And however he allows a regard to the volatile and Urinous
Salts as things most facile to impregnate with and transmute into Saltpeter;
yet does he ascrib^ as much to the fixed (though the progress be sometimes
slower) as to the Volatile Salts in this case. Equidem lubens fateor,, quod
Spiritus Nitri ex omnibus fixis Salibus sibi corpus assumendo, G^aube^. appe^.
qu. part. Pros^^. G^rman. Page 23.
ad pri^^inam Salis-Petrae naturam reverti possit. From this opinion of Glauber
(who sometimes speaks loosly, and calls the Salt in Veget^bles, and Animals,
and Minerals Nitrous, and even Nitre) did Mr. Henshaw borrow his Notion of this
Nitre that is diffused through all the Elements, and disguised in Vegetables,
and Animals and Minerals, which he omits; foolishly!) Animalia nulla sibi alia
quaerunt alimenta, quam quae terra ipsis suppeditat, Prosper. G^rman. part. 3.
p^g. 112.
quibus Sal-p^trae omnino ades^e debet. Salptrae itaque est omnium vegetabilium
Mineralium et Animalium Unicus Servator. -- Salessentiale vel naturae nihil
aliud est quam Salpetrae, prosper. Germ. part. 2 p. 66.
non tamen ardens nisi animatus fuerit per aerem, et ex eodem vitam aut esse
suum hauserit. -- Cuncta haec in omnibus rebus nitrum OCCULTUM latere satis
superque arguunt. Sal enim mundi, sive Sal Universale et essentiale nihil est
aliud quam Nitrum postquam Vitam ex aere extraxit. What Glauber's Opinion is
may be guessed out of what I have already alleged out of him, where he
particularly explains himself. How -- our Virtuoso has disguised and declared
his, I have also showed. But perhaps you will say that Mr. Henshaw never read
Glauber, at least he never takes notice of him: I answer, that in not
mentioning of him he shows his disingenuity: but Glauber's treatises relating
to Saltpeter were published in the years 1656, and 1659. And that Mr. Henshaw
did read him it seems evident from this, that his History of Saltpeter seems
rather to be transcribed from out of Glauber's third part of the Prosperity of
Germany (who transcribed it out of Lazarus Ercker overseer of the Emperor's
Mines) than from any Experiments or observations of his own and other
Salt-Petre-men, (with whom perhaps he lightly discoursed) whatever he pretended
the beginning of his History: page 261. For had he minded the work, he could not
have committed so many Errors. I believe that I ought to rectify Mr.
Henshawe's computation of what Petre the liquor holds by computation before it
be put into the Ash-tubs page: 270. and that for thirty five pound it ought to
be twenty five pound: for so it is in Ercker; who follows that way of
calculating, which I believe our Petre-men do not. Sure I am, that whereas Mr.
Henshaw says that the liquor of the second boiling when it is ready to
Crystallize contains in every hundred-weight about threescore and ten pounds of
Petre. That Ercker says: Liquore sic perfect parato, ex centenario ejus plus
quam 70 l. Salis-Petrae provenient. That Sign also of second boiling being
boyld to a just height, by hanging like Oil on the Scummer, as false as it is,
is out of Ercker, viz. Ligula ipsa liquoris bonitatem denotat, ubi liquori
immissa et iterum extracta ipsum instar olei sibi adhaerentem exhibet. Several
other passages there are, which seem taken out of Ercker, about the color of
the Un-refined Petre, and the mistake about the Mother, or liquor which remains
after coagulation how it is to be disposed of. The casting in of Vinegar, a
pint at a time, and the rising of the black Scumme ( page 273) is the one a
direction, the other an observation of Erckers. The Casting in of quicklime to
make the Petre whiter, and rock the better; the injecting of burnt Allom before
that: are the documents of Ercker, but not that I hear the practice of England.
The covering the Trayes with clothes, to make the Petre begin to shoot at the
bottom and Rock into fairer Crystalls; These and many other circumstances
convince me that Mr. Henshaw stole his narrative, and then certainly fetched his
-- from no other place. Only he Spoils a plausible Theory, and tells us he is
much delighted with it: and no doubt thereof: So were some of the Society, and
it was an Extraordinary apprehension they had of the Worth of this History that
they inserted it into Mr. Sprat's Book: and truly I was as much pleased
thereat, as They could be.

Animadversions upon the History of making of Gunpowder, Page 277.
written also by Mr. Henshaw.
IF some of our Wits were not such Enemies to Logic (a part whereof is Method)
I should have expected to have found in the continuation of the History of
Gunpowder some mention of Brimston, and its refining. And I should have
expected a discourse concerning mute powder, which however it be not
efficacious, This is a particular way of clarifying the Brimstone and
fortifying it so as to be much more servicable: which any one may read in
Casimi^us Semienowicz p. 1. l. 2. c. 9. There is an account of mute Powder
(though not tried by him) in the same Author and a way to take of the crack of
Gunpowder, in Untzerus de Sal. c. 29. of which we hear not a word.
yet is it a sort of Gunpowder, and a noble experiment. And perhaps it might
not have been unworthy the curiosity of an accurate Historian to have treated
of those preparations of Gold and Steel, which are called Aurum fulminans et
tonitruans or crepitans, Ceraunochrysos; Vide Chrysioscopion Casparis.
Mars tonans: and that other made with common Sulphur, and published by
Rolfincius Chym. in art. red. l. 5. Sect. 2. c. 28. Amthour cap. 5. S^nn^^t. de
co^s. ^t diss. chym. c. 19.
These he might very well have inserted, and neither have Invented over again
(a thing usual with our Virtuosi) or have related them as secrets imparted
unto him by an Ingenious friend or Member of the Royal Society: which is
agreeable to their practice: thus particularly Mr. Hook suggests unto us the
usual Study of the Signatures of Plants upon the observation of an able
Physician, ^n^erograph. observe. 30. page 155.
a friend of his whereas that discovery is as old as Paracelsus and Crollius
and in reference to his insinuation of the virtue of Poppyes from the
Signature, I shall add this digressing passage out of Conringius in addend. ad.
med. Hermet. page 400. Nec vero capiti prodest vel nymphaeae flos uel papaveris
caput, quod imaginem aliquam capitis praebeant: omnibus enim ejus affectibus
deberent prodesse et solis, siquidem agant Specifica quodam, ut loquuntur,
facultate, et capiti proprie ^int dicata. Sed et illa capitis effigiem non
aliter prae se ferunt quam poma omnia imo omnes seminum folliculi, quae tamen
nemo duxerit capiti singulariter prodesse. Infinitis exemplis vanitatem
doctrinae ostendere est, si opus fuerit.

But these are not his only omissions; for it became him in the first place to
have represented unto us the facile and less artificial ways of making
Gunpowder, and then the more elaborate procedure at the Powder-mills. But our
Virtuoso is above those pedanticall rules of Logic and History, by which
vulgar Wits are regulated. Because I think it no unnecessary instruction, I
shall set down a Method of making Gunpowder without any Mill at all, as
Casimirus Semienowicz reports it. ^n Art. may ^. A^tiller. part 1. l. 2. c. 14.
many of our Country-peasants know how to make Gunpowder without the use of
any artifice or machines. For we have seen many of the inhabitants of Podolia
and ^^rain, who are termed Cosacs making Gunpowder after another manner then
is commonly practiced. They take certain proportions of Saltpeter, Brimstone,
and Coal, (which proportions they have learned by long practice) and put them
into an earthen vessel, adding thereto some fresh water, they boil it over a
slow fire for two or three hours, till the water be evaporated, and the
materials grow thick and Stiff. Then they take the mess out of the pot, and
drying it a little more in a Stove or in the Sun, they pass it through an hair
sieve, and so granulate it very small. Others take the materials designed for
Gun powder and either upon a plain polished Stone, or in any Earthen Vessel
grind them and mix them well together and incorporate them: then they moisten
it, and so granulate it. Betwixt this way of the Cosacs, and that of Vannuccio
Biringoccio there is a little difference, which makes me set his down apart.
Having weighed the materials, ^ach by it self, and having beat and sears^d them
each apart, in the end (as the best and speedi^st way) to compose them
together, take the quantity of Nitre you are to use, and put into a Caldron
with so much water as, putting it on the fire to heat, you think will dissolve
it; then take off the Caldron and set it on the ground in a firm place, and
then put in the quantity of the Coal by little and little, stirring it about
until it is well incorporated with the dissolved Nitre: then take your Sulphur
finely powdered and s^arsed, and stir it in, stirring it continually about with
a wooden pestell, until you have well incorporated all together, and made the
Co^l fine and impalpable, if you can: then dry it from all moisture and searse
it very well thorough a fit serse; and then wet it with a little common water,
or a little Vinegar, and lastly thorough a sieve or searse grain it, and then
again dry it well for your use.

To pass by his defects it is a notorious untruth with which he begins his
History. The materials of Gunpowder are Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Coal. --
The Coal MUST be Withy and Alder equal parts: for Withy alone is counted too
soft, and some do commend Hazle to be as good as the other two. -- I find that
those that made Gunpowder at Coventry during the late Wars used any
^ight-wood-coal, de vulner: s^l^pet 911.
as Maple and Aspe: and thought their powder as good as any could be. Some have
told me that they have known Birch-coal very good. I find Botallus to reckon up
as ingredients promiscuously used in the making of Gunpowder, Dr. Read also
reckons them coals as m^de indifferently of Willow, or strlks of Hemp: of
wounds lit. 15. Art. magn. or till. p. 1. l. 2. c. 13.
Carbones Cannabinos, saliceos, vel juglandeos^ and Semienowicz says that if
you cannot get enough of Withy, or Hazle to charre: Si Salicis et coryli
sufficiens non detur copia ad urendos carbones, vices horum tilia sicca
supplere poterit. Si exiguam aliquam carbonum portionem praeparare cupis,
virgulta ex coryla et salice, vel lignum tiliae aut j^niperi in parva frustula
secta, et optime siccata vasi alicui testaceo includito, et operculo figulnea
creta ad orificium vasis firmato, postea candentibus ^ndique^ stipatum prunis,
per unius horae Spatium ibidem in uno continuo et aequali semper caloris gradu
manner sinito. Frigescattandem sua sponte, et usti eximantur carbones. Sunt qui
mappas et lineam telam vetustam been et siccatam hoc modo in carbo^em redigant;
cujus etiam non spernenda virtus in re Pyrotechnica. I find another excellent
writer of Pyrotechny one Signior Vannu^cio Biringoccio a Nobleman of Sienna
Printed at Venice the third time in 1559. to use other materials for his Coal
then our Virtuoso propounds. To make the Coal some besides Willowes use the
branches of vine: some make it of Noccido a Nut tree Hazel, bay tree, of the
bark of the fruit of the pine, and some of those twigs they make Baskets with,
some of young Elder, and some of Cane or Reed: and in fine, those coals that
are made of gentle, pliable and flexile wood with pith enough, and that be fine
and young and without hard knots, are fit for this use, and it is made in
diverse manners in great quantities. It is made after the fashion of common
coal. Those Virtuosi that have little to do, use to put twigs split into a
large pot or other Vessel of Earth, Iron, or Brass, and cover or lute it well
about that nothing may respire; and then make a fire upon it, continuing it so
long that they believe the twigs are sufficiently burnt without flame; and then
they let them cool, and take the coal for their use. When I have had present
need I have done it without all this ado I have taken a quantity of clear dry
twigs, and broke them to pieces and laid them on an heap close, and set them on
fire, and let them burn well: then with a Scoop or a ladle I have sprinkled
water on them, and then gently scatterd the fire and quenched them.

But whatever the common practice be, the addition of coal is not so necessary,
but some other things may be substituted instead of it, which practice is usual
with those that make Gunpowder of sundry other colors besides black.

De pulvere pyrio variis coloribus colorato.
Pulveris communis pyrii nigredo ex carbonum atro color resultat. Possibile
tamen ^undem alio quoque color tingere, ^as. S^mieno^icz. ^^t. mag. art. p. 3.
l. 2. ^^ 15.
si carbonum loco vel lignum putridum, vel papyrus alba humefacta prius postea
in furno calido siccata et in pulverem trita, vel aliud quidpiam simile, facile
ignem arripiens et combustibile (ut in sequentibus patebit) sumatur, varijque
colores addantur. Proponemus igitur hoc capite mixtur as aliquot ex quibus
ipsimet propriis manibus saepius variis coloribus coloratos confeci^^s pulveres.

Pulvis albus.
1.
Salisnitri lb. 6. Sulphuris lb. j. medullae sambuci exiccat^ lb. j.

2.
Salisnitri lb. 10. Sulphuris lb. j. corticum vel partis lignos^ Cannabi
decussae lb. j.

3.
Salisnitri lb. 6. Sulphuris lb. j. Taratri ad albedinem calcinati, dein in
aqua communi in olla non vitreata ad evaporationem totius aquae cocti un^.

Pulvis rubicundus.
1.
Salisnitri lb. 6. Sulphuris lb. j. Ambrae lb. se. sandali rubri lb. j.

2.
Salisnitri lb. 8. Sulphuris lb. j. papyri exiccatae et in pulverem tritae, et
in aqua cinnanobaris aut ligni Brasiliani coctae et iterum exiccatae lb. j.

Pulvis luteus.
Salispetre lb. 8. Sulphuris lb. j. Croci sylvestris cum vino adusto prius
cocti, dein optime exiccati et pulverisati lb. j.

Pulvis viridis.
Salisnitri lb. 10. Sulphuris lb. j. ligni p^tridi cum aerugine aeris et aqua
vita cocti, dein exiccati lb. 2.

Pulvis caeruleus
Salisnitri lib. 8. Sulphuris lib. j. Scobis ex ligno tilie cum indigo et vino
adusto coctae, dein exiccatae et pulveris atae lb. j.

It might have become our Virtuoso in an History of Gunpowder not only to have
declined these Errors and Mistakes, but to have treated of these sundry sorts
of powder, thus colored: as also to have taken notice of the difference
betwixt Cannon-powder and that which is used for Muskets and Pistolls, which
distinction, as observable as it is to every ordinary person, is not taken
notice of by our Historian further then that out of the same mass the great
corns serve for Cannon powder, the less for musket and pistol. whereas great
Artillery requires other powder then the small; and the materials of Gunpowder
are differently proportioned to make up the several powders as appears by the
pyrotechny of Vannuccio Biringoccio.

To make common powder for great Artillery.
Take of Nitre refined three parts. of Sulphur 1 part. of Coal of Willow 2
parts.
To make that for the middle sort of Artillery.
Take Nitre refined 5 parts. Coal 1 part and an half. Sulphur one part, Let it
be well incorporated, granulated and dried.
To make that for Arquebusses and Pistolls.
Take Nitre refined 10 parts. Coal of Hazell-twigs cleansed 1. part: Sulphur 1
part.
Some to make it better.
Take Nitre, 13 parts and an half. Coal two parts. Sulphur one part and and an
half.
Let them be well beaten and incorporated etc.

I find also the accurate Casimirus Semienowicz to make a treble distinction of
Powder which I shall set down, as being the best and most approved in the
world. which when I have done we shall not much lament the concealment of that
cheat or secret Mr. Henshaw could well learn, but with promise not to divulge
it: it not being other then to substract from the Petre, and make up the weight
in coal whilst (by this improvement of Gunpowder by the Virtuosi) his Majesty
pays as if there were the proportion of Saltpeter,

Mixturae ad triplicem pulverem conficiendum optimae probatissimaeque.

Mixturae pulveris ad tormenta Majora. Mixturae pulveris ad Sclopeta majora
vulgo musquetas. Mixturae pulveris ad Sclopeta minora, vulgo pistolos et alia.
1 1 1 Salisnitri lb. 100. Salisnitri lb. 100. Salisnitri lb. 100. Sulphuris lb.
25. Sulphuris lb. 18. Sulphuris lb. 12. Carbonum lb. 25. Carbonum lb. 20.
Carbonum lb. 15. 2 2 2 Salisnitri lb. 100. Salisnitri lb. 100. Salisnitri lb.
100. Sulphuris lb. 20. Sulphuris lb. 15. Sulphuris lb. 10. Carbonum lb. 24.
Carbonum lb. 18. Carbonum lb. 8.

Mixturae pulverum ad Tormenta and Majora Sclopeta, inter pinsendum vel
Simplici aqua tantum, vel aceto, vel urina, vel vino adusto humectari et
inspergi possunt. Sin autem ad Sclopeta minora fortiorem vege^ioremque
exoptamus pulverem, superiores duae mixturae sequenti liquore, vel aqua ex
corticibus, malorum Aurantiorum, et Citrinorum, et Limoniorum recentium
Chymicis organis distillata inspergantur saepius, pinsenturque per Horas 24
deinque in minutissima granulentur.

Liquor autem componitur ex vini adusti mensuris 20. Spiritus aceti ex vino
albo distillati mensuris 12. Spiritus Nitri mensuris 4. A^uae simplicis ex Sale
Armeniaco mensuris 2. Camphorae ex vino adusto subactae, vel cum Sulphur trito
pulveri sa^ae, vel d^nique cum oleo Amygdalarum dulcium in oleum redactae,
mensur^ 1.

Aqua ex Sale Ammoniaco.
Rec. Salis Ammoniaci 3 drach. Salis Nitri unc. 1. redigantur in pulve^em
tenuissi^um et probe misceantur: postea in Alembicum ^mponantur, e^ aceto
fortissimo in^uso, distillentur igne lento

I have oftentimes wondered with my self how it was possible for Mr. Henshaw to
pen, and for the Royal Society to approve so pitty^ull an History of
Saltpeter and Gun-P^wder. They are certainly a lamentable sort of Scriblers,
that write so ill, having so good Copies before them! That noble Siennoi^ whom
I have already cited; Nicolo Tartaglia in his Quesi^i et inven^ioni diverse:
and Pietro Sardi in his book L'Artiglieria have written excellently well of
this subject: and in the year 1650 Casimirus Semienowicz a Lithuanian Knight
and formerly Li^uetenant of the Ordnance to the King of Poland, published a
most Elaborate discourse about the use of the great Artillery; He was a man
that made those studies his business and having signalized himself by his skill
in the management of all manner of Artillery, he was employed and Honored by
Uladislaus the 4th. King of Poland and Sweden, by him encouraged to that work,
and to accomplish it the bett^r at his ^harge sent into Holland there to
perfect his knowledge. This Eminent personage in the second book of his first
part has handled all that appertains to the making of Saltpeter and
Gunpowder, to the trial, and to the keeping of it: And were not the discourse
too long, I had inserted it h^re but because I have already made use of several
passages ou^ of him, I shall here add the discourses only of Pietro Sardi and
Nicolo Tartaglia; where they are defective or need amendment I shall supply all
out of Cas. Semienowicz. whom Kircher calls Semienovius, in his Mundus
Subterraneous, and out of him transcribes most that he has about this subject
there.

The Discourse of Pietro Sardi about Saltpeter, and Gunpowder, in his book L'
Artigleria lib. 3. Cap. 49, 50, 51.52, 53, 54. printed in Venice, in folio.
Sal Nitri, being the Groundwork, strength and Spirit of the Powder which by
the Quantity and Perfections of the Nitre, is said to be more or less fine and
effectual, it seems good here to discourse somewhat concerning it, whence it is
Generated, how made and Reduced to perfection; to the end the Gunner in every
occasion, (wanting Powder, Powder-makers and Saltpetre-men,) may know how to
make it, if not in that perfection which the Saltpeter-men do by their Art, yet
at least such as may serve in time of Necessity.

Sal Nitri is Extracted from the Earth in great quantities, and from Walls in
small; to wit, from that Salt, which some walls of Cellars and vaults under
Ground, exposed to Humidity do spue forth.

It is drawn from the Earth, Terra et materia Salnitrosa plerumque reperitur in
maxima copia in locis obscuris, umbrosis, and ^avernosis, ad quae tam radijs
Solaribus, quam pluviae et omni dulci aquae aditus prae clusus est. Tum etiam
in equilibus, and aliis claustris non Subdialibus, sed tectis, ubi omnis
generis pecora: ut sunt boves, caprae, sues, oves, et his ^ ^imilia alia locari
et concludi^: ne^non ubi homines ipsi u^inam reddere solent. Tum denique in
illis locis in quibus post camp stria com^ssa praeli^, plu^ima caesorum
militum corpora in ^oveas conjecta, et super his immensae terrae moles
superextr^ctae sunt. E^ his post multa annorum intervalla, plurimum materiae
Salni-trosae erui vidimus in Valachia et Pod olilae desertis inter Bohem, et
Boristhenem. Cas. Semienowickz p. 1. l, 2. c. 2: yet in England I cannot hear
that they dig for it in places dunged with Sheep although the C^vert, and
time may have seemed to have concurred apparently to generate it.
but not in all places, but such as are Proper, as those are, that are obscure
and Cavernous, where the rain falls not, as in the stalls of Animals great and
small, and Particularly Goats, Sheep and Hogs. In Gascoigne in France, These
three ways are approved by Cas. Se^^en^wicz; but if he say that
Salt-pe^re-c^^^h bites a little to the taste. lingu^m mordacius ^orr^dit, he
does not say it is bitter, as Mr. He^shaw does. p. 266:
I went in the company of the Commissary of the Artigliery of the City of
Bordeaux, through the Cave^ns of the little hills and Mountains, that are
situated on the River Garonne, drawing and digging in many places, Great
quantities of this Salt-petre-Earth; and in Brussels I have seen them draw
Sal^Nitre from Rubbish and D^st of old walls.

And in France th^re is Commission given to the Principal officers of the
Artillery, dispersed through that vast Kingdom, to enter into all houses
private and public, to find out such Salt-Peter-Earth; and the private
persons are forced to be patient because it is for the service of the King. Si
citrei et ad albedinem vergentis aliquantulum coloris in ferro frigefacto signa
inveneris de valor et bointatet err non dubties. Cas. Semienowicz. p. ^. l. 2.
c. 2.


There are Three ways to know if the Earth be Pregnant of Saltpeter. 1. with
the Mouth, putting a little on the tongue, if there be sense of a biting tas^.
2. with a Burning Iron-thrust into a hole made with a Sharp wooden Stick, and
suffering it to Cool there; and if upon drawing it out it appears of a yellow
whitish Color, it is a sign there is Nitre there, but if it remains of the
natural color, it is unprofitable. 3. It is proved likewise, Si strepitum
aliquem edere et lucidos in altum surgere favillos observaveris, multo fale
ni-tri terram ejusmodi abundare judicabis, id. ib. Cineris usti ex ^obore,
fraxino, ^^mo, ace^e vel aliis sortib us et duris ligni ^ ib.
taking a handful and sprinkling it lightly on burning Coals, if there be
perceived any crackling noise, and any sparkles issues forth speedily, it shall
be a sign of Salt-petre-Earth, otherwise of none.

Having got great quantity of this pregnant Earth, you ought also to have Ready
a good quantity of Ashes made of Oak, Cerro.
holme Oak, or Sarmenti signifies also flags, fegs, or Ree^ growing by the
watersi^e, H^jus e^neris suman^ur parts d^ae, (...) been (...).
Vine-branches or some other Strong wood, with a sufficient quantity of
Quicklime, which things being thus prepared, take two parts of the said Lime
and three of Ashes and let them be well mingled together.

Let there be also prepared a Great ^
vessel, placed on high, in such manner that under it may stand another vessel
to Receive the water, that shall be strained from that above.

In the upper Vessel shall be put broom or straw in the Bottom or plain, and
over the hole where the water is to issue ou^, shall be placed a Piece of a
Tile, or some such thing as the women do in their Bucks, and the Hole must be
^hut very well.

Afterward take the Sal-nitrous Earth moderately dried, and put it into the
vessel a handful thick, and upon that a Ground (of two or three fingers high)
of that Ashes and lime mingled together, Paululum exsica^a. Cas. Semienowicz.
ubi supra
and then a ground of Earth, and again of Ashes and Lime, continuing this
Course until the vessel be full within a handful and an half.

This being thus managed, let it be filled up with common water sweet and clear
in which is not the least salt, Insundatur recenti^ et dulcas aqua tantum,
quantum ^at esse videbit u^ atque duos tresve digito^, terrae super exte^. i^.
ib.
and because the Earth will quickly suck up the water, let it be put in so by
degrees till the Earth will admit no more, and the vessel be filled equal to
the Earth, and not higher.

It being thus filled, let it stand twenty four hours, or more, after which
time open the tap-hole, and let the water strain into the vessel underneath,
which being all strained, let that water be emptied into another vessel or Tun
and reserved, Untzerus presents us with another way of making Sal^-Petre, which
because our Historian has omitted, I shall set down: Terr^ ^itrosa aqu^ multa
di^^at^r, d^inde ad p^rum colatur. colatur^ si non satis dives ^alinitro est,
de^^o apponitur materiis et iterum cocta facto sedimento per lacinias
transfertur in vas purium ibique coquit^r^ ad just^m consistentiam Decoctum
ins^^tur in Oll^m, Diges tum per dolia et alveolos, crystali ^angelati
^xim^ntur, residus liquor recoquitur ad m^^ias vel tertias donec gastu sit
acris, et gutt^ super aramento concrescant unde i^^rum expectandi crystalli. et
sic perge^um don^c t^tum ^^^gulaverit. Untzer: de sale c. 18.
and then put in some fresh water into the Earth vessel as before, letting it
stand for the space of twelve hours, then opening the tap-hole again let it
strain into the vessel, which done, put apart into another vessel this liquor,
and not in the first: Do this a third time and empty it into a third Vessel.

This being done, make proof of these three waters by putting some few drops on
your tongue, and tasting it you shall find the first very biting, the second
less, and the third least of all, for the first draws more of the substance of
the Saltpeter, then the second, and the second then the third.

But there may be the fourth operation, for sometimes the Earth does retain so
much Nitrous substance therein, that it may prove advantageous even to the fifth
and sixth time; and all the waters are to be reserved apart, with the
distillations of the first, second, third etc. as many as there shall be.

By this operation of one vessel or ^un, may be apprehended the manner of
making an hundred or as many as you please, according to the Quantity of the
Prepared Earth, observing always that the first waters strained be put in one
vessel, or in what will contain them, and all the other waters (Carelessly) in
one or more vessels that will hold them.

These last waters shall be taken and forced to pass over New Earth, operating
as before, and so many times shall they Pass over new earth until you find the
water sufficiently impregnated with Nitre, which you shall easily know by the
taste; for the tongue will be hardly able to endure it for the great hea^, and
the waters will bear almost a new laid Egg without sinking to the bottom.

^gne lento prius, dein fortiori decoquatur ad consumptionem unius tertiae. id.
ibid.
Having Collected a sufficient quantity of this Nitrous water you must put it
into one or more Great Brazen or Copper caldron (like those of the dyers
accommodated to a furnace) which being filled of two thirds of such liquor (i.
e.) in such manner that a third part of the caldron be yet empty, give fire to
it at first gently, afterward more strongly, by degrees, until the boiling be
well advanced, and so continue until the caldron be but one third part full of
liquor, or to say better until but half of what was put in do Remain.

The waters of one or more Caldrons being boiled and reduced to such a
Quantity, Coque ad consumptionem medietatis, vel quousque spissior et
densior-evadat. id. ibid.
let them be gently taken out, and put in a Capacious Tun, or Tuns, well hooped
with hoopes of Iron, and let them be covered with hempen cloth and tables upon
them very diligently, and so let them be left until they cool, and that they
be settled very well in such manner that all the Earthy substance and naughty
Salt, be fallen to the bottom. Congeli.


These waters being thus purified let them again be gently (that they be not
troubled but the common Salt and earthiness left in the bottom) Returned in to
the cleansed caldrons, and they being boiled as at first until one half be
consumed, Effundatur in ligneos canales, vel vasa alv^ata oblonga e^ lata ^agis
quam profunda: nec tamen plus hujas aquae sit in uno vase, quam ut spatium
unius palmi in altitud^ne occupet, de^nde vasa sineis vel laneis pannis
cras^io^ibus contecta in frigido loco ponantur. id. ib.
or at least until you know it be boiled and be coagu^a^ed, which will be
known, when taking a little upon a stick and dropping it on a Polished marble
or stone, if it remain congealed, or to say better thickened, it is a sign it is
boiled, and therefore take it from the fire and suffer it to cool. It being
thus cooled and clarified, let there be ready some Tray^ made of Planks long
and not too large nor too deep, but more large in the top then in the botome,
let these be filled with the boiled and clarified waters a handful high,
putting into them some little sticks of wood without Bark, and cover the
trays, and let them stand so two or three days, and at that time or longer,
according to the season you shall find the Sal-Nitri, Congealed and cleaving to
the sides of the Trays, and the sticks, (after the manner of clear Crystal,)
which take away carefully and the water that Remains, let it be put to boiling
anew as at first, leaving the salt and the dregs in the bottom of the Trays.

And because the waters in the boiling swell, and make a scum it will be
necessary to take away that scum carefully, (as they do from the fleshpots)
and to reserve that scum to throw it upon the Earth taken from the Tuns to
reimpregnate it with Saltpeter.

Moreover because the water in boiling will spatter out of the caldron, to
remedy this let there be ready a strong lie, made 3 fourths of fern Ashes, or
the ashes of Oak holme, o^ Oak or with Ash, or Maple (such as was used a^ the
first elixiviation,) and of one fourth of quicklime, and in the said strong
lie, for every hundred pints let there be dissolved four pounds for Roach-allu^^

And of this lie so prepared, take one or two pot^uls, and throw it in by
little and little when the Caldron swells, and it will presently be quiet, and
descend, and become of a clear Azure color, and the dreggs of the common salt
will fall to the Bottom.

Of the manner to r^fine Sal-p^trae to make gunpowder, cap. 50.
ALL the vigor of Gunpowder, consisting in Sol-petrae, its quantity, and its
perfection, if the Sal-petre should be put in use of the first boiling, the
Powder would ^ot be so perfect and so strong, as need would require; for the
quantity of Terrestrial matter^ Common^ salt and u^ctuosity, Nessarium bis aut
ter (immo pluries adhuc si tanto majorem pulveris effectum habere volumus)
purgasse et clarificasse id. ibid. c. 3.
which also reside with the Petre, do hinder its virtue and strength, and
therefore the Artists do always anew Refine the said Saltpeter, and purge it
from every extraneous matter, as much as is possible, that they may obtain the
most strenuous effects of Powder, that can be desired.

This Refining is made in two manners, either with water commonly called the
wett; or with Fire, commonly called the Dry, or the Burnt.

A Guazzo.
The wett, or with water, is made thus; They take as much sal-nitre as they
please to Refine, and put it in a Caldron over a furnace, and upon that
Sal-nitre they put such a quantity of fresh and clear water, as may be
sufficient to dissolve it; they take notice of the quantity of the water,
Aliquot cyathi; Cas, Semienowicz. ib. c. 3.
and for every barrel of water which they put into the Caldron, they put five
or six Pot-fulls of that strong lie, made of Ferne-Ashes, Oak, and Quicklime,
and Alum, and giving fire to the Caldron at first softly, and afterward
increasing it, un till the melted Nitre boil and raise a scum. Sabbione, sand
or gravel. Imponatur Sabulonis loti et been purgati tantum, ut ad altitudinem
unius palmi super fundum vasis emineat. Cas. Semienowicz ibid. c. 3.


Let there be ready, a great Tun or vessel placed so high that another vessel
may stand under it to receive the Sal-nitrous water, which by little shall
strain from above, and in the said great Tun let there be put a hands-breadth
of clean and washed Sand, and upon that a great linen cloth doubled, (as the
laundresses do) and on that pour the water from the Caldron, (which contains
the melted Nitre) as soon as it boyles and the scum is taken from it, and let
it strain by little and little by the ^^p into the vessel below, as they do in
making their Bucks.

Which water being all strained, let it be put into a clear Caldron and boil
it till by the proof of a Co^gealed drop, it may be known to be well boiled,
(not forgetting to give it some of the strong li^, of Alum, Ashes, and lime,
when the Caldron swells and would spatter out the water, and having made proof
it is boiled enough, let it be taken out and put into the long Trays, to cool^
as before, and preserve the congealed Saltpeter, and return the water to
boil again that remains, and again to congeale, and do so until the water
Give no more Saltpeter.

Now this Saltpeter so Refined, is called Saltpeter Refined of the ^econd
boyling^ as the Refiners, of sugar, call their Sugar Refined, of the Second,
Third or fourth, boiling, and to make Saltpetre of such perfection, you may (as
some do) Refine it, that is Reboyl it, in such manner the third time,
proceeding always as before.

Because that there is such difficulty in the depurating of Saltpeter from the
fixed common Salt, Alum and Vitriol which adhere to it, and that, without this
be done, no man can judge whether the salt it leaves upon calcination be from
the Nitre, or some other body, which by the usual process even of Mr. Boil, by
filtration and co^gulation can never be perfectly sep^r^ted, nor the Petre
^educed to crystals of (...) right Sig^^ture. (...)lis bestiarum ^rutus per
solutionem et coagulationem purgetur, impossible tamen est, ut ^unditiem suam
debitam et Signaturam vera^ con^eq^^^^^ so Glauber. de signat. Sa^. page 27.
And because the cryst^l^ of Nitre appear best in their own shapes, after such
an ex^ct depuration, it may not be omitted to tell you what Mr. Henshaw might
have done, for (...) evident ^e had (...) Gla^^e^ ^^z. (...) way of making pure
Nitre, is to take the course Mr. Boil found out, to burn part to an Alcali,
and to power upon a filtrated solution of that the Spirit of Nitre, and
evaporating it to ^ cuticle, to crystalize it in a cold place; But there is
another way that may not be (...) in (...) Somienowicz p. 1. ^. 2. ^. 8. (...)
2^ (...) simul mixed a pul^^r^ (...) neo, and aceti, v^l vini, a^^ in defectu
horum aqua d^lois (...) fundatu, bon^ quanti^as, at fia^ lixivium^ Quod per
tridu^ ^p^tium sibi relictum ^ larescat. Pone deinne sa^em-nitri in caldar^e,
(...) tantum lixivij ut salem-nitri cooperiat, pr^^oque lento igne ad
consumptionem mediae partis totius liquoris: resid^um effunde in aliud vas,
faeces autem omnes immundas, quas fundum caldarij petlisse videbisforas ^jiace.
frigescat postea aqua sal^itrosa et ulterius elaboretur, more consueto, that is
i^ such manner, as is pres^ribed by Sordi and him, in the first boiling of
Saltpeter.

The Refining Saltpeter by fire, to wit the dry, is made in this manner, they
have a great and capacious and thick vessel of Brass, Copper, or Iron, placed
on a Furnace, and in that they put, what quantity of Nitre they please, and
making a gentle fire at first, and increasing it by degrees until the Nitre be
perfectly melted and running, and begins to boil, and having ready fine
powdered Brimstone, they throw some of it in the top of the melted Nitre, and
if the Brimstone fire of it self, it is well, if not with a coal, or having a
stick they fire it, and this Brimstone so fired, they let alone until it have
consumed all the grease which swims upon the said Saltpeter.

The which being all consumed, the Saltpeter is emptyed into what vessels a
man will, that the Loaves or Pieces of Saltpeter, may become large, of which
he may prepare what quantity shall seem sufficient, and in the bottom of the
Caldron will remain the Dreggs and common salt, the Saltpeter being cooled,
becoming like a piece o^ fine white Marble, and in this manner you may refine
it as often as you will, and it shall always pro^e more perfect, and work
greater effects.

Of the Manner how to Re-impregnate the Earth, taken out of the Vessels with
new Saltpeter.
HAving taken out the Earth from the Vessels, after that the water has
extracted all the Nitrous substance therefrom, let it be spread on the face of
the Earth, but not exceeding a foot thick, and in some covered place, that it
be subject to neither Rain nor the sight of the Sun.

Which Earth being so ordered and spread, get a great quantity of Dung, as well
of great Cartel as small, and spread it on the Earth, as thick as you can, one
or two foot thick, or more if you have dung enough.

Upon this dung cast all the scum, and the waters which were taken from the
Salt-petr^, leaving the Earthy dreggs, and the common salt.

And afterward gathering in all public pla^es, in vessels prepared to that
purpose, as much Human urine as is possible, and every Day cast it on the Dung,
and doing so at two years end, that Earth will be impregnated, with as much
Nitre as ever, and it may be with greater advantage.

How to prove Saltpeter, to know its finess. Cap. 52.
TAke a Pound of Saltpeter, and put it on a smooth white Table, and with
burning coals fire it, in the doing whereof note these effects.

If it make a noise as Salt does, when it is cast on burning coals, it shall
be a sign that it reteins in it much common- salt.

If it make a fat scumme, it is a sign it has too much fatt.

If after it is all burnt, it leave in the bottom filth, it is a sign it yet
retains some of the Earthy substance, and the greater these signs are, so much
the more extraneous matter does the Salt^petre contain, and it is so much the
less purified fine, and of less Vigor.

But if the flame it cast be Si feceri^ flamm^m claram, ^ongam, and in plurimos
radios disperti^am, fundum ve^o tabulae remanserit mundum: arse^i^que puri
c^rbonis modo, sine omni spuma and e^^pitu hortido, minusque convenienti,
purgatum been and perfectum esse salem n^^ri conjecturam ^iper^ licebit. Cos.
Sem^en^wi^z. ibid. cap 7. and Kirc^e^. Mu^d. Subter^a^. lib 6. Sect. 2. cap. 3.
Quidam injectum candenti prunae spectant, argumento bonitatis and puritatis, si
diff^u^t and def^agret sine reliqui^s salis commu^^^, aut foecum terrestrium,
and saltu crepitante. Lib^zarius, Apocalypse. He^met. p^^t. 1. cap. 17.
clear, windy, long, divided into many parts, after the manner of Brandishing
Rays, or beams of light, that the Table remain clean, if it is burned as pure
coal that makes no s^umme or noise, then the Saltpeter may be said to be well
purified and perfect.

How to know the goodness of Powder. Cap. 53.
The goodness of Powder is known by the Eye, the Touch, and by the Fire: by the
Eye, if it be very Black, or that it is Moist, and put upon white paper and
tinging it with black, Be^etti^o, Gray or Ash Color.

Nimia in pulvere nigredo, signum est humiditatis: haec si super papy^o munda
ponatur, and ^andem nigro tingat color, signum erit eum plurim^m in se
continere carbonum: cincricius autem sub obscurus pulveris color, and
aliquantulum ad rubedicem vergens, bonitatis vestigium est. Cas. S^mi^nowicz.
ibid. c. 17.


it is a sign that it has too much Coal, but if it be of dark Ash Color and
^inge not, it is a sign that it has its proportion of Coal, and it is dry.

With the Touch it is known, when rubbing it with the fingers, it appears soft
and easily broken, it is a sign of too much Coal: and when rubbing it and
powdering it with the fingers, you feel some little knobs that prick the
fingers, it is a sign the Sulphur is not well powd'red and incorporated, and
that the Powder is not elaborated enough.

Denique ignis beneficio in notitiam bonitatis pulveris facile deveniemus: si
nimirum pusillas aliquot conge^ies pulveris super tabula lignea ^unda and
poli^^, latitudine dimidii palmi a se invicem distantes posu^rimus, and unicam
tantum ex omnibus incenderimus. Haec ^i subito flammam conceperit, and sola
tantum, aliis non accen^^s, co^fl^graverit, idque cum fragore and soni^u
quodam: f^^eritque fumum album, clarum, and in ascendendo vel cem: in ac^e vero
circulus quasi quidam, se^ ^orolla fumosa appar^a^, perfectissime pulve^^s nota
^rit.
With the Fire likewise is known the goodness of Powder, taking a pound of it,
and putting it on a Table smooth and white, and near unto it another, a third,
fourth and fifth pound, so that they do no^ touch: and then giving fire unto a
little heap, if at one and the same time all the heap^ are fired, if the flame
be raised clear and quick, cracking in the raising, it is a sign it is fine and
well labored, but if the flame be slow in raising and with much smoke and
without noise, it is a sign of the little strength of it, of the great ^uantity
of Coal and Sulphur more than it ought.

If after it is burnt the Table remain black, it is a sign of too much Coal; if
Unctuous, it is a sign of the grease of the Saltpeter and Sulphur that were
not well refined^ and if with earthiness, and little granulets of matter, it is
a sign the Saltpeter was not well purged of common Salt, and earthy matter,
and that the Sulphur was not well powdered and incorporated; and if after the
powder is burnt, the Table remain whitened, it is a sign the Saltpeter has
much of common Salt, and that it was not well cleansed from that.

Of Powder spoiled, and the ways to Recover it.
BY Powder spoiled is meant that which wants much of the vigor and virtue
which it had in the beginning: now this want proceeds from no other thing, than
that the virtue of the Saltpeter which gives it that vigor is weakened and
vanished.

Now the Virtue of Saltpeter reduced into Gunpowder, is lost either by Age or
Moisture; by old Age, because being ^onjoy'nd with Coal and Sulphur, it does
participate of that corruption which will happen to them in time: by Moisture,
because the Saltpeter, (composed of Salnitrous Waters, as all other Sa^ts of
their Salt Waters) does no sooner as it were see the moisture, but by that, by
little and little it is converted into moisture, and the virtue and vigor
thereof is exhaled by that humidity.

Thus a great part of the Saltpeter being separated by this Humidity from the
rest of the Composition of the Powder; Carbones tamen and sulphur minime hic
suo quem antea habuere, privantur pondere, cum nullo dissolvuntur humore: imo
carbones studiose eum attrahunt, fiuntque ponderosio^es. Id. ibid. c. 18.
and the Saltpeter being more ponderous than the other two materials, which
are no^ exhaled, as is the Petre; it follows, that of that quan^ity of Powder
which in the perfection of it was enclosed in the Barrel: For example, one
hundred pound, after the Saltpeter is wasted in this manner either by old Age
or Moisture, there will not remain the same quantity, but much less.

Now to recover this Powder thus wasted, it is to be done two ways, viz. to
adjoyn the quantity of Saltpeter is wanting to make it vigorous and perfect;
or to take away that Saltpeter which remaining in the wasted Powder, to refine
the Saltpeter, and to make other Powder anew with it.

There is another way of recovering decayed Powde^, by fortifying it with a
certain Lixivium proposed by Cas. S mi^^owicz. p. 1. l. 2. c. 18. which you may
see in him.
To recover that same weakened Powder, by the vanishing of the Nitre, proceed in
this manner: Take all that quantity of wasted Powder, and put it on a cloth,
and lay it in the Sun to dry, which being perfectly dried, fill a Barrel with
it: ^or example, let there be one hundred pound:

Then let it be emptied aside, and let the Barrel be filled with perfect
Powder, such as was the spoiled in the perfect vigor of it, let it be weighed
and noted how many pound it weighs: for example, suppose one hundred and
twenty.

Here we say that those twenty pound more which the Barrel of perfect Powder
weighed, shall be twenty pound of Saltpeter which the other wanted.

Now let us see how much wasted Powder there is in all, and if there be for
example 10000 pound; for to know then in this great quantity of naughty powder
how many pounds of Saltpeter there are wanting to reduce it to perfection and
vigor.

Work with the Golden Rule of the 4 Proportionals, saying, If one hundred pound
of wasted Powder, there want 20 pound of Salt-p^tre, how much Petre will there
be wanting in ten thousand?

Let the second number be multiplied by the third, viz. 20 by 10000, and the
product shall be divided by the first, viz. by 100, and you shall have 2000 in
the Quotient, and these shall be the pounds of Saltpeter which are wanting in
the wasted powder to reduce it to perfection.

Let these 2000 l. of Saltpeter be powdered, and likewise the 10000 of bad
powder, as the manner is, and taking a proportion, let it be incorporated with
the 2000 of Saltpeter, beating them together according to Art; and in such
manner working them, there will be made good Powder.

If we will take away all the Salt-petr^ out of wasted powder, we must proceed
in this manner: Let there be prepared one or more capacious Tubbs, and on them
let there be laid three or four linen Clothes (like the skins of a Drum) well
tied, but not so strait.

Then let there be another Vessel or more of Copper or Wood, and put therein
the quantity of spoiled Powder, that shall seem fit, and pour upon it as much
fresh clear Water as shall dissolve it, stirring it with a cudgel or a Schoope.

This being liquified, with a Ladle or Bucket, throw it upon the cloth over
the Table, that the clear water may strain into the Tubb, and upon the cloth
may remain the Coal and the Sulphur: and when it is all strained, throw softly
a Bucket or two of water to draw away the substance of Saltpeter that shall
remain with the Coal and Sulphur.

And in this manner shall be done until all the Saltpeter of the naughty
powder be strained, drawing away the strained water in the Table when it is
full, and if these waters are not clear, let them be put on again on the washed
and cleansed cloth, and let them be strained again, until they are clear.

Then take all these clear waters and boil them in the Caldrons as before, and
then put them in the Trays to congeal and make Saltpeter, and taken and
refined, and new Powder made of it as the manner is; and the Coal and Sulphur
may be dried perfectly, and proof made if it will serve, but if not, you must
take new Sulphur and Coal.

But here I do advertise that all that is here said, is written only that the
Gunuer in time of Necessity may supply himself and do the best that he can, for
such Saltpeter and Powder is not made with that diligence and Art that the
Powder-Masters and Salt-Petremen do, but yet it will not fail to serve in ^^me
of Necessity.

Dal. Pietro Sardi: in Venet. 1629.

The Third Book of the various Questions and Inventions of Nicolas Tartaglia.
Of Sal Nitre, and the various compositions of the Gunpowder: of the Propriety
or the particular office which each of the Materials has in that Composition,
and ^ther Particulars.
The first enquiry made by Seignior Gabriel Tadino Prior of Barletta.
IS it not to be wondered at, that the Ancients had no knowledge of Sal-Nitre
which to us Moderns is become so familiar? Prior.


Nicol.
Yea Rather the knowledge of that Simple is most Ancient; for most of the Ancient
Naturalists make mention of it; true it is that some of them, Nitre is
mentioned Jeremiah 2.22. and Prove. 25.20. although in the Septuag^nt that l^st
verse is varied, yet Symmachus r^^ds it (...), and (...) f^ll^ws it, and (...)
English tran^lation.
and especially Avicenna have called it Baurach, because it is so called in the
Arabic Tongue; some Aphroni^um, because it is so named in the Greek; and others
as Serapion, Diascorides and Pliny have ca^l'd it Nitrum, or Spuma Nitri, for
the Latins so call it; and in the Pandects it is affirmed there are two sorts
of Nitrum, or Sal Nitri, viz. Mineral, and Artificial, of the Mineral they say
there are four, the Armenian, African, Roman, and Egyptian. Serapion says,
that the Minerals of Sal Nitre are as the Minerals of Salt, for there are found
of it, that are running waters, which become congealed and condensed like a
stone, and this is affirmed also by Pliny, that it is found also in the Mine as
a stone, and called Sal Petrosum; yea, he says that this Sal Nitre is found
White and Red, and of many Colors, insomuch that he affirms that there are
many kinds of it, not only for the diversity of the color, but because there
is found one that is Spongy, viz. full of holes, another very fragile, and
lamines or plates; and of many other qualities, which would be too long to talk
of one by one, of which one is more biting and powerful than the other: of the
Artificial it is not worth time to speak, it being in these days better known
than Betony.

Truly, Prior.
I thought the knowledge thereof had been Modern.

But tell me, The 2 Question.
I pray, If the Ancients had knowledge both of the Natural and Artificial
Nitre, ( as you have proved by the Authority of the Ancient Naturalists) did
they also know that it burns so vigorously as it does?

Truly the Ancient Naturalists make no mention of it, Nicol.
save only of those proprieties that are found in it necessary to Medicine;
C^si^irus S^mienowicz. thinks that the Ancients did seldom or never use
S^lt-petre in their Fire-work^; and that wheresoever it is found mentioned as
an ingredient in the Ignis Graecus, etc. and that passage is spurious: at least
if it were used, it was kept as a secret: for amongst the most r^nowned Writers
of the Roman Wars and Militia, ne jotta quidem unum in illorum Commentariis de
S^le Nitri, Nitro, aut S^le petrae, quod Romanorum ignibus artificialibus
inserviverint, reperict quispiam, Art, mag. p. 1. l. 2. c. 1.
but many other Ancient Authors do acquaint us that they knew it burned; for
they served themselves of it in Compositions of fire for to burn the Testudo,
or Ram, and the Ellepoli, and other portable Towers, which they used in those
days in taking of Cities, and also to burn the Naval powers: it is true that in
such Compositions, some call it by the name of the Burning Salt, and others the
Stone Salt, and Salt of Skill, and others by the proper name of Sal Nitri.

Concerning this I have another doubt, Prior.
If the Ancients knew that Nitre burnt with so much force, The 3 Quest.
how comes it to pass that they knew not how to make the Powder for Artigliary,
of so great importance in Art Military, as well as we Moderns?

The Consequence is not good to say, Nicol.
that if the Ancients knew that Sal Nitre burned, that of necessity they knew
how to compound the Powder; for that is not made of Sal Nitre alone: yea, it is
compounded of three Materials, of Nitre, Sulphur, and Coal; and therefore it is
possible they might have the knowledge of Nitre, and the Nature of it, and yet
be ignorant of the Compositions of Powder.

Prior.
You have reason; But for what cause is the Powder compounded of those three
materials? The 4 Quest.
and what particular office has every one of them? And what effect shall Two
have without the Third?

Nicol.
The Powder is composed of these three Materials, because each one cloth
medicate and supply the defects of the two other; for the Sulphur is most apt
to kindle the Fire with the flame of either of the other two, which fire with
flame is very apt to introduce into fire the Sal Nitre more than any other,
because the said Nitre burning resolves it self into a windy Exhalation, the
which is so po^ent, that it presen^ly quenches the flame introduced into the
Sulphur, and consequently that introduced (by that of the Sulphur) into it
self. For the Nature of Sulphur, and likewise of the Nitre is such, that the
flame being dead, there remains not the least sign of fire, S^ says
S^mieno^icz. also^ Si componeretur corpus quoddam ex Sulphur and sale Nitri,
op^ime tusis, and simul mixtis, admoto ign^, subito quidem arriperet flammam,
nihilominus tamen subito extingueretur, id est, ignis ille non continuaretur,
perduraretque ad consumptionem and combustionem mateteriae totius, sed
pauxilium tantum ex illa consumeret, residuo intacto. Art. mag. p. 1. l. 2. c.
20.
and therefore compounding together only Nitre and Sulphur well beaten, and
putting fire to it, immediately it is inflamed and destroyed, for the Reasons
abovesaid, to wit, that such fire will not continue until all the matter be
consumed and burned, but only a little of it, and the rest will remain not
offended by the said fire: therefore to cure this d^fect, there is mingled with
both Coals well powdered, because Coal is of that Nature, that touched by the
flame of fire, it is presently kindled and converts it self into fire without
flame, the which fire without flame the more it is vexed by any wind, so much
the more it is enkindled and continued, until that all the substance of it be
converted into Ashes: and therefore touching that Composition with the fire,
immediately the Sulphur is taken with flame (as is said) which flame not only
introduces presently fire and flame into the Nitre, but also in the same
instant introduces fire without flame into the Coal, which fire is not
extinguished, but rather augmented by the wind, and because that wind caused by
the Nitre is not apt to extinguish that fire without flame which is in the
Coal, yea, rather, as I have said, it augments it, and forasmuch as the Sulphur
is contiguous with the fire with flame or without flame, and cannot be without
flame, the which flame (as is said) inflames the Nitre, and therefore these
three Materials powdered and mingled well together, and fire being put to this
mixture, it becomes altogether inextinguishable, until all the substance be
consumed: (except there be some accidental defect in some of the materials,
either of Humidity, or that there were taken of them much different from the
convenient proportion) and therefore it is concluded that the office of the
sulphur is to take hold of the fire with flame, and to introduce it into the
other Materials: and that of the Coal is only to maintain the said fire without
flame, already introduced by the sulphur, and chiefly against that great wind
which the Sal Nitre causes; but then the office of the Nitre is only to cause
that great exhalation of wind, for in that wind consists all the virtue and
propriety of the Powder, for that is it which drives out the Bullet with so
incredible a force, and therefore it is concluded that only on the Nitre does
depend all the virtue and puissance of the Powder, and the other two Materials
are put therein only to resolve into fire and wind the said Nitre, and for no
other end: for he that should compound powder only of sulphur and Coal, and
charge a Gun with a considerable quantity of it, I say, giving fire to it
should not be able to drive forth a stick or a straw. And this proceeds because
all the expulsive virtue depends solely on the pure Nitre, and not of any other
thing, and therefore it may be rather concluded p^ssible to make Powder without
Coal and sulphur, than without nitre: for it is more probable to find other
Materials to do the off^^e of sulphur in taking fire with flame, and likewise
of the Coal in maintaining the fire without flame, than to find another which
shall be fit to cause so great and impetuous a wind, as the nitre does.

You have well assigned the cause why the powder is composed of those three
Materials, Prior.
and the office every one of them has in the Composition, now I demand who was
the Inventor thereof, and with what reason the proportion of each of the
materials was determined by him.

Who was the Inventor of powder and Guns, Nicol.
it is spread amongst the Vulgar by the Authority of Cornazanus, The 5 Quest.
who says ^t was found by chance by a Dutch Alchymist: but I am of opinion,
that Archimedes the Syracusan, that famous Philosopher and Mathematician, was
the Inventor of the Composition, and of the same mind is the Commentator of
Vitruvius upon the first Book; for of him it is written in many places (as
Vallurius says in his tenth Book De re Militari) how he found out a certain
Machine of Iron, with which he threw toward a Land Army stones of prodigious
weight and greatness, and with an incredible sound; which gives us to
understand that it was a Machine like a great Gun, with which he threw great
Balls of stone (as it is not long ago, since the Moderns did,) and chiefly for
their great sound, which in discharging them happens, and in any other kind of
Machine it does not appear to me it could be done except in one like it. True
it is, that at that time it is probable they were more deformed and unhandsome
than those used at this present time; for the first Inventions are always
something homely, but mend with time, it being an easy matter to add to things
already found out; and the same thing I say of powder which in the beginning
was found out (either by Archimedes, or by whom you will) but was not
compounded in such order and proportion as at present is used. Yea, I rather
judge that from that time until this, the Composition has been varied many
ways, and that this is true I have found insome Book not very Ancient certain
ways and Orders of composing it much differing from the present, the variety
whereof I shall her^ distinctly set down: 1 Gunpowder of the most ancient way.
Sal Nitre Each equal parts. Sulphur Each equal parts. Coal. Each equal parts.
2 Powder not so ancient.
Sal Nitre 3 parts Sulphur 2 parts Coal 2 parts
3 Powder not so ancient.
Sal Nitre 10 parts Sulp^^^ 3 parts ^oal 3 parts
4 Powder not so ancient
Sal Nitre 12 parts Sulphur 3 parts Coal 2 parts
5 Powder not yet so ancient.
Nitre 9 Sulphur 2 parts Coal 3
6 Powder of the Moderns.
Nitre 4 Sulphur 1 parts Coal 1
7 Powder more Modern.
Nitre 20 Sulph^r 3 parts Coal 10
8 Powder more Modern.
Nitre 100 Sulphur 10 parts Coal 36
9 Powder Great after the Moderns.
Nitre 100 Sulphur 20 parts Coal 37
10 Fine powder not very ancient.
Nitre 9 Sulphur 3 parts Coal of The Autho^ confesses he knows not what
Mirochea is.
Mirochea 6
11 Great Powder more modern.
Nitre 2 Sulphur 1 parts Coal of Willow 1
12 Powder of Harquebuses more Modern.
Nitre 3 Sulphur 1 parts Coals of branches of young willows. 1
13 Fine powder more modern.
Nitre refi^ed many times 5 Sulphur 1 par. Coal of the twigs of young A^olane.
Hazel 1
14 Great powder more modern.
Nitre refined 3 Sulphur 1 p. Coal of Willow. 2
15 Middle powder more modern.
Nitre refined 10 Sulphur 2 p. Coal of Willow 3
16 Powder of Harquebuses modern.
Nitre refined many times 10 Sulphur 1 p. Coal of Verzelle. Nizola is a filberd
or a hazel Probably, Verzelle may be the shell of the Nut, but I cannot ^^nd it.
the (...) branches of the Filberd or Hazel cleansed, 1
17 Gunpowder more modern.
Nitre refined 27 Sulphur 3 p. Coal of the tender branches of the filberd or
Hazel cleansed. 4
18 Gunpowder more strong and modern.
Nitre refined 7 Sulphur 1 Coal as last before 1
19 Pistol powder more fine and strong.
Nitre many times refined 6 Sulphur 1 parts. Coal as before of Hazels, or
Filberds 1
20 Great powder modern.
Nitre 4 Sulphur 1 p. Coal of Willow 1
21 Great powder modern.
Nitre 20 Sulphur 4 p. Coal of Willow. 5
22 Pistol Powder modern.
Nitre refined the dry way 48 Yellow Sulphur 7 parts. Nizolaro.
Coals of filberd or Hazel, or Hempe-stalkes dried. 8
23 Pistol powder modern.
Nitre refined 18 Sulphur 2 p. Coal of Filberd wood 3


Now to make any of the aforesaid Powders, it is necessary to ^ake notice that
the nitre be pure and potent; the which is known by the practices by burning a
little; likewise that the sulphur be clear from the earth and other filth, and
that the Coal be not moist by standing in a moist place, and that it be not
mixed with Dust or Earth; Lastly, that it be well beaten, and the materials be
well incorporated together: and making such powder it will not want effects
answerable to the kinds of it, not forgetting that it be well dried, and kept
in a dry place.

Certainly there is reason to wonder at the various change of the pro^^^^ions,
Prior.
and I cannot wonder, what should lead them so to determin^ them. Nicol.


The first Invention (some believe it was by chance) I am well satisfied was
found by reason speculatively; to wit, that these three Materials well beaten
and mingled together should be apt to make a fire so strong and unquenchable,
uncil each matter should be consumed, for there are clear reasons that it ought
to be so, but to give the proportions of the said Materials, I believe they
were advised by Experience; for the first Order was founded upon Equality, for
they took alike of each, but although it might have a good effect, nevertheless
perceiving that effect proceeded from the nitre, they took a greater quantity
than of each of the other, and they found that Powder more potent than the
first, and so with rational advice some have varied the order unto this day:
True it is, there are some orders of the afore-noted that have been ordained
with little Reason, and less judgment; yea, I believe some of them, (because
they would not do what was done before) to show their wit without any other
reason have made new Inventions, viz. increasing the Coal and diminishing the
sulphur, and vice versa, others varying all three in such strange proportions
that it might appear found out with greater prudence and subtilty.

There are indeed a certain sort of Inventors who knowing not how to speak or
do, Prior. And Tartaglia was very sensible that some of his Inventions would be
invented over again.
but what has been seen or done already by others, and are ashamed that it
should appear that they have leran'd or taken any thing from those went before
them, do force themselves to vary something from the former manner, or the
speech, though it be to make it worse than it was before.

It is a sad truth indeed. Nicol.


You have showed me how the Order and Proportion of the three materials, Prior.
The 1^ Quest.
have been varied from time to time, now I desire to know which of the
aforementioned Orders you esteem to be the best, that is, the most perfect and
poten^ Powder?

Nicol.
Doubtless that which contains the greater quantity of nitre, I say that the
greater in respect of the whole, therefore that of the 16th. Order shall be
more po^ent than any of the rest, viz. that thus composed, Thus in the Original.
Sal nitrio raffinato piu volte 10 parts. Solfere 1 part. Carbon de Verzelle de
nizola giorene e monde 1 part.
Nitre refined many times 10 Sulphur 1 parts. Cole of the tender branches of
the Hazle or filberd young and clear. 1
and this shall be the most powerful for two Reasons: the first is, because it
does contain five sixths of Nitre, the which five sixths is greater than that
in any other part occurring in any of the above specified Orders. The second
is, because the Nitre is refined many times, which makes it more perfe^t: and
there is in it also more perfect Coal; for if the Coal be made of a light and
soft matter, it is more apt to receive, and more falsely to maintain the fire,
and so shall be more fit and disposed to do the office with celerity.

Prior.
You have concluded the 16 th. Order to be the best powder, The 7 Quest.
but I demand, if yet it shall not be more potent that shall receive a greater
part, th^n five sixths of Nitre, and a l^sser by one sixth between the sulphur
and the coal?

Nicol.
Without doubt it shall, provided that, that little part of the sulphur and Coal
be but sufficient to do its office, which is discovered by taking fire with
speed, and also by introducing and maintaining it in the Nitre until it be
wholly resolved into fire, for if there be so little quantity of the sulphur
and Coal as not to do its duty, that composition shall be but unuseful and of
no value: and therefore it will behoove one to take good heed, for if it were
possible to make good powder of pure Nitre, it would be the best and most
powerful of all, ^ut because it is not apt alone to take fire with that
celerity with quick flame as does the sulphur, nor to conserve it till it is
all consumed, as do^s the Coal, therefore it is necessary to give it the
company of the other two, and in such a quantity as may be apt and sufficient
to do as it ought, which may be discovered, as I told you before.

I understand you well, Prior.
but is this rule general for all kind of Artigliery? The 8 Q^estion.
for it is well known, that Pistols require finer powder than Arquebnsus,
Arqnibusus finer than M^squets and Falconets; and Falconets better than other
sorts of great Artillery: and therefore I demand whether it be not necessary to
limit this composition, and finess according to the sorts of the Pieces?

It does appear to me so, Nicol.
although it ^e the custom, yea I have an opinion it is an error as that about
your Cannon in the XI Quest. of the first Book, about the length of Guns,
quantity of Powder and weight of Bullets, etc. but I will consider better of it
and make you sensible of the error in that thing.

Of the same opinion with Tartaglia in this last point does Vannuccio
Biringoccio seem to be, in that he thus expr^sseth himself. The great Artillery
does require other Powder than the small, as the Gunners are pleased to say.
But the common Experience, as well as the authority of Casimirus Simienowicz,
does show that the large grained powder, called Cannon-powder is not so
serviceable for small pieces, as that which is less, and in smaller grains.
Though whether the smaller-grained powder be not more eff^ctual in Cannons,
than what is commonly used, I know not^ certain it is that the lesser the
grains are, the more powerful is the Powder: and yet, if the powder be not
grenulated at all, but in a subtle powder, it loses its efficacy, and will
scarce throw the Bullet beyond the mussel of the Gun. These and other
curiosities (many of which are touched upon by that learned Lithuanian, and by
Kir^herus, our Virtuosi might have taken notice of, rather than have digressed
into those impertinencies with which he concludes his discourse of Saltpeter.
Neither have I time to enlarge upon this Subject: nor is it my intention to
carry this animadversion further, than to demonstrate to the meanest capacity,
how ill some have written upon so noble, so conmon, and so necessary a Subject:
and wherein they had such excellent helps from the Writings of others, had not
their ignorance bereaved them of those aids.

FINIS.
An additional Review.
TO the end that no exceptions may be taken against what I say in relation to
the English Liturgy by any of the Episcopal Clergy on the one hand; or that the
Non-Conformists may not derive any further prejudice against the public and
established Worship in this Nation: I do profess that I neither do hereby any
way derogate from the Liturgy of the Church of England, neither do I think any
man can justly condemn Queen Elizabeth for the course She took herein, but
rather commend her most pious prudence; what I say, is agreeable to what sundry
English Writers say, that justify the equitableness of our penal Laws against
the Papists; it is conformable to what Dr. Heylin writes in his History of the
Reformation primo Elizabethae, and the words of Mr. Hales in his Sermon
preached at Pauls-Cross are these:

Mr. Hale's Sermons, page 57, 58.
And here I may not pass by that singular moderation of this Church of ours,
which she most Christianly expressed toward her Adversaries of Rome, here at
home in her bosom above all the Reformed Churches, I have read of; for out of
desire to make the breach seem no greater, than indeed it is, and to hold
Communion and Christian fellowship with her ^o far as we possibly can, we have
done nothing to cut off the favorers of that Church. The reasons of their love
and respects to the Church of Rome we wish, but we do not command them to lay
down: their Lay-Brethren have all means of instruction offered them. Our Edicts
and Statutes made for their restraint, are such as serve only to awake them,
and cause them to consider the innocence of that cause for refusal of
Communion, in which they endure as (they suppose) such great loss^s. Those who
are sent over by them, either for the retaining of the already perverted, or
preventing others, are either returned by us back again to them, or without any
wrong unto their persons, or danger of their lives, suffer an easy restraint,
which only hinders them from dispersing the poison they brought. And had they
not been stickling in our State-business, and meddling with our Prince's Crown,
there had not a drop of their Blood fallen to the ground: unto our Sermons, in
which the warnings of that Church are necessarily to be taxed by us, we do not
bind their presence, only our desire is that they would join with us in those
prayers and holy Ceremonies which are common to them and us. And so
accordingly, by singular discretion was our Service Book compiled by our
Forefathers, as containing nothing that might offend them, as being almost
merely a Compendium of their own Breviary and Missal, so that they shall see
nothing in our Meetings, but that they shall see done in their own, though many
things which are in theirs, here I grant they shall not find. And here indeed
is the great and main difference betwixt us: As it is in the Controversy
concerning the Canonical Books of Scripture: whatsoever we hold for Scripture,
that even by that Church is maintained, only she takes upon her to add much,
which we cannot think safe to admit: so fares it in other points of Faith, and
Ceremony; whatsoever it is we hold for Faith, she holds it as far forth as we:
our Ceremonies are taken from Her; only She over and above urges some things
for Faith, which we take to be Error, or at best but opinion, and for Ceremony
which we think to be superstition. So that to participate with us, is, though
not throughout, yet in some good measure to participate with that Church: and
certainly were that Spirit of Charity stirring in them, which ought to be, they
would love and honor us, even for the resemblance of that Church, the beauty of
which themselves so much admire. Thus far Mr. Hales, with whose sentiments my
thoughts so correspond, that to justify the procedure of that renowned Queen,
I add that Her action is warranted by the deportment of the Christians from the
Apostolic and primitive times, to the revolution under Constantine, and that
I never read any thing in Ecclesiastical History relating to Christianity, to
convince me that Her demeanor therein was unlawful, or unexpedient.

Where I speak of the Sweating-Sickness, to the accounts of Polydore Virgil and
Hollingshed, add this out of the Chronicle of Edw. Hall published by Richard
Grafton Anno Domini 1550.

In the first year of King Henry 7. a new kind of Sickness came suddenly
through the whole Region, even after the first entering of the King into this
Isle, which was so sore and painful and sharp, that the like was never heard of
to any man's remembrance before that time: For suddenly a deadly and burning
Sweat invaded their bodies, and vexed their blood with a most ardent heat,
infested the stomach and the head grievously: by the tormenting and vexation of
which sickness, men were so sorely handled and so painfully pangued, that if
they were laid in their bed, being not hable to suffer the importunate heat,
they cast away the sheets and all the clothes lying on the bed. If they were in
their apparel and vestures, they would put off all their Garments, even to
their shirts. Others were so dry that they drank the cold water to quench their
importune heat and insatiable thirst. Others that could or at the least would
abide the heat and stench (for indeed the Sweat had a great and strong savor)
caused clothes to be laid upon them as much as they could ^ear, to drive out
the Sweat, if it might be. All in manner as soon as the Sweat took them, or
within a short space after, yielded up their Ghost. So that of all them that
sickned, there was not one amongst an hundred that escaped: Insomuch that
beside the great number which deceased within the City of London, two Mayors
successively died of the same disease within eight days, and six Aldermen. And
when any person had fully and completely sweat 24 hours (for so long did the
strength of this plague hold them) he should be then clearly delivered of his
disease: yet not so clear rid of that, but that he might shortly relapse and
f^ll again into the same evil pyt; ^ea again and twice again, as man^ one in
deed did, which after the third time died of the same. A^ the length by Study
of Physicians and experience of the people, driven thereunto by dreadful
necessity, there was a remedy invented: For they that survived, considering the
extremity of the pain in them that deceased, devised by things mere
contrariant, to resi^^ and withstand the furious rage of that burning furnace,
by lukewarm drink, temperate heat, and measurable clothes. For such persons
as relapsed again into the flame after the first deliverance, observed
diligently and marked such things as did them ease and comfort at their first
vexation, and using the same for a remedy and medicine of their pain, adding
ever somewhat thereto that was sanative and wholesome. So that if any person
ever after fell sick again, he observing the regiment that amongst the people
was devised could shortly help himself, and easily temper and avoid the
strength and malice of the Sweat. So that after the great loss of many men,
they learned a present and speedy remedy for the same disease and malady, the
which is this: If a man on the day time were plagued with the Sweat, then he
should strait lie down with all his clothes and garments, and lie still the
whole 24 hours. If in the night he were taken, then he should not rise out of
his bed for the space of 24 hours, and so cast the clothes off that he might
in no wise provoke the sweat, but so lie temperately that the water might
distill out softly of its own ac^ord, and to abstain from all meat if he might
so long sustain and suffer hunger, and to take no more drink neither hot nor
cold, than will moderately quench and delay his thirsty appetite. And in this
his amending, one point diligently above all other is to be observed and
attended, that he never put his hand or foot out of the bed to refresh or cool
himself, the which to do is no less pain than short death. So you may plainly
see what remedy was by the daily experience excogitated and invented for this
strange and unknown Disease, the which at that time vexed and grieved only the
Realm of England in every Town and Village, as it did diverse times after: but
55 years after, it sailed into Flanders and Germany, where it destroyed people
innumerable for lack of knowledge of the English experience.

In the twenty second year of the aforesaid King, though the Sweating-Sickness
did break out again, yet he says that it did less hurt and displeasure to the
people at this time, than it did before, by reason of the remedy which was
invented by the death of many a Creature in the beginning. But in the
subsequent years the Sweating-sickness is represented by him to be as direful,
as others relate of it. But neither does Hall, or any other Chronologer speak
of this famo^s and almost infalli^le Medicine, what effect it had: so that we
may conclude, that since it was impossible for the people to have been ignorant
of that remedy during those latter mortalities, the course it self must needs
have been ineffectual.

Whereas I observe that the Arcanum of Ivy-berryes was no secret, however that
Arcanist pretended it to be so; I prove it out of Alexius Piedmontius and
others. I add to those Authors Parkenson's Herbal, a Book called, A thousand
Notable things: and Simon Paulli professes he was taught it by a Scotch
Soldier. And that it may appear with how much more accurateness the receipt is
in our Medicinal Books, than in the account of Mr. R. B. I shall set down the
words of Alexius Piedmontius; and that the rather, because if the Receipt were
so effectual as it is represented, (as I am satisfied it has been at other
times) it is necessary men should know how to use it.

Alexius Piedmontius Secret. l. 2. page 92. ex verse. Latin. Weckeri Basileae
1563. Praesentissimum remedium ad eos, qui Peste correp^i sunt; quod valet
etiam ad lividas pustulas in cute ex febre pestilentiali subortas: itemque ad
carbunculos, ignem sacrum, and id genus alia.

R. Hederae baccas, maturas, and in umbra siccatas, deinde contritas, and fiat
pulvis, de quo accipiant aegri ^8. cum poculo dimidio vini albi, deinde maneant
in lecto, ut optime sudent. Posteaquam sudaverint aegri, indusium, linteamina
lecti, and stragula mutentur, fiquidem fieri potest: sin mi^nus, indusium
tantum cum linteaminibus. Atque sic aliqui una nocte sola sani evaserunt.
Mediolanensem quendam vidi ipse Aleppae, correptum peste, ^na cum bubone in
inguinibus and sub axilla altero, qui cum hoc pulvere bis in die, mane scilicet
and vesperi uteretur: sequenti die, bubonibus ruptis convaluisse.

The old MSS. Receipts to which I refer (there is a mistake in the year of that
Plague in the Print, it being 1525. not 1540.) Give as much as will lie on a
six-pen^e (or more) in half a glass of white wine, and direct to cover the
party well and make him sweat: and they add, That some have taken of the said
powder over night, and found themselves in the morning so well, that they have
rose up, clothed themselves, and walked about the house, and finally been
thoroughly cured. Probat. Ann. Domini 1625.

The Treasure for English men, Mr. Parkenson from the Empericks, Qua^ks^lvers,
and Chirur^ions, expresses not the dose not circumstances with which it is
given; but that it must b^ taken 2 or 3 days together.
or Receipts published in Th. Vicary (page 245.) Give a dram of the said powder
tempered with two ounces of Planten-water, or white wine: and direct the
Patient to sweat upon it as much, and as often as he can: and in using this for
three or four days together, he will die or mend without all doubt (by Gods
help.) This has been often and truly proved. The Author of A thousand Notable
things gives only half a dram with two or three ounces of Planten-water, and
directs them to sweat, as Alexius does.

Thus they, R. B. Of the usefulness of Not. Phil. par. 2. page 142.
whereas Mr. R. B. says only that in the Irish Plague, the Arcanum which cured
such numbers (and which he purchased by the exchange of another Secret) was
only a good dose of the powder of fully-ripe Ivy-berryes, which did usually
work plentifully by sweat. Here is neither an account of the Type, or quality
of that Plague; (yet there is a great difference betwixt one and another,
howbeit they go under one name: not are they cured by one method.) No relation
of the dose of the powder, whether half a dram, one, two, or three drams: yet
in the plague such sudorifiques as are otherwise used, are given in double
quantity to what is commonly practiced in lesser exigencies: and though it b^
said to work plentifully by swea^; yet is there no directions that the patient
be laid to sweat; but, for all this saying, it might induce one that knew no
more than this about Arcanum, to advise it only as such powders are given
frequently to continue (with other Medicines) plain transpiration insensibly.
In sum, there is not set down whether that our Irish Physician did begin his
Cure with this powder, or with what Method he used it: and when all these
Circumstances are added, (without which the Receipt is useless) though I am
pleased to have read the happy success of it once, yet I dare not promise that
it shall again, any more than Mr. Sprats almost infallible cure of the
Sweating-sickness, or those other Anti-Pestilential Medicaments (now exactly)
recorded by Experimental Galenists.

Whereas ( page 54.) I speak of the age of Geber, as following of Leo Afer in
my judgment, and that he lived but one hundred years after Mahomet: and
consequently many Centuries before Raym^nd Lully: the Argument I use is
manifest to any man that knows the time of the birth of Mahomet, (which yet
Historians fix to be, See Hottinger Histor. Orient.
some A. D. 570. others A. D. 610. others in 620.) and that the Hegyra begins
A. D. 622. as V^ssius. But I think it fit that I ob^e^ve here that as in all
the Arabian Chronology, so in this particular about the age of Geber, there are
great uncertainties. Blancanus places Gel^r (the Arabian) in the ninth Century
after Christ; Bl^n^a^us Chronolog. Mathemat. Secul. 18. A^dr. Liba^^us exam.
^ens. Parisiens. V^de N^udaeum in histor. Magiae. c. 14. Vide Riccioli
Chronicon utrumque praemissum Almage^^o novo.
and so he must have lived about five hundred years before Raymund Lully, The
inquisitive and learned Libavius reckons upon Geber as contemporary with
Mahomet, saying, Geberus quem volunt circa annum partus virginei sexcentesimum
in vivis fuisse. I find that Vigner places him in the year of our Lord 723.
Ricciolus calls him a Spaniard, Geber Hispalensis in his Chronicle of
Astronomers, he places him in the year of our Lord 1090. and gives this reason
against Blancanus, that it must be so, because that Geber in his Astronomy
mentions Arzachel who lived in the twelfth Century after Christ, and whom by
the name of Arzael is placed by Blancanus two Centuries after Geber, that is,
within the eleventh Century after Christ. There is such a confusion in the
Arabian names, that I am ready to imagine there were two Gebers (or more, the
name being commonly assumed by the Saracens) the one very ancient, and a
Chemist, of whom Leo Afer may speak; and another in Spain, famous for
Astronomy, who corrected sundry things in Ptolomy's Almagest, of whom Ricciolus
and others speak, who call Ge^er a Spaniard. As for Raymund Lully, whom Mr.
Henshaw places in the year 1333. I find Libavius to say he flourished sooner:
Illustris fuit Reimundus anno salvatoris 1324. but Conringius relates how he
was killed in the year 1315. A^^d. Lib^v. exam. cens. Parisiens. Conring. de
medic. Hermet. c. 27. page 380.
Lullius 1315. Octuagenarius circiter, dum religionem Christian^m Bugiae in
Africa doceret Martyr lapidibus obrutus est. From whence it is manifes^, that
if we place Geber in the twelfth Century with Arzachel, (as Ricciolus in his
larger and more accurate Chronicle does) then it is a mistake in Mr. Henshaw to
say that Geber for certain flourished some Centuries before Raymundus Lullius:
and it seems evident that he mistook the Age of Lullius also. So that if I
grant him to have been a Spaniard (as I do not grant that Geber the Chemist was
either a Spaniard, nor yet an Indian King, as some have thought) I have still
just reason to except against Mr. Henshaw.

Where I say there are different Salt-Petres, perhaps according to the several
Earths they are made: and to what I say about the Saltpeter gathered of Lime
walls; add, that since the writing hereof I have been where a new Cellar
yielded me a quantity of Peter on the walls: I observed that the taste was
rather like the salt of calx viva, than of Nitre, yet did it burn without
leaving any fixed salt at all. So that if Mr. Henshaw's friend had minded that,
perhaps there might have been a considerable improvement deduced thence, either
in order to Physic, or the Manufacture of Gunpowder.

FINIS:
THE PLUS ULTRA reduced to a NON PLUS: OR, A SPECIMEN of some Animadversions
upon the PLUS VLTRA of Mr. Glanvill, wherein sundry Errors of some VIRTVOSI are
discovered, the Credit of the Aristotelians in part Re-advanced; and Enquiries
made about The Advantages of the Ancient Education in England above the Novel
and Mechanical. The old Peripatetick notion of the Gravity of the Air, and the
Pressure of the aereal Column or Cylinder. The Deceitfulness of Telescopes.
The World in the Moon, and a Voyage thither. The Original and Progress of
Chemistry. The Use of chemical M^dicaments. The Usefulness of the Peripatetick
Philosophy in reference to the Practice of Physic. The Original and Progress
of Anatomy. The First Inventor of the Circulation of the Blood. The Transfusion
of Blood, the first Proposers and Inventers thereof; and its Usefulness. The
different Nature of the Blood, and the variety of Phenomenon appearing upon the
burning thereof, and mixing of it with several liquors. Some Trials in order to
a discovery of the Nature of the English Baths.


By Henry Stubbe, Physician at Warwick.

Isocrates in Encomio Helenae, (...).

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1670.

A PREMONITION to the Ingenious and Considerate READER.
ABove a year ago, at the Tab^e of a Person of Honor, there happened a Deba^e
concerning the Utili^y of the Ancient and Established Method and Medicaments
used in Physic, and H^w much the knowledge of the Doctrine of Elements,
Elemen^ary Qualities and Humors, (as vulgarly deliver^d) might contribute to
the skill and successful Practi^e of a Iuaicious Physi^ian? There happened to be
present a G^ntleman, very much concerned for the Promoting of Scien^e, and a
professed Admirer of the Institution of the Royal Society, who (as is usual
with that sort of Virtuosi) instantly usurped all the Dis^ourse, and avowed
that All the Ancient Methods of Sci^nce were vain and useless to a Physician,
and d^d not so much as contribute to the Cure of a Cut-finger. With this rash
and hasty Censure I confess I was surprised and demanding what knowledge he had
in the re^eived Methods ^f Physic and Medicamen^s? I found him altoge^her
ignorant therein, but some ^rude Assertions of the new Philosophers, and some
imperfect Experimen^s we^e alleged in behalf of U^iversal Inference^, and no
less then Stupidity charged upon the pr^c^d^^t Philosophers and Physicians,
with those that adhered unto t^em: In fine, He avowed that this o^inion of ^is
was the posi^ive and d^gmatical averment even to a syllable, of Mr. Glanvill
and other Virtuosi, and that it was undeniably evinced in a Book of theirs
about The Modern Improvements of Useful Knowledge. After a brief reply to this
Insolent, showing that the an^ient Philosophy had not been so steril in
reference to Physic, but that it had been the foundation of all those accounts
of the Causes, Prognostics, and Cures of Diseases (as also of the Healing of
Cut-fingers and green wounds) by which of old and in la^ter tim^s Patients had
been benefited: that the nature of infirmities had been explicated, and the
qualities and use of Medicaments succeessfully explained upon those grounds:
and whatever Defects there were in those re^eived Principles, No Physician,
that understood what he said, could deny them to be exceeding useful; that for
any man to speak otherwise, was to expose himself to just s^orn and contempt.
As also for any man to go about to inodiate and discr^dit the present
aut^enti^a^e Me^hods of Curing upon no other excep^ions then those, that the
Philosophy whereupon those Theorems we^e raised was false and f^iv^lo^s, was an
Int^lerable Impertinence; since that even in Mathem^ti^ks it was notorious,
that many solid Truths had been happily deduced from fals^ suppositions and
Postulata; that in Comm^n Log^ck Right C^nclusions might be the result of
ridiculous Premiss^s; and the Rule of falsehood in Arithmetic would alone serve
to convince any man, that upon im^gi^ary, yea, confessedly false Hypotheses,
important and true deductions might be judiciously continued. After that an end
was put to this contest by a more general conversation, I still retained a
sense of the Injury I supposed to be done to me and all Rational Physicians, by
this barbarous Opini^tour; I determined to avenge my Faculty upon Mr. Glanvill
for this, and by sac^ificing that Virtuoso to public Obloquy, thereby to
establish (if possible) our general rep^se and tranquillity, that we might not
(as I observed we were) be troubled in all Companies and Assemblies, with
Extravagancies of this kind; there appearing unto me daily a greater
necessity of securing our Ears with black wool or Wax, against the Buz and
Nise of these Prat^le-boxes, then ever Ulysses had upon his approach to the
Sirens: Our ruin being as certain from them; and there being nothing of
Harmony in such Discourses, nothing but dis^ord and jarring, in comparison
whereof the screeching of Owls, the creaking of doors, and whatever noise ^lse
is offensive, seemed Musical and Melodious. Upon the perusal of Mr. Gl^n^vill's
Book (which He had recommended unto me) I met with so much of Ignorance, that I
wond^ed how se^eral ^en should concur to mistake so, and I thought it a
difficult ^atter to reply, it being too tedious for one of so little leisure as
I have, to info^m persons that we^e conceited and knew nothing.

Howsoever, for the general benefit of the Age, I purposed to write some
Animadversions upon him, and ther^by to put a stop to the pride of such
Ignoramus's, and amongst the several antiquated Philosophies which our Times
have ren^wed, to int^oduce amongst the Virtu^si that of Pythagoras, the first
rud^ments whereof consist^d in this, that the Disciples were obliged for five
years to hold their peace. Upon the reading of Mr. Gla^vill, I saw my self
under a necessity of examining the History of the Royal Socie^ie, the
tendencie whereof I observed to be so pernicious, that, if the first
prov^cation had made me angry, I was now become obstinate In that Famed Work I
encountr^d with so many illiterate passages, that the credit of our Nation
seemed concerned in ^he refuti^g it. I met with Passag^s so destruc^i^e that,
if to be conce^ned for the i^terest of the p^esent Monarc^y, the Protestant
Religion^ and the ^mo^ument of each pr^v^te person (and not solely of
Tradesm^n) could warrant any one for putting Pe^ to pap^r, I o^ght not to be
s^lent I divided my Animadversio^s into several pa^ts; some whereof were to
represent th^se C^mical Wits as ^eally r^dicul^us; others were to make them
odious to the Kingdom^ I considered, that in those days few had pati^nce to
read ov^r prol^xe Treat^ses; as also I imagined, that the Contest would be
more deeply imprinted in the minds of men, if they were excited by a variety of
dis^ourse of that nature. The first Specimen of Animadversions upon Dr. Sprat
and Mr. Glanvill were dispatched last Easter; but the Comical Wits were so
alarmed at what they at first despised, that they employed all their Artifices
to divert me: and if malicious threats or other disingenious proceedings could
have wrought upon me, the thing had died: But those pitif^l Me^haniciens
understood not the weakness of such Batteries upon me, and in all my life
(which those mean spirits pretended they would write) I am sure there was never
any circumstance could induce them to conjecture that I was to be discouraged
by Menaces; Besides, having found them so ungenerous, I conclud^d it more
unsafe to desist, then to proceed: I knew the cruelty of Cowards, and that who
had to do with wolves, must not make himself a Sheep: I evidently saw designs
not only upon my Fortunes, but Life; I know the pernicious (...) of mean and
proud spirits, the Obligation would be lost in sparing them; whilst the
Ignominy was so great, to be at my Mercy: I concluded that the most daring
Council was the best; that it was no disparagement for me to be overthrown by
power, and that I should multiply shame upon them, when it should be said, I
fell their Victour and their Mar^yr. Although I had submitted those papers to
the most severe Judgment of a Cauti^us Person (giving him absolute liberty to
dispunge whatsoever he thought harsh, or culpable) resolving never to look upon
or alter them after he had viewed them; when they were authorized to the Press,
and that there was no longer doubt of their Innocence, they containing nothing
repugnant to the Government, Church of England, or Good Manners, yet did some
of the Virtuosi (notwithstanding that they pretended to be desirous it should
come out, and that rather then the Book should meet with any obstacle their
President should license it) procure the Impression to be stopped: If this be
Genero^s, if this be agreeable to that frankness of mind and Philosophy which
you profess; O tres-haute, and ^res-agreeable Comediants, I appeal to all
English and brave spir^ts! Could any man have persuaded ^he world, before this
Essay, that you who seem the sole Dictatours of Wit, and useful Knowledge,
would have employed your power against me! And that t^irty Legions were to be
called to aid You against a young Countrey-P^ysician, who had so long
discontinued studies of this nature, and had so little time to resume them, or
recollect his thoughts! Pardon me, if I t^ll you, there is nothing Noble in
this demeanor, and whatever there may be of the Virtuoso, there is no
G^llantry of Virtue will give countenan^e to it, nor any thing that d^rives
from the Tutour of Alexander. Go, procu^e an Act of Parliament, or solicit
for a Proclamation, that none write or speak against you; by such means ensure
those Triumphs over the ancient Education of this Kingdom, the two
Universities, and the Protestant Church; which the Sprats and Glanvills by
their Goose-quills cannot a^chieve for you. To this course I should willingly
submit, and not envy you such accessi^nals of Glory: And as a Supplement to the
Life's of your W^r^h^es, only wri^e them impartially, I give you leave to feign
what you will concerning Me. Take not the advantage against these
Animadv^rsions, which the Printers mistakes occasioned: they are many, and
since you were in part a cause of them, by distracting and impeding of the
publication; and I being absent could not remedy them, 'twill be ignoble to
press upon confessed errors, some whereof are reduced into a Catalogue. As to
the incoherences of some places, and the incongruities of the English, I
acknowledge there are sundry of that kind; but do not think my self accountable
for those failures, nor for those repetitions of things, which as I traveled
came into my memory; some whereof had been sent to London before. Howsoever, if
you can refute the substance of the Discourses, I shall leave it to your
prudence, after this declaration, how you will manage the controversy. When
the other piece against Dr. Sprat will come out, is a matter I cannot well
promise to the world: The Virtuosi can best undertake for that. I have respited
the publication hereof thus long, to try, if any Let^ers of mine, or Entreaties
might prevail with them: I joined also Menaces that I would post them; which
indignities I wonder men of Tolerable Ingenuitie, or of so great arrogance
would outlive. And the Theological Censure being already public, I found the
expectation of all men impatient to see some of these Animadve^sions.

There is another T^eatise, showing the Original of the College of
Experimental Philosophers, See Campanella o^ the Spanish Monarchy, in English^
^. 10. p. 47. c. 25. p. 157. c. 27 p. 177, 180, 181, 182, 183.
as Campanella projected it, and containing a parallel of what He contrived
(and their Historian has pursued) for the reducing of England and Holland to
Popery: also a Specimen of sundry Experim^nts published by several Virtuosi,
that are false or stolen, yet boasted of as their proper Inventions: together
with Instances of the danger that all Tradesmen will run into by the
continuance of this Assembly; which to manifest further, I shall here add a
Proposal designed to have been tend^ed, and improved into an Act, in this last
Session of Parl^ament. It was deliver^d by Sir P.N. to an Honorable M^mber of
the House ^f Commons, and by Him sent unto me, adding, In which you may see
wh^t they drive at, viz. Instead of Monopolizing this or that particular Trade
at a time, once for all to have a Monopoly for all that ever should be invented.

It is proposed, that such kind of pretended n^w Inventions relat^ng to
Mechanics, Trades, or Manufactures, as are or shall be offered to the
Parliament, may by them by referred to such indifferent judicious persons, as
are like to give them a faithful Account, about the Newness, Reality,
Usefulness, etc. of the things proposed, and whether they are like to answer
the effects pretended to, and to make Report of the same to the Parliament.

And the Royal Society of London for Improving of Natural Knowledge, being
already fixed into a Corporation, and the Council of the said Society
consisting of 21, being by their Constitution under an Oath, to deal faithfully
in all things belonging to the Trust committed to the said Council: It is
offered, that such things may be preferred to the said Council, and they to
Report unto the Parliament.

They that know the M^n, know their meaning: and whosoever understands the
Consti^ut^on of our Parliaments, is assur^d that they need not look out of
their own number for indifferent judicious persons, to inform the House what
the Reali^y, Usefulness, or Newness, etc. is of Inventions; or should the
Parlia^ent be at any time destitute of s^^h Intelligence, the Council must make
better Reports then does their Historian, or else it will be in vain to resort
^o them in the Case. Upon the same pre^ence, if they once gain this, that
miscellaneo^s Assembly of indifferently judicious Persons, shall pretend to
detect the F^auds ^f Trades; and endeavou^ to reco^mend to all befitting
Preferments in the University and elsewhere, the i^g^nio^s and learned: and
then affairs will be brought to a fair pass. But I enlarge too far, and shall
only add, that I do ^emit the consideration and purport o^ this Project to the
Tradesmen of London, who are better acquainted then I with the tenden^y and
consequences he^eof. Had my Preface to the Animadversions upon the History of
the R. S. come out first, I had there showed that it is no way my intention by
any of these Pi^ces to detract from any Person of Quality or Learniug, that is
an Honorary Member of that Society, not from the Institution of it: I must
refer my Reader to that, as containing ^^ample Justification of me, as also a
defense of those passages in my life, which I apprehended most obnoxious to
their ce^sure. My quarrellies only with the Comical Wi^s, who make such a Noise
in the world, that in them all the rest are as it were drowned, who have
deviated from the int^n^ions of the Royal Founder, and are so deserted by sober
and serious men, that I make it my further Request, that they would inform us
what number of Persons are at present actual Members of the Royal Socie^y, and
which resort thither, and pay the usual Contributions: and that in their
Transactions there may be rel^ted what Persons are present each M^neth: from
hence we shall be able to judge what repute they deserve, and what respects we
are to pay them.

TO THE Reader.
THE Discourse of Mr. Glanv^ll, was the first occasion of my writing about the
R^yal Society, the provocation which it gave to all sorts of men, of different
Professions were such, that it might stir up any public spirit, to support so
^ommon a cause. I was sensible of the injuries he does unto the dead, the
affronts he puts upon the living, the contempt wherewith he decries that
University-Learning, and those Studies by which Christianity has been
supported against the Arrians, the Jews, the Mahometans, and of late the
Papists and Socinians: and which if they be relinquished, I profess, that I
think that the Christian Religion must inevitably fall without the aid of a
Miracle. It is a kind of Apostasy from the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds to
^light Metaphysics. The distinction of the Trinity, of Essence and
Personality, the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in our Savior, and the
meritoriousness of his death, (which depends thereon,) are undermined with
School Divinity; and whosoever has any sense or value for the benefits we
derive from Controversial-Divinity, either as to the quieting of his
Conscience, or convincing of his Adversaries, must detest this Enterprise of
Mr. Glanvill. And methinks that whosoever does but call to mind that variety o^
foolish Sects, which gave the Church so much trouble in its first Infancy, and
of late years, and considers that they had their Original from want of Logic,
should not condemn that Art, by which men argue rightly from sound Principles.
It was no less strange to me to find the names of Reverend, Sage, Grave,
Disputer and Logician, perverted into terms o^ Contumely; yet had not all those
Motives prevailed with me, but that he had so defamed the Ancient and Modern
Physicians, until those late Innovators, that many importuned me to revenge my
Faculty upon this Insolent Man. Besides, I had been much troubled with
impertinent discourses of some, who to excuse their Ignorance in the
Prognostic and Therapeutick parts of Medicine, indulged themselves in the
vilifying all the ancient learning and reading, and asserting out of the
Writings of the Society, the necessity and convenience of new methods, in
curing and abbreviating diseases. I soon espied my advantages over Mr.
Glanvill. But perceiving his Defense so complicated, with the History of the
Royal Society, that I could not well meddle with the one without reflecting
upon the other; I set my self to peruse that also, and found the Errors therein
so numerous and gross, and the tendency of it so dangerous, that it seemed but
an easy, yet necessary work, to the Universities, and all Learning^ as well as
the profession of Methodical Physic, to write against these new-fashion'd
Philosophers; I remarked so many defaults in both books, that I was at last
weary of taking notice of them, there being still Plus ultra. I resolve to give
my Studies no further diversion in pursuing Mr. Glanvill; but to leave him to
the scorn of some more common Pens, who being at the Universities may have more
leisure then I have at present. After all this Ostentation of Learning, the
things he talks and writes of are such, as he is utterly unacquainted with: the
Authors he mentions he never saw, and all his discourse about the Mathematics,
and Mathematicians, procured him no other acknowledgements from a Learned and
Reverend Prelate, (to whom he sent one of his Books) than a Reprimand for
intermedling with what he understood not. Who can choose but smile when he
reads how Apuleius improved the Mathematics (...)? who ever heard of such men
as Maximus Palanudes, Plus Vit^a. page 2^.
Achazen and Orentius? I suppose this last should have been Orontius, and he is
so famous a Geometrician, that when Sir H. Savill (as I remember) was to seek
for an instance of a pitiful fellow; this was the man he fixed upon; He tells
us that the most learned men of all sorts and professions; Page 4.
Mathematicians, Chemists, Physicians, Anatomists, Antiquaries, and
Philosophers, make up the Royal Society: but one would not guess so by their
History! He tells us, that the former Methods of Science for so many Centuries,
never brought the world so much practical beneficial knowledge, as would help
toward the Cure of a Cut Finger, Plus Vltra Page 7. and 8.
which he says is a palpable Argument, that they were fundamental mistakes, and
that the way was not right. Can any one that has heard of Podalirius and
Machaon in Homer prate thus? Quos tamen Homerus non in pestilentia, Corn.
Celsus in Praefat.
neque in variis generibus morborum aliquid attulisse auxilii, sed vulneribus
tantummodo ferro and medicamentis mederi solitos esse proposuit. Ex quo apparet
has parts medicinae solas ab his esse tentatas, easque esse vetustatissimas.
Had our Virtuoso but known how Hippocrates had writ about Wounds and Ulcers,
Diog. Laert. in vita Arist. Suidas in Nicomacho, and Ammonius in vita Arist.
Vide noras Menagii in Diog. Laert. l. 5.
and that Aristotle himself was descended of the line of Aesculapius, and that
his Ancestor Nicomachus was Physician to Amyntas King of Macedon, And that
Aristotle also was a Physician, and writ several books (besides his Anatomy of
Man) in that Science, and was upon that account valued by Alexander the Great,
as Plutarch says. And how little the Ancients stood in need of modern
discoveries and aids to cure Cut Fingers, any man may judge, that knows what
Scribonius Largus, and Galen (in his books de Compos. Medicam. sec. genera)
have written: and how this last Author (upon Philosophical deductions)
compounds several Medicaments to that purpose. In the Augustane Dispensatory,
to this day his Tripharmacon, his Diapalma, his Diadictamnum, and others are
recorded. And if any thing rendered Paracelsus justly famous, it was the cure of
inveterate Ulcers, not green Wounds: and that therein he did out-doe the
ancient Physicians, is a question, I cannot grant, and have not leisure to
dispute.

He reckons up Five Instruments by which the latter Ages have improved
Knowledge above Antiquity. Plus Vltra. Page 10.
The MICROSCOPE, TELESCOPE, THERMOMETER, BAROMETER, and the AIR-PUMP. Some of
which were first invented, all of them exceedingly improved by the ROYAL
SOCIETY. But as for the Telescope, he confesses that to have been invented by
Metius and Galilaeo. Which Confession of his, although it take from the Society
all pretenses to the invention thereof; yet it is unbecoming an inquisitive
person, who might upon better Intelligence from Borellus, in his book about the
Inventor of Telescopes, published in 1656. He might have learned thence that
Adrianus Metius of Alkmaer did not invent them, but one Zacharias Ioannides of
Middleburgh in Zeland, (though perhaps Baptista Porta had obscurely proposed
it) and that he who may most justly come in for a second share in the glory of
that invention is one Ioannes Lapreius of the same Town. And whereas it is
generally written, that Galilaeo was the first who applied those tubes to the
contemplation of Celestial Objects, even that appears to be false, seeing that
the first Inventor, even Zacharias Ioannides, (together with his son Ioannes
Zacharides) did make use of them to discover several new Phenomenon in the Moon
and Heavens. ^^rel de v^ro invent. Teles^op. c. 12.
Which mistake is unpardonable in our Virtuoso (and his Assistants) because
that a more particular Enquiry has been made of late years hereinto, then ever
before. The Barometer he allows to have been first invented by Torricellius,
not to try the gravitation of the Air, but to prove a vacuum; Afterward, the
different ascent of the Quicksilver, being tried on the top and at the bottom
of Hills in France, the opinion of the rising of the Quicksilver from the
pressure of the Air, was introduced and illustrated. But net her is the
gravitation, or pressure of the Air, a new opinion; it is as old as Aristotle,
it is his, ^^ecquet. Exp^^^m 2. in D^ss ^nat. p. ^^. Ed (...) 1651.
and he essayed to weigh the Air, in his book de coelo l. 4. sect. 29, 30, 39.
He proves the Air to ponderate, because a bladder full of Air weighs heavier
then one that is empty. Concerning which Experiment I shall add the words of
Scipi Claramontius, ^
that learned Writer, the truth of it having been questioned, Possum tamen
testari observationem Aristotelis dicto faventem, fuitque diligens observatio,
and a diligentissimo pensatore, exactusque stateris and lancibus peracta, me
praesente and adsistente, cum pluribus veritatis cupidis viris: pensit avimus
ergo primum follem novum penitusque vacuum, primo statera quae solum unciarum
differentiam indicabat, invenimusque unciarum decemnovem, and totidem reperimus
eundem follem diligenter inflatum, and solo spiritu nulloque humore immisso: ac
postea usi sumus lance, quae semuncias quoque indicabat, tumque follem inflatum
unciarum decemnovem and and semis invenimus, adeo tamen ut ibi libra in
aequilibrio absque tractu (ut vocant nostri) adamussim permaneret: at idem
vacuus non amplius in eodem signo sine tractu, sed cum tractu perstabat.
Quocirca verum dicit Aristoteles. So that whether we consider the gravitation
of the Air, or its being weighed, (which Mr. Glanvill in his Plus ultra thinks
so strange of, Plus Vltrae p 59. c. 8.
as he expresses, To have said in elder Time, That Mankind should light upon an
Invention, whereby those Bodies might be weighed, would certainly have appeared
very wild and extravigant; and it will be so accounted for some time yet, till
men have been longer, and are better acquainted with this Instrument, Many
P^rit^^^i^ls ( ^ Claramontius) ^^ld that the impure Air ^f (...) At^^sphear
does ^^a^itate, (...) they deny it as to ^he pur Ele^en^al Air.
etc) The opinion it self, and the attempt to weigh it, is Aristotle's: Nor is
this D^scou^se casually proposed once in Aristotle; but sundry ti^es he avows
the gravita^ion of the Air in his Problems, viz. sect. 11. probl 45 sect. 21.
probl. 18. sect. 25. probl. 12, 13. From hence we may judge how well Mr.
Glanvill is acquainted with the tenets of Aristotle, and how well read he is in
him whom he condemns. He and his Ph^losophick friends dealt only in some
pitiful Compendium of Phys^cs, and from thence learned that which was the
opinion of Themistiu^, Simplicius^ and other eminent Peripatetics, as if it had
been the avowed doctrine of their great Master; and thereupon they thus deliver
themselves. And on this occasion, Sir, I observe the incompetency of their
judgments, Mr. Glanvill, p. 122.
who are E^emies to the real Experimental Philosophy, in that they do not (as I
intimated) at all, or very little, understand what they condemn. This I have
some reason to say, since in the whole Compass of my Acquaintance, which is not
very narrow. I profess I know not one who opposes the Modern way, that is not
almost totally unacquainted with it. And on the other side, upon the most
careful turn of my thoughts among my Philosophic friends, I cann^t light on
one of all those that are for the free and experimental procedure, but who has
been very well instructed in the P^ripatetick doctrines, Pecquet. Exper.
Physico^ Math. de Vacuo. Page 50, etc. Paris 1651.

M^rsenni Pha^nomena Pneumar. page 140. Par. 1644.


which they have deserted, and most of them much better than those who are yet
zealous Contenders for them. I might tell our Divine, that the Gravitation of
the Air seems proposed in Job 28.25. Qui fecit ventis pondus, God is said to
make weight for the wind: indeed neither the gravitation of the A^mosphear,
nor the notion of Aerial cylinders, pressing upon subjacent bodies, were any
News in the world when the Society was first established. But the News of the
Barometer is so pleasant, that I will insert the whole passage.

But (IV.) The BAROMETER is another late Instrument, very helpful to useful
Knowledge. That there is gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element
is only comparatively light, Plus Vltra cap. 8. page 59
is now made evident and palpa^le by Experience, though Aristotle and his
Schools held a different Theory: And by the help of Quicksilver in a Tube, the
way is found to measure all the degrees of Compression in the Atmosphere, and
to estimate exactly any accession of weight, which the Air receives from Winds,
Clouds, or Vapors. To have said in elder Times, that Mankind should light upon
an Invention whereby those bodies might be weighed, would certainly have
appeared very wild and extravigant; and it will be so accounted for some time
yet, till men have been longer, and are better acquainted with this Instrument.
For we have no reason to believe it should have better luck than the Doctrine
of the Circulation, the Theory of Antipodes, and all great Discoveries in their
first Proposals. It Is impossible to persuade some of the Indians that live near
the heats of the Line, that there is any such thing as Ice in the World; but if
you talk to them of Water made hard and consistent by Cold, they will laugh at you
as a notorious Romancer. And those will appear as ridiculous among the most of
us, who shall affirm it possible to determine any thing of the Weight of the
Wind or Clouds. But Experience turns the laugh upon the confident incredulity
of the Scoffer; and he that will not believe, needs no more for his Conviction,
then the labor of a Trial. Let him then fill a Tube of Glass, of some Feet in
length, with Quicksilver; and having sealed one end, let him stop the other
with his Finger, and immerge that which is so stopped into a vessel of Mercury,
the Tube being perpendicularly erected; let him then substract his Finger, and
he will perceive the Quicksilver to descend from the Tube into the subjacent
vessel, till it comes to 29 Digits or thereabouts; there, after some
Vibrations, it ordinarily rests. The reason that this remainder of the Mercury
does not descend also, is, because such a Mercurial Cylinder is just
equiponderant to one of the incumbent Atmosphere that leans upon the
Quicksilver in the Vessel, and so hinders a further descent. It is concluded
therefore, That such a Cylinder of the ^ir, as presses upon the Mercury in the
Vess^l is of equal weight to about 29 Digits of that ponderous Body in the
Tube. Thus it is when the Air is in its ordinary temper: but Vapors, Winds,
and Clouds alter the Standard; so that the Quicksilver sometimes falls,
sometimes rises in the Glass, proportionably to the greater or less accession
of Gravity and compression of the Air has received from any of those
alterations; and the Degree of increase beyond the Standard, is the measure of
the additionable gravity. --

There is something so charming and so divertive in this discourse, that I
cannot yet dismiss it, notwithstanding what I have said out of Aristotle and
Claramontius. Aver^^^s adh^^^^ to A^^sto^le, and ho^ds the Air does g^avitate.
That there is gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element is only
comparatively light, was of old made evident by the Man of Stagira: nor did the
Schools hold a different tenet, if you take Air for this impure mixture and
Sphaera vaporosa about the Earth, which we breath, and in a special manner have
to do with: as appears from Claramontius in his Book of the Universe, and
Septalius upon Aristotle's Problems. But Mr. Glanvill neither understands what
he opposes, nor what he Asserts. For in the beginning he speaks of the
gravitation of the Element of the Air; whereas that Instrument called a
Barometer proposes only a way to measure the degrees of compression in the
Atmosphear, in which Region I believe no man ever denied but that the Aqueous
and Terrestrial corpuscles interspersed had their weight and pressure: Thus the
ordinary temper of this Air (which is never pure) the alterations of it by
vapors, winds, clouds, are the subject of those contemplations, as any man
knows that reads Mr. Boil, or even Mr. Glanvill. Thus all the flourish of
Rhetoric comes to nothing, the wonder is ceased, and we come to try only a
more particular way of examining the weight of a body, which no man in his wits
ever denied to be ponderous. And here I must tell our Vir^noso, that his
reading or consideration extends not so ^ar as to the writings of Mr. Boil,
and the experiment in him. For it appears out of Him that the Mercurial
Cylinder rises and falls in the Magdeburgical Air-Pump, ^
according to the lessening or vigorating of the Spring of the Air: and that
upon putting in the Barometer, and closing the Engine, there appeared not any
change in the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, no more then if the interposed
Glass-Receiver did not hinder the immediate pressure of the ambient Atmosphear
upon the enclosed Air; ^^sides, the d^ff^^en^e in Quick^ilver is such, ^ha^ a^l
Write^s take no^ice of it^ and ^ am apt t^ ^^lieve the (...) may be much va^^^d
in the (...) acco^ding to that.
which hereby appears to bear upon the Mercury, rather by virtue of its Spring
then of its weight. And if this Ph^nomenon proved such in a greater and less
Receiver, with a greater or less cylinder of Mercury (it being indifferent
which is used,) I doubt this Barometer will not determine the strength of the
Spring of the Air, much less its weight. For the Elasticity is a distinct
consideration from the weight of the Air: as when some Experimentators went
about to weigh the Pike, the Flownce or Spring of the Pike was no part of the
weight of the Pike, though it might turn the Scales. This sole consideration
destroys all the great promises we have from the Barometer, for if the Spring
of the Air cannot be exactly known, that we must be for ever ignorant of the
nature of those other bodies which influence and press upon our Air, and
compress the Spring of the Air, and may have many operations upon it which we
know not, neither can comprehend; If the height of the Atmosphear cannot be
determined, (which I make a postulatum of) the alterations in the higher
R^gions are unsearchable, and the mechanismes of those corpuscular combinations
incomprehensible, I shall not do^bt to say, that there is not yet found out a
way to measure^ ALL THE degrees of Compression in the Atmosphear: nay, it is far
from that exactness; for the body of the Quicksilver varies not upon insensible
variations in the Air: the intercepted Air in it takes off from the Niceness
of the Experiment: and since even heat, (and perhaps other circumstances) adds
to the Spring of the Air, it cannot give us that account pretended, about
vapors, winds and clouds.

The Essay by Tubes and Quicksilver, as ingenious as it is, yields the Society
no further glory, then to have illustrated it, and perhaps to have made some
further Experiments in it then those had done, to whom, as the first Inventor,
(by the concession of the Historian) appertains all or most of the Honor which
arises from such accessionals. It is true, our Virtuosi fixed on it the name
of Barometer, but they had done better to have called (...), or (...), or Gas,
or Blas, or Diaceltateston, or some such unintelligible name, rather then have
termed it thus: the Appellation signi^ying no more an instrument to measure the
gravity of the Air, then an instrument to weigh a parcel of Tar, or
indefinitely a pair ^f Stillyards. The Aerometer might have been a little more
Emphatical; especially considering that (...) and (...) are Synonimous. Had not
Aeroscopium been accommodated to the Thermometer, it would not have been much
incongruous. But I conceive, that Aerobaricon or Aerostaticon would have fitted
the Experiment as well as any name I can now think upon. The Barometer was
invented by Torricellius to prove a Vacuum, and in Mersennus's Cogitata
Physico-Mathematica, you may find it applied to the examining the difference of
the Air in several places. The Air-Pump was found out at Magdeburgh, and not in
England; it was first published by Schottus, under the name of Ins^rumentum
Magdeburgicum. Mr. Boil amended it, and prosecuted many ingenious Experiments
in it, for which all Philosophers are redev^ble to him, but cannot proclaim him
the Inventor of the Instrument, Hen. Reg. Philos Not. l. 2 c. 2 p. ^4. and l. 2
c. 3 p. 173 ed. 1^^1
no^ nor of the (notion of the Elasticity of the Air; which was proposed first
to the world by Henricus Regius, under the name of the spontaneous dilatation
of the Air: and illustrated by Pecquetus, who first, (that I know of,) spoke of
the Elater, Pecquetus page ^9 ( quem^ela^ erem nuncupo). ^orel u^i supra c. 12
p. 26. Blancanus de mundi fabr. pa^^ 3. c 2.
The Microscope was invented by the aforesaid Zacharias Ioannides: The
Thermometer, or Thermoscopium was first the invention of Sanctorius; so
Blancanus says, Audivi Doctorem quendam medicum Patavii degentem, qui
Sanctorius cognominatur, hujus esse inventorem And now I demand of our
Virtuoso, which of these Five Instruments for the Improvement of knowledge have
been found out by the Royal Society: The Thermometer is the discovery of a
Galenical Physician; but as to our Virtuosi nothing appears but the pretension
to other men's discoveries, and the improving of them.

By the Benefit indeed of one of these Instruments, the Telescope, we are put
in hopes to find a sure way to determine those mighty Questions, Whether the
Earth move? or, The Planets be inhabited? And who knows which way the
Conclusion may fall? -- I perceive hereby that Mr. Glanvill is not altogether
convinced that the Earth moves; and I am as little satisfied, that the solution
of those Questions is so mighty and important a thing; for if the Earth stand
still, then things will be as they are now: and if it be determined otherwise,
yet shall we not need to fear that the Revolution of the Earth in its Diurnal
motion, either shake our houses about our ears, or shake us of^ by the tangent
line: and as for those inhabitants of the Planets, in case all our other
trading should be lost, we shall not find out any gainful commerce with them;
nor need we dread that they will piss out our Eyes as we look up. So that let
their Telescopes be brought to that unimaginable perfection, whereby to
discover the inhabitants of the Planets as plainly as mites in Cheese, and let
the Conclusion fall which way it will, things will fall out no otherwise than
they do.

He inveigheth bitterly against Aristotle for his Heathen-Notions, and in his
Preface to the Clergy of B. and W. wishes that the devoted Admirers of
Aristotle would study his Rhetoric, History of Animals, and Mechanics. I
wonder he did not recommend unto them the perusal of his Ethics. Certainly
they deserve as much to be read in these days, as any Piece. And perhaps his
Politics might contribute something to the instruction of a Nation. But how
dare he recommend any book of that man of Stagira to be read, if those motives
that swayed him to Anti-Aristotelism, be of any validity: Alas! he is troubled
at his Heathen-Notions! Oh! rare Puritanism! But my dear Brother Scruple, ought
any one to be offended at every thing that is of Heathen-Original, though it
contain nothing of Gentilisme in it? Represent your adversary as you please to
his Diocesan, nothing has more of the Presbyterian and Fanatic then this
Topic. Moreover, what do you think of those Atoms and Corpuscles? are they not
Heathen-Notions, and decried by the Fathers? what do you think of the terms
used by the Mathematicians? what of the Lang^ages, such as are not Sacred? what
of the months, days of the year, and the names of the Stars, Constellations,
etc. Must every thing be reformed according to the Coelum Stellatum Christianum
of Julius Schillerus? Besides, these words in Theology, of Unity and Trinity,
have as much of Heathenism in them, as they have of Platonism. I shall here
take further notice of his exceptions against Aristotle, as they are
Recapitulated here (though they are more largely proposed by him in his Letter
against Aristotle, which I have fully answered in a distinct Treatise) the
general censure whereof is, That they are nothing but Lies, and such as no man
that is acquainted with any thing of ancient Literature could have uttered. I
protest in the Presence of Almighty God, that if there be not great care taken,
we may be in a little time reduced to that pass, as to believe the story of Tom
Thumb, and all the Legends or falsifications of History, which the Papists
obtrude upon us! This Philosophy fairly disposes us thereunto, by taking us
off from the Pedantism of Philology, and ancient reading, and by accustoming us
to believe the forgeries they obtrude upon us. Methinks herein he is one as
absurd as that Romish Monk was in the Pulpit. I^ Hen H^t^ingerus in Smeg^^.
Oriental l. 1. c. 2. p. ^
Heresbachius I. C^ citante Taubmanno, audivi, inquit, Monachum in Ecclesia
declamantem, qui, nova, inquiebat, jam reperta est Lingua, quae vo^atur Grae^a,
ab hac sedulo cavendum: H^c enim est quae parit omnes istas heraeses. Ea lingua
est liber proditus, in manibus passim habetur and vocatur N. T. Plenus hic
liber rubetis, and viperis. Alia etiam oritur lingua, quam vocant Hebraeam,
hanc qui discunt, efficiuntur Hebraei. We are running on as fast as we can to
this condition of ignorance, and shall be so inured to Historical untruths,
magisterially imposed upon us, and disused from inquiring into them, as to
believe any thing. He tells us the Aristotelian Philosophy aims at no more,
than the instructing men in Notion and Dispute, that its Design was mean, and
its Principles at the best uncertain and precarious, -- One may guess how well
our Virtuoso understands the Old Philosophy, to ascribe that unto it all in
general as its aim, which is but the intendment (and that a necessary one too)
of the Dialectick and Metaphysical parts. In Natural Philosophy their designs
were the same that our Moderns boast of, if they miscarried in the main, let us
pity their misfortunes, but not blame their intentions. Did Aristotle in his
books of Animals, or Theophrastus about Plants, instruct men only to Dispute?
Had his Anatomy, and his Problems nothing but Notion? Must we cast off all
Notions? Or ought we to endeavor after the gaining of clear notions of things?
If men hitherto did proceed no further, and yet pretended to be Peripateticks,
blame the abuse, but condemn not the Philosophy, which has nothing in it that
puts a stop to Enquiries and Curiosity. Nor do I find that those Physicians,
and others, who advanced the several parts of Natural Philosophy and Physic,
did thereby act contrary to the rules of their Master or Tutors. It is true,
that their Schools did meddle but with few points mainly, and those were such
as related to Divinity, as the Eternity of the World, the Nature of the First
and Second Causes, of the Soul and its Faculties, etc. as to an exact natural
Philosophy, they did not much trouble themselves, nor had we had what we have,
but that Averroes and the Physicians befriended us. But must Scaliger and such
like suffer under these Imputations, which par^icularly relate unto their
School-Divines? and must they also be blamed for not teaching nor putting men
upon further Enquiries than were necessary to that Christianity, which they
were to support against the Mahometans and Jews? He that knows the end of their
first institution by Charlemaigne, can best judge how prudential it was, and
how they answered expectation. But our Illiterati know nothing of that, and are
always reviling them where they are not faulty, and would have had them
nglected that part which was necessary to the Education of all that were to
live under and support Christianity, to pursue Studies that contribute little
thereto, and such as were never essential to the being of a State, but have
been often exploded as prejudicial thereunto. The same Apology may serve the
present Universities, who do enough in breeding up men to be fitly qualified
for Employments in Church and St^^^, and instruct them in so much Philosophy as
is necessary for the explaining and defending of our Religion against Atheists,
Papists, and Socinians: and whosoever shall put the accurate debate of these
Points, the Art of reasoning, the Validity of Consequences, the unfolding of
crytical Syllogisins and Fallacies, the general doctrine of Topics, the Moral
Philosophy, and Foundations of Civil Prudence, (besides Civil and
Ecclesiastical History and Languages) which are taught there, or ought to be by
their Constitution, into the Scales on one hand, and the Mechanical Education
(recommended with all the advantages that arises from Aphorisms o^ Cider,
planting of Orchards, See Mr Sprat, p. 329.
making of Optic Glasses, magnetic and hortulane Curiosities) on the other
hand, will be able to judge easily which Studies deserve the most encouragement
by the public, and which are most useful and requisite. Having said thus much
in behalf of our University-Learning (which is now contradistinguished from the
Mechanical Education) I shall add thus much in favor of our Ancestors, who
gave solemn encouragement to Archery, Cudgel-playing, Foot-ballplaying, and
other Exercises, that prepared the Vulgar to Military Performances; as the more
Academical did the Gentry to State Affairs: whereas they gave little
countenance to the Experimental Philosophers and Naturalists: that the practice
is justified by Vegetius l. 3. c. 10. Quis autem dubitat artem bellicam rebus
omnibus esse potiorem, per quam libert as retinetur, and dignitas propagatur,
provinciae conservantur and Imperium? Hanc quondam relictis d^ctrinis omnibus
Lacedemonii, and post coluere Romani. Hanc solam hodieque Barbari putant esse
servandam: caetera aut in hac art consistere, aut per hanc artem assequi se
posse con^idunt. Haec dimicaturis est necessaria^ per quam vitam retineant and
victoriam consequantur. But to r^turn to our Virtuoso! Are not the principles
of Des Carts, and the figured Atoms of Gassendus as precarious as those of
Aristotle, and less subjected to sense? Have not the Chemical Principles so
much of uncertainty, Anal^gi^e si accipiantur h^c Chymico^^m p^incipia
assentiri e^s p^ssumu^, ita ut p^o Mercurio aqua ponatur, Sulphur ignis and
a^r, S. le ter^a. Analogi^ negata negatur ^mnia co abire. Ex aqua and ^erra fac
li^um v^s^^^lum, and hunc curae conglurinari and concrescere in lapidem:
quemadm^dum n^tu^^ (...) vid^mus. Si hic resolvatur in ultima non in Mercurium,
Sulphur, and Salem, sed in vulgata and Physica resolvetur principia. M. Ruland.
Progymn. Alchym Qu^^.
as they have of Equivocation? Are not they precarious too^ and suspicious? Are
there any o^ those that agree amongst themselves? and do not they as little
agree with Nature as those of the Peripatetick way? I will not doubt to
maintain that as far as Physic is concerned in the debates; The ancient
Philosophy better agrees with the Phenomenon of Nature, and carries us on with
more assurance to work (as they phrase it) then any other, and that the
diligent reading of Vallesius, Mercatus, Saxonia, Claudinus, etc. shall produce
better Physicians then Sylvius, Helmont, or Odorode. And whosoever resolves any
of the other Questions in the Negative, whatever he pretend, has never
considerately studied the Points. Give therefore the Aristotelians leave to
hold an Hypothesis, which is accommodated to the poli^y of our Nation) at least
as revocable, till a better be introduced; and do not proceed in an
exterminative way, till something else be ready to be substituted.

If Notions might be rejected for being first proposed and used by Heathens,
then is not Aristotle in a worse condition then Epicurus, Democritus, Plato, or
Pythagoras; If Impiety in the Teacher may authorize us to reject doctrines not
impious, I think the condition of our Stagirite not to be worse then that of
other ancient Philosophers, and better th^n some of the New. That there is
impiety enough in Gassendus's Answer to Des Carts, any Christian will grant,
especially if he be a Protestant. And the life of Descartes had but little of
the Saint: this is manifest. I cannot find any ground to conclude Aristotle so
wicked. If we in^^emu^fie him for having an hand in poisoning Alexander, (which
p^rhaps is not true). In his last Will, there is much generosity: in his li^e,
many testimonies of a singular v^^tue: (...) his d^scourses much wit and worth.
He writ an Apology for Piety; got the walls of his destroy^d Country to be
rebuilt, and made excellent L^ws for it. Philip chose him to breed up
Alexander. And those are greater assurances that he was not so wicked, as he is
^eported by his adversa^ies. They repeat nothing but old lies, such as
Apellicon refu^ed: and Arist^cles says, (...). See Ca^au^on upon Diog. L^rt.
And I desire Mr. Glanvill to acquit Para^elsus from being impious in his life,
and many of his doctrines. If he was a Corrupter of the Wisdom of the Ancients,
for mis-citing, and misrepresenting their opinions; and must therefore be
condemned and rejected: who can approve of Mr. Sprat, Mr. Glanvill, and their
Adherents? He says, that Aristotle was of no such superlative Account in the
wisest times. But he tells us not which those most wise times were, when he was
in disesteem. I have not read of any more wise people, then Greece, Rome, and
the Mahometans, under their first Caliphs and King Almansor. And yet all these
admired him at several times. He that charge Philip of Macedon, Alexander the
Great, and his Successors, (particularly the Ptolomyes of Egypt,) with Folly:
and Sylla, Tully, and those other Romans that admired him, with want of wisdom;
Or, who thinks that the Empire of the Moors, and their Academies at Bagdod,
Fez, and Cordula, were composed of a sort of Simpletons, may go seek for the
wise and the prudent in Gotam College. And perhaps those Christians that
celebrated Aristotle, and advanced him to that repute in their Kingdoms and
Universities, were not Idiots or Changlings. That He was much opposed and
slighted by the first Fathers, is an Objection that has some truth in it, but
not much to the particular prejudice of our Stagirite. For at first they hated
and detested all humane Learning, and Philosophy; and when they came any of
them to admit of those Sciences, then they divided into the Aristotelians and
Platonists, as they did into Arians and Catholics: That the Arians were
Aristotelians, is to me as evident, as that Mahomet taking the advantage of
that faction, and of the brutal lives and ignorance of the Catholics
depending upon the Patriarch of Constantinople, did advance the Sect of
Christians, called Mahometans; and his Successors the Caliphs, did wholly
employ themselves to improve the doctrines of Aristotle and the Peripateticks.
I d^si^e that the Virtu^si would enquire a^^er the Peripatetick Philosophy, at
Alexandria after the Ptolomies and not at Athens. And when they have done that,
and studied the condition of Christianity, during the time of the Arrians, and
enquired into the rise of Mahom^^, the circumstances that advanced him and
contributed to the spreading of his doctrine, and increase of that Empire under
the Caliphs, then they will be able to judge of the truth of what their
Historian, and Mr Glanvill writes in the books animadverted on, and in his
Letter concerning A^isto^le.
So that Aristotelism,. Arianism, and Mahometanism issued out of the same parts
of the world, viz. Alexandria, and the adjacent Countries: Nor was it Chance or
the black ignorance of the Age, but great prudence in Charlemaine and his
Successors in the West, that brought in Aristotle: as any man will say that
understands the circumstances of those days. But so much History is above the
reach of my Experimental Philosopher: To supply that defect, Christians must be
once more told, that since their minds are enlightened with the rays of the
glorious Gospel, they have less reason to bow down to the Dictates of an
Idolater and an Heathen. And so farewell to the Rhetoric and other works of
Aristotle, which our Virtuoso a little while ago recommended unto us. Let us
shake hands with Seneca, and Epictetus, and Plato: and join with Tertullian in
that saying^ Nobis Philosophia opus non est post Iesum Christum, nec Aristotele
post Evangelium. Having said thus much to these grand accusations against
Aristotle, with which Mr. Glanvill was so perplexed, I suppose he may think
that a more devout Admirer of Aristotle then I am, with more time, may say
enough to convince him, that it was his fault, and not the Peripateticks, that
he benefited so little by them And I pray what language did Epicurus,
Pythagoras, and Philolaus make use of? He writ better about divine things than
Plato, as Vossius witnesses, Quanquam multa de Deo scripta sunt a Platone,
^ccuratius tamen apertiusque de iis egit Aristoteles. He cites a passage of
Plato, (...), and adds, that the Universe must be known by the Art, by which it
was made. If it be not to be known any other way, it is unintelligible. Let him
answer Dr. More's Dialogues upon that point, where he explodes the Mechanism of
Nature: and reckons upon Descartes as the most prodigious Fool that ever was,
for holding that opinion. I shall add, that Geometricians are commonly a sort
of men, that being once got out of their Science, they are far from being
elevated and improved thereby: And the reason is, because that the severe
procedure of Mathematical demonstrations, and their ways they take to
demonstrate things appertaining to their Science, these do not qualify a man
at all for those argumentations which sway and guide in Metaphysics, A^ist
Eth. l. 6. c. 8.
Ethics, Politics and Religion it self. Upon this account Aristotle observed,
that a child might become a Mathematician, but not a Politician, or Moralist.
Hence it is, that Geometricians, (except their studies have particularly
acquainted them with those Dialecticks, which regulate the generality of
Mankind in such discourses,) seldom, if ever, prove Metaphysicians,
Religieuse, or otherwise of tolerable ratiocination: either rejecting as false,
frivolous, and indemonstrable, those reasonings and studies, according to which
humane affairs are regulated; or else ignorantly, running into Whimseys, and
fantastical ways of arguing. Neither is this more manifest, then I think these
two Conclusions are, which I deduce from thence in opposition to some Comical
Wits in their History, viz.

That by how much more general as to public and private use and emolument in
order to domestic affairs, or Civil ^rudence and the preservation of Humane
Society and Government those things are, which depend upon persuasive
Arguments, and those topics and methods of ratiocination which are laid down
by Aristotle, not Euclide: by so much those courses ought to be pursued, upheld
and encouraged by understanding Statesmen which are subservient thereunto,
above the less necessary and inutile Mathematics.

Next, That the Mechanical Education, or that whereby Youth are inu^ed at first
to vigorous demonstrations, Hist. of the R.S. p. 319.
and necessary deductions from evident Principles, and a Philosophy that is
purely Corpuscularian, ought not to be premised or preferred to other studies
in order to the fitting men for humane life: seeing either accidentally, (yet
so, as in regard of our depraved nature it is almost unavoidable) or
intrinsecally those courses dispose men's minds afterward to Atheism, or an
indifference in Religion; and inhabilitate them toward those more important,
but less delightful studies of Law, Policy, and Religion, with their several
dependencies.

I find that Aristotle has complained of some, that in their Explications of
Nature made too much use of Geometry. Magnenus has complained also of them;
and Conringius, Bullialdus, and Ricciolus, Vide Ricciolum in Almagest. no^. l.
4. p 178.
of Kepler; and Bodinus, in his Theatrum Naturae l. 5. and all Physicians
almost of Descartes his ridiculous book de Homine. And if Plato was so
solicitous, that none but Geometricians should come into his School, yet he
sent them very fools out, if they allowed of his Logic and Physiology. See Mr.
Parkers cen^ure of the Platonic Philosophy.
I shall leave the further defense of Aristotle to others; only I must tell
him, that Vossius in his account of Geometricians allows of Aristotle for no
mean one. And we find that he supposes his Scholars not ignorant in Geometry,
Vide Blancanum in loca Mathematica Aristotelis.
since without that knowledge they could not understand his Analyticks, nor
that part of his Ethics, where he illustrates Justice by the Arithmetical and
Geometrical proportions. And as for his Ethnical opinions, it is ridiculous to
upbraid the University-Learning with them, Epicurus Mathesin insuper habuit:
unde ut Plutarch. ait libro contra Epicurum. Philosophum quendam nomine
Apellem, eo nomine la^dabat, quod ab adolescentia nunquam esset con^amina^us
disciplinis Mathematicis. Vossius de P^ilos. s^ct. c 8 sect. 7.
since they are not taught, but solidly refuted there, However if Aristotle
must suffer on this Account, let not Epicurus triumph. He tells us that
Archytas, that great Geometrician was scared from Mechanical and Organical
Methods to the great hinderance of beneficial Improvements that way, so that he
kept himself up in Abstractive Contemplations. I cannot find any such thing in
his life written by Diog. Laertius, but the contrary, Diog. Laert. l. 8. in
vit. Archy^ae.
(...). He made a Pidgeon of wood artificially to fly. So Favorinus. ^^llius
x. 12.
(...). I wonder oftentimes how He did to commit so many mistakes; and I cannot
believe that He or his Philosophic friends were ever well instructed in the
Peripa^^^ick doc^rines, who are so ill taught in all manner of Humane Learning.
I resign him up to be the scorn and entertainment of others henceforth. Nor
will I engage particularly in the dispute betwixt him and Mr. Cross. I am
informed, that the Relation is very false; and I profess I have no mind to
believe this Virtuoso in any thing he says. It is easy for him to misreport a
private discourse; His great and admired friend Mr. Sprat relates general
Encounters false; He tells us, Of a mischance that befell the Christian Army in
Egypt in the time of the Holy War. Hist. of the R.S. Page 412.
Their strength was great and irresistible, if they had only understood that
which every Egyptian could have taught them, the course and the time of the
overflowing of the Nile. For the want of that slender knowledge, the bravest
men of all Christendom, were led up to the Neck in the River, and were forced
to yield to the Enemies conditions without striking a stroke. This was
occasioned by the stupidity of the Cardinal who commanded them. If he had been
less skilful in the Schoolmen and more in Nature, that dreadful disaster had
never happened. -- Such an untruth as the Historian tells here, such perhaps is
the Narrative of what passed betwixt him and Mr. Cross. I cannot find any such
Story in Fullers Holy War, F^llers Holy War, l. 3, c^ 27.
but the contrary, viz. Egypt is a low level Country except some few
advantages, which the Egyptians had fortified for themselves. Through the midst
of the Land runs the River Nilus, whose streams they had so bridled with banks
and ^^uces, that they could keep it to be their own servant, and make it their
Enemies Master at pleasure. The Christians confidently marched on, and the
Turks perceiving the Game was come within the wile, pierced their banks, and
unmuzling the River, let it run open mouth upon them, yet so that at the first
they drowned them but up to the middle not to the neck. There is no body
charges the Cardinal Pelagius, who was Legate, and commanded the Army there,
for invading Egypt in a^ unseasonable time, nor with being ignorant of the time
when Nile did overflow. The Christians were not ignorant of that, who had
discovered and invaded Egypt before in 1218, and this was b^t two years after
in 1220. The Egyptians, it is true, dammed up the River (which was now low) and
upon the approach of the Cardinal cut their banks, and so gained the victory.
That the Cardinal was no Soldier, and unacquainted with Stratagems of war, I
grant; and for this Historians condemn him, but not for being ignorant of that
part of Natural Philosophy. A Member of the Royal Society published lately an
account of the Original of Nile. The Description had nothing of News in it to
any Scholar, that was material. But they should have procured an account of the
manner of the inundation of Nile, for the Historian is more ignorant then the
Cardinal of it. Had it been the time of the beginning of the overflowing of
Nile, they might have retired easily to Damiata without damage; Prosper.
Alpi^d^ M dic. Egypt l 1. c. 8
for it never exceeds in rising above ten inches each day, sometimes it arises
not eight inches. Just such an Account, I fear, does Mr. Glanvill give of Mr.
Cross's discourses, I know not what Logic Mr Glanvill read at O^^ord, but it is
Ignoratio Elenchi in him, t^ oppo^e what Mr. Cross might say about Asia as it was
of old named, and bounded, and (...) over^ with the new discoveries (...)
China, Iapan, etc which rather constitute a fifth part of the world, then are
inc^uded in Asia. Tha is Asia, which they imported that gave it the name, not
what others (...) to it. (...) the same Sophist^y it may be (...) that the
fo^mer Kings were not Kings of France, because late Conquests have enlarged the
borders.
whom report speaks so advantagiously of, that we must give the Lie to general
fame, or believe him a very learned Person, as well as pious. Perhaps he, as
well as my Lord Bacon might suspect the truth of those Telescopes. And perhaps
also he might be mistaken in saying that Aristotle did travel all over Asia:
No^ was Aristotle implicitly guided by the relations of those Hunters etc. he
diligently inq^^^ed into their reports, and oftentimes r^f^tes the vulgar
stories. See this pa^ticularly alterred by Federicus Bonaventura de pa^tu
Octomestri l. 5. c. 6.
yet, however that, that Ionssius ( de Script Philos. l. 1 c. 18.) disproves
that opinion, yet no less man then Josephus l. 1. adv. Apionem, was deceived as
well as Mr. Cross. Solinus also c. 14 and Ammonius in the li^e of Aristotle
say, that Aristotle did accompany Alexander in his Asiatick Expedition. And I
prosess my self in an error as well as Mr^ Cross, if it be not true, that
Aristotle had sundry advantages to pen his History of Animals which our
Virtuosi want. Pliny Not. Hist. l. 8^ c. 16. says. Alexandro Magno rege
inflammato cupidine animalium naturas noscendi, delegat aque hac commentatione
Aristoteli, summo in omni doctrina viro, aliquot millia hominum in totius
Asiae, Greciae que tractu parere jussa, omnium quos venatus, aucupia,
piscatusque alebant: quibusque vivaria, armenta, alvearia, piscinae, aviaria in
cura erant: nequid usquam gentium ignoraretur ab eo: quos percontando,
quinquaginta ferme volumina illa praeclara de animalibus condidit.

Let a man now consider the greatness of Alexander, the impatience he had to
effect his purposes, how generous he was in acknowledging Services, and how
vindicative when neglected, and how understanding to know what was done and
omitted: Let any man consider this, and he will think that the Society have not
a Patron that interesseth himself so much as Alexander did for Aristotle. He
had several thousands commanded to give him intelligence: their number
transcends any that ours can pretend to: their quality is such as the R.
Society wishes for, viz. Intelligence from the constant and unerring use of
Experienced men, Mr. Sprat. p. 257.
of the most unaffected and most unartificial kinds of life. And if
notwithstanding all these circumstances Aristotle were abused or mistaken, or
defective in his Narrations, I am confident there is less credit to be placed
in the Narrations of some of our Virtuosi, who have been so mistaken in their
Accounts of Cider and Saltpeter, domestic Enquiries; what man will give
himself the trouble to inform them, either at home, or abroad? with what
negligence and imperfectness will they register things? how un-philosophical
will their memoires be? How will they be able by entreaty to procure a second
information? That there are more parts of the world discovered and sailed unto
then in Aristotle's time, I grant. But what certainty shall we have of
Narratives picked up from negligent, or un-accurate Merchants and Seamen? What
judgment have these men of no reading, whereby to rectify or enlarge their
Enquiries? Mr. Glanvill does not so much as know who writ well upon the several
subjects, in which he pretends that the Moderns have outdone the Ancients. As
Improvers of the History of Bathes (by the way we are far inferior to them in
the practice of Bathing) he reckons Savanarola for one: he might as well have
recounted Bayrus, Gordonius and Gatinaria: or any of the barbarous Physicians,
for advancers of the practick: He might have told us of a Volume of Writers de
balneis: But why did he omit Solinander de thermis, Libavius, and our Dr.
Jordan (who lived at our Bathe) and Bauhinus de font Bollensi, and the other
Writers about particular Bathes? Alas! He knew them not: nor did I ever hear
any man commend Blanchellus upon that subject. About Minerals, could he not
have named Enceli^s, Caesalpinus, Fallopius, and Lazarus Erkerus, whom I find
by so^e to be preferred before Agricola? In his Account of remote Histories of
Nature, could he remember the Author of the Caribby-History, and pass by
Carolus Piso, Burggravius, and Bontius about Brasile and the East Indies. So
where he speaks of discoveries made by Microscopes (page 57.) by naming only
Dr. Power and Mr. Hook, ingenious Mechanics, Members of the Royal Society; he
seems to intimate, as if none but the Virtuosi had proceeded in that adventure,
whereas Petrus Borellus, Physician in ordinary to the King of ^rance, published
a Century of Microscopical observations An. Dom. 1656. such as have (if true)
more of utility then those of Mr. Hook, though less of curiosity, and
destitu^e of Cuts; and Kircher after many years employed in those
contemplations, (...) d^ P^st ^^ct. ^. c. 7.
per exquisitissima Microscopia, did publish several Experiments of that kind,
in his book de Peste; Ni^. (...) Phi^o^. (...) part. 2. ^. 3. c. (...). 4. p.
348.
and Nicolaus Zucchius about the same time (1656.) published a short account of
Microscopical observations, about a Lowse, a Flea, the feathers of a Peacocks
tail, etc. encouraging others to prosecute the work. He tells us, ( page 56.)
that the discoveries by Telescopes may inform us of the Longitudes: upon which
must needs ensue yet greater improvements of Navigation, and perhaps the
discovery of the North-west passage, and yet unknown South. I grant that the
invention of Longitudes will be extremely beneficial to man kind in point of
sailing: and the R.S. have made great boasts how that it shall be achieved by
their Members; and thereupon caused some projects to be rejected, which yet
perhaps would have proved as unfeasible as the attempt of Galileo's, to
calculate it by the Medicean Stars. I desire much to see the happy result of
our Virtuosi, though the consequences here affixed to it, as Improvements was
very defective. I shall propose some Scruples about the North-west passage, and
the utility of its discovery, as also of the hopes of finding out the Southern
Tracts First, See Mr^ Gardener in his d^^c^^ption of Ame^i^^ c 25. (...) h^
(...) to w^ite not^ing out what h^s own knowledge, or g^od intellig^nce
pe^swa^ed him unto, he having lived ^^ng in the re^^^^^ pa^ts of ^merica: the
(...) whose large Accoun^ ^hereof we may deplore^
I say that the story about the streights of Aman is very improbable, if not
certainly a Fiction. It has been so thoroughly searched into by our Nation, that
there is no encouragement to a further trial: and this Straight of the
Northwest passage, is indeed nothing but a narrow difficult passage to Button's
Bay, the entrance being properly called Hudson's Straight, in regard of his
first finding it^ the mouth whereof lies in 62 degrees. But were there such a
passage, it would much more concern the Portugals, and the Spaniards, and
Dutch, then it does the English; for their trade is to the North-part of the
East Indies, and ours to the South^ theirs to the Moluccoes, Philippinas,
Iapan, and China; whereas we seldom pass beyond Bantam in Iava. Secondly, were
there a passage that way, yet it were not to be chosen before the other: ^or,
could a man sail in a strait line, first from England to the Straight, and
thence from the Straight to the East Indies, it would prove a further way then
the other by the Cape o^ good Hope. But thos^ that know any thing of those
Seas, know that the Sea-Course to any part of North America, is as low as 23,
24, 25^ or 30 the highest by reason of the wind which blows in the South Sea
East and West^ as well as in the North, that is to say, for the most part West
without the Tropicks, and almost constantly East within them. Wherefore you
must go out of your way as well from the North-part of America to the
East Indies, as from England to this supposed Straight: and there is as much
difference in relation to pleasantness in the Voyages, as between Summer and
Winter. For when one is clear of the Bay of Biscay, in all the Voyage by the
Cape you find no cold weather till you return to the same place again: but on
the contrary, it is so cold and Icy about the Straight in the middle of Summer,
Judge hence what hopes ^here is of making discoveries in the Southern Tracts^
that there is no making way without much difficulty and trouble. And in the
South Sea. where the Sun keeps the same course as in the North in June; Sir
Francis Drake in compassing the world, found so much cold in thirty eight
degrees of North-latitude, that he was forced into a Southerly course. Besides,
if we may take a conjecture from the winds, which have blown when the
Undertakers for that discovery passed into those Streights, one would guess by
their great coldness, that they did blow from the Land, and consequently that
there is no Sea to the North of America, but that the Land of this New World
reaches by the North parts, even to the Northwardly Provinces of Tartary, etc.


I am surprised to find, that Mr. Glanvill does not make the Moderns to
surpass the Ancients, in Architecture, Sculpture, Picture, and several other
Arts of ingenious Luxury. That he does not advance the glory of our
Mathematical burning- Glasses, above the Specula Ustoria of Proclus; and the
Artificial Fires of our Virtuosi above those invented by Callinicus, when he
burned the Saracens Fleet.

But not to upbraid him with what he has omitted: I shall resume the discourse
about Telescopes, and their fallaciousness, wherein if Mr. Cross was a little
doubtful, yet Mr. Glanvill is so assured, that he makes an ample recital of the
contest, and the advantages he gained in it. I shall set down his words, the
better to divert my Reader, and to show how insupportable such kind of men are
in all judicious and intelligent company.

Mr. Glanvills Plus Ultra. c. 9 p. 65.
To my Discourse about the Dioptrick Tubes, the Telescope and Microscope, the
Reverend Disputer replied, [ That our Glasses were all deceitful and
fallacious] Which Answer minds me of the good Woman, who when her Husband urged
in an occasion of difference, [ I saw it, and shall I not believe my own Eyes?]
Replied briskly, Will you believe your own Eyes before your own Dear Wife? And
it seems this Gentleman thinks it unreasonable we should believe ours, before
his own dear Aristotle.

For an assurance of the credit of those Glasses, I told him he might try them
upon objects near, and easily visible by the unassisted sight; and if he made
the trial, he would find they altered and objects in nothing but their
proportions, which are represented larger for the advantage of vision in things
small and remote; and we have all the like reasons to distrust our Eyes, as
these Glasses (for their inf^^mati^ns are the same in all things, but the
mentioned difference) and there is no man so much a fool as not to ^ake
allowances for that. Never was any yet so grossly deceived by the Microscope, as
to be persuaded that a Flea is as big as a Lobster; nor did the Telescope ever
make any o^e believe that the Moon was at the end of his Tube: But if the
former represents that little Creature as bristled and jamar'd, and the other
makes the Planet mountanous and uneven, we have no reason to believe but that
their reports are sincere, though our unaided Senses are too gross to perceive
either the one or other; since, if the mentioned bristles and jamars are in the
Glass, and not in the Animal, they would appear in like manner in all the small
Creatures which in the same light and position are looked on through the
Microscope: And if the ruggedness of surface were in it, and not in the Moon,
the same would be seen upon all other distant Objects, that are viewed through
the other Optic Instrument. And if there be deceit in those Glasses, Seamen
had need beware how they trust them, since the Flags which appear to be those
of their Friends in the Perspective, may be really the Colors of their
Enemies.

Upon these Accounts, Sir, which afford plain and sensible evidence, I wondered
much at the Disputers strange suspicion, which had been scarce pardonable in a
vulgar head; and I know not what to call it in one, that would be thought a
Philosopher: But the wary man gave a reason, which made me as much wond^r at
his Argument, as his Doubt. And to this attend Ye Philosophers of the ROYAL
COLLEGE, and prepare your selves to answer a Demonstration from Experience
against your Glasses; Raise your Expectations for a wonderful, convictive
Experiment; Let the Mountains travel, and the Birth will follow. [ Take
two-Spectacles (says the EXperimental Sage) use them at the same time^ and you
will not see so well as with one singly.] therefore your Microscopes and
Telescopes are Impostors. This man, Sir, is a Logician, and no doubt you
perceive so. O how I admire this rare faculty of arguing! How dull are our
Wits, to those subtle, Eagle-ey'd Schoolmen, who see Conclusions so far off,
through the more unerring Telescopes of their own piercing Understandings? Did
ever old man before make this use of his Spectacles But to leave wondering,
let us endeavor to understand this Philosophy of Ch^e. How a man may see by
Spectacles, that Perspectives are deceitful. [We can see better through one
pair, than two] says the deep Philosopher^ Most sagely observed! The Argument
begins strongly: But in the name of Aristotle, whence comes the Consequence?
Therefore Perspectives are fallacious.

One Proposition for Sense,
And the other for Convenience.
This fits his purpose to discredit new Discoveries, it is no matter how it
follows. This Gentleman, you must know, Sir, uses to have his word taken among
his admiring Neighbors, and so is not wont to be put to the trouble of
proving: but I was so unmannerly as to expect it, choosing rather to see with
mine own Eyes, than his infallible Spectacles. We can see better -- says the
Disputer. How does he know that? If Perspectives deceive us, though naked sense
witness for them. Why may not his single Spectacles be as deceitful as they?
These represent things bigger than they are to the unaided sight; and the
Philosophical Glasses do but the same thing, in a higher degree of magnifying
the Object. But we allow him the benefit of his single Spectacles, though he
will not be so courteous to our Glasses, and confess his R^verend EXperiment of
the use of two, but are inquisitive about the Consequence. The Reason of which
certainly must be, (if any be intended in it) that our Telescopes and
Microscopes have a Glass at each end, which the Man of Sapience thinks answers
the two pair of Spectacles, and therefore must render the Representation
deceitful. If this Philosopher had spared some of those thoughts to the
profitable doctrine of Optics, which he has spent upon Genus and Species, we
had never heard of this Obj^ction, which is as much a reason against the credit
of all Perspective Glasses whatsoever, as the Philosoph^cal ones he would
discredit. And without more Optics than those of natural Understanding, he
might, if it had pleased him, have known, that we see better through the two
Glasses in Perspectives, then any single one; because they are so fashioned and
ordered, that the visive rays are better gathered and united by them for the
advantage of sight: But in the two Spectacles, the case is contrary. These
things I suggested, and some others from the Dioptricks, in which this ^age
Person was pleased then to conceal his Knowledge; and how great that was in
these matters, will appear by the Learned Problem he proposed at this period of
our Discourse, [ ^hy we cannot see with two pair of Spectacles better than with
one singly? For, says the Man of AXioms, Vis unita fortior?] A pleasant piece
of Philosophy this; And I Will show the Disputer how strongly he infers from his
Maxim, by another Question like it. Why cannot he write better with two Pens
then with a single one, since Vis unita fortior? When he has answered this
Quaere, he has resolved his own. I said in the Discourse, That the reason he
gave why one would expect it should be so, is the reason why it is not; and this
is plain enough to sense, from the confusion of Vision, which shows, that the
rays are not united after the way requisite for the aiding the sight (as I just
now intimated) and how that should be, I had here shown, but that I am ashamed
to add more in earnest about a grave foolery. --

Upon this Discourse, the first Remark I shall make is, That Mr. Glanvill has
little or no insight into Optics, and is in a manner as ignorant in that
profitable Science, as he represents his Adversary to be. It is something for a
Man to be able to give an account how he spent his time, though a^out Genus and
Species; rather then to appear to have idly ^ass'd it away^ without acquiring
any knowledge at all. The ^olution of Mr. Cross's fallacy, (if it were his) by
that Inter^atory, Why cannot he write better with two Pens, then with a ^^ngle
one? is ridiculous, since there is no vis unita there: and in one sort of
Tubes, though the rays be united in the first convex-Glass, Vitrum Sphaeri^e
capum, dilatando radios per ipsum transmissos ^mplificat notabiliter imaginem
si in debit^ distantia constituatur post Sphaeri^ convexum. Zucchius phil. opt
part. 2. tr. ^. c. 7 sect. 5. page 360, 361, 362. How it is in Telescopes made
up of all convex-Glasses, the same Author shew^ there: and so does Kepler in
his Dioptricks.
and brought to a Convergency, yet must the Sphaerical Cavity o^ the next Glass
dilate again, and dispose them fittingly to effect the expected vision in the
Retina: and besides this, it is requisite that the Tube be so fitted unto the
eye (not to speak of the fitting it differently according as the Medium is) as
to exclude all other impressions and radiations, that may divert and impede the
sight, Zucchi^s philos. opt. part. 2. tr. 3. c. 7. s^ct. 5. p. 35^.
viz. Ad consulendum sufficienti determinationi potentiae per languidiorem and
angustiorem impressionem a remotioribus, multum prodest, si ex forma
instrumenti and ejus applicatione ad Oculum vel ex condition loci e quo per
instrumentum remotiora, and in minori amplitudine apparentia prospectamus,
impediuntur radiationes aliunde intra oculum simul and semel diffusae,
praesertim validae.

As to what Mr. Cross is said to have argued against Telescopes, that the
addition of one Glass to another must hinder rather then improve vision,
because that the superadding of one pair of Spectacles to another, rather
weakens then amends the sight. I must say, that whosoever understands the
forming of an Argument cannot except against the form of that, nor do the
Propositions coher^ so ill together, as that one should be as it were for
sense, and other, for convenience. All that excursion of our Virtuoso shows his
Ignorance, not Mr. Cross's. It Is one thing to except against the form, another
thing to except against the matter of a Syllogism. I confess ther^ is reason
enough for to do the latter; but now for the other procedure. I believe such a
dispute was never heard of since the declining of Arcadia, as this was: If Mr.
Cross did urge this otherwise then to try the Intellectuals of Mr. Glanvill,
(concerning whose inhability he might be well satisfied) there is no defense to
be made for him, otherwise then that he was unacquainted with a sort of
knowledge which is unnecessary in a Divine, and not expected from him; whose
credit is better supported by those Qualifications which represent him as a man
of godly Conversation, faithful and able in the discharge of his
Gospel Ministry. But that Mr. Glanvill as little understood the subject of a
knowledge he pretends un^o, it is manifest from hence; that he might easily
have denied the Assertion of the Spectacles, that two pair did not impede, but
amend the sight in some eyes that are very weak. I know a young Gentlewoman
that has two Cataracts breeding in her eyes, which reads and works with two
pair of Spectacles, whereas she cannot with one pair. There is also an old
Gentlewoman of my acquaintance who uses the same helps. I am ashamed to debate
these fooleries (as our Virtuoso calls them,) but if Mr. Cross did call in
question the integrity of the Telescopes, I shall assume the liberty of a
digression about that Point, which perhaps may not seem unseasonable in this
Age, and which will abate the pride, and evince the great ignorance of Mr.
Glanvill.

Either my Memory does very much deceive me, or else the Lord Bacon did suspect
these Telescopes, that they might impose upon our Senses: and I am sure Mr.
Boil is in the ^ame Error with Mr. Cross, for he complains that when He went
about to examine those appearances in the Sun called Maculae, Tentam.
Physi^log. page 144.145, 146.
and Faculae solares, he could not make the least discovery of them in many
months, which yet other Observators pretend to see every day: yet does Mr.
Boil profess, that He neither wanted the convenience of excellent Telescopes,
nor omitted any circumstance requisite to the Enquiry. Besides these, Vide
Ricciol. Al^ag^st. nov. l. 8. sect. 1. c. 16.
Scipio Claramontius, he that baffled Tycho about the Comets in the judgment
of most men, and gained advantages enough against Kepler and Galilaeo to make
himself glorious, and to show that instead of Mathematical demonstrations they
proceeded upon uncertain Topics and Probabilities: Scipio Claram^ntius in
defensione Anti-Tych^ni^, and libri de novis stellis a se conl^ripti Italico
idiomate edit^, multis contendi^ Telescopium in repraesen^^^ione objector^m^
fallax esse, Part. 2 c. 25. ex quibus infert c. 16. ei qui velit apparentias
^oe^estium per illud excepta^ ratas haberi, ^ecessario oste^dendum esse ^ null^
abe^ra^ionum, quibus illud obnoxium est, hujusmodi nitiatas esse ^uare cum ex
^na part assumi nequeat, quasi universali^er verum quicquid per Telescopium
repraesentatur; ex alia (...) apparen^^as ^oe^^stium, ^ine mani^est^ p^titione
principii, cum hoc ips^m sit qu^d controvertitur; an fallaci de se instrumento
o^serva^a in coelestibus pro certis ha^enda sint? manif^st s^quit^^ nihi^ ex
u^u Teles. opii ^^n^ti^ui posse de dispositione ^oelestium. Zu^chius Philos.
opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect. -- p. 175.
this learned and inquisitive person does avowedly suspect the Telescopes as
fallacious more then once, and that there are more then He of that judgment,
is a thing unquestionable by any but Superficial Scholars: nor do I apprehend
any other reason then this to be in their heads, who have till this day
employed their thoughts here to contrive new Glasses, and amend defects in the
former. Our Virtuosi have complained of an Iris in their Glasses, and gone
ab^ut to correct that by Turning of them; but a friend of mine writes, that he
imagines it was after that Eustachio Divini at Rome had given them an hint of
it: and then they found it out. A little more modesty in Assertions of this
kind would become our Wits, considering that affairs of this nature (it is the
opinion of Archimedes, and refers to all Mechanismes) admit not demonstration.
Cum neque visus, neque manus, neque instrumenta per quae experiri oportet,
satis ha^eant fidei ad exquisitam demonstrationem. -- Archimed. in libro de
Arena.

I shall not so far engage in the controversy, as to repeat the Arguments and
Replies on both sides. It seems strange, that the Telescopes should so magnify
thirty, forty, or one hundred times objects on earth, and yet les^en those of
the ^ixed Stars in Heaven, Scipio Claram^nt. de unive^so l 9. c. (...)
viz. Stellas primae magnitudinis, Caniculam, etc. Jovem, Saturnum minores
repraesentat multo^ quam oculo libero appareant: and idem instrumentum stellas
nusquam apparentes, ut Jovis Sa^ellites justae magni^udinis repraesentat, and
paulo minores repraesentato Jove, imo tantas facit, ut possint pius apparere
quam queant apparere stellae primae magnitudinis, -- at quid? in Octava Sphaera
stellas nihil apparentes magnas facit, Nebulosas scilicet, and Galaxiae
formatrices. -- This is grant^d all by Galileo to be true, but he solves by an
imaginary irradiation, the fancy whereof he advanced upon some weak
Experiments, Vide ^cip. Claram. de univ^r^^ l ^ c. 17.18.19, ^^ Z^cchius ph^^.
op^ par. 1. c. 1^ ^ect 6 p. 111. Id. ib p. 216.
most whereof he deserted himself, and the re^t are excellently re^uted by
Zucchius, who introduces another Salvo from the configuration of the Ey^, and
that part of it called Uvea: which perhaps may be discovered to be as false as
any of the other hereafter: but he adds, Ex quo est^ u^ in facilitato
detrabendae circumfusae sideribus radiationis sit notab^le discrim^n inter
Planetas collat^s int^r s^, and inter stellas fixas invicem, and aliquas ^arum
cum aliquibu^ little comparatas. Thus the Objection in its full force is granted
by all (except Sorfius deny it) only the cause of the Phenomenon was not till
Zucchius (if then) sufficiently explicated; Zuc^hius p^il. opt^ part. 1. c. 17.
sect. ^. p 199, 200.
Sure I am that he in another place avows, that long Telescopes rightly made do
not lessen Jupiter, but represent him greater then He appears to the naked Eye:
insomuch that his Tube of 23 feet-long did represent Jupiter as big as the Moon
is when at full, and looked upon without any Telescope: so that He says the
Objection holds only in Telescopiis brevioribus, in quibus pariter evenit
inspiciendo lucida inferiora.

Besides, were there such certainty in the Telescopes, how comes it to pass
that there is such a variety of opinions amongst those Observators, whose
diligence can be as little suspected as their learning? Claramontius did set
t^o persons to observe the Spots of the Sun, (both were inclined to
Novelties) they were not 40 miles distant, yet did not their Schemes agree as
to number, or situation. Nor is this a figment of that partial Peripatetick:
Ricciol Alm^g. nov^ l. 3. c 3
any man that reads Ricciolus, and Zucchius, will see that they cannot agree
about the number, Zucchius phil. opt. par. 1. c ^7. s^ct 8 p. 233. S^e this
point o^ the variety ^b^ut the spots in the Sun, particula^ly ^andled by
Schot^us in his No^es upon Kirch^ru^'^ iter exstati^cum coeleste. I^i^er. 1.
dialog. 1. p 18^. and ^ow different the ob^ervations of Ga^ilaeo and ^ch^iner
were ^ou may see in a Syn^^sis in the Rosa V^^^na l. ^. c. ^^ and ib. ^ 10.
the motion, the situation, or so much as color of them. The words of this
last Writer are very remarkable in reference to Mr. Glanvill, and that
certainty which he asserts unto the Telescopes, viz. Neque obstat discrepantia
numeri, vel figurae macularum in observationibus plurium, circa idem tempus
captatis: tum quia longiores Telescopii in ampliori disco plures exhibent, qnae
spectantem breviore Telescopio, angustiori disco latent: immo eodem Telescopio,
ad exactam mensuram suae extensionis redacto, notabiles fiunt aliquae, ante
inobservatae: and facillimum est in tali mensura minus exercitatos decipi; cum
tam pauci ex observatoribus, nec nisi monente Scheinero, didicerint ad exact
consignandam Solis imaginem, and in ea maculas, per trajectionem radiorum
Telescopio in planum direct oppositum, necessariam esse mutationem extensionis
Tubi, eo notabiliter magis producto in hyeme, correpto in aestate: Tum quia
sicut facilis est, ex allatis, varietas in numero macularum, ita in
terminatione, quae facilius mutari potest ex iisdem capitibus in illis, quae in
pluribus observationibus consignantur, and ex modo consignandi. Less do they
agree about the nature of them: one Ioannes Iarde named them Astra Borbonia:
and Malapertius, Mastrius, Rheita, do hold them to be Stars: of this opinion
was Scheinerus once, but he afterward assented to that of Galilaeo, Kepler,
Bullialdus and Blancanus, that they were not Stars, but fuliginous exhalations
arising out of the furnace of the Solar Globe, which he conceives to be a fire.
Kircher and others are of the same judgment; but Ricciolus distrusts it, being
not able to comprehend how fuliginous vapors should arise in such a number,
Vide Sch^ttum ubi ^up^a p. 184. R^c^iol. Alm^g ^ov. l. 3. c. 3 p. ^7.
so constantly, so permanently as to keep a motion about, or with the Sun, of
about 27 days.

The like uncertainty there is in the Observations about Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
etc. what controversies do they raise and how contradictious are their
Relations? Gali^aeo in e^. ad Velserum, citante C^atamontio de univers. l. 9.
c. 9. Ri^ciolus Almag. nov. l 7. sect. 1. c. 2. p. 487, 488. Schottus in
Kicher. iter ex^^ar. coe^este p. 301, 302. Christ. Hugenius apud Borellum de
con^pi^^^^^ p. 63
Galilaeo does represent Saturn in one figure, Scheiner in another: the former
says, that the oblong shape in Saturn arises from a defect in the Telescope,
or Eye, that could not distinguish the Comites Saturni from the Planet it self.
But Ricciolus and others dissent from him in that point: and Christianus
Hugenius made observations about Saturn, such as neither Antonius de Rheita,
nor Hevelius did ever see; and represents the ansulae of Saturn, differently
from what Fontana and the Dantiscan Selenographer do write. The words of
Hugenius I shall propose to Mr. Glanvill's consideration, Expectamus ut sub
finem Aprilis, si non antea, brachia Saturno renascantur, non curva illa,
cujusmodi a Francisco Fontana, and Hevelio depicta cernuntur, sed secundum
lineam rectam utrinque prominentia, siquis melioris notae perspicillo
intueatur. Nam vulgaria si adhibeat binos orbiculos referent, sicuti Galilaeo
primum se obtulere. Nostram quo Saturni asseclam reperimus, quinquagies
diametrum rei visae multiplicat, duodenos pedes aequans; cui postea duplum
longitudine constriximus, multip^icatione centupla. Cum autem longiora etiam
hisce Tel^scopia, utpote triginta and quadraginta pedum ab aliis fabricari
dicantur, aliquid aut vitris vitii inesse, aut haec eadem non debita
proportione mutuo respondere credibile est. Neque enim alius hucusque aciem
eorum effugisset novus Saturni Satelles. Being to speak of Saturn, I must not
forget Zucchius, who after thirty five years diligent observation with variety
of the best Teles^opes, represents this Planet differently from what any others
write, viz. Zucchius philos. opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect 5. p. ^00, 201.
Assero Saturnum multorum annorum spatio figura passim oblonga, and in
oppositione ad Solemn, notabiliter majorem apparuisse, in apparentiae medio
visum esse album illustre tumidum, aliquo modo ad rotunditatem vergens,
accedentibus hinc inde ad illud duabus velut nigris notis, quas altum illustre,
totam apparentiam ad apices terminans ita includit, ut ad apices illius multo
sit orassius, ubi vero eas notas complectend^ ad medium extenditur, gracilescat.

Assertio est facti, in quo a multis jam, annis. convenient accuratiores, ex
variis Provinciis observatores longioribus Telescopiis instructi.

Scio a prioribus vulgatum, tres a se stellas in loco Saturni spectatas, media
multo majori, quae simul mutantes in coelo situm, a fixis aperte
distinguerentur, and Saturni duobus Planetis minoribus stipati apparentium
exhiberent, qui postea, illis a tali situ motis spectatus sit figura rotunda.
Verum triginta quinque ut minimum, anni sunt, quibus figura semper oblonga, cum
dispositione in assertione assignata, a me spectatus est pluries quotannis, pro
vario ad Solemn situ, acutioribus, minus acutis, cavis, convexisque lentibus ad
oculum proxime in Telescopio adhibitis apparentia eadem, semper magis
distincta, and majori, in oppositione ad Solemn, etiamsi meliorem vitiorum
elaborationem in multo longioribus Telescopiis postremo D. D. Evangelistae
Torricellii, and Eustachii Divini artificio, and beneficio singulari consecutus
^sim. -- Quare in hoc priorum observationes, qui brevioribus, minusque
perfectis Telescopiis, ut omnino ratas admittere non audeo.

Concerning Jupiter, Vide Schottum in Kirch. iter exstaticum coeleste p. 268,
269 etc. Ricciol. in Almag. nov. l. 7. sect. 1. p. 486.
and his Satellites, and their number, taking in the Urban Octavian Stars, I
find a great variety, even when two men observed at the same time, as de
Rheita and Gassendus: that both of them were in the right, cannot be said:
which of them were in the wrong, I know not. In sum, the observations about
Jupiter and his Attendants are so various, Aliter enim apparuerunt Simoni
Mario, aliter Apelli, aliter Galilaeo, that Claramontius takes this advantage
of it. Ego igitur argumentum ex ejusmodi diversitate alicio contra veritatem
objecti, S^ipio Cla (...) univ^r^^ l. 9. c. 8.
non contra observationum diligentiam, cum observatio ejusmodi: non sit nisi
pura per tubum transpectio, eaque de^ixa: ii etiam viri perfectum instrumentum
habebant, estque id verisimile, cum in eam rem toti incumberent, instrumentum
etiam exactum paravisse: oculorum etiam and visus acumen, cur demam Apelli and
ejus in observando sociis, potius Galilaeo demerem, qui se fatetur oculum minus
perfectum habere.

Neither are they better agreed about Mars and his Figure, the umbo or spot in
him. Gassendus denies that ever ^e saw it, though he used the Tube of Galilaeo;
others avow it: (...) in Kir^her. ite^ ^xsta^. (...) p. 242 etc. Ricciolus
A^mag. nov. l. 7. sect. 1. p. 486. Zucchius phil opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect 4.
p. 193.
as you may see in Schottus and Ricciolus. In fine, as to the new Phenomenon
about Mars, Venus, and Mercury, to defend them Zucchius is forced to complain
of the Telescopes, and protests thus. Interim te, amice Lector, provoco
Spectatorem, bono and longiore Telescopio instructum, cujus Lens superior ad
obtinendam figuram apparentiarum been praecisam, juxta dicta, maxima ex part
contecta sit, modico ad medium aperto foramine.

I am tired with the further prosecution of this subject; and therefore shall
confine the rest of my discourse to the Observations about the Moon: the
contemplation whereof, as it is more facile, so it has been more pursued then
any other of that kind. There is none of our Comicall Wits doubt that it is a
World, divided into Hills, Valleys, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, and even peopled as
this Terraqueous Globe of ours^ But it is remarkable, that the use of the
Telescope has not convinced some, that the Moon has an unequal surface, but
that the Phenomenon of the spots may be solved by the conceit that some parts
of it are more Diaphanous, some more opake. Who has not heard how Scheiner
looked on the Moon in an Eclipse, (...) d^ Luna. id^b
and did conceive it was fistulous, (at least translucid in part) and so did
transmit the light thorough several Cavities in some places, whilst others, not
directly subject to the Sun, are obscure. They cannot agree whether the Spots
of the Moon be more bright, or obscure in an Eclipse. The observations and
descriptions of the Moon, made by Galilaeo, Scheiner, Fontana, Schottus upon
Kircher, etc. are so defective, that we must repute them but as the first
rudiments of an intended Science. And as for the descriptions of the Phases of
the Moon, made by Langrenus and Hevelius, however there be many things in which
they all agree: yet the Telescopes of Ricciolus (made by a Bavarian Artist) and
of Franciscus Maria Grimaldi either rectified the mistakes, or represented many
Phenomenon different from those delineated by Galilaeo, Fontana, Torricellius,
and Manzini, Ricciolus Almag. n^v. l. 4. c. 7.
viz. Lunaris faciei parts omnes magnas, mediocres, ac minimas singillatim
Telescopio intuens Grimaldus, easque statim cum Langreni and Hevelii
Schematibus comparans, deprehendit multa quidem egregie ab iis peracta, non
pauca tamen superesse, quae aut addenda, aut quoad situm, magnitudinem,
figuram, symmetriam, nigroris aut claritatis differentiam corrigenda forent.
Such as reject the exact Sphericalness of the Moon, introduce Asperities and
inequalities in the surface of it, which some explain by Mountains, Valleys,
and Waters: but concerning the parts of the Moon, which might be Water, and
which Land, our Observators did differ. Galilaeo believes the spots or obscure
parts to be water. Glailaeo system. co^mic. p. 131. ^^it. Londin.

Kepler. Astronom. Optic. c. 6. sect. 9.


Kepler held the contrary, that the bright parts were water, and pretends to
demonstrate it out of Optics. though afterward he changed his opinion for
that of Galilaeo's, which is generally received. As to those asperities in the
surface of the Moon, whether they extend to the Limbus, or utmost
circumference, or no, is a doubt amongst them: Galilaeo denies it; Ricciolus
Almag nov. l. 4. c. 8. qu 2.
Kepler, Ricciolus, and others affirming it: and the latter gives this reason
why they are less frequently observed there: Vera causa cur raro asperi^as illa
Limborum videatur, est partim imperfectio Telescopii, etc. Neither are they
better satisfied about the Atmosphear of the Moon: that there is one, Galilaeo,
Kepler, Antonius Maria de Rheita, Kircher, Kircher. iter exsta^. ^oe^ est. p 48.

Ricciolus Almag. nov. l. 4. c ^. sect. 8.


Cysatus, Scheiner, with others do avow: and Langrenus says, that we may
observe it with a Telescope: eandem Tubo-specillis conspici affirmat Michael
Florentius Langrenus. But others deny it as peremptorily. Interim mihi (says
Ricciolus) nondum quocunque Telescopio adhibito aer hic it a patuit, Ricc^ol.
Almag. nov. l 4. c. 2. sect. ^.
ut illum potius prope ac circa Lunam, quam in aere nostro, in quo and Halones
fiunt, cogar agnoscere. And Zucchius at large proves this Corollary, Zucchius
phil. optic. part. 1. c. 17. sect. 9. p. 2^4.
Non elevantur vi luminis Solis vapores^e Luna, sicut elevantur ex Globo e
terra and aqua integrato: Neque datur circa Lunam Sphaera vaporosa ulla, qualis
circa dictum Globum deprehenditur.

Having proceeded thus far, I shall take notice of some extravagant opinions
that possess many of our Comical wits, and their Associates or Admirers, which
are extended to the prejudice of Christianity, and the growth of Atheism in
this Age, viz. That the resemblance betwixt the Moon and the Earth is such,
that it is a Terraqueous Globe inhabited by men, and they hereupon concern
themselves about their Progeny, Salvation, etc. I shall from hence take
occasion to instruct those fantastical persons, that even Hevelius, who
accommodated the Terrestrial Geography to the Lunar Globe, and seems to
conclude that the illuminated part is earth, the darker is water: yet did it
only because He knew no fitter comparison amongst sublunary bodies. -- Non est
autem quod quispiam ideo existimet Lunam ex ejusmodi sabulo, luto, aut lapide
esse compositam, ut haec terra nostra, siquidem fortassis ex alia poterit
constare materia, ab imaginatione nostra prorsus diversa, Joan. Hevelius
Selenograph. p. 148.
and modo adhuc incomprehensibili. -- Minime etiam hasce Lunares aquas nostris
similes assero, sed quod nihil quicquam similius, propter magnam utrarumque
affinitatem hic in terra habeamus, cum quo illas comparare valeamus. It was
indiscreetly done of Kepler, Kircher, Hevelius, and such Writers to carry on
the comparison so far, the resemblance betwixt the two Globes being so little
as the most unprejudiced persons find it to be. Ricciolus Almag. nov. l. 4. c.
7. p. 203.
Hevelius perinde acsi Luna osset altera tellus, Geographica nostratis Telluris
nomina in Lunam transtulit: licet quoad figuram, situm, symmetriam, etc. nulla
fere sit Analogia inter utriusque superficiem. The truth whereof will further
appear from those considerations which the inquisitive Zucchius after thirty
five years use of all manner of Telescopes at length fixed upon, Zucchius phil.
opt. heart. 2. c. 17. sect. 9. corol. 7. p. 266.
viz. That the discrepancy of Parts in the illuminated Moon may be explained
without attributing thereunto any variety of colors: yea, it ought to be so
explained. The first part of which Assertion he proves thus: because in Opace
bodies the difference of a greater and lesser Obliquity in their ^cituation
toward the body that shines upon them does cause a diverse manner of
illustration. Thus the same wall, of one uniform color, according as it is
differently illuminated, seems in some parts to be white, in others pale, in
others dark-colored, and black: besides that, a greater or lesser asperity or
inequality of the superficies may cause an intermixture of the enlightened and
over-shadowed parts, and so create different appearances of light and opacity
in their most observable parts.

The second part He proves thus: because that the face of the Moon being looked
on with a Tube of an extraordinary length, with Glasses excellently polished
(such as He used for many years) appears all of it like a great Tract of Land
covered over with Snow, which the Sun variously ill^minates accordingly as
the parts are differently framed and situated. Where there is any change of
situation in the parts illuminated in reference to the body that irradiates
them, then do such parts abate of their whiteness: and although they still
continue in such a position that his beams may in some degree and manner reach
them, yet by reason of the unequal surf^ce of the Moon (in which some parts are
more elevated then others) some parts are directly opposite to the Sun,
others are glanced upon with an oblique ray, and this mixture of shades and
brightness occasions those spots which we so talk of. Thus upon the libration
of the body of Jupiter, the girdle, which otherwise seems remarkably black
above the other adjacent parts of the Planet^ becomes like unto the rest of the
body in whiteness, and so disappears.

As to the distinction of the Moon into Sea and Land, consisting of Mountains
and Valleys; Existimo materiam globi luna^is non constar^ terra and aqua
Galilaeo system. cosmic p. 132.
although the Analogy may seem allowable by reason of the Asperities in the
surface of the Moon, (which is a thing not to be denied: albeit that the
calculation of the height of those more elevated parts are ridiculous, except
the nature of the Cavities were better to be discovered, Zucchi^s phil. opt.
part. 1. c. 17. sect 9 p. 260, 261.
as Zucchius shows) yet the imagination of Seas and Lakes therein, or any thing
of that Nature, except what borders upon the Peninsula deliriorum in the Lunar
Chart of Ricciolus, it is all an improbable phancie. For, that the more pale and
obscure spots are not water, appears hence, that those spots keep the same
Phasis or appearance for many days, though the Site of the Moon, both in
respect of the Sun, and of us the Spectators, do vary much in that time:
whereas when the Sun casts his beams upon Seas or great waters on Earth, the
Phenomenon differ according as the Sun, or the beholder vary their station:
And this alone might convince us, but that I find now in Zucchius, Zucchius
ubi supra p. 263.
viz Similiter transitum successivum radiis Solis ad fundum usque ad magnis
maculis intra margines illustriores contentis praebent (ut diximus in
apparentiis, page 239.) quod non evenit in liquido profundo instar aquae, ut in
aquis experimur etiam in multa vicinitate illustratis, quando not abilem habent
profunditatem: tum quia constantem inaequalitatem illustrationis exhibent in
horizonte Lunari, and quidem, juxta dicta in Apparentiis (number. 3.) secundum
magnam extensionem illustratam, intra reliquas parts nondum Solis radiis
perfusas; imo aliquae, Soli proximiores, alias sequentes in eadem majori macula
inumbrabant: Ga^ilaeo prol^nem, that in the Moon the^e is no ^ain; no clouds
there thicken the air. Longis ac diligenti^us observationibus nunquam id
animadvertere potui, ac semper uni^ormem purissimamque serenitatem ibi
deprehendi. Galilaeo. system co^mic. p 133. Zucchius ubi supra^ p 264.
hujusmodi autem convenire non possunt corpori inconsistenti, and liquido aquam
referen^i, quae tamen certum est convenire aliquibus Lunae partibus, ab omnibus
inter maculas computatis. I must confess I think these reasons convincing to
any persons not prepossessed; and they are much more enforced by him with a
discourse concerning exhalations and an Atmosphear about the Moon, which he
denies absolutely: yet considering the proportion of the imaginary Waters to
the Land in the Moon, and the heat and continuance of the Sunne-beams
thereupon, common reason would tell us. that the vaporous exhalatious would
proportionably exceed those about the Earth here, and produce an Atmosphear
that should be observable, whereas the most accurate inspection at most
opportune times with the best Telescopes could not satisfy Zucchius, that
there was any such thing at all.

Kepler (and his Master Moestlinus) did believe that the Moon was a World
consisting of Sea and Land, Kepler Astronom Optic, c. 6. s^ct. ^.
making up one entire Globe, as the Earth does; and that the Mountains there
were much higher and bigger comparatively then those of the Earth: and adds by
way of jocundry, that since the Men and other Animals commonly participate of
the nature of the soil and climate they dwell in, Galilaeo system. Cosmic. p.
132. Existimo materiam Globi Lunaris non constare terra and aqua. Quae res una
ad generationes alterationesque nostris similes tollendas susficit. Ve^untamen
etiams^ concederetur Aquam ibi Terramque dari; non tamen plantae and anima^i^
nostris similia nascerentur, idque ob duas praecipue rations: primo quia ad
nosti as generationes aspectuum Solis varietas adeo necessaria est, ut sine
illis esse nullae possint. Ia^ autem habitudines Solis ad Terram, ab ^^lis quae
sunt ad Lunam, valde differunt. N^s quoad illuminationem diurnam, in major^
part terrae, singulis horarum viginti quatuo^ periodis, noc^is atque di^i
^icissitudinem experimur, quae in Luna men^^ruo demum spatio absolvitur. Item
i^le Solis in Zediaco descensus and ascensus ann^us, qui hiemis aestatilque
^i^issitudinem and dierum ac noctium inaequalitatem produ^it, in Luna unico
mense ^initur: Cumque Sell apud nos sic elevetur acdeprimatur, ut inter maximam
ac minimam altitudinem intercedat differentia gradum, 47. qu^nta ni^irum est
distantia ab uno tro^ico ad alterum; in Luna non nisi 10 gra^ibus aut paulo
amplius illa differentia constat. quanta S^i^icet est maxima la^itudo Draconis
ultra citr^que Ecli^ ticam. Nunc consideretur qualis operatio sit ^utura So'is
in Zona torrida, si per quinde^im di^^ continu^^ adiis suis ^am ferire
pergeret. Perse enim intelligetur, omnes plantas, berbas and animalia p^ssum
itura^ Quod si vel maxi^e generationes iti sierent, illae ta^en a^ herbis,
plantis, and animali^us nostr^tilus dive^si^sim^ forenthu.

Secundo persu asissi^um est mihi, nullas in Luna p^ivias esse. Nam si qua
part ^ubes ibi con^^^^^rentur ut sit in terra, videren us utiq^^ rerum illa
rum aliquid abs^ondi, quas open telescopii in Luna conspicimus: and in summa, in
particula aliqua nobis variare^ur aspectus. Id quod longis ac di^igentibus
observationibus nunquam arimadvertere pot^i, ac semper uniformem purissimamque
serenitatem i^i depre^endi.


that the inhabitants of the Moon must be of a greater stature, and more robust
constitution then those of the Earth: The Day there making up fifteen days of
ours: and the Heats seem so scorching, and so unexpressible by reason of the
Suns being vertical to them so long. In fine, he thinks it no a^surd opinion of
the Gentiles, that made the Moon a kind of Purgatory for departed Souls.

Upon the most serious consideration of all circumstances, whereunto I could
ever engage my thoughts; when I reflected upon the great difference betwixt the
Days here and there; the different influence which the Sun must have here and
there through the Diversity of his Aspects, (whereupon depend Terrestrial
productions) that there is no rain, no clouds there; no Atmosphear (like ours)
proportioned to such respiration and life: no intermixture of earth and water:
no innate diversity of colors, which occasion the Phenomenon that perplex our
overcurious Mortals: and that all the Enquiries hitherto made, have so little
of evidence, that it is more clear that the Moon is a Cheese, (not fat, ^or then
it would melt) odly figured and made with Asperities in its ^upe^fici^s and
perhaps a little vin^yed in ^ome parts ^hen an Earth resembli^g ours: I could
not but cond^mn those (...) Comical and Athestical Wits, who use so l^^tle of
modesty ^r serupulousness in their discou^ses abo^t this so uncertain subject
They are men of so little read^ng and inquisitireness (whatever they pret^nd
unto; as if this Nation produced no persons equal to them for Learning and
Ab^lities) that they never examined these debates; but the opinions which they
take up and transfo^m into Assertions, are only the raillery or casual and
imperfect pieces ^f conversation betwixt more intelligent persons, or some
Coffee house talk, which they confidently obtrude and impose upon speculative
or more considerate Gentlemen, and render th^mselves insupportable in any
Society.

A young Gentleman, a friend of mine, who was not a little valued in the world,
w^o was no stranger to the Mathema^icks, and whose wit and learning far
transcended any thing I can observe in a droll and C^mediantes of these times,
entertain^d me with a discourse once of this nature; Having spoken of the
C^lestial Phenomenon, how differently they were represented by sundry men, he
was more prone to suspect their dioptrick Tubes, then their in^egrity: He
thought our Eyes were Telescopes of God Almighty's making, Tu^us lentibus
du^^us co^sta^s dici potest oculus mere (...) l 2. c. 7 q^^m vide ib. a c. 13.
^^que ^d c. 30.
and the model by which the others were regulated and amended: and that any man
who regarded the daily Occurrents in vision, could never believe it possible,
that any certain^y could be derived from Telescopes, about such Phenomenon as
we could employ only one sense about, and that not in a due distance, and with
such circumstances as legitimate the judgment thereof: That we were to look
through their different mediums (granting that our Air makes but one Diaphanum)
and those not contrived dioptrically, that we know, and that since every
medium, thicker or thinner, (besides the inte^currencies of irregular and
unknown particles, Tam ^a^itas qu^m densitas potest esse ^ausa r^^ractio^nis.
(...).
like to moats in and upon a Glass) did cause a different Refraction, and that
neither the constitution of our Atmosphear (as not proportionate to our
sensible enquiries) and air, nor the intermundial Ether, nor the Sphaera
vaporosa of the Planets could ever be accurately and satisfactorily searched
into; no man could particularly know what he beheld, and deduce with prudence
any theoremes and conclusions from such infirm hypotheses. He added, that our
senses and the daily objects we converse with on earth, did prejudicate rather
then qualify us for these speculations: that we might easily observe what
mistakes arise from the co^templation of resemblances: that similitudes, though
very slender, engage the unwary, (and some that are cautious too) to conclude
an identity in objects: that it would be impossible for any man without the aid
of a nearer approach, and even of his other senses, to conclude whether a stick
lying part in, part out of the water were str^ight or crooked, by reason of the
refraction in the different mediums of Air and Water: and that a Glowworm, or
an Indian fire-Fly would create strange disputes and contests amongst mankind,
had they no other helps to discover the Phenomenon then a Telescope,
magnifying the object and its parts thirty, forty, or one hundred times. He
admired that saying of Aristotle, Arist me^eor. ^. ^. c. 4. s^ct. 2. These a^e
^he words, and this the judgm^nt o^ Galilaeo S^^t. Colm p ^^. (...). H^po^^ de
vet. med. s^. 3^
(...): and commended him, that in his doctrine of Meteors he pretended not to
arise higher then a low degree of probability. That it was possible to imagine
such things to our selves as were not really in the Moon, but not such as were
there, except in a very general and indefinite manner. Posse quidem excogitari
nonnulla, quae in Luna neque sunt, neque esse possunt: nihil autem eorum quae
ibi sunt aut esse possunt, ni^i largissima generalitate. That the appearance of
an Earth, did not infer the inhabitation of men, much less Animals and Plants
like ours: that our own Geography might undeceive us herein, some parts of this
Globe being not peopled, and the animals, and plants, and nature of the soil,
differing so much from our European productions, as we could not have
conceived, had not our Eyes and authentic testimonies gained us to a belief of
it. That the most clear Eyes have in this case a kind of a suffusion, and the
most unbiassed persons their Intellectuals prejudicated, and had no reason to
condemn the opinion of that Peasant, who imagined the Grandeur of Rome to be
like unto his Village, or the Scot who represented London to be such another
town as Edinburgh. It is an opinion wherein the Peripateticks and Lyncei are
agreed: ^para
Quicquid sub nostram cadit imagination^m, id aut jam ante viderimus oportet,
aut ex rebus rerumve partibus jam ante visis compositum sit, quales sunt
Sphynges, Sirenes, Chimerae, Centauri, etc. He smiled at those who thought they
had much improved solid knowledge, by telling men of Quasi-terra, Quasi-mare,
Quasi-sylvae, which he suppposed to be as insignificant terms as the Canting.
of Chemists, or the Quasi-corpus, and Quasi-sanguis, in the gods of Epicurus:
that it was intolerable in a Philosopher to phrase it thus, however a Poet
might say, (...)


But nothing created in him a greater laughter, then the Proposals some made of
flying to the World in the Moon: this design he thought superlatively
ridiculous, though the contrivance of wings for mankind were then but
projecting at Wadham-Colledge: It did not appear to him then that this World
was no Magnet: he wished that first these Opiniatours would go to both Poles,
and placing themselves there try the Observations of Descartes with some dust
of Iron: that ^hey would consider whether the more remote Air would bear up
their wings and weight, (perhaps there might be that difference in Air that
there is in water, where those Ships which sail in salt water do sink in fresh
streams) and how it might agree with their respiration, since the Air upon the
tops of Andes of Peru is so sharp, that those Mountains are as difficult to
pass, Vide P. Alph. Ovag^ium in relatione Chilensi c. 5. Ricciol Almag. nov. in
app^nd. ad part. primam ^omi primi, p. 730.
or live upon, as Aristotle represents Olympus to have been, where men are
forced to breath through Sponges: whether that inhability of the Air for men to
breath in it did arise from the real nature of so elevated a place^ or that it
was occasioned by some destructive exhalations (since Mount Athos is reputed
higher then Olympus) he knew not: but he thought they might enquire well into
this particular^ and into those regions (which are different) wherein storms,
thunder, and snow are generated; what tempests might arise therein (of which we
are not sensible here below) what ^rovision there is against them before one
arrives at the twelve Celestial houses: what accommodation of meat and drink,
what money current in those parts, all which ought to be regarded lest our
Experimentators should come off as ill as the Knight of (...) Manchae did,
Concerning a voyage to the Wo^ld of the Moon, the difficulties of the passage
and of the air, water, and other circumstances the^e, read Kircher his Iter
exstat. unto the Moon; and you will find how just a caveat I give here.
when he had not wherewithal to defray the expense of his Inn: besides that,
he was much afraid, that at their arrival, agreeably to what Kepler says, they
might find their lodging too hot for them.

Having said these things, that great young man, (who died before that
Ignorance and the Virtuosi grew prevalent) presented me with the works of
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, published by D. Meric Casaubon, opening it at that
place where that understanding Emperor acknowledges it to have been the
special favor of the Gods, that he never troubled himself about these
Meteorologies and ex^ravagant speculations, whereunto nothing humane can reach:
He added, that in these kind of speculations he knew enough that was secured
from superstition, that for a man to desert those Studies which qualify him
for a sociable life, and were of importance to the preservation of the
Government and Country he lived in, this was a kind of salvagenesse, had more
of the Anchorete, then of Civil Prudence, and was to be encouraged in a
Cloister, or in the deserts of Thebais, then to be made a practice among wise
Statesmen.

I have sometimes entertained my self with the remembrance of this Gentleman,
and guessed how he would have sported at that passage of Mr. Glanvill, in his
Scepsis Scientifica, where he complements the R. Society, to whom that book is
Addressed.

We expect greater things from Neoterick Endeavors. Scepsi Scientif. p. 133, 13^
The Cartesian Philosophy in this regard has shown the World the way to be
happy. And me thinks this Age seems resolved to bequeath Posterity somewhat to
remember it. The glorious Undertakers, wherewith Heaven has blessed our days,
will leave the World better provided then they found it. And whereas in former
times such generous free-spirited Worthies were as the Rare newly-observed
Stars, a single one the wonder of an Age: In ours they are like the Lights of
the greater size, that twinkle in the Starry Firmament: And this last Century
can glory in numerous Constellations. Should those Heroes go on as they have
happily begun, they^ll fill the World with Wonders. And I doubt not but
Posterity will find many things, that are now but Rumors, verified into God
forbid.
practical Realities. It may be some Ages hence, a Voyage to the It Is very cold
going thither, if you believe Sir Fr. Drake; as I have showed before in my
di^cour^e of the Northwest-passage.
Southern unknown Tracts, yea, possibly the Moon, will not be more strange
then one to Yes a ^ittle mo^e; the Ancie^ts had been there before; besides, the
difficulties in going to the Moon are mo^e insuperable.
America. To them that come after us, it may be as ordinary to buy a payr of
Wings to fly into Remotest Regions; Pacolet's Horse; Fortunatus's wishing-Cap;
the skill o^ Medea in restoring youth, all ancient and modern fable^ shall be
^eally achieved!
as now a pair of Boots to ride a Journey. And to confer at the distance of
the Indies by Sympathetick conveyances, may be as usual to future times, as to
us in a literary correspondence. The restoration of Gray hairs to Juvenility,
and renewing the exhausted marrow, may at length be effected without a Miracle.
And the turni^g the now comparative desert World into a Paradise, may not
improbablie be expected from late Agriculture.

Now those that judge by the narrowness of ^ormer Principles and Successes,
will smile at these They that do not so, laugh at you, and think such
expectations thence paradoxical.
Paradoxical Expectations: But questionless, those great inventions, which have
in these latter Ages altered the ^ace of all things, in their naked Propo^alls,
and mere Suppositions, Prove that they ever did think of them: if they did not,
they could not be ^idiculous to them.
were to former times as ridiculous. To have talked of a New Earth to have been
discovered, had been a Enquire into the Navigatio^s of Antiqui^y and then say
this.
Romance to Antiquity: And to sail without sight of Stars or Shoars by the
guidance of a Mineral, a story more absurd then the Flight of Daedalus. That
men should speak after their tongues were ashes, or communicate with each other
in differing Hemi^phears, before the invention of Letters, could no^ but have
been thought a Fiction^ Antiquity would not have believed the almost incredible
force of our The strangen^^s (...) more in the in^redible force of the powder:
had they known that, they would not have thought the other strange
Canons; and would as coldlie have entertained the wonders of the Telescope^ In
these we all condemn I know not any that cond^^ns the ancients (...)
incredulity about such matters as were never p^oposed unto them, but ^or the
credulity of this Age, ^xpect scorn ^ather th^n pity.
antique incredulity, and it is like lie Posterity will have as much cause to
pity ^ur^. But yet notwithstanding this straightness of shallow Observers,
there are a set of It Is a pretty philosophy ind^ed, it is all invention.
enlarged Souls that are more judiciously credulous, and those who are
acquainted with the ^ecunditie of Not of the Paracea, not of the ^hilos^phers
stone, nor any thing in Ovids Metamorphosis, Atlantis, or Vtopia.
Cartesian Principles, and the diligent and ingenious Endeavors of so many
true Philosophers, will despair of ^^lus ultra, Page 6.6
nothing.

This is a most extraordinary Flourish: Yet I find the Rhetoric defective in
the suiting of the Antitheses and Antapodoses: but I shall not take notice of
that fault now, it is so general in our Comical Wits. I shall now quit my
Digression, and resume the cont^ove^sie betwixt the two Disputants. Mr.
Glanvill, for the c^edit of those Dioptrick Glasses, told Mr. Cross, That he
might try them upon Objects near, and easily visible, by the unassisted fight;
and if he made trial, he would f^nde they altered the Objects in nothing but
their proportions, which are represented larger for the advantage of vision in
things small and remote; and we have all the like reasons to distrust our Eyes,
as these Glasses ( for their informations are the same in all things, but the
mentioned difference) and there is no man such a fool as not to make allowance
for that. -- I see Mr. Glanvill is not only ignorant of the Optics, but
altogether unacquainted with Telescopes: for first there are some made by Mr.
Smithwick (a very ingenious and worthy man) which represent the Phases of the
Moon very well, Duobus vitiis convexis instructo Tel^scopio, habetur simul and
semel objecti mediocris, vel multarum partium g^andioris repraesentatio, sed
inversa: si debite addatur tertium convexum, multiplica^is adhuc
refractionibus, una unius obtinetur apparentia, and in situ con^ormis Objecto.
Zucchius phil. opt. part. 1. c. 17^ sect. 2. p. 180.
and yet invert all Objects, but that is no default or impediment where the
thing looked on is round. These unequal Telescopes alter the Object in some
thing else besides their proportions: nor does any such thing happen in a
well-disposed Eye upon vision. Secondly, he might have known this further
difference betwixt an un-assisted sight, and what is performed by the best and
longest Telescopes about ordinary Objects, that the Dioptrick Tubes do
represent the light and colors of bodies more dilute and remiss then they
appear to the naked Eye. Zucchius ubi supra p. 181.
Per Telescopia, praesertim longiora, objecta spectantur lu^e and color
dilutiora, quam libero oculo. This is granted by Zucchius and others; and the
reason is given by Zucchius, because that so great an expansion or
amplification of the Object, and distancing of its parts one from the other,
Expansion^m repraesentativorum aequival^^e remissioni, and densationem ^orum
intensi^ni, and utramque non a medio, s^d ^ pr^p^ia condition propagationis
radio^um pendere. id ib. Si Telescopium sit extraordinariae longitudinis, ex
nimia expansione, q^ae ^quivalet remissioni qualitatis visibilis, ap^aret nimis
dilurum: ut minus in eovarietas partium internosci possi^. Zucchius phil opt. p
2. ^r. 3. c. 7 sect. 5. p. 366.

Zucchi^s phil ^pt. part 1 c. 17. sect. 6 p. 204


is equivalent to a remission of those qualities therein. But to show Mr.
Glanvill a little more of his ignorance in Telescopes, I shall show him some
further differences betwixt the naked sight, and what is performed by those
Glasses. For some of them represent some Objects greater then they appear to
the naked eye: Some (in the shorter Tubes) are represented no bigger, or rather
less then they otherwise seem: Some Objects in the longer Telescopes are
magnified indeed, but nothing so much as other Objects are by the same Glasses.
The Experiments are obvious: place a candle in the dark at some considerable
distance, and the flame will appear round and encompassed with rays: then take
a short Telescope fitly made and placed, and look through it, and you will see
the irradiation taken off, and the flame represented as oblong, not round, and
rather seemingly less then greater then it appeared before to the naked Eye.
Then turn your eye unto any colored Object, and take notice how big it seems:
assume the same Telescope, and you shall find that to be magnified above what
it seemed to the naked eye by much. After this, take a long Telescope, and view
the aforesaid candle through that; and at the same distance view some other
colored Object, and you shall see that this last Telescope will represent both
Objects much magnified; but the Candle less of the two by far.

But I shall add further, that it is not to be doubted but that the Telescopes
of Galilaeo, Scheiner, Rheita, Gassendus, Grimaldi, Eustachio Divini, Hevelius,
Hugenius, Ricciolus, and Zucchius, were good in their kind, and that they did
represent Objects as truly here on earth, as any could; Si Lunares discos, post
tot inspectores, and inspectiones. p^blicatos videas, neque numero, n^que
conformatione sibi corres^ondent: qu^m multae par^es vel prae aliis
circumpositis illust^iores interj^ctae and sua multo mino^i illustrationis
ex^i^itione illas interrumpentes, aliquos latuerunt, and in angusti^ibus, vel
nin^s accurate expressis. Discis ^missae, q^ae vere internos^ibiles sunt in
luna, and ab a^iis consignantur? quantum totius Dis^i lunaris ter^inatio^ and
insig^iorum in e^ parti^m, variata? Zucchius phil opt. part. 1. c. 17 sect 8. p
2^3.
yet when they come to be applied to the Celestial Phenomenon, what difference
is there in their. Observations? How do they complain either of the default of
the Telescopes, or want of care or skill, each in the other? Simon Marius
boasts of his accurateness: Scheiner in his Apelles tells us, Observationes
omnes factae sunt summo studio coelo serenissimo, semper cum observatum est,
and obscurissimo, plerumque in absentia videlicet Lunae: Vide Scition.
Claramont. de Unive^s. l. ^. c. 8.
talis vero variis and excellentissimis, quorum uno meliorem adhuc ad stellas
non vidi. But enough may be collected to this purpose out of the foregoing
discourse, so that I need not repeat it over again: out of all which as I would
not be understood totally to discredit the use of Telescopes in celestial
discoveries, (I do not deny but some things and some motions are observed by
them, which a naked Eye cannot discern; but this knowledge arrives to a slender
degree of certainty, when the Phenomenon come to be particularly explicated;
and theoremes or assertions framed thence) so I would not have them too much
relied on, nor men be too confident in principles and Conclusions which have no
surer Foundation then those probabilities: and I do herein join with
Claramontius in that Epiphonema, In tanta diversitate, quid certi ex tubo
Optico habemus? If I must suspect the skill or accurateness of Galilaeo,
Scheiner, Gassendus, Hevelius, Fontana, Ricciolus, and Zucchius, and such like;
pardon me, if I know not whom to believe.

I have been the more large in this Point because of the insolence with which
Mr. Glanvill persecutes that Reverend, and otherwise learned person, whom he
represents to the world as He pleases, and accordingly treats him with that
contempt and scorn which is less allowable toward a Divine, and such a one as
is, and always has been in that Country very much esteemed by several
honorable Families, as well as others. However God has so providentially
ordered the dispute, thereby to check the pride of our Virtuoso, that The Man
of Words cannot triumph over the Man of Axioms. And if it be true, that our
Aristotelean was amazed at the hard words of Dioptrick Tubes, etc. as if there
had been Magic in them: I doubt not to Justify Him in it; for the insolent
Virtuoso made use of them, not as became a knowing person, but as Conjurers use
strange terms, and of an uncouth sound, though perhaps really Hebrew, Latin,
or Arabique.

Besides all this, perhaps Mr. Cross seems to have been offended at something
in that mixed discourse or dispute, that might derogate from the Authority of
the Scripture: many sayings are not innocent, but as they are worded or
uttered. To say the Scripture was written to men's fancies is an expression very
unwary in a Divine: although a convenient interpretation may excuse it. To say
it is not written according to vulgar Methods may so be spoken, that the action
may render the words culpable. And in another Age they might have passed better
then now, when men are prone to vilify the Scripture, especially the little
Wits. I perceive Mr. Sprat is not over-tender of the dignity of the Scripture:
for although there be an ancient Canon of the Church against the applying the
Sacred Word of God ad scurrilia and adulatoria (which Canon is authorized even
by the Council of Trent) yet does he encourage men to apply it to ordinary
Raillery. The Wit that may be borrowed from the Bible is magnificent, Plus
ultra Page 414.
and as all the other Treasures of knowledge it contains, inexhaustible. This
may be used and allowed without any danger of profaneness. The Ancient
Heathens did the same. They made their Divine Ceremonies, But this practice of
thei^s was the ruin of their Religi^n, as any man may judge who sees what use
Clemens Alexandrinus and Lictantius make of it against Paganism. And the Greeks
thought so when they punished one, (...).
the chief subjects of their phansies: by that means their Religions had a more
awful impression, became more popular, and lasted longer in force then else
they would have done, And why may not Christianity admit the same thing, if it
be practiced with Sobriety and Reverence. What irreligion can there be in
applying some Scripture-expressions to Natural things? Why are not the one
rather exalted and purified, then the other defiled by such Applications? --
The Case is clear Gentlemen, Has not the Lord said, What have thou to do to
take my words into thy mouth since thou hate to be reformed? Besides,
methinks our Divine might have remembered the feast of Belshazzar, and the
resentment that the Lord expressed upon the applying of the consecrated vessels
to the serving in a festival banquet, though to a Prince. He might have called
to mind the handwriting upon the wall, and very probably have inferred with
himself, that if God was so concerned at the misapplication and abuse of those
Temple-Vessels, he would much more severely interess himself where that Word of
his, which he has so many ways hallowed and recommended to our Veneration, is
abused to raillery: This Humor is no part of the words or works in which the
Man of God is to be perfected by reading of the Holy Scripture. I fear the
great Judge will one day say unto these Drolls, Ye are weighed in the balance,
and found too light. To conclude, the generality of Raillery amounts to no more
but so many idle words, and they become doubly criminal by being profane.

Of the Antiquity and Use of Chemical Physique.
Plus ultra, Page ^0, 11.
Chemistry has indeed a pretense of the great Hermes for its Author, (how
truly I will not dispute.) From him it is said to have come to the Egyptians,
and from them to the Arabians; Among these it was infinitely mingled with
vanity and superstitious devices: but it does not appear at all in use with
Aristotle and his Sectators: Nor does it appear that the Grecians, or the
disputing Ages, were conversant in these useful and luciferous Processes. --

Our Virtuoso is not willing to dispute whether Hermes were the Author of
Chemistry, or not: It had become one that is encharged with the Cure of Souls
very well, to have declined all these other disputes, as being remote from
those Studies, by which he ought to qualify himself for a befitting discharge
of the Ministry. But to tell him further, what I am sure he is ignorant of, the
Egyptians did never attribute to Hermes the Invention of Physic, or any part
of it, but to Apis and Aesculapius; and as for that Chemistry which they
practiced, which consisted in melting down and improving of Metalls, or making
of Gold: the Egyptians did never reckon the discovery of that Art amongst the
praises of their Hermes, (...) nomine olim haud legas quid a^iud sig^ificatum^
quam (...) (...) vero (...) ^^am quae vil^orum metallorum l^pdumque in melius
co^mutationem pallicetur Ne quidem l^gere est. vel medicamentis praeparandis
operam aliquam impendisse primos Ch^m^ae professores Conring. de Med^ Herm. c.
3. p. 15.
though they were very forward to magnify him, and to ascribe unto him a great
many Elogies. Nay, when they do recount the Authors of their Chemistry, though
they do not agree about them, yet there is none that transfers that honor upon
this Trismegistus. But whether Aesculapius, or the wicked Angels, (to both
which the Invention is attributed) were the discoverers of Chemistry, I think I
may allow the Egyptians to have been the first Practisers of it, and that there
wanted not those who did mention Hermes amongst them that used that Art, and
were esteemed Philosophers. Nor is the Egyptian Chemistry of any great
Antiquity, there being no mention of it in any Greek or Latin Writer, Vide
Conring. c. 3 p. 28.
till almost the fourth Century after Christ. Neither is the name only of
Chemia or Chemistry of so modern a date: but there is not any record of any
book written, In the time of Constantine A. D. 320. Fi^micus is said to be the
first that is recorded to have named Alchimia; he says, that Saturn disposes
to Alchimy. Whence Libavius argues that it was then an A^r, and had been long
practiced, or else how comes it under Astrological Prediction? But the^e is no
consequence in that reason of his it being usual for Astrologers to accommodate
the Stars so as to have an influence upon novel inv^ntions. Under Theodosius
the Great, A. D. 38^. Heliodorus writ a book to the Emperor about the
Ch^y^opoeia; and s^mething about that A^e to cr^^lius, as Cedren^s witnesses.
Libav. in Exam censur. Parisi^^s.
or work performed, that imports any such thing. Yet have the Alchymists (it is
true) pretended to a greater Antiquity, entitling several spurious books to
Hermes, Moses, (and Miriam his Sister) Democritus, Plato, Aristotle; and made
as if their Art were intimated in the fable of the Golden Fleece, the Hesperian
Orchards, and the Song of Solomon. In which I cannot but take notice of the
different procedure of those Chemists, and our Experimental Philosophers: the
one attributed all glorious discoveries to the Ancients, their Predecessors;
these will not allow them those praises which indisputably belong unto them.
But however, that I may grant our Virtuoso, that Chemistry did flourish in
Egypt in such manner and at such time, as I have declared out of Conringius,
(to whom I refer the inquisitive Reader) yet I must not gratify him with this
other concession, that from them it came to the Arabians, the followers of
Aristotle not being at all acquainted with it, nor the Grecians, or those
disputing Ages, being at all conversant with it. For it is made evident by
Conringius, ( c. 26. p, 368.) that it passed from the Egyptians to the Greeks.
There are of Greek Writers, Zosimus Panopolita, Olympiodorus, Stephanus,
Several of these Greek Writers were seen by Salma^ius in the King of France his
Library and by Reyn^sius, ( vide var. lecti n l. ^. c. 5 p 155.) who
transcrib^s this (...) as the Con^lusion ^f one of (...) (...), le^t any on^
sh^u^d t^ink that by (...) were meant ^ar Was, and Poets, and ^nventors. I must
add^, that it is a name long ago fixed upon the Chemists and Ch^ysippore^^^ks,
as Reyne^ius declares.
Synesius, M^chael Psellus, Blemmydas, and many others, which are instanced in
by the same Author, and deduced through the several Centuries anteceding the
Saracen Empire. The very name of (...), is Greek, as Vossius observes, de
Philos. c. 9. The Moorish particle Al being prefixed. Nor is the word Alembex
of any other original, being compounded of the said (...) and (...), a term
used by Dioscorides to signify a vessel, not much unlike our Limbecks. Diosc.
l. 5. c. 64. vid. Conring. and Voss. ubi supra. From the Greeks together with
other Learning^ even Chemistry was transmitted: and Geber himself (as Leo Afer
relates it, lib. 3. page 136.) was but an Apostate Grecian. This Geber is the
most ancient of Arabian Alchymists, their Idol, and styled Magister
Magistrorum. I am not ignorant that Conradus Gesnerus (in praef. ad Evon.) and
some others have reckoned upon Geber as if he had been originally a Saracen,
^e^erus qu^m v^lunt ci^ca ^nnum P^r^us vi^gin^i s^x^entissimum (...) vivis
^uisse Libav ^xam c^rfur. Pa^in^us.
and the Nephew of one Mahomet: some say he was the Grandchild of the Impostor
Mahomet: but their credit is not equal to that of Leo Afer, who appears a most
learned person, and inquisitive even to Curiosity into the Lives as well as
Customs of the Moors, his Countrymen. Habent Fessani Arabes multa Chemicae
artis opuscula a viris doctis conscripta, I co A^er Hist. (...) l. 3.
inter quos potiorem locum habet Geber, qui centum annis post Mahometen vixit,
quem natione Gidum aiunt fidem abjurasse. -- Gesner cannot tell at what time he
lived, but he says he was not the Inventor, but Illustrator of the Art of
Distillation. -- Quanquam non illum primum hujus Artis Inventorem, sed
Illustratorem fuisse existimo. Hoc in opere quod summae perfectionis
inscribitur, Con^ad G^^r. (...).
de distillatione in Gener Multa pulchre disserens, varios distillandi modos
fere omnibus notos esse scribit: nimirum ut vetus quoddam suo seculo, non
recens quoddam inventum.

But though the Greeks were not free of the Metallurgical part of Chemistry,
yet did they not prepare any Medicines Chymically (that I know of,) except it
were the Alcalisate Salts, and Ecchyl^mata, or Juices formed into Extracts, and
Oils drawn per descensum. This seems manifest in that Oribasius, Aetius, Paulus
Aegineta, Alexander Trach^anius, PAULUS and IOANNES Iatrosophistae of
Alexandria, Conringius c. 26. p. 370. Gesner. inpraefat. ad Euonym.
Simeon Sethus, Actuarius, Nonas, and others mention no such Medicaments: no,
nor Michael Psellus, though he writ a peculiar Tract about Chemistry. Neither
has Nicolaus Myrepsus (though a modern Grecian) any Chemical Preparation.

The Arabians seem the first that ever accommodated Chemistry in an eminent
manner to Physic; if it be true, as Libavius imagines; that Abulchasis did
live in the time of Muhauia the Saracen, that settled their Empire at Damascus
Anno Dom^ 660. Chemistry then seems to have been regulated into an Art; Libav
in exam. sent. Pa^is.
He writ a Book of Physic called Servitor, which principally treats of
Medicines Chymically prepared, and uses the terms of reverberation,
calcination, coagulation, distillation per ascensum and descensum: and many
such like expressions, together with Processes purely Chemical. It was then
that Alchymie was called Perfectum Magisterium; and that which we call Oil of
Bricks, did bear the name of Oleum Sapientiae and Perfecti Magisterii.

So Avicenna speaks not only of Rose Water distilled: but of Mercury and
Arsenick sublimed: after him Ioannes Mesues shows how to make several Chemical
Oils, Conring^ ubi supra. p 374.
as of Amber, Wheat, Oleum Philosophorum, etc. Neither is it to be doubted, but
that there were an infinite number of Chemical Processes latent in the hands of
particular Artists, since Ioannes Mesues refers us unto them, Vid. Con^ing. ubi
supra.
viz. de quibus loquuntur, qui quae sunt occulta in rebus manifestant and
detegunt. Hos quoque aggredere rei hujus cupidus tam famosae apud illos. After
that the Western Christians were civilized and instructed in the Sciences by
the Moors inhabiting Spain, Read Liba^ius more full^ upon this s^bject in
E^am. censur. Pa^isi^ns.
and that Physic superstructed upon the principles of Galen, Avicenna, and
Averroes, was derived unto them, those Sectators of the ancient Philosophy
improved Chemical Pharmacy very much.

nor were Albertus Magnus, Aponensis, Gentilis de Fulgineo, Arnoldus de villa
nova, Raymundus Lullius, or Ioannes de Rupescissa, or Isaacus Hollandus,
Con^^ng. ubi supra, c. 27. p. 379, 80, etc.
or Basilius Valentinus, or Antonius Guainerius, or Michael Savonorola, or
Montagnana, or Hieronymus Schallerus, and Magenbuchius (Chemical Physicians at
Norimbergh before Paracelsus) or Guilielmus Varigana, or Antonius Fumanellus,
or Wolfgangus Talhenserus, or Hieronymus Brunsvigus (the first that writ of
Chemistry in the German tongue) any other then Pretenders to the ancient
Physic and Philosophy. There was no faction betwixt the Physicians in those
days; nor did they undervalue or decry each other; They rather represented
themselves to be Adherents and Sectators of Aristotle, then his Enemies; and
chose rather to sophisticate his fourth book of Meteors, Conring. ibid. c ^8.
p. ^87. Erastus de metal^. p 34.
to show that great Man knew all things, then condemn all his other works, as
if he knew nothing. Nor were they only followers of the PERIPATETICKS, but I
find the Chymists^ that did precede Paracelsus to be accounted Hippocratical
Physicians: witness this passage in Caspar Bravo, who inquired more into them
then I have had leisure to do.

Caspar Bravo Resolut. Medic. part. 1. disp. 1. sect. 1. resol. 3. sect. 2.
Resolvendum, artem Spagiricam veterum Spagiricorum, quam Avicenna, Geberus,
Rhasis, Arnoldus de villa nova, Raymundus Lullius, Blemmydas, Braceseus,
Virceanus, Ioannes Augustinus, Panterus, Isaachus Monachus, Morienus, Zosymus,
and alii Hippocratis Sectatores professi sunt diversam esse a Secta
Paracelsistica. With this agrees that passage of Conringius de Med. Herm. c.
28. With him agrees Lib^vi^s in the fore^ited ^r^atise.
Certe ante Paracelsum haud est observare in Chemicorum scriptis singularem
aliquam sive Hermeticam, sive Chemicam Medicinam. Observata autem est plerumque
medendi illa via quam Hippocrates, Galenus, horumque Sectatores cum Graeci tum
Arabes, interque eos Avicenna calcaverant: quod unum Arnoldum Villanovanum
legenti non potest non Sole videri clarius. So Primrose de vulg. Error. l. 4.
c. 1. Haec medicamenta praeparandi ratio non a Paracelso inventa est: sed
multis ante Para^elsum natum seculis exculta fuit ab iis etiam Medicis qui
Galeni doctrinam sectabantur, ut Raym. Lullio, Villanovano, etc.

But when Paracelsus was seized with the same spirit that seems to sway some of
the Virtuosi: then did he begin to decry the study of Languages, as loss of
time; our Wits call it Pedantry. He vilified Logic as that which caused
endless disputes, and darkened rather then discovered Nature: He calls it matrem
odii, rixarum and litium; He prohibited the reading of other good and Ancient
Authors.. He seemed to be of no Religion; and if for any, it was to be without
Metaphysics, without the mixture of Glosses and Interpretations, Solum textum
Scripturae legendum, interpretationem nullam adhibendam. He calls upon all
Universities and Countries to resort unto him, to follow him and his new
discoveries^ his real Philosophy, his Essential Anatomies, all other
performances being but empty and verbose.

Because I observe some resemblance betwixt the invitations of Mr. Sprat and
his, I will set one of his passages down in the Preface of his Paragranum, viz.
Me sequimini; Non ego vos sequar. Me, me, inquam, sequimini, Avicenna, Galen,
Rhases, Montagnana, Mesue. Me sequimini; non ego vos sequar, Parisienses,
Monpelienses, Suevi, Misnici, Colonienses, Viennenses, qui Danubium and Rhenum
accolitis. Sed in primo de pes^ilitate tractatu primo, ubi d^ Chelidoniae
contra imagina^iones Magicas amuleto disserit, adeo non rejicit Gale^i and
Hippocratis decreta, ut etiam amplius vider velit Galeni- icus, quam omnium
scholarum profesores publici. Libavius ubi supra.
Vos item Insulae marinae, Italia, Dalmatia, Athenae, Graeci, Arabes,
Israelitae, me sequimini, non ego vos sequar. Mea enim Monarchia. Hereby any
one may see that He was as conceited of himself, and as great a contemner of
all ancient Learning, and of Aristotle, and Galen, etc. as some of the
Virtuosi: and as ignorant of Latin and other tongues; and as false and
imperfect in his relations; as variable in his hypotheses, as if he held
nothing but with the power of revoking it, which is a great qualification of a
modern Philosopher. He was not for the particular methods in vogue, but for a
general Enquiry into the Experiments of old Women, Mountebanks, Hangmen,
Husbandmen, etc. He could make use of the writings and inventions of others,
concealing their names, and boasting them for new and his own, as becomes a
modish Experimentator. To evince this last assertion, I shall set down some
passages of Crato, and others, to show that the disputing Ages were not so
ignorant of Chemistry as Mr. Glanvill pretends. Crato in a Letter to Erastus
writes thus; ^rastus part. 4. p 3^^.
Remedia quibus aliquando usus esse dicitur, non illius esse ex eo certus sum,
quod librum vidi ante ducentos fere annos a Monacho quodam Ulmae scriptum, in
quo eadem medicamenta, quae ille frustillatim, nunc in has nunc in illas
chartas sparsit, perspicue sunt scripta. -- And elsewhere, Fuit in bibliotheca
viri optimi and integerrimi Marci Singmoseri Sacratissimi Impp. Consilii a
Secretis primi, P^ae^ ad Exe^ci^. Scaliger.

Hartman and C^ollius published no new medicines. Cae^erum n^que Crollium n^q
me a iquid (...) p^o^ulise libente ^^^emur, neque ^a unq^am u^riusque nos^^^m
men's fuit.

Hartman. in not. ad Cr^ll p ^38.

Libavius ubi su^ra.


liber ante ducentos annos a Monacho quodam exaratus. Eo multis mensibus usus
sum, and omnia quae isti (Paracelsici) tanquam in Eleusiniis sacris mussitant,
tam evidenter tradita, ut neminem fallere possent animadverti. He himself
confesses who were his teachers in Chimistry, and that he was far from being
the first Inventour of it. Theophrastus Paracelsus natus anno Christi 1493.
mortuus 1541. Hic non erubuit confiteri se remedia in Chymicis accepisse, and
his ipsis Scientiam Artis Chymiae debere. Antiqui Philosophi (ait in 2. part
Chirurgiae mag. tractat. 3. c. 1.) studiosi indagandarum longae vitae causarum
(recitamus breviter sententiam) destituti vero perfecta praeparandorum
componendorumque medicamentorum scientia ab Alchymistis eam petere non sunt
veriti, atque sic utronemque laboribus conjunctis genuina praeparandorum
remediorum Scientia exorta, and variis Chemicis experimentis in medicinam
transfusis est aucta, maxim vero tincturis and floribus metallicis, quarum
tincturarum quanta fuerit efficacia, antiqui ea de re Codices testantur, quos
diu a Pseudomedicorum turba suppressos, nos publicos facere non dubitavimus.
Remedia nostra ex Chymicorum S^hola prodiisse non dubito fateri: and quoniam
Chymica ars infinitis erroribus scatere visa est, illud quoque Augiae stabulum
re^urgandi laborem sumpsimus: in quo felicius mihi versari licuit, quod ob
ineunte aetate magnae Artis studio captus summa diligentia sub excellentissimis
praeceptoribus Arti huic studuerim. Praeceptores enim fuerunt Wilhelmus
Hohenheimius Pater, and alii infiniti: praeter hos quoque scriptis adjutus sum
Setthagii Episcopi, Erhardi Laventalii, Nicolai Hipponensis Episcopi, Matthaei
Schechtii Suffraganei Treisingensis, Abbatis Spanheimii, aliorumque
doctissimorum Chemistarum: Quin and variis eorum experimentis factus sum
locupletior, inter quos honoris causa nominandus mihi venit nobilissimus vir
Sigismundus Fueger Schwathensis, qui magnis sumptibus pluribus ministris
sustentatis Chemicam accessione locupletavit. Haec ibi Paracelsus. Neqne vero
falsa scribere est putandus, quandoquidem seculum istum and exercitiis Chymicis
and voluminibus sca^uit, cum jam plures tractatus typis publicis sint impressi,
nihilominus cernimus, subinde ex tenebris prodire plures, ita ut ne Thesauri
quidem multi videantur sufficere cupiendis, nec Theatra.

His followers confess, that he borrowed much out of Basilius Valentinus, and
more out of Isaacus Hollandus, as Penottus declares, De de^ar. medic.
Cum incidissem in Isaaci librum de opere vegetabili, reperi de verb^ ad verbum
doctrinam de tribus principiis, and de separatione quatuor Elementorum ab eo
desumptam^ Unde constat illum praecipua sua Opera suffuratum fuisse, atque hinc
inde expiscatum: Vide Conring. de med. He^m. c. 2^. p. 252, 253.
ut de gradationibus medicinarum ab Arnoldo, Archidoxa a Raymundo Lullio ex sua
Art operativa: de Arcanis a Rupescissa; nihil prorsus a seipso praeter
convitia: and maledicta: a Trithemio varia. -- The same is confessed by
Quercetan somwhere as I remember, and he himself intimates it by adding to many
preparations the words, Ex nostra correctione, ex me a emendatione. Out of all
which it is evident, that neither the Grecians, nor the disputing Ages were so
ignorant of Chemistry, as Mr. Glanvill asserts; as it is certain that the
Arabians as well as the Grecians were disputers and followers of Aristotle and
Galen, and that particularly Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon were Schoolmen.
Nor can any man doubt the same of those other Bishops and Monks, who knows with
what perfect Veneration, in those days Aristotle was regarded. How useful and
how luciferous their Processes were, it is not for Mr. Glanvill to judge, who
is ignorant of them: but any one will allow them both the one and the other,
recommmendation, who considers that their Chemical Processes which passed
amongst them gave occasion to all, and make a great part of the improvements in
Chemistry, in Dioptricks and other Subjects, wherein our Virtuosi pride
themselves. Particularly as to Chemistry, it is as clear that the disputing
Ages and followers of Aristotle were acquainted with it, and eminent for it, as
that there were Monks and Schoolmen. Those men whom Mr. Glanvill so explodes,
and with whom the Historian disports himself, had of late years before
Paracelsus, in a manner, solely the knowledge of this Art by which Nature is
unwound, etc. De C^ns. Ch^m. c. 3.
This Sennertus grants. Proximis seculis fere inter Monachos latuit Chymia,
quorum non pauci illud, quo abundabant, otium post sacras meditationes and
orationes, arti huic praestantissimae honest tribuerunt: inter quos fuerunt
Raymundus Lullius, Albertus Magnus, Ioannes de Rupescissa, Savanarola,
Morienus, Rogerius, Trithemius, and Frater Basilius Valentinus: quorum scripta
multa hoc seculo in lucem edita sunt, and multa adhuc manuscripta passim
latent. I hope there is no exception against Sennertus, how partial soever
Erastus or Crato may seem. And to af^ront our Virtuoso a little more, it was a
follower of Aristotle, and those Disputers, a pitiful School-Divine that
discovered the making of Gunpowder, which single invention out does all that
our Collegiates boast of. In the year 1354. Bertholdus Schwarz a Benedictine
Monk discovered it, and I dare warrant him in those days no enemy to the man of
Stagyra, the Idol of disputers; A very ancient Manuscript gives him this
Character. Bertholdus Schwarz Goslariensis Monachus ordinis Sancti Benedicti,
cum mire Chymicis delectaretur, atque eorum peritia jam magnam sibi nominis
existimationem acquisiisset, etc. Any one may read the rest in Kirchers Mundus
subterraneus l. 12. sect. 5. part. 4.

V^ssi^s de ph^losoph c. 12. sect 12. G^ss^. in prae^. ad Euonym. Vossius de
philo^. c 13. C^nring de med. Herm c. 26. p. 37^.
I shall relate some particular processes in Chemistry, which are mentioned by
such as were not Arabians, but of a much more ancient date. In the time of
Iulianus and Valentinianus Emperors lived Aetius Amidenus; he and Nicolaus
Myrepsus (who is indeed later then Mesue) do mention the distillation of Oils
per descensum, as Gesner shows; and Vossius together with Conringius avow --
Nicolaus Myrepsus (or Praepositus) -- in quo illud miror nullam ab eo aquarum
oleorumve Chymisticis instrumentis paratorum mentionem fieri. Capnistum tantum
oleum, quod per descensum distilletur, describit, ut Aetius quoque. As to the
ways of making Chemical Extracts, let any man judge whether the Grecians were
ignorant of them, by these passages, as they are cited by Gunterus Billichius,
Observat^ and paradox. chym. l. 1. c. 2. p. 32.
viz. Chylismata extrahuntur aut exprimuntur. Extrahendi nec ars nova est, nec
novus modus, quanquam Heurnio ita visum sit Method. ad praxin. lib. 1. and lib.
2. c. 25. Rat^onem ejus a Dioscoride accipe, verbis interpretis Ruellii lib. 3.
c. de Gentiana^ Contusa, inquit, radix quinque diebus aqua maceratur, postea in
eadem tantisper decoquitur, dum extent radices, and ubi refrixit aqua, linteo
excolatur: mox discoquitur, dum mellis crassitudo, fiat fictilique reconditur.
Similia cap. 9. ejusdem libri de Centaurio minore habet. Dabo tibi ipsissima
Dioscoridis verba; Dioscorides lived in the days of Cleopa^ra and Marc. Anton.
whose Physician he was, a so lower of Herophilus, and consequently of
H^ppocrates and A^istotle. Vide Voss de philos. c. 11. sect. 40. and I^nsium de
script. hist. and p^il. l. 2. c. 6^ p. 145.
(...). Nequid ad plenitudinem artificii deesset, subjungit; Quod siquid
concretum faucibus vasis adhaerescat, deradunt, reliquoque humori permiscent.
Item haec; Quae autem ^iccis radicibus aut herbis liquamenta exprimuntur,
decocta (ut in Gentianae mentione retulimus) praeparantur. Ita Lycium and
Abscynthium, hypocistis, and consimilia coguntur. De Lycio vide cap. 135. lib.
1. de hypocistide libri ejusdem cap. 128. Chylismatis den^que absynthini, cap.
26. meminit. Nec aliter Extractum Melampodii clarissimus Raymundus Mindeserus
concinnavit, quod in Pharmacopoeia Augustana inter Ecchylismata Cathortica
locum non postremum reperit. Ut liqueat, extrahendi artificium, dignum omnino
fuisse, quod and erudita antiquitas inveniret, and non degener posteritas
imitaretur. Nec quicquam Chymia novi, praeter liquorem attulit.

Concerning fixed and Alcalisate Salts, the Chemists and Chemical Physicians
make a great noise: and undoubtedly the Invention is very extraordinary, and
their use very singugular in Medicine. See the antiquity of the use of
Alcalisate and other Salts by the Ancients, largely proved by M. Rulandus
p^ogymn. alchym. qu. 14, 15.
Yet both the preparation and the use of them is set down by Dioscorides,
Galen, Vide Galen, de Theriaca sub finem, and Pharmacop. Augustan. in append.
ad antidot. class. de Salib. Theriacal.
and Aetius, in their discourses about Theriacal Salts; Though latter days have
reformed the preparation, ^. Bellichius observat. and paradox. chym. l. 1. c.
2. p. 30. and in Thessalo chymicum. c. 7. p. 90.
as Galen endeavored to do that which he found in use in his time. Besides, I
observe out of Gunterus Bellichius, that Aristotle was not ignorant of it.
Aristoteles auctor est, Umbros cinerem harundinis and junci decoquere aqua
solitos, donec exiguum superesset humoris: qui ubi refrixisset, salis copiam
fecerit, lib. 2. meteor. cap. 3. Hoc se apud Theophrastum invenire Plinius
testatur, lib. 31. cap. 7. Idemque non harundinei tantum juncique salis
meminit, sed colurni insuper, and querni. Amborum autoritate (nam de
Theophracto nihil mihi constat) Chymicorum castigabitur temeritas, quae suis
inventis salem cineritum annumerare aus^ est.

The preparation of Saltpeter with Sulphur, in order to the making of what the
Chemical Physicians call Sal prunellae, was known to Hippocrates, and others of
the ancients, and they used it in Squinonsyes in Gargarismes for the tongue and
throat. Desinant in posterum Chymici de lapide Prunellae magnifice gloriari.
Nam and apud Hippocratem (...) quater invenimus. G. Bellichius observe. chym. l.
1. c. 5. p 49.
Semel quidem in tertio de morbis: bis in de internis affectionibus: denique
semel in lib. de morb. mulier. Ac ne dubites erudite antiquitati cognitum eum
lapidem fuisse, Plinius auctor est, nitrum frequenter liquatum cum Sulphur
coqui in carbonibus, sulphuri concoctum in lapidem verti. Haec recognosce ex
lib. 31. cap. 10. And the same Author says elsewhere, G. Bellichius ib l. 2.
c. 5. p. 119.
Prae aliis omnibus inclaruit (...) Hippocratis seu lapis Plinii nitrarius,
dictus a barbarorum pruna seu angina, cui singulariter mederi perhibetur. Nec
nova est quaecunque ea laus. Nam and Hippocrates abstergendae Salivae and
^^uco, ac facilitandae exscreationi nitrum anginosis obtulit, indiditque
collationibus Oris. Lib. 2. de morbis, sect. 49.

Neither is the way of subliming Flowers of Benzoin, any thing else then the
imitation of that way which the Ancients had of condensing Soot. Id. ib. l. 1.
c. 2. p. 32.
So Bellichius informs me, Fuligo, definiente Scaligero, cujusque rei pinguis
crematilis pars est, ac demum aliarum rerum fumus condensatus, Exerc. 56. Modus
conficiendae ejus, siquid artificii subest, apud Dioscoriden extat, lib. 1. c.
85, 86, 94, 97. imitatio apud Beguinum, quando Benzoinum defloravit, l. 2. c.
18.

It may perhaps be granted by most intelligent persons, that the making of
Extracts, and fixed Salts, and such instances of Vegetables being prepared as I
have given, and the glory of those inventions cannot justly be denied unto
those disputing Ages; but that the preparation of Minerals, and the medicinal
use of them inwardly, is a discovery the ancient times were not acquainted
with. And this is the judgment of many learned men. But in refutation of it,
seeing that the inward use of Antimony, as it is several ways prepared, refers
to Basilius Valentinus, and before his days; since that, sundry preparations of
Mercury are more ancient then the humor of Novellism; since Paracelsus,
Hartman, Crollius did but publish the processes of Aristoteleans, Avicennists,
and such like Monks and Physicians; all that our Virtuoso can derive from this
Plea is, that the Arabians, adherents to the old Philosophy and their
followers, did improve the extent of Chemistry, and added thereunto as they did
in the other practice of Physic, the use of Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds,
and other benign medicines: and this demonstrates that Philosophy and those
notions not to be so steril, as they are represented in comparison of the
Fecundity of the Cartesian Principles, from whence Physic has received little
(if any) benefit or advantage. But to raise this Enquiry beyond the times of
the Saracen Empire, it is manifest out of Pliny, that mineral-waters were drunk
in those ancient times: and that the Stomoma or rust of iron, as also that
drinks in which Iron was quenched, was given in the time of Dioscorides and
Galen. Diosc. l. 5. ^. 53.

Galen. l. 1. de ^uporist. c. 17.


That Brimstone was given inwardly by Hippocrates to asthmatick persons. That
the Squamma aeris was given inwardly, as a purge and vomit by Hippocrates,
Hippocr. de vict. in morb. acut.

Vide Doring. de medicina, p. 217. Ruland progymn. qu. 20. Brassavol. de me^.
pu^g. p. 1^7. ^oteri^s. Pha^macop. Spagir. l. 2. c ^.


Galen, Dioscorides and Celsus: and the Experiment happily tried by
Brassavolus, that great Experimentator again of later years. So the giving of
Sandaracha, or Orpiment inwardly for old coughs; and the suffiment made out of
it, are recorded by Dioscorides: the trochises of it recommended anew by Mesue,
and the more modern trials in Riverius. Even Chalcitis is an ingredient in the
ancient Treacle of Andromachus. I shall conclude all with the passage of
Doringius in the place already cited, Praeter Sandarachum Isidorus, Athenaeus,
Idius, Eubulus, Heras, Gemellus, Agathius, Nicostratus, Menander, Doring. de
med^c. and med. p. ^19. Vide and Ruland. progymn. Alch qu. 20.
Thanyros, Deletius Epagathus, Asclepiades, and alii: Alumen scissum,
Auripigmentum, Aeris squammam, Aes ustum, Calcem vivam, Sulphur vivum, faeces
unde ustas, Cadmiam, Cerussam, Gypsum, Stibium sive Antimonium in pastillos
redacta dysentericis praescripserunt: quorum praeparandi rationem and utendi
modum vide apud Galenum lib. 9. de compos. med. sec. loc. c. 5. Out of which
passages any Reader will gue^s what President later Authors had out of the more
remote Ancients for the giving minerals inwardly; and if we are just to the
Arabians and their followers, we shall scarcely allow them any further honor,
then to have found out some new ways to serve up old dishes.

I shall add, that in Egypt, at such time as the repute of the Egyptian
Priests, and their fantastical Philosophy had given way to the followers of
Hippocrates, Aristotle, Herophilus, and others, that introduced the Grecian
Learning there, that is, in, and somewhat before the days of Dioclesian, the
Egyptians were Masters of that Secre^ of making Gold, which our inquisitive
Moderns have so vainly sought after. Before that Age there is no mention of it,
and then it is said they had such knowledge of the Art of making Gold, that
thereby they were enriched and empowered to make War upon the Romans; and being
overcome by the Emperor Dioclesian, he burned all the books which they had,
containing the Mysteries of that Art, to prevent any future commotions of that
Nature. So Suidas in the word (...). And in the word (...) he says, (...). The
renown of this Story is not questioned by the Chemists, Joan. Langii Ep. med.
l. 1. ep. ^3. de Orig. Alchym. But O^^s. and Paulus Diaconus were credulous
W^iters, and of little repu^t. Libavius in exam. censur. Parisi^ns. Ro^fincius
^hym. Art. no. redact l 1. c. ^^ and Conring. de med. Herm. c 3. p. 21.
and I find the learned Ioannes Langius to give credit unto it, quoting for
the truth of it in his margin, besides Suidas; Orosius l. 7. c. 16. And Paulus
Diaconus in the life of Diocletian: Neither does Libavius or Rolfincius elevate
the authority thereof, though he mention the passage of Suidas. And to give a
further color unto this relation, I am informed that Aeneas Gazaeus, who lived
in the latter end of the fifth Century, when Zeno and Anastasius were
Emperors, treating of the Resurrection, has this passage, (...). But these
Narrations ar^ rejected by such as deny that other metalls may be transmuted
into Gold: It is replied by Erastus, that either those Egyptian books contained
nothing but the Art of melting down of metalls, Erastus de metallis, p. 103.
and separating the latent Gold therefrom: or that Suid^^ being a late writer,
living but 500 years ago, about 800 years or more after Diocletian, might have
been imposed upon by the Chemists of those times (in Greece, Conring. de med.
Herm. c. 3 p. 23.
and during the disputing Ages! mark that Mr. Glanvill) who even then might
have feigned some such stories as that (and the Allegorising of the Golden
Fleece) just as they have within the last Centuries counterfeited the Works of
Mos^s and Solomon, and entitle them unto their Fictions. There are an infinity
of stories in Suidas, which render his Assertions suspected: and in this he
has not the countenance of any ancient Writer to second him. It seems strange,
that the Romans having so long ruled in Egypt absolutely, and their Governors,
they not being to be supposed free from all desires of gain, how they should
never apprehend the Artifice, nor have the least mention of it in their Writers
( Greek or Latin) till the end of the fourth Century: and that so remarkable a
passage as this is should be omitted by those ancient Writers, who relate both
the war and actings of Diocletian after his victory. Id^ ib p. 22.
As for that saying of Aenaeas Gazaeus, it is replied that he speaks by
hearsay, rather then certain knowledge of the operation: that there have not
wanted many learned persons, De plant. resuscit. vide Bellich. Thessal. rediv.
c. 7. Rolfinc. art. chym. l. 6. c. 3. and l. 7. c. 19.
who have with a great deal of confidence, illustrated the Resurrection by
contemplations of the Phoenix, and of the forms of Plants resuscitated in their
several Salts, as if both were realities: yet is there no such thing as either
the one or the other.

Out of all which it is evident that Chemistry was a practice known and in use
am^ng the Sectators of Aristotle: and that the Grecian and disputing Ages were
not unacquainted with those Processes, though these latter times have been more
various and inquisitive, and have reduced that Art into better Method, and
enlarged the Practice of Physic, with an infinity of Medicines: and indeed we
must confess our ^^^ves very much obliged by the labors of ingenious Chymis^^^
and that they have afforded multitudes of Experiments, such as contribute to
the delight of all Philosophical heads, and to the Cure of many that being
sick; have either better opinion of Chemical Medicines then of others, or are
pleased with their small, and commonly more pleasant d^se.

See this largly disputed by Liba^ius in exam. censur. Parisiens.
But that those parts into which Chemists reduce things, are latent in the
compound body, otherwise then by the Aristotelean distinction of formaliter and
materialiter (so much laughed at by Mr. Glanvill, page 119.) This is an
Assertion which does not become any man that pretends to have read Mr. Boil in
his Skeptical Chemist, where that Point is too amply debated to be here
transcribed, or ever (I think) refuted. Having denied Mr. Glanvill, Vide
Kerger. de fermentat. sect^ 1. c. 3. p. ^0. and Rolfinc. chym. in a^. ^ ed. l.
1. c. 19. Conring. de med. Hermet. c. 22.
that by those useful and luciferous processes, Nature is unwound and resolved
into the minute Rudiments of its composition. Which Rudiments were not made use
of at the first Creation, when one Fiat created those compound bodies, which
Artful Fires sometimes (and but sometimes) analyze into several parts, as
Salts, Oil, or Sulphur and Spirit, and those grosser Elements of Earth and
water. All which are not found in many bodies, (and when they are, it is with a
great discrepancy betwixt those of one Concrete, and those of another) nor any
of them to be separated from Gold. De fe^ment. c 1. p. 4.
Which Libavius, no, nor Dr. Willis does not make to be the last unmixt, and
simple Constituents of natural bodies, sed ^jusmodi tantum substantias, in quas
veluti parts ultimo sensibiles res Physicae resolvuntur: Substances into which
natural bodies are resolved finally as far as sense can judge, and when the
Analysis is prosecuted in one sort of procedure: for another method, different
Solvents, and different Fires discover different parts, and those sensible too
from what the usual Chemistry builds upon. Having denied him this, I must
further tell him, that when the Countreywoman sets her Eggs to be hatched, she
produces by those means such bodies as no Chemical fires wi^h their vexatious
Analysis ever would discover: so she does when she does brew and churms her
butter. Nor is this more evident, then it is clear that the Chemical
principles, when they come to be accommodated to the solving of the Phenomenon
in nature, or in diseases, have as much of darkness and dissatisfaction in
them, as occurs in the Peripatetick way: so that now we are more dubious, not
more knowing, then before: and this any man that has considered how the
Chemical Physicians disagree about the causes of diseases, and even about the
common Phenomenon of Nature, will easily grant me: nor will it appear less
manifest, that if the Chemical hypotheses do take place, that it will subject
the Mechanic Philosophy, and establish that of Anaximander, revived by the
ingenious Berigardus.

But Mr. Glanvill adds, Plus ultra, p. 11.
That Chemistry directs Medicines less lothsom, and far more vigorous, and
freeth the spirits and purer parts from the clogging and noxious appendices of
grosser matter, which not only hinder and disable the operation, but leave
hurtful dregs in the body behind them. -- This Plea for the preferring CHEMICAL
Medicines before those commonly called Galenical, is much insisted on by
Beguinus, Quercetanus, and others of that way. Yet, first it is observable,
that whether we regard taste or smell, those very Authors recommend as odious
medicaments, and as loathsome, as ever Coerdus or Foesius in their
Dispensatories, if not worse. Will any man in his Wits condemn Wormwood and
Centory because of their bitter taste, or Castoreum for the smell? Secondly,
every thing is not the better for being extracted. Thus the Extract of Rhubarb,
Freictag. noct. med. c. 75. p. 325. See Mr. Boil of the usefulness of Philos.
part 2 p. 148, etc.
though quickened with its Salt, is not so efficacious as plain Rhubarb, except
it be sophisticated with Diagridium. Nor is Cynnamom improved by Extraction.
Their being more vigorous and freed from grosser parts is not always a
commendation, and sometimes it carries danger with it. That those grosser
parts, and those natural vehicles are requisite, seems even thence clear, that
their spirits and essences must be tempered and mixed often with other gross
bodies before they be given. See this point fully debated in the Vulgar Errors
of Primrose, l. 4. c 3. which I desire Mr. Glanvill to read.

In Pha^mac^p. August. De CC philosophice calcinat. p. 805.


Those appendices of grosser matter are not always noxious to Nature, since in
our meats we find none to be able to live on Chemical viands, but good
Kitchin-Preparations. How many ways are there of preparing Hartshorn, yet is
there not one that equals the crude Horn. I shall set down Zwelfers words,
whose credit no Chemist almost will extenuate. Licet ex cornibus vel ossibus
ita Philosophice calcinatis distillationi subjectis de spiritu sale volatili,
and oleo ipsorum foetido nonnihil eliciatur, non tamen propterea existimandum
ipsa adhuc iisdem quibus crudum cornu pollere viribus vel majoribus etiam
(prout nonnulli sibi imaginantur and asserunt) vel etiam, ut alii arbitrantur,
hac calcinatione nihil aliud peractum fuisse quam quod friabilia, ad
pulverandum aptiora, and magis pura reddita sunt: Neutiquam, Quippe, qui ambo
cornua, tam crudum quam Philosophice calcinatum, examini ignis subjiciet,
reipsa deprehendet multum de nativa sua humiditate, de sale volatili and oleo
huic cornu Philosophice calcinato detractum esse, and eorundem vix part quarta
adhuc gaudere, ut propterea and hanc calcinationem Philosophicam, licet totali
exustione aliquanto meliorem, In prosecution of this point let any man
consider, that Chemical oil of Annis^eds is not so effectual as the powder.
Heurn. meth. adv. l. 1. c. 5. Nor does the like oil of Camomile equal the
infusion, as Simon Paul's ^l. quadrip. p. 2^5. practically observed. So the
common Pillute de succino and Franckfort-pills transcend the ^i^ute ^oses of
diverse and the most famed Panchymagog^. This ^s an observation so common with
all practitioners, that none but Mountebank^ and Q^acks can deny it. Crato,
S^eeghius, Hofman, and others, generally taking notice of it.
approbare nequeam: e contra vero ipsum crudum cervi cornu subtiliter and
minutim raspatum pluris aestimem, quod tamen diversimode parari, inque
virtutibus sui^ exaltari potest: Ut vel in substantia, forma nimirum pulveris,
vel in aqua deco^tum and in mucilaginem vel gelatinam conversam tuto and sine
nausea propinari possit. Nor is this more true in Hartshorn than in Vipers,
which are more effectual being eaten as Eeles, or by a common infusion in wine,
or given in powder (plain powder) then when reduced to volatile Salt and
Essences. It is also false, that Chemical preparation always amends, or does
not render some things worse: The ingredients of sublimated Mercury are not
poison; the result is. How much is the nature of Antimony and Mercury altered
by preparing, so that a few grains prove mortal to the taker, who might without
prejudice devour great quantities of either of them unprepared, M. Ruland.
progymn. Alchym. qu. 33.
Hydrargyrus, Antimonium crudum larga saepius porriguntur: The infusion of
crude Antimony, (a pound in four Gallons of Ale) often rectifies all impurities
of the blood, as well any viper-wine: and Mercury, which being crude is not
only given in Pills by sundry Physicians, Poterius Pharmacop. Spagir. l. 1. p.
352. This experiment is not down in the two Treatises of the Vituosi about the
sophistication of wines: but in short, those ^ieces (as much as they are famed
before they came out) have been laughed at by all knowing persons and
Wine-coopers.
but drunk without any hurt in greater or lesser quantities in several cases.
Non desunt qui Mercurium crudum in dolioli fundo detinent, ferunt vinum ne
arescat, aut vaporem contrabat, aut pendulum fiat, ea ratione fieri. Nos tale
vinum ad ventris lumbricos plurimum valere certo scimus. As for the hurtful
dr^gs which the Galenical Medicaments are said to leave behind: I am confident,
that whosoever shall enquire into the ill consequences of the two
Pharmaceutics, will say, that if the Galenical be not always the most
efficacious, it is always the most safe and innocent: and any man will be more
apt to dread the violent impressions which the powerful spirits and minerals
may make upon the membranes of the Stomach (which may introduce an irrelievable
distemper in the torenus of that part, whereupon depends the nutriment, health,
and vigor of the whole body) then any noxious faeces or little and remediable
hurt from the generality of the Galenical Medicaments. Qui Deum credit
malefactorum vindic^m ultoremque, is a noxiis medicamentis, cum ad manum sunt
alia, diligenter abstinebit: ne quando homicidii, accusante conscientia, reus
fiat, parum profuerit novend^ci^ curasse periculoso curationis genere, quo
vigesimus, aut triges^mus sit necatus. Erastus disp. de propr. medic. c. 65.
And there is this to be said in Justification of that Course -- that those who
have most decried it, and raised their r^pute upon a different way, yet have
practiced with it. In ipsius Paracelsi scriptis passim la^^antur remedia
morborum vulgarimodo and composita and praeparata. Conring. de med. Herm. c.
21. p 279. Palundan. epist. ad H. Smet. Ea habetur in Bartholini cista med. in
vita Severini. p. 127.
Etiam Petrus Severinus test Paludano, Medicamentis Paracelsicis non semper
usus est, verum and compositionibus Galenicis saepe. Nor are Paracelsus and
Petrus Severinus Danus singular in this action: it is the common usage of
Quercetan, Crollius, and Hartman; not to mention Dr. Willis: I shall add, that
Chemical medicines have never or very seldom answered their expectation, which
men raise of them: and whosoever shall inquire into the credit which
Paracelsus, Petrus Severinus, Phedro, Vide Conring. de med. Herm. c. 2^ p. 358,
etc. de Paracelso, de Phedrone, and Pharmacis Paracelsicis vide Bernardum
Diss^nniam Croneburgium in def med. veter. c. 40, 41, etc. and de Petro
Severino Dano. Vide epistolam Palu dani, ubi supra. De Scheunemanno vide
Rolfinc. chym. l. 1. c. ^8. p. 51.
or Scheunemannus, or Helmont gained by these refined Medicaments, he shall
observe that either they are infamous for their destructive courses of Physic,
or at best achieved nothing beyond other Mortals, except by Chance. In fine,
though I have seen very good success of many Chemical Medicines; yet dare I not
express so great an admiration for them as Mr. Glanvill declares: and if he in
all the number of his Philosophic friends, had but one understanding
Physician, or two, they would tell him, That there are some diseases in
themselves, or by accident incurable; that men will die under the most able
Physicians, and that the most best and innocent Physic will som^times have
effects different from the wishes and hopes of the Doctor: Nec Paracelsi
s^ctatores prob^, qui medicina dogmatica explosa and relicta, Elixir vitae,
quintas essen^ias. Axungiam Solis and Lunae, etc. and alia pe^nicios^ and
deterrinia pharmaca in parva dosi, magno cum supercilio exhibere solent,
aegrorum palato consulere volentes: cum hoc titulo tenus saltem medicamenta
sint, ipsorum quidem opinione singularia, revera autem mortis ^ercula and
p^cula, quib^s pler^mque corpus humanum vehementer exagitatur, and magna cum
jactatione satigatur, and ita debilitatur, ut aut ae^re aut nunquam amplius,
pristinas vires recuperet. Gabelchover. Cent. 6. hist. 7. in annot. p. 24.
and he would find that by ordinary medicaments not purged from their dregs,,
nor exalted into spirits and essen^es, as great Cures a^e done by
Countrey-Physicians and Countrey-Gentlewomen oftentimes, as any ever were
wrought by Chemistry. The Physic which is celebrated in the Scripture, that
which St. Luke, St. James, Cosmas and Damianus, Ioannes D^mascenus, and others
followed, was that which our Divine scruples, at least it leaves dregs in the
body.

I confess that among the Egyptians, and Arabians, and Paracelsians, and some
other Moderns, Chemistry was very fantastic, unintelligible and delusive; and
the boasts, vanity, and canting of those Spagyrists brought a scandal upon the
Art, and exposed it to suspicion and contempt: but what the Society have done
in order to its improvement, I understand not so well as Mr. Glanvill seems to
do: the Treatise of Dr. Willis about Fermentation was writ before he was of
that number: and I know not how he has improved Chemistry much since. And in
that famed Piece, all is not to be reckoned upon as invented (much less is
improved) that is written. His notion of Fermentation, as thereby he expresses
the natural and praeternatural occurrences in our bodies, is taken from
Bellich. de sermentat. sect. 8^. His notion of the fire in the heart it very
near related to the doctrine of Contingius de calido innato; and the comparison
of the blood with wine is derived from Carolus Piso: so that those things
(which are the principal in his book) seem rather illustrated excelently well,
then new discoveries and Hypotheses.
Those that have improved it most, and made it intelligible, are Beguinus,
Crollius, Quercetan, Hartman, Angelus Sala, Schroder, Zwelfer, Sennertus,
Glauber, and others, that never conversed with the Society, whose Improvements
are not mentioned by Mr. Glanvill, though so great, that (considering what men
now write or do, is but by their Example, and after they had removed away all
difficulties) all that our Inventors have done, does not deserve to be
mentioned.

I shall add, that we owe not only the invention, and rude improvement of
Chemistry to the Disputative followers of Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, those
superstitious Porers upon the Writings of the Ancients, those ridiculo^s
Schoolmen, and Monks, and Physicians, but even the present credit and esteem
which it has in the world, and upon which it has so far advanc^d it self.
It was not Paracelsus with all his noise and Insolen^^, but the Dogmatical
Physicians, who observing the benefit thereof in Pharmacy gave it fame, and
introduced it into the Shops, and Cabinets of Princes, and the use of serious
and considerate Persons. Crato introduced it into the Emperors Court at
Vienna: Crato medicin. ep 137. Erast. adr. Para^e^s. part. 4 p. 285. and de
metal. p^ 8.
not a Chemical Oil, or Extract was prepared there, till he gav^ Encouragemen^
to the thing. So did Erastus, a greater enemy to Paracelsus than to Chemical
Physic: as appears by that saying which he uttered in the midst of his
Disputes and animosities against the Paracelsians. Equidem ne absoluta est Ars
nostra sine distillatoria. And had not Langius, Audernacus, Gesuerus, Senner^
de cons. chym. c. 2.
Fernelius, Zwingerus, Schegkius, Augenius, Minadous, Matthiolus, Libavius, and
many other Physicians of the Hippocratical way introduced the sober and honest
practice of it, and rendered it helpful to common life, perhaps our Virtuosi had
never meddled with it, at least not have been able to give it any esteem in the
world. But now that the Galenists and Aristoteleans, (as they are commonly
called) have refined it from its dross, and cast of^ the Chrysopoietick and
delusory designs, and magical intermixtures, and Rosicrucian vapors and
superstitions, all which they effected; and gave Mr. Glanvill the opportunity
of this Cant, with which I conclude this discourse.

Mr. Glanvill, p. 1^.
I confess, Sir, that among the Egyptians, and Arabians, and Paracelsians, and
some other Moderns, Chemistry was very fantastic, and unintelligible, and
delusive: and the boasts, vanity, and cantings of those Spagyrists brought a
Scandal upon the Art, Perhaps not s^ delusory as Mr. Glanvill thinks: but I am
sure the projects some go upon are delusory, have much of the Rosicrui^n humor
in them: and the design of introducing a ^ensible Philosophy is the pretense of
C^ollius, and of the Rosicrusive Order.
and exposed it to suspicion and contempt. But its late Cultivators, and
particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY have refined it from its dross, and made it
honest, sober, and intelligible, an excellent Interpreter to Philosophy, and
help to common life. For they have laid aside the Chrysopoi^tick, and delusory
designs, and vain transmutations, and Rosicrucian vapors, Magical Charms and
superstitious suggestions, and formed it into an instrument to know the Depths
and Efficacies of Nature. -- All this without dispute the Society has done;
and without disputing. And hereupon I do agree with our Virtuoso, that they
have no small advantage above the old Philosophers of the N^tional way.

Of Anatomical Improvements.
WE have another advantage above the Ancients in the study, Plus u^tra, p. 12.
use, and vast Improvements of Anatomy, which we find as needful to be known
among us, as it is wonderful 'twas known so little among the Ancients, whom a
fond Superstition deterred from dissections. For the Anatomising the bodies of
men was counted barbarous and inhumane in elder Times: And I observe from a
learned man of our own, that the Romans held it unlawful to look on the
Entrails. And Tertullian severely censures an inquisitive Physician of his time
for this practice, saying, That he hated man, that he might know him. Yea, one
of the Popes ( I take it 'twas Boniface 8.) threatens to excommunicate those
that should do any thing of this then-abominable nature. And Democritus was
fain to excuse his dissection of Beasts, even to the great Hippocrates. Nor
does it appear by any thing extant in the writings of Galen, that that other
Father of Physicians ever made any Anatomy of humane bodies. Thus shy and
unacquainted was Antiquity with this excellent Art, which is one of the most
useful in humane life, and tends mightily to the eviscerating of Nature, and
disclosure of the Springs of its Motion.

I have set down without any interruption the words of this English Bravo and
Hector of our Modern Philosophers, that my Reader might come with a greater
expectation to the perusal of my Animadversions: so high a charge of ignorance
upon the Ancients, such useful discoveries of the Moderns render the former to
be contemptible fellows, and the latter a very beneficial and important party
in this Age. But if it do appear that the Moderns have not as yet convinced us
by their works and great performances in Physic, that the knowledge of these
new inventions is so necessary to Physicians, and so advantageous to mankind,
but that those which either slight or ignore their discoveries, acquire a
greater repute, are more employed and possessed of a more honorable and
gainful practice, and, in fine, do greater Cures in general, then our
Braggadochios; then is there no such reason for this Triumph of Mr. Glanvill,
as he imagines. The better to judge hereof, I desire all con^idering men to
look back upon the several Physicians, who have flourished in Greece, Rome and
Barbary, and to view the present state of Physic in Italy, Spain, and France,
and try his most severe judgment if it be possible for him to condemn that
Physic as imperfect and pitifully deficient, which gave that credit to
Hippocrates, Galen, Rhases, Avicenne, Fernelius, Lacuna, Mercatus, Vallesius,
Christophorus, and Thomas a Veiga, Claudinus, Massarius, Septalius,
Rondeletius, Hollerius, Ballonius, Rodericus a Castro, Fonseca, Saxonia,
Sennertus, Crato, Prosper Alpinus, Antonius Musa Basavola, Hofman, and many
others whom I shall not name; as indeed I name these without any order) which
they now ^njoy. Let him set his most ambitious thoughts on work, and see if he
can propose to his desires greater things then they attained unto, and
achieved. Let him employ all his envy, and yet condemn their Diagnosticks,
Prognostics, or that Secretorum Secretissimum, their method of curing, and
their Medicines. If there be little or no fault in these parts, it ^ignifies
not much what principles they went upon in Philosophy, nor whether they did
mistake or ignore some things in Anatomy, as long as they were not such as
hindered a Physician from the obtaining of that end which is designed by his
Art: And as to the improvement of the Therapeutick part of Physic, by new
Medicaments, or new and more pleasant preparations of old Medicaments, if they
be no more efficacious then the former, we pay to the Inventors those
acknowledgements, which we do to the introducers of new garbs and fashions of
clothes, the best contrivances whereof, howsoever they may excel in
convenience, cannot be endeared unto us by the representations of being
necessary. I have named practical Physicians; I shall now instance in
Surgery: What man is there in this Age, that would not be content with the
repute of Ingrassias, Vesalius, Fallopius, Carcanus, Aquapendens, Spigelius,
Marchettis, Severinus Paraeus, Chalmetaeus, Pigraeus, Guillemeau, Hildanus,
etc? or what man is there in this inquisitive Age, that any sober man would
compare with them, much less prefer before them? If the Posture of Physic be
such, and that the value we ought to place on every thing be to be regulated by
its subserviency and conduciveness to some end, (finis conciliat mediis
gratiam) it is easy to judge what certain esteem we are to put upon the modern
Improvements of Knowledge in order to Physic, and how far we may justly
censure the Ancients, and such as either slight or are ignorant of them. I
profess my self not to know what disease it is that the Virtuosi cure better,
or with more certainty then those that follow those other of the Dogmatical
way. If it were done, there would not want such as should cry such performances
up; besides the inter^st of the Novellists, the sense of their great Cu^es^
would gain them all the practice that is now in the hands of such as vary not
from the ancient Method, and Rules of that Art. I shall add, that I could
demonstrate by unden^able testimonies, and such as ar^ confirmed by modern
trials, that the introducing of new Medicines, either Chemical, or otherwise,
and the neglect of a diffused reading, has occasioned the dis-use and
ignorance of several Medicines for Consumptions, the Gout, Plague, and other
grievous diseases, which might be attempted with much more assurance, then is
to be placed upon the later Methods. To prosecute this point further, I shall
tell you, that Physicians hitherto looked with a great indifference upon the
Principles of natural Philosophy, whether they were true, or no; so that they
did but serve as convenient Memorials to regulate them in their practice, and
that they did guide them to their wished end with such certainty, as if they
were true. All disputes about Natural Philosophy that did not refer to
practice, they looked upon as Curiosities, going beyond their Art, and about
which they would not contend, so as that the Method of curing were not
undermined thereby. Upon this account they did allow of two sorts of Truth, the
one in Physic, the other in Natural Philosophy, and that what was such in one,
might not be such in the other. This President they derived from their great
Master, Hippocrates, who in his discourses sometimes proceeds upon the Doctrine
of the four Elements, as if that were true: Sometimes he goes upon the doctrine
of Atoms, as if he regulated his Cures thereby: sometimes he seems to favor
the T^nets of the Chemists; (...) 14 C^n^^^ning the ^e^ning o^ which pla^e see
E. ^^^us a^v P^rac. p. ^. page 96 and Con^ing. de H^rm^t. med. c. 1^ p 191.
and he cries out as Mr. Boil, and other Chemists cite him, Non calidum,
frigidum, humidum, siccum esse quod maximam vim agendi habet in corpore, verum
amarum, and falsum, and dulce, and acidum, etc. Sometimes he proceeds as it were
upon the principles of the old Methodists, and ascribes the origin of diseases
to the altering of the texture of the body, to the different conformation of
parts, the different configuration of pores, etc. This was the course that
Great Man took: he was willing to observe in all diseases the motions and the
course Nature took; to take those for ill signs and symptoms, which he found to
be such from that great Instructor; however (...), those ways whereby Nature
did usually terminate diseases, were the ways he thought they ought to be
terminated by; and he made that the scope to be aimed at in the curing of
diseases: those evacuations that had helped naturally to cure, he endeavored
to promote artificially, by such Medicines as Experience showed to be
serviceable to those ends, when administered at due times and seasons. In short,
he made himself absolutely the slave of Nature, attended on her motions,
sometimes gently leading her on, as it were a Gentleman Usher; sometimes
following her, as a Page, never pretending to command her by his Medicines: So
cautious he was, that he would not adventure to do good unseasonably, and at
other hours then his Teacher directed him, lest he should do harm: he would
not adventure to shorten a disease, lest he should shorten his Patients life.
As if he had foreseen the truth of that observation, which Vallesius, and
others in these days experiment, Celerior quam pro morbi longitudine curatio,
Consultius esse nullus ^escit tempore paulo lo^giore and tu^o ^urari, quam
paulo breviore cum cert^ vitae periculo sanari. Erastus disput. de p^opriet.
med. c. 65. sub finem.
detrahens plus virium quam pro morbi ratione facit in tempore curandos ante
tempus mori. Agreeable to this Method of Hippocrates, was that counsel which
Dr. Bathurst (of Blackfriars) gave me, when I first seriously set my self to
study and observe his practice in Physic, viz. Nunquam ille Medicus magnus
erit, quisquis patitur sese principiis Philosophicis alligari atque constringi.
It is impossible for any person to be a great Physician, who ties up himself to
one sort of Natural Philosophy, as if it were really true and certain: the
operation of Medicaments is oftentimes such as answers not the Principles of
any Philosophy, and the digestions of Nature are so different from those of
Chemistry, her fires, her solvents, her filters, her furnaces and vess^ls, her
mixtures and degrees of heat so discrepant, that there is no arguing from the
one to the other: nor is there any thing to be relied upon in Physic, but an
exact knowledge of medicinal Phisiology (founded upon observation, not
principles) semeiotics, method of curing, and tried, (not excogitated, not
commanding) medicines: where this course fails (as sometimes it will) we then
try uncertain Medicines, rather then abandon the Patient to those Prognostics,
which are seldom so fatal as to destroy all hope; and where Skill is at a loss,
we frequently behold Chance to be successful. And this last is the Mystress of
our Reforming Physicians, it is under her conduct that they will enrich our
Therapeutick part of Medicine, and alter our Method. I shall not enlarge further
hereupon, being content to have showed what esteem Physicians have had
Philosophy in, and how they have had as little regard to the truth of their
principles in natural Philosophy, as a man ought to have to the hand of a Dial,
or which points out the way to any place: It is not requisite that it be a real
hand, whatever men call it; nor would we endure the impertinencies of any that
should go about to persuade us out of our way, because they that called that an
hand, were mistaken: In sum, so the way be good and certain, I am content to be
one of those whom the Italian Proverb commends, for going that way which the
Mules go. Ito qua Muli eunt. In this opinion I have amongst late Writers the
learned Hofman, Instit. med l. 2 c. ^ sect. 11, 1, etc. and Ad a^^ed. c 1.
whose words are these, Quae enim necessitas est Medicum semper loqui cum
Physico, siquidem usus, a quo pendet ars nostra, aliud velit, vel certe
permittat? Quid enim ibi VERITAS est, hic UTILITAS est.

Nor will it be amiss to propose the Judgment of the learned Practitioner
Ioannes Antonides Vander Linden, which he passed not long before his death at
Leiden A.D. 1659 after a mature consideration of all the new speculations in
Natural Philosophy, Jo Ant. Vander Linden de circuitu sanguin. exercita. sub
finem.
which this last Age had produced and acquainted him with. Physici ab
imaginariis incipiunt, per ratiocinia pergunt, and in frivola desinunt.
Cordatos obtestor, an apud se non (...)? Ad quid igitur Physica, ut nunc
constituta est, Medico? Etiam quae nunc docetur optima ( praeter quod
Principiis nitatur non necessariis, and ob id certa non sit) quid ad medendum,
si scitur, utile; aut, si nescitur, noxii confert? Etiam, si extaret, quae
absolute certis principiis and perfectis regulis constaret, tamen Medicinae non
esset, nisi Institoria, non Institutoria. Institoria, inquam; nam id Medicis
est Physica, quod Fabris omne genus taberna mercium Novicarum. Instituriam
Medicin^ qui volunt, nae illi sciunt, quid velit detritissimum, ubi desinit
Physicus, ibi incipit Medicus. Medicina non habet opus aliena; nedum a Physicis
ficta and emendicata principia: habet sua, and certa, and ausa stare contra
omnem dubitationis impetum. Qua fiducia concludo: Physica hodierna optima
Medicinae parum aut nihil utilis est. Qui habet aures ad audiendum audiat,
mentemque sanam in corpore sano habeat. Saltem vos, vos iterum alloquor (...),
sapite; and ab ea quae Medicinae larva se tegit, Physica cavete; and hoc agite,
ut quam aliquando salutis humanae praesidem Artem in bona conscientia vultis
facere, eam ante cum certo fructu regia via velitis discere.

Upon this account I often laugh at our modern Virtuosi, when they dilate
themselves with a great deal of ostentation and confidence, about the qualities
and correctives of Opium, whether it be hot or cold? which controversy how
great soever, has no influence upon practice, because both agree pretty well
in the cases in which it is to be used, and many of the modern preparations and
corrections are foolish, and make it worse; And as to that Laudanum of Helmonts
amongst the Virtuosi; I have seen much more simple preparations stupifie less,
and produce greater Cures, then that did when made by the hands of one of the
Society, and given by another of it: whilst the best of Modern Chemists,
Zwelfer; Pharmacop. August in conf. Archigenis.
bestows this commendation upon that old medicine of Archigenes and Mesues --
Erit sic rite praeparata opiata, quae merito Laudani opiati, multarumque
aliarum Opiatarum vi^^s supplere poss^^. I could enlarge here, but that Mr.
Gla^vill will think I have forgot him.

Having made this general Apology for Physicians, which is sufficient to
justify them, both as to their care of their Pati^nts, and their skill; I
shall come to apply my discourse particularly to Mr. Glanvill. It is hard to
reconcile the necessity of Anatomy, with the Mosaical Constitutions, it seeming
strange that God should make it so unclean a thing for any one to touch a d^ad
body, and yet the knowledge of Sceletons should be so necessary. To supply
this, the Jewish Rabbis say, that God Almighty did reveal unto Moses the
accurate knowledge of Anatomy: and when we consider how they embalmed their
dead, and that embalming does infer a knowledge of dissection, and of the
Entrails; when we observe (out of Buxtor^s Synagoga) that artifice with which
the Jews kill all Animals, thereby to let out the blood exactly: when we
conside^ that the multiplicity of accidents in war, or otherwise, would render
the knowledge of the inward and outward parts nec^ssary to them, and experience
acquaint them with their nature (not to mention some Jewish relations about the
Vid. Rio^an. Anthr^pogr^ph. l. 1. c. 3.
opening of the Os pubis and the partus Caesareus) I am apt to think that the
ancient Jews were not ignorant of useful Ana^omy, nor so superstitious as
totally to avoid the practice of it; nor dar^ I say (with our Virtuoso) such
Superstition is fond, which is ascribed to God as its immediate Author.

As for the Gre^ks, the study of Anatomy was very ancient amongst t^em, since
it is attributed to Al^maeon, that ancient Physici^n (a Scholar of Pythagoras)
as the first Author of it, if we will believe Chalcidius upon the Timaeus of
Plato. From him it was derived to posterity by tradition and manual operation,
children being bred up unto it, such as were to be Physicians, as also
Philosophers. So Democritus, Hippocrates, and many others came to be acquainted
with it. But none of the Ancients, Hi^r^n. Mercurialis Var. L^ct. l. 1. c. 1 c.
until the time of Diocles Garystius, did write any thing about it: which
notwithstanding, that Science seems to have been in never the worse condition,
The^. Anatomica^ ^^^ra^i^ns of the Youth were calle^ (...), which Hosman th^nks
may be (...) a me^ Exercitia Ana^omica. A^^ing^ Didiceram enim ^x ^^us operis
(apud Galerum) l. 2. init^o ha^ (...) ab ipso artis incuna^u^ (...)
Asclepiade^, alto (...) ad factitandam mediciram. Sciebam etiam ali^nde, long
alium ^u^ss^ tum Anatomiae rationem, q^am nunc ^st^ s^oifim inquam fuiss^
traditam histo^^a^ pa^t^^ mipsarum, s^mperq fultam oculari inspec^i^ne. V^d^
H^fman Va^. L^ct. l. 2. c. 13. The same (...) V^salius in his Preface to
Charles V.
as Mercurialis thinks. Anatom^^ etsi a nullo veterum usque ad Dioclis aetatem
Scriptis mandatam referat Galen. in 2. de anat. admin. melius tamen sic
conservatam and amplificatam inde intelligere possumus, quod tunc homines a
primis annis Anatomen (ut caeteras arts,) non ex scriptis sed ex Parentum
sermonibus ipsaque exercitatione addiscebant; sicque melius ipsam comparantes,
non modo tenacius in animis servabant, verum etiam assiduis studiis augebant.
But to put this question more out of doubt, I shall appeal to Galen, who could
give a better account of what they did in the elder times then Mr. Glanvill. I
have not his Works by me; but Lacuna in his Epitome thus expresses him. ^
" Quod veteres nihil scripserint de consectionib^s administrandis, vertendum
illis vitio non est: quandoquidem erat iis tum frequens tamque in communi usu
ipsa Anatome, ut domi apud Parents etiam ab ipsa pueritia, in illa omnes olim
exercerentur. Postea vero tam praeclaro illo exercitio intermisso, opus certe
nobis fuit Commentariis, quae Anatomicam disciplinam Chirurgicae medendi
rationi maxim necessariam, integram conservarent. That Aristotle did dissect
the bodies of men is manifest out of his Hist. Anim. l. 3. where he informs us
how he made an inquiry into the nature and series of the veins in humane
bodies: ^
and as to his anatomizing of other creatures, beasts, birds, fishes, insects,
(...) every pass^ge in (...) Ana^omy: (...) ha^h many gr^ss (...) Harvey^ (...)
s^ man^ as man ex^^se (...)?
(and how he had some thousands employed under him to that purpose) no man can
doubt who reads Riolanus and Pliny l. 8. c. 18. How accurate he was (however
his brevity does not represent every circumstance, nor fully describe things)
we may judge by this that there are few of the new inventions, but are ascribed
unto him; and Dr. Harvey is known commonly to have said, D^. Pearson in Dedic.
Laertii ad Carol. II.
Nihil fere unquam in ipsis Naturae penetralibus invenisse se, quin cum
Aristotelem suum pensiculatius evolveret idem ab illo, aut explicatum, aut
saltem cognitum reperiret. After Diocles, I find these other reckoned as
notable Anatomists by Volcherus, Coiter, viz. Polybius, Erasistratus,
Callistus, all Scholars of Aristotle: Vol. Coiter intro. in anat. c. 6 Galen in
his Coment upon H^ppoc^ates de na^. hum. reckons up abo^e 10 eminent Anatomists
of the ancien^s. Vide Ri^lan. Anthrop^g^.
And after them Marinus, and Lycus, the Master of Galen, and Satyrus, and
Pelops, and Numesianus, besides several others at Alexandria all which Galen
went to converse with. But I must not pass by Herophilus without an especial
Character, who did not only correct the mistakes in Anatomy which his Master
Praxagoras fell into, but by his industry and skill acquired a repute so great,
that his name is equal to the most famous that ever were before, or since his
time: This great man is preferred by Vesalius before Galen: And it was an usual
saying of Fallopius, that any man might as easily contradict the Gospel, as
contradict Herophilus in Anatomy. Mae^ius sundam med. c. 1. p. 10. and V^ssius
de (...). 1. ^^ct. 2.
Contradicere Herophilo in Anatomicis est contradicere Evangelio. This man is
that inquisitive Physician, of whom Mr. Glanvill speaks, and who is blamed by
Tertullian not for dissecting humane bodies, but for dissecting them alive,
which he terms Butchery. Because, I think Mr. Glanvill never read him, and
because I will make it evident that one of the Ancients did dissect more bodies
of men, then all the Society put together, and that with an extraordinary
caution. I shall set down the words of Tertullian, and they are these,
Tert^lli^n. de an^ma^ c 1^. (...)
-- Herophilus ille Medicus aut Lanius, qui sexcentos ^execuit ut naturam
scrutaretur, qui hominem odiit ut nosset, nescio an omnia ejus interna liquido
explorarit; ipsa morte mutante q quaevixerant, and morte non simplici, sed ipsa
inter artificia exectionis errante. Upon which passage, Philip le prieur notes
thus, Anatemia quae and celebris magnoque in precio fuit apud Ethnicos, a
veteribus Christianis odio quam maximo afficiebatur. Quamvis hic dictum Lanium
Herophilum constet, quod vivos homines dissecaret. Id autem facere solitos
Erasistratum, Dioclem, and Herophilum docet Claudius Galennus 8. de plac. and
2. anatom. administr. Agreeable to of Tertullian, C^lsu^ 1. in picoemio.
is that passage of Cornelius Celsus in his Preface. Necessarium ergo esse
incidere corpora mortuorum, eorumque viscera atque intestina scrutari, longeque
optime fecisse Herophilum and Erasistratum, qui nocentes homines a regibus ex
carcere acceptos, vivos inciderint, considerarintque etiam Spiritu remanente,
ea quae Natura clausisset, eorumque posituram, colorem, figuram, magnitudinem,
ordinem, duriciem, molliciem, laevorem, contactum: processus deinde singu orum
and recessus, and sive quid inseritur a teri, sive quid partem a terius in s^
recipit. This Herophi us was undoubtedly a person of vast parts, great earning
and curiosity. He brought the Hippocratica Physic to its height and
perfection, completing the Anatomica part, and illustrating the Doctrine of
the Pulses. His followers had a Schoo not far from Laodicea, as Strabo says,
wherein it is not to be doubted but that Anatomy was taught, and so in that
other School of Erasistratus at Smyrna. (...) Geog^aph. in fine lib 12. citant^
Mercuriale Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 12.
(...) From whence it is clear, that in the Reign of Augustus Caesar (when
Strabo lived) Anatomy in the East was in great request, and that the Physicians
and followers of Herophilus had a great Academy betwixt Laodicea and Carura.
And that before those times at Smyrna, Erasistratus that was a great Dissector
of men (even alive) had another Academy of his followers: V^salius de ^ad.
Chin^^, p. 16^.
whose works though they are lost, yet Vesalius says, that one may conjecture
out of the passages in Galen that relate to them, that they were very accurate
Anatomists. -- Veteribus dissectionum proceribus, quos ex Galeni libris in
corporum anatome sedulo versatus esse nobis persuasum est. -- Not much unlike
this character o^ Vesalius is that Elogy which Veslingius bestows upon the
Ancients in an Epistle of his to C. Hof,+man, enquiring whether the venae
lacteae of Asellius were a part of the porta vena known so long ago? Sic
habeas, incertum mihi esse quid primi illi qui ante Dioclis Carystii aevum
privatis a^^^ectionibus in corporis humani parts inquirebant hic viderint, cum
nihil eorum quae cognorant scriptis divulgarint. Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona
multi, ait Lyricus: and proculdubio ante Herophilum eximii, and in hoc
dissectionum studio exercitatissimi, quos ob monumentorum defectum longa nocte
oblivio premit. Veslingius Ep. 20. edit. per Bartholin.

I shall conclude this discourse of Herophilus, with an observation about the
time when he lived; which was not in the days of Tertullian, though Mr.
Glanvill represents them as Contemporaries: but many Centuries before, in the
time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, and he is famed for his raillery upon Diodorus
Cronus, who denied there was any motion, yet had his shoulder dislocated. See
Conring. de medic. Hermet. c. 9. p. 83. Some make him more ancient, but none
ever brought him so low as our Virtuoso. Vide Voss. de Philos. c. 11, Ionsium
de Script. Philos. l. 1. c. 15.

As to the Romans, and their skill in Anatomy, I cannot say much of it, except
it be to their disparagement. They were a military sort of people, rough-hewen,
and thought all that below their studies or serious thoughts which our
Experimental Philosophers boast of, and recommend unto our care with so much
vanity. All the Mechanic, I had almost said the Liberal Sciences, they thought
to be excellent qualifications in their slaves, not in themselves: And they who
gave Laws to all the world, scorned to be instructed by their vassals, and a
conquered Nation. Upon this account, not only in the time of Tully, but
afterward to the days of Quintilian and Tacitus, (I know not which writ the
Book De Oratoribus) it is evident, that however many Gentlemen did inform
themselves of the several parts of ingenious Learning, yet did that haughty
people behold those persons with indignation, and some thoughts of hatred, in
so much as that those who were best versed in it, pretended ignorance and scorn
of it. Things being in this condition, and the Romans having no other
Physicians then their Slaves, it is not to be wondered if they were not eminent
for Anatomy. Cato had banished the Physicians long ago, and after-ages gave
them little encouragement. I do not at present remember any Physician, whose
name has any thing of the Roman till Cornelius Celsus, and after him Vectius
Valens. Pliny says, that even to his time, in the reign of Titus Vespasian,
the Romans did not care to profess and practice Physic. Solam hanc artium
Graecorum nondum exercet Romana gravitas in tanto fructu: paucissimi Quiritum
attigere, and ipsi statim ad Graecos transfugae: imo vero autoritas aliter quam
Graece eam tractantibus, etiam apud imperitos expertesque linguae, non est.
Not. hist l. 29. c. 1. In the time of Augustus Caesar, his freed man Artorius
Musa, and his brother Euphorbus gave some credit to Physic, ^.
and afterward several eminent Greeks are said to have flourished; but whether
it were that the Romans were impatient to learn so much as was requisite (or
thought to be so) to make a man eminent in the Hippocratical and Herophilian
way; whether they thought it more becoming their grandeur, rather to learn
(with all the world) a new Method of Physic, then seem to have been so long as
it were brutish and ignorant in comparison of the Greeks; or whether that the
new principles and method were more agreeable to that Empirical way, During the
flourishing of the Roman Empire, the (...) P^^sick was principally pursued at
Al^xand^^a in E^^pt. There Herophilus and his Scholars (...) credit, and the
Empiricks and Methodists had their Acad^mies, and the Jatrosophistae^ were
endowed professors The repute of Alexandria ^eing such even in the days of
Valentinian^ that it was credit enough for any Physician to say he had been
bred there. Ammian. Ma^cell. lib. 22.
they had been accustomed unto (See Plin. not. hist. l. 26. c. 3.) and so more
easily received by the populace then that of Hippocrates made up of a Grecian
diet, and medicaments; whatever was the reason, I find that the Romans did
generally incline to that Sect of Physicians, called the Methodici, begun by
Asclepiades and Themison in the time of the Triumvirate, or Vectius Valens, and
completed by Thessalus in the time of Nero: This Sect seems to have had the
advantage over all other the Physicians amongst the Romans from the time of
Augustus, to the reign of Severus, which is near three hundred years. (...).
Pliny calls Themison, Summum authorem, and by that place in Iuvenal one would
guess him to have been a man of great notice and general practice in the days
he lived.

Morborum omne genus, quorum si nomine quaeras,
Promptius expediam quot amaverit Hippia moechos,
Quot Themison aegros autumno occiderit uno.
Thessalus, against whom Galen and Pliny inveigh, was certainly a man, not only
of great Eloquence, but also of extraordinary Learning and Judgment, as we may
guess by those parcels and fragments of that excellent man, which are all that
remains of him, and they preserved in the works of others. His Books de
Communitatibus and Syncriticis are pieces whose losses I much lament. The
Memory of his Tomb is not lost upon which he inscribed himself, (...); or, The
Conqueror of Physicians. His Letter to Nero had something of a gallant
confidence in it, which may become Heroes, and is justified in men of great
Learning. Cum novam sectam condiderim, and quae sola vera sit, propterea quod
qui ante me fuerunt omnes nihil utile prodiderunt, vel ad sanitatem ^uendam,
vel ad mor bos propulsandos --. The generality of his followers seem to have
been excellent Physicians, as Dionysius, Proculus, Archigenes, Soranus, Attalus
Iulianus, and others. I shall not insist upon a particular relation of their
tenets, Prosp Alpin. de medic. methodi^a.
which one may see excellently illustrated by Prosper Alpinus. This sect of
Physicians seems to have left impressions of its method and principles,
Quintilian being to describe Physic, renders an account of it agreeable to the
Methodists. In declam. 8. Gemini Languentes.
in all places where the Roman Empire swayed. They called Gallen^ when he put
himself forth in the world by the os^enta^ion of Anatomy and Philosophy,
Logiater: Logiatri autem nomen sui temporis medici Romae Galeno per c^ntemptum
imponeba^t; ut ita eum traducerent^ quasi non reipsa, nec usu, and ^xercitio
artis peritus ^ss^t: Sed ad loquacitatem duntaxat and disserendum de iis quae
ad a^tem per^inent comparatus. Ges^er. in Scholiis ad Cassium p. 57.
They placed little value upon the exact knowledge of Anatomy, being content
with a general skill therein, and enquiring no further than was necessary. They
knew that the Romans had formerly banished the Physicians (as Archagathus) from
amongst them, for using their Patients with much cruelty, cutting and burning
them; and understood the humor of the people so well, how they disliked the
dissections of humane ^odies, especially alive, and therefore they closed with
that popular prejudice, and turned it to their advantage; neither dissecting of
bodies, nor tormenting them with those odious or cruel methods of Cure, which
were practiced by the followers of Herophilus. Nor do I doubt that those
objections in Celsus against Anatomy, were put into his mouth by the
Methodists, as well as Empirics, viz. that all Anatomy of bodies was a nasty
performance; but to dissect the living, most barbarous and cruel: that as much
of Anatomy as would instruct one sufficiently, might be learned in a Camp,
where the Physician need not make wounds, but learn at once and practice Cures.
Hence it was that the study of Anatomy was so much out of request at Rome in
Galens time, that I think he mentions not one curious Anatomist there, though
he tell how Satyrus taught him at Pergamus, and Pelops at Smyrna, and
Numesianus at Corinth, and others. There were some that were excellent
Ostrologists at Alexandria. And I am apt to think, that even he durst not for
fear of public odium, dissect any living men there, because, as Celsus says,
most people held it to be cruelty, and perhaps would not have thought well of
him, who should have dissected any dead men. Whereupon he set up with Apes,
dissecting them, as being nearest to men in resemblance, Vesalius i^ ^is
Treatise de ^ad. Chinae shows how Ga^en dissected Apes, and was thereby led
into sundry mistakes But even such as did blame Galen were themselves faulty,
as Vesalius and Columbus; which app^ars by what they say about the kidneys;
which they describe out of brutes, not men, as Piccolomineus and Beverovicus
observe. Beverovic. de calculo, p 3 Read also Fallopius Obs^rvations
and imagining the fabric of their bodies to have as great an affinity with
the parts of men, as their shapes had; that this was the cause of many mistakes
in him, is certain; and demonstrated by Vesalius. But that he never made any
Anatomies of humane bodies, or considered any as they came in his way, Vesalius
in dedic. lib. de fabric. co^p. hum. ad ^arol V. Imper. In the same place he
calls Galen. d^ss^ctionis pref^ssorum facile prima^^^m.
is a calumny which might be refuted by sundry instances out of his Works, and
some thereof are to be seen in Riolanus Anthopogr. l. 1. c. 12.

Vesalius never raised his imputations to this height; all that he says of
this nature, is, Nobis modo ex renata dissectionis art, diligentique Galeni
librorum praelectione, and in plerisque locis eorundem non poenitenda
restitutione constat, nunquam ipfum nuper mortuum corpus humanum resecuisse. At
vero suis deceptum Simiis (licet ipsi arida, ac veluti ad ossium inspectionem
parata hominum cadavera occurrerint) crebro veteres Medicos, qui hominum
consectionibus se exercuerant, immerito arguere. Nay, it is evident out of
Galen, Galen. l. 3. sec. genesis c. 2.
that the Roman Physicians which were in the Army of Antoninus did dissect the
Germans that were killed by him in battle. As for that Learned man of our own,
out of whom he tells us, That the Romans held it unlawful to look on the
Entrails: I know not who it should be. Mr. Boil indeed does say, that in
Galens time it was thought little less then irreligious, if not barbarous, to
mangle the bodies of men: which how far it is true, one may guess out of what I
have said; But that Honorable Person speaks in such a manner as gives us
little of exception; Mr. Glanvill is so peremptory, that I wonder that he did
not deny, that the Romans did not use any Augury from the inspection of the
bowels, heart, and liver of beasts; or that they did not eat the Livers of
Geese, and other Guts of several Animals. This is so well known to every
Schoolboy that has read Martial, or Horace, or Virgil, that I need not speak
of it. Had the Romans held it so unlawful a thing to behold the Entrails of
Animals, I wonder they gave the name of Visceratio to those distributions of
flesh which they publicly used: to such unlawful customs, Virgil would not
have alluded, when he brings in Dido her self, -- Pecudumque reclusis
Pectoribus inhians, spirantia consulit exta. Aeneid. l. 4. v. 64. and Georgic.
l. 1. v. 484.
Tristibus aut Extis fibrae apparere minaces.


Nay, they carried the bodies of beasts open with their Entrails displayed to
be sold publicly, as Mart. shows l. 6. ep. 64.

Ne valeam, si non multo sapit altius i^tud,
Quod cum panticibus laxis, and cum pede grandi
Et rubro palmone vetus, nasisque timendum,
Omnia crudelis Lanius, per compita portat.
But perhaps he will confine his discourse to the Entrails of men, why then did
not he speak more plainly? And even in this case, that some superstitious
persons might hold it impious and unlawful is possible^ and that others out of
enmity to the Anatomical Physicians, (as Pliny l. 28. c. 1.) Aspici humana exta
nefas habetur, might call it so, (...) in (...) relates only ^o Augu^y, that
i^ was not lawful am^ngst men t^ make use of humane bodies, and s^arch their
^owe^s to t^ose ^nds: this was nefas: but nothing ^l^e.
I deny not. But what Law was there against it? How comes it to pass, that
Celsus in his debate about the lawfulness of Anatomizing even living bodies,
says (or makes others to say) that it is only cruel, or nasty and abominable;
not impiety or a breach of Religion? Besides, how could any Physician in those
days have dressed such wounds in which their Entrails either gushed out, or
were hurt, in case it had been unlawful to look upon them? It is manifest that
Celsus says, a prudent Physician may from such accidents learn Anatomy; Ita
sedem, positum, ordinem, and figuram, similiaque alia cognoscere prudentem
medicum, and advises him to improve the occasion: And he was a Person learned
not only in the Physic, but Civil Laws of his Country.

To convince our Virtuoso a little more, out of Schoolbooks, in which he ought
to be conversant. Is there not a controversy agitated in Seneca, Controvers.
l.x. contr. 6. about Parrhasius the Painter? how he brought an old Olynthian,
and dissected him alive, thereby to draw the picture of Prometheus with a
vulture preying upon his Liver! Is it not agitated pro and Con, by Romans and
Grecians? Is there any one that says it was unlawful for him to behold the
Entrails? Nay, is it not said in the midst of Rome, that it was always LAWFUL?
In argumentis dixit, quantum semper Artibus LICUISSET, Medicos ut vim ignoratam
morbi cognoscerent, viscera rescidisse HODIE cadaverum artus rescindi, ut
nervorum articulorumque positio cognosci possit. In Quintilian is there not a
Declamation Declam. 8. ( Gemini languentes) in which the Mother accuses the
Father for permitting the Physician to dissect one of the sick twins, thereby
to discover the disease of the other! Does not the Mother there bid him dissect
the bowels of the dead youth? Differ saltem, pater, hanc calamitatem: quicquid
ex filio facis, facies ex cadavere. Si deprehendi potest languor dum occidit,
facilius cum occiderit. Does she not describe the cruelty of that Anatomy very
tragicaliy? Passus est miser discurrentem per omnia reserati pectoris improbum
vagae artis errorem. Contentum fuisse medicum toto homine discurrentem primo
putatis aspectu? Egesta saepe vitalia, pertractata, diducta sunt: fecerunt
manus plura, quam ferrum. Stat juxta medicum pater apertis visceribus in^ians,
stillantem animae sedem cruentis manibus agitantem: ne festinet, hortatur;
jubet altius diligentiusque scrutari: Interrogat, dubitat, contendit, affirmat,
and accepit d^ filii morte rationem -- Inter haec reficiebatur miser haustibus,
detinebatur alloquiis, comprimebatur residuus cruor, claudebantur aperta
vitalia. Nemo unquam tam nova pertulit commenta fevitiae, tanquam san^retur
occifus est -- Vos tunc putatis illius tantum languoris medicum quaesiisse
causas? quaesivit quicquid nesciebat, and usus occasion rarissima in omnem
voluit proficere novitatem. After this she tells in what manner she gathered up
his bowels, and by closing up his Corpse fitted him for the Funeral. Corpus quod
medicus, quod reliquerat pater, hoc sinu misera collegi, ac vacuum pectus
frigidis abjectisque visceribus rursus implevi, sparsos artus amplexibus junxi,
membra diducta composui. If any one can imagine, that this great Orator in so
solemn a Declamation would have omitted so important an objection as the
unlawfulness and impiety of beholding the entrails of the youth, certainly he
thinks too meanly of the judgment of Quintilian, and too well of his own. It
appears out of that Oration, that they had seldom opportunities of dissecting
men alive, and therefore he calls it rarissimam occasionem. And that they were
not ignorant of Anatomy and the inward fabric of humane bodies, it is evident
furher out of that Oration, where the Mother says the Physicians must needs
already have learned that part of their Art. Sufficit quod aliquando jam facta
ex unius hominis inspectione, How could they behold the Ludi Circenses, the
Gladiators fighting in the Theater, and at the tombs of the deceased; or those
sad spectacles described by Martial? I profess I think it as gross a mi^take to
say they held it unlawful to behold the ent^^ils of men, as to deny the Augury
by beasts.
ad totius intellectum naturae medicina pr^fecit. Quid allaturus huic aegroto
es, quod non tot seculorum, tot languentium experimenta deprehenderint?

As for what Mr. Glanvill says about Democritus, that he was fain to excuse
himself to Hippocrates for dissecting of beas^s; this is as tr^e as all the
rest. Never was there a fitter second for Mr. Sprat, then Mr. Glanvill. They do
not cite, but invent stories, and that with so much confidence, that a man must
be assured by his own reading, before he can suspect theirs. That Hippocrates
was a diligent Anatomist, is a thing every one must confess who either knows
the manner of their education then, or has looked into his Anatomical books de
locis in homine, de fracturis, and sundry other pieces of his. That he not only
contemplated the seat and action of parts in the dead, but living, appears by
this passage, De Articulis sect 43. where he speaks about the setting of the
Sp^ondyles of the back; Page 800. ^om. 2. edit. Vander Linden.
Itaque si tale contingat, palam est quod neque concutiendo, neque alio quodam
modo reponi possit, nisi qui dissecto homine and manu in ventrem injecta,
inquisitionem faciat, ut ex interna part ad externam manu retrudat: atque haec
in mortuo quidem facere possent, in vivo autem non ita. But I shall give an
account of the Anatomy of Hippocrates, in the words of the learned Riolanus
Anthropograph. l. 1. c. 2. Testatur Galenus Comment. in lib. 3. de artic.
Hippocratem potissimum rationi corporum incidendorum sedulam operam dedisse,
cum Anatomen mirum in modum ad artem medicam confer sciret, quod nunc aperte
docet cum spinae naturam intelligi voluit, quam Empirici non secus atque
caeterarum partium contemplationem inutilem esse dicunt. Ipsemet Hippocrates
lib. 3. de artic. Commentarios de venis and arteriis pollicetur, quos nunquam
videre potuit Galenus. Praeterea librum de dissectione conscripsit, quem
imperfectum habemus. Ipsemet Galenus libros de Anatome, secundum Hippocratis
doctrinam composuerat, quorum deploranda est jactura. Hippocrates canes
dissecuit ut pulmones observaret. lib. de cord. Ibidem monet quod dissectio
accurata hujus partis non est opus cujusvis, sed periti artificis, and appellat
istud opus Chirurgian. l. 6. Epidem, scribit hominem habere cola intestina cani
similia. Idem lib. de intern. affect. testatur se in bove, in cane, and sue,
quod impedibus dissectis tubercula in pulmone aqua referta invenisse, unde
natus fuerat hydrops thoracis. Idem testatur se ex hominis ossibus ossa
descripsisse: primus spinae admirabilem figuram descripsit: primus vesiculas
seminarias, earumque situm, omenti usum, valvulas venarum, ortum nervorum,
lienis actionem, uteri conformationem. Atque ut extaret aliquod monumentum
aeternum and immutabile suae diligentiae, laborisque in hoc studio exantlati,
sceletum aere fabricatum Apollini Delphico consecravit: ut Author est Pausanias
lib. 10. And is it credible that ever Democritus should be forced to excuse
himself to Hippocrates for cutting up of Animals, as if it were so uncouth and
strange to him? I cannot answer for the Intellectuals of our Virtuoso, but no
man of an higher capacity can believe it. The pleasantest part of this
Narrative is, that there appears no such thing upon record. First of all the
story of Democritus, how Hippocrates came and found him busy in dissecting of
Animals, is called in question by Cortesius in Miscellaneis, as Riolanus tells
me. And indeed I cannot persuade my self that those Letters in the end of
Hippocrates works are genuine. But to pass by this exception. All that
Hippocrates writes in his second Letter to Damagetus amounts to this. That at
the request of the people of Abdera, he came to cure Democritus of his supposed
madness, that being conducted to his house, he found him sitting under a
Plantanus tree in a garb not much differing from a madman, and postures that
had something of the same humor: Ipse Democritus sub ampla and humillima
plantano sedebat, in vest crassa citra humeros desinente, solus, discalceatus,
super lapidea sede, valde pallidus ac macilentus, promissa barba -- Ipse vero
cum inculto ornatu, super genibus, librum habebat, sed and alii quidam ex
utraque part adjacebant. Accumulata etiam erant Animalia multa per totum
resecta. Et ipse quidem aliquando concitate incumbens scribebat, aliquando
quiescebat, diu mu^tumque se continens, and in seipso meditans. Deinde non
long post, his peractis, exurgens deambulabat, and viscera animalium
inspiciebat, and depositis ipsis digressus, rursus desidebat. -- When
Hippocrates approached near him, he was busy writing, and even then his
deportment had something odd and Enthusiastical in it. (...) -- (...). After
the first complements (which are great and not usual in those days) Hippocrates
demanded of him what he was writing? He replied about madness: and what about
that, said the great Physician? To which he answers again ^hus. (...). Quid
enim, inquit, aliud quam quid sit, and quomodo in hominibus generetur, and
quomodo allevetur. Nam animalia haec, quae vides, inquit, hujus gratia reseco,
non quod odio habeam opera Dei, sed bilis naturam ac sedem quaerens. How much
this and the whole passage of that Enterview makes for Mr. Glanvill's purpose,
I see not. Hippocrates does not blame him for anatomizing of animals, nor is
surprised at the novelty, nor troubled at the impiety of the action. Democritus
knowing what apprehension the people had of him, and fearing left the garb and
posture he was in might confirm to Hippocrates, the truth of the report tells
him how he employed his thoughts, and that the Animals that lay there upon the
ground, were not slaughtered by him in a frantic rage, out of hatred to the
creatures of God; but cut up Anatomically by him, thereby to discover the seat
and nature of the gall, and the effects it had upon Maniacks. Whereupon
Hippocrates was wonderfully pleased with the testimony he gave of the soundness
of his judgment, and after some other prudential discourses, departed,
satisfied about the good condition of his Patient. But if Democritus were not
out of his Wits, I believe Mr. Glanvill was to allege such an impertinent
story. But idle persons, that would upon easy terms acquire the repute of
Learning, by citing quotations, are often thus imposed upon, and liable to
mistakes. And perhaps there may be some person in the world that I know not of,
who may have abused our Virtuoso in this case: but He should have minded the
Text better.

What Pope Boniface the Eighth did, I know not. But I am apt to suspect a
person that has told me so many untruths. The place in the Canon Law, which I
am apt to believe Mr. Glanvill never saw: An^hiop^g^. l 1. c. 12.
It is lib. 3. Extravag. titulo de sepultura. And Riolanus, whom I had rather
credit, gives this account of it; Inter Christianos Papa Bonifacius octavus
barbarum and inhumanum judicavit, peregre mortuorum corpora exenterare,
carnibusque spoliare, ut ossa lecta and tersa in locum sepulturae, quem vivi
delegerant, commode perferri possent. It seems that Pope thought it an inhumane
and barbarous thing not to dissect ^^dies for information sake; but to embowel
them, and reduce them into Sceletons, and so to carry their bones to distant
places to be buried according to the desire of the deceased. I am apt to think
this Canon was never applied to Anatomy, and perhaps there is nothing of
Excommunication in it, since Riolanus does not mention it.

As for the gross errors in Anatomy which Galen is charged with, I know not
one that incommodates a man in point of Practice, but that the Metbod he took
(however founded on false principles) was secure and good. Upon which it
happened that all his followers implicitly submitted to his Anatomical
relations without further Enquiry, Hinc [Galeno] universi fid^m dedere, ut
nullus repertus sit medicus, qui in Galeni Anatomicis ^oluminibus vel
levissimum quidem lapsum dep^eh^nsum es^e^ mu t^que minus deprehendi posse
censuerint. Vesalius in dedic. lib. de Fabric hum.
and taught his Errors ^or truths: And perhaps a certain vanity seized Galen
to contradict the famous Herophilus out of dissected Apes, thereby to raise his
own credit. However it was, from him arose most of the mistakes in Anatomy,
that were translated to the Moors, and from them to our Ancestors. The Moors
are said by their Religion, to forbid the meddling with dead bodies: Which
Assertion, how true it is, I know not, because that Avicenne and Albucasis
commend the study of Anatomy, as necessary in a peculiar manner to Surgeons.
They practiced sundry Chirurgical operations in Cauteries, and opening
Arteries, which seemed to require an Experimental skill in dissections; and
which were their own inventions. In fine, Averroes pleads not any scruples of
Religion for his ignorance in Anatomy, but laments the Civil Wars of the Moors,
which hindered him from inquiring by dissection into those controversies betwixt
Galen and Aristotle, which he had occasion to debate. Yet did Averroes at all
adventures, assert the credit of Aristotle against Galen, out of an emulation
against Avicenne who was a Galenist. From these two great men amongst the
Moors, as the knowledge of Physic and Philosophy, happened to be imparted to
the barbarous Christians of the West, so was there a feud propagated betwixt
the Philosophers, and the Physicians; and the contr^versies were the more
intricate, because the Sciences had not been so well translated out of Greek
into Arabic, as was requisite; and they were worse put into Latin. After the
taking of Constantinople by the Turks, when some learn^^ men had fled thence
into Italy, they began to impart unto the world new books, to acquaint the West
with the Greek tongue, and with the Greek Works of Hippocrates, Aristotle, and
Galen; and thereby multiplied many Controversies in the practice of Physic,
about Phlebotomy, and Purging, and the like; especially about bleeding in a
Plurisy, on which side it should be done. The contention was fierce, and some
proofs being fetched out of Anatomy, some persons were excited to enquire into
humane bodies dissection, thereby to determine this controversy, and also the
others betwixt Aristotle, Galen, and others. Amongst these Vesalius was (I had
almost said) the first and principal, and by his indefatigabl^ pains prevented
much the industry of others. After him Fallopius and Eustachius were the most
remarkable; though many others came in with their little inventions to make up
the cry, and failed not to supply the inutility of their discoveries with
excessive clamor. What Apologies were made for Galen by Sylvius, and others,
would be tedious to relate; they being so ridiculous, Ye^ neither are all the
ex^eptions made by Vesalius against Galen allowable. Galenum aliquando in
verbis potius quam in lententus ca^pit, aliquando mutilum (quod facere
debuerat) minime excusat. ac saepe indignius, quam Anatomieum, Philosophum, ac
Medicum tam insignem deceret, ca^pit at accusat. Fallopius observat. ana^om. p
3.
and repugnant to common sense, that nothing could stop the growing glory of
Vesalius and his followers. The issue of all was, that as Hippocrates lost no
credit by an ingenious confession of his mistake about the Sutures in the head
of Autonomus; small errors being not observable in great Authors: So Galen
still retained a great repute in the world, his other Works having advanced him
above the effects of petty calumnies, or defaults. And the great Guinterus
Andemacus, a competent Judge of old and new discoveries in Physic and Anatomy,
gives this censure upon those curious Disquisitions: Devet. and nova med
comment. 8. dial. 5 p. 261.
Multa in rerum natura extant, quorum notitia non quidem Medicum aptiorem
facit, sed medicinae tantum profectum reddit, Sic nolli ob acc^ratam illam, ne
dicam curiosam nimis, partium corporis perscrutationem Medici excellentiores,
sed ob curationes dextre sentatas absolutasque censentur. Ideo etiam
Hippocrates, Galenus, Erasistratus, and plures id genus alii, tantum ex rerum
natura and corporis humani fabricatione scrutari voluerunt, quantum ad
medicinam probe exercendam ex usu esse putarunt. Non eadem enim semper omnibus
similem ob causam conducunt. Sic Anatome aliter physicis inseruit, qui
disciplinas ipsas propter se amant; alterii, qui illam non adeo affectant, sed
nihil temere a natura factum esse demonstrant: aliter his qui argumenta (ut
ill^ ait) ad actionem quandam vel naturalem vel animalem cognoscendam, ex
partium humani corporis historia adferre nituntur: aliter medico qui manum
aculeis, telonumque cuspidibus probe exprimendis vel alicui parti apt
excidendae vel sinubus and fistulis and abscessibus incidendis adhibiturus est;
quo Anatomes usn nihil aeque est necessarium.

Certainly it had been an action of greater ingenuity in our Novelists to have
acknowledged the many excellent things that are in Galen, which are so
advantageous to Physic, then to endeavor to render a man multi ingenii,
multaque nihilominus habiturum, contemptible by the representation of a few
defects in him, relating to things not much material to his prof^ssion. It must
always be said of Galen, that he was the man who by his dextrous wit, happy
practice, and great eloquence, as well as universal learning, did restore the
glory of the Hippocratical Physic, which was in a manner extinct in his days.
He again brought Anatomy into request, which had been slighted and dis-used so
long: he himself dissected bodies priva^ely, and publicly in the Temple of
Peace; and amongst other Discoveries of his own, it is observable that he found
out the use of recurrent nerves, Vide Columbum Anat. ^. 14. and Vesalium de
fabrica corp. hum. l. 4 c. 9.
whose influence upon the voice is such, that as they are pressed or cut into
two, so a Dog becomes perpetually mute, or only howls, never barks. Had that
curiosity been but the discove^ry of some Novelists, what a noise would they
have made? what boastings should we have had? But all that is good in Galen is
passed by, and to make way for the glory of our new Inventors, Vesalius,
Fallopius, Carcanus, Eustachius, Ingrassias, Columbus, Arantius, Varolius, are
not so much as mentioned by Mr. Glanvill; to the end that we may (if we will)
believe that it is the genius of this Age alone, which puts men upon
discoveries, and that before them there were none that had merited this remark.

Plus ul^ra, page 13.
I instance in the most remarkable of their discoveries briefly: Riolanus
asserts the first invention of the Va^ves in the veins to Hippocrat^s.
Anthropogr. l 5. c. 49.
and those I take notice of are, The valves of the veins, discovered by
Fabricius ab Aqua pendente: The valve at the entrance of the Gut Colon, found
as is generally thought by Bauhinus. -- I cannot think these to be so
remarkable discoveries, but that he might have found out many more, since the
time of Vesalius, I shall n^me one wo^ gave a great light to the Circulation of
blood, and that is the discovery which Realdus Columbus made, that the blood
did pass through the Lungs out of the right ventricle into the left, and so
into the Aorta, and all the body. As for the valves in the veins, I believe
there are few that think that Fabricius ab Aquapendente, was the first
discoverer of them: for they were showed to Fabricius by father Paul, that
famous Venetian Monk, as appears in his life written by Fulgentio, and extant
in English. Neither indeed was Father Paul the first Inventour of them, for
they are described before by Iacobus Sylvius, Professor of Physic at Paris, as
Riolanus, and Slegelius, Riolanus Anthropogr. l. 5. c. 49. Marquard. Slegel. de
ci^cul. fangu. l. 2. p. 7. Bartholin. in libelio de venis c. 2. Var^lius Anat.
l. ^. c. 3 Riolan. Anthropogr. l. 2. c. 14. Bartholin. Anat. (...). l. 1. c. 1^.
and Bartholinns do inform the world. And as to the valve in the beginning of
the Colon-gut (if there be such a one, and that it be not rather a protuberant
circle, arising from the joining of the Ileon and Colon, as Pavius,
Falcoburgius, and Riolanus hold whatsoever it be, it was discovered by
Varolius, and called the Operculum Ilei, before that ever Bauhinus was born, as
Riolanus does demonstrate: there are two others that may as justly pretend to
it, to better merit the credit then Bauhinus, and those are Solomon Albertus,
whom Bartholin inclines unto: and Ioannes Posthius of Montpelier, whom Riolanus
also favors.

Plus ultra, page 14.
The Sinus of the veins, and their use found out by Dr. Willis --. I wonder Mr.
Glanvill should not acquaint us with those particular Sinus which Dr. Willis
should find out; for since in common discourse, when we speak undeterminately
of the Sinus, we understand those of the brain, it did become him to tell us
which others he meant: lest a man that knew his skill, should apprehend him so
ignorant as to think that Dr. Willis had newly found out those Sinus, one
whereof has for above two thousand years born the name of Herophilus, and was
called Torcular Herophili, Dr. Willis de cerebro c 6. p. 82, 83.
in Greek (...). But I shall be so favorable as to think that these are not
the Sinus he meant, Dr. Willis having tried nothing more in prosecution of
them, then to pursue the Circulation of the blood there by the injecting of
Inkish liquor, Io. Iac. Wepferus Apoplex. p 116. Bartholin. Anat. l. 3. c. 7.
whereas Wepferus used a tincture of Saffron; and Bartholin evidenced the same
thing by a pair of bellows, or tube and wind insufflated. I do believe that
He, or they that suggested this to him, did mean the Sinus or venae
vertebrales, which are described exactly in the Doctors Book, in the thirteenth
Table. But I must tell him, that whatsoever there is in that Piece, which is
Anatomical, the glory thereof belongs to Dr. Lower, whose ind^fatigable
industry produced that elaborate Treatise; and any man that knows the great
practice of that other Doctor, will grant, that although he could not want
abilities, yet he wanted leisure to attend to such painful and tedeous
inquiries. Dr. Willis indeed heartily does relinquish this honor to Dr. Lower,
and his pains deserved your commendation (Mr. Clanvill) if that be of any
value, so much more then those other inventions that are celebrated by the
Virtuosi, by how much the subject was more minute and subtle which he was to
trace. All that Dr. Willis contributed, that I hear, was the discourses and
conjectures upon the Anatomical deductions of Dr. Lower, which as ingenuous as
they are, I am sure neither are, nor ever will pass all for inventions. But in
the case I now mention, I am confident that Dr. Lower is so ingenuous, as to
acknowledge that what He exhibits there, is taken out of the Cuts of Varolius,
as far as where they empty themselves into the subclavian veins: but I think
that as to the Synus, or veins, and arteries all along the Spine, as there is
not any Cut of them extant before that I hear of, so I allow them to pass as
his invention: but the accurateness of his Neurology equals to the best
Inventors^

But if Mr. Glanvill injured Dr. Lower in attributing what he invented unto Dr.
Willis, he will not conceal his own discoveries, you shall see what a Divine
can do in Physic. 'St. St"! I add the origination of the Nerves, which were
of old supposed to arise out of the substance of the brain, but are found by
late Anatomists to proceed from the medulla oblongata. This is such an Addition
as becomes our Novellists, most that they pretend unto being no more then Mr.
Glanvill here boasts of; and which is so pitiful an accessional in Anatomy,
that none ever bragged of it, or upbraided the Ancients about it, that I
remember, except Bartholin may be said to do it. As to the late Anatomists,
unto whom he ascribes this invention, I would he had told their names. The
difference betwixt the cerebrum, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata, is a modern
(but not very late) distinction. Some have made the medulla oblongata and the
spinal marrow to be but productions of the brain and cerebellum, from whence it
raises it self by four foundations or roots: the discrepancy betwixt that and
the other parts whence it is originated, not being such as to justify any
great contest about it: since it is the usual course of Nature in its progress
from the union of two different bodies, to produce an intermediate substance,
participating of the nature of both. Spinalis medulla or^us principium rectius
cerebro atque cerebello acceptum fertur, Vol. Coiter. observe. anatom miscel.

Ex substantia cerebri and cerebelli quatuor radicibus oritur primum ^runcus
insignis, Medulla spinalis appellat^^, ex quo multi emergunt s^^culi, nomine
ne^vorum insig^iti. Varolius Anatom. l. 1. c. 13. p 12.


unde non immerito caudex, sive processus, sive soboles cerebri appellatur: nam
vix in ullo, nisi in duritie (est enim cerebro aliquanto solidi^r and fi^mior)
videtur a cerebro differ. Some have made the brain and cerebellum to be
productions of the spinal marrow, which enlarges it self within the skull, and
generateth those two Apophyses called the cerebrum and cerebellum. In fine, it
does not appear that the Ancients mistook much the place of the origination of
nerves, if you reckon amongst them Vesalius and Fallopius: but they said they
rose all from the brain, understanding by that word all tha^ which is included
within the skull, and termed that to be the spinal marrow^ which was without
the skull, and whence those other paria nerv^rum seem to rise, which Anatomists
describe. And this subtilty of Mr. Glanvill is so little regarded by late
Anatomists, that Moebius (a man of as great note as most are) slights it by the
example of Hofman, Moebius fundament med. c. de usu ^ervor. p 606. Caspar
Hofman. (...). med. l 2. c. 65. sec^. 1.
whose sense I shall here report: Monendi sunt ado^escentiores, ne forte
morentur illos qui neglecta veteri distinctione dicunt, Omnes nervi sunt a
medulla, sed alii ex illa, antequam cranio excidat, alii ex ^adem, cum jam in
spinam delapsa est, and Spinalis dicitur. Quid enim hoc aliud est, quam
frustranea nominum novatio? So Dr. Charlton in his Discourse to the Royal
Society concerning the Brain, takes the liberty to understand by the Cerebrum
as well as others, totum illud corp^^ quod Calvariae concavo contin^tur ( page
67. de Propr. cerebri humani) though afterward, when he comes to s^eak more
accurately, he treats of the Medulla oblongata thus: Cerebro proxime subjicitur
alma nervorum ad sensus spectantium matter, and funi^ argentei (sicut Sapiens in
Ecclesiaste cleganti ^^d obscu^a Allegoria vocat Medull^m spinalem) principlum
Medul^a scilicet intra cranium oblon^ata. Behold the addition of Mr. Glanvill!
Cum dico me de nervis ex cerebro ortis acturum, intelligo totum id quod ^ranio
continetur. There is another Origination of the nerves, which is as ancient as
Aristotle, and which Hofman and Vander Linden assert, whereby they are deduced
immediately and formally from the brain, but immediately and materially from
the heart; for so much as they hold each nerve to be an Artery vested with the
membranes of the brain, and so issuing to several parts. This opinion is very
agreeable to the observations that occur in the practice of Physic, and
their arguments seem to me so plausible, that I am so averse with Mr. Glanvill
to proclaim a new origination of the nerves, that I much doubt whether the
followers of Galen were not deceived^ and the Peripateticks in the right. See
Vander Linden Disp. 38. de vasis and nervis, and Hofman de partib. similar. in
these. de orig. nerv. sec. Aristot.

It is clear now that Mr. Glanvills new addition amounts only to this, that
the Ancients did some of them hold that the nerves had their original from the
brain; others deduced them from the heart. V. de V^ro^ium l. 1. c. 3.
Some (perhaps before Varolius) did subdivide the brain into several parts, If
Varolius (...) I ^elieve be did, by a pe^^liar wa^ (...) di^^^cting the head^
what is it that Mr G^anvill then (...)? I am sure that F^acassatus says,
Va^olius p^imus principium spinalis medull^ vel intra cranium sobole^cere in
nervo^^ quorum o^igo olim a cerebro peteba^u^, d^cuit.
and said that the nerves had their origination from the medulla oblongata, and
not from the cerebrum and cerebell^m. This nicety Dr. Willis makes some use of,
but since he explicates nothing of the brain with a mechanical accurateness; I
shall only subjoyn, that whosoever shall view or eat that which they call
Medulla oblongata and spinalis, and compare it with the marrow that is in the
bones otherwise, he will think it a less impropriety of speech, to say the
Medulla oblongata is a part of the brain, then to term it a Medullary substance.

And though the Succus Nutritious be not yet fully agreed upon by Physicians,
yet it has so much to say for it self, that it may not unreasonably be
mentioned amongst the new Inventions -- It Is strange Mr. Glanvill should
entitle this opinion about the Succus Nutritious to so great a degree of
probability, as he does. Physicians are so far from being fully agreed upon it,
that, excepting Dr. Glisson, Dr. Charleton, and perhaps one or two more, the
rest do generally reject it. Dr. Highmore, Highmore de affect. hypochond^. c.
4. Willis in Anatome cerebri c 20.

Bartholin spi^ileg. 1. c. 3.


Dr. Willis, and Bartholine have written against it; and so has Deusingius
writ a particular discourse against it. Nor do I doubt, but whosoever peruseth
those Authors which I refer unto, will be so far from imagining it reasonable
to ascribe the Succus Nutritious to the number of modern Inventions, that he
will term it at best but an ingenious Paradox, which when the first surprise is
over, vanishes with the appearance of being ridiculous. How much does our
Virtnoso, and Bartholine differ? Bartholin. ^pic^^eg. 1. de vasis lymphat p. 23.
Prodeat Herophilus, ex a^tro educatur Democritus, advocentur prosectores
cujuscunque sortis and aetatis, si in dissectis corporum nervis ullum
invenerint liquorem nutritioni opportunum, nolim inter eos locum mereri.

But of all Modern Discoveries, Wit and Industry have made in the Economy of
humane nature, Plus ^^tra, p^g. 15.
the noblest is that of the Circulation of the blood, which was the invention
of our deservedly famous Harvey. It Is true, the envy of malicious
Contemporaries would have robbed him of the Glory of this Discovery, and
pretend it was known to Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others among the
Ancients; but whoever considers the expressious of those Authors, which are
said to respect the Circulation, who find that those who form the inference,
do it by a faculty that makes all kind of Compositions and Deductions, and the
same that assists the Enthusiasts of our days, to see so clearly all our
alterations of State and Religion, to the minutest particulars in the
Revelation of Saint John. And I think it may be as well concluded from the
first chapter of Genesis, as from the remains of those Ancients, who if they
had known this great and general Theory, how chance they speak no more of a
thing, which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How came it to be
lost without Memory amongst their followers, who were such superstitious Porers
upon their Writings? How chance it was not shown to be lodged in those Authors
before the days of Dr. Harvey, when Envy head impregnated and determined the
Imaginations^ of those who were not willing any thing should be found anew, of
which themselves were not the Inventours? But it is not only the remotest
Ancients, whom time has consecrated, and distance made venerable, whose Ashes
those fond men would honor with this discovery; but even much later Authors
have had the glory fastened upon them. For the Invention is by some ascribed to
Paulus Venetus; by others to Prosper Alpinus; and a third sort give it to
Andraeas Caesalpinus. For these, though either of them should be acknowledged
to be the Author, it will make as much for the design of my discourse, as if
Harvey had the credit: and therefore here I am no otherwise concerned, but to
have justice for that excellent man: and the World has now done right to his
Memory, Death having overcome that Envy which Dogs living virtue to the Grave;
and his Name rests quietly in the Arms of Glory, while the Pretensions of his
Rivals are creeping into darkness and oblivion.

Whether those that have gone about to deprive Dr. Harvey have been incited by
Envy and Malice, it is hard for any considerate man to judge; since those which
first proposed the doubt about the Author, were great friends to the Theoreme;
such as Walaeus, who first mentioned it; Riolanus, Nardius, Fracassarus, and
Ioannes Antonides Vander Linden: All of them pay a great respect to Dr.
Harvey's Performances; All of them concur with him generally in his Assertions,
saving that Riolanus made some variation therein, and perhaps his passion might
blind his candor; though I do not think so, because I find him zealously
vindicating of Dr. Harvey from those imputations by which Walaeus endeavored
to transfer the credit of the invention upon Father Paul.

Another thing I must take notice of is, that Mr. Glanvill speaks very
peremptorily about a thing he has not enquired into, for it is evident that he
never read the passages out of the Ancients, which are cited by Walaeus and
Riolanus, to to show they were not altogether ignorant of that motion of the
blood which is called Circulation. He thinks it may be as well concluded from
the first chapter of Genesis, as from the remains of the Ancients. And why so?
Is there any thing mentioned in the first chapter of Genesis, that sounds like
the Circulation of the blood, or any words that can be applied unto this late
discovery? not one. But any man that understands Greek, must confess that the
words (...), and (...) in Hippocrates (whatever he meant by them) do most
emphatically signify the Circulation of the blood, as it is now proposed. If I
merit not to be believed herein, take the judgment of Julius Caesar, Scaliger
upon Aristotle de insoma.xiij. 1444. (...). I shall not from this place deduce
the mystery of the Circulation of the blood, by saying that rivers circulate
under ground thorough that sandy earth, which those that dig in Wells, when
they come unto, they can descend no further: (which Helmont in the Brabant
Dialect calls Quellem, other Dutchmen name Well-ground and Well-sand, and
after return unto the Sea again by open Channels: But whatever the intent of
the Philosopher was, that (...), properly imports such a thing, and that we
have the name given it by Aristotle, this Scaliger confesses, Ejus ad
apotelesma xxxi. haec sunt verba. (...), motum; ut infebribus accessionem.
Circuitum Calvus cum dicit, fideliter, non plene explicat. Neque enim.
circumducitur sanguis, ut (...) impleat significationem Nam in febribus idcirco
dicitur (...), quia revertitur paroxysmus: quasi circumductus ob diem parum and
vacuum a morbo. From which it is evident, that if Scaliger had known that the
blood had circulated, he would have granted it to have been properly expressed
here in the Text: which is more then He would say of any Apocalyptical
discoveries, or deductions of that opinion out of the first Chapter of Genesis.
And if the word (...) be so significant, it is hard to deny that Hippocrates
did not set down the thing it self in this passage, (...). Hippocrates de oss.
not. t. ^7.
(...) Ven^ per corpus fusae spiritum, and fluxum, and motum praestant. Ab una
multae propagantur: sed illa una unde incipiat, ^^t ubi desinat, non scio.
Circulo enim ducto, E^ lib. de alim. 1.4 12.
principium non invenitur. And in that other: (...). In pilos alimentum [id
est, sanguis nutriens] and in ungues, atque extremam superficiem intus advenit:
faeris alimentum ab extrema superficie intime revertitur. Corrivatio una,
conspiratio una, consentientia omnia. Certe quod ad communem naturam omnia: in
quavis part parts ad opus. Principium magnum [id est Cor, per transmissos
spiritus and sanguinem] ad extremam partem pervenit: ab extrema part ad
principium magnum revertitur. There are more passages in the same Author which
seem to import the same thing, though his usual brevity and obscurity is such,
that had not Harvey and others dilucidated the point, we had never, I believe,
fixed this explication upon him, which amounts to no more then a new gloss upon
an old Text: which yet is sufficient to check the largeness of Mr. Glanvills
assertion. The (...) of Plato, and his making the Heart to be the original of
the veins, Plato in Ti^^ae^.
(...); these are something more then is to be found in the first of Genesis.
And that passage of Aristotle de Genesis Anim l. 4. c. ult. is so unlike any thing
of Moses's, and so like to the doctrine of Harvey, that any man must blame Mr.
Glanvill, for rashness of what he says. The words are thus set down by
Riolanus, and I have not the Original by me to consult: Cum coelestia corpora
circulariter moveantur, inferiera corpora motum illum imitari debent, cumque
Oceanus fluxu and refluxu moveatur ab influxu Lunari, similiter humores ^^lem
motum habere necessum est. Which words seem clear enough, so as to justify the
Epiphonema of my Author, in opposition to our Virtuoso. Quid ista significant
nisi sanguinis Circulationem. He that would be informed more fully about the
judgment of the Ancients, whether there be any thing in them that discovers
the Circulation of the blood, to have been known unto them; or that they were
not totally ignorant, and without any apprehensions of it: let him read the
first letter of Walaeus, and the several Pieces of Ioannes Riolanus about the
Circulation of the blood, and the disputations of Vander Linden about the
Circulation of the blood, in which he vindicates it in a prolixe discourse unto
Hippocrates. I will not trouble my self to transcribe them: It is evident that
all men do give unto Harvey the credit of having so explicated it, and
Anatomically proved it, that he may as well be termed the Author of it, as
Epicurus and others the Authors of that Philosophy which they derived from
Pythogoras, Democritus, Leucippus, and Ocellus Lucanus. Nor has Harvey any
other Plea and Right to the Invention, then that he did more fully and
perspicuously declare it, and in the most judicious and solid manner assert
what others had but hinted at, or faintly insisted on.

Nor is Mr. Glanvill any better acquainted with the notions of the Modern
Writers, then he is with those of the Ancients. He says, that some have
ascribed the Circulation of the blood to Paulus Venetus. I must inform the
Reader (who may easily mistake, if he be one of the ordinary Comical Wits) that
it is not to be ascribed to Paulus Venetus, the great Traveller, who is
generally understood, when that name is mentioned; none can say that he brought
it from the Kingdom of Cathay. But Pater Paulus Sarpa (or Serpa) or Father
Paul, the famous Venetian Monk, of the order of the Servi; who signatised
himself during the time that Venice was interdicted. He was a Student at Padoa
at the same time that Harvey was there, and discovered to Aqua pendens the
valves in the veins, which discovery that great Anatomist appropriated to
himself; and so Harvey was thought to have abused the same Father. Vide Slegel.
de motu Sanguin c. 2. and Ri^lan. in not. ad ep. Walai.
But since Fulgentio in the life of Padre Paolo does not challenge Harvey for
this Cheat, as he does Fabricius for that other; and since Marquardus Slegelius
could not hear of any such thing upon a strict Enquiry at Venice and Padua, I
know not any since Walaeus and Franciscus Ulmus, that have ascribed the
invention to Paulus Venetus Servita.

Neither did I ever read of any man that attributed it to Prosper Alpinus: nor
is it credible that any ever did so. For that great Physician established his
glory by being an excellent Practitioner, and not by any Anatomical
curiosities, which he rather contemned, then pursued: and till I know what
Author Mr. Glanvill follows, I believe the mentioning of him was occasioned by
that way of discoutse which is common to the Wits of this Age, to blunder out
any thing: and by laughing at improbabilities (of their own suggestion) to
explode substantial truths, or represent them as forgeries. But if any did
deceive the world in attributing the Circulation of the blood to Padre Paolo
and Prosper Alpinus, it does not follow but that Andreas Caesalpinus was the
first Inventor of it, and proposed it to the world in his Medical and
Peripatetical Questions, though not in any Set Discourse, but as it casually
falls into the discussion of other Problems: Whereupon it was little regarded,
and not enquired after; the book being also scarce, and he being of that
faction of Physicians which adheres to Aristotle against Galen, whence it
happened that few read his Paradoxes, and one of the bravest men of the latter
Age has been almost buried in oblivion. However, an ingenious Florentine,
called Ioannes Nardius, has asserted the repute of Andraeas Caesalpinus, for
precedence to Harvey in the Discovery; nor does the same Author doubt^ but that
Erasistratus was of the same opinion: but he ^aith of Caesalpinus this: Foelix
cui contigit post mortem nancisci clarissimum Patronum Guglielmum Harveium
Regium M^dicum, nobisque per charum, qui abortivam illam opinionem excoluit
adeo, ut nihil cultius nostro seculo, nilque mirabilius occurrerit curiosis and
amaenarum literarum amatoribus. To decide this question, and to put an end to
those disputes which trouble some of our Virtuosi so much, by reason of that
little converse they have with Books, I shall draw out the opinion of
Caesalpinus, as he expresses himself in his Disputations.

A^d^aeas Caesal^inus ^. peripatet. f. 5. qu. 3.
As a great abettour of Aristotle, he avows that the Heart is the principal part
in man, and the original of the veins, arteries, and nerves; which is the
opinion of Hofman, Van der Linden, and other Aristotelian Physicians.

He describes the Fabric of the Heart as exactly as any of the Circulators in
reference to the Valves, so much talked of; Ib. q^ 4.
but he declares not their shape: Vasorum in Cor desinentium quaedam
intromittunt contentam in ipsis substantiam, ut vena Cava in dextro ventriculo,
and arteria venalis in sinistro: quadam educunt, ut arteria aorta in sinistro
ventriculo, and vena arterialis pulmonem nutriens iu dextro: omnibus autem
membranule sunt appositae and officio delegatae, ut oscula intromittentia non
educant, and educentia non intromittant.

And for the account of the Vena arteriosa, and Arteria venosa in the Lungs,
Harvey is not more perspicuous, then he is afterward, where he makes the one
to be an Artery, the other a vein, viz. Putaverunt autem Medici usum hunc non
videntes commutatae fuisse vasa in pulmone, ut Arteria quidem similis esset
venae, vena autem similis Arteriae: appellantes venas vasa omnia quae in
dextrum ventriculum desinunt, Arterias autem, quae in sinistrum: figmenta multa
and absurditates excogitantes ut usum invenirent. Pulsat igitur in pulmone vas
dextri ventriculi, haec enim e cord recipit, ut Arteria magna, and similiter
fabricatum est ejus corpus. Vas autem sinistri ventriculi non pulsat, quia
introducit tantum, and ejus corpus simile est reliquis venis.

He holds that the motion of the Heart and Arteries depends not upon any
pelsifick Faculty, but that it arises from the (...), ebullition, or
effervescency of the blood in the Ventricles; and that the Heart and Arteries
are dilated at the same time, the blood dilating the Heart, and issuing out
thorough the valves of the Aorta and Pulmonique Artery at the same instant,
which is pure ^artesianism.

He holds that the Blood comes up from the veins to the Heart, and there
acquires the last Perfection, and becomes vital and spirituous: in the mention
of the Arterious Blood, he uses indifferently the terms of Blood, spirit, and
natural heat, which I desire may be observed, lest the proofs seem not full
enough, and he be construed to speak of nothing but spirits and natural heat in
the Arteries. He says, that this Blood having acquired its Perfection in its
passage through both the ventricles, is distributed through all the parts of
the body, for its nutriment by the Arteries, in which Arteries there is such a
constant quantity of Blood, that the effervency of that in the Heart impells
the whole continuation of the Arteries, so that they beat all at once. Cum enim
pulsatio Cordis and Arteriarum sit accidens quoddam quod ex necessitate
insequitur humoris in cord effervescentiam, qua sanguinis generatio per
ficitur, ut in caeteris quae igne elixantur, accidit. lib. de vita and mort. c.
2. intumescente cord necesse est simul omnes Arterias dilatari, in quas
derivatur fervor: non enim repleri pot^st una pars, quin totum fiat majus: ubi
non omni ex part vasa quae continua sunt fuerint exinanita. Nam nullo intus
existente corpore, non contingit simul repleri principium and extrema, cum
motus non fiat in instanti: existente autem per totos canales aliquo spiritu,
simul ac in principio alius fuerit genitus, necesse est totum simul dilatari,
unum enim sit spiritus accedens cum toto. Cum ergo totum reddatur majus simul
ac accesserit pars, non potest una pars dilatari, quin eodem tempore dilatetur
totum. Est autem veluti totum quoddam Arteriae omnes cum cord; Mark this,
where he m^kes the Heart and Arteries to be one continued receptacle of perfect
blood: by which you must ^xplain what he says in some p^aces, as i^ only
spirits or natural heat went into the Arteri^s, or returned by the v^in^.
Continuum enim est vas sanguinis perfecti. Spiritu autem efflante inhabitum
corporis, and distributo particulis sanguine, necesse est tumorem vasorum
desidere, quae est pulsus contractio. Continue autem hoc fit, quia continua est
partium nutritio, and continua sanguinis generatio in cord. Elevatio igitur
Spiritus a calore fit, non tamen temere, sed alicujus gratia. Nam sine
hujusmodi amplificatione non fieret distributio alimenti in omnes parts.

He plants a kind of Flammula cordis, or fire in the heart, which causes the
ebullition, and imprints a spirituousness in the blood that issues out into
the Arteries. Hujusmodi locus Cor est in quo secundum Naturam elementum
praeparatum ardere possit, and fieri spiritus: venae alimentum supp^ditant,
Arteriae flammae spiritum recipient.

He ^aith, that the Blood moves toward the Heart, as the Oil to the flame of
the burning Lamp, and that the Valves as the orifice of the Vena Cava which
immit the blood, are placed there to moderate the source of the blood, lest it
should fall in too fast, and extinguish the vital fire: and that the valves at
the entrance of the Aorta do fly open upon the effervescency of the blood, by
the pressure of it every way, to get more room: it finding no outlet but by
those yielding valves, which were so placed, lest upon any accident, or violent
passion, the arterious blood should regurgitate into the Heart, Motus fit ex
venis in Cor caliditate alimentum trahente, ex cord autem in arterias, quia
hac solum patet iter propter membranarum positionem, positae autem sunt hoc
modo membranae, he unquam contingeret contrarium motum fieri, quod accidere
posset in vehementibus animi perturbationibus, aut aliis causis, a quibus
sanguinis retractio fit ad Cor: Obsistunt enim huic motui membranae. Nam si hoc
modo condite non essent, ignis cordis vel levi causa extingueretur. Si enim
motus f^eret contrarius simile esset, ac si flamma compingeretur deorsum ad
alimentum^ quod ^um minime sit praeparatum, aut copiosius qu^m (...) ignem
s^ffocat. Oportet enim alimentum praeparari, and (...) disp^^s^ri ad locum
flammae.

He says the (...) blood, or spirit, is distributed into all parts of the
body^ with great celerity, and that it is that which nourishes the parts: and
that upon its diffusion into the habit of the body, the spirits are very much
exhausted, and the corpulent part of the aliment does remain, being coagulated
partly by heat, and partly by cold.

He says, that the variety of the pulse, as to strength or debility, celerity
and slowness, depends upon the nature of the vi^^l fire, the nature of the
aliment with which it is fed, and sometimes upon the particular Fabric, or
conformation of the Heart, in which that Fire is seated.

He places Anastomoses betwixt the veins and arteries every where in the body.
Osculorum communio est non solum in cord, sed etiam per totum venerum and
arteriarum ductum,

He says that the blood is never extravasated, but where it is aggregated to
any part by way of nourishment, or else it putrifies: he does not understand
how it should not coagulate if once extravasated; nor can he comprehend how it
should be reassumed into the veins in such a case. Venam continuam esse
oportet, usque ad cordis ventriculos, ut inde omnis virtus descendat: nec
ullibi contingit disjunctam esse; sanguis enim calore cordis destitutus
concrescit, and tandem putrescit.

He makes the Blood to pass betwixt the right and left ventricle of the Heart;
partly by the Lungs, and partly by the Septum Cordis. Pulchre igitur condita
sunt omnia. Cum enim fervere oporteret in cord sanguinem, ul fieret alimenti
perfectio: primo quidem in dextro ventriculo, in quo crassior adhuc continetur
sanguis, deinde autem in sinistro, ubi sincerior sang^is est: partim per medium
septum, partim per medios pulmones refrigerationis gratia ex dextro in
sinis^rum mittitur. Interim autem pulmo abunde nutriri potest: totum enim eum
sanguinem absumere, quem recipit, egreditur fines rationis. Non enim rara esset
ejus substantia and levis, ut videtur si tantum alimenti, vim in suam naturam
converteret. This he thus ^urther explains. Pulmo per venam arteriis similem ex
dextro cordis ventriculo fervidum hauriens sanguinem, eumque per anastomosin
arteriae ^enal^^ ^^de^s quae in sinistrum (...) ventriculum tendit, transmisso
interim aere frigido per asperae arteriae canales, qui juxta arteriam venalem
pro^enduntur, non tamen osculis communicantes, ut pulavit Galenus solo tactu
temperat. Huic Sanguinis Circulationi ex dextro cordis ventriculo, per pulmones
in sinis^rum ejusdem ventriculum optime respondent ea guae ex disse^^i^ne
apparent. Nam duo sunt vasa in dextrum ventriculum des^n^ntia, duo etiam in
sinistrum. Duorum autem unum intro^^^^it ^an^um^ alterum educit, membranis eo
ingenio con^^r^^^is. Vas igitur intromittens, vena est magna quidem in ^extro,
quae cava appellatur: parva autem in sinistro, ex pul^^^^ introducens, cujus
unica est tunica, ut caeterarum venarum. Va^ autem educens Arteria, est magna
quidem in sinistro, quae A^rta appellatur, parva autem in dextro ad pulmones
derivans, ^ujus similiter duae sunt tunicae^ ut in caeteris arteriis.

He holds that the spirituous or arterious blood is cast out, and diffused
vigorously into the habit of the body, that the v^ins and arteries being
continuous by Anastomosis, it returns to the Heart again, vigorating the blood
of the vena p^rta and ^ava as it returns: which is sufficiently intimated in
that he deduces all the vigor and vitality of the blood from the Heart^ and
that this vigor or natural heat is carried over the body by the Arteries
alone, and that it is necessary that the whole v^nous Systeme, or contexture of
Arteries and veins be continuous, lest the blood in the veins, being destitute
of the cordial heat, should coagulate and putrify. He holds that this motion,
or Circulation of the blood is without intermission: and that the swelling of
the veins upon the Ligature is a suffici^nt proof of it. But he holds, that the
recourse of the blood by the veins is greater in the sleep, then when we awake;
which he proves thus^ in that the veins are more full and ^umid during sleep,
then waking: and the pulse weaker, and more slow; as any man may observe. From
whence he concludes, that the natural heat (which is the Art^ri^us blood, as I
observed before, to prevent all possible (...) which was otherwise in great
part expended upon the (...) and sensories, does in sleep return: and fill the
(...) (that exhaustion ceasing) then when we (...)

His opinion will be best set down in his own words; and I think it necessary
to do it, because Nardius has done it so imperfectly, that one would attribute
as little to his allegations, as to those which are cited out of the Ancients;
and if I had not read Caesalpinus long before, I should have thought the
Florentine to have entitled Caesalpinus to the opinion out of envy to Harvey,
or out of a partial desire to advance the glory of the Tuscan Academy at Pisa,
when Caesalpinus was Professor. Thus that learned man writ about the year
1590. or a little after.

Audraeas Caesalpinus Quest^ Medic. l. 2. Qu. 17. edit. venetae secunda in 4to.
A. D. 1593. fol. 234. col. 1.
Sed illud speculatione dignum videtur, Propter quod intumescunt venae ultra
locum apprehensum, non citr^: quod experimento sciunt qui vena secant: vinculum
enim adhibent citra locum sectionis, non ultra: quia tument venae ultra
vinculum, non citra. Debuisset autem opposito modo contingere, si motus
sanguinis and spiritus a visceribus fit in totum corpus: intercepto enim meatu,
non ultra datur progressus: tumor igitur venarum citra vinculum debuisset
fieri. An ^olvitur dubitatio ex eo quod scribit Aristoteles, de Some c. 3. ubi
inquit, Necesse enim quod evaporatur aliquousque impelli: deinde converti and
permutari, sicut Euripum: calidum enim cujusque animalium ad superiora natum
est ferri: cum autem in superioribus locis fuerit, multum simul iterum
revertitur, ferturque deorsum. Haec Aristoteles. Pro cujus loci explicatione
illud sciendum est: Cordis meatus ita a natura paratos esse, ut ex vena Cava
intromissio fiat in Cordis ventriculum dextrum, unde patet exitus in pulmonem:
ex pulmone praeterea alium ingressum esse in Cordis ventriculum sinistrum, ex
quotandem patet exitus in Arteriam Aortam, membranis quibusdam ad ostia vasorum
appositis, ut impediant retrocessum: Sic enim perpetuus quidam motus est ex
vena cava per Cor and pulmones in Arteriam Aortam: ut in Quaestionibus
Peripateticis explicavimus. Cum autem in vigilia motus caloris nativi fiat
extra, scilicet ad sensoria: in Somno autem intra, scilicet ad Cor: putandum
est in vigilia multum spiritus and sanguinis ferri ad arterias, inde enim in
nervos iter est. In somno autem eundem calorem per venas reverti ad Cor, non
per Arteriam. Judicio sunt pulsus, qui expergiscentibus fiunt magni,
vehementes, celeres, and crebri, cum quadam vibratione: in somno autem parvi,
languidi, tardi and rari notante Galeno. 3. de cause. pull. 9, 10. Number in Somno
calor nativus minus vergit in arterias: in casdem erumpit vehementius cum
expergiscuntur. Venae autem contrario se modo habent: nam in somno fiunt
tumidiores, in vigilia exiliores, ut patet intuenti eas quae in manu sunt.
Transit enim in somno calor nativus ex arteriis in venas per of culorum
communionem, quam Anastomosin vocant, and inde ad Cor. Vt autem sanguinis
exundatio ad superiora, and retrocessus ad inferiora ad instar Euripi manifesta
est in somno and vigilia, sic non obscurus est hujusmodi motus in quacunque
part cor. poris vinculum adhibeatur, aut alia ratione occludantur venae. Cum
enim tollitur permeatio, intumescunt rivuli qua part fluere solent.

From hence it is clear that He held that the blood did circulate continually,
falling into the Heart by the vena Cava, and issuing out by the Aorta into all
parts of the body: that this motion of the blood was perceivable by the
Ligatures at any time, but most manifest in the intumescence of the veins in
sleep: at what time also the blood or natural heat (which is all one to him)
did pass by way of Anastomosis out of the arteries into the veins, as well as
at other times. So that we are not to imagine any interrupted circulation in
him, but that it did constantly flow night and day, sleeping and waking, though
with unequal celerity. In letting of blood he tells us, that the blood which
first issues out is venous, and blacker then that which follows, Qu. Med. l. 2.
qu 5 ^ol. 212. col. 1. lit. c.
and comes more immediately out of the Arteries. -- Venas cum Arteriis adeo
copulari osculis, ut vena secta primum exeat sanguis venalis nigrior, deinde
succedat arterialis flavior, quod plerumque contingit. And he explains the
motion of the blood, Qu. Med. l. 2. qu. 15. fol. 230. col. 1. l. c.
and natural heat thus, to prevent all ambiguity. At instabit quis in somno
nequaquam prohiberi calo^em in cerebro and sensoriis: pulsant enim arteriae in
toto corpore etiam in somno. At praesente calore innato debuisset duci in actum
facultas animalis. An calor innatus in somno viget in venis and arteriis, non
in nervis sine quibus, non sit sensus and motus? Extra igitur forri est nervos
petere, intra autem non solum ad viscera, sed in omnes venas and arterias; unde
operationes naturales magis perficiuntur in toto corpore.

I hope I have now determined the Question which has occasioned so many heats
in the world concerning the Circulation of the blood, who was the first
Inventor of it? I have demonstrated that Andraeas Caesalpinus, a rigid
Peripatetick upon sensible Experiments and Mechanical considerations, not
notional apprehensions, did not only discover this motion of the blood (even
through the Lungs) but gave it the name of CIRCULATIO SANGUINIS; which name is
not so proper in it self, considering the Fabric of the veins and arteries,
and the Labyrinth in which the blood moves universally, describing a Line no
way circular, as that a man would have pitched upon it in any other Age then
when Caesalpinus lived, when the knowledge of the Learned Languages was less
general then now, and such a barbarous style in fashion, as our Inve^tour ^sed.
But it was not so in the days of Dr. Harvey, who published his Treatise in 4to.
at Francfourt in the year (as I take it) 1628. I must confess I am apt to think
upon this consideration, that Dr. Harvey (who was a Peripatetique Physician,
and in whose time at Padoa, those Physicians did flourish with the greatest
repute of Learning and skill in Anatomy, as well as Philosophy) did take up
this opinion from my Author. And although there wanted not occasion by reason
of what Walaus, Riolanus, Slegelius, and others had said upon the point, for
him to declare the original of the discovery, yet in his two Answers to
Riolanus, and his Book of Generation, He no where asserts the Invention so to
himself as to deny that he had the intimation or notion from Caesalpinus; but
leaves the Controversy in the dark: which silence of his I take for a tacit
Confession. His Ambition of Glory made him willing to be thought the Author of
a Paradox he had so illustrated, and brought upon the Stage, when it lay
unregarded, and in all probability buried in oblivion. Yet such was his
Modesty, as not to vindicate it to himself by telling a Lie. And such his
Prudence, as rather to avoid the debate, then resolve it to his prejudice. Had
Dr. Harvey been a Chemist, I should have guessed that he might have fixed upon
the word Circulation, upon other reasons, and those congruous enough to his
Hypotheses: but since (especially in the days when he writ) those Studies were
unknown to him, Narravit mih. Nobiliss. and Ampliss^ Nic^laus Cudart,
illustrissmi Principis Auriaci Consi^^arius, meminisse se andire ipsum Harveium
profitentem se revera primam circuitus sanguinis n^titiam, and in cum se^tione
viventium inquirendi occasionem ex He^ioto accepisse. Fuit is serenissimi (...)
^^pis Iac^bi gemm^rius. and Mathe^^os peri^us, eoque nomine Londini ^elebris.
-- Si verum hoc, verisi milius quoque est, vel ips^m, vel Sarpium, vel
Heri^^um, a C^s^lpin^ accepisse. Nemo enim mihi pers^aserit, ab eorum nemine
visum fuisse scriptum [ venetiis impressum] quod vel titulo s^, nedum
eruditionis varietate atque sublimitate commendet. Io. Art^r^ Vander Linden
disput, de circuit. sangu (...). 9. sect. 196. and exercit. 16. sect^ 582.
and not valued by him, I am inclined to think that He did receive his first
I^telligence from this Professor at Pisa (where Harvey also was) and so
improved those hints, that in the divulging of his Opinion, they are as little
to be seen, as the first indeclines which Painters draw in Pictures that are
lost, when the Pourtraict is finished^ or as in the first Appearances of Plants
above ground, where those leaves and buds, which often give growth^ to the
succeeding stemme^ flower, and fruit, are lost, or altered so as not to be
known. Let it suffice, that Dr. Harvey had parts and industry enough to have
discovered it, had he not been prevented th^^ein. And I should have imagined
that our Countreyman had found it out, without any communication with those
other books (a thing possible enough, and of which we have instanc^ in the case
of ^udbek, Bartholine, and Iolice) but that the reasons I have alleged render
the case suspicions. Had C^salpi^us writ a distinct Treatise, I doubt not but
much of the Glory had been his: since there are as great differences between
one Circulator, and another, and greater, then betwixt him and H^rvey: but his
notions being confusedly laid down here and there in his Peripatetick and
Medicinal Questions, and he being not ambitious to pretend to any (...)
discoveries, only to illustrate Aristotle^ tenets. I shall allow Harvey the
possession of his present repa^^: nor do I give my self this trouble of
collecting up into a method th^se confu^ed a^^e^tions of Caes^lpi^us on^ of any
envy to the dead, but out of animosity to Pre^^^ders to Wit and Learning, that
brave it th^s amongs^ u^; ye^ if to be ignorant of what (...) passed (...)
heretofore^ be an argument of c^^ldishness, ^here is not any thing more puerile
then this sort of Vi^t^^si.

I might not dismiss my Reader^ but that the great noise which this Circulatio^
of bl^^d makes in the World, enforces m^ to speak a little m^^e about the
utility of this discovery, which ou^ A^^hour describes to be the most noble of
^ll those discoveries in the O^conomy of humane nature, which Wit and I^dustry
have made. I do confess I think the Arguments for it to be such as admit of no
Answer in general; but when we come to debate how it passes throught the
Lungs, (which Riolanus almost invincibly disproves) or through the Septum
Cordis, (which Riolan and Bartholin asserts, but Harvey, Slegelius, Vander
Linden, and others, reject it on good grounds) what it is that causes the
pulsation of the Heart? what continues on the motion of the blood in the veins,
even when a Ligature is made betwixt the antecedent and subsequent blood.
Whether the blood be diffused into the habit of the body, and reimbibed by
capillary veins, or conveyed on by Anastomoses? whether there be any difference
betwixt the venous and Arterious blood? How the Phenomenon (which undeniably
are observed) about the pulse can be made out; and particularly how some have
lived without any Pulse, others (which I have known) in the palpitation of the
Heart, suffer no change in their Pulse? How upon diffection or wounds sometimes
both ends of the vein divided do bleed? How some bleed at the arm without any
Ligature; some upon a double Ligature? These, and many other questions, when I
come to dispute with my self, methinks I am forced to constrain my judgment in
the assent I give to that Problem: and what I am ashamed to deny, I find I
cannot own without some reluctance, which is daily increased in me by scruples
arising from the Practick Part of Physic; nor do I blush to declare my self an
Abettour only of such Tenets, as are consistent with, and illustrated by
Practical Physic: it was thought at first that this Circulation of blood would
overthrow all the usual Methods of Physic, and introduce new and beneficial
discoveries in that part of Medicine which is Therapeutick. But Harvey denies
that it varieth the Medicine of the Ancients; and Slegelius asserts the same
opinion, avowing it to be rather an happy illustration, then a subver^ion of
the former praxis, though it alter the Theory much. In fine, those little
advantages and Diorismes, which we derive from that Invention m^rit not our
notice; nay, any man shall with more assurance bleed in many diseases in sundry
manners and different places, upon diverse indications upon the old
observations and rules, then on the new hypotheses, wherein as to the use of
parts, and nature of humors, there is as little of ^le^^n^ss and ^^rtai^ty; as
there is efficacy in that practice, which is regulated most thereby.

I had forgot to take notice of the venae l^cteae ascribed to Asellius,
Navdiu^. noct Genial. ^. p. 412.
the invention of them is thought a great discovery, and such as signatiseth a
man in this Age. Yet even those vessels were known to Galen, as Nardius proves
out of his book against Erasistratus, c. 5. and out of the last chapter of his
Anatomical Administrations. It is true, he calls them Arteries; he says they
were in the Mesentery filled with Milk, and that he observed them in young
Kids. And Hofman in his Variae Lectiones does produce out of Galen, de usu
part. l. 4. sect. 19. a place ^o evidently showing that Galen and Herophilus
did recover those Venae lacteae; that Vestingius cries out in a Letter to him,
Existimo aut nihil cum Herophil^ Galenum vidisse, Epist xxi.
out has (...), hos ipsos ductus esse, quos lacteos cum Asellio nominamus. Quae
ad Pancreatis (...) (ex multarum enim glandularum compage constructum videtur)
pertinent. The place in Galen is this, as Hofman represents it. C. Hofman var
lect. l. 2. c. 2.
(...). Which proof as it is p^rspicuous enough to ruin the discovery of the
Venae Lact^ae^ and the deducing of them unto the Glandules of the Mesentery
(beyond which Herophilus and Galen did never trace the journey of the Chy^e,
but imagined those veins to nourish the Mesentery) so I think that the
invention of the Ductus Thoracius belongs to Andr. Vesalius, and Barthol.
Eustac^ius: the one more obscurely proposes it, the other more openly.

A^dr. Ve^alius de f^brica corporis humani l. 3 c 7. p. 291 Edit. Venet. 1568.
I^ Ant. Vand^r Lind^n de Ci^^ui^fangu. ^x^rc. 9

-- Aleo ut mihi etiam persuasum fit quamvis id nunquam vid^rim; interdum a
^inistro coe^ae caudicis latere, ubi jugulum contingit, venam depromi, quae
secundum finistrum vertebrarum latus declivis ducta, sinistris cos^is samos
offerat: illa quam sine pari nuncupamus, dextras costas alente. Atque hujusmodi
ven^ or^um, non tantum a jugulo primum posse^fieri, sed paulo infernis, etiam
agnus attestatur: in quo ^ale aliquid semel observavi.

Viden' venisse in rem, and quasi in manu jam habuisse illud Ariadnae filum,
quod secutus penetra^e in naturae Labyrin^hum, majoremque sibi gloriam
comparare potuisset? sed quo fructu? Audi sis, and disce, quam homini,
scientias sectanti, necessarium sit, etiam in naturalibus eum, qui sui juris
and muneris fecit, docere homines scientias and arts, Ps 94. v. 10. Jer. 28.
v. 26, precari, Revela oculos meos ut cernam mirabilia in operibus tuis, ex Ps.
119. v. 18.

Verum, inquit, ejuscemodi non nisi rarissime occurrentes venarum series,
anatomes studioso non aliter expendendas putarim, quam s^interdum sextus in
manu digitus, aliud ne monstruosum se spectandum offerret. Adeo ut siquando in
publicis sectionibus haec observo, ea tanquam non essent, tacit praetereamne
artis candidati in omnibus corporibus haec observari arbitrentur.

Quanto egregius, and propter hoc non unam atque immortalem laudem meritus
Barth. Eustachius: qui non solum candide exponit, quod vidit; sed et praemisso,
quod res merebatur, praeloquio conatus est posteriorem studia excitare ad
ulteriorem inquisitionem et perfectiorem cognitionem. Neque enim ignorabat, rei
quidem inventionem, (...) munus es^e: at vero ejus plenam cognitionem (...)
opus ef^e. Sed audiamus ipsum.

Ad hanc naturae providentiam quandam equorum venam alias pertinere credidi:
quae cum artificii and admirationis plena sit, nec delectatione ac fructu
careat: quam^is minime sit ad Thoracem alendum instituta: operae pretium est ut
exponetur. Itaque in illis animantibus, pergit ab hoc ipso insigni trunco
sinistri juguli, qua posterior seeds radicis venae internae jugularis spectat,
magna quaedam propago g^rminat: quaepraeterquam quod in ejus origin ostiolum
semi-circulare habet, est etiam ALBA ET AQUEI HUMORIS PLENA; noc l^nge ab ortu
in duas parts scinditur; paulo post rursus coeuntes in unam: quae nullos ramos
diffund^ns, juxta sinistram vertebrarum latus, penetrato septo transverso, deor
sum ad medium usque lumborum fertur: quo latior efferta, magnamque arteriam
circumplexa, obscurissimum finem, nihilque adhuc non been perceptum, obtinet.

Since the writing hereof, I have met with a book containing certain Letters of
Marcellus Malpighius, and Carolus Fracassatus; in which it is observable that
Fracassatus (the Anatomy. Professor at Pisa) does ascribe the Invention of the
Circulation of the blood to Caesalpinus; and of the ductus Thoracius to
Eustachius: His words are these: Adeo oscitantia Autorum quaedam tam male
praeponuntur, ac tanguntur, ut oporteat alios eadem repetere, ac ditare novis
elucubrationibus, ac si nunquam fuissent. Sanguinis Circulatio, Galaxia in
Microcosmo humano, scilicet via Chyli Cor, nonne ^aesalpinum agnoscit Authorem,
ac Eustachium de vena sine pari? Et tamen soles in Scholis Autores crepant
Anglos Harvaeus, and Di^penses Pecquetos: non tamen spernendi, qui verum
rudimenta ponunt, etiamsi infecto nec absoluto opere cessaverint: Fracassatus
de cerebro. p. 202.
qui invenit anticipavit laborem and curam quaerendi: and ad minora vocatur, si
quaetionis solicitudo and jactatio tollatur: par tamen decus manet and illum,
qui primum invenit, and qui postremum perfecit, nescio enim an praestet
invenisse, an ditasse.

Having said thus much, I leave Mr. Glanvill, to answer those little quillets
of his, which can convince none but Shallow-brain'd and Comical Wits. -- If
they knew these grand Theories formerly; how chances it that they speak no
more of things, which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How come
they to be left without memory among their followers, who were such
superstitious porers upon their writings? How chances it not to have been
shown to be lodged in those Authors before the days of Dr. Harvey, etc. when
Envy had impregnated and determined their imaginations? Let illiterate persons
and Mathematicians be swayed against plain proof by these Arguments. I think in
stead of Temples and Altars to be erected to these Inventors, there is more
need of a Schoolmaster and an Antiquary, the one to teach them humane learning,
the other to instruct them in past discoveries; least, with much trouble and
pains our new Philosophers should find out again the Art of Printing, or
E^ching: the use of Gunpowder, or the Lodestone.

Of Transfusion of Blood -- into Animals.
Plus Vltra. page 17.
THus, Sir, I have done with Instances of Anatomical Advancements, unless I
should hitherto refer the late noble Experiment of Transfusion of the Blood,
from one living Animal into another, which I think very fit to be mentioned;
and I suppose it is not improper for this place: Or however, I shall rather
venture the danger of improprie^y and misplacing, then omit the taking notice
of so excellent a Discovery, which no doubt future Ingenuity and Practice will
improve to Purposes not yet thought of; and we have very great likelihood of
advantages from it in present Prospect.

For it is concluded, That the greatest part of our diseases, arise either from
the scarcity, or malignant tempers and corruptions of our Blood; in which cases
Transfusion is an obvious Remedy; and in the way of this Operation the peccant
blood may be drawn out^ without the danger of too much enfeebling Nature, which
is the grand inconvenience of mere Phlebotomies. So that this Experiment may be
of excellent use, when Custom and Acquaintance have hardened men to permit the
Practice in Pleurisies, Cancers, Leprosies, Madness, Ulcers, Smallpox, Dotage,
and all such like Distempers. And I know not why that of injecting prepared
Medicines immediately into the blood, may not be better and more efficacious
then the ordinary course of Practice: Since this will prevent all the danger of
frustration from the loathings of the Stomach, and the disabling, clogging
mixtures and alterations they meet with there, and in the in^estines, in which
no doubt much of the spirit and virtue is lost. But in the way of immediate
injection they are kept entire, all those inconveniences are avoided, and the
Operation is like^ to be more speedy and successful. Both these noble
Experiments are the late Inventions of the ROYAL SOCIETY, who have attes^ed the
reality of the former, that of Transfusion of Blood by numerous trials on
several sorts of brute Animals, Indeed the French made the Experiment first
upon humane Bodies, of which we have a good account from Mounsieur Dennis. But
it has been practiced also with fair and encouraging success by our
Philosophical Society. The other of injection, if it may be mentioned as a
different invention, was also the Product of some generous Inventors; though
indeed more forward Foreigners have endeavored to usurp the Credit of both^
This latter likewise has succeed^d to considerable good effects in some new
Trials that have been made of it in Dantzick, as appears in a Letter written
from Dr. Fabricius of that City, and Printed in the Philosophical Translations.

I shall not quarrel with Mr. Glanvill for misplacing this discourse about the
Transfusion of Blood, Those Forreigner^ will rectify hereaf^er their mistakes,
and not attribute the injectin^ of Medic^ments to th^^^ ^nvention^ as Caspar
Schottus in Mir^b. Art. l. xi. c. 21. p. 891. ^ Phil. Iac. Sacks in Ocean
Micromicrocosm. s^ct. 155 have do^c, unjustly magnifying ^oler^iss^ram
Industriam and Ex^p^rientiam of these Pretenders

Andr. Li^av. defens. Syntagm arcanor adv. Henning. Scheunemem act 2. c. page
8. edit. F^ancof^urt. A. 1615.


but I think all the World will condemn him for ascribing either the invention
of Transfusing blood, or of injecting Medicaments into the veins, unto the
Society. That the latter was a thing much practiced by Dr. Wren and others in
Oxford, before the Restoration of his Majesty, and before that ever the SOCIETY
was thought upon, is a thing known to all that were at those days in that
University. I saw my self in those days the Dog into whose veins there was
injected a Solution of Opium, at the Lodgings of the Honorable Robert Boil,
of which he makes mention in his second discourse of the Usefulness of Natural
Philosophy, and Borrichius in his Letters to Bartholinus.

As for that other of Transfusing the blood out of one Animal into another, if
the Question be who first proposed it into the World to be tr^ed, it is certain
that Libavius first did tha^, at least I know not any more ancient then He^
That Learned man above Fifty years ago, so plainly describes the Tran^fusion,
that one can hardly discourse of it with more clearness, then there is done in
these words. Adsit Iuvenis robustus, sanus, sanguine spirituoso plenus: Adstet
exhaustus viribus, tenu^s, macitentus, vix animam trahens. Magister Artis
habeat tubulos argenteos inter se congruen^es, ap^riat arteriam robus^i and
tubulum inserat, muniatque mox and aegr^ti arteriam findat, and tubulum
foemineum infigat: jam duos tubulos sibi mutuo applicet, and ex sano sanguis
arterialis calens and spirituosus saliet in aegrotum, unaque vitae fontem
afferet, omnemque languo^em pellet. This allegation was made use of by an
Italian Phi^osopher, and silenceth all those in England, or France, that
pretend to the Glory of having first proposed: Phil^s. T^ansact. Numb. 37. p.
740.
So that the Author of the Philosophical Transactions confesses it in these
words". This indeed is clear enough, and obliges us to aver a greater
Antiquity of this operation, ^y his leave it infers only the mention of it to
be more ancient, not ^he Operation.

Libavius propos^th it out of some Paracel^ian Magical Writer, and not from his
own Fancy: adding that the Physician who practices th^s Transfusion, de^e^vs
Hellebore himself.

See Mr. I. Denny's Letter in the Transact. numb. 27. Ib. num^ 28


then before we were aware of, though it is true, Libavius did not propose it,
but only to mock at it (which is the common fate of new Inventions in their
Cradle) besides that, He contrives it with great danger both to the Recipient
and Emittent, by proposing to open Arteries in both, which indeed may be
practiced upon Brutes, but ought by no means upon Man. Till that learned
Italian had instructed the Virtuosi in the point, there had been a great
Controversy agitated between the French and English Societies about the
Invention. The former pretended, that it was mentioned first amongst them about
eleven years ago, at the Assembly, in the house of Mounsieur de Montmor; and
that the public is beholding to that Monsieur for this discovery, and the
benefits and advantages that shall be reaped thereby. But about the person that
should first m^ntion the design, the French vary. Monsieur de Gury fathers it
upon the Abbot Bourdelot: but the Author of their Iournals upon a Benedictine
Friar. Our Society having given the world occasion to take notice of it
publicly, and having otherwise long before pursued the Oxford Invention of
injecting Liquors into the veins, thought themselves injured in this, that the
French should usurp the Credit of such a discovery as had its first birth in
England, upon a pre^ence that it was conceived in France: it being notorious,
the French took occasion to try it by the Example of the English Virtuosi: and
there being no public record cited, declaring the time and place of the
Invention proposed the Method to practice it, and the success of the Execution'
Thereupon began a Paper-scuffle betwixt the Gazettiers of the Curiens^ which
any m^n may read^ with some pleas^re, because they had on both sides such
little Logic, as to argue from the mentioning of a design, to the effecting
it. If the way of Argumentation be good and solid, then Aristotle, and such of
the Ancients, as proposed the squaring of the Circle, must not be denied the
glory of being Inventors of it: So they which first proposed a perpetual
motion, or the Northwest Passage, may go for Inventors of them: yet are none of
these things yet discovered. Oh! new Correlates, and worthy of our Inventors!
Long ago Aristotle and the Common Dialectio^s told us, Datur scibile de quo non
datur Scientia. But none lik^ our Anti-Logicians-ever taught, there were a sort
of Inventors who^e Inve^tions were yet to seek. All that our Inventors did,
was, that after Dr. Lower had first discovered and practiced the Transfusion at
Oxford in Febru^ry 1665. They on the seventeenth of May following 1665. gave
order that there should be trials made for transfusing the blood: See Transact.
Number. 28. page 524.
b^t their ^rials proving lame for want of a fit Apparatus, and a well
continued Method of Operation: the Dr. sent them a convenient Method for
effecting the thing. Before this, there never was any mention or proposal made
at the Society concerning the Transfusion, as I am certainly informed by one of
their Number, who has examined their Iournal Books, in which such Proposals
and Experiments are recorded. Nay, they were so far from pretending to it at
first, that when it was mentioned unto them by Mr. Boil, there were some as
well severe as ingenuous Critics, who thought it somewhat strange and bold for
him to affirm that the Dr. had made it succeed. And besides, I observe that Mr.
Boil in his Letter to Dr. Lower (who has vindicated the Invention to himself
in his late Book de Cord) does not say that ever the Society had thought of or
attempted, or designed to attempt the thing. He calls it insolitum and
insperatum conamen. June. 26. 1666. and desires He would acquaint the Society
with the manner how he achieved it. Now since that neither was Dr. Lower then
of the Society, nor any way entitles them unto it, but himself, and that in a
Treatise wherein he does not so much as call himself a Member of that Assembly,
set any man judge with how much truth this other Discovery is ascribed to these
NEW EXPERIMENTATORS, In the Transactions numb. 37. page 371. The G^z^ttier
affi^ms, that upon further inv^stig^tion i^ wa^ by g^od proof ( which is in h^s
hands) proved that the invention (...) ^nown to some Ingenious pers^ns in
^ngland thi^^y years ago. If so, ^hen is not the Soc^ety the Inventors of it,
exc^pt we will say, that Societies as well as individual (...) de pre-exist!
But may not a man ask (...) Gazettier^ where is the public record (...) this
Inven^i^n? w^a^ Account ^s there of the Me^hod with which it was practiced?
with what su^ces? How comes all this ^o be concea^ed till after Dr. Lower
atchieves it, and the Fr^nch pr^^^nd to it? would any man have con^^^led their
claim to the D^scov^ry^ afte^ that it was become the talk of E^rope^ the
Da^ling of the Soc^e^y and wo^thy to ^e dispu^ed by the French? why did they
not put in their Claim, being w^thin hea^ing, till about three years after,
by our Virtuoso. But least I should seem to deal too severely and mal^ciously
with them, rather then it shall be said That they invented nothing, I grant,
that They invented a LIE; and shall conclude the Debate by representing the
words out of their Transactions, by which they assume to themselves the Credit
of the Invention, and by a dubious wording and pointing of the Period,
insinuate as if Dr. Lower as well as Dr. King had been encouraged to the
Attempt by the Society.

Phi^osoph. Transact. Numb. 27. page 490.
How lon^ so^ver that Experiment may have been conceived in other parts (which
is needless to contest) it is notorious that it had its Birth first of all in
England; some ingenious persons of the Royal Society, having first started it
there, several years ago, ( as appears by their Journal) and that dextrous
Anatomist, Dr. Lower, reduced it into practice, both by contriving a Method for
the Operation, and by successfully executing the same, wherein he was soon
overtaken by several happy Trials of the skilful hand of Dr. Edmund King, and
others encouraged thereunto, by the said Society, which being notified to the
World Numb. 6.19. and 20. of these Transactions printed November. 19. and December.
17. 1666. the Experiment was soon after that time heard of to have been tried
in foreign Parts, without hearing any thing of its having been conceived ten
years ago.

In which relation, I must take notice that it does not really appear in their
Iournal-books, that ever any such thing was started by any persons how
ingenious soever of their Society; Dr. Lower being not then, nor long after in
the History of the Royal Society reckoned as a Member of it. Next^ that the
int^rpunction of the period is so equivocally placed and penned, that the
unwary Reader may think that Dr. Lower, as well as the others was encouraged to
the trial by the Society. Whereas he was not, whatever the others were. Again,
it is disingeniously said, that he was soon overtaken by several happy Trials
of Dr. Edmund King, and others, encouraged thereto by the Society. Since it
appears by the letter of Mr. B^yle, that the Society knew not how to do the
thing in June, which Dr. Lower had effected in February, and the fame thereof
at that time was spread over England. In July Dr. Lower acquainted the Society
with the manner of the Transfusion, whereof Dr. Wallis had given the Society an
imperfect acco^nt a little before of what he had seen Dr. Lower do at Oxford.
So that for at least four or five months, the Members of the Society did not
overtake Dr. Lower. But after they were acquainted with the contrivance, they
invented it very clearly.

From hence it is easy for any man to judge with how much right Mr. Glanvill
does say, that both the injecting of Medicines, and transfusing blood into the
veins of Animals, those Noble Exp^riments were the late Inventions of the
SOCIETY. I shall now proceed to inquire into the Utility of them; thereby to
discover how noble and excellent they are, and what advantages we may hope to
derive from them hereafter.

Because this Transf^nding of blood has hitherto been looked on as the primary
Invention, and the most famed of any the Society were ever entitled unto: and
that they themsel^es have particularly concerned themselves in asserting it to
be their discovery^ to the end that every Reader may the better be able to
judge of the Controversy, without being forced to go seek out amongst the
scattered transactions and elsewhere, several Histories that are material to
the passing a right judgment; I shall crave pardon if I do relate particularly
the matter of fact. and what has been sundry times performed by the English,
Italian and French Virtuosi, with every circumstance, both as to injecting of
Medicines, and of blood into the veins.

As to the injecting of Medicaments into the veins, it is an Experiment that I
am apt to think was first tried by the English, and as a curiosity, it was not
unpleasant; but that it should be so advantageous a discovery as Mr. Glanvill
represents it is like to be, I do not believe. There was a time when men had
regard to their Consciences, and what could not be administered but upon
prudential hopes of advantage to the Patient, no approved Physician durst, or
would give to any sick person: but in this Age, such as ought to protest
against it, are as forward as any to forget these considerations, and prompt
men on to practices without either regarding whether the effect be not Murder
in the Physicians, besides the ill consequences to the diseased. In the
injecting of Medicaments, I must complain that neither the Operation of
Medicaments immediately injected into the blood and veins is known, nor the
dose; and consequently the Project not like to improve Physic at all, unless
our Magistrates will license men to try so many Experiments, even to the
apparent hazard or certain death of the parties, and may regulate and
authenticate the practice in such manner as becomes a Baconical Experiment: and
to encourage Rational men to this procedure, there ought to be a greater
deficiency in Physic, then yet appears, and a more hopeful success then any
man can yet expect, supposed by this way. A Paynim told us, Nulla unquam de
morte hominis cunctatio longa est.


A sober Physician will look upon the act to be as indiscreet, as the Comedian
describes love to be, Quaeres in se neque consilium, neque modum habet ullum,
eam consilio regere non potes. That there is no probability that this way of
Medicine can ever amount to any thing, appears from this consideration, that
Liquors immediately injected into the blood, have a different Operation there,
then when taken in by the Stomach: and that the mixtures of Liquors with blood
upon Phlebotomy in a Pottinger, gives no light to the Experiment. As I shall
now show.

Seignior Fracassati Professor of Anatomy at Pisa tried these Experiments by
injecting Medicaments.

1. Having injected into the jugular and crural veins of a Dog some Aqua fortis
diluted, the Animal died presently: Transact. number. 27. p. 490 491.
and being opened, all the blood in the vessels was coagulated and fixed: but
that which was in the Viscera (which I dare not English Guts, Car. Fracassat.
Ep. Ana^. de cerebro. p. 252.253.^54.
but take it to denote the Heart, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, where the blood passes
extravasated through: though the Transactions render it Guts, and destroy the
antithesis betwixt vasa and viscera) did not so easily coagulate. It was also
observed that the great vessels were burst, or as it were cut asunder, yet have
I known who has put Aqua fortis into cooling Iuleps in Fevers, as others do
spirit of Vitriol without any harm. 2. There was also infused into another Dog,
some spirit of Vitriol, which had not so present an effect: for the Animal
complained a great while, and foamed like Epilepticks, and had its respiration
very thick: and observing the beating of his breast, one might easily judge,
the Dog suffered much: who dying at last, his blood was found fixed in the
veins, and grumous, resembling Soot: whereas in the Experiment with Aqua fortis
(which may as easily be given inwardly as spirit of Nitre) the blood is not
said to have been changed in its color from other coagulated blood. It was
also observabl^ (though the Transactions mind it not) that the blood in this
last Dog was not upon coagulation continuous in the veins, but broken and
severed into parcels. 3. There was also injected into the jugular of another
dog, some oil of Sulphu^ per campanam, but he died not of it, though this
inf^sion was several times tried on him. And the wound being closed, and the
dog let go, he went into all the corners of the room, searching for meat, and
having found some bones, he fell to gnawing them with a strange avidity, as if
this Liquor had caused in him a great appetite. 4. Another dog, into whose
veins some Oil of Tartar per deliquium was injected, did not escape so well:
for he complained much, and was altogether swollen; and then died: ^eing o^ened,
the Spectators were surprised to find his blood not curdled, but on the
contrary more thin and florid then ordinary. Dr. L^wer de mo^u Cordis page 1.9.
5. Dr. Lower having extracted half a pound of blood out of the crural urine of
a Mastiff dog, did inject the like quantity of warm milk into him; within half
an hour the dog became very sick, breathed with difficulty, and seemed to
labor much with his heart and diaphragme, and after to palpitate, tremble and
sigh grievously, and at length miserably died. Upon dissection he found the
vena cava, the ventricles of the heart, the vessels of the Lungs, and the Aorta
full of blood and milk coagulated together, and the concretion was so hard,
Transact. number. 27. page 49.
that it was not easy to part it. This he tried but once. But Monsieur Dennys
the French Physician says, he tried it with a different success. For having
syringed about a quarter of a pint of milk into the veins of an Animal (he
tells not what) and having opened the same some time after, he found the milk
so perfectly mixed with the blood, that there was not any place in which
appeared the least footstep of the whiteness of the milk, and all the blood was
generally more liquid, and less apt to coagulate. 6. I received an account of
some Experiments, from one much versed in these injections (which he may one
day acquaint the world with) to this effect. That the infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, injected in a less quantity then otherwise ( viz^ ss) will work by
vomit in a dog, almost presently, and very strangely, and make him grievously
sick. Yet Dr. Wren informs Mr. Boil, Mr. Boyl^ of the Usefu^nes^ of Not
P^il^s. part. 2 p. 54, 55.
that a moderate dose of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum did not much move
the dog that he injected it into: but a large dose of two ounces or more
wrought soon, and so violently, that he vomited up life and all. That a dog
will take two drams of Opium into his Stomach, and seem never the worse, if you
keep him from lying down half an hour after; but two drams of Poppy-seeds made
into an Emulsion, and injected into his veins, will kill him presently. Vid
^up^a p 53.54
7. Mr. Boil says, that he conveyed a small dose of the tincture of Opium into
a dog this way, which began to work so speedily upon the brain, that he was
scarce untied before the Opium began to disclose its Narcotick quality; and
almost as soon as he was upon his feet, he began to nod with his head, and reel
and faulter in his place; but being kept awake, and in motion, by whipping up
and down the Garden, after some time he came to himself again, and not only
recovered but began to grow fat so manifestly, that 'twas admired. 8. A certain
German Count coming into England, Phil. Iac. Sachs in Ocean-macromicrocosm.
s^ct 15^.
relates an Experiment, which he saw in the presence of Pr. Rupert. After some
blood taken from a dog, there was injected into him a small quantity
(portiuncula) of Spanish wine; within sometime after the dog was perfectly
drunk, being giddy, performing sundry ridiculous actions, then vomiting with a
profound sleep. 9 Dr. Fabricius Physician to the City of Dantzick injected
purgatives into humane bodies, Transact. numb. 30. pa^. 564, 565.
with this effect. A strong bodied Soldier being dangerously infected with the
Pox, and having grievous protuberations of the bones in his arms, two drams of
a purgative liquor were injected: he presently complained of great pains in his
elbows, and the little valves of his arm did swell so visibly, that it was
necessary by a great compression on's fingers to stroke up that swelling
toward the Patients shoulders^ Some four hours after it began to work, not
very troublesomely; and so it did the next day, in so much that the man had
five good stools with it. Without any other remedies those protuberances were
gone, nor are there any footsteps of the disease left. Two other trials were
made upon women, the one a married woman of 35, the other a Servant-maid of 20
years old: both from the birth had been grievously troubled with Epileptick
Fits, so that there was little hopes of curing them. There was injected into
their veins a laxative rosin, dissolved in an Antiepileptical spirit; the first
of these had gentle stools, some hours after the injection; and the next day
the Fits recurred now and then, but much milder; and are since quite vanished.
The Maid, she went the same day to stool four times, and several times the
next: but by going into the Air, and taking cold, and not observing any diet,
cast her self away. It Is remarkable, that it was common to all three, to vomit
soon after the injection, and that extremely, and frequently.
I have not time to add any more of these kind of trials: but from hence it is
evident, that things operate (where they do operate in the same manner) in a
lesser dose, then when taken into the Stomach, and with more violence. Vulgo
hactenus a non p^ucis sp^^itus Vitrioli, and Sulphu^is pro diversis reb^s
habiti sunt: adeo quidem ut nonnulli (...) sulphuris and acidum ad
e^sdempulmonis morb^s exhiberent: sed valde impe^ite cum ac da omnia sint
pect^ri inimica, and spiritus Sulphuris and Vitri li ess^ntia null^ modo
^iff^rant^ sed ex ^adem re generent^r, and parentu^. Etenim spiritus V^trioli
and Sulphuris eundem sa^orem, co^o^em and omnino easdem q^alitat^s and ^ff^ctus
habent, and ad ^osd^m usu^ in m^dicina adhi^^ntur: n^ndumqu^ inventus est, qui
^pecu^iarem aliquam, seu manifestam seu occuliam qualitatem in spiritu
Sulphuris monstrare potuerit, quae non e^i^m i^ spiritu Vitrioli sit. S^nnert.
in Paralipomen. ad institut. l. 5 part. 3 sect. 3 c. 5.
That oftentimes such things as are innocently taken in to the Stomach, are
mortal when injected immediately into the blood. That although learned
Physicians have made little or no difference betwixt the op^ration of Oil of
Sulphur, and that of Vitriol, yet by this Experiment there is found to be a
quite different effect. So the Salt of Tartar (which is as innocent as Salt of
Wormwood, or any such Salt) had a pernicious effect upon the dog, though
discrepant from the others.

As to the Experiments of Dr. Fabritius, they do not give much of Encouragement
to the Trial, for the one died which had the most of youth; and though her
death be attributed to other circumstances and neglects, yet either those are
irivial, or for some ( unknown) length of time there must be greater care then
ordinarily after Physic, otherwise small accidents become mortal. And the
extreme and frequent vomitings (which here happen from the sufferings of the
Heart, and not the Stomach) render the course more hazardous to tender
Stomachs, and weak Constitutions, then Mr. Glanvill suggests. So that the
loathings of the Stomach are not prevented by this way, nor the success very
inviting (how speedy soever) upon those Experiments any more then from the
Churlish Physic of the ancient and moderate Chemists of Mr. Odored's party,
which wisemen will not imitate. I wonder the laxative Solutions were not set
down that we might judge of their strength: and that the way of di^ting and
ordering of them afterward was omitted: whereas the knowledge thereof might
avail to prevent the ill consequence which befell the Maid.

I shall now consider the effects which the several Liquors have upon a (...)
with the blood^ when taken warm in a Pottinger, and those a^^u^ed to it. This
is a Practice which the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil imparted to the Royal
Society in December 1664. and thinks that Eracassati may have taken his hint
from it, to inject those Liquors^ but I find a Letter from Leyden sent to
Bartholinus, Dated Ian. 9. 1662. in which there are several E^periments of that
kind, which I shall set down presently. If I placed any great value upon the
Experiment, I could put in for the Practiser of it at Stratford upon Avon in
1660^ and prove that I made some Solutions of Salt of Ash, Salt of Wormwood,
and Salt of Tartar, and received the blood of sheep into the glasses in which
they were, to try the differences betwixt those Salts, whether they were of the
same nature (so that it was indifferent whether one used Salt of Wormwood,
Garduus Benedictus, Yarrow, or Mugwort) or that there were any difference.
Which last Angela Sala denies, ^ngelus Sala Tartaralog. sect. 3 c 2. p. 133.
though other Chemists affirm it. But after that I had enquired into that
Controversy by several ways, I went to Iamaica and neglected the Experiment.
But since that I see that every unprofitable trifle, becomes a famous and noble
Experiment, and if it bring no present Emolu^^^^, yet at least it becomes
Luciferous, and (as they say) puts us in the Prospect of several great
advantages; at least, more and greater things will be disclosed by it, when
future ingenuity and diligence has improved and perfected the invention. Since
that time I have made many Essays about the mixture of sundry Liquors, with the
blood of Sheep, Lambs, Calves, Cows, Oxen, Hogs, Poultry, and that in several
manners.

I have received the blood of several ^^^atures upon warm solutions of sundry
Salts, of Allom, impure Saltpeter, Sal Prunellae, Salt of Nitre, upon solution
of the several Vitriols; upon Steel wine, Vomitive mine, Sack, French wine, and
Malaga, upon spirit of mine, spirit of Cider, and spirit of the grounds of
Beer^ upon warm Urine, upon mixtures with spirit of Vitriol, and oil of
Sulphur, and Juice of Lemons, and Oranges, upon the rare liquor o^ Saltpeter;
upon it, after it has passed the Ashes, and upon the Mothers of it, and many
other trials with oil of Wormwood, Amber, etc. dissolved in spirit of wine.

I have also poured upon the Mass, after it has coagulated several acid
spirits, before and after the Serum was separated from it.

I have also taken the separated Serum, and affused spirit of Vitriol to some;
to others spirits of Hartshorn, and other spirituous waters, and I have
affused to those that had a mixture of the spirit of Hartshorn some acid
spirits, and other liquors to see the changes.

I shall not now set down the several Phenomenon, and observations I made, not
having leisure to digest them all; nor being willing to dismember a discourse I
intend about the nature of blood and Phlebo^omy, in which I shall not only
treat of all these things, but add many other observations, from the burning
of blood, and the Serum, which any man may do, without feeling any thing by
sympathy, notwithstanding the whimseys of Helmont, and that great Virtuoso Sir
Kenelme Digby. I have done it fourty-times in Men, Women, and Children, to
observe those varieties in blood, which never entered into the heads of our
Experimentators^ Though Dr. Walter Needham, my learned School-fellow, a Member
of the Society, D^squisit. de soe^u. page 130.
deny that blood will burn, Carbonibus injectus sanguis flammam non facile
concipit, sed potius torretur in grumum. Yet if any one please but to take a
piece of the coagulated Mass of blood, and lay it on a Fire shovell, and so
place it in an hot fire, that the coals arch round about it, but touch it not:
after he has observed the great variety of its intumescence, and the ^rackling
of diverse salts, as it were decrepitating, it will take flame commonly when
dry, and burn with a great variety of Phenomenon: some will not flame at all,
though brought to ignition: there will be also variety in the remaining Cinis,
as to its saltness. In the like manner set the Serum to coagulate on the coals,
and then burn it. I have also burned the blood and Serum, after it has been
mixed with acid liquors. By this trial will appear more then can be imagined as
to the differences of the blood of Animals, and of young and old Animals, I
will endea^our to finish that Tractate, wherein there will be observations
about the color of blood, and melancholique, and pituitous, and crimson parts;
and a certain pellicle which generates by the Air on the top of most blood, if
it stand 24 hours; which sometimes is as firm as those tunicles that
encompass the Liver, or Kidneys. Observations upon that, and upon the ^urning
of the coagulated Mass, and its becoming red again, though not so floridly.
Trials upon that in vessels covered, that it is not from the air, in opposition
to the Fracassati.

I will not mention any thing hereof now, but having imparted some observations
to some, and knowing what plagiaries some men are, I thought fitting to publish
thus much, that they might not pretend to the inventions, each whereof were
enough to make one of them proud, and fill the Transactions. Yet I will say
this, That I never had put my self upon these trials, but out of envy and
indignation against them, and the Transfusion of blood, about which they made
such ado every where. I shall promise one thing, that Mr. Boil is very much
mistaken in, imagining that there is a great difference betwixt the effects of
Medicaments, when mi^ed with the warm blood of an Animal out of the veins and
in them, as will appear by the mixture of milk already sp^cifi^d, and that of
the Salt of Tartar, which will follow out of the Letter of Borrichius.

Experiments upon the mixture of Liquors, with the warm blood of Animals, taken
out by Phlebotomy.
1. By putting into the warm blood, Transact. numb. 29. p. 552.
as it came from Animals, a little Aqua fortis, or Oil of Vitriol, or spirit
of Salt, (these being the most usual and acid menstruums) Mr. Boil observed,
that the blood not only would presently lose its pure color, and become of a
dirty one, but in a trice also be coagulated; whereas some, if fine urinous
spirit, such as the spirit of Sal Armoniack, were mingled with the warm blood,
it would no^ only not cu^dle (...), or imbase its color, but make it look
rather more florid ^hen before, and both keep it fluid, and preserve it from
putrefaction for a long time.

The. Barth^lin. ep. Centur. 3 ep. 97. page 421, 4^2
2. The Learned and Inquisitive Man Olaus B^rrichius, having cut up a dog alive,
made these observations. He took five glasses, and placed them in order,
putting into the one spirit of vinegar, into another oil of Tartar per
deliquium into a third a Solution of Allom, into a fourth spirit of Salt
Armoniack, into a fifth spirit of wine; into each of the Glasses, he suffered
the blood of the Crural Art^ry to run. After some time he come to look upon his
Glasses, but the next day the observation was most perspicuous. That Glass
which had the spirit of vinegar in it, it was become black like to the blood of
Melancholique persons, Inspeximus post intervallum and before postr^^ie omnia:
Observavimus sanguinem, cui aff^sus erat spiritus ace^i, reddi^um nigricantem
instar sanguinis Melancholicorum, sedimento crasso, copioso, a^ro,
supernatantem liquorem, paene etiam atrum. Cui af^usum oleum salis tartari,
redditum coloris sic satis floridi, sed turbidiorem liquorem^ sedimentum
nullum, ramenta tantum fibrillarum ins^ar hin^ inde conspicua. Cui affufa
solutio aluminis, redditum instar puti^ae and subcine^itiae put^ilaginis, omni
sanguinis color pror^us abolito. Cui affusus spiritus vini, redditum
turbidiorem, quam cui oleum salis tartari. Cui spi^itus salis Armoniaci,
reddit^m omnium elegantissimum, color floridum, tenuem substantia, infundo
se^imentum diaphanum instar Galatinae (...).
with a thick and copious black sediment, and that liquor which was on the top,
was blackish.

Where the Oil of Tartar was, the color was pretty florid, but the liquor more
turbid, no sediment at all, only some filements, like little fibers floated in
it conspicuously, here and there.

Where the Solution of Allom was, there all seemed like a subcineritious or
dirty^coloured putrilage, there being no relics of the crimson color of
blood to be seen.

Where the spirit of wine was, there the liquor was more turbid then that which
had the Oil of Tartar in it.

Where the spirit of salt Armoniack was, that was of the most beautiful color
of all, being very florid, of a thin consistence, with a diaphanous sediment
like to the gelly of currants.

This observation he also tells Bartholinus, that he had in like manner made
the preceding Summer.

Out of all which it most evidently appears how nice a thing the blood is, and
how small mixtures alter the color and texture of it: and what consequences
may follow upon such alteration of its consist^nce, and particular texture, no
man knows; but that they may be very bad (even where innocent, and wholesome
Medicaments are affused) is evident ou^ of what I have set down.

It is also as manifest, that there are in the bodies of men and women
solutions or liquors imbued with sundry salts, as aluminous, acid, and
vitriolate, etc. which when they shall mix with the injected blood, what the
issue may be, I leave the Prudent to conjecture. C^rtain i^ is, that for these
considerations specified (reserving my own Experiments to my self) none but
inconsiderate Quacksalvers would put a Patient upon the trial of injecting of
Medicaments, or transfusing of blood. It is a course Nature (whose Servants and
Imitators Physicians hitherto were) never prompted us unto: Having taken so
many courses whereby blood might at any time of need issue out of the veins and
arteries in sundry parts of the body: But especially provided that nothing
might immediat^ly come into the veins. Whatever comes into the veins by the
Stomach; suffers a great alteration first, and whatsoever is noxious, either
separates from it there and in the guts, or is mortified, or mitigated so as to
be innocent, and agreeabl^ to the nature of the veins. Which particular nature
of the sanguif^rous vessels, is that which in the dead keeps its own blood
fluid, and in the living contributes so much to the motion of it, Vide ep
Walaei de mo^u sangu.
that if you make a stop and int^rcept the impulse of the subsequent blood, yet
will the other continue its cours^. But what will the effect be of
Heterog^neous blood? For undoubtedly the nature of the veins is agreeabl^ to
the blood, and communicates its impurities and virtue, as the cask does to the
wine. But further, since the blood is to pass through the porosities of the
Liver and Lungs, and capillary veins and arteries; how will they agree with the
new blood. (it being evident upon mixture of Liquors, and upon burning, that
there is a difference in the fibrosity of the bloods, and consistence of the
several Serums) or how will that circulate which results from the mixture, I
know not, but certain it is, that the ill consequence is almost, if not
absolutely past remedy.

In fine, what is it that is aimed at in this Transfu^ion? is it the rectifying
the mass of blood (suppose sev^nt^en pound in a body) with the affusion of a
few ounces, or a pound of L^mbs blood? They may as soon rectify as much
vinegar, or decayed wine, with the like proportion of good wine? would they
amend the impurities of the vessels? there is the same difficulty as before.
That which they transfuse is not a Chemical spirit, but an impure, and
h^terogeneous mixture, fitted by different digestions and ferments to a
different nourishment of another Animal, with different excrements resulting
from it. It is in the Stomach and first digestion where food is so concocted by
the Humane heat, or Acidity, as to turn to a chyle adequate to the nourishment
of man, and generating such blood, and such excrements, as are the result of
such a concoction as is agreeable to the nature of man. And so it is in all
creatures: Thus we see, that in different Animals different Excrements are
generated, nor is it to be doubted but that the concoctive principle differs as
much in a dog, or cat, as do those excr^ments which differ much from those of
men, though both eat the same meat. Otto Tachenius Hipp^^r. med. clavis c. 9.
p. 201.
Sicut acidus spiritus quilibet animam inseparabiliter in ventre suo portat,
atque in illud corpus, cui infunditur, dominium suscipit, illudque confestim
juxta sui naturam format: hinc spiritus salis in Alcali Tartari fusus statim
sibi format corpus salinum propriae naturae consentaneum, and fit sal: and
aceti spiritus, vel acetum distillatum in eodem Alcali tartari sibi format
corpus adaequatum suae propriae naturae, and fit tartarus vini, and sic de
vitriolo, and reliquis acidis: Ita quoque acidum Stomachi humani, cum
apprehendit panem, vel quicquam alibile, in quod dominari possit, illud
convertit and commutat in chylum, and exinde in carnem humanam: and eundem
panem Acidum Stomachi canini convertit and transmutat in carnem caninam: uti
and de reliquis viventibus quotidie docemur, eo quod natura in omnibus iisdem
instrumentis operatur. If the Case be such, and that the blood transfused has
received those impregnations of vitality which are agreeable to the nature of
the Animal whence it is transfused, and is qualified to generate such
nourishment, and such excrements as are the consequences of those digestive
characters (if I may so call them) and impressions; How can we imagine that
such blood being immediately transfused into our (...), without those pr^vious
alimental ^igillations and digestions, produce those effects which are to be
expected in human^ bodies, and are (though irrationally) in this case wished
for.

But perhaps they think to atchieve their design, by introducing a new texture
in the vitiated blood, and vessels, or fermentation, whereupon should ensue the
amendment. I perceive indeed by their stories a new fermentation, I had an
intention to have set down at large all the Stories relating to the Transfusion
of blood, with remarks upon them: but I was so much pr^ss^d to conclude, and
had so little leisure to dispatch it in that manner at that time, that the
Reader must be content with this brief, but I think substantial ^eply to all
that has yet been said.
that the dogs piss blood (no desirable or trivial accident!) But what a little
time is there for the blood to pass unto the heart, and mix with those other
Liquors, and ascending blood, and so to pass into the Heart and Lungs? How do
they know that the blood they transfuse is good? Upon burning they shall find
a difference in blood of beasts; and a different taste and coagulation in the
Serum. Besides, that the blood of young Animals is generally less balsamical
and inflammable, of another texture and color, the Serum very saline; and in a
word, exceeding different from what is in men and women of years. And in the
blood of men and women, there are often defects not to be perceived but by
coagulating and burning of the Serum and blood. I have taken the Serum of a
Maid seemingly healthful, only pained at Stomach, and abounding in blood, it
coagulated and looked like tallow, and would not burn at all, and smelt
noisomely after coagulat^on, not before. I have several strange instances of
this kind. If there be such indiscernable causes of distempers, and mixtures in
blood of persons that are not well, if they neither know what they aim at in
transfusing in, nor what they transfuse, Let Mr. Glanvill talk of great
Advantages to be expected, and let them try it for me. See the Stories in the
Philosophical Transactions.
Sure I am that the Transactions report an Untruth, in saying that Coga was
ever the better for it: I am told his Arm was strangely ill after it, and
difficulty cured: and if all the great likelihood of Advantages from
Transfusion that are in their present Prospect, a^ise from no other grounds,
they are very improbable. The Parliament of Pari^ have forbid it to be
prosecuted but by the allowance of the Parisian Facul^y of Physicians. A
Swedish Baron died upon it: and to argue from the cures of Madmen, I remember
they say that it is not expressed, how the Transfusion was practiced upon the
Baron Bond, nor after how long time it was repeated when he died But this is no
excu^e for them; for they have fixed no r^les or circumstances whereby to
regulate the operation^ those are to be lea^ned by frequent Experiments, and it
may be, the death of mo^e Patients. Next, it is not to be doubted, but that He
that did it might act as Cautiously as they, for his own credit, and the credit
of the t^ial, and the q^ality of the Person. It concerns them to p^ocure ^n
Authentic Narration of the things and what appeared upon his being embowell^d
or from what they suffer without hurt, is not for a Physician, but for one
that deserves to be sent to Bedlam: for mad people endures a thousand ill^^ and
strong Physic, such as others cannot endure: and if they find any amendment
sometimes by uncouth means, it is by accident, as it makes them ill, which
sometimes prove their recovery.

As for dogs, they cannot declare what they suffer: but I am in haste, and
refer my Reader to the perusal of the Histories in the Transactions: in which
what I last objected, is all confessed: and if after all I have said, he find
encouragement to try a remedy, that has sometimes proved not unfortunate, (but
is always rash) let him do it for me.

I am satisfied, That the operation carries more of terror (and many swoon upon
bleeding) then a potion, or Galenical Physic; and that the greatest part of
our distempers do not arise from the scarcity, or malignant tempers, and
corruption of our blood, is as manifest as can be; more arise from the depraved
motion, and redundancy of the blood, and serosities in and about the brain, and
the laxity and strictness of the habit and pores of the body; and in these
cases Transfusion is no remedy; much less in malignant diseases, in which to
let blood is often mortal, commonly dangerous; and it always must be antecedent
to Transfusion, excepting only the scarcity of blood; in which case what
strength is there to assimilate, or ferment with the new blood.

As to the Transfusion of blood in Pleurisies, the attempt is very ridiculous,
considering what an Ebullition and Inflammation of the blood there is then in
the Lungs, whither the transfused blood immediately flows: what extravasated
serosities do afflict those parts? how unfit are they for any seasonable
fermentation? And in the Small Pox, how few are they in (...) in that disease
at all? and ^ow (...) Tran^fusion seem, which distu^bs and diverts nature in
her present work? what h^zard must the Patient run amidst a Fever, and that
violent commotion of ^umors which afflicts his head, back, heart and lungs at
tha^ time, should ^e besides all other accidents fall into pis^ing of blood^ a
symptom so dangerous in that disease, and so usual a consequent of this
Operation.

Having dispatched those papers thus far: the length of time since they were
sent to London to be transcribed, perused, and several insertions made,
according as my memory, amidst a constant employment, suggested any thing new
unto me, and the delay of the Printing till Michaelmass-Tearm, gives me an
opportunity to relate some Observations I made at Bath, during my stay there
this Summer: As famous as the Bathes are, and of as general an use as they are
(there being no better R^medy in the world for the Scurvey the^ the Cross-Bath
regularly pursued, and as it might be, I cannot say is commonly practiced) yet
have not our Experimental Philosophers made any Inquiries into its nature and
qualities: not a man of them ever so much as tried the mixing of several
liquors and spirits with the water: as I did, and found no change upon the
mixture of Acid spirits: but the urinous and volatile spirits of Sal Armoniack
(drawn the Leiden way) and Hearts horn did change the water of the Pump in the
Gross Bath (which arises from the hot Bath) into a lacteous color and
opacity, insomuch that it represented an Almond-milk, and after a time there
precipitated to the bottom an ins^pid Magistery resembling Burnt Hearts horn
finely powdered: the precipitated powder was more copious in the affusion of
the spirit of Sal Armoniack, then that of spirit of Hartshorn: and the former
in that mixture lost its urinous smell, (and made no unpleasant, but an
unctuo^^, soft, emulsion^like dri^k) which the other retained.

Not a man of them ever tried whether the several Bath-water would coagulate
milk: which I tried first, and found that the Kings-Bath water makes Posset
with a soft cu^d, and whitish posset drink, which will not become clear: the
Cross-Bath makes an hard curd, a clean but whitish-posset-drink: the Pump^water
of the Cross-Bath (which arises from the neighboring hot Bath) yields an hard
curd, a clear and very green posset drink; which being drunk by a woman that
gave suck bred a great deal of milk (more then fennel^posset-drink) and made
her break abundance of wind, which those usually do that drink the
Bath-waters. And I believe this way of giving the Bath-waters might be no small
improvement of Physic, were those courses taken there, and that method which
those that understand the ancient and modern Bathes, and waters that are drunk,
might easily pitch upon: but this is above the reading of our Comical Wits.

I could find no grounds to believe there was any sulphur, or bitumen in the
Baths: but rather some odd Alcali mixed with the vitriol of Iron^ Mr. Ch
Hotham, when I showed him some of the extracted Salt, did conceive it to be a
mixture of common Salt, and vitriol of Iron.
I extracted the Salts by evaporation of two gallons of the Cross-Bath-water;
When I was there, a Spring of the Cross-Bath being lost, they dug for it; I
ta^ted the Earth, but could find nothing nitr^us in it: opening the gutter by
which that Bath empties it self, we found the passage crusted very thick, with
a white la^ideous concretion, rough and unequal in the surface, with several
cryst^ls fixed in it, resembling those of cream of Tartar: to taste, it was
insipid, an^ of substan^e like to what precipitate, with ^rinous spirits in the
water: but after it had ^e^ on the tongue a while, some p^eces discovered a
taste exactly ^ike cream of Tartar, others an a^striction somewhat vit^io^ine^
I brought some away, and intend to examine it further.
and having reduced them to three quarts I set it to shoot; but there was no
appearance of saltpeter at all: then I evaporated it to three-pints, but still
neither saltpeter, or any other salt appeared: then I evaporated it quite
away; and then I had about two ounces of a dark-colored salt, which at first
resembled cream of Tartar somewhat in taste; but having lien longer on the
tongue, it resembled very much the Vitriolum Mortis, with some more Alcalisate
taste: I performed the Operation both in Iron and Glass vessels with little
difference of the taste, or quantity of salt: some of the said salt dissolving
into a moisture in the air did eat off the writing upon such papers as it fell,
and turned the paper yellow all over, and rotted it. I made a Lixivium with the
Cross-Bath water, and evaporated that, thinking that if there were any unctuous
matter in the water, it might hinder the discovery of the Nitre in its
shooting; but neither could I find any thing of Nitre this way: but still
there was a taste of ^he Vitriolum Mortis in the salt: and (...) Mr^ (...) a
Practitioner there assured me, that he had known the Bath^water drink, and to
have tinged the (...) cannot avow the truth of that.

I inquired about (...) truth of what Dr. Mearn had writ about the Stone he
took up^ upon Lands-down, which being infused in water produced a resembling
heat and taste to what is in the Bath: (...) Maplet, an inquisitive and learned
Physician there, who was with Dr. Mearn then, and had some of the mineral
stone, assured me it was a lime^stone: so did Mr. Chapman an observing
Apothecary there, who likewise saw the Stone, and tasted the infusion. In fine,
where Dr. Mearn took up that Stone, any man may take up ^ thousand, they not
being east out of the Earth, but dropped out of the lime^carts which pass that
way into Bathe^ the Kills being thereabouts.

The stones in the bottom of the Cross-Bath, many are of reddish rusty color,
others green: but concerning the Batthe, I may next Summer, during my stay
there, in the midst of June and July (if God gi^e me life and health) make a
further Narrative: I only mention on this to prevent the Virtuosi from usurping
upon my discoveries and intendments. Yet to do them some justice, I was told
that in some of their Transactions, they have this observation about Bathe,
that if any person that is drunk go in there, the Bath will make him sober: If
any that is in the Bath drink freely there, it will cause him to be presently
drunk, with less drink by far then if he were out of it. This report is worthy
of our Philosophers, and advances their intelligence above the credit that
Aristotle and his Hunters deserve. The first part is defective, for it should
have been added that the drunk person must sit still, and sweat soundly: if he
stir up and down or swim, he shall be more sick then if he had never come in.
The second part is notoriously false, and all the Bath-Guides and others that
have tried it avow, that it is usual for the Townsmen to sit some hours and
drink in the Parlour of the Queen^-Bath, and never be drunk: and they say, a
man that sweats there shall bear much mo^e drink, then if he were out of the
Bath: which I thought rational and agreeable to what I had observed in the
Indies, where men sweat and have more drink then in England, and stronger.

But I come now to that Case, for which I add this Discourse, and that is,
Observations upon the mixture of the Bath-water and other Liquors with blood,
and the Phaenomen^ thereupon, which, though. I might reserve for that other
discourse of mine about Phlebotomy, yet I will oblige my Reader with some of
those Curiosities here, especially since it will give him occasion to reflect
how facile it is to multiply such Experiments, and how negligent they are who
pretend to be the grand Observators of this Age.

When I went to make use of the Bath, amongst other Prepar^tives thereto (which
are better taken upon the place, then at a distance) I caused my self to be let
blood, and being willi^g to improve that occasion as well for my instruction,
as health, I c^used several Venice-Glasses to be filled with several liquors,
each liquor amounting to some three ounces, and into each glass I suffered to
run as much as half an ounce of blood, or little more; taking no other measure,
then that the whole liquor seemed of a deep blood red. The Phenomenon thereupon
were these ensuing^ being observed presently after I had bound up my arm, and
was in condition to write.

1. That Glass which contained the spirit of S^l Armoniack (drawn the
Leiden-way) kept of an equal consistence from top to bottom, being of a deep
red, and not ^ransparent, li^e Tent-wine. 2. Into two several Glasses I had
dissolved the Salts of Ash and Wormwood, half a dram in three ounces of water;
the solutions of these two Salts showed no difference at all; the top, after
some space, was of a florid red, (such as is visible in watrish blood) for
about a quarter of an inch: the bottom was of a more dark red, and resembled
Tent-wine. 3. A fou^th Glass held Oleum Tartari per deliquium: the blood and
that liquor did not first mix, but were a^ two distinct liquors,
notwithstanding that the blood had streamed into the Glass: After a while the
blood and oil mixed together, and it all became of a deep-red from top to
bottom; the surface only was transparent, and of a brighter red, as that of the
other Alcalisate Liquors, but not so far downwards^ the rest was as Tent-wine.
4. I dissolved half a dram of All^m in three ounces of water, and upon bleeding
thereupon, all the crimson of the blood was immediately destroyed, and it
became almost as black as Ink: after a little space toward the surface it
cleared up: there were certain bubbles on the top that continued the redness.
5. Another Glass held a quantity of the Kings-Bath water, the blood that did
stream into it, appeared of a dark red, but transparent, as deep Bourdeaux wine
shows: a little below the surface it was deeply red, not transparent, but like
Tent wine. 6. The Cross-Bath altered little from the Kings-Bath, saving that
the transparency of the surface extended it self downwards to a greater
profundity then the other. 7. A Solution of half a dram of Sal prunellae,
yielded a blood on the surface like to that of Salt of Wormwood, but not to so
deep a descent: otherwise it was of the color and consistence of Tent wine.
After they had stood in the window about five hours, I returned and observed
these Phenomenon.

1. That with the spirit of Sal Armoniack continued like Tent-wine, only the
uppermost part of it to the thickness of a barley-corn, was diaphanous as deep
Bourdeaux-wine. 2. That with the Sal prunellae coagulated into a Mass, shrunk
from the sides of the Glass, and sunk to the bottom, leaving them super-natant
water of a pale citrins color; the Mass it self being of a florid red on the
surface, and of a deep red, not blackish, to the bottom, that I could perceive.
3. That with the Cross-Bath water changed not, but seemed thick as Tent-wine,
the upper part being diaphanous, and like deep Bourdeaux-wine? 4. That with the
Kings-Bath water changed not; only the diaphanous surface extended not it self
downwards so far as the other Bath-water did. 5. The Solution of All^m
contin^ed all fluid and black; no c^agulated mass therein: but the bubbles had
lost their crimson-colour, and were become cineritious, 6. That with the Salt
of Wormwood resembled deep Bourdeaux wine, but was less diaphanoux a little
below the surface: The surface extended downwards to the length of a
barley^corn with a perfect transparency. 7. That wherein was the Sal fraxini
was diaphan^^s to the bottom; no innatant filaments, or coagulated mass in it:
But the surface to the length of a barley-corn was like decayed Claret made
with a mixture of white and red wine: the residue was deeper like that of
Bourdeaux. 8. That with the oleum Tartari per deliquium was diaphanous to the
length of a barley-corn, and of the color of Bourdeaux wine: the lower part
un-coagulated, and like Tent^wine. 9. It is to be noted, that the reflection of
the Glasses in all the Liquors, they being held up to the light, (except the
spirit of Sal Armoniack) did create a corona of several colors, mixed with
green, blew, and so as not one resembled the other. That with the oleum Tartari
per deliquium resembled the blew in Bourdeaux wine, with an eye of green.
I had forgot to relate how I kept some of the blood in a separate Pottinger;
and it seemed excellently well colored; when it coagulated^ the top was of a
due red, the bottom blackish red; the serum of a due transparency and
proportion, and not tinged to citrine color: and coagulated all as the white
of an egg over a gentle fire.

I poured also upon the blood in two other Pottingers; upon the one spirit of
Hartshorn; on the other spirit of Sal Armoniack, but not much: perhaps a dram
or more: that with the spirit of Hartshorn at first seemed more florid, then
that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack: both coagulated into Mass^s after a
while, and were then both of one color on the surface: but that with the
spirit of Sal Armoniack coagulated its Mass so as to break from the sides: that
with the spirit of Hartshorn did not break from the sides; whether the blood
of one, and the other might differ, I know not; but both immediately followed
one the other. That blood which had nothing mixed with it, after coagulation,
differed not from the other two, though they were covered over with the spirits
as soon as they wore taken, and that exposed only to the Air.

After a while upon the surface of that with the Kings-Bath-water, there was a
kind of fatty crem^r which covered the whole surface; and so on that with the
Queens-Bath-water: the others had none at all.

On Monday after dinner, the next day after I had bled^ I came to observe
again; and found, 1. That with the Sal fraxini to be more and more diaphanous,
resembling Bourdeaux wine: that with the Sal abscynthii less diaphanous, but
red still. 2. I observed the Solution of Allom^ and however it looked black,
yet being held in a clear light, one might discover in it visible appearances
of a deep red. I poured on it some spirit of Sal Armoniack, to see if it would
restore the color: but in stead of that the liquor coagulated presently into
little massula or flakes, resembling raw flesh when the blood is washed out. 3.
There was no alteration in that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack. 4. That with
the Queens-Bath-water continued more diaphanously red toward the top: but that
with the Kings-Bath-water, did not lose its redness, though it were not
diaphanous near the surface. 5. Of the two Pottingers in which were the spirits
of Hartshorn, and Sal Armoniack, though both were coagulated, yet that with
the spirit of Sal Armoniack was the most florid. 6. That with the Oleum Tar^ari
per deliquium continued red, but lost its diaphaneity at the top almost quite.
7. That with the Sal prunellae after the coagulated Mass had subsided, had on
the top of it in the middle of the Glass, to the breadth of sixpence, a
concrete gelly, exactly resembling that of the clearest Hartshorn, not boiled
up to its greatest height; from hence protended certain filaments, with which
it was fastened to the mass of blood, which was buoyed up thereby, so that it
touched not the bottom; the jelly was insipid and stuck to my finger, when I
touched it: whether that little which did so adhere took off from the
equipollency of the two bodies; or whether I broke casually some of the
protended filaments, or from what other cause I know not; but after a while the
Mass sunk quite to the bottom, and drew the gelatine below the surface of the
water. 8. Upon the pouring out of the blood, that with the Queens-Bath water
happened to seem of a pure Claret, like Bourdeaux wine, no settling, or floating
filaments, but something red, which resembled exactly the flying Lee in botled
C^aret. 9. That of the Kings-Bath-water appeared as the former, only at the
latter end, as it was poured out, there was a certain gelutine mixed with it,
and sticking to the sides, that for color and consistence exactly resembled
the jelly of red currants. 10. That with the spirit of Sal Armoniack upon
effusion, appeared like deep Bourdeaux wine, and so from top to bottom without
any alteration. 11. Upon the effusion of that with the salt of Wormwood, it
appeared also like to Bourdeaux wine; but toward the bottom there was Gelatine
red, like that of red currants, more tenacious and in greater quantity then was
in that mixture with the Kings-Bath-water. 12. That with the sal fraxini poured
out like common or less deep Claret: at the bottom there was no Gelatine, but
it ran a little thicker like to Tent wine. 13. That with the Oleum Tartari per
deliquium, upon its first effusion ran like Claret a little decayed: but the
most of it dropped, as if it were a weak Gelatine, and so continued to the
last, being almost of as deep color as a ripe Mulberry; I poured upon some of
the said jelly almost as much of the spirit of Sal Armoniack, and it
immediately dissolved all the ^elly, and made it fluid, yet so as that the
bloody crassament appeared unequally mixed, some parts being more deep and
opac^us then others. 14. I took the Pottinger in which was the blood with the
spirit of Hartshorn affused to it, having separated the mass from the sides of
it, I poured out the Serum, which was as black as common Ink: the surface was
red, but not so florid as that with the affused spirit of Sal Armoniack: most
of the melancholy blood seemed dissolved into that black Serum, the
super-incumbent mass being thin. 15. That blood on which the spirit of Sal
Armoniack was poured in the Pottinger, appeared from top to bottom red, only in
the bottom there were some little spots of a blackish and darker red then the
other parts: on the surface there was a Gebatinous pellicle generated: the
Serum was of a citri^e color: the consistence of the coagulated mass of blood
here was more ^enacious and fibrous then in that other Pottinger with the
affused spirit of Harts^horn: There was no pellicle discoverable upon that with
the spirit of Hartshorn; upon that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack so tough
an one, that it would bear up a little way in your hand the whole mass of blood
adhering to it. 16. The blood which was kept in a Pottinger without any
mixture, being placed in an arched fire on a fire-shovel burned with a bright
and continued flame^ as if it had been Turpentine, but crack (...) ^ike a green
bay-leaf cast into the fi^e: and so it did being cast immediately into the
fire, but the crackling was less durable, by reason of the vivid fire into
which it was cast. It is to be noted that this pottinger having been removed
into the Sun, all the Serum was exhaled or incorporated into (...) which was
grown to the bottom of the Pottinger, and dried there, so that I scraped it
off: whether that might add to the Phenomenon I know not. 17. The blood in
that Pottinger where the spirit of Harts-^orn was affused, being taken out and
placed in an arched fire, rose up with an equal intumescence, as a cake does in
an Oven; it crackled much less then the unmixed mass of blood: It burned
slowly, with a continual but not vivid flame, and in such a manner as if the
mass had never taken fire, but only the smoke issuing from it; for one might
easily see an interstice betwixt the mass and hovering flame all the while,
till it came to a perfect Ignition. 18. The mass which had spirit of Sal
Armoniack affused unto it, being placed in an arched fire, did rise with an
equal intumescence, but greater then that with the spirit of Hartshorn: it
crackled less then that with spirit of Hartshorn: the flame at first resembled
that of the other; afterward instead of hovering about, it seemed to issue
immedia^ely from the blood, and not to appear like a smoke that took fire
within the arch; the flame then was vivid, and continued. 19. The fire being an
exceeding quick fire, I poured some of the s^rous blood that was in the
Pottinger, impregnated with the affusion of the spirit of Sal Armoniack, and as
it dried it took fire presently, the flame resembled that of the former mass,
only it wasted faster then that, being cast upon so quick a fire: The black
Serum of the coagulated mass with affused spirit of Hartshorn, though cast
into the same fire, would scarce burn at all. 20. I took some of the mass that
was impregnated with the Sal prunellae, and placed it in an arched fire (the
Serum or Solution poured of^ from it was insipid) it rose with an unequal
intumescence copling, like a loaf, in the midst: I brought it to a perfect
ignition and coal, yet did it not crackle at all, neither burn till the last,
and then but a little, and with an interrupted flame which seized now on this,
now on that part: nay, there was but very little sign of any Sal prunellae in
it to sputter as it burned. 21. I told you how I poured some spirit of Sal
Armoniack, upon the mixture of blood and a Solution of Allom, and of the odd
coa^ulation that happened thereupon into white massulae which seemed like flesh
when the blood is wasted out of it: I took of those incoherent flakes or
massulae, and putting them to burn in an arched fire upon the fire shovell, it
run all off, upon a great ebullition, into the fire: I took the red hot
fire-shovell, and placed some more upon it, which seemed to burn as Allom does
in the like case, and so stayed on it: but being put into the arched fire, and
brought to ignition, it would neither flame, nor crackle, nor left any visible
quantity of coal or ashes behind it, as if it had almost all evaporated. 22.
These were the Phenomenon which I had opportunity to take notic^ of at that
time: but I also left a Solution of the Alcali of Nitre of about three ounces
with the Apothecary, if any else came to bleed there in my absence: upon
bleeding, an healthy young man that was somewhat indisposed, some was suffered
to stream into that Solution: at first it was of a florid red, but paler then
blood usually is, resembling a bastard-scarlet: after some days standing I
found it of a deeper red from top to bottom: one half of it was transparent
like to the duller and more decayed sort of Claret: the other half seemed like
Yent-wine, not diaphanous: on the surface there was a crem^r which extended it
self almost all over it: Upon pouring it out, it appeared all to be of a
blood-red, only that which ^an last was of a deeper dye: at the bottom there
was a kind of Gelatine like to that of red Currants, which rendered the one
half of it opacous: it was no way dis- colored, nor unequally mixed: the spirit
of Sal Armoniack being poured on it, did render it fluid presently and
transparent.


Having occasion after some weeks stay at the Bath, to ride in extreme hot
weather above 200 miles in a few days, and being tired with watching and the
journey, and being wet very much with a great shower of rain at my return, I
went immediately into the Cross-Ba^h for half an hour, to prevent any
inconveniences that might befall me upon such travel: but at my coming out of
the Bath I felt so violent a defluxion into my throat, and the adjacent
Glandules, that I apprehended some danger of a Squinoncy, which yet I avoided
by bleeding, purging, and other means together, with the use of the same Bath
after all: when I was to bleed, I was willing to try some further Experiments
in Liquors; different from the former, and the Observations I made were these.

1. I caused two veins to be opened in the left arm at once, and received one
Pottinger out of the Mediana, and the other out of the Cephalica: my intent in
that was to observe (as I had done once before in my self) whether the blood of
two veins in the same arm would yield different b^ood: if so, then I thought
that it might not be indifferent in what vein a man bleeds, though they all
arise from one trunk of the vena cava; and that we might justly have regard to
those cautions of our observing Ancestors, not to bleed those veins
promiscuously, but some in one case, and some in another. I was confirmed in
those sentiments by the Phenomenon I met with a second time in the trial, as
other observations have satisfied me about the doctrine of revulsion, and its
truth. Having taken one Pottinger out of the Mediana, and another out of the
Cephalica, I stopped the Mediane, and continued to bleed into the liquors out
of the Cephalic. In the first, issuing out of the two bloods, I could find no
difference in the color or consistence; but after standing three or four
hours, that of the Mediane had much less of Serum in it: the Serum thereof
seemed Limpid in the Pottinger: but that of the Cephalic was citrine colored:
that of the Mediane somewhat of a volatile saline pungency upon the tongue,
different from the taste, which the other Serum had, that being very salt: that
of the Mediane had a bluish Gelatine gathered upon the top of the condensed
mass of blood; the other had none, but was of a f^orid red on the top. After
two days I came to look on them again, and upon turning the coagulated mass of
blood in the pottinger, that of the Mediana had much more of black toward the
bottom, then the other: and also a thinner surface of red then that of the
Cephalic. 2. To carry on the Experiment of mixing several liquors with blood,
I bled into some ounces of Aqua mirabilis, which grew deep colored almost unto
the top, which was transparent and of the color of Mant-wine almost: after
some hours the Liquor became of a bright beautiful ^laret-colour almost unto
the bottom, where there was an opacous, dark-red settling, with an enaeorema of
contexed ^ilaments pretended to the top. The Wasps flocked to that glass in
great numbers, and drowned themselves in it, not meddling with any other of the
subsequent glasses. After two days was little changed, only the beautiful
Claret was somewhat darkened. 3. I bled upon some ounces of Treacle-water, which
turned as black as Ink presently, but continued the blood perfectly fluid: The
red was so destroyed, that the Aluminous Solution did not equal it; there not
being upon inclination of the glass the least sign of any incarnadine; and so
it continued for two days, no variation happening. 4. I bled upon some ounces
of Cinnamon Water, which turned of a pale red; is I held up the glass to the
light, it seemed almost to the top opacously red as Tent^wine; but, if viewed
otherwise it se^med of a paler red, approaching to bastard-scarlet. After a
while it seemed as if all the blood were coagulated into one mass from top to
bottom, subsiding a little within the tinged Cin^amon-wate^^ Upon agitation and
stirring with a knife, it appeared that the ^ibres of the blood were so
destroyed, that this mass was no coherent thing, but broken into little
massulae, or parcels of a pale red, such as the subsiding curds are in whey.
After two days I viewed it, and found the Phenomenon of the whole Glass to
look cherry-coloured, but the incoherent massulae were of a pale red. 5. I bled
into some ounces of Aqua Bezoarticae, that did coagulat^ with the blood^ so
that^ it all fell in one incoherent mass toward the bottom: but wheth^r there
happened to be a greater proportion of blood in the glass, or for some other
cause, the coagulated blood filled almost all the water, much beyond what we
observed in the Cinnamon^water: the consistence of the one, and the other
massulae were like the curds in whey; these were of a pale red retaining to
whitishness; and so it continued two days; the small quantity of water
appearing in it giving no opportunity ^or further Observations. 6. I bled upon
some ounces of Nan^es-Brandy, it gave us a more tenacious curd then the former,
of a pale red: but the mass and liquour was opacous toward the bottom, so as
to appear like Tent-wine, in what light soever I placed it. After two days that
of the Brandy which was fluid, (the curd not being answerable to the Aqua
Bezoartica) was of a pretty florid red, the coagulated mass was of a brick
color. 7. I bled upon some ounces of Anise seed water drawn from the grounds
of beer, it yielded a mixture of a deep bl^od red from top to bottom, somewhat
transparent. The mass coagulated from top to bottom, the curd was of a deeper
red then the others, and of such a tenaciousness as is to be found in the foft
curd of possets. After two days it turned bl^ckish, the coherent curd^ being of
a little lighter red. 8. My indisposition, and other cares permitted me not to
pros^cute these Experiments as I did the other: but one curiosity more
possessed me, to put two drams of spirit of Hartshorn into a pottinger, and to
bleed thereupon, to see if it would alter the Phenomenon from what it is, if
the spirit of Hartshorn be poured on the blood: I did so, and I found at this
time that it kept my blood from coagulating into such masses as otherwise it
would, but the blood turned blackishly-red, and in it there was observed a
crimson gelatine, which run off the knife as jelly of red currants would, when
beginning to cool. After two days it continued still fluid, but blackish. I
have sundry times tried that way of putting spirit of Hartshorn into the
pottinger first, and then caused them to bleed upon it with this success, that
immediately it spoils the red, giving it a more dirty colour^ and casts up a
mucous phlegm, (such as I never saw in any blood upon other Essays) just like
what many spit and blow out of their noses in catarrhs: this covers all the
pottinger, without any mixture of blood in it, and would be white, but that the
subjacent blood gives it another muddy color. The blood under it was always
fluid, and unequally mixed with parts of a bright and blackish red. Whether my
^ourney, or distemper prevented that appearance in my blood, I know not. 9. I
had a Patient there which had unknowingly taken much of Mercurius dulcis in
pills at London, to her great pre^udice several ways: and though she had taken
golden-bullets, and u^ed other means to discharge her body of that troublesome
Inmate, yet found little benefit: At the Bath I let her blood, and to try an
Experiment I cast a Guinny into one of the middle Pottingers as she bled: I
could observe no difference betwixt the blood preceding, and that therein: but
in the afternoon I came and went to that pottinger which had the most florid
and best colored blood, and searching there found my gold, and that stained
with white spots from the Mercury^ on the lower side. Whether the separation of
the Mercury, or some other efficacy in the Gold (of whose power in such cases I
can give good instances) caused that difference in the bloods, I cannot tell,
having never tried it since.
Being not well at Warwick^ by reason of a violent defluxion into the Glandules
of the Throat, I caused my self to ble^d October. 20.
1. I took six drams of spirit of Hartshorn, not very well rectified, nor
clear of color, and put it into a crystal-glass; and bled thereupon about half
an ounce of blood; it turned of a dark red pres^^^ly, inclining much to black,
though, as it stood, or as it was held on one ^ide, you might perceive a
lighter, but not florid red at the sides. It seemed fluid for two days; but as
^ poured it out it appeared to be very Gelatinous, and of color like that
which is become sanious, and degenerated into blackishness with keeping.

2. I bled upon the same liquor of Saltpeter, about half an ounce of blood,
upon four ounces of liquor, at first the blood did turn on the surface to a
bastard-scarlet (which is an effect ^very thing of Nitre mixed with blood so
produces) afterward the whole blood sunk to the bottom, the upper part being
all of one color and consistence, such as is observed in the Serum of the
blood sometimes, when the supernatancy is whitish, and not transparent. Being
poured from the blood, I found that coagulated into a mass, which was all of a
very natural red all over, only spotted in many places underneath with black
spots. The concretion was so brittle, that it would not hang together, nor
endure any light pressure, but as it were melted, and seemed gelatinous.

3. I bled upon a Solution of the Alcali of Nitre; it appeared upon the first
mixture like bastard-scarlet; then the blood sunk to the bottom, the top being
transparent, yet of the color of High-countrey-white-wine: the bottom seemed
redder then that of the former; the limpid liquor being poured out, seemed all
gelatinous, and had incorporated with it the serous part of the blood: the red
at the bottom was fluid and not tenacious, but of the consistence that blood is
of when it is hot, and newly received in a vessel out of the veins.

N.B. After I had poured out the blood and mixtures out of the several glasses,
and that the glasses had stood a while, I observed that that of the raw Liquor
of Nitre, which remained in the bottom, did turn of a most beautiful red, as
ever I saw in any thing: but that with the spirit of Hartshorn, or Solution of
Alcali, etc. did not vary: after two days all the remains of blood in the
several glasses turned blackish and sanious, only that with the raw liquour
altered not.

4. I bled upon the liquors of Saltpeter which had passed the ashes, and on
that which had never passed the ashes: both were of the same blackish and
sanious color (after the first bastard-scarlet was past) both had on the top a
certain cremor, which being cast into the fire discovered it self to be
nitrous: both of them, though they were of such a dirty red inclining to black,
yet were they of one consistence from top to bottom all fluid, nothing
gelatinous, nor any one part blacker, or redder then the other. Which is very
much, considering the difference of the two Liquors.

5. I bled upon the unctuous Mothers of Saltpeter, which turned at first to a
bastard-scarlet: the blood did never mix with the Mothers, nor otherwise ting
their color, then as it cast a shadow by its innating on the surface of them.
It coagulated on the top of the Mothers, being of color all thorough exactly
like to Ocher: the concretion was a quarter of an inch thick, a firm mass to
se^ to, like so much bees wax cast into a cake: I took it up in one mass with
my knife but trying its tenaciousness, I found it as brittle as most short
cakes are. Upon the surface, there was an appearance of certain striae, which
might be saline. All the blood did not coagulate so, but underneath there was a
quantity which in the glass was of equal dimensions with the other mass, it was
of the color of Oker, and fluid, and would not mix with the Mothers at all: I
took of the mass, and tried to burn it in an arched fire twice or thrice, it
boiled and bubled up upon the fire-shovel, like impure Niter, and so burned
with a flashing, as if it had been most of it Peter, it never came to flame as
blood does usually; only one blaze as it were always hovered over it for a
moment or two, not being continued to the body, otherwise then by a parcel of
smoke issuing out them.

6. I took also two pottingers of blood, the first and the last of the blood I
took away: there was no difference in the blood of one and the other; the
coagulated mass well-colored, of a good consistence, less of that black or
melancholic crastament then is commonly found: the Serum well- colored, of
taste brinish: I placed it in an arched fire, it rose up with a globous
intumescence (but crackled not so much as at Bathe; though very much, and like
a bay-leaf) it burned with a continued, vivid, and lasting flam^.

I suffered a potti^ger of the same blood with which this last Experiment was
made, to stand ten days or more, in which time it was quite dried up into a
hard fryable mass, the top of which was almost as black as Ink, the bottom
having somewhat of a dark red in it. I cast a piece of it into a quick
coal-fire; therein it crackled like unto a bay-leaf, but burned with a short
and weak flame. I placed another part of it upon a fire-shovel in an arched and
quick fire, where it crackled as much as the other did (and more then that part
of the same blood which was burned in the foregoing Experiment of blood newly
congealed, and separated from the Serum, which was in this last case dried into
the mass) and it did burn with a vivid and continued flame presently. Which
accident I take notice of^ to show the different Phenomenon upon the diverse
way of burning the blood. I took a third portion of the said congealed and firm
mass of blood, and put it to some cold water in a Glass, and it dissolved most
of it therein, and tinged the water of as beautiful a red as any claret, though
otherwise ^he mass were blackish, and had nothing of red but what was in the
extimous crust of the bottom, which seemed of a most deep red inclining to
black.

I suffered two or three spoonfuls of Hogs-blood to run into a large
Venice-Glass, in which was half a pint of the Mothers of Peter; I suffered it
to stand some days, and comeing then to see it, I observed that the Mothers
were become opacous almost to the bottom, on the top was a mass of coagulated
blood exactly resembling the color of Oker; it was so firm, that I took it
with my knife in one entire piece, but I found the top and bottom of the mass
(which was pretty thick) to be very soft, but not as it were fibrous; the
middle was more firm: I put some of it upon a fire-shovell in an arched and
quick fire, when it boiled up, and ran about, and by its sputtering discovered
a mixture of Saltpeter: but it did not flame at all, though I brought it to
ignition. Examineing the remaining Mothers, I found a sanguin^ mixture to float
in, and stain the liquor of an Oker-colour, and some of it was aggregated into
little masses or lumps, whose particles did not cohere by any tenacious fibers
(indeed I have not been able to observe any tenaciously-fibrous coagulations in
the blood of Hogs hitherto) but upon the least touch of my warm hand, they
dissolved or yielded unto the least pr^ssure. Out of all which I intend to
deduce, that some common Experiments may show that, which no Chemical Fires
give any light unto. That there is a great diversity betwixt the blood of other
Animals, and that of Men: because that upon the same Liquors they disclose
different Phenomenon; and consequently that the Transfusion is a rash and
unsafe attempt.

I shall conclude with this intimation, that neither is the lood of several
Animals, nor the blood of the same kind of Animals the same; but in taste and
color of the Serum there will be often a sensible difference, and it is
rational to think the like of the blood it self: nor do they burn or coagulate
alike, or with the like Phenomenon: nor is the blood of the same Men always the
same, though he continue within the latitude of Health; and in diseases
Epidemical let two bleed, and there shall often be no affinity in the color of
their blood, The other day coming into my A^othecaries Shop, and finding one
(not othe^wise very ill) going to bleed, I sent for a bottle of that Lixivium
of Saltpeter which had passed the ashes, and into the first p^ttinger which he
bled, which seemed to have little of crimson in it, but a Serum of a dark-blew
color; I poured a little of it, and it turned black, though it continued
fluid: Into the third pottinger which seemed better b^ood, with a red color, I
poured some of the same liquor, and it improved the color, and kept it from
coagulaoion awhile; what happened afterward I had not leisure to observe.
or in ^^e Serum, the one being white and turbid, the other Limpid, the Serum
of the third citrine-coloured. And if so, what regulations shall we have for
this operation: shall a transfuse he knows not what, to correct he knows not
what, God knows how? This may become indeed that sort of men, being the worst
and most irrational Empirics the Sun ever shined upon, as I demonstrate more
fully in my Letter to a Physician, in a Parallel betwixt them and the ancient
Empirics.

Let them from these Observations draw their sophistical Conclusions for and
against spirit of Hartshorn; for, and against spirit of Sal Armoniack; against
Allom, and Treacle-water, and such like; till all the world come to admire them
as much as I: And that there be a new History penned to render them as
contemptible as this mag^ifies, by a Rhetoric that has more of the nature of
the Microscope, then of Truth.

Miscellaneous Additions by way of Postscript.
Whatever may seem to be said from hence in favor of the spirit of
Hartshorn, is not so valid as may be imagined: for I have mixed a little of
the Solution of the Alcali of Nitre (which turned Syrup of Violets green, and
rendered it less fluid) upon the blood of a man, which was blackish, waterish,
and ill-coloured, after it began somewhat to coagulate, and I brought it to a
new fluidity, and as vivid a red as ever I saw: and so it continued for 24
hours; at my return after two days, I found the blood in the Pottinger, (by
reason of the Sun on the window) all coagulated, and become friable; but even
that it had visible signs of a remaining redness, which the other blood that
had nothing effused ^etained not. Oil of vitriol affused to the Serum of blood,
tinged with the crimson part, does improve the red for an instant or two, but
then it turns black and coagulates ^^to a soft mass, that admits the least
impression; the fibers being destroyed: but yet it burns rather better,
brighter, and quicker then otherwise; being poured on the surface of coagulated
blood, on the top whereof was tough pellicle generated; it did not eat the
pellicle, but in one night reduced the Mass, almost to the bottom, into a
consistence like to Bees wax, which burnt well.

In January last 1669. I had another occasion to bleed, but though the
Phenomenon of my blood upon the Mothers of Salt peter were the same as at
first; yet in the other mixture with Salt-peter-liquors, they were not: the
blood separately taken seemed not to differ from the former, only the Serum was
a little yellower: it did burn as well as before, but crackled much less. At
the same time I caused an old man to be let blood for a catarrh and pain in his
shoulder, which he used to ease with bleeding; the blood seemed very good and
well-colored; after it had stood a while I had the leisure to view it, and
upon one pottinger of coagulated blood, I poured twenty drops of spirit of
Vitriol, whereupon immediately all the top turned as white as milk, even the
bubbles which seemed of blood before: whereupon I took another pottinger, and
separated half the blood from the Serum, and poured on the blood and Serum some
spirit of Vitriol as before presently all the Serum became of color and
consistence like milk: the blood turned black, and hardened into a substance
that cut like white-washed-wax: the other, at my return, I found of the
consistence and color of a common custard. The vitriolated Serum would not
^lame: the vitriolated blood did burn with a brisk but short flame: the simple
blood would scarce burn at all, but with air hovering and discontinued flame.

I took also some of the pure citrine Serum of my blood, which tasted not very
salt; I set it in the window for some time: during the frost it coagulated into
a body of the consistence of butter in the heat of Summer: it gathered no Ic^
at all: the color became less citrine; but still pellucid. I set it after some
days to thaw; which it did immediately before the fire, but came not to its
former fluidity, but like oil: after that, it coagulated with the warmth
before the fire, and seemed exactly like to boiled Turpentine, but that it
wanted the smell: it would not flame at all (though crackled much, as salt) yet
I brought it to ignition.

I did also take some Hogs blood again, and poured on the Mothers of Peter, it
mixed not; only after some days some filamentary corpuscles subsided unto the
middle of the liquor: the color at first was a pale bastard scarlet: but after
a day it turned to a darkish red, and so continued many days; and in its
primitive fluidity, it suffering not any alteration, but being as fluid as when
it first issued from the veins: it stood in the window all the frost, not
changing or freezing at all. No more did another pottinger of my blood that was
mixed with the liquor of Peter which had past the ashes: but that last blood
turned very blackish.

In fire, notwithstanding any thing I have done or purposed about the nature of
blood, I do now desist from the Enquiry: the result of my thoughts being this,
that there is a continual va^iation in the blood upon every disease, and often
without it, during a state of health: that the blood of Individuals of the same
kind differs not only from it self, but in each other individual: that no man
can by reason of this consideration know what he would transfuse; nor what it
is he would rectify. In a word, that it is most prndential to insist upon
Experienced Methods in Physic, and that all phancies about spirit, salt,
sulphur, fermentative fires in the heart, occasioned by heterogeneous mixtures,
and the explications of the operations of Medicaments by the n^w Philosophers,
either Chemical or others, ar^ all vain, and cannot be allowed as a ground of
practice, till justified by successful trials; seeing that not only the
suppositions are false, but whilst the blood is sub diminio animae, effects
upon it are different from what when it is separate: and I think I may thence
conclude rationally, that it is not conceivabl^ that the fabric of our bodies
is purely Mechanical: for the liquors would have the same effect on the blood
in the body, and without: which they have not.

A REVIEW of the precedent Discourse against Mr. GLANVILL.
AFter I had written the present Discourse, I was so unwilling to give any
offense to the world, and so apprehensive lest my just indignation for the
affront Mr. Glanvill had put upon my Faculty, should transport m^ beyond all
fitting moderation, that I desired a Friend, (without further advising with me)
to blot out whatever h^ might in prudence think equitable; by reason of his
great cautiousness, as well as thorough that great haste and continual
interruptions wherein the Treatise was penned; I find several passages either
omitted totally, or not sufficiently explained; so as that I could not
acquiesce in the publicati^^ thereof, without some few additions, partly to
prevent some cavills that might (though weakly) be raised against it, and
partly to put every thing past dispute hereafter; that so I might not have any
further occasion to write against our Virtuos^, nor his Abettors have any thing
to do but to call in his Libell against the Physicians, and do some reasonable
justice to those he had so arrogantly and injuriously insulted over. I desire
my Reader to pardon me, if I have not in some circumstantial embellishmeats and
regularity of procedure answered his expectation, since in the main I am sure I
have outdone it.

Whereas I charge Mr. Glanvill (page 2.) with not having read the Authors which
he mentions. These words, Who can choose but smile, when he reads how Apuleius
improved the Mathematics after Euclide? the whole passage should have run
thus; Who can choose but smile when he reads how Apuleius improved Arithmetic?
All that Apuleius did was to to translate something about Arithmetic into
Latin, at such time as the Latins had no other Numerals then L.M.D.C, etc.
And by reason of this performance of his does Vossius give him a place amongst
the Authors, not improvers of Arithmetic: and takes notice of him as the first
that ever writ in Latin about that subject. Upon which account it was
judiciously done of Vossius to mention him there; Vossius de Scient^ Mathem. ^
51. sect 1.
but Mr. Glanvill is grossly mistaken her^ t^ name him, where he treats of such
as advanced useful knowledge; which a bare Translation does not. It is true,
Vossius says of Apuleius, Primus Arithmeticam Latinis literis illustravit:
Ap^leius Arithmeticam Nic^machi Geras^ni Pythagorici Latin tran^^ulit test
Cassi^d^r^ de mathem. discipl. cap. de Arithm. and Isidor^ Hisp. Orig. iij. a.
Jonss. de script. Hist. phil. l. 3. c. 13. p. 280.
which words import no more then I say; and it is manifest, that what He did was
but a Translation of Nichomachus. So Cassiodorus d^ mathem. disciplinis. cap.
de Arithmetica. Reliquae disciplinae indigent Arithmetica disciplina, quam apud
Graecos Nicomachos diligenter exposuit. Hunc primum Madaurensis Apuleius,
deinde magnificus vir Boethius Latino sermon translatum Romany contulit
lectitandum. The ^ame is asserted by Isidorus Hispalensis. V^^si^s de s^ie^.
math^m. c 10 sect. ^.
This might our Virtuoso have observed in Vossius, when he read him: and what
Apuleius performed is so meanly thought of by Blanc^aus, Bl^nca^ns Mat^em.
(...). 15
that in his Chronicles of Mathematicians he affords him no place, though he
mention the Arithmetical work of Boethius, The imputation I fix upon Mr.
Glanvill, for not understanding what the Authors he mentions had writ, and
about his not having ever seen them, is manifest to any man that shall not only
trace him by Vossius, Vossius de scien^. Mathem. M^. Glanvill p. 4^, 4^, etc ^^
but consider the ridiculous characters he fixes upon the Writers alleged,
viz. Ptolomy of Alexandr^^ made considerable improvements in Optics: and
Alhazenus the Arabian is famous for what he did in it. From these Vitellio drew
his, and advanced the Science by his own wit and their helps. S. Stevinns both
invented and writ such in al^ parts of ^he pure and practical Mathemati^ks, in
Geography, Germa^y, Navigation, Mechanics, etc. that never did any one, no,
nor all the Virtu^si in England or Europe, ^ver equalled, or pursued: From
hence it is apparent Mr. Glanvill, and his Abettors never read him: he was tho
^i^st Proposer I know of, and before my Lord Bacon, of a Society to carry on
Experiments in order to the rect^fying many err^u^s, and impr^ving many known
truths: (...) Admirer of the Ancients, and their learning.
Stevinus corrected Euclid, Achazen, and Vitellio, in some fundamental
Propositions^ that were mistakes; and in the room substituted considerable
inventions of his own. Roger Bacon writ acutely of Optics. -- Any man will
grant, that he who gave so lame an account of these Authors, never was
acquainted with them, nor understood particularly what they writ, or added of
their own invention: whether new theoremes, or different and new demonstrations
of old known truths. Whereas he says that Roger Bacon was accused of Magic to
Pope Clement the fourth, and thereupon imprisoned: but the accusation was
founded on nothing but his skill in Mathematics, and the ignorance of his
Accusers. -- Assertions of this nature are not so easily passed by, so many
le^rned and judicious persons having reckoned him in the number of Magicians;
such are Ioannes Wierus and other Daemonographers. J. Wierus de p^^st daem. l.
2. c. 2.
That the said Writer might declaim against Magic, or de^y the possibility of
it, and yet practice it, is an usual procedure with Vide Bpdin. in p^ae^. ad
daemonomani^m.
that sort of people: and that his works have in them sundry Prop^sitions that
are superstitious and magical is granted by Delci^; such happily was that which
Franciscus See Gabr. Naudaeus his Histo^y of Magic chapter 17.
Picus says he had read in his book of the sixth Science, where he affirms,
that a man may become a Prophet, and foretell things to come by the means of the
Glass Almucheti, composed according to the rules of perspective, provided he
made use of it under a good constellation, and had beforehand made his body
very even, and put it into a good temper by Chemistry.

As to what I say about Orontius, I add the words of Sir H^ Savile in his
Lectures, p. 71. Josephus Scaliger -- home omnium mortalium, ne Orontio quidem
excepto, (...).

Whereas I say ( p. 3.) that the ancient Physicians did not only cure
cut-fingers, and invent^d Diapalma and and other Medicaments in order
thereunto. I add (what I know not how was omitted) that it is notorious how
all our Herbals and Druggists have explained the nature and use of Medicaments
according to the Doctrine of the Elements, and qualities either arising
therfrom, or from the peculiar mixture of the parts: and whosoever has acted,
or shall proceed according to those notions in compliance with the Ancients.
shall not stand in need of any novel Method from the Virtuosi to salve a
cut-finger.

What I have said in the first and second sheet concerning the Barometer (as
they call it) that it does not determine exactly, neither the weight nor
pressure of the air, wind, or clouds, is an opinion which the more I think
upon, the more I am confirmed in; nor do I doubt that others will be as
scrupulous as I in their assent to our dogmatizing Virtuoso, when they shall
seriously consider what follows, and accommodate it to the Elasticity and
gravity of the Atmosphear.

First, when our Virtuoso speaks of the Elasticity of the Air, he understands
thereby a body whose constituent particles ar^ of a peculiar configuration and
texture, distinct from what can be ascribed to earth, water, or fire? That the
Air near the earth is such an heap of little bodies lying one upon another, as
may be resembled to a fleece of wool; for this (to ^mit other likenesses
betwixt them) consists of many slender flexible hairs; each of which may indeed
like a little Spring, be easily bent or rouled up; but will also, like a
Spring, be still endeavoring to stretch it self out again. For, though both
these Hairs, and the Aerial corpuscles to which we like them, do easily yield
to external pressures; yet each of them (by virtue of its structure) is endowed
with a power or principle of self-dilatation; Mr. Boil in his first part of
Experiments o^ the Ai^e: Experim. 1.

I desire my Reader to take ^otice about ^he ^la^^icity of the Air, that the
very names of ^later and ^lasticity a^e of ^ more ancient ^ention then the
being of the Society: Regins and Peeg^et^s use the te^ms: and that a^ to the
expansi^^ motion of the Air, it is proposed b^ seve^al Cartesians, and before
them by Kircher de mayner. l. 2 part. 1. pr^g^m^. 3. See also Mersenn. and
Schottus^ mechanic p^^umat. hydraul: So th^^ the So^i^ty ca^ pre^end to nothing
but the s^mili^ude of a fleece o^ wo^ll, and the expli^ating it ^y that way.


by virtue whereof, though the Hairs may by a m^ns hand be bent and crowded
closer together, and into a narrower room then suits best with the nature of
the body: yet whilst the compression lasts, there is in the fleece they compose
or endeavor outward, whereby it continually thrusts against the hand that
opposes its expansion. And upon the removal of the external pressur^ by opening
the hand more or less, ^age 59.
the compressed wool does as it were spontaneously expand or display it self
toward the recovery of its former loose and free condition, till the fleece
have either regained its former dimensions, or at least, approved them as near
as the compressing hand, (perchance not quite opened) will permit. -- Against
this I except not only that this supposition is far from a sensible Philosophy;
but that whosoever would weigh the Air exactly, and estimate the accession of
weight which the Air receives from winds, clouds, or vapors (the thing Mr.
Glanvill promises us) must weigh the Air singly first, and in its utmost
degree of expansion, otherwise he can never tell what its gravity is, or what
accessional it receives by its Elasticity, by exhalations and different
mixtures: But this is not done by the Barometer (however it be essayed in the
experiment of Aristotle very judiciously) but only an imaginary column or
Cylinder of Air, and its pressure upon the Mercury is considered: which
procedure seems to me as ridiculous, as if a man should lay a fleece of wool,
or any other body upon any thing, and there being above that an incumbent body
of lead (or the like) bearing thereon, yet should he proceed to say that he
weighed the fleece of wool and not the incumbent lead: for as yet no
discoveries have acquainted the world with the nature of that Ether which is
above the Atmosphere, whether it gravitate or press upon the subjacent Air
(which a very subtle but rapid body may do) nor what effects the Libration of
the Moon and other Planets may have by way of pressure upon the contiguous
bodies, Thus the Moon according to the Cartesians by its pressure upon the
waters, causes the Tides on Earth.
which pressure may be communicated to the terrestrial Air: and without the
determination hereof, it is as vain to pretend to weigh the Air by this
Barometer, as to determine of the weight of a board that presses a Cheese in
the Vat, without considering the superincumbent stone. Neither are we informed
sufficiently what the Figure of the Ether is, whether it make a convexe and so
encompass the Atmosphear; or also be interspersed with, and differently move
therein; nor what effects those motions and agitations of it have upon the
grosser corpuscles of the Atmosphere, (not only a abating of their gravity
sometimes, but adding to them a levitation: nor is it explicated yet what
effects the corpuscular rays of the fixed Stars and Planets may have in or upon
the Atmosphere, adding to its gravity, (as ^tis just to imagine, since that
eminent Virtuoso, the Pliny of our Age for lying, but a Virtuoso! could wash
his hands in the beams of the Moon) or Elasticity, of which those intercurrent
corpuscles seem not void (though not Aerie) which constit^te Thunder, (...) K.
D. of S^mp p. 42. Cha^lt^n de (...).
Lightning, etc. or diminishing them both in order to the Phenomenon, which
occur daily. Secondly, it does not yet appear by any thing alleged by our
Experimental Philosophers, that for certain the Air which encompasseth the
Earth is a distinct body of a different structure from the Earth and Water that
compose the Terraqueous Globe. Isaac Vossius does think the Air to be nothing
else but watrish exhalations drawn up by the Sun. (...) and (...) c. 21 p. 94.
-- Credimus Aerem esse Aquam seu humorem dilatatum, ad legem aequilibrii
quaquaversum se extendentem. If it b^ so, it is a vain supposition which
attributes such a structure to the Air, (...) q^^dam pe^pe^uo occ^pe^ant^s
(...) and spi^abilis substant^a. Kir^h^r^ P^r (...). 2 dial. 2. c. 3.

^he (...) a kind ^f (...) pa^ticl^s d^ssolv^d ^t to the Ether, an^ agitated
^y i^^ just as the ^incture of (...) is noth^ng (...) pa^ts o^ tha^ (...) by
the (...) ^a^er. M^. Hook Mic^ogr o^s ^. p. 1^. (...) action zolis and (...).
qu^^um (...), inter (...) l. ^. p. 1. ^^.


as is repugnant to the water: Others there are which make the Atmosphere to be
an aggr^gate of heterogeneous particles exhal^d from this Globe, whose
structure must be as discrepant as the vapors are: and what a difference there
is in them we may guess by the infinite variety of Meteors, Rains, Snows, Hail,
Winds, Dews, etc. and their component corpuscles. If this latter be true, (as
it is probabl^ that it is; at least that there is no more besides but an
intercurrent Ether or materia subtilis of the Cartesians) what becomes of this
Elasticity, or pressure of this Springy Air so much talked of? Thirdly, it is
necessary to distinguish betwixt the pressure and weight of bodies: for,
suppose were a man pressed under a bended stick, or other springy body
compre^^ed, he shall f^^l a great oppression upon him, and be kept down to his
great pain, not with the weight but spring of the said stick, or other spri^gy
body: and whosoever by the violence of the compression would judge of the
weight of the incumbent body, would expose himself to laughter. Fourthly, it is
possible for a body without any springiness or accessional gravity, to press
downwards above its weight: Acus ^omnino parall^^^ horizonti, qua subito atque
magneti affricat^r, nullo modo fit gravior, tamen deprimitur, perind^ ac si
magnes esset acui subjectus. Finge ^unc aliquem, qui haec a magne^e fieri
nesciat, is profecto credet cum Aristotele acum tendere ad c^n^rum mund.
Be^igard. d^ terra: c^r^ulo 6. part. 3.
thus a needle touched with a Loadstone declines from that line in which it
hung parallel to the Horizon, without any addition of weight: (...) is
de^^nstrable from (...) variety of its d^cl^^ation and r^stit^^ion: and it is as
indubitable that such declination of it carries with it something of pressure.
Fifthly, we are to consider the nature of the Earth, whether that be a Magnet,
or no: for if it be such, (however the Magnetism be explained, whether
according to the Cartesian Hypothesis, or that of Berigardus) instead of
weighing the Air, we deceive our selves as grossly as if we took the impulse
with which Iron runs to the Loadstone for its weight: and thus in some cases we
shall weigh things by their ascent, which is inconsistent with the common
notion of weighing things. Sixthly, to wave the unestablished notions of
Gravity and Lenity, and to abstract from all the preceding considerations, I
say, that even so this opinion of the Aerial Column pressing down upon the
Mercury is false: since in a body so unequally mixed as the Air is often (and
it cannot be disproved that it is ever otherwise) it is impossible to imagine
that the pressure or gravitation is by way of a Column or Cylinder. Imagine the
Experiment to be tried by six or more weights pressing at one time upon the
Mercury, would any man in his wits say, that this joint pressure were
cylindrical? consider but the variety of mixtures in the Air, (and the separate
pr^ssures that are consequential thereunto^ which the contemplation of the
clouds will lead us into, and it is the same thing. Were a man swimming in that
concourse of water in Hungary, where the unmixed rivers flow in one channel,
and his body so placed that part of it were in one stream, and part in
another,) would you say that the incumbent water did press upon him in a Column
or Cylinder? But to proceed ^urther, if it be true that the superior part of
the Air or Atmosph^re, which transcends the mountainous asperities of the
Earth, has another motion or lation then that which is more low, (explain it
either the Aristotelian way, ^ide ^alilaum ^y^^em. (...) dial. ^. ^ag 32. (...)
in 4^0.
or according to Galilaeo, and agreeably to the motion of the Earth) if this be
true, (as I take it to be now) how can we determine of the Gravity of the
neighboring Air by this Experiment? and how vain is this notion of a Cylinder?
for in a fluid agitated with different motions as the subject Air is by
repercussion from the Hills and Plains, (which begets vibrations and
undulations God knows what it suffers upon the ge^eration and motions of
Meteors; and where the superior part has a motion different oftentimes from
the other, of whose rapidity we are as uncertain as of its structure, and
texture, (and we see that the rapidity or swift motion of an heavy body takes
it from its pressure and gravity how can any man talk of Aerial columns, much
less pretend to weigh the Air incumbent, and to determine exactly of any
accession of weight, as M. Glanvill professes to do? Besides, if heavy bodies
do not gravitate in a straight line, but describe the circumference of a
Circle, or some such line, (as new Philosophers hold in opposition to
Aristotle) and if the Atmosphere be to be reckoned amongst the bodies that
gravitate, Vide Galilaeum de system. mundi dial. 2. page 119. edit. in 410.
Sectatoribu^ Copernici opus est dicere (quippe qui ponunt orbem magn^m circulo
ferri) motum gravi^ deorsum ess^ per lineam curvam vel ^nstar quadratricis
Nicomedis, vel circulari ut Galilae^s c^ntendit. Scipio Claramont. de univ^r^.
l. ^ij. c. 20.
how can we imagine this gravitation to be performed by way of a column or
cylinder? Moreover, this Atmosphere can no way be considered to press
cylindrically, if we consider that in every part of it there are continual
exhalations, and smoke ascending through it, so that the weight of it must
needs be abated by the ascent of those vapors: and what we experiment here is
not the weight of the Air properly, but the super-ponderancy or over-weight of
it. The Atmosphere seems to me constantly to resemble a Glass in which water is
poured on wine, and the wine is ascending thorough each part of the water
indeterminately; if it be thus, and that the ascending vapors carry a great
force with them, (which any man will grant who considers the weight of the
smoke, V^de Sanctorii medic. static. Hanc Aeris concitationem demonstrat vel
ipsa saliva ^x (...) demiss^^ quae dilaceratur p^ope terram in quam co^citatus
a^r impi^gen^ ^d salivam redit, c^mque discerpit. Berigard. circ. Pisar. part.
^. circ. 6. de terra.
in comparison to what remains of the wood and coal that is burnt: and who
statically regards the steams transpiring from our bodies: and how that
spittle, which in an entire body issues from our mouths^ descends till near the
ground it be dissipated and distended) I cannot imagine how it can be said that
w^ thus measure all the degrees of compressi^n in the Atmosphere, and estimate
exactly any accession of weight which the Air receives from winds, clouds, or
vapors. To conclude, if the Air do thus press upon the Mercury, how comes it to
pass that there is no difference when the Experiment is tried in a chamber
(where the incumbent column is less then abroad) and in the open Air of the
same level? Why does it not press up water (or other liquors) in the like
Siphon to an height as different as is the disproporti^n betwixt the gravity
of Mercury and water: Why does not this Cylinder of Air which so presses upon
the Mercury, depress a leaf of Gold, but (...) it to fly up and dow^?
which I have not heard it does; yet the proportion betwixt Mercury and water
in gravity is 1 ^. 13^. In fine, how is that true which Mr. Hook says, viz.
That he contrived an instrument to show all the minute-variations in the
pressure of the Air: Mr. Hook in the Preface to his Micrography.
by which he constantly found, that before and during the time of rainy
weather, the pressur^ of the Air is less, and in dry weather, but especially
when an Eastern wind, ( which having past over vast tracts of Land, is heavy
with earthy particles) blows, it is much more: though these changes are varied
according to very odd Laws. If this be true, (as I am apt to believe it is)
with what face can our Virtuoso tell us, Pa^e 61.
It is concluded, that such a Cylinder of the Air as presses upon the Mercury
in the vessel, is of equal weight to about 29 digits of that ponderous body in
the Tube. Thus it is when the Air is in its ordinary temper: but vapors, winds
and clouds alter the Standard, so that the Quicksilver sometimes falls,
som^times rises in the Glass, If you would see how true Mr Gla^vill speaks,
read Mr. Boil his eighteenth Experiment, and the defense of it against Linus:
there you will find that the Mercurial Cylinder did in winter sometimes
correspond with the weather Glass and sometimes (...): and the reason Mr. Boil
gives, is such a^ takes (...) from the certainty of Mr. Gl^^vill's CONCLUS^ON.
proportionably to the greater or less accession of gravity and compression the
Air has received from any of those alterations: and the degree of increase
beyond the Standard, is the measure of the additional gravity. Is not this
prettily said by a man that writes a year after Mr. Hook, and more after Mr.
Boil? How unacquainted is He and his Assistants^ even with the Writings of
their fellow Virtuosi? And if we may be allowed to transfer the Fool's Cap from
the Ancients for concluding too soon, may we no^ crown the heads of our
Virtuosi now therewith? And how careful the R.S. is in making good their
promise to Olaus Borrichius, that what their Members should write, the whole
Society would be resp^nsible, let any man judge that considers how Mr. Hook,
and Mr. Glanvill (I beg Mr. Hook's pardon for the unequal comparison) disagree;
and Dr. Henshaw (another Virtuoso) differs also from Mr. Glanvill, saying, That
the Quicksilver Tube will not give so exact an account of every small
difference in the pressing Air, as the THERMOMETER! what confus^on shall we be
reduced unto in time, should these contradict^o^s Experimentators proceed as
they have done! I shall here add, that I do conceive that this notion of an
Aerial column gravitating upon the Earth, or subjacent body, was framed in
imitation of the Hypothesis of Simon Stevinus, the Teacher of Mathematics to
Grave Maurice of Nassau, in his fourth book of Hydrostaticks, where he insists
much upon this Aqueous Column; but it is observable that that judicious person,
the better to make out his Theoremes, presupposes such things as give some
repute to my objections about the Aerial Cylinder or Column, viz. 1. Aquam
omnibus partibus esse ponderitatis Homogeneae. 2. Cujusvis aquae superficiem
planam and horizonti parallel^m esse. 3. Aquae fundo horiz^nti parallelo tantum
insidet pondus, quantum est Aqueae Columnae cujus b^sis fundo, altitudo
perpendiculari ab aquae superficie summa adimam demissae sit aequalis.

Out of this last Proposition, and the demonstration and consectaries thereof
in him; it is manif^st, that he supposed not one of his assertions would hold
(though the Phenomenon were the same in nature) as he worded and explained
them, if that he did not free his aqueous Column from any oblique pressures, S
Stevinus hydrostat. Elem. l 4 Theoorem 8.
and make it rectangular. And as for his Postulatum, that the surface of the
water is plain, flat and level; he confesses it is not so really, viz. Quatenus
pars est sphaericae sive mundanae superficiei; mundanam autem superficiem
dicimus sphaerae cujusvis mundo concentricae: he only professes to assume it
as true, because in hydrostatics, things happen as if it really were so;
whereupon he scruples not to make use of a supposition, which is really,
confessedly, and demonstrably false, as long as it conduces to practice, and
serves his turn as if it were true, without pursuing a more tedious, and not
more useful Hypothesis agreeable to Archimedes. Id. ib. postulat. 6.
Which I take notice of by way of Apology for my self, and those who think fit
to acquiesce in, or not to blame such Methods as are effectual, though
otherwise vain and groundless. Another thing is, Id. ib. postul. 7 Et profecto
tam receptum ^uerit h^c ipsa non admittere, quam postulantibus Astrologis
terram esse mundi centrum. ^^dem derogare^
that He supposes there that the Earth is the Center of the world. Out of all
which I am more and more satisfied of the validity of my former doubts against
this so much concluded upon Aerial Column, to the explanation whereof I find
no such cautions, or previous suppositions used, to take off the edge and force
of such objections: neither indeed have I yet met with any thing of that
subject proposed in a Scientifical way; and therefore much how it comes to be
concluded upon so as Mr. Glanvill represents it to be.

Whereas I have said, that the gravitation of the Air (even Elementary) is an
opinion of Aristotle's, and that his Experiment was tried by Claramontius; I
add, that the verity of that trial (though indeed it extend only to the impure
Atmosphere) is attested by Ricciolus in these words, Duo quarto Aquam, Ricciol.
Almag^nov l. 2. c. 5. sect. 4.
and Aerem nostrum habere aliquid levitatis gravitati admistum, ut vi illius
adscendant, ut ^int supra id quod est ipsis gravius; and vi hujus descendant.
Hinc ^it ut folles lusorii, and Aere addensat^ been inflati, etiam sine
farinulae ac vim infusione, plus ponderent, quam flaccidi: ut exquisita trutina
deprehendes: immo ego expendi vesicam bovinam, quae flaccida erat scrupulorum
4. and granorum quatuor, esse inflatam scrup. 4. grav. 6. quaere Aer additus
per inflationem appendebat grana duo. Thus the incomparable Ricciolus, whom I
may as well reckon amongst the Peripateticks, as Mr. Against H^b^ c. ^.
Boil does Schottus: and how true that Aristotelean Experiment is Mr. Boil
demonstrates in his Experiments of Air. Exper. 6. and against H^bs c. 3.
pneumatick discourses. And though the works of Galilaeo, Kepler, Mersennus,
Gassendus, Pecquetus, Paschal, were lost, and were is ignorant as some Virtuosi
of their trials about the weight of the Air; yet would not the Assertion have
seemed so strange and incredible as Mr. Glanvill represents it to be; for
though Maynenus deny it, yet he brings in this Objection. Democrit. revivise
disp. 1. c. 2. p. 84. in 410.
Aer est gravis, etc. go. probatur primo a Mathematicis, qui de Aeris pondere
scripserunt, inveneruntque ejus ponderis momenta. 2. A Francisco Mendoza, qui
in suo viridario problema instituit, An in Aere navigari possit? 3. A descensu
lapidum and aliorum gravium, quae Aeris pondere praegrammata urgent suum
descensum, and velocius in fine quam in principio moventur. 4. Experimento
adducto a Bassone, qui follem inflatum citius descendere ait quam Aere vacuum,
Circul. Pisa^. part. 6. circ. 7^ de nutritione.
ob additum Aeris pondus. l. de motu. intent 1. art. 3. Berigardus also asserts
the gravity of the Air, and justifies it by this Barometer, and the unequal
ascent of the Mercury on the top, and at the foot of a mountain. I shall sum
up all, that may take off from the novelty of the thing, and deprive the R.S.
of the glory of pretending to any interest in the discovery in the words of
Thomas Bartholinus de pulmon. sect. 3. p. 60. Sancto^^us was ^ Gal^^ist.
Ingeniosus Sanctorius in inveniendis instrumentis Medicis, inter alia Com. in.
1 Fen. Avic. Stateram ponit, qua ventorum vim and impetum ponderat. Inventis
aliquid addam. Vitream phialam lanci nostrae impone, and leni halitu inflato
videbis quam parum ponderi accreverit. In instrumento Magdeburgico testatur
Otho Geriche Consul Magdeburgensis and inventor ejus, ponderari posse Aerem hoc
pacto; quanto levius est vitrum post Aerem extractum, tantum ponderabat A^r
antea in eo contentus. Varios modos alios A^ris levitatem bilance expendendi
tradit Caspar Ens Thaumat. Mathemat Probl. 93. c. 15. Vesicam bovinam se
expendisse ait Joannes Bapt. Ricciolus Tom. 1. Almag. nov. l. 2. c. 5. number. 4.
quae flaccida erat scrupulorum quatuor and granorum quatuor: and deprebendisse
^andem inflatum scrupul^rum 4. and granorum 6. Marcius Mersennus in Phaenom.
Propos. 29. asserit se Geometris praes^ntibus and adjuvantibus ponder ass
bilance. Aeolipilam aeneam satis calefactam, and prop^modum candentem, omnique
humore destitutam and quam minimum Aeris continentem; deprebendisseque pondus
fuisse unoiarum quatuor, drachmarum 6. and granorum 15. postquam vero
naturaliter refrixisset Aeolipila, and Aer antea rarefactus rediisset ad
pristinum ac naturalem suum statum, iterum ponderasse ipsam, and invenisse
pondus praecedente pondere majus fuisse quatuor gravis. Plura in hanc rem
congessit. cl. Casp. Schottus in Mechan. p. 1. protheor. 4. c. 6.

I have not Schottus by me at present; neither is there need of any further
Inquiries; for I have sufficiently demonstrated that the Gravitation of the Air
is an opinion of Aristotle, Averroes, and other Peripateticks, though not
generally received by that sort of Peilosophers: and that it was truly and
experimentally demonstrated by them, especially as far as the Atmosphear is
concerned in the Question. I have also made it apparent, that the Barometer, or
Mercurial Experiment does not discover the weight of the Air with any
certainty; much less, all the degrees of it: That the pressure of the Air is
not by way of a Cylinder or Column; and that the Barometer had not its original
but denomination from the R.S. they were, as I may term them, the God^fathers,
not Parents. The World may justly say of the Honorable Mr. Boil, that he has
improved the Experiments of his Predecessors, and represented them more
accurately; and of Mr. Glanvill and his Assistants what it pleases.

In the marginal note ( page 15.) where I say, that perhaps it is not true that
Aristotle had any hand in, or was privy to the impoisoning of Alexander; I add
that Pausanias after he had spoke of the Stygian water, and its strange
property, doubts whether Alexander were made away by such means, or no: (...).
This he says (in Arcadic) without reflecting any way upon Aristotle as one
concerned in the report. And Arrianus who writ the life of Alexander, out of
the Memoires of Ptolomaeus Lagides (who was present when that great Prince
died) avows, that he died of a surfeit: yet he relates sundry rumors about his
death, one whereof is, that Aristotle (being fearful of Alexander after the
death^ of Calisthenes) should prepare the poison for Antipater, to be sent him:
but concludes thus, (...). Arrian. de expedit. Alexandr. l. 7.

Whereas I reflect ( page 16.) upon that passage of Plato, (...), and what Mr.
Glanvill says, That without Geometry we cannot in any good degree understand
the Artifice of the Omniscient Architect in the composure o^ the great World
and our selves: Mr. G^anvill p. 25.
and that the Universe must be known by the Art whereby it was made. -- There
should have been a Chasme made for some passages, I know not why omitted. I
add therefore, that it is not revealed unto us that God made the Universe
according to that Art, and it seems an Additional to the first Fiat, or let
there be -- in Genesis, to say his commands were regulated by the rules of
Geometry, and his powerful and omnipotent word confined thereunto. Had Mr.
Glanvill been pleased to consult the fathers, he would have found that this
Tenet of his is no primitive notion: and that particularly Eusebius has
refuted it, Eusebius. de p^aep. Ev^ng l. 14 c. 4.
denying that God in his Works is obliged to Geometrical numbers; and that
Socrates (whose authority is greater then Plato's) did place no great value on
those Sciences: that the first Christians did slight the knowledge of them as
useless to Piety and knowledge of God; because my opinion about these things is
agreeable to that of the first Christians, and of Socrates; I shall insert the
whole passage, as it is translated into Latin in the Paris Edition.

Eusebius. praep. Evangelicae l. 14. c. 10, 11. edit. Paris. 1628.
Primum tamen quoniam Mathematica illa sua tantopere jactare solent, prorsusque
necessarium esse dicti^ant, ut quisquis comprehendendi very studio tenebitur,
A^tron^miam, Arithmetriam, Geometriam, Musicam, illa nimirum ipsa, quae ad eos
a Barbaris profecta esse jam ostendimus, persequatur: (his enim qui carebit,
doctum perfectumque Philosophum esse neminem, imo rerum veritatem ne primoribus
quidem labris digustare posse, nisi qui harum ante rerum animo cognitionem
impresserit:) deinde hanc suarum artium peritiam magnificentius ostentantes,
aethere sese medio sublimies propemodum incidere, numerisque suis ipsum quoque
Deum circumferre arbitrantur: nos vero qui similium disciplinarum amore non
flagremus, nihil a pecudibus abesse existimant, deique propterea nunquam
nunquam reipaulo gravioris notitiam percepturos esse pronunciant: Age, hoc
ipsum quam pravum sit atque distortum, vera laminis loco ratione proposita, sic
tanquam ad libellam and regulam exigamus. Erit ea quidem ejusmodi, quae
Graecos, innumerabiles, infinitosque Barbaros complexa; alios tametsi his
artibus doctrinisque paratos, nec Deum unquam, nec honestae vitae rations, nec
omnino praeclarum and utile quid percepisse; alios, ut ab omnium disciplinarum
studio destituti essent, religiosissimos tamen ac sapientissimos extitisse
demonstret. Enimvero quaenam hoc in genere Socratis illius, qui ab istis
omnibus tantopere celebratur, sententia fuerit, e Xenophonte intelliges, si
modo ei suis in Memorabilibus haec scribente fidem adhibebis.

Docebat, inquit ille, praeterea, quatenus cujusque rei peritum esse hominem
been institute oporteret: principio Geometricae dandam eatenus operam esse
dicebat, ut siquando res pasceret, dimensam rite terram vel accipere ab alio,
vel alii tradere, vel eam dividere, vel opus aliquod designare posset. Id porro
tam esse ad discendum facile, ut qui dimensionem attendere voluerit, idem simul
and quanta sit terrae magnitudo assequi possit, and quaenam ejus metiendae
ratio breviter admodum expediteque cognoscere. At ejusdem in Geometricae
studio, ad illas usque descriptiones intellectu difficiliores quenquam
progredi, Socrati non placebat. Cui enim bono futurae illae essent, videre se,
tametsi ne illarum quidem imperitus esset, rogabat. Enimvero, ad exhauriendam
hominis vitam cum satis illas esse, tum aliarum interim and plurimum and
utiliorum doctrinarum studia impedire. Astronomiam similiter eatenus complecti
solum jubebat, ut noctis, mensis, annique tempora cognosceres, atque hujus
cognitionis open, siquando vel iter, vel navigatio suscipienda esset, vel
agendae forent excubiae, vel in aliud quidlibet quod noctis, mensis, annique
spatio fieri solet, incumbendum, signis ad ea omnia suis quaeque temporibus
obeunda, certioribus uterere. Atqui haec nihilo difficilius tam ex nocturnis
venatoribus, quam ex navium gubernatoribus, and aliis quamplurimis resci^i
posse, a quibus eorum peritiam suae cujusque parts officiumque deposcat. At
eandem artem eo usque persequi, dum ea quae non eodem motu circumferantur,
stellasque simul errantes and vagas distinguere noveris, adeoque in earum abs
terra intervallis, conversionibus causisque rimandis aetatem viresque
consumere, id vero graviter imprimis ac serio prohibebat, quod multum hujus
^tiam opere pretium videret, tametsi ne in istis quidem rebus hospes ipse ac
peregrinus esset. Addebat, conficiendae hominis vitae illas quaeque satis
futuras, quae interim a pluribus utilioribusque studiis avocarent. Postremo
quibus coelestia quaeque rationibus Numen moderetur, investigari nolebat, quod
cum eo ab hominibus aspirari non posse, tum minus cum diis probari existimaret,
qui quae prompta notaque esse noluissent, inquireret. Nec minus illi, quem ea
vehementius cura destineret, insaniae periculum imminer^ dicebat, quam
Anaxagorae, qui explicatus a se deorum Machinas tantopere gloriabatur.

I shall add, that if God Almighty be regulated by the rules of Geometry, and
mechanical motion in the management of this world, and that the fabric of
things is necessarily established upon those Hypotheses, I cannot any way
comprehend how God can do any miracles: how the Sun should stand still at the
command of Ioshuah, or the shadow go back on the dial of Ahaz: or how there
could be a general deluge; or such an Eclipse as is related at the death of our
Savior: or that the fire should not burn, or destroy the three children: in
which, and other cases, if God were not tied up to this Art, I do want proof
(till he declare it) that at other times he acts altogether agreeably to it.
This opinion of mine has been hitherto the most Christian Assertion, and held
most consonant to Piety, and has been amply maintained of late by Dr. Henry
More, in opposition to what the Royal Society lays down in their History; That
Generation, Corruption, Alteration, and all the vicissitudes of Nature, Mr.
Sprat page 312.

I wonder that such effects should be attributed by them to the bare co^course
and meeting of corpuscles of differing figures, magnitudes and velocities;
without taking notice of that alteration of texture, and of the figures of the
concurrent particles, without which Carte^ianism, nor the other Mechanical
Philosophies can subsist: and not so without allowing the constant assistance
of God, directing and ordering lay- Mechanism. So des Carts Princ. Philos
part. 2. Deus materiam ^imul cum motu and quicte in principio creavit; jamque
per Solemn su^m concursum ordinarium tantundem motus and quietis in ea tota,
quantum tunc posuit conservet. Oh! rare and sensible explication of things! God
Almighty in a peculiar matter agitates matter! must we thus explain the
secondary and mediate creation of the world in six days, whereas the like
productions have not hapened in so many thousand years as are lapsed since!
Besides, whatever our Virtuoso thinks of the Eternal Generation and Incarnation
of the Son of God; He does not except in this Assertion the Generation of
mankind in the ordinary and natural way.


are nothing else but the effects arising from the meeting of little bodies, of
differing figures, magnitudes and velocities. Then which opinion there can be
nothing more pestilent and pernicious; and Dr. More, albeit a Member of this
Society heretofore, (for he allows nothing to it now) yet a pious one,
professes that this Mechanical Philosophy does incline to Atheism: neither
would he approve of those deductions as necessary, but ridiculous, when I
upbraided him lately with that non-sensical and illiterate History, Mr. Sprat
p. 348. It Is true, his, [viz. The Experimental Philosophers] employment is
about material things. But this is so far from drawing him to oppose invisible
Beings, that it rather puts his thoughts into an excellent good capacity to
believe them. In every work of Nature that he handles, he knows that there is
not only a gross substance, which presents it self to all men's Eyes; but an
infinite subtilty of parts, which come not into the sharpest sense. So that
what the Scripture relates of the purity of God, of the spirituality of his
Nature, and that of Angels, and the souls of men, cannot seem incredible to
him, when he perceives the numberless particles that move in every man's Blood,
and the prodigious streams that continually flow unseen from every body: having
found that his own senses have been so far assisted by the Instruments of Art,
he may sooner admit that his mind ought to be raised higher by an Heavenly
light, in those things wherein his senses do fall short. If (as the Apostle
says^ the invisible things of God are manifested by the visible: then how much
stronger Arguments has he for his belief, in the eternal Power and Godhead,
from the vast number of creatures that are invisible to others, but are exposed
to his view by the help of his Experiments? My censure upon this place is, that
if his Experimentator have any skill in Logic or the ways of arguing, though
from the Rules of Mechanism, and the contemplation of visible bodies, he may
proceed to the allowance of invisible and insensible corpuscles, yet shall he
still confine his progress and ascent within the nature of matter and
corpuscles, and never apprehend (upon those grounds) the being and operations
of an immaterial, omnipresent Deity acting by the Word of his Power and Will:
nor the incorporeal nature of the soul of man. Such a Transition ad genus a
genere, or (...), he that owns those principles cannot assent unto, if he
understands himself, and argue not so as to allege, One Proposition for sense,
The other for convenience.


Where I speak of Archytas (page 18.) that he was a practical and Mechanical
Philosopher, contrary to what Mr. Glanvill asserts ( page 27.) I shall add his
life; As it is "briefly written in Ricciolus thus. Archytas Tarentinus
Pythagoreus nobilis, Ricciclus in Chroni^ part. 2. ^rae^i^es ad Almag^st. 1.
(...) in Archytas.
Mathematicarum peritissimus, quem ut una cum Timaeo cognosceret Plato, in
Italiam navigavit, ut ait Cicero. In Mechanicis excelluit, and vi illarum
quinquies vicit hosts in praelio, ut nihil dicam de columba lignea, quam
libramentis ad violatum compulit; sed in Cosmographia at Geometria practica
excelluisse indicat illud Horatii lib. 1. odorum.

Te maris ac terrae numeroque carentis arenae,
Mensorem cohibent Archyta.
Neither is Mr^ Glan^ill mistaken there in reference to Ar^hytas only^
Blancanus says of Archytas, that he was Mechanica Inventor, ^n Chrono^.
mathem. ^^cul. 5. And Will. Snellius in his P^eface to the Hypomn. mathem. of
S. Stevinus, does reckon upon Archytas and E^doxus as eminent for practical
Mechanics.
what^ he says abo^^ E^doxus Gnidius is false: who was a M^c^anician also, and
amongst other discoveri^s, Inv^nit ^tiam Ara^^^^^, ^orologium videlicet solar^,
in quo lin^ae borariae, and arcus signorum in modum ara^^c^ se secant, Blancan.
in Chronol. Mathemat. Sevil. ^.

Whereas I say ( page 22^) that the Royal Society were not the first that
applied themselves to the observing the forms of Animals, etc. by the
Microscope: I add that Zucchius did not only prece^^^ them in the attempt, but
seems to have had b^tter glasses to that purpose then they: for whereas Mr.
Hook in his description of a Flea says of the Eyes only thi^, that the head is
on either side beautified with a quick and round black eye: the more accurate
Zucchius says, Mr. Hook microg^aph. p. ^10. Zucchius philos. opt. part 2. cap.
2. s^ct. 2. p. 39.
Novissime Microscopio parato ab axc^llentissimo Vitrorum in omnes for^^as ad
proposit^s ^sus farmatore D. Eustachio Divinio Septempedano, spectavi men's
oculis senesco^^^bus Oculum pulicis, disti^ctis in eo alhescente Selerotide a
Cornea, and per cornea^ I ride ^culi^ And in the description of the feet of a
Fly, and the feather of a Peacock I observe that there is such a difference
betwixt those two Writers, that as one of them must ^^eds be in an error, so I
am apt to think that our Virtu^s^ is the person: see Mr. Hook p. 167, 168,
169, 170. and Zucchius Philos. opt. part. 2. tr. 3. c. 7. sect. ^. page 349^
350. If England do yield better Microscopes then those of Eustachius Divini^s,
then I am ready to change my judgment.

Where Mr. Glanvill speaks of going to the World of the Moon, and I animadvert
upon the difficulti^s of the journey, and that his lodging will be too ^ot for
him; add in the Text these words page 43.

Besides the other difficulties of the journey, it is further considerable, that
from the Center of the Earth to the Moon, according to the calculation of Tych^
Brabe, there is near 56 semidiameters of the Earth, Van Ettens Mathem.
recreations page 220, 221.
which is about 192416 miles: and admit it be supposed that Mr. Glanvill fli^
20 miles every day in ascending toward that world, he should be above 15 years
before he could come to the Orb of the Moon.

Where I speak against the accommodating of Scripture to common railing, p. 49.
I add, that not only the Council of Trent ( -- fas est and ab host doceri)
has prohibited Sess. 4. that any should apply the holy Scripture ad scurritia,
fabulosa, vana, adulationes; but also that the first Council at Millain,
forbids the using it ad jocum, ostentationem, contumeliam, superstitionem,
impietatem. And, to upbraid our Divine-Railleurs a little more, an ancient
African Council decrees. Si Glericus, aut Monachus verba scurritia, jocularia
risumque moventia loquitur, acerrime corripiatur. The words of which Canon,
(viz. Scurritia and jocularia) are by a learned Frenchman rendered raillery. --
"Nous avons le Canon d' un ancient Concile d' Afrique, qui parle en ces terms:
Si quelqu' un du Clerge ou siun Religie^se dit des paroles de raillerie, des
chooses plaisantes and enjouces, qui' il soit chastie tres severement. Qu'
eussent ^it a vostre avis ces bons Peers si ces railleries eussent este terees
de l' Escriture? This Question has been agitated with much wit and address in
French, betwixt Mr. de Girac and Mr. Costar in sundry books, wherein any man of
common reason and piety, will give the advantage to adversary of Voiture, who
is justified by the concurrent opinion of Balzac in his remarks sur les deux
sonnets: and to these Writers I refer our Virtuosi, such as reckon upon all
other learning as Pedantry, may inform themselves thence as out of Writers
which transcend not their breeding and studies.

Whereas ( page 58.) I speak somewhat in commendation of the ancient
Aristotelean Monks, I find that their est^em is much advanced by the learned
Gabriel Naudaeus in these words. After the last taking of Constantinople,
Learning, began to creep out of Monasteries, Gabr. Naudaeus H^st. of Magic. c.
7.
which for all the time before had been (as it were) public Christian Schools,
where not only youth, but also such men as would apply themselves that way,
were instructed in all manner of Disciplines, Sciences, and Morality, and that
to such an height, that not content with that so famous Quadrivium of the
Mathematics, which, besides all that is now shown in Colleges, was then
taught, Medicine both as to Theory and Practice, was so well cu^^ivated, that
we need no more to convince us how expert they were therein, then the Writings
of Aegidius, Constantine, and Damascene, Joanni^^^s, ^^ter of Spain^ and
Turisanus. So that it were ^as^e for me to ans^er t^^m who charge them with
illiterature and ignorance.

Where I speak out of G. Hofman and others, that it is sufficient for a
Physician that he proc^ed upon such rules and methods as may most commodiously
guide him in his practice, without b^ing solicitous whether they be rigorously
and philos^phically true: page 75. I add, that there are others as eminent as
any that ever pretended to cure, which concur with me in this opinion. A^
Avicenna and Riolanus; the words of the latter in his Examen of H^rvey, c. 9.
are these. -- Quapropter cum Avicenna doctr. 6. cap. distingu^ sermonem utilem
a vero; Medicus qua Medicus, inquit ille; non curat, quid in veritate sit, sed
contentus est Phaenomenis quibusdam, quae sunt satis illi in curatione marb^rum.

I add unto the passages ( page 97.) which relate unto the diligence of the
Ancients in Di^^^ctions, this: That the Ancients, and particularly the
P^^^pateticks were very curious and inquisitive into Anatomy appears by this
passage out of Chalcidius, in his discourse upon the Timaeus of Plato; he lived
about one thousand one hundred and seventy years ago, and the passage (which
relates to the Platonic notion about vision) in the Latin Edition of Meur^i^s,
( page 340) runs thus. Q^are faciendum ut ad certam explorationem Platonici
dogmatis commentum ve^us advocetur medicorum, and item Physicorum, illustrium
sane virorum, qui, ad comprehendendam s^n^ naturae solertiam, actus humani
corporis, facta membrorum exsectione, rimati sunt: qui existi^^abant, it^ d^mum
se suspici^nibus, atque opinionibus certiores futur^s, si tam rationi visus,
quam visui ratio concineret. Demonstranda igitur oculi natura est: de qua cum
plerique alii, tum Al^maeus Crotoniensis, in Physicis exercitatus, quique
primus exsectionem aggredi est ausus; and Callisthenes, Aristotelis auditor;
and Herophilus, multa, and praeclar^ in lucem protulerunt. Out of which it is
manifest that the Ancients (especially the Aristotelians; for such were
Calisthenes and Herophilus) did with some curiosity examine the Phenomenon of
nature, and regulated their opini^ns by sensible experiments; and that this was
the practice of most of the eminent Physicians and Naturalists of old.

The Letter of Hippocrates to Damaget^s mentioned page 89. (though cited as
genuine by Gal^n) is suspected by Io. Baptista Carts. miscell. medic. dec. 1.
c. 4. Caeterum and haec Epistola, quae sub nomine Hippocratis circumfertur,
suspecta est mihi, primum quia Diogenes Laertius lib. 9. in vita Democriti
scribit illum nequaquam rident^m, quanquam concedat ab Hippocrate fuis^e
visitatum (non quidem ut ipsum sanaret) quo tempore jam Democritus erat
decrepitus, nec amplius aptus sectioni cadaveram: nam Hippocrates 436 annos
^ate Christum natus; Democritus vero 492 ita ut ita ut Democritum nativitate
secutus sit Hippocrates 56 annis: and tum sive ad videndum, sive ad sanandum
eum conveniret, vigesimum quintum annum attigisse verisimile videtur: cum tunc
temporis Hippocrates medici famam ad^ptus. esset, quod non potera^ nisi per
longum temporis cur^um and varia experimenta in Medicina facta sibi comparare.
-- Sed probandam provectio^em Hippocratis aetatem, and majorem senectam
Democriti, ejusdem Laertii testimonium extat dicentis; Ultimum, quod in vita
Democriti legitur dictum, aut factum, fuisse illam cum Hippocrate
collocutionem: atque annum agentem 109. ab hujus vitae Statione decessisse. I
find also that Menagius suspects those L^tters, though he confess them to be
very ancient. Menag. in Diog. Laert. l. 9. p. 238.
Extant ^odie Hippocratis de sua ad Democritum profectione Epistolae, sed
supposititiae, licet perantiquae.

Whereas I say page 114. that I have observed in some that their pulses have
suffered no alteration, at least kept no time, or palpitated as did their
hearts. I shall illustrate this with an observation in a young Lady, which I
had too fatal an opportunity lately to make: she died of a very malignant
Fever joined with the Measils: two nights before she died I watched with her,
and frequently observing the variety of her pulse, I determined to mind
whether there were any such alteration in the beating of the Heart, as I then
observed in her Arteries:. I laid my hand upon her Breast, and I found that her
heart did not beat as usually it does, the bone erecting it self, and impelling
the left side, but it seemed like a great bullet (transcending any proportion
that is natural to the Heart) a^ it rolled in the Thorax from the right to the
left side (as much one way as the other) with an uniform and equable
revolution, and thus it continued to do for an hour; during which time I
observed all the varieties almost that are recorded about evil pulses: as
quick, slow; great, small; unequal, deficient, dicr^tus, etc. Nor is this new;
for Riolanus says in Exam. Harvey c. 3. Notavi multoties in palpitationibus
cordis vehementibus arterias non sequi motum Cordis, sed bis terve pulsare Cor
pro una diastole Arteriarum: quod indicat Arterias in sanis and aegris
corporibus, non semper sequi motus cordis. So does Mercatus teach, Fit interdum
palpitatio cordis nihil mutatis pulsibus. Tom. 2. de Philos. differ. l. 2. tr.
1. c. 28. and tom. 3. l. 2. c^^j.

Since the writing hereof, being casually in the shop where an old man was
blooded, who upon the healing up of an old sore in his leg, was very ill: I
observed his blood to have very little of what was c^im^^n in it: but it seemed
all a fluid Serum to the bottom, (which was pellucid, not of a turbid white,)
in some Pottingers: in one Potting^r^ that ran last, it was coagulated into a
thicker mass, on the top whereof was coagulated a translucid gelati^^ over most
of the Pott^^ger, the rest being of ^ (...) Serum like to the other: ^ took
some spirit of Vitri^k and poured a pretty quantity, ( ^iz. about 20 drops) on
that which was partly coagulated upwards, partly not: and all that part which
was not blood, did coagulate into a mass like unto the white of an Egg when
hardened by the fire, but without that sm^ll which is usual to it when
coagulated upon a gen^l^ ^i^e: the blood under it coagulated into a co^^^ence
much l^ke wa^: but of a dark red inclining to bla^k: into another Pottinger I
poured some of the salt-peter-liquor that had passed the As^es; but this latter
caused no change at all: I then poured on the same some spirit of Vitriol, as
in the other, and it did immediately turn lacteous, and coagulated into a mass
like to that of ordinary custards: and the blood under, which seemed but very
little, and scarce coagula^ed, appeared thereupon as a large quantity,
equalling three parts of the Pottinger, upon which all the Serum was thus
coagulated. I went to b^^n these: that blood which had only spirit of Vitriol
did not crackle, and scarce burn: though a little it did: the pure coagulated
Serum did not burn at all, yet crackled like decrepitating Salt, a little: that
with the spirit of Vitriol and Lixivium of Ni^re, did burn with a vivid and
lasting flame a long time.

I think my self obliged to add one thing more where I speak as if Dr. Willis
had had little to do in the discoveries of Dr. Lower about Anatomy: that
although that great Physician had not leisure of attend the Anatomical
Inquiries, yet did he propose new matter for improving the discoveries, and put
Dr. Lower upon continual investigation, thereby to see if Nature and his
Suppositions did accord: and although that many things ^id occur beyond his
apprehension, yet was the grand occasion of that work, and in much the Author.
This Intelligence does not cross what I related before from good testimony; yet
I thought my self obliged to declare the whole truth, and such I believe this
to be. I must also profess that I think the Sinus venarum vertebrales, whose
invention I ascribe to Dr. Lower, may without considerable injury be ascribed
unto Fallopius in his Anatomical Observations page 193. edit. Coloniens. 1562.
in 80. Thus much I thought fitting to annex, lest the Virtuosi should censure
me as partial to my old School-fellow Dr. Lower, or swayed by any regard then
that of Truth.

The Hogs-blood which I last mentioned as poured upon the Mothers of
Saltpeter; after it had stood above three weeks unmixed, did at last cast down
about half of it self below the Mothers, it continuing in that place it turned
crimson: that on the top did not change its color, but on the surface there
gathered a crust or mass, not very thick (as before) nor of so solid a
coasistence.

FINIS.
To divert my Reader after so tedious a discourse, I shall here add the Letter
of Coga their Patient, that they may see how efficacious the Transfu^ion has
been on him, and what returns he makes for his Cure.

To the Royal Society the VIRTUOSI, and all the Honorable Members of it, the
Humble Address of AGNUS COGA.
YOur Creature (for he was his own man till your Experiment transformed him
into another species) amongst those many alterations he finds in his condition,
which he thinks himself obliged to represent them, finds a decay in his purse
as well as his body, and to recruit his spirits is forced to forfeit his
nerves, for so is money as well in peace as war. It Is very miserable, that
the want of natural heat should rob him of his artificial too: But such is his
case; to repair his own ruins, (yours, because made by you) he pawns his
clothes, and dearly purchases your sheeps blood with the loss of his own wool.
In this sheepwrack't vessel of his, like that of Argos, he addresses himself to
you for the Golden Fleece. For he thinks it requisite to your Honors, as
perfect Metaplasts, to transform him without as well as within. If you oblige
him in this, he has more blood still at your service, provided it may be his
own, that is may be the nobler sacrifice.

The meanest of your Flock, AGNUS COGA.


ERRATA.
PAge 2 Line ^1 blo^ out after Euclid. p. ^ l. 13 read vetustissima^ p. 4. 35
r. e^actisque p. ^ blot out the Margi^a^ note p. 9 l. 14 r. (...) ibid l. 13 r
diaceltat^st^n ib. l. 34 r. Methinks I already live in th^se ^imes when the
Virtuosi are as absurd as that R^mish Monk p. 13 l. 17 ^cryptical p. 14 l. 22
r. Odorde p. ^^ ^22 r. ^agdad, Fez and Cordova p. 17 l. 15 r ind^m^nstrable
ibid. l. 31 r. rigorous p. 2^ l. 34 r. Savonarola ^^ 2 l. penult. r be very
defective p. 23^ l. 3 r^ Anian p. 28 in the Margin r. Spharice cavum ib. l. 29
r. none p. 29 ^19 r. and thereupon etc. in the Marg. citation ou^ of Zucchius
l. 9 r. vitiatas p. 30 l. ^6 r. prius p. 31 l^ 2 r. Sarsuis p. 32 l 32 r.
construximus l. penult. r. ali^s p. 33 l. 8 r. album ibid. l. 17 r apparentiam
ibid. l. 7^ r. vi^rorum ibid. l^ 31 after Telesco^iis add a^is^nt ibid. l. ul^
r. elicis p^ 38 l. 15 r. in p. 39 l. 5. r. Iocantry ib. Marg. pessum i^ura p.
40 l. 3^ r. thorough three p. 41 l. 20 r. ^n p. 47. l. 33 r. ^ubis Margin after
^rsci^ blot out the ^ull stop, and for p. 2^^. r. page 234 p. 48 l. 3^. blot
out perhaps p 49. Margin r. Mushei^. ib. l. 2^. r. most Comi^al Gentlemen p. 5^
l. 22 r. natione Graecum ib. l. 27 r. Genere ib. l. 31 for free r. ignorant ib.
l. ult. r. Trallia^us p. 56 l. 25 r utrorumque p 57 l. 2 r Fre^singensis ib. l.
3 r. capiendis. p. 59 l. ^8. r (...) ib. l. 20. r. (...), and (...), and l. 21.
(...) ib. l. 31 r. Minde^erus p. 60. l. 19. r. Theophrast^ p 62. l. 10. r.
Sandaracham ib l. 1^. ^ Thamyras. ib. l. 14. r. faeces vini p 63. l. 19. r.
(...) p 66. l. 2 r. Cordus p. 67. l. 22. r. ^cescat ib. l. 33. ^. (...) p. 69
Margin r. Billich de ferment^ sect. 89 p. 67 l. ^6 r. Norica^um^ Institutoriam
p. 77 l. 33 r. Alemae^us p. 80 l. 32 r. versat^s p. ^4 l ^7 r. Osteologists p.
88 l. 34 quad^upedibus p. ^9 l. 3 r. tentatas ib. l. 9 ^. aliter^is p 95 r.
about ib. l 35 r subclavian ib. l. penul^, after equals add him p. 9^. l. 17 r
mediately p. 93 l. antepen. ^or who r. well p. 106 l. 13. r. alimentum p. 113
for indeclines ^ rude lines ib. l. 3^ r now p. 117 l. 8 r. the same ^b. l. 13
r. about p. 122 l 1^ add impresperous before effect ib l. 19 for and r. (...)
p. 124 l. 4. for urine r. vein p. ^5. l. 20 for them r. thence ib. l. 25 r.
crassament p. 153 l. 15 after a add Man p. 154 l. 7 blot out it p. 155 l. ^7
r. In sine p. 156 l. 5 r. dominio p 159 l. 1^ r ^elrio p. 160 l. 29 for or r.
an ib. l. 37 r. approached p. 163 l. 6, 7, 8 ^lot out which (...) demonstrable
from the variety of its declination and restitution p. 163 l. 20 r. Levity p.
167 l 23 after therefore add wonder ib. l. 29 for duo r. dic^ p. 168 l. 6
before c were add we ib. l 9 r. Magnenus ib. l. 15 r p^^gravata p. ^^ 9 l. 1
r. Marinus ib. l. 10 r. grani^ p. 174 l. 30 r. vola^um l. 31 for at r et p. 174
^ 2 r raillery ib. ^. ^ r. scurrili^ ib. l. 5 before Council add Provincial p.
1. 5 l 27 r ar^^s p. 1^8^ l. ^ r. Damagetus ib. l. 2 r. Cortes ib. l. 36 r.
cone p 179 l. 13 for Philes r Pulls p. 178 l. ult. r. consistence.

These are most of the material Errata which I have had leisure to take notice
of: th^re are several of the Ma^ginal Notes and Citations which a^e not placed
opposite to the plac^s they refer unto; an understanding Reader and Adversary
will easily judge thereof: and i^ any man take any advantages from any probable
Errata or such like ^a^lu^e^ as my haste or the Licensers d^sh may have
occasioned, (th^ugh not taken notice of here neither have I ever seen all the
Sheets) I know not how to help my self (...) this Premonition avail m^ not.


