A LETTER Sent to His EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetvvood, FROM Mr. JOHN STREATER
Comptroller of the Ordnance by Authority of PARLIAMENT. On December the 15th.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.

My Lord,
IT does not a little trouble Me, to see how your Lordship is Engaged, to that
which will in the issue be Your own Destruction: I am, and have bin no other
then faithful to your Lordships Personal Interest, so far as it can consist
with your public Interest: I have absented my self five or six Days for no
other reason. Let me be bold to acquaint your Lordship, and tell you, that you
do not see your Interest, you are led out of one uncertainty to another, and
still will be, until at last you have ruined, and lost all, and fall into the
hands of Charles Stuart as a prey; amongst the rest of absurd Models of
Government that have been under consideration since the Interruption of the
Parliament, they have bin no other then the worms and Chimeraes of the Brains
of such as have not the spirit of Government: the last that have bin under your
consideration is one of the worst, and most Inconsistent that can be Imagined,
and will produce nothing but necessity for new Changes, which will not only be
Inconvenient in respect of public Interest, but also to your Lordships own
Person; I presume that your Lordship does not value your own personal
preservation above that of the Public, also that your Lordship knows it will
be more Glory, and Honor, and Peace to your own conscience, to contribute all
the advantages you can to a public, Just, and Equal Settlement; then for you
to sit at the top of Affairs.

If that Government of twenty one, Conservators, of Exempting secluded Members,
of Electing only such as as have served seven years in every Corporation, of
Electing another House for the Negative Voice out of that number of Men so
chosen, with other things which you shall after add, were the best Form under
Heaven: Yet it will not be endured or submitted unto, in regard the Original of
it is the Army; Who by it design a particular Interest, which shall always
meet with a public Interest, struggling with it, and by consequence it will
produce Changes. Besides, if your Lordship will only consider what benefit your
Posterity shall have by a Government that must run in so straight a Channel as
it must: If the Army be the Legis-Lators, and Lawgivers, that is, to give Us a
Form of Government; your Posterity will be Slaves, unless you can Intail the
Government of the Army upon them; and make the Qualities they shall be Endowed
with, the Standard to measure out to the Nation what they shall have, and what
the Qualities are, that your Posterity, or our Successors shall be endowed
with, whether with Virtue, Honor, or Honesty; or with Lust, Pride, Envy,
Ignorance, or Inhumanity, none knows.

My Lord, If your Rules of Government be so short and your qualifications
already made, be not enough; we presume we must have the rest from the Army, as
they declare by the words of their Vote, viz. such Qualifications as are or
shall be): I beseech your Lordship, at this rate, where or when shall the
Armies Legislating Power end? What shall be a Period to it, that it shall go
thus far and no farther? Can your Lordship tell? If the Lord Lambert does
return Victor from the Nor^h, He will expound that Riddle to your Lordship.

My Lord, I was in the General Council of Legislators, holden in Wallingford
Chapel, and You could scarcely put Questions so fast as they were ready to
pass them. A Reverend Council indeed! they will serve to promote, and carry any
thing On, that those that are uppermost propose to them: A Spirit of discerning
they have not; I saw they might be led by sense like Beasts: They are a better
Army then a Senate, if they would keep to their Duty in Arms it would better
b^come Them. They are out of the Way when they treat or meddle with Government;
Your Declaration of the 6th of May says no less in these Words; We our Selves
contributing thereto, And again, We have trod in and by Crooked Paths, and the
presence of the Lord has departed from Us ever since We left the Long
Parliament. And my Lord, indeed the presence of the Lord has now departed from
You, and will leave You quite if You do not return thither again.

My Lord, My Self of all men have little Reason to be their Advocate, they
never did me any thing else than mischief; there was not 5 of them, I may say
not 3 of them, that I knew or had any Acquaintance with, at their last
Interruption. The principal Reason why I do adhereto them is, I do dread and
abhor the Settlement of Government by an Army, I knowing that the Consequences
will be fatal: your Lordship knows, that when the Papers were sent up from
Derby to You, the next Morning I spoke with You, and entreated You to interpose
with your Authority, to prevent the further Raveling into that Matter; withal I
told You, it would not rest in Petitioning onyl, but it would produce further
Mischiefs. I have had the happiness to foresee the Events of Public Affairs
for 10 years and upwards last past, and now I am confident that the Parliament
will again sit: notwithstanding all the Opposition that can be made against
them, Nay, if there were not Monck's Army, nor any other Endeavors on foot,
yet you would run your Selves into the Necessity of sitting under them again,
or Charles Stuart. My Lord, The Reasons and Grounds I have for this Assertion
are too large to communicate to You in a Letter; I shall only add this, that
You may preserve your Power, Honor, P^^son, and All that you can imagine, by
adhering to them: I do know that hitherto nothing has been done, but in order
thereunto; and with much respect to your Lordship, the same I have done, I take
God to witness: Now, if your Lordship shall think it your Interest to adhere to
the Lord Lambert, against the Interest of the Public, which cannot be secured
any other way than by the sitting again of the Parliament, the which if your
Lordship will promote you may have your own Terms, and may secure your Self
against the underhand Dealing that is on foot, in the behalf of the Lord
Lambert, the which (I can assure your Lordship) you cannot avoid, by any other
means. My Lord, I desire you seriously to consider the premises.

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, and faithful Well-wisher, J. S.


FINIS.

