A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT CHESTER, September XX. 1681.

By N. STRATFORD, D. D. and Dean of St. ASAPH.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Robert Littlebury, at the Kings-Arms in
Little-Britain, 1681.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God JOHN, Lord Bishop of CHESTER.
MY LORD,
SOme will perhaps think it a piece of Vanity, to prefix so great a Name to so
small a Thing; but how mean soever the ensuing Discourse may be, since it is
Your Pleasure it should be sent to the Press, it may justly take Sanctuary in
Your Lordship's Patronage: For what more reasonable, than that He should answer
for its manifold Defects, who caused them to be exposed to public Censure? I
thought indeed, that I could not, without some appearance of Rudeness, resist
the importunity of the Honorable Justices of Assize, and other Persons of
Quality, who heard it preached; yet I could not prevail with my self to publish
it, 'till, to their Desires, Your Lordship added Your Command; and then I
thought it my Duty no longer to Dispute, but forthwith to Obey. That it may be
successful in promoting those important Ends at which it aims, I humbly beg
Your Lordship's Blessing and Prayers for it.

And as this Church is already blessed in Your Lordship's most Pious and
Learned Labors; so that God would be farther Gracious to it, in giving Your
Lordship Health and long Life to perfect those other great Works You have
begun, and to add many more to them, shall be the constant Prayer of

Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, N. STRATFORD.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT CHESTER.
ACTS 24. 25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Felix trembled.


WHich words giving us a brief account of a Sermon preached by St. Paul,
concerning the Faith in Christ, to Felix the Roman Governor of Judea; in them
we may observe, 1. The manner of the Apostle's preaching, He reasoned. 2. Those
points of the Christian Faith about which he reasoned; Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come. 3. The Effect wrought upon Felix, by his
reasoning upon these; He trembled.

1. The manner of St. Paul's preaching, he reasoned: As he did not entertain
his Hearers with words and noise only, instead of sense; so neither did he
Magisterially impose: But whatsoever he commended, either to their Faith or
Practice; as he delivered it in a plain, unaffected dress of Words; so he
backed it with such strength of Argument, as was sufficient not only to Court,
but even to Command their assent. He knew 'twas in vain to attaque the Will and
Affections, before the Understanding was subdued to the Faith; that while Men
follow the conduct of a blind or erring Guide, it is not likely they should be
reduced from their Wanderings; that no Man can be persuaded to abandon his
Favorite Sin, till he be indeed convinced, that 'twill be an evil and a bitter
thing, to hold any longer fellowship with it.

That therefore he might effectually translate Men, from the Power of Satan, to
the Kingdom of God; he first endeavored to open their Eyes, and to turn them
from Darkness to Light; to convince them, both of Sin and of Duty, by solid
uncontrollable Arguments; and to give them the most forcible Dissuasives from
the one, the most quickening Incentives to the other.

This was the way of preaching, that in St. Paul's judgment was the most
powerful, and therefore the method he here used, in order to the Conversion of
Felix. I therefore humbly crave leave in imitation of our Apostle, briefly to
reason with you, concerning Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come; by
showing what indispensable Obligations we are under, what potent Motives we
have, as to the practice of the two former, so to the belief of the later. And
first for Righteousness.

As the word is not here to be extended to our immediate duty to God, so
neither shall I confine it to that scantling of Justice, which relates to
another's Estate only; but shall take it in a middle Latitude, as comprehensive
of all the duty we owe to our Neighbor, whether with respect to his outward,
or inward Man: Which tho it be of vast extent, yet it is usually reduced to two
general Heads; the one Negative, to do him no manner of wrong; either in his
Person, or in his Relatives, or in his Estate, or in any other Capacity: The
other Positive, to render him his due; whether it be that which we owe to all
Men indifferently, (as all common Offices of Humanity,) or to some in special,
by virtue of that particular Relation in which we stand to them (as Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor:) And not only what is due by the Laws of Men (which are contracted to a
narrow compass,) but by the more extensive Law of God. For the Apostle here
reasoned of Righteousness, as it is a part of the faith of Christ, who has
raised our Justice as high as Charity, and made it our bounden Duty, not only
to do no Evil, but as we have opportunity to do Good to all Men; to feed the
Hungry, and cloth the Naked; to give Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame.
And that not merely out of private Designs, and sordid Motives; but from a
suitable affection and inclination of Will; which is that alone by which all
our outward acts of Righteousness are animated, and rendered genuine and
acceptable to God.

This being the Sum of the Righteousness here meant, how easy a matter is it
to reason about it? To demonstrate, that it is not only highly becoming us, but
our necessary Duty; and that, both as we are Men, and as we are Christians. For
first, this is no more, than to do as we would be done to; a Law which Nature
it self teaches us. Were it a Duty far from us; were we to ascend to Heaven, to
bring it down from above; or to descend into the Deep, to fetch it up from
beneath; were we to toil and perplex our Brains, either in lofty, or profound
enquiries, to find it out; we might then perhaps be excused in our neglect of
it: But when it is not only nigh us, but within us, that we need look no
farther than our own Breasts to find our obligation to it; what Apology can we
make for our selves, in case we be found Transgressors?

It Is true, ( Whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to
them) we find among the injunctions of our Blessed Savior; not for that it was
not a Law of a more ancient date, but either because it was somewhat sullied by
the long growing wickedness of the World; or because Men were generally so
biased by their corrupt Affections, that they were not willing to take notice
of it; he therefore reprinted it in so fair a Character, that he that runs may
read it: For certain it is, that as it was at first impressed upon our Nature,
so it was never so totally defaced, but that a mere natural Man, by a
considerate reflection upon himself, might easily read it: Witness Aristotle,
Isocrates, and many more, Diog. Laert. l. 5. in vita Aristot. Isocrat. Orat. ad
Demon.
conducted only by the light of Reason, who owned themselves obliged to the
observation of it, before the Laws of Christ were published to the World. Yea,
so indelibly is it engraven in our Consciences, that those who live in a
constant defiance to it, are not able to expunge it; for however they
transgress it in their dealing with others, yet when their own Rights are
concerned, they always expect, that others should observe it toward themselves.
Let us now reflect, and commune a while with our own Hearts.

Are we willing to be wronged our selves? Are we content to fall a Sacrifice to
another Man's Revenge or Ambition? Do we desire to be trampled in the Dirt, by
those that are greater and stronger than we are? Would we be fraudulently
circumvented in our Contracts? Would we be blackened by false defamatory
Reports? Would we take it well to have our innocent Words and Actions wrested
to a mischievous construction? In a word; would we have our own Rights in any
kind invaded by others? If not, with what face can we assault the Body, or
undermine the Estate, or either openly or secretly wound the Reputation of our
Neighbor? With what reason can we take that Liberty to our selves, which we
deny to others, who may lay as good a claim to it as we can? As if we our
selves only were free from all Duty to others, and all others in Bonds to us.
Nor are we more tied to Justice by the Law of our Nature, than we are, 2. By
our Interest, which, if rightly understood, is a Law too.

It Is but reason that that should most sway us, which, all things considered,
is most beneficial to us; now would we contrive our own advantage, how can we
do it more effectually, than by an exact observation of the Rules of
Righteousness? That we are hereby raised to a conformity to God himself, whose
Image mainly consists in Righteousness, and true Holiness; and that by the
contrary we degenerate, not only into Beasts of Prey, but become like the very
Devil, who was a Cheater, a Liar, and a Murderer from the beginning, will, I
suppose, be denied by none. And doubtless, so much the more happy we shall be,
by how much the more we resemble the most blessed Being; so much the more
miserable, by how much the nearer we approach to the most accursed.

But in case we are sunk so far below our Original selves, have so much
forgotten our Divine Extraction, as to place our happiness in the poor, little,
sensual enjoyments of this World; yet nothing certainly is more highly
conducible thereunto, than the exercise of Justice.

Were we in the Leviathan state of Nature, in which every Man's hand would be
against every Man; should one Man blow up our Credits, another seize upon our
Estates, a third make an assault upon our Lives; how calamitous and deplorable
would our condition be! And yet there is no Man that offers these, or any other
injury to another, but he thereby provokes and invites another to do the like
to himself. For what reason have we to expect, that others should not mete that
measure to us, that we have meted to them before?

It Is true; we should do to others, not as they do, but as we would (were we in
their circumstances) they should do to us: But the daily practice of the World
assures us, That the generality of Mankind make our dealing with them the
Standard of their carriage toward us again. And therefore when we injure our
Neighbors, we do in effect but wrong our selves, because the wrong we do to
them, it is likely they will return into our own Bosoms: And on the contrary, by
every good office we do to others, we engage them to do the like to us; and in
case they be persons but of an ordinary Ingenuity, they will not fail as they
have opportunity, to recompense us.

But besides the obligation this lays upon others, to requite us in the same
kind; it is a thing in it self highly venerable and amiable, that makes a Man's
face to shine, and commends him to the Esteem of his greatest Enemies.

I might also show, how Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14. 34.
(in the prosperity of which, the welfare of every private person is bound up)
how Societies are firmly cemented and established by it; and by the contrary,
would soon be broken into pieces, and sink into dissolution.

But I pass to a third Consideration; namely, the near Relation we stand in one
to another. 'Twas in Moses's account a good Argument; Sirs, ye are Brethren,
why do ye wrong one to another? Acts 7
Which also the Prophet Malachi urged to the same purpose: Have we not all one
Father? Has not one God created us? Why then do we deal treacherously every
Man against his Brother? Mat. 2. 10.
And St. Paul thought us sufficiently obliged to speak the truth every one to
his Neighbor, because we are Members one of another. Ephesians. 4. 26.
The Learned and the Ignorant, the Rich and the Poor, the Base and the
Honorable, they are all of the same ancient Family, derive their Pedigree from
the same common Parents. What tho one be a younger, another an elder Brother?
Tho one has a more liberal, another a more scant Portion of this World's
Goods? Yet should we not still remember that we are Brethren, and be mutually
serviceable to each other's good?

Nor are we more closely tied together by Nature, than we are by Religion: Ephesians.
4. 2, 3, 4.
As Christians we are all Members of one Body, are all animated by one Spirit,
and called in one hope of our Calling. And for those who are so many ways one
and the same, both by Nature and Religion, is it not as monstrous for them to
be injurious one to another, as it is for a Man to be cruel to himself, and to
hate his own Flesh?

But if these Reasons should be of little force with any Man, there is one
Argument still behind, that will undoubtedly be prevalent with all those, who
are not so absurd, as plainly to contradict their Profession by their Practice.

For fourthly, What does the Lord in his written Word more expressly require,
more vehemently inculcate, than to do justly, and to love Mercy? Micah 6. 9.
Isa. 1. 17, 18.
These things he accounts, not the Lighter, but the Weightier Matters of his
Law, Mat. 23. 23.
and sets so high a value upon them, that he values nothing where these are
wanting. And tho the Jews were generally so disingenuous and ill-natured, that
God in some Cases, merely for the hardness of their Hearts, made them some
Allowances; yet he expressly forbad them, not only to Hurt, but also to Hate, or
so much as bear a Grudge against their Brother. Levit. 19. 17, 18.
And can we in reason think, that our Blessed Savior, who came not to Evacuate
the Law, but to Fulfill it; who expects, that all his Disciples should, by
their exemplary Virtues, become the Salt of the Earth, and the Lights of the
World; and in order thereunto, has more fully revealed our Duty, and brought
Life and Immortality to light, the more powerfully to engage us to the
performance of it; can we, I say, think, that he made us any Abatements?

If we will but impartially consult his Sermon in the Mount, we shall soon be
resolved in this Matter: We shall there find, that he has laid his Prohibition
against the Murder of the Tongue, and of the Heart, as well as of the Hand;
that rather than knowingly to Do, he has commanded us patiently to Suffer an
Injury; and instead of returning evil for evil, that on the contrary, we
recompense evil with good. And because, if there be any persons in the World
that we may be allowed to do a mischief to, they may well be supposed to be
those, who, for Christ's sake, are our Enemies, and therefore His Enemies more
than Ours; so far is our Savior from giving us a License, to do the least Hurt
to such as these, that he peremptorily commands us, to return them all manner
of Good, for all manner of Evil: To bless them that curse us; to do good to
them that hate us; and to pray for them, who (for his sake) despitefully use
us, and persecute us. Mat. 5. 44.


And that he might effectually oblige us to the observation of these his Laws,
he transcribed them to the Life in his own Practice. As while he lived, he
continually went about doing Good to an ungrateful World, and at last, freely
gave his Life for those who with violent hands took it away; so together with
his Blood, he also poured out his Heart, in an ardent Prayer to his Father to
forgive them. Luke 22. 34.


This is the Example we profess to follow, and these are the Precepts we
pretend to obey; yea, which we have solemnly vowed to conform to. And if we are
tied by such strong Bonds, to be kind and courteous, and good and gracious, and
that to those, who (if any Men in the World) deserve the quite contrary from
us; how much more to be just and honest, that is, as good as Turks and Heathens?

I know no greater obligations we can have to any Duty, than these already
mentioned; if we are able to break these Bonds, none will be found strong
enough to hold us.

I therefore proceed to the second part of St. Paul's Sermon, namely,
Temperance. This contains our Duty to our selves, as the former, that we owe to
our Neighbor. The word in the Original (...).
denotes Power and Dominion over a Man's self; and tho it may be extended to a
due command of all our inordinate Affections and Appetites, of what kind
soever, yet it is here to be limited to the Government of those especially, to
the Tyranny of which, Felix was most enslaved; that is, to the Lusts of the
Flesh, as they are distinguished by St. John, from the Lust of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life. And therefore I see no necessity of mending our Translation, if
we take Temperance as comprehensive both of Sobriety and Chastity; as giving
Laws to all our exorbitant fleshly Lusts, and bringing them into subjection to
the Empire of Reason and Religion.

Now so apparently reasonable is this Duty, that there is no Man so brutish,
who may not easily reason himself into a sense of his obligation to it: For
whether we consider our Body, Soul, or Spirit; whether we consult our Sense,
our Reason, or our Religion; we shall be furnished with store of Arguments to
oblige, and of Motives to induce us to the practice of it.

First, Our very Flesh it self (which alone rebels against it) were it capable
of reasoning, would become its Advocate. Tho the sensitive Appetite be
absolutely necessary to the well being of the Body; yet when it once swells too
big, and stretches beyond those Bounds that Nature has assigned it, nothing is
more destructive to the Parent that breeds it; and nothing more highly
advantageous, both to the health and pleasure of the Flesh, than to retrench
the Extravagancies of its own Appetites.

For, 1. Indulgence to Sensuality is a most deadly Enemy to our bodily Health,
without which, the Flesh must needs be very ill at ease. The Glutton swallows a
Disease in every intemperate Morsel; and the Wanton fills his Bones with
Rottenness, as fast as he empties them of Marrow; and by every sort of
Intemperance, the Sensualist either begets, or nurses up some Viper, that will
prey upon, and devour his beloved Flesh. 'Twould be endless to descend to
particulars: In general, such numerous Armies of Diseases are raised and
maintained by this Vice alone, as are able to overthrow the strongest
Constitution in the World. And therefore Diogenes deservedly laughed at those
Sots, who took care to be Embalmed after they were dead; and in the mean time,
did their endeavor to stink and rot while they were alive.

2. Moderation of our fleshly Appetites; it is a great advantage to the
Pleasures of the Flesh; it gives them a higher and more generous Taste, and
makes them much more Delicious, than otherwise they would be: For by restraint
our Appetites are quickened, our Perceptions are rendered more clear and brisk;
and by how much the keener our Senses are, by so much the more is the Pleasure
heightened. Whereas Prove. 27. 7.
the full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb, to the hungry Soul every bitter thing
is sweet; a Crust of dry Bread, and a Sup of cold Water, when sawc'd with
Hunger and Thirst, are more delicious than the Banquets of Cleopatra, to a
gorged Stomach.

For when the Appetite is let loose, it is soon tired by its own Extravagancy;
it is cloyed and glutted by immoderate Enjoyment; and then the most exquisite
Entertainments of Lust become not only Unsavory, but Fulsom. So foolish and
sottish is the Voluptuous; for Pleasure's sake he abandons the greater, and
pursues the less; he forsakes a Fountain of living Water, and runs to a dirty
Puddle to quench his Thirst.

And if Intemperance be so great an Enemy to the Body, then certainly much
more, In the second place, does it War against the Spirit; to the nature,
working, and improvement of which, nothing in the World can be more directly
opposite. It darkens the Mind, and enslaves the Will; it dethrones Reason, and
exalts Passion; it softens, debases, and impoverishes the Spirit, and renders
us wholly unfit for manly Undertakings; it throws down all our Defenses, and
exposes us naked to all the Mischiefs, that a benighted Understanding, an
ungovernable Appetite, and unbridled Passions can betray us to. Whoredom and
Wine, and new Wine (says the Prophet) take away the Heart; Hos. 4. 11.
and in Solomon's reckoning, a Drunkard is as stupid, as one that lies down on
the top of a Mast. Prove. 23. 34, 35.
In a word, Intemperance quite stifles the Breath of God within us, and
transforms us, not only into Beasts, but into something far worse.

In case therefore we have any regard to the well-being, either of our Bodies,
or of our Souls here in this World; if we would show our selves Men, do any
thing becoming the Dignity of our Nature, we need no greater Motives to induce
us to live soberly.

And yet, 3. By the pure Religion, and undefiled, which we all profess, we are
more strongly obliged to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh,
as well as of the Spirit; 1 Cor. 7. 1.
and that not only by virtue of its Precepts, but of its Promises.

First, By virtue of its Precepts. As our Blessed Savior himself chose such an
uneasy condition of Life, and exposed himself to such a painful Death, as were
a perfect Contradiction to all sensual Gratifications; so he requires, that all
those who call themselves by his Name, should so far transcribe the Copy he
has set them, as to make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof: Romans 13. 14.
And therefore he has not only cautioned us against Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, Luke 21. 34.
(the grosser acts of Intemperance) but has assured us, that he will own none
for his Votaries, who do not crucify the Flesh, together with its Affections
and Lusts. Gal. 5. 24.
Nor will it suffice, if after we have once nailed them to the Cross, we let
them loose again, and suffer them to recover of their Wounds; but we must rack
and torture them, even to Death: For we are commanded to mortify our Members
which are on the Earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, Passion, evil Concupiscence,
and inordinate Affection. Colos. 3. 5.
Yea, be they Members as dearly beloved, and such as seem as necessary and
advantageous to us as our right Eye, or our right Hand; we must without remorse
pluck them out, and cut them off, and cast them away from us with abhorrency.

Nor are we more strongly obliged to this by the Precepts of our Religion, than
we are, In the second place, by its exceeding great and precious Promises,
which are given us to this very end, That by them we may be made partakers of a
Divine Nature, having escaped the Pollution that is in the World through Lust.
2 Pet. 1. 4.
For as these Promises are all made to those only, who through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body; so the good things promised are of such a
refined and spiritual Nature, that no others are capable of enjoying them. For
put the case, that God should lay open the Enclosure, and give free leave to a
Sensualist to enter into the Regions of immortal Bliss; yet a person of such a
brutish Temper, would be as indisposed to relish the Entertainment there, as a
Goat is to taste the Pleasures of Music. For there is not any thing in Heaven
that is suitable to the desires of a carnal Man; there is not so much as eating
or drinking; there is no marrying, nor giving in Marriage; much less any
intemperate Cups, or unclean Embraces, to entertain the Voluptuary with. Such
are the Joys above, as mainly consist in the Vision of God; and how can he take
any pleasure in God, who can behold nothing in him, but what is as opposite to
his own Inclinations, as Light to Darkness? No, the presence of the infinitely
blessed Being would fill such a Soul with Confusion and Horror, and make him
almost as much deprecate the being in Heaven, as in Hell.

If therefore we have any love to our selves; if we desire to be happy, either
in the Life that now is, or in that which is to come; instead of pampering our
fleshly Lusts, we shall rather starve them, and hold them in as with Bit and
Bridle, till they become tame and tractable, and humble Servants to our Souls.

But if we are so far bewitched with Sensuality, as not to be disenchanted by
such calm and gentle Reasoning, it is high time to proceed to that which is more
loud and thundering, namely, The Judgment to come, the third and last part of
the Apostle's Sermon. That the Doctrine of a Judgment to come is no cunningly
devised Fable, we may be undoubtedly assured, (if we can be so of any thing)
and that both by Reason and Revelation.

For First, We find it impressed by God himself upon our Minds.

Secondly, It necessarily results from the natural Notion we ^ave of God

And Thirdly, We are infallibly assured of it by Divine Revelation.

First, The Doctrine of a future Judgment is by God himself impressed upon our
Minds, and therefore has been ever owned, even by those persons, who had no
other Teacher than themselves. It Is needless to give a particular account of
those Heathen Writers, who have given their Attestation to this Article of our
Faith: He that will not be at the pains to peruse the Authors themselves, may
find many of their Testimonies collected, by St. Clemens of Alexandria, Justin
Martyr, Eusebius, and others. Clem. Alex. Stromat. l. 5. p. 606. Just. Mart. de
Monarch. Dei, and Paraen. ad Graec. Eusebius. de Praeparat. Evang. l. 11. c. 38.
l. 12. c. 6.
And that this Notion derives its Pedigree from God himself, who can have no
design to cheat and abuse us, will easily appear by these Considerations.

1. Because it is not the product of Institution only; for if it were, how came
it to pass, that the most rude and uninstructed Nations in the World have been
ever possessed with it? That the barbarous Indians, and the salvage Americans,
had a prenotion of Rewards and Punishments in another World, we cannot so much
as question, unless we will be so unreasonable, as to call in question the
Truth of the most credible Histories. Besides, if the conceit of a Judgment to
come proceeded from hence, there must be some Man who first broached it: And by
whom was he taught, who first taught it to others? And if it took not its
Original from Institution, 'twill yet appear more highly credible, that it is by
the God of Nature interwoven with the very Essence of our Souls; in that,

2. Those persons are possessed with a Fear of this Judgment, who can have no
ground of Fear, but what they find in themselves. Whence is it, that they who
commit Villainies in the Dark; or in the solitary Wilderness, without any
Witness but God and their own Consciences, cannot reflect upon their Sins
without Fear and Regret? They are in no danger of any earthly Tribunal; what
then can they dread but the Judgment of Heaven? Whence is it, that those
persons, whose very name is a Terror to evil doers, in case they themselves do
evil, do often become a Terror to themselves? Whom do they fear? To whom are
they accountable? But to him only who is higher than the Highest, who will
judge the Great and the Small, the Strong and the Weak, without respect of
Persons.

Which is yet, In the third place, more strongly concluded; Because many
persons, who do their utmost to stupifie and debauch their Consciences, are by
no means able to rid themselves of this troublesome Guest; which certainly they
would be, were it not connatural to them.

Many there are who set their Mouth against Heaven, and their Tongue walks
through the Earth; who set themselves down in the Chair of the Scorner; who
droll upon Religion, and make a mock at Sin, and laugh aloud at a Judgment to
come, and proclaim them all for Fools or Knaves, who endeavor to possess Men
with a firm, steadfast, practical Belief of these things. And yet these jolly
Men cannot get an absolute Conquest over their own Consciences; but maugre all
the Violence they offer to them, and the strongest Bands of Iniquity they can
bind them with, they sometimes break loose, and hale them to the Bar, and
pronounce that Sentence against them here, that shall hereafter be pronounced
by Christ himself in the General Assembly of the whole World.

From all which it plainly appears, That the Notion of a Judgment to come, is
not the product of Superstition or Credulity, of a feminine Understanding, or
an abused Fancy; but so deeply impressed by God himself upon our Minds, that
nothing is able to erase it.

Secondly, A future Judgment is necessarily concluded, from the natural Notion
we have of God. That God is a Being absolutely perfect, there is no Man but by
the exercise of his rational Faculties, may soon attain to the knowledge of;
and by necessary consequence, that he is neither ignorant, nor impotent, nor
unjust, nor unmerciful; but so infinitely Knowing, that all Sins, how secret
soever or disguised, are naked and open to his Eyes; so Powerful, that the most
potent Sinner is not able to stay his Hand; so Holy, Just, and Good, that he
cannot but discountenance Vice, and encourage Virtue, and will some time or
other render to every Man according to his Works. All this is no more than what
the very Notion of God includes: And yet, where can the Man be found, that is
so quick sighted, as to be able to observe such a Dispensation of Recompenses
in this World, as bears any Proportion to this Idea?

It Is true indeed, there is no Age, but affords some such remarkable Examples
of God's Justice, as (if duly considered) would give check to the boldest
Sinners: But these are comparatively rare; where one is branded with a mark of
Divine Vengeance, how many Hundreds escape untouched? According to the common
course of Providence, There is one event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked;
to the Clean, and to the Unclean. Eccl. 9. 1, 2.
Yea, do we not sometimes see the Wicked lift up their Horn on high, while the
Righteous hang down their Heads? Eccl. 10. 6, 7.
Folly set in great Dignity, and the Rich sit in low Place? Servants riding on
Horses, and Princes walking as Servants on the Earth? The best of Kings brought
to a Scaffold, and the worst of Rebels advanced to his Throne? And such unequal
Administration of Affairs, as seems so absurd and preposterous to common
Reason, can we think it the ultimate result of infinite Wisdom, and Power, and
Justice? Are we not hence forced to conclude, that there shall be another day,
in which all that is now crooked, shall be made strait; and all that is rough,
shall be made plain? when the Righteous shall lift up their Heads with joy, and
the Wicked ( who now account their Life madness, and their End to be without
honor) Wisd. 5. 3, 4.
shall be forced with Anguish to confess; Verily, there is a Reward for the
Righteous; doubtless there is a God that judges in the Earth. Psalm. 58. 11.


But, Thirdly, We have yet a more sure word of Revelation, which expressly tells
us, That God has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in
Righteousness: Acts 17. 31.
That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad: That in order to this, the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
the Trumpet of God; 1 These. 4. 16.
That all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done Good, to the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done
Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation. John 5. 27, 28.


Knowing therefore this Terror of the Lord, let us be persuaded to walk
honestly, as in the day; not in Rioting and Drunkenness; not in Chambering and
Wantonness; not in Strife and Envying; but to put on the Lord Jesus Christ:
That so this great Day of the Lord, that will be a day of Fire and Brimstone,
of Storm and Tempest, to all such as walk after the Flesh, may be a day of
Jubilees, and of Triumphs to us. And that we may be indeed persuaded to this, I
shall briefly represent the Terrors and Amazements, wherewith all unrighteous
and debauched Persons will then be seized.

Let us imagine, that we now heard the voice of the Archangel; Arise ye Dead,
and come to Judgment: That we thereupon started out of our Graves, and found
the whole Earth on Fire about us, and heard the fearful Thunders, and dismal
Groans, of the dissolving World: That we saw the Judge upon the Throne of his
Glory, attended with Millions of the glittering heavenly Host: That we saw vast
Armies arising out of the Sea, and Death and Hell delivering up the Dead that
were in them: That the Books were then opened, and all the hidden things of
Darkness brought to Light, the most secret Sins made manifest.

Vbi se tunc impii videbunt? Vbi adulteri, ubi ebriosi, ubi maledici se
recognoscent? Vbi amatores luxuriae, ubi raptores, ubi superbi and invidi
apparebunt? Quid infelices pro sua defensione dicturi sunt, quos totiens
admonitos, and tamen imparatos dies ille repererit? Cum ad illam Archangeli
tubam omni buccina clariorem, totus simul coeperit mugire mundus, etc. Aug. de
Tempore, Sermon. 54.
With what confusion of face (think you) would the Deceiver, the Hypocrite,
appear before the Righteous and All-seeing Judge? He that can now put a fair
Face upon the foulest Matter; that can dress up Schism and Faction in the
Garments of Peace and Unity, and transform Sedition and Rebellion into Loyalty
and Obedience; how will he be covered with Shame and Blushing, when the Mask
shall be pulled off, and all that Paint and Daub washed away, by which he
Smoothed, and put a Gloss upon his most wrinkled and deformed Actions? He that
now thinks it a fine thing to overreach his Brother, that decoys him into an
evil Net, and then braves himself as a Man of Wit and Parts for so doing* How
will he be at his Wits ends, when too late he shall be convinced, with a
Vengeance, that Honesty was the best Policy, and that he was a wise Man, who
chose to part with his own, rather than usurp another Man's Rights? He that is
now Mighty to drink Wine, and a Man of Strength to pour down Strong Drink, who
leaves Trophies of his Victories at every drunken Meeting; how will his Courage
be cooled, and his Crest fall? How will he sneak into a Den to hide his guilty
Head, when all his Rioting and Revelling, and Swaggering, and Swearing, and
Ribaldry, (for which he was here hugged and applauded by his dear Companions)
shall be exposed naked, in all their Shame and Turpitude, to the view of all
the holy Angels, and of all the good and wise Men that ever lived? And when
after their Sins have been made bare, and held up to the View of all the World,
that dreadful Sentence shall thunder in their Ears; Depart from me ye Cursed
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: What
inexpressible Horrors and Agonies will then possess them? Methinks I hear
their despairing Cry. What! is this the end of my fleshly and worldly Lusts? Is
this that for which I have taken so much Pains, and spent so much Time? Have I
so often resisted the Holy Ghost, and offered Violence to my own Conscience, to
bring my self to this woeful State? Prodigious Sot! had I done and suffered but
half so much in mortifying my sinful Lusts, as I did in gratifying them, I had
now been crowned with an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Magna est ejus
severitas post Judicium, cujus ante Judicium ineffabilis misericordia prorogata
est. Aug. de Verb. Dom. in Evang. secund. Matthew. Sermon. 22.
But alas! it is now too late; the date of Mercy is out, and the day of
Vengeance is come; the fatal Sentence is already past, that will never be
revoked; the Judge is now inexorable, no Prayers nor Tears, no Sighs nor
Groans, will move him to Pity; nothing remains for me but Torments great and
intolerable, without End, without Intermission, without the allay of one
Glimpse of Hope. And who can dwell with devouring Fire? Who can dwell with
everlasting Burnings? Oh! it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
Living God! So fearful, that the very preapprehensions of it is enough to make
the sturdiest Sinner to tremble; which was the effect wrought upon Felix by St.
Paul's reasoning: The third and last thing considerable in the Text.

That Felix was as strongly fortified against the Assaults of Conscience as
most Men in the World, we shall have no reason to doubt, if we read the
Character given of him by Josephus and Tacitus; Joseph. Antiqu. Jud. l. 20. c.
6. Tacit. Annal. 12. 11. Hist. 5. 3.
and yet being conscious to himself of a wicked Life, the Voice of a poor
despised Prisoner citing him to a Judgment to come; sets him a Trembling.

By which we plainly see, that the Arrows of an evil Conscience are so
piercing, that there is no Armor of Proof against them; that its Assaults and
Batteries are so strong and violent, that no Bulwark is able to withstand them:
But be the Sinner never so Great and Powerful, never so Daring and Resolute;
yet Wisd. (...)
Wickedness being condemned by its own Witness, will be very timorous; and
being pressed with Conscience, will always forecast Grievous Things: Witness
the most Potent, and the most Insolent Sinners that ever were; such as
Tiberius, Caligula and Nero, in Heathen Story; besides Cain, Belshazzar, and
others, recorded in Holy Scripture.

What then remains, but that forthwith we reconcile our selves to our own
Consciences? That when they deal faithfully with us, and tell us roundly of our
Sins, and of the Judgment to come, for them; we do not rudely shuffle them off
(as Felix did St. Paul) to a more convenient Season; that we no longer stifle
our Convictions, and check our Tremblings, but suffer them to proceed to a
sincere Conversion; not only to the shaking of our vicious Habits, but to the
tearing them all up by the Roots, and utterly destroying them; that whatsoever
we have done amiss heretofore, we do so no more: But for the future denying all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that we live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in
this present World: That so when we shall be Summoned to appear before the
Judge of all the Earth, being first acquitted by our own Consciences, we may
also be absolved by the Judge, and may be advanced to an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
all those, who, by patient continuance in well-doing, do seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, for the Merits
of our Blessed Savior; to whom be ascribed, etc.

FINIS.

