FOR THE King and both Houses OF PARLIAMENT. Who are desired to read over this
following Treatise, and in the Fear and Wisdom of the pure holy God to
consider, and lay to heart what is contained therein. And in tender Bowels of
Compassion to Repair the great Breaches that are made all over the Nation. And
to grant a Speedy Redress, now, while it is in your power.

Given forth in the Spirit of Love and Meekness; And written by John Stubbs.

Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, Matthew. 5. Printed in
the Year, 1670.

For the King and hoth Houses of Parliament.
ALL ye that go under the Name of Christians, which are after Christ, and not
after Old Adam in the Fall; Christ's command to such is to love Enemies, Matthew.
5.44. then not to destroy them: So not one Christian to destroy another about
Religion; for Christ came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke
9.54.55. And God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son into
the World, not to destroy the World, but that the World through him might have
life, John 3.16, 17. The Devil is called a Destroyer, Rev. 9.11. and Jesus a
Savior, Matthew. 1.20. And was not Cain the first that persecuted his Brother
about Religion, Genesis 4. And are ye not all Brethren, Matthew. 23.8. first, as you
are in Adam; secondly, as you are in Christ Jesus; and Sons of God by creation,
and Sons of God by adoption; and therefore, why should you destroy one another,
who are of the Image of God? for all look upon Cain, that he was a wicked man,
that persecuted his Brother to death, about Religion: And you know the
Scripture says, He that envies his Brother is a manslayer, 1 John 3. and no
manslayer has Eternal Life abiding in him; and therefore love one another,
for love is of God; and he that loves not, is not of God; and he that hates
his Brother abides in death; so he cannot be in Christ the Life, see the
Epistles of John. And he that is born of the Flesh will persecute him that is
born of the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. and therefore cast forth that birth that will
persecute; for he that is born of the Spirit cannot join with that Spirit that
is born of the Flesh; for if he could, he should not be persecuted.

Its mighty strange that Christ Jesus and his Apostles should command so much
for Christians to love one another, who says, If they have the gift of
Healing, and Prophesies, and diverse kinds of Tongues, and interpretation of
Tongues, etc. 1 Cor. 12.10. And if they have not love, they are but like
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

So what is all Christendom, that does hate and persecute one another about
Religion, but like the sounding Brass and tinkling Cimbals, though they have
Gifts, and Tongues, and want love. And though they give their goods to feed the
poor, and their bodies to be burned; yet if they have not love, they are but
tinckling Cymbals, 1 Cor. 13.

And does not Christ say, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together until the
Harvest; he knew men would be busy to meddle with that they should not do; and
therefore he forbids to meddle, lest they should pluck up the Wheat with the
Tares, Matthew. 13.30, 38, etc.

And also you know, how Christ in that Parable reproved him that took his
Brother by the Throat, Matthew. 18.28. and tells the Jews in Matthew. 21. of their
perfecution, in that Parable of the Householder, how that he had sent out his
Servants to the Husbandman; and how they beat one, and killed another, and
stoned another; and at last he sent unto him his Son, saying, They will
reverence my Son: But they caught him, and cast him out of the Vineyard, and
slew him also: and so what became of those Husbandmen.

And are not the Sheep on the right hand, but the Goats on the left hand, that
persecutes, and that does not visit Christ in Prison in his Members, who were
sick, and who were hungry and who were naked, and they did not visit him: And
if they went into everlasting Punishment that did not visit him in Prison, what
will become of them that casts into Prison where he is made manifest, and
suffers for his Sake. See Math. 25.

And so in the Light and Fear of God consider these things, before it be too
late, in your day; and in the Bowelsand Mercies of Christ Jesus, lay things to
Heart.

And be not spurred on by the chief Priests and Bishops to Persecution; for was
it not the Priests and false Prophets that stirred up the Kings and Princes
against Jeremiah, to cast him into Prison, and into the Dungeon? And what
became of those Priests and false Prophets? And also, What became of the King
and Princes, that were stirred up by them, when Nebuchadnezar came and found
Jeremiah in prison. See Jeremiah chap. 37, 38. and 43.

And was it not the false Prophets that stirred up Ahah against Micaiah? 1
King. 22.24. etc.

And was it not Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, that stirred up Jeroboam King of
Israel against Amos, and said he had spoken Treason against the King? Amos 7.10.

And was it not the chief Priests and Elders, that stirred up the Magistrates
and people against Christ, as you may read in the Evangellists: And how they
persuaded Pilate to Crucify Jesus, the Son of the Living God, who is the
Original of Christianity?

And did not Christ say, That they should hale the Disciples out of their
Synagogues? John 16.2. And the chief Priests and Pharisees should be against
Christ Jesus?

And did not Christ Weep over Jerusalem, and tell them, That the Blood of Abel
to Zacharias would come upon that Generation? Mat. 23.35, 36, 37.

And as you may read in the latter end of the four Evangelists, what Counsels
the chief Priests had with the Elders, to raise up Accusations against Jesus,
and said he was against Casar. And was not the chief Priests his greatest
Enemy, from his Birth, to the very day of his Crucifixion? and was it not the
chief Priests that cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and
release unto us Barrabas. John 23.18.

And did not the chief Priests and the Scribes Mock him, saying, He saved
others, himself he cannot save? Mark 15.31.

And when they had Crucified him, was it not the chief Priests and Pharisees
that came unto Pilate, Matthew 27.62. Saying, Sir, we remember that that
Deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After Three Days I will Rise again.
Command therefore that the Sepulere be made sure until the 3d day, least his
Disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the People he is
risen from the dead; so the last error shall be worse then the first.

And when he was risen, did not the chief Priests persuade the Soldiers to
say, That his Disciples had stole him away by night, Matthew. 28.13.

And it was the chief Priests, with the Elders, that gave large money to the
Soldiers to say so, verse. 12.

And so all along throughout Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, you may see it was
the chief Priests that were Christ's greatest Enemies; not the meanest of them,
but the chief; and so it is now.

Do not the Bishops, and Prebends, and chief of the Priests stir up Persecution
now against the people of God.

Did not Christ's words come to pass upon the Jews, and upon Jerusalem, when
Titus came against them about forty years after Christ's Ascension.

And was it not by the chief Priests Order and Authority that Saul went with
his Packet of Letters to hale those that were Believers and Followers of Christ
to prison, Acts 9.

And do they not do so now, with their Paraters and Informers, by order from
their Bishops and chief Priests.

Now consider these things in the tender Bowels and Mercies of God, for we
would not have the Magistrates ridden upon, nor spurred up by the chief Priests
nor Bishops to persecution; but we would have them provoked to love and good
works, that they may be a praise to them that do well, and a Terror to the Evil
Doer, Romans 13.

And was it not the high Priest that examined Stephen when the false Witnesses
came against him, where you know he was stoned death, Acts 7.

And was it not the chief Priests and Elders that caused the Apostles to be
whipped so, as you may see in the Acts all along.

And you may see there how much the chief Priests were against the Apostle
Paul, after he was converted and had forsaken them, and followed Christ Jesus
who is a Priest for ever made higher then the Heavens, Hebr. 7.26.

And so all along you may see in every Age, since the Pope got up; how
Persecution has been stirred up by the Priests.

In the other Powers days, Did not the Priests give Oliver high titles; and
the Presbyterian Priests, and Independants made Petitions and Addresses to him
for Pesecution.

And then in his Son Richards days, Did not the Presbyterian Priests and
Independants petition against us, that we might be persecuted; and called him
their Joshua: So that many thousands of our Friends in his time were
imprisoned; besides the unreasonable havoc they made, in spoiling of their
goods; and about forty suffered Death in that day, by cruel imprisonments; but
the Lord has been our Preserver and Helper, who had no Helper in the Earth;
whom (ever since we were a People) the Priests of all sorts would have rooted
us out of the Earth.

Therefore we would desire, for your eternal good to consider these things: For
Caesar, that is, the Magistrate must have his due, which is the Tribute and
Custom; and God must have his due, that is, the Rule in the Conscience, and in
the heart, and his Worship that is in Spirit and Truth, John 14.24.

Now concerning Liberty:
MOses, who was a Magistrate, and a Judge, and a Prophet, he did not restrain
others from Prophesying. but said, Oh, that all the Lords People were Prophets,
Numb. 11.29. He did not say, It would destroy the Government, if they did
preach in the Camp: He did not say, It would make Riots, and Routs; but said,
Oh, that all the Lords People were Prophets!

Abraham dwelt among the Canaanites a long time, yet contrary to them in
Religion, Genesis 13.7. and 16.13. again he sojourned in Gerar, and King Abimeleck
gave him leave to dwell in his Land, Genesis 20.21, 23, 24.

And also Isaac had Liberty to sojourn in those parts, Genesis 26.

But you do not read that they were forced by them with whom they sojourned, to
be of their Religion.

Jacob lived twenty years in one House, with his Uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Genesis 31.

Neither was Lot forced to the Sodomites Religion.

Neither do you read any of the Pharaohs, during the Children of Isreal's
sojourning there, Exodus 12. forced them to be of their Religion; but it was
his own oppressing mind, to set them at work, that made him to keep them there;
and so he would not let them go forth, to worship God, till the Ten Plagues
came upon him.

Neither did any of the Emperors compel the Israelites to be of their Religion
during their seventy years Captivity.

And (...) he encouraged the Jews to build a Temple though he was different
concerning their Religion.

And Darius and Cyrus, see their tenderness, though they were Heathens; they
were tender to the Jews, and gave them Liberty to worship the God of Heaven,
though there were many that did inform against them; and said, Their City had
been a Rebellious City. Ezra 4.12.15.

And the three Children in Nebuchadnezars time were persecuted, because they
would not join, nor fall down to worship that great Image they made; read
Daniel.

So what was of man, and man's making, man was not to fall down to that, because
it was the work of man's hands; and have they not been making Religions ever
since the Papists got up.

And does not the pure Religion come down from above from God, which all is to
fall down to, and worship, which is in Spirit and Truth, Jam. 1.27.

And Daniel he had Liberty to worship God in Babylon, though his worship were
contrary to the Emperors; and and prayed, as at other times, notwithstanding
the Emperors Decree, till those wicked Informers rose up against him, but mark
their end, see Daniel 6.

And so its very much how people that are called Christians can say the Lords
Prayer, that are so full of envy, and say Forgive us as we forgive them that
trespass against us, and have so much enmity and hatred in their hearts one
against another? Do they think to be forgiven that do not forgive? Does not
Christ say, they must be reconciled to their Brother before they can offer
their Gifts to God? Matthew. 5. And what have they against those people called
Quakers, but in matters concerning their God? and because they pray to God, and
worship him in Spirit and Truth, in that Worship that Christ himself set up
above sixteen hundred years ago, see J^^ 4.20, 21, etc.

Do not the Quakers love Enemies? Matthew. ^.44.

Do they not bear all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

Are they not the best Tenants that the great men in the Nation have. And do
they not deal truly with you in their Shops, and Merchandising? and in then
Commerce are they not at one word with you?

Why should they be chased and coursed up and down, like a Partridge upon the
Mountains.

And why should the Priests and Bishops be against them? Is it not only because
we cannot pay them Tithes?

And is not the Priesthood changed that took Tithes; and the Commandment
disannulled that gave him his Tithes? read Hibrews 7.

And does not Christ say to his Ministers, Ambassadors, Teachers and Disciples;
Freely ye have received, freely give? Matthew. 10. And he bids them Go into all
Nations, and he would be with them; and if he be with them, that is enough; then
they need neither to seek for Bag nor Scrip.

Now where are there any of your Bishops or Priests that goes freely, and
preaches freely? Is not this Command of Christ's with them thrown away;
because it brings in no gain? who says, Freely ye have received, freely give.

And in Matthew. 10.12. Christ tells them, When they enter into any House, they
are to salute it, saying, Peace be unto this House, and what they set before
them that they may eat, etc. He does not say, You shall send Constables,
Parrators, and Informers to ransack and spoil the House; neither does he say,
You must give me two or three hundred a year.

And does not the Apostle say, 1 Timothy 3. That a Bishop must be Blameless, not
given to Wine; no Striker; not greedy of (...) not a (...) not Covetous, and he
must be Gentle, and apt to Teach.

And he must not covet men's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel, Acts 20.33. but to
keep the Gospel without charge: was not this the practice of the Apostles, to
keep the Gospel without charge, 1 Cor. 9.18.

But do these Priests and Bishops so, that cast into prison for Tithes, and
such things? Do not those mind earthly things; and such seek not the Lord
Jesus, but their own Bellies, Romans 16.18. which have from a hundred a year, to
a thousand; and the Bishops have several thousands.

Do you think the Priests and Bishops will leave those fat Benefices, and
preach the Gospel to the Heathen, freely, in Sheeps-skins, and Goat Skins, as
some of the holy men have done, spoken of in Hebrews 11.37. they were not
gotten so high then as White-Sleeves, Tippits and Hoods.

Now those which have cast into prison, and spoiled, and ransacked Houses; and
made havoc of peoples Goods; and made many Widows, and Fatherless; and
Imprisoned many unto Death: this is not glad Tidings; for the Gospel is
Glad-Tidings: such do not keep the Gospel without charge; these do not obey the
commands of Christ, nor the Apostles, which says, Freely ye have received,
freely give, Matthew. 10.8.

And unto such we cannot bid God speed, 2 Jo. 10: 1. For while we put into the
Priests and Bishops Mouths, they preached Peace unto us, and blessed us; but
when we see they were out of the Doctrine of Christ, and could not put into
their Mouths, then they prepared War against us, then they came to biting of
us with their Teeth, like Men eaters, and gnawing our flesh and Bones to the
very Marrow, see Mic. 3.

And also Jer^m. 5. who said, The Priests bear Rule by their means, etc. which
was a horrible and filthy thing, committed in the Land: So consider what became
of them in Jeremiah's days, how they went into Captivity.

And see in Isaiah 56. how they fought for gain from their Quarter; and he
calls them greedy Dogs, and dumb Dogs, and Dogs which cannot bark; and you know
Dogs are subject to bite; for I never read that a Sheep bit a Dog, and they
were such as sought for their gain from their Quarter.

And do not the Priests now seek for their gain from their Quarter? when a
Bishop is dead, will not another quickly seek for his Benefice? yes, it will
not be long vacant, another will say he has a call, and a motion to go and get
another Benefice that is dead; and so will the Priest do, for another Priests
Benefice that is vacant; especially if it be a fat one, and bigger then his own.

And does not the same Prophet, in the same chapter call the Watchmen
Time-servers? as in Junius and Tremelius Translation: and how many Priests, in
this day, are guilty of this? let Cities and Countries speak?

And see Ezekiel 13.14, 33, and 34. chapters, and there you may see now the
false Shepherds preached for handfulls of Barley, and pieces of Bread; and
feeds themselves; and eats the Fat; and clothes with the Wool; and kills them
that are fed; but feeds not the Flock; but he speaks in that thirty fourth
chapter, how the Lord would gather them from their Mouths, and set one
Shepherd over them, even Christ Jesus.

Christ did not set up Tithes nor Augmentations, nor Easter Reckonings, nor
Midsummerdues; nor Gleab-Lands in the Worship of God, for his Ministers nor
Appstles; but said, Freely you have received, freely give.

And the Apostles charge was, to keep the Gospel without charge; and rebuked
them that did it, as you, may see in his Epistles; for God is as free to you in
his Spiritual Gifts and Graces, as he is in the things that are Temporal in the
Creation.

And so as I said, Christ has ended that Law which held up Tithes for the
Priests amongst the Jews, Hebrews 7.

And are not those people called Quakers more chaste in their lives and
conversations then any; and kept out of Drunkenness, Swearing, Oaths, Theft,
Fornications, Adulteries, Debaucheties, etc. more then any other people?

And is not this an case to Magistrates?

And should not the Magistrates be a praise to them that do well?

And yet are not those that do well, as Sheap that are led to the Slaughter?

And also consider there are many of those People that are Tradesmen, as
Clothiers, etc. some it may be keeps two or three hundred at work; and some are
Knitters, and other callings and Trades: Now you taking away their Goods, you
make them incapable to manage their Employments and Trades whereby they
themselves are not only undone, but many hundreds of poor people are liable to
famish, having no other way to subsist, but only their daily labor: and so
what will become of those poor people they set at work, when their Masters are
cast into Prison, and their Goods taken away. And besides, you make our Friends
incapable to pay the National Taxes; and so these things hinder the King of his
Customs and dues; when people grows poor, how can they pay them? for the Riches
of a People is the honor of a Prince.

And you know (...) than have (...) takes one part, and the King another, and
the Poor another; how can the Rents be paid, when the Stocks are taken off the
Land? must not they be necessitated to relinquish their Farms?

And there are many Merchants and Shopkeepers, what encouragement have they to
trade, when they know not but their goods may be taken from them, for
worshipping and serving the Living God? and if they have no encouragement, what
profit can come to the King?

And so in the Fear and Wisdom of God consider these things, that there may be
Liberty in the Gospel, the Power of God; every one should improve their Talent,
and their Measures, Gifts, and Graces, as good Stewards, 1 Pet. 4.10. And they
were not to quench the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying

And is it not said, That in the last days the Lord would pour out of his
Spirits upon all flesh, and Sons and Daughters should Prophecy; and young men
should see Visions, and old men should dream Dreams; and on his Servants and
Handmaids he would pour out of his Spirit in those days, and they should
Prophecy, Joel 2 28. Act, 2.17.18

And are not these the last days? here you see the Lord has promised that
every one should have something, both Sons and Daughters, Servants and
Handmaids should prophecy; and young men see Visions, and old men dream
Dreams: So let the Prophets and Prophetesses tell their prophesies; and let the
young men tell their Visions, and the old men their Dreams, and do no hinder
them.

Did not Christ say, He that did not improve his Talent was to be cast into
utter darkness, where should be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth,
Matthew 25.28.

And does not Christ say, How the Word was sown upon all Grounds; and how far
it sprang up in some, till Persection came; and how it sprang up in others,
till the Cares of this life choked it; and upon the Highway ground, but the
Fowls of the Air picked it up; and upon the good ground it was sown, and it
only brought forth from it Perfection, Matthew. 13.19. etc.

So here Christ would let them see, and all men, that if they did not improve
their Talents, and Gifts, and Graces which the Lord had committed to them, and
given them to profit withal; and to live up to the Word of God in their hearts,
that then they should be cast out and rejected, as unprofitable Servants and
Stewards.

And so I desire that the Lord may give you an understanding.

Also you may see that Persecution for Conscience sake is against the
Profession of Christian Princes, and likewise condemned by the ancient and
latter Writers.
FIrst, King James, in his Speech to his Parliament 1609. says, It is a sure
Rule in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church by Violence and
Bloodshed.

Also see the said Kings Exposition on Revel. 20. in which he says, The
Compassing of the Saints, and the Besieging of the Beloved City, declares unto
us a certain Note of a false Church to be PERSECUTION; for they come to seek
the Faithful, the Faithful are them that are sought; the wicked are the
Besiegers, the Faithful are the Besieged.

Secondly, Stephen King of Poland says thus, I am King of Man, not of
Conscience, a Commander of Bodies, not of Souls.

Thirdly, the King of Bohemia says, That men's Consciences ought in no sort to
be violated, urged, or constrained.

And further he says, So that once more we do profess before God, and the
whole World, that from this time forward we are firmly resolved not to
persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested any person
whatsoever for matter of Religion, etc.

By the ancient and later Writers, in short, thus.

Hillary against Auxentius, says thus, The Christian Church does not
persecute, but is persecuted.

Tertul. ad Scapulam, It agrees both with humane Reason, and natural Equity,
that every man worship God uncompelled, etc. neither beseems it any Religion
to compel another to be of their Religion; which willingly and freely should be
embraced, and not by constrant: forasmuch (says he) as the Offerings were
required of those that freely, and with good will offered, and not from the
contrary.

Jerome in pr^am. lib. 4. in Jeremiam. Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of
the Spirit, etc.

Bre^tius upon 1 Cor. 3. says, No man has power to make or give Laws to
Christians, whereby to bind their Consciences; for willingly, freely, and
uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind must those that come, run
unto Christ.

Luther in Postil. Dom. 1. Post Epiphan. he says, Let not Christians be
commanded, but exhorted; for he that willingly will not do that whereunto he is
friendly exhorted, he is no Christian: wherefore they that do compel those that
are not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but
worldly Beadles.

Again, upon 1 Pet. 3. he says thus, speaking of the Civil Magistrate; If you
cannot bear it, that any should usurp Authority where you have to command; How
do you think that God should suffer you to thrust him from his Seat, and to
seat your self therein.

Chrysostom says, It is not the manner of the Children of God to persecute
others to death about their Religion, etc -- Moreover (said he) The shedding of
Blood about Religion, is an evident token of Antichrist. Relig. Uris. page 192.

Haywardus said, That the best Writers of that time did agree in one Opinion,
and with Tertullian, Lactantius, Cassidorus, and Josephus, etc. That People
must inform men to embrace Religion, with Reason, and not compel them by
Violence.

Lactantius said, If you will with Blood, with Evil, and with Torments defend
the worship, it shall not thereby be defended but polluted, lib. 5. cap. 20.

Reinaldus said, That he who with Imprisoning, and Persecuting, seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his hands with Blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

The Prince of Orange says, Anno 1579. That it was impossible that the Land
should be kept in Peace, except there were a free Toleration in the Exercise of
Religion.

I might add the serious and ponderous Expressions of King Charles the first,
concerning Toleration, and Liberty of Conscience; as also King Charles the
second, that now is, his Speeches and Promises at Breda, with Speeches and
Sayings of theirs, are more ample, copious and pertinent, concerning toleration
of Religion, and liberty for tender Consciences, then any other King or Prince
that I have here inserted; but for brevity sake I am constrained to omit them
at present; because I hope King Charles the second, who now is, has not
forgotten his own Promises; neithers his Fathers Counsel, in order to
Toleration and Liberty in matters of Religion and Worship of God.

A Postscript.
IS it not a strange thing that the Turk should outstrip a Christian; for how
many Religions are tolerated in several places in his Dominions, as Greeks,
Jews, Armenians, Jacobites, Papists, and others. And also in Mogul^s Country
they do not force any. And in several places of Poland and Hungary they give
Toleration.

And you know the Jews in Christ's time were under the Roman Empire, where
lived diverse Sects of Religion, as Herodians, Scribes, and Pharisees, Sadduces
and Libertines, Thadaeans and Samaritans, with others, besides the Religion of
the Jews, Christ and his Apostles; all which differed from the common Religion
of the State, which was like the worship of Diana, which almost the whole World
then worshipped, Acts 19.20. All these several Religions lived under Caesar's
Government, giving unto Casar that which was his, and for their Religion and
Consciences, he left them to themselves, as having no power over the
Conscience; and when any Tumults were raised by the persecuting Jews, Priests
and Professors of the Law, against the Christians; you may see the prudence of
the Magistrate appeased them, Acts 18.14. and 19.35. I desire that the Lord
would so compose and qualify the minds and spirits of the Christian
Magistrates to do so now, as the Heathen Magistrates did then.

J. S.

THE END

