A FURTHER JUSTIFICATION OF THE PRESENT WAR AGAINST THE United Netherlands.

Illustrated with several SCULPTURES.

By Henry Stubbe, a lover of the Honor and Welfare of old ENGLAND.

Everard. Reidan. Annal. Belgic. lib. 17. A. D. 1600. Decretum Ord. General.
advers. Groninganos. Quod ad pactiones and foedus toties ruptum provocarent,
absurdum nec audiendum, neque vitio Patribus vertendum esse quod securitati
rerum suarum consulere velint. LONDON, Printed for Henry Hills, and John
Starkey, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Miter near Temple-Barr, in
Fleetstreet, MDCLXXIII.



The Contents of the Epistle to the READER.
THe Reason why this Treatise is called the Apology of the Parliamentarians.

The Insolence of the Dutch against the Parliamentarians in particular.

An account of the Loevesteine-faction; the powers of the State-holder, and
Advocate of Holland.

A Relation of the folly of John de Wit in subverting the fundamental
Government of the United Provinces.

The Contents of the Preface, unto the loyal Subjects of His Majesty.
THe necessity of writing the ensuing Treatise, for the full satisfaction of
the King's Subjects, about the lawfulness of the present War. page 1 Several
just and approved Causes of War, which yet His Majesty did not insist upon. p.
1, 2 A true and full account concerning the true grounds of this War, and how
it was unavoidable on the part of His Majesty. p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
Reasons why the League betwixt England and Holland was not endeavored (nor
ought) to be renewed, after its violation. p. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 What advise
Q. Elizabeth would have suggested in the case. p. 15, 16, 17 Arguments against
the Neutrality of England, during the War betwixt France and Holland. p. 17
Arguments for the English to combine with France. p. 17, 18, 19 Two Objections
against the Alliance with France, urged by an unknown Casuist, and fully
answered. p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 The regard which His Majesty still
preserved for the security of Flanders, according to the Triple Alliance. p.
26, 27 The prudence of His Majesty in transacting the League with France with
so much Secrecy. p. 27 The prudence with which His Majesty penned, and signed
the Declaration for liberty of Conscience, March 15. 1671/2. The parallel
proceedings of the primitive Christian Emperors, during the fourth Century.
That it is the interest of the Church of England, that Liberty of Conscience be
granted at present: That the Christian Church at first was settled by such
contrivances as His Majesty now pursues: That His Majesty has in that
Declaration provided better for the security of the Church of England, than the
ancient Emperors did for Christianity in their times: And consequently, the
Church of England is in no danger to be subverted by the present Indulgence.
That the present Indulgence is consonant to right reason of State, and not
repugnant unto civil Policy, or likely to prove destructive to the Government.
p. 27. unto p. 73 A confutation of some assertions relating unto the Dominion
of the Sea, tendered to the Parliament in 1640. p. 76 Certain projects of Q.
Elizabeth, whereby she advanced the Honor and Trade of England. p. 83 An
Exhortation unto the English to be Unanimous and Courageous, notwithstanding
the troublesome condition of Europe. p. 87
The Contents of the Apology.
THe Apology of those that were unhappily engaged in the service of the
pretended Commonwealth, and O. Cromwell, for the King's Majesty's Declaration
and Proceedings against the United Provinces. The Congratulation of the
Parliamentarians for, and their brief vindication of the Declaration of March
15. 1671/2. p. 57 Though the Dutch were Protestants, yet this War is lawful. p.
58 The Right of the Flagge, a just cause of War with the Dutch; the demands of
the Parliamentarians, and the Dutch concessions about it heretofore. p. 58. 59,
60, 61 The English Channel not the sole British Sea. p. 61, 62 The demands of
the Parliamentarians concerning the Fishing; the debate betwixt them and the
Dutch about the Right of England thereto. p. 62, 63, 64, 65, 66 The villainous
composition made betwixt Oliver and the Dutch about the said Points, and
against His Majesty. p. 66 The King's interest in the English Planters at
Surinam affer^. p. 67 The Barbarity and Insolence of the Dutch toward the
English in the East Indies. p. 67, 68, 69 A parallel betwixt the indignities
done to His Majesty, and those put upon the Parliamentarians formerly; the
defense of the Parliamentarians for their Resentments thereof. p. 67, 70 The
perfidiousness of the Dutch illustrated at large. p. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75 An
account of the Dutch Religion. p. 75, 76, 77 The Parliamentarians resolve that
no secure peace can be made with the Hollanders, except they submit to a
Coalition, or be reduced to an incapacity of hurting England. p. 77, 78 An
account of the Treaty betwixt the Parliamentarians and Hollanders. The States
of Holland and West-Friesland confess their errors in fighting against England.
p. 78, 79 The Parliamentarians reply; and how they outwitted the Hollanders.
p. 79, 80 The Parliamentarians refuse unto the States General the Title of High
and Mighty; and they discontinue it. p. 80, 81 Hugh Peter's intercedes for the
Dutch; the voluntary proffers of the Dutch; they (amidst their solemn
professions of Love unto the Rump) persuade Cromwell to depose them, and then
cheat him. p. 81 The Council of State beats the Dutch, and makes them proceed
by way of Humble Petition. p. 82, 83 The stark loving kindness betwixt the
Dutch and the Council; and their joint concern for the Glory of God. p. 84 The
Council demands that the Dutch submit unto a Coalition; the reciprocal
Arguments about it. p. 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90 The Dutch refuse all
Coalition, and depart; the sense of the whole Nation, and particularly of the
Fifth-Monarchists concerning them. p. 91, 92 The distressed condition of the
Hollanders; their Petition and submissive Memorial unto the Fifth-Monarchists.
p. 92, 93, 94, 95 The Dutch are hated and scorned. p. 96 Effectual projects to
curb the insolence of the Dutch. p. 97 Cromwell's dissimulation with the Dutch.
p. 97, 98 The Dutch temporise with the Commissioners. p. 98 9^ A Preamble and
draught of Articles tendered by the Commissioners. (...). 99, 100. 101 The
exceptions of the Dutch thereunto; their Papers slighted. p. 101, 102, 103,
104, 105, 106, 107, 108 The Dutch and English do again debate the point of
Coalition. p. 108, 109, 110 The Dutch persuade Cromwell to discard the
Fifth-Monarchists, and to assume the Government: their Promises and Submissions
unto him. p. 110, 111 Cromwell betrays the English interest unto the Dutch; and
yet is cheated by them several times before the Conclusion of the Treaty. p.
111. unto p. 117 Both Parties agree to omit the general concernment of
Religion. p. 117 The Dutch observed not that Peace. ibid. A large Memorial
penned by the pretended Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, concerning
the English Rights to the Flagge, Dominion of the Sea, and Fishery; with the
Importance thereof. p. 118, etc. A Relation concerning the passages of Amboyna;
and how Cromwell connived at the Actors, contrary to his own Articles. p. 134,
etc.
The Sculpture A. is to be placed before the Title Page. B. page 3. C. D. page
124. E. page 134.

THere are several proofs in the Preface, and sometimes elsewhere, which the
Printer for his convenience, has placed together, whereas they relate to
passages not opposite to them: but the inquisitive Reader will find that the
citations in each page do fully prove the Text.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Could not well discharge my promise concerning the publishing of the Speech
of Mr. St. John's at the Hague; the Copy which I had was so imperfect in names,
places and Sums, mentioned and demanded, that I would not injure such a piece
by exhibiting those fragments, and I have not been able by any industry to
supply that deficiency. But I think I have sufficiently recompensed that
omission by bringing to light the Narrative of the Treaty betwixt England and
the United Provinces in 1653. In which if it appear that Cromwell was not so
wise as the world apprehended him to be, nor so honest as some of his Partisans
would now insinuate, who is to be blamed? It has been observed that Usurpers
and Tyrants do always fix upon some particular Projects whereby to endear their
Government to the people. Those subtle men who ruled in the Council of State
and pretended Parliament, did pursue those courses, and esteemed nothing more
beneficial, just, and generous (great considerations with English Spirits) than
to assert the Dominion of the Seas, the Rights of the Fishery, and to vindicate
the English commerce thorough all parts of the world. They did rightly
apprehend that the strength of this nation consisted in Naval forces; and the
life thereof was Commerce: It is true that Trading furnishes the Land with
Riches, and Seamen; but it is likewise certain, that the Trading can never be
managed securely without a constant Naval force, wherein whosoever is most
powerful, He becomes immediately master of the Seas and of Trade. Our Rich
Commerce cannot be discontinued in time of war without so great prejudice, that
I cannot reckon upon that navigation as a Seminary of Seamen: of our inferior
Commerce what have we but the Colliery, and Fishing of Newfound land, which
may be reckoned upon to the purpose aforesaid; and both of these yield us not a
proportionable number of Seamen, to what the Dutch have; nor will they prove
good Coasters, or half man our Ships, should we (as we cannot) even disfurnish
our Colliers and Fishermen. It remains then that we must either retrive the
Fishery (which is the grand Seminary of Mariners in the United Provinces, and
whereby they far exceed us) or abandon our selves to despair, poverty, and
perhaps protection of our puissant neighbors. This that Council of State most
prudently foresaw, and therefore readily embraced that occasion of a war which
the Treachery of the Hollanders did present them with: and you will here see
that their opinion was, that there was no confidence to be put in any League or
Union with those people, except they were united to us by a Coalition, or
confined by very rigorous Articles, so as that they might never be Competitors
with the English for strength, or renown. I thought the designs of his Majesty
could not be better justified unto his enemies (if he have any such in England;
which is but a Dutch ten^t) then by showing that the intendments of the Court
are the same with those of the Council of State, and those the most popular,
advantageous, and necessary for this Nation in this juncture, that can be put
in execution. I call this Treatise an Apology of the Parlamentarians for His
Majesty's Declaration: Because it is extracted out of the Declaration and other
papers printed, or Manuscript, which that party did pen in those times. I do
value the writing upon the certainty of the Allegations: I have followed the
most authentic Memorials, and the best intelligence I could attain to; and
particularly I must say of Leo ab Aitzma, that his credit is equal to that of
Mr. Rushworth in England; he negotiated for the Dutch here at that time, and
transcribed His Book out of the Originals of Holland. The other Authors which I
cite, are generally the best that have writ on those subjects, be they
Historians, or Politicians. The marginal notes and proofs were all added by me,
even in that eminent Memorial which is here added at the end; the which I was
forced to alter much, that it might be complete as it is. I had another motive
to publish to M. Schoockius de imperio maritimo c 30. urge^t apud ple^em cultum
cujusdam divae, quae precis^as vocatur, cujus matter est superstitio, (...)
Hypoc^sis, and nutri^ Ambitio -- Bipedes Lupi, qui induerint pelles ovillas,
and impiis injustisque suis armi^ Biblia sociaverint.
the world this Treatise as an Apology for that party, which may induce them to
prize it: for the Dutch have proclaimed them in print to be the veriest Rogues
the world did ever produce, two-legged wolves, that carry sheepskins on their
backs, Bibles in their hands, and dissimulation in their hearts: a sort of men
that worship a Deity called preciseness, the mother whereof was superstition,
the God-mother Hypocrisy, and the Nurse ambition. They say the Parlamentarians
were their Eleemosynati^s, that having got a vast Collection in the United
Provinces A. D. 1644. for the relief of the Irish protestants, they turned it
to their own use, ruined their king, Id i^td. c. 27. Ipsi enim armati nostris
primo eleemosynis (anno 1644 per has provincias pro afflictis quasi Hibe^nis
collectis) in suum regem etc.
and then quarrelled with their Benefactors, and of ungrateful Alms-people,
turned barbarous Pirates: that they neither showed valor or conduct in that
war, nor acted any thing that might eclipse the renown of the Dutch. That it
was no wonder if six English men of war did take one Hollander; but that one
Hollander with eight guns and two and twenty men should fight three Flag-ships
of England for eight hours, and after that escape by running on ground, this is
a miraculous fortitude: yet did this happen in September. Assist me, Gallant
Fanatics, but with the name of this Argo-naut, the year and the day; for my
Author does not: and consider with your selves to what degree of misery you are
to bring an Hollander, that you may abate his insolence. I think you reduced
them to a low condition; I think the Council of State did treat with them as
they deserved, and in their Articles proposed nothing but what was reasonably
to be domanded from Hollanders: But the villainous Ambition and solly of Cromwell
did subject you to these abuses, and those that professed such implacable love
toward you during the Treaty, published these things after the Peace. Mingle
then your concerns with those of His Majesty, and the Nation; revenge your own
indignities as well as those of the King, Court, Parliament, and Realm; beat
them a third time, that they may at length confess they were once well beaten.
I need not to excite you by any greater examples then what Sr. John Harman and
others of your friends continue to give you; and an English Spirit, whatsoever
his persuasion be, needs no arguments to excite his valor, where indignities
are offered. These are the same Enemies which the Parlamentarians did
heretofore contend with, the Subject of the quarrel is the same, there is the
same justice therein that was formerly, the Government is only varied to a
Monarchy under which they possess their former Indulgence; It behooves them now
to convince the Dutch by new achievements, and redoubled fervor, that they
were no less valiant, then fortunate; and to satisfy His Majesty that they
are not factious, but deserve the favors they now enjoy.

I had forgot to tell the Reader one thing, which is, that the Dutch and
English Memorials and Narratives, do differ in their dates, not only in the old
and new Styles, but otherwise two, or three days; so that if any person should
endeavor to invalidate this Treatise upon such trivial exceptions, I confess
thus much, and desire any man, who can, to amend such mistakes, which are not
much material to the grand controversies.

This ensuing Treatise was written long before the late revolutions in Holland
and the death of the two brothers Cornelius and John deWit; and whatsoever
therein does reflect upon the treacherous designs and villainy of the States
general and People, it is to be applied unto the Lovestein faction, which has
always presided, directed and swayed in the Councils and Determinations of the
United Provinces, partly by Artifice and popular insinuations, partly by the
interest of the Province of Holland. For the better understanding of this
affair, it is requisite that I deduce the History of that faction from its
first original, whereby it will appear that the English have just cause to
detest the Memory thereof, and the Dutch good reason to impute thereunto the
Odium, Infamy, and Calamities under which they at present suffer, and upon the
sense whereof the Burghers of the Hague did so barbarously murder those two
insolent criminals. John Olden Barnevelt was born at Amersfort in the Province
of Utrecht; his Extraction was mean, but such his insinuation, so popular his
address, so ready his wit, so great his prudence, so extraordinary his Learning
in the Civil and Municipal Laws, Usages and Records of his Country, that,
having spent several years at Lovain, in France, Italy, Germany, and
Switzerland, at his return the Province of Holland entertained an high respect
for him, and He was much resorted unto, being one of the Advocates at the
Hague: when the Count vander Marck had seized the Brill, and that the rest of
Holland began generally to embrace the party of the Pr. of Orange, he was one
of the three Advocates, who in the year 1572. first acknowledged the proscribed
Prince to be the lawful Governor of Holland. He had no aversion for Popery;
his wife was of that Religion. He contested with Leicester and the Protestant
party in the Netherlands for an equal toleration of the Romanists etc. But he
was so fierce an Enemy to the Roman Ecclesiastics, that the Spaniards formed
particular designs against him, who by his niceties in Law disturbed the civil
power, and animated the people unto those outrages whereby their Church, and
Churchmen were destroyed. Having signalized himself by this demeanor, he was
chosen Councellor and Pensioner for the City of Roterdam A. D. 1576. The which
office He executed with so much Zeal for the general liberties of his Country,
and of Roterdam particularly; he so studiously caressed the Burgomasters and
populace, so fervently did he persuade his masters of Holland to seize upon all
Church Lands, so vigilant was he that the Magistrates in each Province and City
should preserve their Sovereignty over the Protestant Clergy, (by placing and
displacing them at pleasure, and confining them to preach as the Magistrates
pleased) that he gained the repute of a most worthy Patriot in Holland and
West-Friesland. His Councils and Actions always showed him to be implacable
against the Spaniards, and he pretended a great devotion to the House of
Orange: in 1579 he was zealous for the contracting that everlasting Union at
Utrecht: At which time the Provinces had not cast off all obedience to the King
of Spain; the Prince of Orange was Governor or State-holder of Holland,
Zealand and Utrecht by virtue of a Commission from the King; in his name, and
for his service all things were said to be done by the United Provinces.
Notwithstanding that by this Union Art. 9. No agreement for truce, or peace, or
war, was to be undertaken but by common consent: And notwithstanding another
League, or Union, particularly contracted betwixt Holland and Zealand, for
their acting jointly and by communication Deduct. ord. Holla^d. part 1. c. 4.
sect. 1. and (...). 3. sect. 4.
of councils in 1575, 1576. This Barnevelt- faction designing to erect
themselves into a Republic, did take a resolution, and privately swear amongst
themselves, that they would never acknowledge the king of Spain for their
Sovereign, pretend his authority, or make use of his Seals: whereby through an
immutable negative Suffrage of that Province the rest were involved in a
perpetual revolt. This determination was made, and they absolved one another
from the Oath of Allegiance, without the consent of the other Provinces, and a
good while before that the Deputies of Holland could persuade Zealand to
consent thereunto. It was decreed by Holland and West-friesland April 19. 1581.
whereas the States General did not before 1582. declare Leo ab Aitzma's notable
revolutions. p. 166.
that the king of Spain had forfeited his right and Dominion over those
countries, and all princely authority ceasing in him, thereby was consolidated
into the Estates, and the whole Sovereignty devolved to the States of the
respective united provinces. Hereupon the Pr. of Orange from a Spanish
Governor became subordinate to them, and derived his Commission of
State-holder and Captain General from their Authority. I shall not mention what
the said faction did in opposition to the Archduke Matthias, and the Duke of
Anjou, whereby they enervated their authority; always acting separately and
clandestinely from the rest of the Union. It is an acknowledged case, that the
Province of Holland (being swayed by the faction of Barnevelt) Deductio ordin.
Holland. part 1. c. 4. sect. 7. etc. 5. sect. 22.
were averse from the incorporating their Province with the Realm of France,
and had that king seriously inclined to accept the overture, he would have
found such private restrictions on the part of Holland, as would have
frustrated the negotiation; indeed they were contrary to the conditions which
the same province had assented unto in the Assembly of the States General.
Neither was Barnevelt better inclined unto Engalnd, in reference to any real
subjection thereunto: It was never the intention of that party to return under
any Monarchy, and whatever he (as one of the Deputies) protested upon his
knees, whatever he signed unto, it was his purpose only to engage the Queen to
their protection, and to involve Her Majesty in a war with Spain, and thence to
derive all the strength and profit imaginable, without ever submitting unto
her, or to the Crown of Spain.

In that Treaty with Q. Elizabeth in 1585. He (with the rest) told the Queen,
that the revenues of the Provinces were E. Grimston's General History of the
Netherlands A. D. 1585.
much less than they were, thereby to draw from her the greater sums; And
whereas it was coven^nted betwixt the Queen and the States, that the Earl of
Leicester should continue all such in their employments, which he should find
already preferred, this Reidanus Annal. ^elgic. l. 5. A. D. 1584.
Barnevelt did solicit the States of Holland and West-Friesland, that they and
also Zealand would choose Grave Maurice State-holder This, and most of the
Narration is principally taken out of the Apology of Olden-Barnevelt forhimself.
before the arrival of the Earl, thereby to disappoint him of that Government,
at which he aimed, and unto which by a custom received in Brabant the Earl
might well pretend. He did also further contrive that Grave Maurice should be
dignified with the Title of Prince, though it did not of right appertain
Reidanus uli supra.
unto him, he not being the Heir, but Administrator of the Principality of
Orange, during the imprisonment of his elder brother, Philip William, in Spain.
Both these actions the Queen (being already engaged) did think fit to
dissemble, though the Earl did not conceal his resentments, but construed the
one as a diminution of his power, and the other as a lessening of his esteem
and glory. The Election of Grave Maurice to the said See the Deduction of
Holland in Leo ab Arzma's notable revolutions. p. 2^2.
State-holdership was purely a provincial act, he had not any Commission from
the Generality, yet he had thereby the disposal and managing of the affairs of
war by land in Holland and Zealand, and particularly the besetting or
garrisoning of all Cities and Forts of those Countries, by the advice of the
States thereof, or their Commissioners: and also the removing or trans-placing,
the increasing, diminishing or altering of the Garrisons of the said Provinces,
was to be done by the Orders of his aforesaid Excellency of Nassau, with the
advice of the States before named, or their Commissioners. To allay the
Indignation of the Earl of Leicester, upon his arrival at the Hague, the States
(contrary to the mind of the Queen) made him by a public instrument and
absolute Commission to be Governor and Captain General, not simply of the
Leaguers, or over the Soldiery only, without the voicing Provinces, (so as the
successive Princes of Orange had their Commissions of Captain General limited
and circumscribed) but absolutely over all the United Provinces themselves,
there being yielded up unto him powerfully and absolutely (to make use of the
words of Authorization, given by the States General unto the Earl Jan. 10.
1586.) to command Ibid. p. 238. E. Meteran. Hist. Belg. l. 10. A. D. 1586.
in the matter and point of war, and that which depends thereon, by Sea and
Land, over all the aforesaid Provinces, Cities and Members thereof etc.
accordingly, as he should think best. The collation of this absolute power
(which all the Dutch Historians acknowledge) was the voluntary and unanimous
deed of the Deputies of the Generality, and Olden Barnevelt, as Pensioner of
Roterdam, was instrumental in the promoting it; but no sooner did the Earl
begin to put in exeoution the power which they had given him, without applying
himself most humbly unto the Council of State, and the then pitiful
Magistrates of each Province and City, but the confederates of Olden-Barnevelt
begin to repine, clamor, and contrive how to invalidate the Commission of the
Earl, and to elude that obedience which they had so solemnly sworn unto. In the
same year, 1586. Olden-Barnevelt is put into the place of Advocate General of
Holland; whereupon he was no sooner entered, but he informs the people and
Provincials of Holland, that all their former Customs were inverted, their
privileges infringed, the Government in danger to be altered, the Union of
Utrecht violated by the excluding Papists from the Magistracy; that they had
done ill to confer so great power on the Earl, and to permit the English in the
Council of state to be acquainted with all the Secrets of their Government.
Having possessed that province herewith, designs were formed against the Earl
of Leicester to invalidate his Authority, Remonstrances framed, Libels, Medails
and scurrilous pictures scattered abroad, jealousies fomented betwixt Pr.
Maurice and the Earl, the Count Hohenlo is exasperated and spreads dissentions
in the Army; a devi ce is found out for the introducing an Assembly of the
States General, with an Authority and Superintendency over the Council of
State: All oaths taken unto the Earl are either forgotten, or annulled: and it
is declared that the People are the original of the Magistrates power, which is
so transferred upon them that it still remains in the donors: that the Majesty
of the Government is not fixed in the persons of thirty or forty assembled and
ruling as States, but in the Provinces themselves, who might reject or admit of
the decrees of the Council of State, as they saw cause. A declaration to this
purpose was sent unto the Earl by the States of Holland and West-Friestand,
being penned by Olden-Barnevelt. This Notion of Government, and of the States
General was at first laughed at and exploded universally in a manner, and the
persons of the provincial States rendered contemptible: but in time
Olden-Barnevelt and his associates made the Government so uneasy unto the
Earl, that he departed and resigned it up: and because the Ministers were
extremely devoted to the Earl, and asserted his power and the obligation of the
Oaths of fealty taken unto him, to distract and divide them, this
Olden-Barnevelt introduces amongst some of them the Tenets afterward
denominated from Arminius; whence arose such f^uds amongst them, that they were
forced to divert their thoughts from State Affairs to those of Religion, and
and to demand a National Synod for the composing of Church-Divisions. The
Advocate by his artifices and private insinuations eludes the calling thereof,
and thereby necessitates the Ministers to seek their support by a greater
compliance with the Burgo-masters. The Earl having relinquished his titular
Authority, the States General assume all power to themselves; the Office of
Governor general is extinguished; they make Pr. Maurice Captain General, whose
power extended only to the Soldiers in the Leaguer and field, he not having
any command over the particular Governors or State-holders of the Provinces
within their respective jurisdictions: but these particular Governors,
notwithstanding the Captain General appointed over the Soldiery, were
themselves Captains General over the Soldiers lying in the respective
provinces: Neither could the Captain General transplace any Garrisons, or
enquarter in any City, without the Consent of the Province, and Magistracy of
the City. The prerogative of the Advocate General's See the Apology of
Olden-Barn^velt.
Office consists chiefly in this, viz. To have a priority in all matters, and
to defend the Soveraignties and rights of the States provincial, and the
immunities Hic apud Civitates, pagos, collegia, privatosque omnes cum
Hollandiae, tum aliarum regionum, ^trarum segerit partium, ne^ini obligatus:
cur^e quantum sieri potest solitus, ut jura, privilegia, and consuetudinis
Provinciae, ordinumque authoritas illaesa serventur. Hujus est omnia Ordinum
Comitia probe observare, ijsque stato tempore interesse, nisi morbus aliave
causa impediat. Hujus, congregatis ordinibus, prima Comitiorum die, brevibus
ea, de quibus agendum, cum viva voce, tum ex scripto commemorare; de singulis
nobiles civitatumque legatos sententias rogare; easque fideliter notatas summa
sileatii fide legere, and post rationem quae prevaleat indicare; catalogum
omnium actorum conficere, constitutiones omnes, idque genus alia, quae alicujus
ponderis, extendere and cum nobilibus and civitatibus communicare. Paulus
Merula de statu Reip. Batav.
of the Country: to have a care of calling the public Assemblies: in them to
have a voice in all businesses, to take charge of Remonstrances, and Petitions
tendered unto them, and to exhibit them at convenient times: to consult and
deliberate with the Nobles concerning them, and all other things propounded in
those meetings: That being done, to pronounce the verdict passed either by
joint consent, or at least plurality of voices, to be their verdict: and to
strengthen them with allegations and reasons as should be most fit. Afterward
to demand the suffrages of the free Cities, to conclude by most voices; and
lastly to employ his utmost ability, that what was decreed may be put in
execution. This place is esteemed the highest whereunto any man can arrive in
that Democracy: the people reverence him as the great assertour of their
franchises, and the Atlas libertatis Belgicae: It is not to be wondered if a man
of great address and subtlety being thus dignified, do sway the Provinces as he
please, the whole interest of Holland being at his devotion. Olden-Barnevelt
and his faction have endeared themselves always to their Provincials by raising
suspicions and jealousies in the heads of the populace, as if the Princes of
Orange had designed to make themselves Sovereigns there, and have peretually
(except when they made use of the house of Nassau in opposition to the Earl of
Leicester) labored by all manner of practices to depress them, and lessen
their power: so that, upon every occasion the instructions of the Captain
General were more and more limited, and the power of State-holder was abated by
many restrictions in the several Provinces, according as the province of
Holland could influence the Members thereof. Every Province does separately
choose its State-holder, and the power does vary much in the several Provinces:
One Leo ab Aitzma's notable revolutions p. 149.
part of his power is to choose the Magistrates out of a double number proposed
unto him: this he does with the Council or Court provincial, or, in his absence
the Court alone does it. Another part of that charge is, that in case the
Provinces or Union of Utrecht Art. 9. 16.
Towns could not agree amongst themselves about matters of Truce, Peace, War,
or Contributions, the difference was to be referred and submitted to the
State-holders of the said Provinces, who were to reconcile the differences
betwixt the parties, or determine the same, as they should judge it fitting in
equity: there being no appeal from, or review of their sentence. But
notwithstanding this Authority, so refractory were that people always, so
tender of their privileges, so jealous of their State-holders, that the Lords
State-holders durst not make use of their power to pronounce any definitive
sentence, or make decisions between the principal members of such a
considerable body, but endeavored for the most part to compose the differences
by way of intercession and persuasion. Twice we find the State-holders to have
acted Authoritatively; in the suppressing of Olden-Barnevelt, Hugo Grotius,
etc. in 1618. and in the visitation of Holland, and attempt upon Amsterdam in
1650. But so malevolent and tumultuous are those Provinces, especially Holland,
that they have never laid aside the resentments for those proceedings, nor ever
ceased to contrive the ruin of the house of Orange upon that account:
Notwithstanding that their State-holders did therein nothing but what the Union
and resolutions of the States General empowered them to do, and what was
absolutely necessary for the preservation of the Country in peace. Grotius and
Hogherbet were imprisoned in Louvestein- house, near Gorcum, and so was deWit
together with the other five Lords in 1650. This faction has always been
enemies unto England; and although Olden-Barnevelt did prefer the protection of
the English before that of France, it was rather out of interest than
affection, and with a design upon all occasions to impose upon and cozen the
Queen. The which he did sundry ways, whereof he boasts in his Apology, as of so
many services rendered unto his Fatherland. He was perpetually averse from K.
James, and hated him for his opposition to Arminius: In the several Treaties
betwixt that King and the States about the Fishing, and East India trade, he it
was, and his faction that first disputed the Sovereignty of the Seas, and from
that Cabal did issue the Mare liberum, entitled unto Grotius: Not one of those
Treaties betwixt the two Nations did ever take effect, and all the damages
which the English have sustained in the East Indies, all the mischief which
has befaln this Nation, has ever been occasioned, or fomented by that party.
It is not to be wondered that they have so long continued, for in that
government (if I may call it so, for it never deserved that name, any more than
Poland does) The Burghers or Townsmen, have no power to elect their
Magistrates, but the Common Council or Vroed-Schapen (which are for life, and
consist of 20, 26, 32, or 40) do choose them, and Declaratio de antiquo jure
Batavita reip.
supply their own number accordingly as any one happens to decease: and the
people are absolutely concluded by their Magistrates: whence it is manifest
that the Republic was no Democracy, nor were the people free, as the
Considerer and those Canaanites did pretend. This party being thus once settled,
did perpetuate themselves, nor was there ever any of their State-holders who
did not once in a year or two sensibly understand who were their Masters. This
party of Olden-Barnevelt did always profess to vindicate the liberties of the
people, and by alleging old customs and immunities, and insisting thereon, as
also by new expositions of Laws and deeds, nice distinctions, (which ^bid more
of acuteness than probability) and urging oftentimes the Letter contrary to the
meaning, intent and design of the Authors, did imbroyl and dissolve the
Government. Those that shall hereafter write political discourses, when they
come to treat about Common Lawyers, what interest, employment, and regard, they
merit in a Government, will find occasion to amplify their debates from the
consideration of the United Provinces. The Province of Holland being the most
rich, and contributing more than all the rest unto the public, as also
abounding more in Towns, was the most easily wrought upon: and Olden-Barnevelt
did so contrive affairs, that his partisans ruled in Holland, and Holland did
rule all the rest of the Provinces. Although the Union of Utrecht was so formed
that in matters of the greatest concern the plurality of voices had no place,
but every Province was particularly to consent; yet did Olden Barnevelt in
1609, enforce Zealand to admit of the Truce: and afterward when he was
resolved to ruin the Authority of Pr. Maurice (which was not great, except
when the Army was in the field) that he might fortify the Arminian faction, he
revived old privileges, that each Town might raise what Soldiers they
pleased, without the consent or privity of the States General, or Provincial,
and without any Grotius Apo^lget. c. 19.
subordination unto the Captain General, or State-holders, and administer an
Oath of fealty unto them to be true to them, not the States: provided they did
this at their proper charge. He told the People that they were the Sovereigns,
and that the States General had but a delegated representative power, the real
Majesty being fixed in them. He sowed discontents and jealousies be wixt the
Nobility, Gentry and Commons, and also betwixt Holland and the other Provinces,
and either actively advanced that Province unto a Sway over the rest or
indirectly by their Negative Suffrage. Though the death of Olden-Barnevelt did
put some stop to the designs of that party, yet did the interest continue, and
in John deWit the Spirit of Olden-Barnevelt s^ed to be risen again. The States
General under Pr. William in 1650. would willingly have brought the Government
unto some certainty, and adjusted the power of the States General and
State-holders s^ as that it might have some form in it: But the province of
Holland were so animated by their Pensionaries, that the design succeeded not,
and upon the death of that. Prince, this faction proceeded to introduce that
Anarchy which has at last occasioned the general desolation of the Republic.
It was a maxim transmitted unto them from the first Pr. William that this
Polyarchical Government could not subsist without Leo ab Aitzma's Nota^le
revolutions p. 310. 193. 201.
a State-holder, who was to reconcile all emergent differences betwixt the
Towns and Provinces: and the continuance of that office was a branch of the
Union at Utrecht: Nor was the said provision ever cancelled or altered by the
joint approbation of the Consederates: But this faction did abolish this office
in Holland, and did partly by persuasion, partly by over pouring the other
Provinces extinguish it in all places, except Gr^ninghen: and to decide
emergent differences a new expedient of Arbiters, and Super-arbiters was found
out; who being men no way elevated above the vulgar by extraction and degree
could not answer the general aim, and intent, but the final power would reside
in Holland; the disposal of the Militia and Commands was principally fixed in
the Council of State, not in the Generality; that the said Province might rule
all their affairs in the Council of State; It being managed by plurality of
personal and not provincial votes, and the Hollanders being always present upon
the place. In fine the Union was so infringed that Gelderland, Over-yssel,
Utrecht and Friesland were in a manner subject unto Holland, and the Nobility
and Gentry were every where depressed and despised by the Merchants and
Commonalty of that Province. One might justly apply to that State what was said
of the Romans heretofore, Socii Romanorum tacit redigebantur in servitutem, By
little and little the Roman allies became their Bondmen. As for Zealand the
Hollanders did seemingly yield unto them greater regards and deference, but
withal complotted how to weaken that Province so by an alteration of the
Government, and intestine divisions, that they might in effect be reduced under
their tuition. The Prince of Orange had three voices or Member-ships in Zealand
of seven, as Primier Noble man, and Marquess of the Vassal-cities Terveer Id
ibid. p. 622.
and Flushing, besides the power of placing the Magistrate in Middleburgh,
Ziricksee and Tolen (Goes only being exempt) so that he seemed to have the full
direction of that Province. To depress this power of the Pr. of Orange, there
was dissension raised betwixt the Grandmother and the Princess Royal; and also
John deWit with some others were sent into Zealand, where they revived the jus
directum Universitatis, the power of the people, telling them that their
liberties were undermined, and the Government committed unto the hands of a few
and those none of the best. Whereupon the Burghers began to seek a Reformation,
demand that several Magistrates be deposed, attempt to kill and plunder some,
and cause the Burgomaster of Middleburgh, Tibant, Landsbergen etc. to be
banished: and after that the people were thus animated, and the States there
changed, or intimidated, John deWit and the rest acquaint the Towns of Terveer
and Flushing with their fundamental rights, that the Earldome of Zealand was by
the revolt, from Spain devolved to the Province in general, that the Pr. of
Oronge's power over them was an usurpation (though it were expressly contained
in the deed of Sale 1581. when the Prince bought the Towns) and that they ought
to dispose of their own votes in the States provincial: A long deduction to
this purpose, with a multitude of quirks in point of Law, was exhibited by
them, and readily believed by the people against all reason, and
notwithstanding any allegations made by the Guardians of the infant Prince:
whereby that Province lost much of the influence it had in the Councils of the
Generality, and became subordinate to Holland: the faction of deWit ruling
every where. To secure themselves for the future against the Pr. of Orange this
faction privately contracts with Cromwell to assist him against the Royal line
of England, provided he will support them against the house of Orange; and by
the credit of his amity they proceed first to seclude the Infant-Prince from
ever being elected State-holder, Admiral or Captain General by their suffrage;
and afterward draw all the Provinces to swear a perpetual Edict against it: In
vindication of their actings they publish a Deduction, wherein the whole
succession of Princes, from the first to the last William are defamed, as if
they had all designed to themselves the Sovereignty of the United Provinces:
they upbraid them with the revenues and emoluments which that family had gained
by the wars; and avowed that the said family was obliged unto them for the
dignities and opportunities to advance themselves which the States had given
thereunto: they reckon up each minute gratification which they had publicly
given them, and declare them to be most ungrateful for abusing their power, and
not the Hollanders for discontinuing it.

Out of the precedent Narration any one may collect how little interest the
Princes of Orange have always had in the Government of that Commonwealth; and
upon what faction all the villainy of that State is to be charged: nor will it
be difficult for any to calculate the original and source of the present
calamities and distractions there. The want of a State-holder left all emergent
controversies difficult to be reconciled: for that office, together with the
hereditary reverence which the generality had for the Princes of Orange, was
the cement of the Republic. The Union of Utrecht was pretendedly owned by
Hollard, but yet openly violated, or by subtleties of Law invalidated: so that
whereas the Provinces were to sharein the public management of affairs, as
they were Provinces, and not according to the Quota or Ra^es which they
contributed; now the rest were despised and imposed upon by Holland: the Gentry
with the House of Orange sunk under the Commonalty, and the six Provinces under
the seventh: all which was done without reducing the Government unto any form
or settlement; all things were acted not by a Rule to be substituted unto the
Union of Utrecht, but by the Artifices of the Pensionary, and the violent
resolutions of the provincials of Holland, who seemed to design unto their
Province an Aristocracy as it were above the rest. As to the Government, the
authority of the States General became insignificant and precarious, the
decrees and resolutions thereof being not obligatory (in Holland especially)
any further than the States Provincial, and each Town, pleased. Each Province
was independent, and each Town in a manner; no Soldiers could march into any
voicing Province, or be enquartered in any City but by particular consent: and
in each Town the Burgomasters kept the keys of the Gates, and gave the
watchword. The Nobility were excluded all commands by the jealous followers of
that insolent son of a Tallow-chandler, whose deportment made him no less
insupportable at home, then he was amongst foreign Princes. The testimonies
that may be produced for his great parts and abilities are not more than those
of his folly. Wise men are cautious how they attempt alterations in Quare
sanctissimum est Alcitiadis apud Thucydidem judicium, dicentis eos tutissime
agere, qui Rempublicam administrantes in regimine and legilus quam minimum
varient.
Government, and rather acquiesce in known inconveniences (especially if
inveterate) then seek to remedy them by innovation. The jealousies which he
raised against the Pr. of Orange were not greater than those he created in the
other Provinces against Holland: and it was evident that the Polyarchical
government would fall into an Anarchy by the breach of the Union, and omission
of a State-holder; nor could it support it self against any that should invade
it by land. His popularity gave him no stable interest, nor could all his
subtleties of Law convince the provincials that he did not abuse and impose
upon them, as he did upon all the Allies of the United Netherlands. We may hope
for a better neighborhood when persons of Honor and integrity shall rule in
their Councils, and the Government the reduced into some rational form; but
certain it is that most of be mischiefs which have befaln Europe during this
last century have had their original from this perfidious faction of
OldenBarnevelt, and in the ruin of the de Wits our nation is freed from two
dangerous and implacable Enemies, who would have left no means (how barbarous
and inhumane soever) unessaied for the destruction of the English. As to the
manner of their deaths, we may observe how instable the people are in their
affections, and how brutal in their passions: as also how just God is in
overthrowing them by a popular tumult, who had by the like procedure undermined
the Pr. of Orange. Their friends have not much cause to complain at what befell
them, for the jus directum Universitatis was revived in the Hague by reason of
the maladministration of affairs, the real Majesty of the Burghers did
sentence them, and they were put to death by those whom that faction had always
declared to be so possessed of the Sovereignty that the dernier resort was unto
them, and they might upon any occasion rescind all oaths, revoke all powers,
and rectify all failours in their Governors, according to the Genius of that
people, and as they have done heretofore an hundred times under the house of
Burgundy.

To all LOYAL SUBJECTS of His SACRED MAJESTY.
THere is not any thing of greater importance unto these Kingdoms in the
present juncture of affairs, then that all the Subjects of His Majesty, be
fully convinced of the Justice and Necessity of the present War with the United
Provinces: For whatsoever be the expense thereof, whatever the event, (as the
charge, and issue of Wars is very uncertain) the People will be satisfied with
the Conduct of their Governors, and acquiesce in the determinations of the
Divine Providence, when They shall perceive that Equity, and the welfare of the
Nations, have been the Sole Principles by which our Rulers have moved, and
Prudence it self seems to have presided in Their Councils. It has been usual
with Princes to make Wars purely for enlargement of Empires, and propagation of
J. Seldom de jure natural. Hebr.
Their Glory: And Wars of this Nature were allowed of unto the Jews of old. It
has been usual for Princes to make War upon others, when They grew too great
and powerful, and multiplied Their Forces, though with all protestations of
Amity to their Neighbors: And such Wars are esteemed Alberic. Gen^ilis de jure
belli l. 1. c. 14. Scipio Ammiratus discurs. polit. l. 20. disc 10.
just and necessary by Civilians and Statesmen; but They are much more
warranted, when that any Neighbor has more or less cause to fear lest that
excessive Power be employed against Him particularly. Injuries done even to one
single Subject have been avenged by open War; when the Re-publick Alberic.
Gentilis de jure belli l. 1. c. 20, 21. Id. ibid. l. 1. c. 20.
has refused or declined to punish them: Thus Israel made War upon the Tribe
of Benjamin; and the Romans upon Teuca Queen of the Illyrians. Even Ingratitude
was esteemed by the Romans a just cause of War against the King of Cyprus; the
which no doubt Cato approved of, seeing He undertook it: Upon this same Score
did Queen Elizabeth purpose to relinquish Grotius de bello ^elgico l. 7.
Ingratum pro ingentibus beneficiis animum justi^simam. Reginae causam ut
abjecta Belgarum cura sibi soli cons^lat. Reidanus Annal. Belgic. Anno Them.
1587.
Her League with those ungrateful Netherlanders.

These, and such like have been the inducements for Princes to annul Treaties,
and make War upon others: But our King has been more tender of the effusion of
Christian Blood, and of the Purses of his Subjects, then to spend either the
one or the other upon needless Quarrels. Though the Provocations of the Dutch
by their Pictures, Medails and Monuments, (all public, and either authorized
by the States, or commonly tolerated) were such as would have justified a more
early War: (Neither is there any English man, who can imagine Himself to be so
insensible and stoical in his humor, as that He would not, even
inconsiderately, have revenged less Indignities.) Though the depredations and
injuries done to Our Merchants in several places, and the detention of His
Subjects (contrary to agreement) in Surinam, rendered it necessary for His
Majesty to protect his distressed People in their commerce, and other Rights:
(It being a duty which He owes unto His oppressed Subjects; and the interest of
all that are not immediate Sufferers, since the subsistence and Riches of all
in general depend upon Trade) Yet did His Majesty proceed with all Lenity, and
amicable Solicitations for redress by His Ambassador at the Hague, and secured
the Dutch as well as Flanders, from the fatal consequences of the French Rights
of Devolution, by projecting and finishing the Triple Alliance: From whence it
is apparent how averse His Majesty has been (as indeed it is His Royal nature)
from seeking the occasions of a breach, whereas the Dutch continually
administered Them; and the only effect which His Gentleness produced was, that
They were thereby imboldened to offer more, and miscoustrued His Qui
dissimulat, tacito suam fatetur indignitatem, and mod^stia postea pro ridiculo
habetur. Didac. Saavedra Symbol. politic. 33.
Friendly deportment, as if it proceeded from weakness, or fear. It is most
certain that in the dishonor of Our King the Not ion did suffer; there was not
a Port in Europe, wherein the drunken Dutch Seamen, and their Officers, did
not revile and abuse our English Merchants, and others of our Countrymen,
uttering words so reproachful against His Majesty and His Royal Highness, that
they are not to be related; trayling the English Colors defiled with
Excrements thorough the Streets, and at the Sternes of Their Boats; whereby
Foreigners were persuaded that the Dutch had totally destroyed the naval
strength of these Realms, and gained to themselves the Sovereignty of the
British Seas. Curious Prints were divulged every where of the English Phaetons,
being overthrown, not by the Thunderbolts of Jove, but Ualour of the United
Provinces. Britannia, or Old England, was no longer seated on Her Globe with
Her Feet on the Sea, but prostrate on the dry Land, Holland Ecquid igitur si
etiam negligitu^ haec vindicar^ injuria? s^peradditus contemptus is it: qui ^ec
modica injuria est. Et ita St^bo reci^t, just il^atum fuisse bellum Messeniis,
qui non multarint compollatores conviciosos alienarum mulierum. Injuria fuerat
appellasse. Quae nunc aucta sic est. Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli l. 1. c.
20.
being mounted upon an Elephant, and trampling upon Her: Also a Boor cutting
off the Tails of the English Mastiffs, whereof some ran away, others sat
licking their Soars, others stood barking at a distance: Another Boor was
employing His Hatchet to kill a multitude of Adders with this Inscription: The
English Dogs and Vipers destroyed by the Valor of the Hollanders in such a
manner, that they shall give the World no further t^ouble. By these Artifices
not only the Merchants of England have been discouraged in their Trading, the
foreign Princes alienated from Us, and their Subjects induced to believe that
the English were so odious, so despicable a People, that they deserved not to
be regarded in point of Commerce. The Tongues, the outrages and insolences of
the Dutch, have done England more prejudice, then Their Ships and Canons. If
the English seem to have reason to complain of the Conduct of His Majesty, it
is for this, That He endured so long, and with so much patience these
intolerable Affronts: But as the Station of Kings does elevate Them above
ordinary Men, as Their prospect of affairs excels that of the vulgar; So Their
Actions, and the grounds thereof are different from what We comprehend. Our
Phansies and Judgments are influenced and formed by the Objects we converse
with; and those are for the most part no other then Common Reports, and
fabulous Narrations which We believe, examine, condemn according to our prejud
cate opinions, and passions. The seeming Maladministration of the State, the
decay of Trade^ the dispiritedness of the English, the Arrogance of the Dutch,
have really no other Foundation or Original, then OUR SELVES: those failours
and miscarriages which WE charge upon the King, Council and Court, We are
principally the occasion of, if not absolutely guilty. WE decline our duties;
WE break Our selves into Schisms; WE retain and multiply implacable
Animosities amongst our selves; WE defame our Superiors, censure and derogate
from every Action of Theirs; WE by unnecessary and unseasonable contests retard
the proceedings of Parliament, and exasperate the two Houses, and each Member
thereof, so as that they fall into Factions and Parties: WE in the City and
Country do repine, complain and rage, till the whole voisinage prove
Malcontent. Would each Subject seriously mind what is His proper Station and
Business; would He diligently perform His duty, and refer Himself unto His
Governors for the prudent and conscientious discharge of their Offices; Would
WE take but half the pains to compose our minds, which WE do to perplex and
distract them; would WE study those important Lessons, of Fearing God,
Honoring the King; seeking to have Peace with all men, if it be possible, and
as far as it ^lies in Us, Our Divisions and Animosities, and Jealousies would
cease; our breaches would be made up; our Government be most happily resetled;
the honor of the Nation would be redeemed at home and abroad; Trade, Plenty
and Peace, would be ensured unto Us, and our posterity.

WE, WE alone are to be blamed for the evils of this present War, and those
which antecedently occasioned it: The Dutch, judging by the outward
appearances, did imagine the King, City, and Country, to be so many different
and irreconcilable Interests: They thought the two Houses of Parliament to be
so repugnant each to other, and likely to continue so, that his Majesty should
never be able to Re-ingratiate them, or raise any besetting supplies in case He
were Attaqued and invaded: They apprehended that the Conformists, and
Non-conformists, were so opposite in Principles, and in Hatred, each toward
the other, that it was no less difficult for his Majesty to grant any
Indulgence to the Sectaries, then it was for Him, or his Realms, to subsist
without granting such a Toleration: These Reflections, how vain and deceitful
soever they have proved, Our indiscretion made to seem probable, and
prudential. Thence arose their conjectures that WE were easily to be Trampled
upon and Subjugated; Thence grew that Confidence of theirs to disgrace our
helpless King, and distracted Government; to affront, and Rob our Merchants,
undermine our Trade, alienate our Mariners, and every way to impoverish and
infeeble our Nation: By these degrees, when they found the English so stupid as
not to resent those Injuries, and In^ignities, or so Intimidated as to have
only Courage to rail at their Governors; they proceeded to improve the
opportunity of this Juncture (when the Puissance of his most Christian Majesty
alarmed all Europe, and astonished these Kingdoms) to our destruction: They
increased their own Strength proportionably to that of France, so as that they
seemed not to fear that Potent Monarch by Land, and needed not to do it by Sea.
Whilst our condition was so despicable, that Our Exchequer was low, Our Fleet
unprepared, Our Parliament dissatisfied, Our Church divided, Our Country
discontented, and Our Seamen alienated from the Service of his Majesty in the
Navy Royal; now Our good and faithful Allies, the HOLLANDERS, begin to Insult
over us HERE AT HOME, to Treat with the most Christian King, to make overtures
of an Alliance whereby they would Transport Fifty Thousand of his Soldiers
into any part of the English Territories: They who had struck their Flags, and
lowred their Topsails unto a Ketch of two Guns in the time of Cromwell, refuse
to do it unto a Yacht of his Majesty's, though they were obliged thereunto now
as much as then; the Articles being expressly the same, and the submissions
which they were to pay at Sea unto that Usurper, being regulated, as to the
manner, by the president of what had been Exhibited to the Royal Progenitors of
his Majesty, the Ancient Kings of England; the Right of whom was so
acknowledged a thing heretofore in Holland, that it is not only confessed in
the League of Cromwell, and both the Treaties betwixt his Majesty and the Dutch;
but in the Twelvth^ Article of the Offensive and Defensive League betwixt
France and the United Provinces, Anno Dom. 1635. It was Agreed That if the
Dutch Fleet (which was to Scowre the French Coasts in the Mediterranean from
Pirates) should at any time meet the French; the Admiral of the Dutch was to
strike his Leo ab Aitzma H^st. tract. pa^is Belgi^. page 177. ^dit. Lugduni
Batavor. in ^to 1654
Flag, and lowre his Top-sail at his first approach unto the French Fl^et, and
to Salute the Admiral of France with Guns, who was to return the said Salute by
Guns also, as was usual when the Dutch and English Fleaets did meet.

With what sincerity the Dutch did Negotiate with the Crown of France, is known
only to the Searcher of Hearts, and to Themselves: For since the first Revolt
of these p^rfidious Hollanders unto this day, it has been their constant
course to observe no Leagues, further then they conduce to the Profit of the
United Provinces; and to Imbark all Princes in Wars upon promises of a firm
Amity and Assistance, and as soon as the said Princes are plunged thereinto, to
desert them, and draw Advantages from their Enemies, or else compel their
Allies aforesaid, to yield them more beneficial Articles. Thus They served
Queen Elizabeth: (Who complained (...) qui lem nec Deus si tat, ut ingratis
praeser prionibus elusa exemplum Regibus fo^t, abstinendi auxilio populi, qui
nulla in emi^tex reverentia, ^ec (...), nisi s^i, (...). R. Elizabetha ap^d
Grotium, H^st. Belg. l. 7.
thereof in 1598.) Thus They imposed upon the most Christian King in 1635 and
afterward all along until the conclusion of the Munster-peace. Thus They
served the Queen of Sweden in 1643, 1644 It is possible that the King of France
might suspect their Treachery (especially since the same Men do now Sway the
States General, and Province of Holland, who cheated France in the
Munster-Peace) lest, having involved Him in a War with England, and transported
his Forces into that Kingdom, they should change Sides; and having extorted
Cautionary Towns from the English, employ their Arms against Him, to His great
detriment, and disgrace, if not Ruin. It is much more possible, that this
Haughty and Generous Prince, seeing in the Person of the King of England, the
Sacred MAJESTY of all Princes, V^lified and Abused; and recalling to mind how
the same Dutch had Cosened the Crown of France, and disappointed all the most
hopeful designs of that Kingdom, and its Allies, by the Munster-peace, contrary
to so many Leagues renewed from them, and after such constant supplies of Men
and Money, and without any default on the part of the French; I say it is much
more probable that upon these regards, and a Detestation of the late Insolence
of the Dutch toward His most Christian Majesty, (who during his Progress in
Flanders, had sent their Navy as it were to Brave him on his Coast at Dunkirk)
He was inclined more to the Amity of the King of England. However it were, the
Dutch Negotiations in France were discovered by His Majesty the King of Great
Britain, some months after the aforesaid refusal of the Flag. Our King had
Expostulated with their Ambassador Boreel, concerning the Indignity of that
Act, which was a notorious Breach of the Articles, and a thing which they
yielded unto Cromwell. As for Cromwell, the Ambassador replied, THEY FEARED HIM.
The which words, as they carry with Il se (...) craindre.
them the greatest Contempt in the world toward His Mayesty, so they are
demonstrations of the Dutch principles, that these Hollanders act out of no
sense of Honor, Honesty, and Conscience, but accordingly as THEY HOPE AND
FEAR. He did further answer, that If his Mayesty would be informed of the
Action, and the Sentiments of his Superiors, their Assembly was at the Hague,
and thither he might send to be acquainted therewith. Although Replies of this
nature sound very harsh in the Ears, and sinck deeply into the Minds of
Princes; yet so averse was His Majesty from a War with the United Provinces, so
willing to retain an inviolate Amity with that arrogant and ungrateful People,
that He did purpose to send an Envoy to demand Satisfaction for what had past,
and to understand their future Intendments. But since to precipitate this
Message had been to undervalue His Crown and Dignity, as also an Argument of
His fear to lose the Alliance of their High and Mighties, one Month (viz.
August) was suffered to Lapse, before those Thoughts were assumed again: It
being but Justice, that those who had offered the Affront (and those,
HOLLANDERS; HE, the King of Great Britain) should first apply themselves unto
His Majesty. After a Month, or so, was past, Mr. Boreel takes an occasion to
Discourse with the Principal Secretary of State, and asks When His Majesty did
intend to dispatch His Envoy to the Hague about the Action of Van Ghent? It
being rumored that His Majesty was much displeased thereat. The Reply was,
That His Majesty had very great reason to take it ill, that, since He had
gratified the Hollunders so much in the Treaty of 1662. and that of Breda, and
also in the Triple Alliance, League of Guaranty, and defensive Articles; They
should deny unto HIM above all others, the RIGHT OF THE FLAG, that ancient and
undoubted Regality of the Crown of England: That he could not comprehend their
meanings; since if they had any respect for His Majesty, or valued his
Friendship, they should voluntarily have done him right in a case so NOTORIOUS
and Well-known unto them. That the causless Breach of one Article, in this
Conjunction of Affairs, rendered the Alliance with the United Provinces NULL,
and their FRIENDSHIP for ever suspected. Yet so willing was His Majesty to
continne the mutual Amity, that an Envoy should ere long be dispatched. It
seemed harsh to an English Spirit, that the King of Great Britain should send
any Envoy from London to attend the leisure of an Audience from their High and
Mighties at the Hague; yet this had been done, but that the States General, to
anticipate the Errand, and prevent all hopes of accommodating the Affair, but
by a new Treaty, proceeded to Vote and Decree that Van Ghent had done nothing
but what became him; nor did the Articles oblige THEIR FLEETS to strike the
Flag unto ANY SINGLE MAN OF WAR of the Navy Royal of England. They also
represented the claim of his Majesty unto the Dominion of the Seas, to be most
Irrational and Ridiculous: THIS was the Subject of the general Laughter and
Scorn in Holland; and with much Contempt did their Ambassadors discourse of it
in the Courts of Foreign Princes.

His Majesty did regard these Passages with extraordinary Prudence; He
considered their Import at present, and their future tendency. It was manifest
that all the Confederacies betwixt Him and the Dutch were at an end, that the
Defensive Articles were no longer of any force to oblige the Dutch to assist
England in case that France should turn its Forces upon these Kingdoms: Neither
could He demand any Aid by the League of Guaranty, except his most Christian
Majesty did Declare and make it to APPEAR that He Invaded the King of England
on purpose to revenge his entering into the TRIPLE ALLIANCE for the defense of
Flanders. At the same time his Majesty had notice of the secret Applications
and Overtures which the Dutch had made unto the Crown of France; and He
perceived how dangers multiplied every way upon Him, that the Source and
Original of all these Perils was the Ambition and Treachery of the Hollanders,
and the implacable Animosity of the De Wits against England; and that if He did
not by some sudden Councils secure Himself that Winter, his Affairs would be
but in an evil Condition in the succeeding Spring: The Dutch had of a long time
formed a Design to ensure themselves of the Universal Empire of the Seas, and
to give Laws thereon to all Princes and States in point of Traffic, HOW, AND
WHETHER THEY SHOULD TRADE: These Projects had been insinuated into the People
by Mr. Schookius, Necessaria Belgis maritima potentia. -- Quis enim ei maris
usum concesserit qui Sollicitus non est ut in eo aliquid possit. -- Ance omnia
laboremus Anglos toto mari ^pellere, illiusque imperium asserere. M. Schoockius
de Imperio marit. c. 28. Curandum omnibus modis ne conj^ngatur Oriens et
Septentrio cum Occidente, sive ne Mercateres qui ad Orientem et Septentrionem
habitant, puta Dantisci, Regiomonti, Hamburgi, in Dania, Norwegia, Suecia,
Russia, etc. Ipsi plagas Occidentales adeant, and inde petant quae sibi ^sui
sunt: ac vice versa Occidentales frequentent O^entales and S^entrionales
Regiones. Id. ibid. c. 31.
one of the Professors at Groninghen, and were the Dictates of -- in the States
General. Their Actions in the East and West Indies, Russia, and the Baltic
Sea, were evident Arguments of such Intentions: Their Annually building a
determinate number of Capital Ships; their driving upon our Fishermen, and
spoilling their Fishing within the proper Seas of his Majesty. Their Attaquing
of foreign Ships under the Protection of our Castles and Ports; their Attempts
upon the Navy of the pretended Parliament in the Downs; and the Burning of our
Ships at Chatham (when a Peace was even concluded) were all Results and plain
Consequents of the said Design. Now it seemed they would finish it as to the
English (and consequently upon all Europe) by their great preparations of
Capital Ships and others; which, though purposed against France, yet had their
influence and carry terror amongst all their Neighbors: And the refufal of
the Flag was but a Degree toward those demands which ensued, That his Majesty
should relinquish his usurped Dominion of the British Seas. His Majesty had
already yielded at Breda enough to satisfy a moderate Ambition, but where the
desires are boundless, those concessions become ineffectual which are not
proportionate thereunto: If he entered into a New Treaty, who could ascertain
Him where the Hollanders would begin, or when they would end? Their
consultations are generally slow, and most commonly dilatory: Who knew, how
they would protract time in this Juncture, and draw Advantages thereby from the
necessities of his Majesty? It seemed evident that his Majesty must make as
great preparations to procure a tolerable Treaty from them, as to make War upon
them; and in the mean space, whilst We pursue no other aims then a sirm
Defensive League with the Dutch, and remain separate from France, who can
Imagine otherwise then that the Dutch would, to Crush the Rising Power of
England, and to busy France, prosecute the Overtures privately, and contract
an Offensive League with his most Christian Majesty? What straights his Majesty
had then been reduced unto, the most Vulgar capacity can apprehend. But, to
gratify the Credulous and Ignorant; suppose his Majesty had prevailed with the
Dutch for a speedy and real Treaty; (which He could not by his Ambassador Sir
G. Downing) Is it not now visible, which the Elevated Spirit his Majesty did
easily foresee, That they would demand of us to Relinquish the Dominion of the
Seas? Which if he had assented unto, what Debates would it have occasioned
amongst the Lawyers, and in Parliament, conthe giving up of such a Royalty?
What anger and discontents would it have excited in the Breasts of all his
Subjects, to see so much of Pusillanimity in the King and Court, and to find
themselves, their Families, and Estates exposed as a Prey to any Invader, who
might sail our Seas, and possess our Ports and Territories, without giving any
warning; and Fish upon our Seas, without our License? Nothing is more clear and
certain, then that His Majesty must have lost the Love of all His Subjects to
purchase the suspicious Amity of the Hollanders. I call their Amity suspicious,
because they never observe any Articles, how solemnly soever ratified, beyond
their Interest, and pleasure: And who knows but They might have imagined it
their Interest, to prolong a War with France, until the expense thereof had
exhausted England? Is not Money the Nerves of War? and is it not in long Wars,
as in long wrestlings and scuffles, where the Victory depends upon the strength
of the sinews? Is it not likewise evident, that, upon so tedious a War, the
King of England must have been reduced to the same condition, as if He had been
vanquished by France? The Dutch would thereby have survived as Masters of the
Sea, by the power of their more numerous Fleets, and his Majesty have been
necessitated to an unseasonable breach with them (not being able to perform
Covenants) or to pawn the Isle of Wight (which upon an exigency they desired as
a Mortgage from Cromwell) or Portfmouth, or Plimonth, or Hull, or All.

Let us but remember that the defensive Articles must have been renewed; and
calculate what the annual expense of forty Ships, six thousand Foot and four
hundred Horse amounts unto; and observe that We should pay them, and not be
reimbursed till three Years after the War is ended. Let us but ruminate hereon,
and think how the Dutch served Queen Elizabeth upon the like Articles, and all
the precedert Evils will seem no futile apprehensions, and dreams. I know the
present humor of the Nation: there is not a Fop or Simpleton, but is a
Statesman; and esteems himself wise enough to censure the Actions of the Privy
Council, and to agitate in a Caball, would the King but vouchsafe Him a place
in His Cabinet: Let any of those profound Politicians but fancy themselves
Ambassadors to negotiate with the Dutch in such a Treaty as is related
hereaster betwixt the pretended Commonwealth and the States General, and I am
confident that, as vain as They are, there is not one will say He could have
concluded it with expedition: And if so, these men may forbear to condemn their
King, for not involving Him self in tedious and uncertain Treaty with these
perfidious States, at such a time when it was necessary for Him to fix unto
some Resolution speedily. In February indeed the Dutch did send over a Latin
Memorial penned by De Wit, and delivered by Boreel: but it is so dubious and
Equivocal, that no wise Man can think such a Paper a sufficient ground for a
Treaty. They modestly offer to strike the Flag, and lower the top Sails of
their Fleets to single Ships of Ours, in token of honor and respect to their
good Ally. not as it is His Right, as long as we shall adhere to the defensive
Articles: And that we shall retain so long (the empty Title of) the Sovereignty
of the British Seas, provided it be not construed any way so as to impede them
in the free use thereof. By such a Treaty we should have given away the ancient
right of the Flag, and held it by virtue of a Treaty, and suspended it upon the
condition of our adhering to that League: Nor could we have punished the
refusal as Rebellion, but as a breach of the League, for which complaints must
first have been made at the Hague. It had also been no more a testimony of Our
Sovereignty of the Seas, but of the civility and respect which the Dutch bear
unto His Majesty: Or, if it had been an Argument of the Dominion of the Seas,
that Dominion would have signified no more then the Dominion of Jerusalem does
to the King of Spain. As to the FREE USE OF THE SEAS, who can tell the
signification thereof? Is it in reference to Navigation of Merchants only, or
of what Fleets they please? Does it include our Ports, and Channels, and those
Seas called the King's Chambers? Does it include the Fishing without License,
or Custom? Will it never be construed so as to exclude the carrying
Contra-band Goods to our Enemies? and that they may import in what Vessels they
will what Goods they please, and that paying what Customs they judge meet? I
am sure that all these Cases are disputed under the grand Question about the
Freedom of the Seas; and since that some do comprehend them all (and more) in
that one grant of the free use of the Seas; it is not to be doubted but the
Dutch Casuists would insist upon all that would make for their profit. That
this may be made more evident, I shall set down the Plea of the H^se towns, who
having asserted the Freedom of the open Sea, and condemned the Venetian
Sovereignty over the Hadriatick, proceed in these words Inter res communes; uti
ipse imperator numerat mare, Jo. Angel^us J. C. de rebusp. Hanseat. part. 6.
page 85. Edit. Fran^ Anno ^om, 1641.
and ideo nemo in mari piscari aut navigare prohibetur, and adversns inhibentem
competit actio injuriarum. l. 10. Si quis in mare l. injuriarum sect. ult. de
in uriis. sic littora quoque communia sunt, l. 2. de re. divis. Quia
accessorium sunt maris, and accessorium s^quitur naturam principalis, l. 2. de
peculio legate. c. accessorium de reg. jur. in 6. Ad littus maris igitur
accedere quivis potest, non piscandi tantum gratia, sed etiam aedificandi and
occupandi causa. l. quod in litt. de acquir. rer. Dom. l. in lit. ff. nequid in
loc. pub. etc. Such Arguments as these have been made use of you see, and may
be again by a Potent Enemy; though indeed they are vain, as the Venetian
Advocates do show. Quemadmodum communio Julius Pacius de Domin. maris Adriatici.
littorum restringitur ad populum, a quo occupata sunt, l. 3. sect. littora D.
de quid in loc. public. ita etiam communio maris: adeo ut per mare a nemine
occupatum navigatio sit omnino libera: per mare autem occupatum ab aliquo
principe, ii liberam habeant navigationem, qui sunt illi principi Subjecti;
alii vero eatenus, quatenus idem Princeps permittit. As to the paying of
Customs, it is notorious that the Dutch have by open War inhibited the Dane
from advancing his Customs The Hanse-Towns urge many authorities and disputes
against all Customs and Tolls upon Merchandise. Jo. Marquard. de jure commerc.
l. 2. c. 3. sect. 4.
in the Sound above the ancient Toll, though the value of the Coin were
advanced, and the Trade much more gainful to them then it had been formerly. It
is also recorded that the Hanse-Townes did refuse to pay any higher Customs to
Q. Mary and Q. Elizabeth then had been paid in the days of Eaward the 3d.
urging that such an enhansment of Customs was a prejudice to Commerce, and the
Freedom of the Navigation. One Reason of the quarrel betwixt the Dutch and the
pretended Parliament was, because they were prohibited to import Goods that
were not of their growth, and excluded traffic with our Plantations. This
they then said was Leo ab Aitzma, p. 760. Jo Marquard. de jure commerce. 4. c.
3. sect. 28, etc.
contrary to the Freedom of Commerce; and the orders about it, which had been
immemorially observed: And the same complaints were urged by the Hanse-Towns.

Upon these considerations, I should have said, Let us then lay aside all
considerations of renewing an uncertain, dilatory and insidious Treaty with the
Dutch: Let us not seek the Amity of Persons so Treacherous: Let us not give
them the opportunity to deceive us twice in one Year; Let us not provoke
against Us the Arms of France by entering into a Defensive Alliance with those
ungrateful, insolent, and perfidious Hollanders; whilst we cannot be assured
of their Freindship. If the Power of France bend it self upon the United
Provinces, and they by our assistance, become victorious, the Glory of the
success, will be by all the World appropriated to the Dutch, and the
Achievements of the English, drowned by the fame of the Dutch exploits; they
being Principals in the War. It too much derogates from the renown of England,
that they have dared to affront, and contest it with the the Grandeur of
France: What if they preval? Their Authors Quod si Resp. Veneta, propter Cypri
and Candiae regna exigua, Regibus aequalem sibi dignitatem ascribit; quanto
meliori jure Faederatum Belgium, cujus Majestatem maximi Reges agnoscunt, eodem
Privilegio utetur? Georg. Hornius Hist. polit. dissertat. 16. The Author of the
Alcedonia Faederati Belgii Printed at Leyden, 1667. Having represented the
Dutch as Victors over the English, does tell the States General, Vos mihi ut
olim Aulae Magistri seu Praefecti Paletii Parisiorum, Martelli, aut Romani
Senatores; si non Reges, iit Regum Domini, mihi perpetuo colendi, observandi,
suspiciendi.
now challenge for their Republic an equal respect to what is paid to Crowned
Heads. To what height will their Pride hereafter transport them? May We not
justly apprehend by this, and their Arrogance at Munster, that they will claim
precedence of all, or most Kings? Let us but consider how much it concerns Our
traffic, that our Prince be reverenced abroad: Let us but inquire whether
remote States do not admit, or exclude Us from commerce, according as the
Reputation of our King, as to strength, and conduct, is greater, or less
amongst them: And We shall not want Motives to induce Us by all means to hinder
them from eclipsing Us in point of Reputation. But, ought We not also also to
apprehend their immoderate growth in strength? Will they change their natures,
and principles with new accessionals of Power? Will they become-less
Avaricious, less Insolent, less Treacherous by those fair additions? Shall We
be able to live more quietly and securely? Shall our Merchants Trade more
peaceably? Shall our King be entreated more respectfully, when they become more
puissant: Who have enforced the English by so many Wars (as well as
Remonstranses) to vindicate our just Rights and Honors? If these things be
unimaginable, if great Arrogance be an usual Concomitant of great Power; If
Ambition fortified with Strength does ordinarily break all Bonds, and cancel
all Leagues of Amity, which are Obstacles to its Progress; If Covetousness
exert it self more and more according as its opportunities increase: What
Affiance can we place in the Hollanders, when they shall grow more Potent and
Renowned? And how vehemently ought We to apprehend, lest their States General
do grow too High and Mighty for Us? I remember a Speech made by the Dutch
Ambassadors to Q. Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1598. when they dehorted from making
any Peace with Spain, they represented unto her Majesty the Ambition, Avarice,
Gruelty, and Insolence of the Spaniard; which qualities since he was not likely
to change, it was in vain for Her to think of a safe and durable Peace: The
same Inclinations, the same Incentives continuing, wouldin a short space
produce their usual effects; that by this Amity she would but give him time
Grotius de bello Belgico. lib. 7.
to Recruit that Strength which would be employed against Her. The conclusion
with a little Change runs thus: Those Kings and States have taken wiser
Courses, who without any particular Provocation, have made a timely Opposition
to growing Empires, lest the Conquest of their Neighbors should render them a
Prey to the Victour. They knew that there are some Wars made to procure a
Peace, some because no Peace can be had. For as betwixt Fire and Water, both
being of a contrary Nature, so between those that are ambitious to Rule over
all, and those that scorn to become Tributaries and Vassals to any, there is a
perpetual Strife and everlasting Enmity; wherein it is too late to revenge
Injuries, when received: It becomes the Wise, and it is most Glorious to
prevent them whilst they are yet only Threatened, or Imminent. Heaven has not
given unto Kings their Power and Government only that they might redress and
punish Evils; their chief Business and Care ought to be to provide that they
may never happen. He does not so much as defend himself, who contains within
the narrow bounds of Defense. Wicked minds are excited by Impunity. Whether the
Dutch make War with France, or enlarge their Conquests in both Indies, or Fight
with the Dane, or Swede, or with great Fleets guard their Fishermen, and
Merchants, those dangers which we do not yet feel, do still hang over our
Heads; and whilst they are in Arms, England must be in a continual Jealousy,
and at a constant Expense. The question is, Whither it be best to perpetuate;
or dispel our Fears? And which is the most prudent course, to spend our own
Incomes, or subsist upon the Spoils of others -- These considerations prevailed
with that Queen, whose Memory and Actions are to this day Celebrated and
Reverenced in England. Were that Queen now alive, let us examine what Maxims
She would inculcate to this Age upon the present Juncture; and if we may
conjecture by her past Deportment what She would urge, it would be to this
effect; Never to Relinquish any thing of Honor: A Prince despised, and
contumeliously used, is already half-ruined: If he endure it long, he is
totally lost at Home and Abroad. She made the States decree Death to such as
should Libel, or revile her Majesty; E Reidanus Annal. Belgic. l. 6. Anno Dom.
1587.
and one reason of Her quarrel with Spain was, that the King had slighted her
Ambassadors. Never to abandon the Dominion of the Sea; but to maintain
constantly such a Fleet of Ships as may secure it, and strike an Awe into the
Neighboring States: To propagate Trade by all possible means into all Parts,
as the principal means of increasing the Riches of private Men, the Revenues of
the Prince, and the Renown and Puissance of the Realm. To improve the Fishery
by all manner of Contrivances, as observation of Lent, and Fasting-days,
encouraging and protecting the Fishermen; whence will arise, besides the
effects for a gainful Trade, a constant Seminary of Mariners, inured to the
Sea, acquainted with the Coast, and skilled in Navigation. Never to suffer any
Nation to grow more Powerful at Sea, or greater Traders then our selves; but by
sundry Artifices, or open War to d^stress them, and draw the Trade to England.
Thus She undermined the Hanse-Towns, because they did prejudice the English
Trade; notwithstanding that many of them did profess the Reformed Religion.
Such Aphorisms as these would She instill into the English were She now living:
And I am confident had She lived to see France and the United Provinces, both
in their grand^ur last Winter, She would neither have stood Neutral, nor joined
Her Forces with those of the Dutch. Against a Neutrality it is a Rule in
Politics, That in a War begun betwixt two mighty States, it is dangerous for a
Th^rd, and Neighbor to Consul Quintus ad Achaeos Quod optimum esse dicant, non
interpor^ vos b^llo: Imo nihil tam alienum rebus v^stris est: Quippe sine
gratia, fi^ e dig^tate praemium victoris eritis. Livius l. 35. Scipio Ammirat.
disc. polit. l. 18. disc. 7. Didac. Saavedra Symbol. polit. 115.
them both, not to be a Party being called into the Action: For he is in peril
of becoming a Prey to the incensed Victor: Except the Neutral Prince be so
Potent, as to be able to secure himself from the Conqueror. But this not being
our condition at present, the next Debate is, Whether we ought to adhere to the
United Provinces, or to France? Against the United Provinces so many Arguments
have been already Alleged, that it is a shame not to assent unto them; except
the like or greater can be produced against the League with France.

Although it be true Policy for every Prince to oppose the excessive growth and
strength of another State, that it arrive not at that height of Puissance, as
to be able to reduce the rest under obeisance; yet Wise men suggest many
considerations before a War be commenced against this so Potent Empire: For, if
we judge of Events by the ordinary course of Humane Affairs, whosoever makes War
upon a State infinitely Scipio Ammiratus disc. polit. l. 20. disc. 11.
surpassing his in Power, does but occasion his own Ruin; Neither is it
providenti^l for a weak Prince, though he foresee that he shall be at last
subdued by this puissant Empire, therefore to run Precipitously into a War
against it; any more then it would seem Wisdom, for a company of Men to
Accelerate their own Destruction, because they are ascertained that in time
they shall be Destroyed. If the Question were now the same that it was in the
days of Cromwell, which way the Scales should be turned betwixt Rising France,
and Declining Spain, the debate might end in favor of the House of Austria;
but since that Cromwell by Assisting France, and Depressing of Spain, has
contributed much to the paramount Greatness of that Monarchy; and that His
Majesty of Great Britain has, since his Restoration; been enforced to employ
his Cares upon those most necessary and urgent Affairs of composing his
distracted Kingdoms, Re-establishing the Government, Securing and Advancing the
Trade of his Subjects in opposition to the Hollanders, without leisure to
regard the growth of the French Monarchy: The Case now seems different from
what it was, and it does not seem prudential to oppose the greatness of France,
now that it is Arrived unto its present Height, under so Haughty, Martial, and
Wise a King, so able Council, so plentiful a Treasury, so Vast, Wellcommanded,
and Well-disciplined Armies. There is no one State that is able to
Counter-poise the Forces of his most Christian Majesty; and great Leagues,
which are to be made up of a multitude of Parties and Confederates, are so
uncertain Strengths to be relied on by the Wise, that History does not acquaint
us with any Instances almost of their succeeding well; and it is manifest to any
who understands the Genius of this Age, that any such League would become
Ineffectual. Let Us therefore resolve, that it is at present best for the King
of Great Britain to join his Arms with those of France, leaving off the
respects unto Remote and perhaps. only imaginary Evils, that may never fall
out. Let it be thought a more safe Procedure, to Acquiesce in the Royal Word
and Honor of the King of France, then in any promises of the Hollanders: Let
it be conceived that the Designs of Universal Monarchy in Europe, are vain and
success-less Projects; that a thousand Casualties may disappoint them, and that
his most Christian Majesty may Die, and leave an Infant, or a Successor, whose
Inclinations, Wisdom, and Conduct, may not be equal to his. But the Case is
different in regard to the Dutch, for there is no Death to be looked for of the
States General, but in the subversion of the Republic: A succession of Men
educated to the same Principles, and capable to manage the same Projects, is
there perpetuated: Trade is the great interest of England; the Dutch have now
in a manner engrossed it; the French are not Competitours with Us for it; and,
by reason of the incommodiousness of their Harbors, and the unfitness of that
Nation to manage Traffic with other People, perhaps never may become our
Rivals therein: So that this benefit will arise by the French alliance, that
the English shall divert the Traffic of the Dutch, and with much advantage
Scramble for the greatest part with the French Merchants: and that Fishing,
which the Sates General do esteem one of the Principal Revennues and happiness
of their So it is styled in the Dutch Proclamation for the regulating of the
Herring fishing. Sub^stit praeterea tellus perpetua illa magnaque piseatine,
navigationeque peculiaribus plane propriisque Hollandorum professionibus Lud.
Guicciardin. in indes^r. Hollandiae.
Provinces, will inevitably devolve unto these Realms. Besides, a War with
Holland (upon the account of Prizes) is less expensive then a War with France:
And it has this further advantage, that it weakens our only competitour in
Naval strength; and the same maritine Force which baffles Holland will secure
Us of the French amity, revenge the injuries we have received, and regain that
Honor which they have so Villanously clouded and bereaved Us of abroad: the
recovery whereof, and the revenging the indignities done to our Prince, are
considerations superiouri to any that can be alleged unto the English, and the
sole means remaining whereby to convince the World, that our Friendship and
Enmity is of any impor tance: It cannot be expressed what great Respect and
Confidence in Friends these Superficial things created from opinion do produce,
nor what reservation and fear they beget in Enemies. How Mr. S^lhon Minister of
State part. 2. disc. 9.
much does it concern sick and crazy States, for preventing the Obstructions of
Recovery and of Restitution to Health, That it be believed they are in Health,
and and have also Forces for defense against Have we not seen this evidently in
in the late Grandeur of the Dutch, who su^sisted mainly by the opinion all bad
of their good Government, Wisdom, and Puissance?
assaults? The two Principal Parts of the Greatness of a State are these; and
to seem to have them is oftentimes as availaable, as if we were possessed
thereof.

There are but two Material Objections that can be urged with any speciousness
against the present Alliance betwixt His Majesty and the most Christian King;
and ^ne is drawn from the regard to be had unto Protestancy in general, the
condition whereof may be weakened by the Conquest of the Dutch, and so become
obnoxious to the n^w prevailing Popery. The other is deduced from this
consideration, that we assist a Roman Catholic Prince, against the Protestant
State, the Governors whereof howsoever they have been so irreligious as it is
specified and universally acknowledged, yet the public Restoration of the
Papistical Religion, and the excluding of the honester and more real
Protestarts from their Churches and Evangelical Liberty, do seem to make the
Alliance to be un Christian, and un-lawful in Us, who believe the truth of
Protestancy, and the Idolatries and Impieties of the Church of Rome; and
although we do verily believe that ^is Majesty of Great Britain has not in
this League any direct intention to extirpate Protestancy in those Countries,
yet since the consequences and events of Actions are to be examined, and in
point of Conscience and Morality to denominate an attempt just or good, we
ought to regard the final Issue thereof; for if the general or most frequent
consequences of such Councils be evil, the whole Series becomes so, and the
will of the Author is at least indirectly criminal and culpable. It being a
Rule amongst the Casuistical Divines; Quando ex factis nostris indirecte
gravissima fequuntur, vel s^mper, vel plerumque mala, actionem ceteroquin de se
indiflerentem, reddunt illicitam, perinde ac si directa voluntate appeterentur:
Seeus vero, si per acci^ens, hoc est raro tantum, and quasi casu aliquo
consequantur. When most grievous evils (and such are the profanation of the
Reformed Churches, the Restoration of the Idololatrical and Antichristian
Mass, the contempt and subversion of Protestancy, the leading of those into
temptation, if not destruction for whom Christ died) do constantly, or most
commonly ensue upon any action of ours which is indeed in it self indifferent,
the action is thereby rendered so unlawful, as if we had directly intended all
those evils: But the Case is otherwise where those evils do seldom, and as it
were thorough un-foreseen chance fall out upon any indifferent Action of Ours.

To these Scruples, which indeed are of some moment, and were transmitted unto
me by an unknown hand, I do return this perspicuous and satisfactory Answer:
and I shall begin my reply by a Solution of the latter, and then proceed to the
former.

It is most certain that the Measures of our Love to others are to be taken
from the affection we bear to our selves: We are to love our Neighbors as our
selves, but not better. That common Proverb, Charity begins at home, is a
principle of Nature, and Consonant to the Gospel. The War, on the part of His
Majesty, is purely defensive, and was inevitably drawn upon Him by the
arrogance of the Dutch in vilif^ing the Honor of His Majesty, and of his
Realms; their injuries in detaining some, and oppressing others of His
Subjects: their treachery in breaking the Articles made at Breda, whereby His
Majesty was deprived of that support whereon He might rely in opposition to the
Grandeur of France; their constant treachery in the forming and observing of
Leagues, whereby it became unsafe for his Majesty to enter upon, or presume on
any Treaty with them. Out of all which considerations it is manifest to the
most prejudicate Persons, that His Majesty is totally innocent as to any evil
consequences which ensued upon the Alliance and War; and the whole blame is be
transferred upon the Dutch. There has never happened a War in the World (that
I remember) wherein those only suffered by the consequences thereof which were
guilty of its occasion: Those that are Subjects to hereditary Princes might be
better absolved, then those whose Magistracy is elective, and their Authority
more precarious: But as there are just Wars betwixt successive Monarchies, so
the righteousness of this with the united Provinces is most notorious; the
generality of the People being so exasperated against the English, and so
malevolent toward His Majesty, that 'twas thence their Superiors derived much
of their confidence. They did believe the suggestions of John de Wit and his
Partisans, that His Majesty did seek, what He could not avoid: That what they
made unavoidable, was purely the effect of his unsatiable avarice, and
ambition: That he was the most blood-thirsty person in the World; that He armed
against them such a Militia, as would make Fricacies of their Children, and
Salt up the Men and Women for Naval Provision. If the prevailing Party (which
swayes their Councils and Determinations) were thus animated, whatsoever be the
fatal consequences of the War, they are not to be imputed unto Us, but unto the
Loevesteine Faction, and their deluded or malicious adherents: If their ill
success, and time has undeceived some, what does this reflect upon the
Resolutions which His Majesty assumed last Year, before they were
dis-possessed? We may reckon them unfortunate, we may pity those who were
averse from the War, (and His Majesty did express as much concern for the
interest of the Prince of Orange, as the nature of His Treaties would permit)
but we can charge no injustice upon the Arms of our King. There was heretofore
a sort of People who did not think it lawful for Protestants to contract
Leagues with Papists, or Idolaters. But Prince William of Orange (and His
Divines) did long since refute this Opinion. For albeit that the Israelites
might not make any League with the Inhabitants of Canaan (whom God destined
unto destruction) yet with other Nations, as with Hiram King of Tire, E.
Reidanus Annal. Belgic. l. 2. Anno Dom. 1579.
the Kings of Egypt, and Assyria, etc. they might. The Cantons of Swizzerland,
as well Protestants as Papists, are consederated for mutual defense: The
Protestant Princes of Germany join with the Papists in one Empire, and in the
Election of a Romanist to be Emperor: The same Princes have sometimes called
in (by League) the French to their assistance; as Geneva has implored their
protection against the Savoyard. If we consult the Law of nature, the respect
we owe to our Lives, Liberties and Estates, requires this at our hands, that we
preserve our selves; and if we cannot effect thus much by our Domestic Forces,
we must recur to foreign assistance: The Law of Grace does not destroy that of
Nature; hence it is that the Obligation does still remain, and that those
Alliances made by Kings with Infidels and Heretics, when profitable or
necessary, may not justly be blamed. Do we not see in holy Writ, how the
Patriarchs, and the most renowned Kings of Juda, have authorized this Doctrine
by their Example? Did not Abraham covenant with Abimelech both for himself and
his Posterity? as also with the Canaanites? was not Lot confederate with the
King of Sodom, and went to War in his Company? The Maccabees (though zealous in
the observance of their Religion) did yet confederate themselves with the
Lacedaemonians, and Romans. King David joined his Forces with those of the
Philistines against Israel; nor does it appear but He would have fought in that
quarrel, since He tells the King, now thou shall see what thy Servant will do.
To pass by the examples of Antiquity, let us descend to latter times, where
seeking for Proofs of this Truth, we find St. Paul recommending to the
Primitive Christians a Peace with all men. He himself makes use of the
protection of the Pharisees against the Saducees, and refuses not to be
secured against the violence of the Jews by the assistance of two hundred
Archers and seventy Horsemen, all Infidels. What can be objected against this
Reason? It is permitted every one to make an alliance with all such as are
comprised under the notion of Neighbors; and it may not be doubted, for the
Son of God has commanded Us to love them as our selves. The Infidels are
positively comprehended under that Title, especially when they are of advantage
unto us; as Jesus Christ testifies in the Parable of the Samaritan: And by
consequence it is evident that alliances with Infidels, and Heretics, are
permitted unto Princes. If it be said that a Prince may make an alliance with
such, to have Peace with them, or commerce; or perhaps employ their Forces
against others of the same Religion with them, but not against such as profess
the same Religion with himself. I answer that the general practice of
Christianity, has been otherwise. How often did the Emperors of
Constantinople, the Kings of Spain and France, contract for the assistance of
the Sarracens against Christians? Which of these Realms has not confederated
with the Turks to invade the Christians? Which of them has not combined with
the Heretics, and made use of their assistance against their Enemies, though
of the same Religion with them? If we turn our Eyes upon the Protestants, do we
not find Q. Elizabeth contriving with the Count of Embden, how to undermine the
Hanse-Towns, many whereof were Protestants? Do we not find the Dutch assisting
the French King against the Protestants of Rochel? Do we not read of Maurice
Duke of Saxony assisting Charles the Fifth against the other Protestants? Did
not the House of Brandenburgh do the like? Have not the Swedes fought against
the Duke of Saxony, and other Protestants in Germany (who were reconciled to
the Emperor by the Peace of Prague) and did not the one Party adhere to the
House of Austria, whilst the other was supported by France? Have not the Danes
fought against the Swedes by confederation with Poland, and the Emperor? In
such cases every Party regards the other as Potent, Ambitious, and Injurious
Adversaries, not as Protestants, and whatever Damage befalls the Reformed
Religion in the heat of War, it is to be charged upon those that give occasion
thereunto, not unto them that are enforced to secure themselves. We must
distinguish betwixt the Church and State; this War is not commenced against the
First, but the Latter; nor does his Majesty contract to advance the Religion,
but Dominions of France: Whatsoever has, or may fall out as to the Popish
Religion being restored in the United Provinces, is not to be imputed unto Us,
but unto the French, who are Zealous for its Promotion: His Majesty is but
indirectly and by accident concerned therein, it being contrary to his Wishes
and Inclinations, nor can He be said so much as Interpretatively to Will the
thing. We ought to distinguish betwixt those events Disting ^dum i^ter eventus
malos, qui naturali quadam ^olligatione, seu ^secutione nostram actionem
co^s-quuntur; and eos qui ex aliorum libera voluntate seu malit^a s^i salent.
Esto igitur doctrina ista de indirecta vel interpretativa malorum eventuum
voluntate in prioris generis effectibus, vel semper, vel potius plerumque locum
habeat; null tanen modo generaliter ad illos casus extendi potest, in quibus
eventus malus nullo naturali nostrae actionis influxu, sed ex sola libera
voluntatis alienae per^titate sequitur. Vam ex communi Theologorum sen entia,
nemo tunc tenetur ab hu^smodi action temperare, si justam aliquam habeat
causam rationemque faciendi. Ex quofit etiam, ut tunc neque express, neque
interpretative mala consequentia velle, vel perpetrare, vel eorum reus esse
censeatur. -- Bello concordiam quaerit; and siquid in ^o gerendo praeter votum
acciderit, non voluntatis crimen est; sed necessitatis, cujus amarissimae sunt
leges, and truculentissima imperia. -- Hoc posito quod voluntas sit boni,
nullus belli eventus eam potest efficere malam, cum bonitas voluntatis ex solo
pendeat objecto. Thom. Aquin. Quest. 9. Art. 2.
which do by a natural consequence follow our own Actions, and those which
ensue accidentally, by reason our Allies are of another Religion. Though there
may be found a way to argue an indirect, and interpretative Will in the former
case; yet that cannot be extended indefinitely to all such evil contingencies
as arise not from our Wills, but the particular intendments of another. And it
is a received Maxim amongst the Casuists, that in such Circumstances no man is
bound to avoid such enterprises, if He have just Causes and Reasons moving Him
thereunto: Nor can he be said either expressly, or interpretatively to Will, or
occasion these evils, which thus ensue; nor is He any way guilty of them. If
then the War with the United Provinces be Just (which is an unquestionable
truth) if it be lawful for the Protestant King of Great Britain to enter into a
League with the King of France, though a Papist (which cannot well be
questioned) those considerations ought not to perplex the Consciences of any
English man, which arise from the voluntary and subsequent proceedings of his
most Christian Majesty. It became the States General at first to weigh those
things; they are extrinsical to our Business: But we ought to take notice with
what circumspection as to this point his Majesty has proceeded, by Inviting
them to come hither, and securely to profess their Religion in England:
Whereupon his Majesty did most piously, and motuproprio, make as great a
provision for the support of the Protestant Religion, as it was possible for
him in that condition, which the Treachery and Villainy of the Dutch Governors
had reduced Him unto. They had made the Interests of the two Nations to be
incompatible: and as it becomes all Englishmen to prefer their own Welfare
before that of a Stranger; so it is manifest that the Reformed Religion will be
in a better Posture by the Grandeur and Puissance of these Realms, than if they
fell under the force of Holland. Out of what has been alleged in Answer unto
the first Scruple, there has been in a manner suggested a Reply unto the
Second: Yet I do further say, That his Majesty has a Cordial and sincere
regard unto the general good of the Protestants; and how much he regarded the
welfare of the Dutch, it does appear by the Treaty at Breda, the Triple
Alliance, and Defensive Articles: It is not in His Power to oblige them further
against their Wills; nor is it requisite and fitting that he give up the Rights
of England, and abandon the concerns of His natural Subjects for the benefit of
Holland. It is for the general benefit of Protestancy that England flourish,
rather then be destroyed: Hereunto His Majesty has bent all His Councils; He
neither sought this War, nor ever declined a just and honorable Peace: We
cannot expect He should perform impossibilities in behalf of the reformed
Religion in general: and we ought not to amuse the People with insinuations
that are either vain, or malicious. Let us rather contemplate the success which
has happened upon the contests betwixt Protestants heretofore: When Maurice
aided Charles the 5th. though the Lantgrave of Hesse, and Elector of Saxony,
both were overthrown in the quarrel, yet was not Protestancy it self prejudiced
thereby; and the like events have sundry times fallen out: so that we have no
such reason to prognosticate these calamities unto the reformed Religion,
whether we attend unto experience, or the good will of God in the disposition
of affairs: and whilst we perplex our selves about the Hollanders, it may be
they are now saying, It is good for us that we were afflicted: They may now be
reclaimed from their Pride and Insolence, and at once become better Christians,
and better Neighbors.

But to resume my Discourse: The Reasons aforesaid (did not the more elevated
judgment of His Majesty suggest unto Him any others) are sufficient to
authorize our Amity with France, and Enmity with Holland: Which His Majesty did
so conclude upon, as to remember the English interest in preserving Flanders
unto the Spaniard: The Ambassador of that Crown (I am sure) has with repeated
Declarations been satisfied that His Majesty did not intend, nor had, by this
League, abandoned those thoughts which at first led Him to enter upon the
Triple Alliance; and that an Article, to that purpose, was so penned, that a
Son of Spain could not have been more express as to that point, then the King
of England was. If his Majesty did transact this whole affair with great
secrecy, it is an Argument of His extraordinary Conduct; which was necessary to
so great an affair. If He did not advise with the Parliament about the War, let
us believe it not to have been fit that His privacies should be made public,
or that the League should be protracted by their tedious debates: and let us
acknowledge that according to the English Laws, His Majesty is sole Arbitrator
and Judge of War, and Peace: and if our Kings have sometimes advised with their
Parliaments about Wars, they were never obliged thereunto.

If that hitherto the Conduct of His Majesty has appeared to be such, that
every man must be satisfied with His care and vigilance for the welfare, and
honor of His Subjects: that which I now come to treat of is such an Action,
that represents His Prudence to be as great as Clemency; and as by the latter
virtue He has equalled Himself to the best of former Princes, so I am
confident that Antiquity, even those Ages, which our Homily terms purer then
our's, did never produce any contrivance equal to what I now come to discourse
upon; and that is, His Majesty's Declaration to all His loving Subjects March
15. 1671. To do His Majesty justice about this point, and to describe the
excellency of that advise, I shall choose to imitate the Painter of Crotona,
who being to draw the Picture of Venus, assembled all the beautiful Damsels of
the City, and by reducing all those perfections which were scattered amongst
them into one Effigies, did pourtray His Deity: or as in some Optic Tables,
the beauty of a multitude of little Figures are transferred, and by reflection
form the Image of some Hero, which is all life, charm and attraict: Thus I will
faithfully repeat the several Decrees of the Christian Emperors in the purest
times, whose Prudence and Piety has endeared their memories unto all the
Church, and whom the Church of England does oblige all Her Sons to have in
Reverence; and thence it will be manifest that His Majesty has revived again,
with advantage that Piety and Policy which is thought to have declined these
thirteen hundred years.

Before I descend to the particulars, it is requisite that I deduce these
Counsils of His Majesty from their true Original; that is, His great Devotion
unto, and tenderness for the preservation of the Church of England. Were Our
Church retired into the Wilderness, were their Dioceses in the deserts of
Thebais, or some unknown corner of the Earth, the Ecclesiastics might with
safety perhaps attend unto their Devotion, and perform in their Cells,
Hermitages, and Mandrae, the duties of Religion, with poverty, and without
molestation. But since it has pleased Divine Providence to advance the
Christian Church above its Primitive Streights, (want and persecution being
originally its allotment) to reduce the Kings and Emperors of the Earth unto
the Christian Faith, and to incorporate the concerns of Religion with those of
the Empire, other contrivances, other means are necessary to support the Luster
and Grandeur of this Church now, then were practiced in its first condition;
and those are such as conform with the dictates of humane Policy. It is now no
less requisite unto the Clergy that the Nation be puissant, populous, and rich;
then it is unto the Layety, and the common interest of all is, that the
Monarchy be supported, and Rents duly paid: But these ends could not be
accomplished without the Declaration aforesaid. As to the Divisions in these
Kingdoms, the Sects and Heresies which distract and afflict the Church, His
Majesty is innocent as to their original, and progress: Inimicus homo fecit
haec. He did not make them, but found them, and from Holland they were
constantly fomented. His Majesty not only by His Royal Example, but by sundry
Acts of Parliament, and reiterated endeavors for the space of twelve Years,
has labored to compose the affairs, and promote the interest of the Church of
England; And perhaps if all others, in their proper Spears, had contributed as
much to the removing of Scandals, and re-establishing of the Peace of the
Church, there had not been any need to exchange the ways of Coercion for those
of Toleration. But since those pious intendments of His Majesty have been
frustrated so long, partly by the negligence and other defaults of some, and
the untamed obstinacy of the Sectaries, it seems the dictate of ordinary
Wisdom, rather to endure then attempt the healing of inveterate Ulcers, and to
continue them as running Sores, rather then to endanger the whole Body by
amputation, or violent, Remedies. It is apparent that this Nation does want Men
to carry on our Trades at home, and Merchandising abroad: And if we consider
how requisite it is unto the common security that the Naval strength be always
great, and that the Fishing be resumed, nothing can be more clear, then that we
ought by all possible means continue amongst us the People which we already
have, and invite in hither also what Numbers we can of Foreiners. We do not
live in the new Atlantis, nor have we for our Neighbors the Natives of China,
who desire not to enlarge their Domions; nor any such Potentates as have made a
decree not to increase their Territories: Our Shores are washed with the
British Seas; the United Provinces, and France are our immediate Neighbors.
Ever since the days of John Olden Barnevelt unto the Reign of John de Wit, the
Hollanders have been constantly undermining our Reputation, and our Trade; and
our long sufferance had so far imboldened them, as that at length they doubted
not by open force, and Clandestine machinations, to effect our ruin, or reduce
us under their protection. Had we been at the same time attacqued by their
Fleets, and imbroiled by domestic Commotions, what would have been the
condition of our State, and Church? If there be no Trading, how little will the
difference be betwixt the alienation of Church Lands, and the receiving no
Rents from them? In fine, let the Clergy consider how they are better provided
for by his Majesty's Declaration, then they would have been by the Pensionary
of Holland, and any Placart of the States General, and they will see just cause
to acquiesce in, and magnify that Prudence which has preserved the Nation;
that Prudence whereby our domestic Peace is ensured, our Trade and Strength
pnt into a possibility to be advanced; and whereby His Majesty has obliged the
Non-Conformists unto His Service, whom the Dutch presumed upon as their
Friends, and had rendered as it were their Pensioners by their joint Trade, and
the sums of money which had been remitted to Amsterdam: Whereupon they seemed
to be the most fitting Instruments, and were treated with in order to the
involving their native Country in another civil War. It is certain John de Wit
omitted not any artifice, or suggestion that might conduce unto these ends:
That Faction did not propose to themselves a generous War, the issue whereof
might be an honorable and lasting Peace; but such a one as should end in the
desolation of these Realms, and final subjection under them: Less would not
secure unto the Dutch the universal Trade, and the passage through our Chanel
for their East India Ships, whose Voyage by Scotland they complain of as
tedious, expensive, and dangerous. Not would the malice of the de Wits satisfy
it self with any more moderate terms then the ruin of His Majesty, of His
Roy^l Highness, and the Court, and a total alteration in the Government. The
Pensioner, the better to inveigle the English, pretended that they had no
quarrel with the Protestants of this Nation; they beheld them as dear Brethren,
and begged they would either divert His Majesty from this War, or pray to God
to confound His Counsils: that the Advisers of this War were the common Enemies
of both Nations; and from the insinuations of John de Wit came that vulgar
jealousy of the designs on Foot, to introduce amongst us a change of Religion,
and an Arbitrary Government, by this War with Holland. But those they treated
with did not prove such absolute Phanaticks as the great Minister of the States
of Holland did imagine they would: Experience had showed them how difficult a
thing it was to overthrow an hereditary Monarch^, and how impossible it was for
a Nation inured to Monarchy, divided in interests, discriminated by degrees of
honor, debauched in its manners, irreconcilable in its factions, to retain
its liberty, though Fort^ne upon any accident, or attempt, should dissolve its
present Monarchy: They did consider the general treachery of Men, and the
particular Impostures which their own Partisans had deluded them by heretofore;
nor could the^, upon the most diligent enquiries, propose to themselves any
Person in whose; hands they could wish the Conduct of affairs entrusted, rather
then in those of His Majesty; of whose Prudence, Generosity, and Clemency they
had seen so great and unexpected Trials. They knew that the Dutch hated the
Phanaticks by reason of the damages they had received by them in the War,
1652, 1653. And that they would never endure England to be modelled into a
Republic, especially under the leading of the Phanatick Party: Nor could they
believe the design feasible upon this account (though the beginnings should
happen prosperous) that all new Governments are weak; and there being two such
potent Neighbors adjoining unto England, it seemed unimaginable that they
should be Passive in the business, and neither of them endeavor to possess
themselves of all, or some of these Realms, and draw to themselves so great and
facile advantages, as such a revolution would invite them unto. Upon such
considerations, besides that regard to the honor of old England, which nothing
can obliterate in any English Soul, those generous Phanaticks (who were most of
them removed out of the Dominions of His Majesty) did abominate the enterprise,
discovered the Plots of the Lovesteine faction, and prepossessed their Friends
against the artifices of the Dutch, and fixed them unto the service of His
Majesty, and of their native Country. This deportment of that supposed Faction,
created in the breast of his Majesty better Sentiments concerning their Persons
then some of Saturnine Constitutions, and petulant Wits, could approve of.

It did then appear unto the Sovereign judgment of our most discerning Prince,
that there was not in those Men such an inveterate Animosity against Monarchy,
such an hatred toward his Reign, such a rest-less Spirit, as some rash and
impolitick Men had inculcated every where: It was manifest then that those
heats which Youth, unexperiencedness, intemporate and inconsiderate Zeal,
Ambition, or Covetousness, had bred in those men, were by Age, a better
discovery of the vanity of precipitous Counsils, and the false-hood of
pretenders to the public good, Liberty, and Religion, so abated and allayed,
that He might presume confidently to employ them in His Service, whom neither
the rigor of penal Laws, nor the insolent deportment of their Enemies, in
their discourses and writings (contrary to ordinary discretion, the Laws of
Christian Charity, and the Act of utter Oblivion) could force into a
confederacy with the Dutch. If their malice against the Church, if their
covetousness to regain the Ecclesiastical and Crown Lands, had been such as it
was boldly represented, certainly in this juncture, and with the ready
assistance of John de Wit, those so turbulent Persons (irritated by so many and
so bitter Contumelies) would have embraced designs consonant thereunto. His
Majesty being very well satisfied with the services which some of that Party
had done Him, and which many others were ready to do; and being desirous to
engage them universally unto the defense of His Crown and Dignity (when the
implacable and restless malice of His Enemies did necessitate Him to employ all
His care, and all possible Provision against their secret and desperate
complotments) He issued out that Declaration March the 15th. 1671. to all His
loving Subjects, wherein He exempted all sorts of Non-conformists from the
execution of the penal Laws against them; but with such a Declaracion of His
reverence for the Church of England, such a regulation of the Non-conformists,
that whilst His Majesty expresses himself to be the common Father of His
People, at the same time He demonstrateth himself likewise a zealous and
perfect Son of the Church. He revives the Primitive Policy of Constantine, and
acts like Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. c. 24. Petrus de Marca de Concord.
Sacer. and Imp. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 7.
a Bishop over those that are without, whilst he defends and owns the Orthodox
Bishops over those that are within.

The Judgment of the Church of England in Her Homilies, concerning the four
first Centuries of Christianity.
FOr three hundred years after our Savior Christ, the Christian Religion was
most pure, and indeed Golden -- Constantine was a Prince of good zeal to our
Religion. Homily III. against peril of Idolatry. -- In those days, which were
about four hundred years after our Savior, the Church was much less corrupt,
and more pure then now. Homily II. against peril of Idolatry.

In the Act of Parliament against Conventicles there is this Clause inserted;
Provided, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend
to invalidate or avoid His Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs; but
that His Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors may from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authorities in
Ecclesiastical affairs as fully and as amply as himself, or any of his
Predecessors have or might have done the same, any thing in this Act
notwithstanding. This Proviso puts me upon a necessity of researching into the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions of the Royal Predecessors; And I am sure that
Constantine the Great Constantius e Britannia, and in Britannia natus,
Imperator Britannia salutatus, Romanum, Imperium Britanniam quasi transtulisse
videtur. Seldom Analect. Anglo-Britan. l. 1. c. 5. Quanquam postea haud perdiu
in domo Constantini Imperium mansit, ita cito humanae opes cadunt: tamen Deus
ipfius Imperii cadere non potuit, cum etiam nunc Reges Angliae, more majorum,
Diademate Imperiali ucantur, ut munere ab Imp. Constantino in suos posteros
collato. Id. ibid. ex Polydor Virgil. hist. l. 3.
was one of them, who was not only born in England, but began His Reign in
this Realm, and did in a mauner (as Seldom Avows) transfer the Roman Empire
unto Britain. The Imperial Crown which the Kings of England at present wear,
did descend unto them as being Successors of the said Constantine. He began his
Reign Anno Dom. 306. and continued until 337. He was (and is) esteemed of by
the Church as an Apostle, and sometimes so styled, also the Apostle amongst
Kings, or one equal unto the Apostles. (Eusebius. de vita Constantini M. l. 4. c.
60. cum notis Hen. Valesii) His President, His Authority is so much the more
illustrious and great, by reason of the Century in which He lived; And for so
much as that the Christian Church deriveth it is first Settlement, and the
Hierarchy its luster, from His auspicious Conduct and Decrees. I shall
therefore particularly relate the Transactions of His Age in order to the
composing of Sects more violent, more dissonant, more lewd, and not less
obstinate, or numerous then those which distract these Kingdoms. And because
those Emperors which did succeed Him immediately, lived in those days whereon
our Church bestows the aforesaid Elogy, and since they contributed as much by
their proceedings unto the Peace and Tranquillity of the Orthodox Christianity,
as Constantine did; as also their memory is not less reverenced by the
Universal Church; I shall add an account of their deportment.

The Declaration of Constantine the great, concerning a general Indulgence.
I Do desire, O God, that all thy People should live in Peace and Eusebius. de
vita Constantini l. 2. c. 56.
free from dissensions, out of a regard unto the common good of Mankind:
Notwithstanding, let those that are deluded enjoy the benefits of peace and
quiet equally with those that believe. For this Regulation of Men under a
mutual Amity is an effectual course for the reclaiming of them unto the right
way. Let no man molest another. Let every man follow his own judgment: Only
let well-meaning Persons believe, that they alone live holily and purely, who
are regulated by the holy Laws; and they who with draw from their assemblies,
Let them pursue their false Deities, since they will have it so. We are
possessed of the truth, which thou have revealed unto Us: and we wish them in
the same condition; that they might participate in the satisfaction which would
arise from the general Unanimity of the Empire.

Thanks be rendered unto thee, most great God, and Ruler of Id. ibid. c. 59.
all things; for the more that humane nature discovers it self in a diversity
of judgments and interests, the more will the true Religion be confirmed in
the minds of its Followers. But whosoever will not be cured of his Errors, let
him blame none but Himself: For the way to recover him is public and obvious
unto him: But let every one have a care left they injure that Religion, which
does manifest it self to be blameless and unspotted; wherefore let us all make
use of the benefits tendered unto us, keeping our Consciences free from what is
contrary thereunto.

But let no man prejudice another for being of another per swasion: Id. ibid.
c. 60.
But whosoever understands any thing, let him, if possible, communicate it to
his Neighbor: If it be not possible to prevail, then let him alone. For, it is
one thing for a man voluntarily to pursue the race for immortality, and another
to compel him by penalties thereunto. I have insisted hereon more largely then
seemed to my purpose, because I would not conceal or dissemble the truth;
especially seeing that some, as I hear, do give out Reports, as if I had
interdicted all the Temples, and Kingdom of darkness. I should indeed have
given that advice to the public, but that so many are too obstinately
prepossessed and fixed in their errors, to the retarding of the general
Reformation.

In which Edict Henricus Valesius observes that Constantine In notis ad
Eusebium de vita Constantini, l. 2. c. 56.
did permit unto His Subjects the liberty of embracing and continuing what
Religion they pleased. The most pious Prince declares His approbation for
Christianity, and recommends that unto all his Subjects: He condemns
Gentilisme, as false, vain and Idolatrous: Yet does not prohibit the usual
Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the Temples. This was decreed in the beginning of
His Reign, when He found the strength of the Christians (including therein all
the Sects) not to be sufficient to support the Empire, nor to contest with the
numerous and potent Painims, whose assistance since he found necessary, he
enacted this Toleration for their Religion, and did himself defray the expense
of the public Sacrifices, and retained the quality and habit of Pontifex
Maximus, as his Predecessors had done. From wence it is apparent that Julian
the Apostate was not the first that projected a Toleration of all Religions,
thereby to destroy the true Christianity; but Constantine, that He might
advance that Faith. That Emperor made sundry Decrees in favor of this large
Toleration, which extended not only unto those without, and were never by
Baptism or otherwise incorporated into the Christian Church, but unto
Sectaries and Heretics expressly: adding this Clause unto the first of them,
which was made when He and Licinnius were a second time Consuls, viz. That this
indulgence did extend unto all sorts of Sectaries, Jews, Samaritans,
Marcionists, Montanists, Novatians, Sabellians, and universally to men of all
Religions. The entire Decree is lost, but it is mentioned in this ensuing,
which was made upon this account, that some Christians, had complained that by
the former Decree the true Church seemed to be injured by being ranked in the
same predicament, without any distinction of Pre-eminence, and to enjoy the
same indulgence with the most abominable Sectaries, and execrable Jews.

Another Declaration of Constantine and Licinnius for Liberty of Conscience,
WHereas we had long ago observed that Freedom of Religion, ought not to be
denied to any man, but that every one Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 10. c. 5.
should have the liberty to pursue and manage the affairs thereof, according to
his proper Judgment and choice: We did thereupon decree that all persons, as
well others as Christians, should retain and adhere unto the Rules and
Profession of their several Sects and Religions. But for as much as diverse This
part of the Declaration is obscure in the Greek, by reason that the Decree
whereto it relates is lost: but I followed that sense which the learned
Henricus Valesius does put upon it.
Persons have been offended at that Declaration, by reason that in it the
several Sects were promiscuously named to be tolerated, (...) if it were
indifferent unto us, which of them our Subjects embraced, to the great
detriment of true Christianity: After that we, Constantine and Licinnius
Emperors [after the overthrow of Maxentius, and the composure of all things at
Rome] were happily arrived at Millain, we did consult diligently about all such
matters, as might conduce to the public welfare: and amongst many things which
seemed of general import, we concluded that there was nothing of greater
concernment unto the Empire, then the establishing of the worship and service
of God: that is, that we should give unto the Christians in general; and all
others, the Freedom of their peculiar Religions and Sects, accordingly as
their inclination and judgment leads them; to the end that whatever there is
of a Deity or Celestial being, it may be propitious unto us, and our Subjects.
Wherefore we upon sound and right Reasons, do enact that none be hindered from
the embracing of Christianity; but that every man be permitted to follow that
Religion which he thinks most fitting for himself: so God may be induced to
continue his usual mercies unto Us. It seemed the more necessary that we should
issue out this Rescript or Declaration, to the end that leaving out the mention
of the variety of Sects and Heresies, and without any reflection thereupon, (as
it happened in the first Edict concerning the Christians) nothing may be
deduced hence, which seems repugnant to our clemency: as also that henceforth
all which purpose to embrace the Christian Religion in general, may freely and
resolutely, and without any let, or molestation, do it. The which we thought
fitting to signify unto Your prudence, that you might understand our pleasure
concerning the Liberty to be indulged unto the Christians: To whom as we have
granted a plenary and absolute. Toleration, so you are to take notice that the
like indulgence is yielded unto all other men in order to their proper and
several Religions. It being a notorious truth, that this general Toleration
does highly conduce to the common tranquillity of the Empire at this time: And
we are thus reserved in our expressions, to the end that no Sect or Religion
may think it self injured or depressed hereby. We Quippe in prima illa Lege
quaedam verba erant, quibus and Gentiles, and Christianorum nonnulli, ii
scilicet qui a Catholica fide desciverant, Novatiani, Montanistae, and reliqui
non mediocriter offendebantur, cum se Haereticos in ea appellatos viderent. Sed
and Christiani seu Catholici aegre ferebant sibi Herericos adjungi, and quasi
copulari in eadem constitutione. Quam orbem Constantinus, ut erga omnes se
benignum ostenderet, ea verba supressa voluit. Hen. Valesius in Eusebius. hist. in
Eccles. l. 10. c. 5.
add further, in favor of the Christians, that all their Meeting-places which
have been confiscated, and either sold, or given to any else, or yet undisposed
of, shall be gratis restored unto them: And all such Lands as the several
Corporations (or Churches) of them did formerly possess, and have been
escheated, these shall likewise be restored unto them. And We ordain that this
constitution of ours shall be affixed and promulgated publicly, that none may
be ignorant thereof. Given at Millaine, in the third Consulship of Constantine
and Licinnius A. A. A. 315.

Such was the Indulgence which that renowned Emperor did enact: Whereunto He
was induced by a regard unto the general welfare of the Empire: The Painyms,
the Jews, and the sundry Sects of Christians were so numerous, so obstinate in
their opinions, and even their mutual Division was so necessary to the
ballancing of the several interests in his unsettled Empire; that if the
authority of Tertullian, and Tertullian Apologet. c. 24. and in libro ad
Scapulam c. 2. Lactantius de justitia c. 20, (...).
Lactantius (who was Tutor to his Son Crispus) and the vulgar Principles of the
ancient Church, had not warranted His proceedings, certainly Reasons of State
would. He had a further reason also for the granting this public Toleration:
It was the constant policy of the Roman Empire, to prohibit all clandestine and
nocturnal meetings, though upon pretense of Religion, and of Sacrificing to the
Gods. It was not lawful in Rome privately to consult by Augury, or to advise
with the Haruspices. The which Law was revived by Constantine Anno Dom. 319.

Cod. Theodos. l. 9. tit. 16. lege 2. Ad populum.

We do forbid the Augurs and Priests, or whosoever deals in Sooth-saying, to
resort unto any private house, or to come within any man's doors, though upon
pretense of a Friendly visit: The Violator of this Law being to be punished
severely. But you that do believe such practices available, go to the public
Altars, and Temples, and there perform the usual Rites and Devotions. For we do
not prohibit the usage of the old Religion in the day time, and openly.

This political regard was one grand motive for the permission of the open
practice of all Religions, that so their vanity, or impiety might be notorious
to all: Besides hereby they prevented all private complotments against the
State, all practices that were bestial, or repugnant to Morality. Nihil est
scil. velandis fraudibus and sceleribus tam idoneum, quam privatae amicitiae,
privatique congressus; qui merito dominantibus suspecti. Nam Jacob Gothofred in
Cod. Theodos. l. 9. tit. 16. lege 2.
ab nullo genere non aeque summum periculum est, si coetus, and concilia, and
secretas consultationes esse sinas, quod Cato apud Livium lib. 34 dicebat. Sic
and olim Si qui in urbe coetus nocturnos agitabit, capital esto: dei^de lege
Gabinia promulgatum, Qui coitiones ullas clandestinas in urbe conflavisset,
more majorum capitali supplicio afficeretur. Jac. Gothofr. in com. ad. leg. 12.
Tabular. Tab. 9.
jam prospectum, Nequa sacra fierent in operto. Livius lib. 39. Sic Tiberius,
ut Suetonius memorat cap. 63. Haruspices Secreto and sine testibus consuli
vetuit.

Hinc est igitur ista nunc Sacrificiorum, etc. Nocturnorum Id. Cod. Theodos. l.
9. tit. 16. leg. 7.
prohibitio, nempe quia seeleri favere tenebrae videntur. Unde illa apud
Horatium improba vota;

"Noctem peccatis and fraudibus obiice nubem.
"Notumque illud Prudentii;
"Nec test quisquam lumine,
"Peccare constanter potest.
Item Tacitus lib. 14. Quod perditissimus quisque per diem concupiverit, per
tenebras audeat. Eaque ratione fingunt Poetae, Noctem generasse dolos, fraudem,
mendacia.

Constantine having thus prohibited all private Cenventicles, and secret
Meetings, and empowered those of any Religion or Sect publicly to profess, and
hold their Assemblies for divine worship, and mutual instruction, the Empire
yields us this prospect of affairs: The old Religion or Heathenisme Jac.
Gothofr. de interdicta Christianorum cum Gentilibus communione. Idem in Cod.
Theodos. l. 16. lit. 1. lege 1.
continued in its former luster, the Temples, Revenues, Pontifical Offices, and
Solemnities (all, or most) remained in being, and under the Protection of the
Emperor: as appears by a multitude of Laws in the Theodosian Code. All the
great offices of the Empire, in the Senate, and Armies, were equally to be
communicated unto them, and the Christians. The Jews were in a very flourishing
condition under their Hierarchy of Patriarchs, Primats, Presbyters, and Rulers
of Synagogues: Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit. 8. lege 2 cum notis Jac Gothofredi.
All which were by Constantine exempted from all personal and civil charges,
which carried much of trouble and expense, and were unsuitable to their
Function. As to the Christians, it is most certain that all Sects had their
liberty of Profession, and their particular Church-Governments, under their
Bishops, etc. So that in 325. when Constantine did summon Seldom in notis ad
Eutychium Abrah. E^lens. de Eccles. Alexandr. orig. c. 13. Gul. Beveregius in
proaemi^ An^ in can. Co^. Nicen. 1.
a general Council at Nice against Arius, the Writers of the Eastern Church do
avow, that there convened 2048 Bishops, of several Sects, who having tendered
their Confessions apart unto the Emperor, he fixed upon that of the 318.
(perhaps not all Bishops) and those composed that Council, and enacted its
decrees; whereunto the Primitive Emperors and Fathers so often refer
themselves.

As to those that were Schismatics and Heretics of separate Churches amongst
the Christians of those times, the Emperor Constantine did thus demean himself.

Whereas the Laws of the Empire during his Predecessors Cod. Theodos. l. 16.
tit. 2. lege 1. 11. 7. cum notis Jac. Gothofredi.
had not exempted the Christian Clergy from the trouble and expense of civil
Offices, Constantine did free the Catholic Clergy from that burden, leaving
the Heretics subject thereunto: many of which Offices were such as any
Christian could hardly comply with; as the attendance upon and defraying of the
lustral Sacrifices, the Watch and Ward for the Security of the Pagan Temples.
The discharge of such employments did contribute very much to the overthrow of
the Schismatics and Heretics, who had not the opportunity thereby either to
qualify themselves, or to mind their Churches, or to avoid many evident
Scandals, which the Catholics enjoyed.

Whereas the Christian Churches under His Predecessors Ibid. lege 4. cum notis
Jac. Gothofredi.
were incapable of any Legacies or public endowments by the Imperial Laws: He
continued the said Heretics under those Laws, and made the Catholic Churches
exempt from them.

The Lands which were given either by the Emperor, His Cod. Theodos. lib. 11.
tit. 1. lege 1. cum notis Gothofredi.
Mother Helena, or the Charity of others unto the Catholic Churches, were
exempted by Him (whilst the Church was poor; for when it seemed rich enough,
neither was this priviviledge valid, nor could it receive Legacies from
Widows, etc.) from Taxes and Tributes.

As it was His care that the Catholic Bishops should be men of sound doctrine
and exemplary life and charity; so did Jac. Gotho^redus in paratitlo Cod.
Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 2. Id ibid. in paratitlo Tit. 5.
He likewise provide that they should be universally reverenced by His Officers
throughout the Empire: Their Bishops, their Presbyters, their Churches were
mentioned with peculiar Elogies and veneration in all imperial Decrees: whereas
the Heretics were either simply named, or with an addition of detestation and
infamy. And after that the Nicene Council had reduced the Church into some
form, under a special regulation, and distinct Creed (in opposition to the
Arians) then did Constantine by this general Law exclude all Sectaries and
Heretics from participating of those privileges which were granted unto the
Catholics, and the followers of Meletius and Arius were particularly aimed at
in the Constitution, who till then, had enjoyed the privileges due to
Catholics.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 16 tit. 5, lege 1. A. D. 326.

Those Privileges which are indulged upon the account Vide notas Jac.
Gothofredi. ibid.
of Religion, ought to avail only such as adhere unto the Catholic Law: It
being our will and pleasure that the Heretics and Schismatics, shall not reap
any benefit thereby, but be also liable unto several Duties and Offices.

Notwithstanding the precedent Decrees, it is but equitable that I inform the
Inquisitive Reader, that the force of them did not extend unto the Sect of the
Novatians. These were a sort of Schismatics, who about the Year 250. did
separate from the Catholics, as having generally Apostatized and Lapsed unto
Paganism, during the Persecution under Decius. They were of the number of those
which had been Martyrs, or Confessors in those Calamitous times, and would not
Communicate with, nor be ordained by those Bishops of Italy who had Revolted
from the Faith, and were Returned again, and Admitted of others that had Lapsed
upon easy terms. They had an Hierarchy of Bishops and Presbyters within
themselves, derived from those that had not Apostaztied. They were very severe
in their Discipline, for they did exclude from their Communion (though not from
hopes of Mercy with God) such as did fall into Apostasy; or other enormous
Crimes. Socrates Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 25 Extat body liber Novatiani de cibis
Judaicis, quem ille fic inscripsit, Plebi in Evangelio persistenti. Hen.
Valesius in notis ad Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 43. Id. in notis ad lib. 7.
c. 8. Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 7. Sozomen l. 1. c. 22. G. Beveregius in
Concilii Niceni primi ^anon. 8.
They called themselves Cathari, or Puritans; and their followers such as
continued in the obedience of the Gospel. They were strict in their
Conversation, Oxthodox, and Zealous in their Religion; but so averse from the
mixed Congregations, and the relaxed Discipline of the Catholics, that they
Rebaptized such as came unto their Churches from the Communion of the
Catholics. Yet so great a respect had Constantine, and the Nicene Fathers, for
this Sect, that a Bishop of theirs, Acesius had his place in that General
Council; and a Canon was there made whereby such as came over from them unto
the Catholics, should immediately be admitted to Communion, according to the
Rank they held during their Novatianism, as Laymen Presbyters, or Bishops: And
Constantine, in the year following that Council, made this Decree in favor of
them.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 5. lege 2.

We have not found that the Novatians have been so absolutely condemned
heretofore, as that we should not grant unto them their Requests: We do
therefore Enact, that they shall without Let or Molestation, possess the
Meeting Houses appertaining unto their Church, and their Buryingplaces: That
is, such as they have either Bought, or otherwise acquired to themselves, since
their Separation. But care ought to be taken that they do not Usurp any of
those which before their Schism, did appertain unto the Churches retaining a
perpetual Sanctity. Given at Spoletum on the Calends of October, Constantine A.
7. and Constantius Coss. [326.]

The Sect of the Novatians began abont Eighty years before this Law, and upon
their Separation, they did Build to Jac. Gothofredus in notis ad legem citatam.
themselves sundry Churches, Oratories, and Caemiteries, or Burying-places. By
reason of the Law against Heretics and Schismatics (already recited) some
began to disquiet the Novatians in the Possession of those Places for Public
Worship, which they had Purchased by ready Money, or other Legal Titles; as if
they were declared Heretics, and known Schismatics. It is true that Eusebius
does produce a Law of Constantine, wherein the Novatians are mentioned Eusebius.
de vita Constantin. l. 3. c. 64, 65.
first, before Valentinians, Marcionists, and Paulians, and the Assemblies of
them, and of all others that Separate from the Church, are Prohibited. The same
is Recorded by Sozomen: And it is apparent that they had been condemned Sozomen
Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 30.
by Cornelius, Bishop of Rome long before, and others. The Nicene Council
seemed to have determined them to be Schismatics; and the Emperor himself in
that Council, Socrates Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 7.
did testify unto Acesius (when He there defended his Separation) how much he
disliked them. But yet Constantine could not find that these Novatians were so
rigorously to be censured, or condemned, as that they should be deprived of
their public Churches, and Caemiteries. And with this does Sozomen agree, who
Sozomen, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 32. Novatiani vero, utpote qui bonos ductores
nacti essent, itidemque cum Eccle sia Catholica sentirent de Divinitate, jam
inde ab initio permulti fuerunt, atque ita deinceps permanserunt, nihil fere
detrimenti ex hac lege passi. Nam and Imperator ipse sua sponte rigorem legis
imminuebat, quippe qui perterrefacere potius quam perdere subditos in animo
haberet. Et Acesius qui tunc temporis eorum Sectae Episcopus erat
Constantinopoli, cum ob vitae sanctitatem Imperatori esset gratissimns
Ecclesiae suae, ut verisimile est, plurimum adjumenti contulit.
having compared the usage which the Heretics met with under Constantine, he
expressly says, That their condition was not so bad as that of the other
Heretics, and that the Law of Constantine was not executed against them. Their
Rulers being men otherwise of peaceable Spirits, and unblameable Lives, and
being Orthodox as to the Christian Faith; they received no great prejudice by
that Imperial Constitution: Especially since it was not the intention of
Constantine rigorously to put in Execution that Penal Law, but only to show his
regard for the Catholics, and his aversion from Herefie and Schism; as also to
terrify the Fanatical, Factious, and Turbulent, whilst he willingly suspended
all severe proceedings against the Conscientious and Moderate; such as Acesius
and his followers were.

In these proceedings of Constantine the Great, we may observe sundry things
which carry a parallel to the Intentions, and Procedure of his Majesty. 1. The
General Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. 2. The Prohibition of Private
and Clandestine Conventicles. 3, The Reservation of all public Revenues and
Endowments untothe Catholics. 4 The declaration of hisspecial favor unto, and
designs of the promoting of the Orthodox I call them Catholics, it being a
Law-term in those days, and signifying no more then such as adhered to the
Nicene Creed, and were not Separatists from the National Church of Christendom.
Catholics. 5. Upon the known wickedness of certain Sects, as the
Valentinians, Cataphryges, etc. (which couldnot have been evident, but by
giving them an open Toleration at first) His Penal Laws against Schismatics
and Heretics indefinitely; he reckoning the most Orthodox of Schismatics,
with the most Vile and Profligate Heretics. 6. His Relaxation and Suspension
of all those Penal Laws as to the Novatians; yet withal, declaring that their
Separation was a Discidium, or Schism: That the Catholics or Orthodox Churches
were Ecclesiae perpetuae Sanctitatis. 17. That they should not attempt any way
to possess themselves of the Pulpits, or Churches of the Catholics.

This was the posture of Religion in the time of Constantine the great; in
whose Reign we have nothing further to consider besides the great progress of
the Orthodox Church, and the decay of Paganism and Heresies; unless it be some
rigorous proceedings of His against the Donatists, and Arians.

The Sect of the Donatists began about the year 311. The Hen. Valesius de
Schismate Donatistarum. c. 1.
People of Carthage had elected into their Bishopric, which was vacant,
Caecilianus, who was ordained by one Felix: The Primate of Numidia called
Secundus was greivously offended that Caecilianus had been consecrated by any
but himself, Ibid. c. 2.
and joined with many other Bishops to depose Him, for that He had been
ordained by some who had delivered up their Bibles in the
Diocletian-persecution; and that He being a Deacon had prohibited Victuals to
be brought unto the Confessors in Prison. Seventy Bishops agreed upon His
condemnation, elected and ordained Majorinus Bishop of Carthage, and renounced
all Communion with Caecilianus, who refused to appear and vindicate himself
before them. Hereupon arose a great Schism in Africa, and the People of
Carthage divided against their Bishop Caecilianus: The Proconsul Anulinus
informed Constantine thereof, who remitted the Examination and Decision of the
matter unto a Council at Rome: There Caecilia us was acquitted, and
communicated with the Roman Clergy: The Donatists will not be concluded by this
Arrest; the Emperor refers the trial unto the Gallicane Bishops at A^les:
These likewise acquit Caecilianus, and receive him into their Communion. The
Donatists would not thus be satisfied; whereupon the Emperor, being angry,
commands both Parties before Him at Rome. The Donatists did appear; but
Caecilianus failed: Whereupon the Donatists desired that he might be sentenced
as guilty: But the Emperor did refuse to comply with them therein, commanding
both Parties to appear at Millain. The Donatists hereupon concluded that the
Emperor was partial in the Case, and some of them withdrew from Court into
Africa, the rest were seized upon by the appointment of Constantine, and
reserved as Prisoners until the Audience at Millaine. Upon a mature hearing of
both sides Constantine pronounced Caecilianus to be innocent, and the Donatists
to have calumniated Him. Those Schismatics were very angry at this judgment of
the Emperor, and railed upon Him as corrupted by the insinuations of Hosius, a
Bishop much reverenced by the Emperor, and a Friend unto Caecilianus. Those
which had fled before unto Africa, defamed the Emperor and those about Him,
and such tumults were raised in those Parts, as that the civil Peace was
endangered, and Domitius Celsus together Id. Ibid. c. 17.
with the other Imperial Officers found it difficult to allay those Seditions.
The Orthodox Clergy being perpetually affronted, injured, and oppressed by the
numerous and prevailing Donatists, Id. Ibid. c. 14. ex appendice Optati.
fled unto the Emperor for protection: who writ unto all the Catholic Bishops
and People this Letter.

Constantine Aug. unto all the Bishops and People appertaining unto the
Catholic Church in Africa.
YOu understand very well that I have done all things that our Faith requires,
our wisdom could, and our purity enabled us to do by way of moderation and
amicable means, that, according to the Precepts of our Law, the holy Peace and
Brotherly love (such as God by his grace instills into the Breasts of his
Servants) might be restored. But because the wickedness and obstinacy of some
Persons has frustrated our intentions, they not enduring to be convinced of
those Errors wherein they delight: We must patiently expect until the mercy of
God do allay this mischief, which by the means of a few persons does diffuse it
self amongst the populace. It is from thence that we must hope for a redress,
whence all good desires and actions do proceed. But until that great Physician
be pleased to heal our breaches, we ought to form our minds unto patience, and
with composed Spirits suffer all the efforts of their insolence. Do not
retaliate any injuries: It were folly to anticipate that revenge, which we
ought to leave unto God: especially our Faith instructs us, that whatsoever the
rage of the Donatists shall Act against you, will procure unto you in Heaven
the Crown due to Martyrs. What is it to overcome on Earth in the name of God,
then that the peaceable Believers should undergo the outrages of the wicked? If
your sincerity can thus dispose it self, you will soon see by the grace of God
that the Ringleaders of this contention will loose their credit, and the People
will see their Errors, that they ought not at the instigation of a few to
hazard that salvation, which early repentance may ensure unto them. Farewell
dear Brethren.


This Letter is supposed to have been written Auno Dom. 317 or 318. But this
Lenity of Constantine's produced no Id. ibid. c. 15.
other effect then that the Donatists grew more insolent against the Followers
of Caecilianus. In the City of Constantina (formerly called Cirta) the
Donatists being animated by Silvanus their Bishop, did by violence possess
themselves of the principal Church, ejecting the Catholics thence: This Church
had been built at the charge of the Emperor, yet would they not restore it
upon several imperial Mandates: They proceeded further, to put in execution the
penal Laws against Heretics and Schismatics upon the Catholics, making their
Clergy to serve in sundry civil and undecent employments. Hereupon the
Catholics did modestly complain, and desired they might not be brought under
the penal Laws; and that Constantine would be pleased to grant unto them
another Plot of Ground, whereon they might build a Church. Their Requests were
yielded unto, and the Church built at the public charge. Not long after this
there happened a quarrel betwixt Nundinarius a Deacon, and the Silvanus
aforesaid; the former accused the latter to have been himself a Traditor; and
convicted Him before Zenophilus Consular of Numidia, who thereupon did inform
the Emperor that Id. ibid. c. 16.
this fierce Donatist, who had made so great a combustion in Africa, and so
disturbed the civil and Ecclesiastical Peace, had been himself a Traditor and
by indirect means attained unto the Bishopric: Whereupon the Emperor banished
Him, and some other of the Donatists Bishops, who were proved to have ordained
Majorinus, and rejected Caecilianus not out of any just cause, but out of
malice, and by the instigation and corruption of a rich Woman named Lucilla.
The Donatists hereupon petition to the Emperor that their Bishops may be
recalled from exile, and declare that they will undergo all torments and
penalties rather then communicate Id. ibid. c. 17.
with that Knave Coecilianus. Although it was impudently done of the Donatists
to term Him a Knave whom the Emperor himself had acquitted; yet was their
desire assented unto; their Bishops were recalled, and a plenary toleration
granted unto them; their Madness, or Schismaticalness being left unto the
immediate punishment of God, Anno Dom. 321. Some two or three years after this,
when Constantine was involved in a War with the Goths, and Licinnius, the
Donatists raised grievous tumults throughout Numidia, to Id. ibid. c. 18.
the great hazard of the Province in that juncture. After which, if we find
Constantine to have proceeded rigorously against them, confiscating their
Churches, and giving them unto the Catholics; or punishing them sundry ways:
It will never appear that this was done purely upon the account of Schism, but
by reason of Outrages, Murders and horrid tumults committed and raised by that
obstinate and furious Sect. I have showed how long, and what manner they were
tolerated: By the endowments of their Churches, it appears that they were
equally indulged with the Novatians. Both these Sects were Orthodox in
Doctrine: Their default was Schism: The Novatians were the more ancient and
exemplary Offenders: and since they were privileged, who can imagine that the
others were depressed for Separation only?

It may perhaps seem strange unto the less intelligent Reader, that such
tumults should happen amongst the People, in behalf of their Bishops, whither
Donatists, or Arians, etc. Athanasius in Apolog. 2. ad Imper it. Constantium.
Cyprian. ep. 68. ad clerum and plebes in Hispan.
But the wonder will cease when he shall be informed that in the Primitive Ages
none could be chosen to be Bishop in any Diocese but where He had formerly
lived: The People being assembled together did nominate and elect them: and it
was in their power to chose the worthy, and reject the unworthy. The nomination
of the several Competitors was not so limited to the People, as that the Clergy
(except as in the case of the reconciled Meletians. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1.
c. 9. Petrus de Marca de concord. Sacerdot. it Imperii l. 6. c. 2. Athanas. in
Epist. ad Orthoeoxos. Socrates Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 5. cum notis Vales.
Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 62.
Sozomen l. 1. c. 24.) might not propose any; but their Business was to Examine
if the Election were Regular, to consent unto the choice made, and to
consecrate the Person chosen: Even the Emperor Constantine did not assume the
Nomination of a Bishop of Antioch unto the People, but only recommended some to
them, that they might be Nominated by them. But the sinal approbation of the
Bishop Elect and Consecrated, was in the Emperor, as to the Orthodox and
endowed Clergy. Thus Athanasius having certified the said Emperor, that he was
canonically Nominated, and chosen by the People of Alexandria, he did
immediately confirm unto him the possession of the Episcopal See. The Bishop
being thus (...). Philorstogius Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 11. Eusebius. de vita
Constantin. l. 3. c. 60. 62. G. Beveregius in notis ad Council Nicen. 1. Canon.
15. Athanasius in Apolog. 2. ad Imperat. Constantium Socrates Hist. Eccles. l.
5. c. 7. Sozomen l. 6. c. 7.
Invested in the Bishopric, was esteemed no less bound unto his Chair and
Diocese, than the Husband unto his Wedded Wife: He could not exchange his See
for another, though Canonically Elected by the voluntary Suffrage of the People
of a more Rich and Illustrious Bishopric: As was judged in the case of
Eusebiw, Bishop of Caesaria; and is averred by Athanasius, and others of the
Fathers. The Bishop being thus to be Elected, must needs carry himself with
great Infinuation, and a specious show of popular Zeal and Piety, that he might
gain their Suffrages, and being once Enthroned, he had another way besides
those Appearances to preserve his Interest amongst them: For he had more or
less of Annual Revenue and Incomes to dispose of in a way of Hospitality, and
he had the charity of the Church to distribute amongst the poor Widows and
Orphans, and Distressed persons, besides the Presbyters, Deacons, Eusebius H
st. Eccles. l. 6. c. 53. cum notis Hen. Valosii.
Subdeacons, Acolythi, Exorcists, Readers, Door keepers: All which Persons did
sometimes in an ordinary Bishopric, amount to the number of three Thousand.
The which Circumstances being considered, it is not to be wondered at, if we
read of so frequent Tumults when a Bishop then was declared, or in danger to be
declared an Heretic, or Schismatic, or to be Banished.

It will not then seem strange if upon the dissension betwixt Alexander the
Bishop of Alexandria, and Arius a Presbyter of his, after that the Latter was
Excommunicated, great Tumults did follow; For though the Power and Authority
did seem Lodged in the Metropolitan, yet did Arius supply that Defect, by his
Learning, and Subtilty. He was befriended by many Neighboring Bishops, of
great Repute, and Power; he himself was exceeding Popular, and he framed
several Drolling Songs, and Discourses, whith were Sung in Athanasius adu.
Arianos Orat. 2.
the Streets by the Vulgar, and made the common entertainment of all Festivals.
Those of the Bishop's party, were Exasperated at these Actions, and being
Instigated with Zeal, Indignation, and Interest, they engaged the others in
several Quarrels: The Emperor interposed by reconciliatory Letters, but to no
purpose; for the Arians drawing no Emolument from the Charity of the Bishop,
and being subjected to the Ignominy and Odium of an Excommunication, they
Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 4.
grew so outrageous as to injure the Statues of Constantine: The Pagans
fomented the Division, and abetted the Arians, that so they might with more
facility ruin Constantine. The Meletian Bishops and their Followers (being
Orthodox, yet under an Umbrage, and looked on as Schismatics by their
Metropolitan) did contribute all they could to the support of Arius: So that
Constantine was necessitated to call the Nicene Council; where the Tenets of
Arius were condemned, and those that adhered thereunto Anathematized: But
neither was Arius by Name fulminated against, nor did the Hen. Valesius in
Sozomen Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 16.
Council solicit for, but rather pitied his Banishment.

After the censure passed upon the Arians in the Nicene Council, most
Ecclesiastical Historians do agree, that Constantine did Banish him, and a few
other Bishops, his Adherents: Baronius Anno 325. number. 78, 79, 80, 81 Jac.
Gotho. dissert. in Philostorg l. 1. c. 9, 10.
But the Narrative which they make concerning his Exile, and his Revocation, is
so incoherent and defective, that Baronius doubts, and Gothofredus knows not
what to make thereof. If he, Theognis, and Eusebius of Nicomedia were Banished;
against the latter civil crimes (as Treason) are alleged for the cause: And
whether the forementione^ Tumults, or the sense of any future Broils in Egypt
(which was the Granary of the Empire, and prone to Rebellions) Sozomen. Hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 21.
did occasion the Banishment of the others, I know not: Their Fxile was not
long, nor were their Followers rigorously proceeded against, but the Edict
suspended. And afterward Athanasius, having succeeded Alexander, is Banished
no otherwise then they had been before, by the power of the Arian Faction.
Athanasius was sent back again by Constantine the Son, upon the Death of
Constantine the Great, whereupon he Repossessed himself of the Sea at
Alexandria. Upon the Division of the Empire betwixt the three Sons of
Constantine, the East fell to Constantius, who finding the perpetual Tumults
which arose from this contest, tried many ways to compose Affairs. The Arians
did attribute a greater Power unto the Emperor in matters of Religion, then
did the Catholic: And they persuaded him to violate the Canons for Election of
Bishops, by Imposing upon the People such as he should Nominate, cause to be
ordained, and sent. Whereupon he Ejected the Catholic Bishops, and Substituted
Arians; the Orthodox were Tormented and Punished sundry ways, as by
Imprisonment, Banishment, Athanasius in Apolog. 2. ad Constantium Imperat. et
in Epist. ad Orthodoxos.
etc. and a Toleration given unto all but those of the Nicene Faith. The
proceedings of this Emperor not being very Exemplary, I shall conclude the
account of his Reign with this Observation. That by reason of this Persecution,
Athanasius and other Catholic Bishops, moved Disputes, Whether the Emperor
had any power to Judge in Ecclesiastical Affairs? And, Whether it were lawful
to Persecute any in cases of Religion, with Imprisoning, or Banishment?
Athanas. ad solitar. vitam agentes et Synodus Alexandria apud Athanas. in
Apolog. 2. ad Constantium.


Julian the Apostate succeeded Coustantius; He labored by all means possible
to restore Paganism to its pristine Glory. He granted Liberty of Conscience to
all the Sects of Christians: But withal, he did equally subject them unto civil
Employments, and took away the public Allowances which had been granted unto
the Catholics. He recalled all the Exiled Bishops, (but did not restore them
to their proper Seas) Jac. Gothofred. orat. 2. Julianus.
and Admonished them, and such as had been Deposed for Scandal, to look after
their Churches, and provide for their Parties and Interests, as well as they
could.

Whereupon in sundry Cities, there started up two or three Philostorgius Hist.
l. 7. s. 4. Socratis Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 4. s. 6.
Bishops, an Arian, a Meletian, and a Catholic: In some places more. He
permitted them to Quarrel, and Fight, and commit all Outrages one against the
other; encouraging the Sectaries and Pagans against the Orthodox. This was the
Indulgence which he gave unto them, and whereby he designed to overthrow
Christianity.

After his Decease, succeeded Jovianus, who was an Orthodox Emperor; his Reign
was but short; he found the Empire divided into Potent Factions of the
Orthodox, Arians, Gentiles, etc. Whereupon he declared that he would not molest
any Person for his Faith, whatsoever of Paganism, Hrresie, or Schism, he
professed: But he should principally Love, Honor, and Favor those which
endeavored to Themistius in Orat. Consulari ad Jovianum.
Restore the Church unto its peace. He restored the Orthodox unto their former
Immunities and Privileges, which Constantine had bestowed on the Catholic
Church. These proceedings gained unto him this Character, That the Empire
Socrates l. 3. c. 25. Sozomen l. 6. c. 3. Philostorgius l. 8. c. 5. Jac.
Gothofredus dissert. in Philostorg. l. 8. c. 5. Socrates l. 3. c. 26.
had been brought unto a most happy Posture, as to Church and State, if it had
pleased to God to grant him a longer Life.

Upon the Decease of Jovianus, there was chosen for Emperor Valentinian, and
he Elected his Brother Valens for his Consort. They were both Christians, but
Valentinian was Zealous for the Nicene Faith, and Valens favored the Arians as
much: Such testimonies had each of them given of his Sincerity, that both did
proffer to Die Martyrs, rather that Sacrifice to Idols under Julian. The
Artifices of Julian had broke Christianity into so many Sects, and Subdivisions
of Sects, that in every City almost their might be found Two, Three, Four, or
more Bishops, all Anathematizing Socrates Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 1.
each other, and most Rebaptizing the Converts, gained from any other
Congregation. The East did abound principally Sozomen l. 6. c. 6.
with Arians, (and Macedonians, Eunomians, etc. Which were of the same
Sentiments almost) in the West the Interest of that Heresy was much lessened,
by the care and piety of Saint Hilary, who by his Christian Prudence, Charity,
and exemplary Piety (joined with as great Indulgence or forbearance) did
reclaim the Arians in France: Yet were those Heretics considerable at Millain,
and in sundry others places of the Western Empire: As also were the Donatists
in Africa, notwithstanding their fierce Persecution under Constans, by Macarius
Governor of Numidia. It was then seen that no confiscations of Lands, and
Churches, nor Exiles, or the most severe Punishments could extinguish a
numerous and obstinate Sect: Whatsoever they endured, they esteemed it as
Martyrdom and became Implacable against the Catholics, as having solicited
that Emperor and his Officials to infest them, contrary to the Rules and
Practices of Orthodox Christians. Julian (at their Petition) had re-setled them
in their Lands, Churches, and Bishoprics, and their specious Zeal, together
with the glory of their Sufferings, had created in the People such a Reverence
for them, that they prevailed every were in that Province. They Rebaptized such
as they Converted from the Catholics, and esteemed none to be true Churches
but theirs. The Pagans were very numerous and powerful at Rome, in Asrick, and
elsewhere, retaining most of their Sacrifices, and their Rural, and City
Pontificate. Valentinian beholding the Posture of the Empire, Decreed unto his
Subjects an Universal Liberty of Conscience, and though he did always Socrates
Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 1. etc. 29. Soz. l. 6. c. 6. Constant. Aug.
Porphyrogennet. in excerptis ex Joanne Antiocheno.
manifest his own Judgment, and Kindness unto those of the Nicene Faith, yet
did not he molest those of a different persuasion. Such was his Demeanor unto
the Arians, and to the Pagans: He did not so much as remove the Altar of
Victory, which stood at the entry into the Senate, and where Sacrifices were
offered, and the Christian Senators were compelled to assist with their
presence. He did indeed prohibit Nocturnal Ambrosius Epist. l. 5. c. 30.
Sacrifices, but none else. The first Laws of his concerning this Indulgence
are lost, but this following sufficiently speaks his Proceedings.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 9. tit. 16. lege 9. The Emppp. Valentinianus, Valens and
Gratianus A A A. Unto the Senate.

I do judge that Augury or Soothsaying, is not to be ranked amongst those
Maleficia, or execrable Sorceries, which are Prohibited. Nor do I esteem either
that, or any other Religion, Cum notis Jacobi Gothofredi.
tolerated by my Ancestors, to be a Crime. Those Laws which I enacted in the
beginning of my Empire, do attest this to be my sense I did thereby permit
every man to pursue that way of worship which pleased him, nor do woe regr^hend
Augury, but allow the innocent use thereof. Given at Triers. Gratian A. 11. and
Probus Coss. Anno Dom. 371.

The Charactr which Ammianus Marcellinus gives of him after his death, is this.
His Reign was famous for the moderation Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 3^.
used therein, the Emperor carrying himself with an even hand amidst that
diversity of Religions: Neither did he molest any one, nor commanded that he
should believe and worship thus or thus; neither did he by any menacing Edicts,
It is true he did suppress the Manichees, but not as Hereti^, but as S^erers
and Magicians. Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit. 5. lege 3. cum notis Jac. Gothofredi.
incline or ^ffright his Subjects to embrace the Religion of their Prince: But
he left the several Parties untouched, as he found them.

As for Valens he did give liberty of Conscience unto all but the Orthodox
Churches, whose Bishops he deposed, banished, and put to death, punishing their
Followers by Fines, Imprisonment, Paulus Diaconus hist. mis^ll. l. 12. Jacobus
Gothofredus in Cod. Theodos. l. 9. tit. 16. lege 9. and lib. 6. tit. 10. lege 7.
etc. He tolerated all other Sects and Religions, even unto open Paganism;
except the Novatians, who were subjected to like persecution with the
Catholics. Were it possible for to extirpate by violence an inveterate and
numerous Sect, that Emperor had atcheived his designs: But at last he found
Divisions, Discontents and Tumults to increase at home, and dangers to threaten
him from abroad: and by the persuasion of Themistius (a Pagan Philosopher,
Senator of Constantinople, and Favorite of all the Christian Emperors of his
Age) he stayed his fury, and left every man to adhere unto what Religion he
pleased, without any menaces or penalties Themistius in Orat. ad Valentem.
unto the contrary. It is probable, that all Ecclesiastical Immunities and
Privileges were limited by Him unto the Arians: and some say he did continue
to send into Exile the Orthodox Clergy; but whither all or some, and whither
Socrates hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 32. Sozomen. l. 6. c. 37.
upon a civil or Religious account, it is uncertain. But Themistius, does aver
unto him, that he did not by his persecution make any Converts unto Arianisme,
but Atheism, and brought men rather to worship the imperial Diadem, then the
true God.

Valen^inian had two Sons Gratian and Valentinian, the younger. Their Father
died Anno Dom. 375. Gratian was Jacobus Gothofredus in Chronologia Cod.
Theodos. ad a^m 375.
immediately proclaimed Emperor, and though young Valentinian were at that
time Augustus, yet did not he share in the administration of the Empire, until
the death of Valens. It is observed by the learned Gothofredus, that during the
Reign of Jovian, Valentinian the Elder, and Gratian, there is not to be found
one Law against Paganism, in order unto its Id. in Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit.
10. lege 7.
suppression. He did remove the Altar of Victory from the Senate House; He did
withdraw those public Revennues, and confiscate the Lands which appertained
unto the Priests, and Vestals; but neither ejected the Pagans out of the Senate
and chief commands, Military or civil, nor did he shut up, or dispoile their
Temples and Altars, or render them incapable Symmachus in relat. ad Theodos.
lib. 10. Epist. 54. Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 31. Jac. Gothofredus in Cod.
Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 2. lege 20. id. Ibid. tit. 10. lege 7.
of Donations and Legacies: In which last point [by reason of a Law made by
Valentinian in 370.] the Pagan Priests and Temples were in a better condition
then the Churches of the Catholics: Neither did he prohibit the Pagan
Ceremonies, but that the public Sacrifices were continued at Rome until 391.
As to the Heretical Christians it is apparent that in the beginning of his
Reign, and whilst he ruled only in the West, that he did make severe Laws
against all Heretics, that they should forbear their Assemblies in City and
Country, and that all their Meeting-places or Churches should be confiscated.
The first Law in 370. is not recorded; but the second runs thus.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 16 tit. 5. lege 4. The Emppp. Valens,

Gratian and Valentinian A. A. A. unto Hesperius P F. P.

We did heretofore (in the behalf of the Catholic Religion, Cum rotis Jacobi
Gothofredi.
that the Heretical Meetings might cease) ordain, that wheresoever any
Assemblies were held, in City, or Country, different from those of our
Religion, all such places should be It was the form in those days to add all
the Emperor's names, though but one made the Decree.
seized upon and sold, notwithstanding any pretenses to the contrary, as if
they were merely set apart for the practice of a [false] Religion. Whither the
connivence and dissembling of the Magistrates, or the refractoriness of those
profane Persons shall hinder the execution thereof, the same death shall be
inflicted on those that give the occasion. Given at Triers, on the tenth of the
Calends of May. Valens and Valentinian being Coss. A. D. 308.

But notwithstanding that this penal Law was so strict, and so rigorously
enforced; in the same year, when Valens was dead, the whole Empire devolved
unto Gratian, and he embarked in a War with the Arian Goths in the East, either
out of reason of State (to create a good opinion of him amongst Sozomen. hist.
Eccles. l. 7. c. 2. Socrates hist: Eccles. l. 5. (...). 2. Constant. August.
Porphyrogennet. in excerptisex Jo. Antiocheno. Suidas i^ vote (...) Jac.
Gothofredus in Cod. Theod. l. 16. tit. 5. lege 4.
his new Subjects, to prevent Foreign correspondencies with his Enemies, or
the better to recall those from amongst the Goths, who were banished or fled
unto them from the fury of Valens) or other motives (as disliking the
Proceedings of his Uncle in banishing such as were not of his judgment in
point of Religion) he by a Law (bearing date at Sirmium) did recall from
banishment all those that were exiled for Religion: and gave them free leave to
profess what Religion they pleased, and to assemble publicly in their separate
Churches: Excepting the Manichees, Photinians and Eunomians,

Hereupon many Orthodox Bishops did return to their Seas, and in the same Town
there was to be seen an Orthodox Bishop (sometimes two, as in the Schism of
Meletius and Paulinus at Antioch) an Arian, Apollinarist and Macedonian Bishop;
All of them having recovered the Churches which had been Sozomen. l. 7. c. 2,
3. Socrates lib. 5. c. 3, 4, 5.
taken from them. Some of the Catholic Bishops are famed for their
condescension and desire of Peace and Unity, in that they proferred unto the
Arian Bishops (who were possessed of the great Churches and Revenues) that if
they would consent unto an union of Congregations and worship, the Church
should be jointly administered by both, the Arians retaining the Precedence.

The Goths, notwithstanding this Indulgence, did so far prevail as to overrun
Thracia, Scythia, Mysia, even as far as the Gates of Constantinople, and
Gratian found the Western Empire so unsettled by reason of the Almans, that he
could not attend unto the Wars of the East, nor yet entrust the young
Valentinian with such a burden: Hereupon He made Theodosius his Co-partner in
the Government, and sent him unto the East, reserving unto himself the
Government of France, Spain, and Britain: and unto his Brother Italy,
Illyricum, Jacob. Gothofredus in chronolog. Cod. Theodos. A. D. 379.
and Africa in the year 379.

Theodosius was no sooner acknowledged Emperor, but he marches against the
Enemy, and in Macedonia gains sundry Victories over them, and teturns
triumphant in the end of 380 unto Constantinople; where he finds that the
principal Churches and their Revenues were at that time, and had been so,
during 40 years, possessed by the Arians: and so were almost all Socrates l. 5.
c. 7.
the Churches of the East, whilst the Catholic Bishops exercised Sozomen l, 7.
c. 2 5.
their Religion in obscure Conventicles. Theodosius was a Spaniard, descended
from Christian Parents, educated in the Nicene Faith, and baptized by Acholius
(or Ascholius) a most holy and worthy Bishop at Thessolonica, zealous for the
same Doctrine. The Emperor determined to cause the Council of Nice to be
universally received in the East; but considering how long those Heresies had
infested those Countries, how numerous and potent the Heretics were, the
splendor and riches of the Arian Churches, the magnificence of their Service,
and the poverty of the Catholics, he thought it most prudential to proceed by
degrees, and not to attempt so great a work at once. The bloody battles which
he had fought, the conquests which he had made over those barbarous Goths, Huns
and Alans, had gained him the affection of the Soldiery, and general Love of
the Country: The glory of his exploits had imprinted awe and reverence for him
in the most remote parts, and any Declaration from such an Emperor would have
great influence on the minds of men. Whereupon he published this Manifesto.

Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 1. lege 2. The Emppp. Gratianus, Valentinianus,
and Theodosius A. A. A. unto the People of the City of Constantinople.

We will and require that all those People who are Subject unto the moderate
Government of our Clemency should profess and live in that Religion, which the
successive Tradition unto this day, shows to have been at first taught the
Romans by the Apostle St. Peter; and which it is evident that Pope Damasus does
adhere unto, and which is owned by Peter Bishop of Alexandria, a person of
Apostolical Sanctity. That, according to the Apostolical discipline, and
Evangelical Doctrine, we may all believe the Unity of Godhead together with the
equal Majesty, and sacred ^rinity of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. They that
follow this Creed, we commanded to assume constantly the name of Catholic
Christians: but those others extravagant and mad Fellows let them be accounted
infamous Heretics: Let not their Conventicles be termed Churches: and let them
expect due punishment from God in the first place, and in the second place from
Us, according as divine Providence shall direct our Counsels. Given at
Thessolonica. Gratian V. and Theodosius 1. A. A. Coss. Anno Dom. 310.

This being promulgated, He went to Constantinople, and there sends to the
Arian Bishop, to persuade Him to re-establish the Union and concord of the
Church, by Subscribing unto the Nicene Creed: but Demophilus refusing to
Conform, the Emperor commanded Him, since He would not leave His Socrates,
Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 7. Sozomen, l. 7. c. 5. Jac. Gothofred. dissertat. in
Philostorg. l. 9. c. 19.
Factiousness, to leave His Church, A. D. 380. The which He did, and retired
into the Suburbs, where the Arians ever after (as long as they continued) did
hold their Assemblies. After this the Emperor resolved to call a Synod at
Constantinople, and to essay if He could by parties draw off the Sectaries and
Heretics unto the Catholic Church; whereupon He most amicably invites 36 of
the Macedonians, Bishops, thereunto, and 150 Catholics. The difference between
the Macedonians and Catholics Sozomen, l. 7. c. 7. Socrates, l. 5. c. 8.
did not seem great, or irreconcilable, and they were Men of a Mortified life
and popular Sanctity. But they declined all accommodation: Whereupon He issued
out a Decree forbidding any Sectaries or Heretics to retain any public
Churches, or hold any Meetings within any City, A. D. 381. Cod. Theodos. lib.
16. tit. 5. lege 6. and tit. 2. lege 3.
But that all Churches there should be surrendered up to the Catholic Bishops.
By his order a second Convention of Bishops was held, and strict orders were
given for the observation of the Ecclesiastical Canons; and such persons were
the Bishops He chose for their exemplary life, sound doctrine, and pious
government, that the People and generality reverenced them, and were readily
disposed to follow such men in the true Faith, and most expedite way to the
Emperors favor, honor and riches. After this He made another Essay to unite
the several Sects and Heresies into the Catholic Church; but the project
succeeded not: Whereupon He made several rigorous decrees against them,
forbidding them to Ordain any new Bishops, to hold any Assemblies in City or
Country: Depriving Et graves quidem paenas legibus suis adscripsit:
haudquaquam tamen executioni mandavit. Neque enim punire S^bditos, sed terrere
tantummodo studebat, ut idem cum ipso de Divinitate sentirent. Nam and illos
laudabat, qui sua sponte converterentur. Sozomen, l. 7. c. 12.
them of the Franchises of Citizens, and of the liberty to make any Wills or
Testaments; and in a manner Out lawing them. But these Laws were by Him
suspend^d, and not put in execution. For, it was the method of Theodosius, to
enforce His Laws with grievous penalties; but not to execute them: He did not
intend to Persecute His Subjects, but to affright them into the same Sentiments
with Himself concerning the Deity And He did particularly commend those who
voluntarily did embrace the Nicene Faith.

For the truth of this Assertion let us consider how Theo-dosius dealt with the
Novatians; For, If to separate from the Cathelicks; If to condemn their
Churches as d^filed and impure; If to re-baptise such as revolt thence to
Novatianisme, can be sufficient incentives for penal Laws: then were these men
liable thereunto, and concluded under their rigor. It is unanimously avowed,
that the Novatian Bishops were all this time highly valued, and consulted with
by Theodosius, and Nectarius his Bishop of Constantinople. It is Socrates,
Hist. Eceles. l. 5. c. 10.
also affirmed that the Novatians were not excluded from the Cities, but
permited to hold their Assemblies there: And the Emperor admiring the Harmony
of their Confession with that Sozomen, Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 12. and lib. 8.
c. 1.
of the Catholics, did Enact that they should securely retain their Oratories,
and that their Churches should enjoy the same Privileges which those of the
Catholics did.

As to the Arians, it is likewise recorded, that He did not Persecute any of
them (after He had excluded them from Assembling within Constantinople) but
only Eunomius: And Eunomius Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l. 5. 20.
(together with His Sect) was not properly an Arian; for He did equally
rebaptise and re-ordain those of the Arian and Orthodox Party which came over
unto Him. He was banished for not obeying the Decree of the Emperor, but
continuing to hold private Meetings within Constantinople. The said Arians
persisted openly to hold their Meetings without the City of Constantinople in
the days of Arcadius and Honorius, making a Socrates, Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c.
8.
splendid procession thorough the Streets, and singing Antiphons as they went
unto their Churches. In fine, Procopius does assure us, that, notwithstanding
the many and severe Laws Zozomen, lib. lib. 8 c. 8.
which we read of against Arians, and other Sects, yet there were Heretics
openly tolerated in the Empire until the days of Justinian, with their
Churches Procopius in Histor. Arcana: ex edit. Alemanni, p. 51.
richly adorned; such were those of the Montanists and Sabbatians, etc.
Particularly the Churches of the Arians were so splendid, that Erant quidem,
Alemanne, [complures Christianorum Sectae, quas vulgo Haereses vocant:
Manichaeorum, Samaritarum, etc.] Sed tamen templa and fana ubique locorum
possidebant. Illa vero praesertim quae Arianorum furori serviebant, auro and
argento gemmisque and pr^sis lapidilus, omni denique divitiarum and opum genere
incredibiliter abundabant. Tho. Rivius in defens. Justiaian. adu. Alemann. p.
62. Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 5. lege 21.
nothing in the Roman Empire could compare with them: they had also large
Revenues throughout the Empire, Having never been molested by any Emperor from
their first Original until the days of Justinian.

After that Julian had restored the Donatists unto that Liberty which Constans
had deprived them of, they enjoyed their Churches, their Bishops and freedom
(with little molestation) until the Reign of Honorius. Theodosius had made a
Decree against such Heretics as should either give or take Orders, that they
should pay Ten pounds of Gold, A. D. 392. This Law was pressed by the
Catholics against the Donatists, to be put in execution, when the
extravagancies of that Sect were such, that they seized the Churches of the
Catholics, slew some of their Bishops, beat and murdered diverse Jacob.
Gothofredus in Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 5. lege 39.
Presbyters: yet was it not put in force until the days of Honorius, A. D.
405. Nor did the Synod at Carthage importune the Emperor to enforce it but in
such places as the Catholics should be violently assaulted in.

I might enlarge my Discourse about this subject unto the succeeding Emperors,
Arcadius, Valentinian II. (who decreed unto the Arians an ample Toleration, and
commanded that their Churches should be restored unto them, even that of St.
Ambrose's Cod. Theodos. lib 16. tit 1. lege 4 cum notis Jac. Gothofredi.
within Milaine, A. D. 386. upon pain of death) Arcadius, and Honorius: and so
down to the Age of Justinian. From whence I might draw materials to illustrate
the Question, Whether it be greater wisdom to attempt the suppression of
numerous, rich, and obstinate Heretics (they not being like unto the old
Manichees, Basilidians, or Priscillianists, etc. upon whom are fixed the
imputations of Magic: or occasion of crimes that are universally infamous, and
inconsistent with Humane Society) by rigorous Edicts? Or, to indulge them for a
time, and by more gentle means to contrive and pursue their conversion? But I
have confined my self unto that Century which Our Homily recommends unto me;
and unto those Emperors, whose prudence and piety all Ecclesiastical Writers
do extol, and by whose means Christianity was principally advanced. The
subsequent Princes were Children, or commonly of weak intellectuals: and they
are proofs of little efficacy which are alleged unto any of the Church of
England out of the Sixth Century. Though even there I find the Emperor
Justinian Alemannus in Procop. hist. arc. p. 56. Jac. Gothofredus dissert. in
Philostorg. l. 10. c. 3.
tolerating the Hexacionitae, who were the chief of the Arians, into the
fraternity of whom the Gotthish Kings in Italy usually were admitted. However I
will insert some cases out of Ecclesiastical History which are deduced out of
the Fifth Century, and relate unto the times of Honorius, who made more Laws
then any Emperor against Heretics.

Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 11.
CElestinus being Bishop of Rome seized upon the Churches of the Novatians
which they had within Rome, and compelled their Bishop Rusticula to hold his
Assembly in obscure and private houses. For until that time the Novatians
lived at Rome in a very flourishing condition, having many Churches and
abundance of People resorting thereunto. This raised Envy, and that was the
cause of their overthrow, now that the Bishop of Rome was Cyrill Bishop of
Alexandria, that See being raised unto a Principallity, did shut up, about the
same time, the Churches of the Novatians at Alexandria, and seized on the
Furniture: and afterward confiscated all the Estate of Theopemptus their
Bishop. Socrates, l. 7. c. 7.
advanced into a Secular Magistracy, in like manner as was the Bishop of
Alexandria. Upon this score it was that the Roman Bishops would not permit
those to keep their separate Assemblies, who were otherwise as Orthodox as
themselves: but having commended them much for their Consent in matters of
Faith, they dispossessed them of all they had. The Novatians at Constantinople
were not used so, but were exceedingly beloved there, and their Churches
tolerated within the City.

The Character of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople. Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l.
7. 2.
IN the beginning of the Reign of Theodosius the younger, Atticus was Bishop of
Constantinople, a person of excellent learning, piety, and prudence: from
whence it happened that the Catholic Church did increase much in his days. For
He did not only countenance and uphold those of his own Religion, but
astonished the Heretics with the apprehension of His singular wisdom. He did
not at all desire to molest and persecute them; but sometimes He would terrify
them a little, and then oblige them unto Him by gentleness.

The Character of Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, under the same Emperor.
Socrates, Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 41, 42.
PRoclus, Bishop of Constantinople, was a man of as excellent Moralls as any
one in the world: For, being Educated (...).
under Atticus, he did studiously imitate his virtues; but he was of a greater
patience and forbearance then his Master, who would upon some occasions show
himself severe toward the Heretics: But Proclus was all gentleness, purposing
thereby, rather then with compulsion, to gain them unto the Church. He did not
molest or vex any Heresy in being, but left unto the Catholics the renown of
mildness and charity, according to which He had demeaned Himself. He had for
His pattern Theodosius Himself, who had taken a resolution not to exercise His
Imperial Authority against those that were obnoxious: and Proclus was likewise
determined not to regard such as differed from Him in their Sentiments
concerning God. For this reason did Theodosius love and honor him: For the
Emperor Himself was of such a frame of spirit as becomes the true Priests of
God, neither could He endure those that delighted Socrates lived in his days.
in Persecution. I dare boldly say that He surpassed all the true Priests of
God that ever were, in meekness; according as the Scripture says of Moses in
the Book of Numbers, that He was the most Meek of all men upon earth; so may I
say of Theodosius, that He was the most mild and obliging Prince in the world:
And for this reason God has subjected His Enemies unto Him without fighting.

Such have been the proceedings, such the presidents of those Excellent
Emperors in the purest times, whereby they contrived How to settle and advance
the Orthodox Church, amidst variety of numerous and potent Sects. But how
renowned soever these Princes are for their prudence and piety; there is not
any of their projects (no nor all of them summed together) which may compare
with the Declaration of His Majesty in order to the preserving at present, and
re-setling for the future the Church of England.

If the Primitive Emperors did publish their own judgments concerning the
Orthodox Church, thereby to insinuate unto their subjects which way they wished
and desired them to conform their Opinions: If they did extend several
privileges and emoluments of Revenue and Legacies unto the Catholics, which
the Sectaries were not to receive: Behold what His most Sacred Majesty does
declare!

In the first place We Declare our express Resolution, Meaning, and Intention
to be, That the Church of England be preserved, and remain entire in its
Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, as now it stands Established by Law: And
that This be taken to be, as it is, the Basis, Rule, and Standard of the
General and Public Worship of God; and that the Orthodox Conformable Clergy do
receive and enjoy the Revenues belonging thereunto; and that no person, though
of a different Opinion and Persuasion, shall be exempt from paying his Tithes,
or other Dues whatsoever.

Hitherto the Ancient Politics concur with the modern prudence of His Majesty;
yet there is this advantage on the part of the Church of England above what the
Primitive Christians had, that the Revenues of the Conformists are better
settled, and greater by far then the Nicene Fathers, then the Hillary's, the
Basil's and the Nazianzen's could pretend unto: And the power and dignity which
our Bishops hold as Spiritual Lords (not to mention their influence upon the
subordinate Clergy) has nothing parallel to it in the four first Centuries,
except we should seek for particular instances in Rome and Alexandria. Jac.
Gothofredus in Cod. Theodos. lib. 1^. tit. 10. in Paratitlo.
Here are no Pagan Pontifices, Sacerdotales, Agrorum Hierophantae, etc. to
rival, much less transcend them: No Jewish Patriarchs, Primates, Archisynagogi,
etc. that equal them in Titles, and are to be respected and exempted, by
Franchisements equal unto theirs. The common Schools and Universities are Id.
Ibid. tit. 8. in Paratitlo.
not now (as Athens in the time of Nazianzen; and generally the Professors and
Sophistae) devoted to Gentilisme, but managed by the Church. The Parliament (as
of old the Senate) does not consist of Paynims, or Arians, etc. Those which
sway in our Councils, and in the Magistracy, are now no such kind of Men as
heretofore. From whence it is easy to conclude that If the Orthodox Church did
advance it self in the Primitive Ages, amidst those circumstances, there is no
fear that the Church of England (which takes that Antiquity for its pattern as
to Doctrine and Discipline) should be ruined amidst much better conditions.

His Majesty does further add; That no person shall be capable of holding any
Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical Dignity or Preferment of any kind in this
Our Kingdom of England, who is not exactly Conformable.

This is, conform unto the Presidents of Constantine, Theodosius, etc. who did
require an exact Subscription to the Ni^ene Council: Thus Athanasius and S.
Hilary, etc. urge an unalterable Conformity to the Decrees of the Three hundred
and eighteen Bishops at Nice: From thence the Fathers never would reeede:
Athanasius and nonaginta per Libyam and AEgyptum episcopi, in epistola ad
Episcopos in Africa.
And when the Emperor Constantius at the Councils of Sirmium, Ariminum, etc.
had formed sundry Comprehensional Creeds, whereunto both Arians and Catholics
might, saving their sundry judgments, subscribe: the best of the Fathers
totally rejected the contrivance, and those, which, out of a desire for the
Union of the Church, had assented thereunto, did soon repent themselves: for
thereby the Orthodox Church received extraordinary prejudice. The Nicene
Fathers, and the Catholics seemed to have condemned the practices of their
Chief Prelates and of themselves, in making so great a Schism, and fulminating
out Anathema's against their Brethren for needless words and forms, which the
Church might want, and which they now expunged. The Arians triumphed every
where as Victors, the whole World seemed to follow them, and the rest appeared
to be justly exiled, and scorned, who had raised such Divisions and Animosities
in the Church and State about Trifles. Hereupon the Comprehension was utterly
dissolved, and never resumed again in old Christendom, as the most foolish and
impracticable design that could be. Upon this precedent did the D. of Saxony
rather proceed by a special form of Concord, then by any General and
Comprehensional course: ^hus did the Calvinists in the Synod of Dort: The
Romanists in the Council of Trent: Q. Elizabeth in her Subscriptions. Thus have
all wise Princes done, except Charles V. who by an ill-favored Interim tried
the other way, but with so bad success, that it is no president for His Majesty.
How Orthodox soever the Novatians were, yet were they ranked always amongst
the Heretics and Schismatics; nor did the Church ever project a Comprehension
for them. It is true the Primitive Emperors did grant them the same privileges
with the Catholics; which I believe did help to continue their Schism so
long: But herein the Judgment of His Majesty seems more clear and elevated, in
that He does not imbolden any Pretenders unto Orthodoxy to be Schismatics, by
communicating with them His public favors, etc. equal emoluments with the
true Sons of the Church of England. As we do now reckon all Separatists
whatever under the Name of Non-Conformists (albeit they differ as much as
Novatians, Basilidians and Manichees) so did the Ancient prudence esteem them
all Heretics and Schismatics: And if the hopes of preferment, if the honor
of a public Church, be not motives sufficient to make some men Proselytes to
the Church of England, It is rational, to think that the being indiscriminately
mixed in such a loathsome company and character, may operate upon the minds of
many to abate of their preciseness.

It follows, We do in the next place Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That
the Execution of all and all manner of Penal Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical,
against whatsoever sorts of Non-Conformists or Recusants, be immediately
suspended, and they are hereby suspended.

His Majesty herein writes after the Copy of the Primitive Times; The Penal
Laws are suspended; the Defaults, the Heresy, the Schism are not
authenticated. The punishment is taken off, the guilt is not: None is
encouraged hereby unto Separation, but indulged if he do separate. They are
still Non-Conformists to the Church of England; They are still Recusants as to
the Law; They may assemble publicly, but it is under P. AErodius Rer. judicat.
l. 1. tit. 6. c. 1^.
this ignominious denomination. What power properly belongs to the Church, is
entirely reserved unto it by His Majesty. Ecclesia enim jus Judicii habet;
Imperii, minime. They are Spiritual Fathers and Judges: their Authority, their
Censures are not suspended: The Parliamentary and Secular Laws are invalidated
for a season; which is conformable to the Ancient Proceedings: It is not
declared that They are not Heretics, or Schismatics; but that They shall be
tolerated though such. It is one thing to encounter an Heresy or Schism in
the begininng, and another when it has made a large progress. Then it may be
suppressed easily, and the public receives little prejudice by the banishment
or ruin of a few. But in the latter case, it is to be considered that the
Kingdom receives a great and irreparable damage in its strength, in its trade,
in its unanimity, if Multitudes come to be exiled, or impoverished: The
Manufactures may be transported into foreign Countries, as happened in Flanders
upon the persecution there by the D. of Alva: Secrets of State and Interest may
be divulged: Or if they will not retire, foreign correspondences and
complotments may happen to be driven on by the enraged or desperate, to the
ruin of the Kingdom and Church. If the revolt of Africa to the Vandals, If the
revolt of Italy unto the Goths, were an effect of the rigorous usage against
the numerous and obstinate Donatists, and Arians: If the progress of
Mahometanisme was facilitated by the severity practiced against the Arians in
Syria, Egypt, and Africa; I would fain know whether the Church benefited more
by the Indulgence of the first Emperors, or rigors of the latter? It was a
Rhodomontado of Philip II. King of Spain, that He had rather have no Subjects
at Quantum inde vulnus aerariis Regis inflictum sit, quid attinet dicere, cum
res ipsa omni testificatione luculentius clamet? Sed vincit amor fidei, and
cupido propagandae pietatis, quam sibi cum sceptris, and prae sceptris,
commendatam tuendamque suscepit. Alex. Patricius Atmacan. Mars Gallicus, lib.
2. c. 30.
all, than those He had to be Heretics. By such Maxims the Moors, the Jews
were ejected Spain. If a Wiseman examine the consequence of this opinion, He
will find that the Exchequer of Spain has been exhausted, the Revenues
infinitely lessened, the strength and riches of the Kingdom mightily
diminished, several Provinces lost, the Monarchy scarce able to support it
self: And is this nothing unto the Bishop and Canons of Toledo?

Next, It is Declared, That there may be no pretense for any of Our Subjects to
continue their Illegal Meetings and Conventicles; We do Declare, That We shall
from time to time allow a sufficient number of Places, as they shall be
desired, in all parts of this Our Kingdom; for the use of such as do not
Conform to the Church of England, to meet and assemble in, in order to their
Public Worship and Devotion: which Places shall be open, and free unto all
persons.

This Paragraph contains a part of Wisdom which is superior unto any thing the
Fourth Century does suggest unto me about this Subject. Hereby His Majesty
understands the Place, the Persons meeting, and their Numbers; and may (the
access being free) inform Himself of the Doctrine taught, of the Discipline
practiced, and of the Immoralities that may happen amongst some Sects, which
may resemble the Valentinians, Gnostics, Basilidians, Priscillianists, etc.
Those Sects which most distract the Church, and subvert the Commonwealth are
such, as cannot bear the Light, and a public view. There cannot be a more
Moral certainty that neither Church, nor State shall be damnified by these
Schismatical Assemblies, then this, That His Majesty does allow the Place, and
Teacher. Amongst the old Heretics and Schismatics, the Emperors never had the
Approbation of their Bishops; but they were Elected and Ordained, and admitted
without His privity. This occasioned great troubles to the Emperors, and to the
Schismatics themselves; for as they sometimes chose out of faction, at other
times they were deceived by the Hypocrisy of an Ambitious person (who was to
rise by a seeming piety and cajolling of the populace) so the Emperors did
persecute them frequently for the disorders and misdemeanors of their Pastors,
and were forced to enact Laws against those Heretics, that did ordain, or were
ordained. Something like unto what His Majesty does, I remember to have Tanta
fuit in Theodoricho cura ejus quam non profitebatur ipse Religionis, ut optimos
ei semper Episcopos daret. De quo sic nepos ejus Athalarichus (Cassiodor.
varior. l. 8. cp. 15. Senatui Urbis Romae.) Gratissimum nostro profitemur
animo, quod gloriosi domini avi nostri respondistis in Episcopatus electione
judicio. Oportebat enim arbitrio boni principis obediri, qui sapienti
deliberatione pertractans quamvis in aliena religione talem visus est
Pontificem delegisse, ut agnosceretis illum hoc optasse praecipue, quatenus
bonis sacerdotibus Ecclesiarum omnium religio pullularet. Recepistis itaque
virum, and divina gratia probabiliter institutum, and regali examinatione
laudatum. H. Grotius in Prolegom, ad Hist. Gotthorum.
read of in the life of that brave and wise Goth, Theodoric King of Italy. He
was an Arian, yet did tolerate the Orthodoxe, their Bishops, and Churches. And
it is observed, that whilst He had the Approbation of the Catholic Bishops,
the Churches were better served then ever: He inviolably adhered unto the
Indulgence given, and placed His interest in approving of such Bishops only as
were peaceable, and pious: Nor did They endeavor to serve their private ends,
but the Church, in their Ministry; because that such courses might endanger
their Bishoprics, which were held but precariously of the King. Whosoever
shall compare this Declaration, and way of meeting, with that Act, whereby four
besides the family might convene; under any Teacher: will discern the sagacity
of Our King, who hereby prevents the Blasphemies, Gross Errors, un-moral, and
pernicious principles which might be inculcated into his subjects privily that
way by the illiteterate, ignorant, wicked Teachers (as Ranters, etc.) who might
be retained.

I cannot but take here notice of that Ancient Prudence and Respect unto the
Church of England, which His Majesty shows in the form of His Licenses, wherein
He does not vouchsafe unto their Assemblies the Name of Churches, but Meetings,
and their Instructor is called a Teacher, not Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 5.
lege 26. and tit. 1. lege 2.
a Pastor or Presbyter, which is exactly consonant to the Edicts of Theodosius
the Great, and His Son Arcadius.

His Majesty concludes, And if after this Our Clemency and Indulgence, any of
Our Subjects shall presume to Abuse this Liberty, and shall Preach seditiously,
or to the Derogation of the Doctrine, Discipline, or Government of the
Established Church, or shall meet in places not allowed by Us, We do hereby
give them warning, and Declare, We will proceed against Them with all
imaginable severity: And We will let them see We can be as severe to punish
such Offenders, when so justly provoked, as We are Indulgent to truly Tender
Consciences.

Those that preach Sedition do abuse their Liberty, and if they suffer
thereupon, the Indulgence to Tender Consciences is not violated. To be obedient
unto the Magistrates in Civil affairs; To walk orderly, and without giving
offense: these are indisputable Duties of Christianity. If we consider the
example of Our Savior, he fulfilled all Righteousness. If we regard S. Paul,
he retracts the harsh Language which he had given unto the Jewish High Priest;
and at Ephesus He was not found Blaspheming, or Reviling the Gods of the
Gentiles. In the Levitical Law there was a precept Not to blaspheme the Gods:
And it was a tenet of the first Christians, that they ought not to blasphome,
or rail against the false Deities of the Pagans, lest They should give the
Gentiles occasion to blaspheme the true God. There is a Canon of the Church,
which denies unto them the Glory of Martyrdom who should disturb a Priest at
his Sacrifice, or demolish their Altars and Idols. Such a reverence had They
for Government, and so great a care to preserve the Peace. The Donatists were
persecuted by Constantine, Constans, and Honorius, by reason of the frequent
tumults they made, contemning the Authority of the Emperors, seizing violently
the Churches of the Catholics, committing intolerable outrages upon their
persons, sometimes killing their Bishops and Clerks: Whereas the Novatians
demeaning themselves Civilly and Peaceably, were not molested. The Arians were
enjoined by the Great Theodosius to hold their Meetings without the City of
Constantinople; And were peaceably suffered there: But when They began to hold
Socrates hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 8. Sozomen. hist. Eccles. lib. 8. c. 8.
other unlawful Assembleis in the public Porticos of the City, though not to
worship therein, but to sing certain Antiphons which tended to Sedition, and
unto the disparagement of the Catholics: there arose a tumult thereupon, and
several were AErodius ver. judicat lib. 1. tit. 6. c. 15.
ssain on both sides; whereat the Emperor was incensed, and suppressed those
Meetings as unlawful: and such Hymns were interdicted. Thus much I find
recorded; but I do not remember that any of the Ancient Emperors did express
such a concern for the Church in their Edicts, as His Majesty does manifest in
His Royal Declaration, viz. that None shall preach what derogates from the
Doctrine, Discipline, or Government of the present Church, then which nothing
can be more prudential, or conducing to the public tranquillity. Their Teachers
may instruct Their Flocks, and those (as I may say) that are within: But not
judge those that are without. If they do establish their supposed Truths, the
Contrary tenets fall of themselves; and it is a needless, if not a seditious
attempt to expatiate against the Religion that is National. The Sectaries ought
to consider the Umbrage they are under; and to walk warily upon that account,
as well as upon this motive, that in cases of Treason and Rebellion greater
caution is used, and less proofs suffice then in lesser crimes: They must not
only be innocent, but free from the suspicion thereof: For the consequences of
Sedition are so dreadful and horrid, that no wise Governor will stay till it
manifest it self by open actions, but he puts a stop to what has a tendency
that way. And if any one shall at any time find Himself abridged in his Liberty
for any such misdemeanor, He must blame himself, and not the State, which ought
to be jealous of small matters where the Common welfare of the Kingdom is
likely to be endangered. The precedents which I have alleged for Indulgence
conclude nothing in this case; for even those Emperors did not esteem Actions
un-moral, or Seditious to fall under the notion of a Tender Conscience. It
behooves therefore All the Nonconformists, in common Gratitude, to be Civil and
Respectful unto that Church whereof their Indulgent Sovereign is a Member: It
behooves them in common prudence, not to enervate, or subvert that Government
which protects them: It behooves them according to the common Rules of
Christianity, to be wise unto Sobriety; to walk worthy of that Liberty
whereunto they are called.

As to the Sons of the Church of England, I can suggest nothing unto them in
this juncture of affairs, that is comparable with their own principles. The
Homily against Contentions is the most perfect Sum of all that can be said
about Moderation. They profess to gather their Doctrines out of the Fathers:
And they will never err at this time in their deportment, who shall consult
those Oracles; Neither will any thing conduce more unto our peace, then that
our Church conform themselves unto those illustrious and pious precedents which
They have transmitted unto Us, How to deal with obstinate and condemned
Heretics. I am more convinced by S. Hilary, then the more modern dictators of
Ecclesiastical Policy. The former treated the Arians with much mildness, and
regained them unto the Church, without the assistance of the Secular power: And
there is a great difference betwixt the addresses of the African Fathers unto,
and for the Donatists, and what I can find in the present Incendiaries. I dare
not be so bitter in my expressions, and so uncharitable in my Censures, against
the Non-Conformists; because the Fathers do not allow of it; Nor is it
consistent with that Charity which thinks no evil; nor with the Homily against
Contentions, whereunto our Clergy subscribes. It is there that I read How
taunts and Satirical invectives are forbid: It is there that I read How a
Scoulder and a Taunter is reckoned (1 Cor. 1.) with Thieves and Idolaters. We
are not to eat with such: And many times there comes less hurt of a Thief,
then of a railing Tongue; for the one takes away a Man's good name, the other
takes away his riches, which are of much less value then his good name. A
Thief hurts but Him from whom he steals: But He that has an evil tongue
troubles all the Town where He dwells, and sometimes the Whole Country. And
a railing tongue is a pestilence so full of contagiousness, that St. Paul
wills Chr^ian Men to forbear the company of such, and neither to eat nor
drink with them. And whereas he will not have a Christian Woman should forsake
her Husband, although he be an Infidel: or that a Christian servant should
forsake his Master which is an Infidel and Heathen: so that He suffers a
Christian maen to keep company with an Infidel: Yet He forbids us to eat
with a Scoulder, or Quarrelpicker. I dare not entertain so severe thoughts
against the Generality of the Non-conformists as to say that their obstinacy
arises from malepertness and a Peevish Humor. I allow that they are deluded,
but S. Salvian tells me that a man may err with an upright intention, and
pious designs. The Truth is lodged in Salvian. de gubernat. Dei. lib. 5.
the Church of England, but they think themselves possessed of it. The right
Worship of God is amongst us, but they think their ways to be right: And
whatever Impiety they are guilty of, they do not esteem it to be such. What
they are unto us, we seem to be unto them: And how they shall be judged for
their erroneous opinions at the last day, He alone knows who is to be their
Judge. Whence is derived this new mode, of rendering evil for evil? of cursing
them that perhaps do not curse us? Do we think to convert Men by Satyrs? or
winn upon English Spirits by contumelious language? or make men love us, by
proclaiming them for Hypocrites ungovernable, and intolerable Sectaries? do we
think to reconcile affairs by repeating matters? Pardon me, ye modern followers
of Idacius and Ithacius, if I imagine the example of S. Martin to be most
authentic in our Church! I dare not say that a Belief of the indifferency, or
rather Imposture of all Religion, is now made the most effectual (not to say
the most fashionable) Argument for Liberty of Conscience, Because I know that
Necessity Vires quae supersunt tempestive fovendae sunt, ne penitus deficiant.
In extremis consilia etiam necessitate honesta fiunt; ac Sinuanda vela cum
tempestas jubet. Omnia maris mala naufragio minora sunt: and Gubernator, ut
aureis Curtii verbis utar, ubi naufragium timet, jactura quicquid servari
potest, redimit. Puteanus in Statera Belli and Pacis.
of State, and Salus populi, are superior thereunto, and much more in fashion:
And whosoever understands the Controversy, must know that there are
considerable Arguments for it; and it is a great mistake in History for any Man
to say, That Toleration (after Ecclesiastical Censures are passed) is only
cried up by oppressed parties. It is an effect of the same Ignorance, for any
man to say, That Toleration is inconsistent with Government: That it is better
to abrogate penal Laws, then to suspend them in this case. I cannot believe
that to be the course to ruin the Church, whereby it appears to have been
settled: Neither can I comprehend How the Toleration of numerous, potent, and
inveterate Sects or Factions, should be so destructive to Government: Since
that I find hereby that Constantine, Valentinian, and Theodosius the great; as
also Theodoric, did most happily compose their affairs; whilst Honorius,
Justinian and others by rigorous Counsils have ruinated fair Empires, and
renowned Churches. Whosoever compares the ancient and modern Sectaries, will
find the Manichees, the Piscillianists, and Basilidians the more fanatical:
Compare the Ages that was the more ignorant and brutal; Compare the persons,
those were the more subtle, perfidious, and designing: There is in an
Englishman a native temper which carries with it innocence and simplicity: Evil
principles have not usually here those violent transports and effects which
seem inevitably to be deduced from them. The president of the Late war is most
ignorantly made use of at present: It arose from a complication of causes which
cannot possibly concur again in this generation; And it is a gross paralogisme
to argue, that because in a broken and dissolved Government this or that ill
effect was produced by Fanaticisme: therefore it will occasion the like
calamities in a composed State. Or, because when Men apprehended not the evils
thereof, they were thus and thus transported; therefore they will fall into the
same extravagancies, after they have paid dearly for their errors. Or, because
that when all our neighbors were engaged in war, some designing Men thought
they might securely attempt a change in the Government; therefore they will
complot the same now when the circumstances are altered. By the same reason
that all these horrid consequences are charged upon the Sectaries, one might
argue against choler and other peccant humors in the bodies of Men; yet it is
certain that they balance each other by their contrariety, and their
proportionate mixture (they retaining their several natures) does make that
desirable thing called Health. Nay, it is evident, that even diseased bodies,
with a moderate care, do subsist and live as long, or longer then those that
seem more sound of complexion: When we have made as bitter harangues against
the Spleen, Gout, or that unequal constitution of a cold stomach and hot liver,
as any Scholar of Ben. Johnson against Schism and Liberty of Conscience: yet
it will never be demonstrated that it is better to endanger, or absolutely to
destroy the patient, then to permit him to live (as long as others) under such
intolerable distempers. What necessary connection is there betwixt Schism,
Heresy and Rebellion? Why must diversity of Religions introduce Civil
dissentious unavoidably? Were not the Religions of the Noachidae, or Proselites
for inhabitation and that of the Circumcised Jews quite different? Was not the
Religion of the Alexandrian Jews and Christians different from that of the
Romans, and Egyptians? Was not that of the Babylonish Captives different from
the Worship of the Persians? Was not there something peculiar in the precise
Jews that was more likely to create tumults and disturbances, than can be
found in any English Sectaries? And had not they greater opportunities to
create Rebellions in Egypt, and Babylon, by reason of their Princes, or
AEchmalotarchs, then our Schismatics here have, who are not so much as united
under Bishops? The which is remarkable in order to our future hopes for the
re-establishing of our Church; since Episcopacy is a powerful remedy against
Schism, and the Macedonian Heretics, when they turned Presbyterians, and
ceased to chose any Bishops over them, they continued not long after in being,
as Ecclesiastic Historians do observe. To conclude; the Sectaries are
irreconcileably divided one against the other: The penal Laws unite their
Interest against the Government: But Indulgence continues them dis-joyned.
Which is the most secure course?

If the case were to be determined by such as understood any thing of
State-affaires, the Judgment of the famed Monsieur La Noue (in his discourses)
and of Bodin (in his Commonweal) Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli, l. 1. c. 10.
and in commentat. de jure belli, p. 28.
and of Albericus Gentilis (the Dictator of Civil Law in the days of Queen
Elizabeth) not to mention others, would signify much in the debate. I shall
conclude with the Report of AErodius how the cause has been adjudged.

P. AErodius rer. judicat. l. 1. tit. 6. de haereticis, c. 9.
LEt us thus decide the c^se: When an Heresy first begins, it is best to
punish the Author severely, for so it will be easily suppressed. But when it is
far spread, and has taken deep root in men's minds; if the parties have no
other intents, then to Worship God in their way, as the Christians desired
under the Pagans; then so much may be indulged unto Heretics, as (without
approbation thereof) the present exigency requires that we should dissemble,
and tolerate. The Emperor Julian did by a Law approve of Liberty of
Conscience, when He (as Ammianus Marcellinus relates it, lib. 22.) did by name
recall from banishment all the exiled Heretics, and ordained that every one of
them, of what Sect of Christians soever, should speak and teach according to
his inclination. Why did He ordain this by a formal Law, and Edict? Because by
the solemnity of the thing, the Heretics would be more imboldened to make use
of their utmost Liberty, whence dissensions would arise, and the Christian
Bishops become exasperated one against the other, to the subversion of
Christianity, and confirmation of Paganism. This He did so Let our
pseudo-politicians mark this, and they will find that the Penal Laws are much
better suspended by an extraordinary Declaration, then by an Act of Parliament.
little conceal, that the Emperor Honorius, by a rescript unto Hadrianus,
caused the Edict which He had made in favor of the Donatists, to be publicly
affixed, that every one might know the purposes then on foot. It is certain
that He wills and intends the growth of Heresy, who fortisies it by a Law: who
commands that the Appellation be not esteemed infamous: Who in preferments and
employments of State, makes no difference betwixt the Heretical, and Orthodox.
But He connives only at them, who either delays, or gently inflicts his
punishments: Who forbids that they be inquired after: Who prohibits all
proceedings by Law against them: Or who, to prevent greater evils, does so
indulge them, as to express the particular reason thereof. As for example, Pope
John I. was sent on an Embassy to the Emperor Justin by Theodoric the Arian
King: and He obtained a Toleration of the Arians in the East, to prevent the
indignation of Theodoric against Italy, which He threatened to lay waste, in
case that Justin continued His persecution of the Arians. When a Kingdom is
brought to these resolutions, men ought not to despond, or prognosticate fatal
inconveniences, when Laws are indulged; there is still a great influence upon
the mad multitude, by the example of the Prince, and the unblamable life, sound
doctrine, and great learning of the Orthodox Clergy. Thus we resolve the
Question, if bare Heresy be the Subject thereof: But if other Crimes mingle
with Heresy; if they be swaied by Ambition, and not an imaginary piety: if the
Heretics propagate their Sect by force and violence, not gentle pcrswasion;
then the Prince ought to prosecute them in such manner as the Senate of Rome
did the Festivals of Bacchus: or as it is usual to proceed against Traitors.

I think I may now put a period unto the Discourse about Indulgence, which I
have so managed as becomes a Son, and a Friend unto the Church of England, as
well as a lover of the peace and welfare of his Native Country. I have not
debated the point of Prerogative in particular; partly because, what was said
heretofore about the Deity, is true concerning these Gods on earth, It is
dangerous to tell even the truth concerning their Essence: partly, because I
could not do it without offending, if not prejudicing the Church of England. I
do not think it convenient or seasonable, that we should minutely inquire,
whether, All the Power which was owned to be in the Pope at the Lateran
Council, were vested in K. Henry VIII. Or to examine strictly what the purport
of those words are, that The Kings of this Realm shall be taken, accepted and
reputed the only Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England, called
Anglicana Ecclesia, and shall have and enjoy annexed and united unto the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the title and style thereof, as all
Honors, Dignities, Preheminences, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Authorities,
Immunities, Profits and Commodities to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of the
same Church belonging and appertaining. Our Laws do likewise tell us, that the
King is the only and undoubted supreme Headof the Church of England and
Ireland to whom by Holy Scripture all Authority and power is wholly given to
hear and determine all manner of causes Ecclesiastical. Which passages
whosoever shall discreetly consider, He will esteem of these Arcana Imperii as
matters which no wise man will search into, that affects the tranquillity of
these Realms. To exemplify this further; did not Q. Elizabeth dispense with the
Act for coming to Church, and connived at the Popish Service in private Houses,
in a manner without punishment, although it were prohibited by the Law under a
pecuniary mulct? This Indulgence she used for thirteen years: And when the
Statute was made against the bringing in of Bulls, Agnus Dei's and hallowed
grains, etc. (privy tokens of Papal obedience) or to reconcile any man unto the
Church of Rome: yet was there no man in full six years proceeded against by
that Law. What imports it, whither a Law, be suspended by Practice, or
Declaration? Her Reign does afford some instances of Toleration, as also do the
Primitive Times, which I have declined to mention; But yet they are instances
of what a Prince may do upon Reason of State, and against which I have not met
with any Father, Bishop, or Lawyer that has protested.

I thought to put an end here unto this Preface, which is grown prolixe beyond
my intention. But I met lately with a Book, written by an English Lawyer in
1640. and tendered to the Parliament, which requires some Animadversions
thereupon: The Case is about Ship Money but there is an excursion against the
English Sovereignty of the British Seas, the which since I have so
perspicuously asserted against the Dutch, it seems necessary that I do not
suffer it to be betrayed by the English: I am sorry to find a sort of Civil war
betwixt the Temple, and a faction in Lincoln's Inn: and I wondered who had
suggested unto the Dutch those principles of refusing the Flag, and denying our
Rights on the Sea, until I found this Book to have given them a pretext
thereunto. If I be any thing sharp in my reflections thereon, I may be p^doned,
since those assertions are less to be endured in an English man, then in an The
case of Ship Money briefly discoursed according to the grounds of Law, Policy,
and Conscience, presented to the Parliament, Nov. 3. 1640.
Hollander: After the writings of Seldom, it is strange to find a Subject of
the King of Great Britain, that doubts Whether the Sea be a part of the King's
dominions? and adds, But grant the Sea be a part of the King's Dominions to
some purposes, How is it a part Essential or equally valuable, or how does it
appear that the Fate of the Land depends wholly upon the Dominion of the Sea?
France subsists without the Regiment of the Sea, and why may not we as well
want the same? If England quite spend it self, and pour out all its treasure
to preserve the Seignory of the Seas, it is not certain to exceed the Naval
force of France, Spain, Holland, etc. And if it content The ancient strength of
Shipping in England heretofore, considering the condition of our Neighbors, did
far transcend ours of late.
it self with its ancient strength of Shipping, it may remain as safe as it
has formerly done. Nay I cannot see that either necessity of ruin, or
necessity of dishonor can be truly pretended out of this, that France, Spain,
or Holland, etc. are too potent at Sea for Us.

The Dominion of the Seas may be considered as a mere Right, or as an Honor,
or as a Profit to us. As a Right it is a Theme fitter for Scholars to whet
their Wits upon, then for Christians to fight and spill blood about. And since
it does not manifestly appear, how or when it was first purchased, or by what
Law conveyed unto Us, we take notice of it only as matter of wit and
disputation. As it is an Honor to make others strike sail to us as They pass,
it is a glory fitter for women and children to wonder at, then for Statesmen to
contend about: It may be compared to a Chaplet of Flowers, not to a Diadem of
Gold: But as it is a profit unto Us to fence and enclose the Sea, its matter of
moment; yet it concerns Us no more then it does other Nations. By too insolent
contestations hereupon, we may provoke God, and dishonor our selves; we may
more probably incense our friends, then quell our enemies; we may make the Land
a Slave to the Sea, rather then the Sea a Servant to the Land.

I mention this passage to show the Frenzy which possessed the Heads of many
that would be reputed Patriots and Defenders of the Laws and Liberties of the
English Nation in 1636, etc. But there are some fatal periods amongst these
Northern Regions, when the Inhabitants do become so brutal, and prejudicate,
that no obligations of Reason, Prudence, or Conscience and Religion can prevail
over their passions, especially if they are instigated by the Boutefeus of the
Law in opposition to the Gospel of Peace and Obedience. At another time, it
would have seemed strange, that a Common-Lawyer should doubt whither the Sea be
a part of the King's Dominions? Whereas our Laws, and Parliaments have always
decreed it to be so. It is strange that one of that Robe should controvert our
Right thereunto, or scruple How it was purchased, since in Vulgar Titles the
Common Law looks no farther then Prescription; and in explication thereof; they
are not so nice as the Civilians: ^or by the Civil Law there is required a Just
Title, which the Common Law requires not: And Bona fides, which the Common
William ^ulbeck's Pandects of the Law of Nations. c. 4.
Law requires not: and continual Possession, which the Common Law only
requires: And This He might have seen proved in Mr. Seldom, and Sir John
Boroughs. If it be true that the Sea is free, according as some Civilians have
written, this can no otherwise be understood, then as it is commonly said, The
Highways are common and free, by which is meant that they cannot be usurped
by private persons, for their sole proper service, but remain to the use of
every one: Not therefore that they are so free, as that they should not be
under the Protection and Government of some Prince, and that See the Plea of
Chizzola for the Venetian Sovereignty over the Adriatic Sea, at the end of the
English Seldom: and (...) Archbishop of Jadera, in ^is supplement of the
History of the Us^chi.
every one might do licentiously, all which it pleased Him, either by Right or
Wrong: forasmuch as such licentiousness or Anarchy is abhorred. both by God and
Nature, both by Sea and Land. The true Liberty of the Sea excludes it not from
the Protection and Superiority of such as maintain it in Liberty, nor from the
Subjection to the Laws of such as have command over it; rather necessarily it
includes it. The Sea, no less then the Land, is subject to be divided amongst
men, and appropriated to Cities and Potentates; which long since was ordained
of God, as a thing most natural; and this was well understood by Aristotle,
when He said, That unto Maritime Cities the Sea is the Territory, because from
thence They take their sustenance and defense; a thing which cannot possibly
be, unless part of it might be appropriated in the like manner as the Land is,
which is divided betwixt Cities and Governments, not by equal parts, nor
according to their greatness; but as They have been, or are able to rule,
govern, and defend them. Berne is not the greatest City of Switzerland, and yet
it has as large a Territory, as all the rest of the Twelve Cantons put
together: And the City of Noremberg is very great, and yet the Territories
thereof hardly exceed the Walls: And the City of Venice for many years was
known to be without any possession at all upon the firm land. Upon the Sea
likewise, certain Cities of great force and valor have possessed a large
quantity thereof, others of little force, have been contented with the next
waters: Neither are there wanting examples of such, who notwithstanding they
are Maritime; yet having fertile Lands lying on the back of them, have been
contented therewith, without ever attempting to gain any Sea-dominion; Others
who being awed by their more mighty Neighbors, have been constrained to
forbear any such attempt; for which two Causes, a City, notwithstanding it be
Maritime, may happen to remain without any possession of the Sea. God has
instituted Principalities, for the maintenance of Justice, to the benefit of
Mankind, which is necessary to be executed, as well by Sea as by Land. S. Paul
says, That for this cause there were due to Princes Customs and Contributions.
It would be a great absurdity to praise the wellgoverning, regulating, and
defense of the Land, and to condemn that of the Sea: and if the Sea in some
parts for the ampleness and extreme distance thereof from the Land, was not
possible to be governed and protected, that proceeded from a disability and
defect in Mankind; as also there are Deserts so great upon the Land, as it is
impossible to protect them; witness the many Sandy parts of Africa, and the
immense vastities of the New World. As it is a gift of God, that a Land by the
Laws and public power be ruled, protected and governed, so the same happens to
the Sea: And those are deceived by a gross equivocation, who aver, that the
Land, by reason of its stability might be subjected, but not the Sea, for being
an unconstant Element, no more then the Air; forasmuch as if They intend by the
Sea and the Air, all the parts of those fluid Elements, it is a most certain
thing, that They cannot be brought under Subjection and Government, because
whilst a man serves himself with any one part of them, the other escapes out
of his power: but this chances also to Rivers, which cannot be detained. But
when one is said to rule over a Sea or River, it is not understood of the
Element, but of the site where they are placed. The water of the Adriatic and
British Seas continually runs out thereof, and yet is the same Sea, as well as
the Tiber, Po, Rhine, Thames or Severne, are the same Rivers now which they
were one thousand years ago. And this is that which is subject to Princes by
way of Protection and Government. If any man should be demanded the Question,
Whether the Sea should be left without any Protection, so that any one might do
therein well or ill, robbing, spoiling, and making it un-navigable? This would
appear so ridiculous and uncouth a demand, that all intelligent men would
peremptorily deny it: From whence it is easy to collect, that the Sea ought to
be governed by those to whom it most properly appertains by the Divine
Disposition: And if so, is it fitting They should do it with the expense of
their own Treasures and Blood, or rather that such should contribute to it, who
do equally enjoy the benefit? To this any man may form a ready answer, and say
that the doctrine of S. Paul is clear in the point (not to allege matter of
Law) that such as are under government and protection, are thereby bound to pay
customs and contributions. Wherefore if the Republic be that Prince to whom it
appertains to protect and govern the Adriatic Sea, it follows necessarily,
that whosoever navigates it, ought to be subject to their Laws, in the same
manner as such are who travail through a Country upon the Land.

Thus the case is argued by the Venetian Lawyers: and that Republic is so
jealous of the Dominion of the Adriatic, that they would adventure their
total subversion, rather then abandon that which our Discourser does so
slight. It is thereby that Venice does principally subsist; it is thence that
she derives both strength and riches; and the loss whereof would immediately
ruin all her possessions on the Terra firma: whereas that being preserved, the
Terra firma being lost was easily regained. If the Dominion of the Sea be such
a trifle as this Politician of Lincoln's Inn does imagine. What Fools have
been the Emperors and Kings of the world to insist so much thereon? How
strange is it Joan Palatius de domin. Maris, l. 1. c. 8.
that in such a Foppery even Old Rome, and Greece, Christendom and Turkey
should agree? Is it possible that They should all conspire to make this a
State-secret, (even the Hollanders themselves in the East Indies.) which is not
worth the regarding? If it be an error, it is almost authenticated by the
consent of Nations; and it seems incredible that so many ages, amidst such a
variety and dissonan^y in Ministers of State, should never discover the vanity
thereof, whereby They have obliged their Land-Territories to a defense of the
Sea, and made it a slave thereunto (as by the Dane-gilt each Hyde of Land was
charged for Sea-service) with so much imprudence. What Feminine Humor has
possessed the English for so many Centuries of years, that they should so
rigorously insist upon the Right and Honor of the Flagge? Nor is it peculiar
to this Nation, even France has more then once been involved in the same
folly, by Joan. Marquardus, J. Comitus de jure Mercator. l. 2. c. 5. and 41.
etc. Leo ab Aitzma, p. 177. Jo. Loccenius de jure marit. l. 1. c. 4. and 10.
Enacting several Decrees for it, and contracting for it in their League with
the Hollanders in 1635. And the Swedes and Danes have likewise concerned
themselves about that point, (as well as the Dominion of the Sea) in 1645. The
several Sects in England have a^ sundry times determined for it, in continuance
of this usage in our Admiralty: The rigid Presbyterians; the haughty RUMP; and
the furious Fifth-Monarchy-men; and that HYPOCRITE CROMWELL: And we see from
what Original the Pentionary De Wit, his abettors and Partisans, do transcribe
their Tenants. This Nation never was guilty of this Fanaticisme, of abandoning
the Dominion of the Seas: None were ever so ignorant and unskilled in Politics
as to contemn that whereupon the most wise and most potent Nations have
established their puissance. If we will not regard the presidents of more
ancient times, let us call to mind the glorious Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Her
great Civilian, Albericus Gentilis, assures me, that those Empires are
Meminerimus etiam, atque etiam, claudum esse Imperium, si non and maris sit.
Imo Imperium maris imperare terrae quoque. Alberie. Gentilis disput. Regal. 2.
but feeble, and lame, which have not the Dominion of the Sea annexed unto that
of their Lands: Nay, that the Dominion of the Sea is of such importance, that
whosoever is possessed thereof, and enstated therein, may dispose of the
Sovereignty at Land as He pleases. That Queen at her first coming to the
Throne, found this Kingdom in a far worse condition then it is now: the
Popish Interest was much more powerful in riches, number and nobless: the
Exchequer very low, and the revenues of the Crown altogether inconsiderable.
The Spanish Monarchy was then in its grandeur, terrified all Europe, and
proposed to its self no less aims then those of the Universal Empire. Sundry
Councils were formed for the security of Her Majesty amidst so great hazards
and difficulties, and several projects for advancing the Royal Revenue. Amongst
others Dr. John Dee (whose kindness She requited with a visit at Mortlack, and
bestowed on him the Title of Her Mathematician) being looked upon as a curious
and intelligent person, and very much honored by many of Her favorites,
communicates a project out of the Life of Pericles in Plutarch, and Thucydides,
showing that the only way for the Queen to be secure of Her subjects at home,
and against Her Enemies abroad, without infusing any jealousies into the Heads
of Her Subjects, was to increase Her Fleets to such a constant strength, that
She might instill terror into Her Neighbors, and veneration into those Princes
which were more remote from Her Majesty; that hereby She would multiply Her
Mariners and Sea forces, (the best offensive and defensive strength of
Islanders) increase Navigation and Commerce, (which would improve the Riches of
Her Cities, and Towns, and raise the Rents of Land (whereby Her Subjects would
be better enabled to assist Her) and augment the Crown revenue by Customs and
Imposts: neither would any Foreign Prince dare to tamper with Her Subjects to
Her prejudice, whilst She could awe them by Her Navy; nor would Her Subjects,
however incensed, dare to make any Domestic Commotions against a person so
redoubtable abroad. He urged the President of K. Edgar, who, though He were
Surnamed Flores Historiar. Radulfus Cestrensis. Matheus Westmonasteriensis
the Peaceable, did ensure His tranquillity by a constant Navy Royal of 4800
Ships: the which He divided into four Stations, in the four Seas, and those He
visited in Person every Summer. He inculcated the Glory of Pompey, whose Honor
had this for its principal foundation, ^um oram maritimam praedonibus
liberasset, and Imperium maris populo Romano Restituisset; Ex Asia, Ponto,
Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Syria, Scythis, Judaeis, Albanis,
Iberia, Insula Creta, Bastarnis: and super haec de Regibus Mithridate and
Tigrane Triumphavit. Plinius not. Hist. l. 7. c. 26.
that He had restored to the Romans the Dominion of the Sea. But above all He
pressed the advice and example of Pericles and the Athenians, and by the glory
thereof He excited Her Majesty to fix upon the course of strengthening Her Navy
Royal. The Queen did embrace the advice, and within the compass of a few years,
(not full four) Her reputation grew great, the trading and tillage infinitely
did increase, Her Coffers began to replenish, Her Subjects were rich, loved and
reverenced Her. She was called by Foreigners The Queen of the Sea, the
North-Starr, the restorer of the Naval Glory: Gambden's Elizabeth. An. Dom.
1561.
and in 1503 the Parliament presents Her with two Subsidies, the Clergy giving
one, the Layety another, together with two Tenths and two Fifteenths; and
amongst their reasons for this gift, this is one, That She had repaired the
Fleet, and made unexpected preparations for War and Navigation. In 1567 Her
renown diffused it self into the most Northern parts; Russia Courts Her to
increase the English Trade thither, a Muscovy Company is founded, and endowed
with great Privileges in that Kingdom; the King himself, Vasilowich, being
ready to put himself into the protection of this famous and potent Princess.
And the Grand Seignior being astonished with the exploits of that Queen against
the Spaniard, did exhibit special Honors to the English Ambassador at
Constantinople: The Fame She had won by Her Naval Expeditions having Lord Bacon
in his Answer to a Libell, published in 1592 c. 7.
given Her reputation throughout the World, and that procured unto Her Realms
tranquillity at home, and riches abroad. If we enquire into the felicities of
Her Reign, which had all their original from Her regard unto the Dominion of
the Sea; and the advancement of the Fishing Trade; you will find a great
increase of Inhabitants, new Manufactures introduced, Ships and Merchandising
increased, Wealth flowing in so that a multitude of beautiful Palaces were
built, the Towns and Cities were enlarged, Plate, Jewels, and sumptuous
Movables were every where in great plenty; great provision of Horse, Id.
ibidem, c. 2.
Armor, Weapons, and Ordnance of War. In fine, never had the English
Merchants so much respect abroad, never so great Privileges, never so few
injuries, and so speedy reparations, as under Her, that is, under a Prince
POTENT AT SEA, and RENOWNED.

This recent and famous President of Q. Elizabeth ought to add courage unto
every English Spirit, and rather excite in them an Emulation, then despondency.
The most generous passions are always the most becoming, and now such are
absolutely necessary; and if we do not with Gallantry acquit our selves of this
war, if we do not regain our Honor, draw the Fishery unto Us, and break the
Dutch Trading, I dare turn Fortuneteller to the English, and assure them, They
never shall be able to manage another war, much less have the same
opportunities; Since that Ireland is in a peaceable condition, and Scotland
ensured to us by the prudence and conduct of that modern Hero, the Duke of
Lauderdale; insomuch that those brave Souls anticipate our wishes, They do not
attend our motions, but choose to give rather then expect noble examples of
Loyalty; since that our foreign Plantations do flourish, and our Trade at
present exceeds any that England heretofore possessed, since we no longer fear
Spain, and can say of His Most Christian Majesty, This potent King is our
Ally: Our circumstances are much better then those we were in at the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth's Reign: and it will add to the ignominy of this Age, that a
Woman should dare to attempt greater things then Men dare to imagine now. We
are not to build ships; the care, vigilance, and indefatigable industry of His
Majesty has prevented us in that important point; Our Coin is not imbased as
in those days, nor our City so poor that Six thousand pounds should be the
greatest sum, with the Loan whereof the necessities of our Prince may be
supplied. England has been oftentimes in a lower condition then it is at
present: as in the end of the Reign of King Henry VIII: In the days of K.
Edward VI. the Commons were constrained to supply the Kings wants by a Tax of
Sheep Clothes, Goods, Debts, etc. for three years. We are not so weak as we
conceit our selves; we Stat. de an, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 36.
are troubled with the Spleen, and therefore phansy our selves so crazy that we
are continually dying. or Metamorphosed into Glass: We delude our selves into
timerousness, and think it to be caution and Sagacity: We quit the most
pleasant passion for the most vexatious, Hope for fear: this last is the worst
of Councillors, and therefore it is not to be wondered if so many at this time
do form unto themselves a wrong Idea of things, whilst the Advice has its
original hence. Calamities are Calamities when they do befall us, why do we
anticipate them, and make our selves rea^ly unhappy under imaginary evils? The
timorous Languisheth already under all the evils that He apprehends; a thousand
whereof in course of nature will never ensue. But Hope is the great condiment
of humane life, the great support of the distressed, the great Spurr unto the
generous and valiant: Hope, though irrational and ill-grounded, or erected upon
weak foundations, has g^ined Victories, subdued Empires, avoided dangers and
distresses, which were impossible unto Men excessively cautious. I tell you, O
most courageous English, that distress and poverty are not the way to ruin,
but universal Empire; and the miserable have achieved greater things then the
Rich and Luxurious. Are you so wretchedly poor and weak, who have a greater
stock left then Rome had to erect its Empire upon? Enquire into the conquests
of Sparta, Athens, Venice,, and those others your predecessors who claim of a
Dominion over the Seas; consider the progress of the Macedonians, Goths,
Saracens, or more modern Swedes; You are in a better condition (and yet
despair) then they when they began. But that the declination of ancient
Learning has bereaved us of the knowledge of former times, Old Rome, and old
England, afford us no Examples of despondency: Those Annals suggest unto us
nothing but what is Great and Brave, and fit for our Imitation: But we are
degenerated from the School of Aristotle to that of Epicurus, from all Moral
Gallantry and Virtue, to a most impertinent and effeminate Virtuosity. Renowned
Pericles told the Athenians that if they were ^slanders, and had a potent Fleet
they would be invincible. We are possessed of both these qualifications, by the
Goodness of God, and Prudence of our King, and yet abandon our selves unto
Despair; and even that passion which usually produces the greatest efforts of
Valor. has not that operation on our minds, which were to be desired. To
imbolden us a little more, Let us consider that the most difficult part of our
work is overcome; the puissance of the Dutch, and the opinion thereof, is in a
manner extinct: It cannot require above one years provision to complete and
ensure the happiness and prosperity of England: Their own wants and necessities
will enforce their Fishermen to settle here for a subsistence, and that one
Trade is more to be valued than ten East India Fleets. This year They are
deprived of it by the wisdom and prudence of His Royal Highness, whose courage
not the most dreadful battails, nor more terrible Storms and Tempests can
deject or intimidate. This, together with the domestic distresses of Their
States, must distract and break the Trade and Correspondences of Holland in all
parts of Europe, and transfer them to the English, if we do not neglect the
opportunity. A potent Fleet is the least charge, and the best security of these
Realms: It carries an universal awe and terror with it. I read it in the
Instructions of Pius V. to his Nuncio who negotiated in Spain for a League
against the Turks. In somma un' armata potente allegerisce le spese, and
assicura d'ogni Philippus Honorius. Praxis prudentiae Polit. page 466.
periculo casa sua, and porta gran speranza d'acquisto in casa d'^, and
congiunge le Provincie lontane, and le loro forze, quasi come un ponte, and
l'historie antiche, and modern demostrano la prova. A powerful Navy does
diminish the expense of a Realm, secures the Territories at home, carries
terror every where, and gives hopes unto Foreign Conquests; it unites the
strength and force of distant Provinces, as it were by a Br^dge; as Ancient and
Modern Histories testify. This is the old policy of England; and Edward IIII.
armed out 400 Id. Ibid. page 202.
ships. Henry V. provided above 200 great ships against France in 1418. Henry
VII. Henry VIII. never kept fewer than 100 able Men of War with Men and
Munition, even in times of Peace. The same courses were pursued by Q Elizabeth,
at the instigation of Dr. Dee, whose Proposals for a facile maintenance
thereof, 'twould be too long to insert here: But I dare say, If we duly assert
our Dominion of the Sea, a constant and potent Fleet will be no charge to the
Nation; whereas to maintain 40 or 50 only, will in time undo us. The Seamen
are our Legionaries, our Janissaries, and Mammelucks: There is not any Fund or
Bank for the English to adventure their Money in, but a good Navy well
supplied: Security and Riches are the natural result of these Councils; and all
other projects for the advancement of Trade, or improvement of Lands, are in a
manner inutile. This is the true Treasury of S. Marc, whereby Venice subsists:
All the Glory and Riches which England did enjoy during this last Century were
but a consequent of these Advises. There are two flourishing Cities in Italy,
Venice and Genoa, yet betwixt them there is this disparity, that Venice far
surpasses the other: and the reason thereof is this: The Venetians have
always had an especial regard unto the Public Honor and Naval Strength (each
private person esteeming of his Welfare and Riches, by the Greatness and
Puissance of the Commonwealth) but in Genoa each man minds his particular
Disquisit. Politic. cas. 19.
interest and advantage, without any regard to the dignity or opulency of the
State: whereby the Public Revenues are small, their strength inconsiderable;
and the Seigniory liable to the invasion of every Neighbor. It is indeed
manifest, that there will happen some times when a regard to the State may
prove inconsistent with the immediate profit of private persons: such cases we
read of in all Governments, especially of Rome, Athens, and Constantinople: but
if we examine the events of affairs, the former preserved themselves by
complying with the more general concernments, by the neglect whereof the other
lost themselves, and became a prey unto the Turks. Of two evils the least is to
be chosen, and that is the least, not which is accompanied with the greatest
inconveniences at present, but which occasions the greatest damage for the
future. Wherefore it becomes prudent Ibid. Disquisit. 41.
persons to attend unto both these cases. For as in Arithmetic one great sum
does prove much less then many smaller accounts put together and added to the
first: So in the Government of a State, that which seems a very great evil at
the first view, may judiciously be submitted unto, if the contempt thereof be
probably accompanied with greater and irreparable detriments. Besides that a
very great prejudice, if the effects thereof be of no long continuance, is to
be chosen before a less but everlasting misery.

Let us then peaceably acquiesce in those Counsils which Prudence it self seems
to have dictated, and whence we derive our present tranquillity, and an hopeful
prospect of future Strength and Riches. Let us not asperse our Superiors with
Calumnies, to their great discouragement, and the distraction of the Realms.
Let us think better of them, and more meanly of our selves. There is not any
Pest so dangerous to a State, as that of declaiming against Men in Authority: I
need not urge the destruction of the Florentine Republic; which was ruinated
thereby: we may remember what did precede our Wars, and was the consequent of
those specious pretexts of bringing Delinquents to Trial; and how fatal was the
Denomination of Malignants. No Ruler, no Minister of State could ever please
all people; and some have valued themselves and their Counsils by a repugnancy
to the populace. If we will consult the Presidents of Machiavel. discurs. l. 1.
c. 8.
Rome, we shall find it to have been a part of their Civil prudence, rather to
pass by, then punish the failors of their Magistrates; and to have had that
regard unto Authority, that those who had either voluntarily mis-employed their
power, received but gentle punishments; and such as had miscarried through
ignorance were appaied with Honors and Rewards. They did imagine that public
affairs were accompanied with so much of Solicitude, so great difficulties,
that 'twas imprudence to augment the cares of their Governors with new terrors
and additional considerations id. Ibid. c. 31.
of their personal hazards, if they miscarried in their Counsils, or
Transactions: And certainly those Men create a very ill president against
themselves who instruct the giddy multitude in complaints against their
Governors. If there be any rumors of this nature diff^sed through the nation,
be they well or illgrounded, they are unseasonable, and all wise Men ought to
stifle them as far as they can possible. All private animosities, and injuries
ought to be forgotten out of a respect to the general welfare. Not only Rome,
and Greece, but also the Barbarians have celebrated those who have relinquished
their domestic concerns and feuds, the better to serve their Country. Thus
Themistocles and Aristides being joined in an Embassy, agreed to lay aside all
particular quarrels betwixt them, until their returns. And I cannot but
recommend unto Christians the example of the Christian Emperor Constantine:
Several People resorted unto Him with Remonstrances and Complaints; the
Emperor commanded them all to bring in before Him on a certain day all their
Libels and Petitions, that He might take cognizance thereof: Which being done,
He arose up, and having with a grave Speech reproved them for retarding the
public business and concernments by Private quarrels and remonstrances, He
cast them all into the fire, without vouchsafing to read those Papers which
were likely to embroile, not amend His Affairs. That Nicene Council which we
all reverence, did admire and magnify this conduct, and by their Authority do
I propose it to the imitation of our Parliaments; though the considerations of
the distracted and forlorn condition wherein the late-united Provinces, and
the Kingdom of Poland now suffer, are more immediate Objects to convince this
Age, How unseasonable and dangerous an attempt it is for Inferiors to foment
even just quarrels or resentments against their Superiors, much more to revile
and persecute them with unjust calumnies, idle suggestions, and frivolous
surmises, whilst the approach, or attack of a most puissant Enemy, or a
suspicious Neighbor does oblige us to pursue the more secure courses.

An APOLOGY, etc.
WE cannot but with some resentments behold those, who, after that gracious Act
not only for our Indemnity, but the utter Oblivion of our defaults, continue to
upbraid Us, and unseasonably to foment those differences amongst the English,
which the most Heroical Example, Authority, Prudence and Charity of his Sacred
Majesty has so studiously and wisely endeavored to extinguish. We are all
promiscuously twisted together by mutual affinity, relations, and common
Interest, subjected equally to the same Prince, and Natives of the same Realms,
and we do heartily desire that we may be looked upon as Brethren, under which
Civil consideration we do regard our other Fellow Subjects. We profess to
retain no other Memory of our former quarrels, then what endeareth us to the
service of his Majesty, by imprinting in us a sense of those dangers which
arise from misinterpretations of State Affairs, vain jealousies and
imaginations of remote and foreign consequences which may happen, God knows
when, from such grounds and principles as popular brains do rather fancy to
themselves, then really comprehend: We do experimentally know upon what
specious pretenses the vindicative and Ambitious spirits do contrive their
si^ister and wicked designs to the public detriment, and the great abuse of
well-meaning persons: And we have been so often betrayed, and suffered so much
hereupon, that they must be strangely prepossessed, who think us not
impregnable against any suggestions or attempts of that nature. We are
infinitely sensible of the Clemency, which our King expressed to us in his Act
of ^race; and we think He has completed his Royal favor toward us by the
late Declaration for suspending the penal Laws in reference to All
Non-conformists: It is our unhappiness to dissent from the doctrine and
discipline of that Church to which his Majesty does adhere: but since we
continue to do so rather out of Zeal for the supposed Truth, then Faction
against His Majesty, and pursue spiritual not temporal advantages thereby; It
is evident, that the Civil Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli, l. 1. c. 9.
Clapmar. de arcan. ^ip. l. 4. c. 21.
Government can receive no prejudice by such toleration of us, It may receive
much accessional strength from the continuance of so numerous parties, and
perhaps (if we may credit great Politicians) some security from the so-much-
exclaimed against diversity thereof; since it is apparent that wheresoever
there happen to be in any Realm potent factions, Machiavell. disput. l. 1. c. 4.
and such as the supreme Authority cannot well extirpate, it is much more safe,
for the general peace, that dissentions remain under many entire and lesser
parties, then be reduced to a narrower compass; And the Prince is best served,
whilst each party distinctly courts and strives to merit his esteem and
affection. Such like insinuations have heretofore been made by such as the
world valued for policy; but we request not any benefit therefrom, but upon the
regards of Piety, desiring to serve the same God, and pray for the same
Sovereign under our several forms of worship. How zealously the Fathers
justify the present Declaration of his Majesty, it is a thing well known to
the Daille de usu patrum. l. 2. c. 6. Chillingworth against Knot. chapter 5. Sect.
96.
Learned; and Mr. Chillingworth (a Book licensed by the greatest Episcoparians,
and reprinted under no less Authority since his Majesty's return) does make a
large harangue in the behalf of it: And if to impose upon men the profession of
what they do not believe, seem the most ready way to Atheism, and if Atheism be
much more pernicious to Government then Superstition, the late procedure of his
Majesty is authorized by the most prudential documents: and we do heartily wish
that the reign of his Majesty may be as prosperous and as glorious as was that
of Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius, etc. who are the illustrious Albericus
Gentilis de ju^e belli. l. 1. c. 9.
presidents in this way of Royal clemency.

It is most certain that nothing did more in bolden the Dutch in their
insolences against his Majesty and the English Nation, then the opinion they
had that we being subjected to the rigor of the penal Laws, must needs be
thereupon discontented with the present Government, and inclined to favor them
during the war. But how cogent soever were those motives which made us desire
greater indulgence, we have not so learned Christ as thereupon to become rebels
and enemies to our native Country: Neither should ever De Wit by his
artifices and so^hisins convince us of the equity of their Cause, who in the
height of religious extravagancies, and fanaticism, did so vigorously assert
those English rights, in the defense of which His Majesty is now embarked.

We are not at all concerned in favor of the Dutch, because They profess the
same Protestant Religion, which the English adhere unto. It is most certain
that the sense of Religion does not extinguish Civil rights; neither ought
Injuries therefore to be tolerated, because the Authors are Protestants: No
Judge, no man regards the Effusion of Christian blood, when a cut-^urse, or a
Robber is to be put to death: we consider here the demeanor, not the Creed of
the criminals, and injurious. The Dutch pressed us with such Arguments as
these, when they had in ^ain assaulted our Fleet in the Downs, A. D. 1652. They
harangued unto us by their Ambassador Adrian Pauw about the Interest See the
Oration and Memorials printed with the Declaration of War, 1652.
of Protestancy in general, and the mutual regards that ought to be betwixt
Nations avowing the same Reformed and Orthodox Religion: But the Council of
State then would not be amused with such expressions, nor relinquish thereupon
the Rights and Honor of England: They challenged the Right of the Flag, as
anciently and indubitably appertaining to this Nation: and esteemed that no
trivial Ceremony, but so See the Declaration, and An^ers of the Council of^
State. ^652.
important a matter as to bottom the Quarrel, and pursue the War thereupon. We
did not look upon the thing as a Civility, which 'twas indifferent, if paid,
or omitted: but beheld it as Landlords do those small acknowledgments of a
Capon, or Pepper-corn, by which their Tenants hold their Lands: We esteemed it
such a Ceremony as whereby woe preserved our Title to the Dominion and
Sovereignty of the British Seas, the which Seas if we, like Prodigals, do not
improve to all Advantages; yet we would not bereave our Posterity of their
Right to do it: We said, 'twas a Right which All Princes and States, even those
of Holland, and their Ancestors, had allowed to belong unto England; that a
long Usage and Prescription (which 'twas easy to deduce out of Authent'ck
records) had confirmed unto us. The Dutch were not then so insolent as to
demand of us any Declaration, that we pretended not thereby to the Dominion of
the British Seas; but we know very well that Our Sovereignty over those Seas
was suspended thereupon, and that they did not refuse the Flag but that they
might deprive us of, and usurp to themselves the other. The Dutch then were not
so impudent as openly to justify their Admiral, and other Captains which
refused to show that Obeisance; They did not commissionate them to deny it, but
intimated to them their displeasure at it, whilst they publicly avowed, That
they Adrian Pauw in his Memorial tendered to the Council of State ibid.
had ordained them to continue those civilities and testimonies of affection
which were usual upon any rancounter with the English Men of War. Their Pride
was not become so extravagant as of late it showed it self against His Majesty,
and yet we thought fit to abate it then, and therefore we cannot be justly
suspected to be averse from this quarrel; All our claim, All our prescription
was deduced from Crowned Heads, and we do not imagine the Rights of England to
be lessened, because that His Majesty does sway the British Scepter. We
prosecuted that War with so much courage and conduct, that our valor amazed
the whole world, until the achievements of his Royal Highness did give Men
greater occasions for wonder: And what we demanded by way of Treaty this
Article will attest.

ARTIC. XV.
That the Ships and Vessels of the said United Provinces, as well Men of War,
as others, be they single Ships, or in Fleets, meeting MSS. Comment. of the
Treaty and Ar^icles betwixt the English and Dutch in 1653.
at Sea with any of the Ships of War of this State of England, or in their
Service and wearing the Flag, shall strike the Flag and lower their Topsail
until they be passed by, and shall likewise submit themselves to be visited if
thereto required, and perform all Leo ab Aitzma hist. trac. pacis Belgicae. p.
841.
other respects due to the said Commonwealth of England, to whom the Dominion
and Sovereignty of the British Seas belong.

This was one of the Articles delivered to their four Ambassadors, November. 18.
1653. And the pretended Commonwealth did so peremptorily insist thereon, that
without the Solemn declaration and acknowledgment of the English Sovereignty
over the British Seas, they could not any De mari, and piscation^ mentio fuit:
de iis ante omnia conve^endum. etc. Leo ab Aitzma p. 845.
way treat with the Hollanders. And it is well known to those which were
commissioned to treat with their Ambassadors (I had this relation from Sir
Robert Reynolds, who was one of them) that the said Ambassadors (being
introduced and recommended to their pity by Hugh Peter's) did offer to the
several Commissioners, that the States General should by a public deed
acknowledge that The Dominion and Sovereignty of the British Seas did belong
unto the [pretended] Commonwealth of England: and that Thus much should be
expressed in the several Commissions and Instructions issuing out of their
Admiralties, and Their Ships upon this account, avowedly, to strike the Flag
and lower their Topsail. We so much the more insisted thereon, because we knew
the usual evasions of the Dutch would otherwise reduce affairs to a second
dispute, if ever They recollected their strength. We wonder that They should so
far obliterate in their minds all sense of the respect due to Crowned Heads
above the Republics; and so extremely forget what they owe to his Royal
Ancestors, as to entreat His Majesty so uncivilly in this case, whereas in
June 1652. after their Fleet had been repulsed by Blake, to appease Us, They of
their own accord, did declare by the Lord Adrian Paaw, that The States General
had no intention This is expressed in his Memorial given in to the Council of
State, and printed with the Declaration.
to lessen the Honor and Dignity of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England; but that They had given command heretofore, and also since the late
unhappy Accident, New Order, That upon meetings and salutings of the Fleets or
Ships of War, concerning the striking down of the Flag, and what belong to it,
there should be the same Honor done to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, as was formerly done during the other Government. We cannot but wonder
that They should be so ready then to exhibit those Honors to such as they were
not due unto, and now refuse to pay them when they are due by an immemorial
custom, which They cannot plead ignoran^ to; The Rights of the Crown of
England, being the basis of the Parlamentary pretensions; and the measures for
the adjusting those Honors were taken from what had been done during the
Monarchy of England.

To the Article aforesaid, as it is worded, their Ambassadors Nov. MSS.
Comment.
22. 1653. did not make any exception, either as to the striking of the Flag,
or Sovereignty of the Sea; but they protested against the visiting Leo ab
Aitzma. p. 847.
of their Ships, as repugnant to the practice of their Country, and subject to
a thousand disorders and disputes, and injuries to their State; besides, the
visiting is not to be reciprocal. Whereupon Cromwell, in the name Visitationem
navium dicebat esse rem minime novam, sed jus indubitatum dependens a
Supremitate Dominii in mare, Anglis competente. Ius adeo antiquum, quam ullum
in Europa ab aliquo aliud protensum. Numerum Navium non ess^ nisi juris istius
sequ^ quam nunc magis quam unquam d^bant conservare; cupidi quippe antiquas
protegere prar^ ^vas, novis injuri^s l^sas. Leo ab Aitzma, p. 848.
of the Commissioners replied, That the searching of their Ships was no new
thing; but an undoubted right which naturally followed from the Sovereignty of
the Sea, the which did appertain to England: It was likewise an efflux of the
same dominion, for the English to prescribe unto them, with what number of
Ships of War they should pass the British Seas: That they ought to be much more
zealous now for the asserting the said ancient dominion of the Sea in all its
branches; because it had been so lately, and so notoriously, disputed and
invaded. And whereas the Ambassadors had somewhat boastingly said in their
Memorial, that Their people were of such Generosity that they would never
endure such Terms: To this Cromwell said he would reply no more, Then that we
were Englishmen, and had not lost our Courage.

After this the Ambassadors came to be more calm, and Dec. 23. 1653. gave in a
particular Answer to the Articles exhibited: and as to this, They desired it
might be extended in this manner.

That the Ships and Vessels of the United Provinces, as well Men of War, as
others, meeting with any of the Ships of War of the State of England, shall
honor and dignifie them with the striking of the Flag, and lowering the
Topsail in such a manner as ever under any form of Government in times past
they have been honored and dignified: and to prevent all quarrels for the
future, MSS. Cemment.
the particulars thereof shall be regulated by the advice of the Generals and
Commanders.

But hereunto the Council of State would not assent, being resolved to have the
Dominion of the Sea recognized by them: And the Ambassadors did at last
resolve to comply with them in that demand, beseeching them that they would
mitigate the other Articles: But Cromwell having deposed first that pretended
Parliament, and then the Council of State, to ingratiate himself with them, and
secure his usurpations the better, He consented December. 26. 1653. That the
Article should run thus.

That the Ships and Vessels of the United Provinces, as well Men of War, as
others, meeting with any of the Ships of War of the MSS. Comment.
State of England, shall strike their Flag, and lower their Topsail.

The Ambassadors hereupon December. 28. 1653. moved That it might be limited
within the Narrow Seas, which commonly are called the British Seas, and by a
special Order it may be regulated with a distinction of places and shores in
such a manner, That the same honor and dignity of striking the Flag and
lowering the Topsail, be observed for the future, as in ti^e past under the
former Government it has been observed.

On the same day Cromwell returned them this Answer, that For the inserting of
those words, the British Seas, He did adhere thereto: but it seems He thought
it a Diminution of his Glory, to have the respects paid to his Highness
compared with those which were usual to the former Kings of England: Whereupon
the Ambassadors rejoyn: That the words (In such a manner as it has been
observed in times past under any Ibid.
former Government) derogate nothing from the State or Nation (...) but are
necessary for them to justify it to their Superiors and People, supposing it
to be no Novelty.

By these degrees was the Thirteenth Article of the Treaty betwixt Cromwell and
the Dutch, modelled into what is printed in Aitzma: And thence it was
transcribed into the Tenth Article of the English League made at White Hall
Sept. 14. 1662. and afterward into the Nineteenth Article at Breda. In the
management hereof we may observe, that Cromwell the better to ensure himself
against his foreign and domestic Enemies, did rather leave untouched and
undecided the Sovereignty of the Seas, then relinquish the Right: Secondly by
the British Seas in the Article about the Flag, are meant the Four Seas, and
not the Channel only. Which is evident hereby, in that Art. 3. He does not
distinguish the British Sea from the North-Sea, as in the Seventh Article of
the Treaty of Breda; but includes the North Sea in the British Seas, where He
mentions depraedations happening twelve days after the Peace being signed. It
is also to be remarked that the pretended Commonwealth did explain what They
meant by the British Seas.

ARTIC. XIV.
That the Inhabitants and Subjects of the United Provinces may with Their Ships
and Vessels furnished as Merchantmen freely use their navigation, sail, pass
and repass in the Seas of great Britain, and Ireland, and the Isles within the
same, (commonly called the British Seas) without any wrong or injury to be
offered them by This Article Cromwell in the name of the Coun^il of State told
them was a genuine result of the Dominion of the Sea; that They were Sovereigns
of the British Seas, and should be very unwilling to understand that any Fleet
of 70 or 80 Men of war should come into their Seas, Rivers, or Harbors,
without giving any notice before of their coming. Leo ab Aitzma, p. 850.
the Ships or People of this Commonwealth, but on the contrary shall be
treated with all Love and friendly offices. And may likewise with their Men of
War, not exceeding such a number as shall be agreed upon in this Treaty, sail,
pass and repass thorough the said Seas to and from the Countries and Ports
beyond them. But in case the States General shall have occasion to pass the
said Seas with a great number of Ships of War, they shall give three months
notice of their intentions to the said Commonwealth, and obtain their consent
for the passing of such a Fleet, for preventing all jealousies and
misunderstandings betwixt the States by means thereof.

This therefore, being the notion of those times, must contain the sense of
Cromwell; and we wonder that the Considerer should offer to intimate as if
because the Article had been varied in the words, as aforesaid, that therefore
it was suited to his sense: No less strange is it, that He should expound the
intentions of his Majesty by the privacy of Cromwell's Conclave, and not
according to the true, legal and known import of the words. We add, that if He
found in our ordinary Maps the Channel, and British Sea, as equipollent and
Synonymous terms; yet He never found the Channel to be called the British
Seas: and therefore that allegation is most impertinent, and fallacious; And He
must seek to the common vogue for a more authentic explication thereof. As
little does it avail Him to find in the Seventh Article a distinction betwixt
the British Sea and North Sea; for, seeing that the Number is varied, it is
most certain the Sense is also. However it is a Rule in the Civil Law,
Dubitationis gratia quae apponuntur, nocere non praesumuntur. Philippus Decius
de reg. furis. Reg. 81. Qua dubitationis to^enda causa contractibus inseruntur:
jus commune non ladunt.
Such clauses or words as are put in to prevent disputes, ought not to occasion
any, or prejudice the inferter. Surely Pride, or Passion transported the
Considerer beyond his reason, when He esteemed that Objection invincible; as it
did beyond Truth, when He distinguished betwixt Fleets and Ships: and made
Cromwell to do so too; of which there is not the least appearance, to our
knowledge.

How willing soever the Dutch were to acknowledge the Rights of England as to
the Dominion of the British Seas, and Flag; They still insisted upon the
Freedom to fish without License, or Letters of Safeconduct. This they proposed
in a draught of Articles tendered by L^o ab Aitzma page 755.
them to Mr. St. John's, and after to the Council of State. But the pretended
Commonwealth refused absolutely to assent thereunto; nor would They admit of
any Treaty with the Dutch, except they would first acknowledge The English
Sovereignty of those Seas, and contract Leo ab Aitzma p. 845.
for the Liberty of Fishing. The Article which They imposed was this.

ARTIC. XVII.
The people and inhabitants of the said United Provinces of what condition or
quality soever They be, shall with their Busses and other MSS. Comment. Leo ab
Aitzma p. 841.
Vessels fitted for that purpose, have liberty from time to time, for the term
of one and twenty years next coming, to sail and fish as well for Herrings as
all other sort of Fish, great and small, upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great
Britain, and Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where, and in such
manner as they have been formerly permitted to fish. In consideration whereof
the States General shall, during that Term, pay into the public Treasury of
this Common wealth at the City of London the sum of -- The sum was not adjusted
in the Treaty at first, but they intended one hundred thousand pounds, besides
payment for constant Wafters, or Convoyes.
at two equal payments upon every twenty fourth day of June, and twenty fourth
day of December. The first payment to begin on the twenty fourth day of June
next.

Hereunto the Dutch excepted; That by the taking of such a Lease for the
Fishing, the States General should be put out of an Immemorial possession
without Cause or Reason: Having always enjoyed the freedom of Fishing. As they
were ready to prove by an ample deduction of Arguments and Evidences. And
instead of this Article, They thought it reasonable to urge MSS. Comment. Leo
ab Aitzma p. 847.
the Fourteenth Article of the Treaty called Intercursus Magnus, A. D. 1495.
viz. That the people and Inhabitants of either State, of what condition or
quality soever they be, shall freely without any molestation, safeguard or
pass, sail and fish every where at Sea. The Council of State were very angry at
this plea of the Ambassadors; and told them, that They wondered with what
confidence the States General could pretend to an Immemorial possession of the
Fishery, seeing that the time was not yet Immemorial, since They first were
owned to be Free States: If, according to the Civil Law, we allow an 100 years
as a just prescription, yet was it not so long since their Ancestors first
possessed themselves of the Brill, A. D. 1572. That the time wherein they
fished as Subjects of the House of Burgundy (by virtue of a League made betwixt
England and those Dukes.) did not establish an Immemoridlpossession, or
prescription in favor of the States General. That, since the Fishery was held
by the Subjects of Burgundy, and they exempted from the paying for Licenses and
Convoyes only by virtue of a Treaty; Nothing was more manifest than the
Immemorial Right of the English, whereby before that Treaty they did exact money
for Licenses and Convoyes: That what was held by League did expire with the
said League: That this League of Intercourse was expired upon the subsequent
Wars betwixt Qu. Elizabeth and the Crown of Spain: and had never been confirmed
again since that time: That the Dutch could not claim any Liberty by virtue of
that League now; partly because the Alterations of the Government in the
Netherlands, and other accidents have deprived the English of those great
benefits which accrued to them by that Treaty, and in consideration whereof it
was assented unto by them; and consequently, It was lawful and just for
Privilegiumstnitur. finita privilegii causa.
them to resume their Right of the Fishery: and that the Effect should cease
with its final Cause: partly, because that the United Provinces are not to be
deemed the same people, since their Union into a Republic, and alienation from
the other Provinces and Dominion of the Dukes of Burgundy, that they were
before: They are not the persons with whom the English made any such Contract,
or ever renewed it. It is most certain that Qu. Elizabeth did deprive the Hanse
Towns of their privileges in London, upon these reasons; That since the English
had acquired the manufacture of Cloth, and could manage that Trade themselves,
therefore there was no need, no reason to continue the privileges of the Hanse
Towns which had been granted purposely for the better exportation Joan.
Marquard. ICtm de privilegiis Hanseati^is in Anglia.
and vending of our Cloth: Also, because that most of the Hanse Towns were
extinguished and esloigned from the first and ancient confederation, which
consisted of 72 Towns: and therefore the Corporation, or subject of those
privileges being ceased, the privileges themselves were ceased. It was
further urged, that since the expiration of the said Treaty, whatsoever Liberty
the Dutch had taken in Fishing, it was an usurpation upon the English rights;
that by the Civil Law, they were possessores malae fidei, and consequently
could not Lessius de jure and justitia l. 2. c. 6. dub. 2. possessor malae
fidei non praescribit. Inter regulas juris.
claim any Prescription: They knew that the Right of the Fishery was vested in
the English; and since They fished in those Seas during the Burgundian League
in right of the English, and afterward by a notorious usurpation, 'twas no
less evident that They had not any possession, then it is, that whatsoever They
had was not Immemorial: And therefore the English expressed a great kindness
unto them in not demanding Possessor malae fidei tam de fructibus perceptis,
quam de his qui potuerunt percipi tenetur. Thil. Decius de reg. juri. r^g. 78..
4. 5. Leo ab Aitzma p. 8; (...).
Satisfaction for the past Fisking. Besides their possession had been at
several times disturbed, and therefore the claim invalid. For not only Philip.
II. had taken a lease of it in the days of Q. Mary, for one and twenty years:
but K. James had asserted his right, and prohibited the Dutch to fish without
License A. D. 1609. the like was done by K. Charles; and the E. of
N^rthumberland enforced them to recognize the English rights.

These Arguments were vehemently urged by the Commissioners of the Council of
State at several conferences: and notwithstanding the boast of the Hollanders,
that they would largely and plainly deduce their possession and rights: All
that They did allege was, That they had Immemorally fished there without
License: That this was assented unto by the Treaty of 1495. That before that
League they did not take Licenses; nor could it well be imagined that they did:
for the Herring-fishing, id. ibid.
since the Invention to pickle Herrings, was not much more ancient then that
Treaty; It being discovered A. 1414. That They did not know upon what grounds
K. Philip did take the Lease aforesaid; since He needed not to do it, by reason
of the said Treaty. That the Proclamation of K. James was never put in
execution; but at the request of the Hollanders, either suspended, or totally
abrogated: That the enterprise of the E. of Northumberland was an act of force
and violen^e, and his expedition merely praedatory: That They expected more
from the Justice of the Republic, then that They should follow so evil
presidents. Hereunto the Commissioners replied; That the English were obliged
to vindicate their proper Rights; which were conveyed to ibid.
them by a Prescription, and possession, truly Immemorial; And of the reality
The discourse is annexed hereunto.
thereof They had in the beginning of the War convinced their Ambassador, the
Lord of Hemsted. That the Kingdoms of France and Sweden were not less potent,
nor less considerable then the United Provinces, and might as well insist upon
the Freedom of the Fishing, as they: but They did not, but did seek leave for
to fish in the British Seas. That the Dutch ought to follow so illustri^us
examples in recognizing the English rights, rather then create an ill precedent
for others to dispute them. That it was not the intention of the Parliament, to
exact any v^st sum of money from them ^nnually, but to acquiesce with a
moderate recognition: But They would never do England that dishonor, as to
relinquish totally that Right.

These Dutch are always arrogant in their Language, but empty in their proofs.
How vain is their Immemorial possession? Common Impudence would not embolden a
man to insist thereon. It is evident, They never fished without License, except
that it was otherwise agreed upon by League. And if that the modern way of
pickling Herring, were of so late an Invention; yet They had Jo. Is. Pontan.
hist. Dan. l. (...). A. D. 1182. Zuerius Boxhorn. Apolog pro navigat.
Hollandor. Jo. Is., Pontan. hist. Dan. l 7. A. D. 1320. Joan Angelius de
rebusp. v. Hanseat. part. 3. (...). 24. Jo. Isac. ^ontan. hist. Dan. l. 8. A. D
363.
some other way of ordering them heretofore: For it appears by the Treaties
betwixt the Crown of Denmark, and the Dutch, A. D. 1324. and afterward by
other Leagues betwixt that Realm, and the Hanse-Towns, A. D. 1370. as also by
the Records of Scotland and England, that the Herring-fishing was very great
and considerable long, before that the Fisherman of Bier^let was born. The
reason K. ^hilip proceeded to take the Lease, was, because that His Spanish
Subjects could not fish otherwise in the Irish Seas: they not being
comprehended in the Intercursus magnus; and and He well knowing the English
rights as to the Fishery. If K. James did not execute his Proclamation, He
never did suspend, or renounce it; but with great fervor pursued his claim,
and forced the Dutch to acknowledge his rights, and desert the pleas of
Immemorial See the Letter at the end of the English Seldom.
possession, and Freedom of the Sea. I do not find any violence or depredation
used by the E. of Northumberland, nor that the Dutch did protest against his
actions: I have already given an account of that expedition: and I had rather
believe what that Honorable Person sets his hand unto, then all the clamours
of these impudent Hollanders.

It is most certain, that the pretended Commonwealth did suspend the whole
Treaty, upon this one point of the Fis^ing: they duly considered that it would
be impossible, that the English should be able to counterpoise the Naval force
of the United Provinces, without a numerous Seminary of Seamen; and that in
order thereunto, the English had no other means at present, but the Colliery at
New Castle, which did not bear any proportion with the Dutch Fishery: They
supposed that it would be impossible for the English, ever to replenish the
maritime Towns, to advance Trade, and render themselves terrible or useful to
foreign Princes (which motives sway chiefly in Alliances) unless they did
regain the Fishery unto England: And they esteemed these reasons so powerful,
that they seemed impregnable against the most amicable and religious harangues
of the Dutch, and also against the tender of 300000 l. offered to purchase
their Amity. On the other side, the Dutch, not minding the title of Sovereigns
of the Sea, nor the glory of the Flag, but the real prejudice whereto they
should subject themselves, if they relinquished the Fishing, or made a
(temporary and precarious) contract for it, with a people jealous of the growth
and power of Holland (and therefore determined to increase MSS. Comment. Leo ab
Aitzma p. 851.
their Naval force, Seamen and Trade) did resolutely declare, They would treat
no longer, but must return to their Superiors. December. 15. 1653. In the mean
while Oliver determines openly to proclaim himself Protector, and having
effected that, the Ambassadors were stayed, and the Treaty resumed: and Oliver
sends them this Answer to their last Memorial, concerning the Fishing. The
Lords Deputies having by their former Papers desired that Freedom of Fishing
MSS. Comment.
in these Seas might be declared in this Treaty: the seventeenth Article was
thereupon propounded, whereby License is granted to the people of the United
Provinces, upon the Terms therein expressed: which notwithstanding is in their
Lordships power to accept or refuse: But it cannot be admitted, that any thing
should be inserted in this Treaty that may prejudice the right of this State in
the Fishery.

No sooner had Oliver enstated Himself in the Protectorship, but He found the
Dutch to dally with His Highness: They listened to His proposals, and essaied
how far He would condescend; offering to stand Cerimoniam illam tecti vel nudi
capitis parvi quidem fecerunt. Leo ab Aitzma p. 852.
uncovered in his presence; but protesting They had no power from their
Superiors to conclude and sign any Articles with this New Government.
Whereupon They desired a pass, and departed Jan. 6. 1653. In the ensuing Spring
the Treaty was resumed and concluded: The points of the Sovereignty of the
Seas, and Of the Fishery were left undecided: The Protector thinking it most
for His convenience to decline the mentioning of those particulars, since He
had gained other Articles that did conduce to His personal security against the
Sectaries and Commonwealth-men at home, and the Royalists abroad. The Dutch not
being to aid, or suffer any in their Territories to assist with Ships, Arms,
Money, Leo ab Aitzma p. 854.
Victuals or advise, any of His Enemies: but to assist Him upon any occasion of
danger with Soldiers and Ships, in what proportion should be agreed upon. Nor
should They receive into their Territories any Rebels, or declared Enemies of
His, nor aid them in any manner wheresoever They were, nor permit any others to
do it. In fine, It was agreed, that no person in the United Provinces, of what
dignity or degree soever, living under the United Provinces (At first the
Prince MSS. Comment.
of Orange, and the Princess Mary were named; but the Dutch desired that They
might not be expressly named, but included in the general terms afaresaid)
should receive into their Dominions, Houses, Castles, privileged, or not
privileged, (wheresoever situate) any Enemy or Rebel of England, or assist
them with Men, Ships, Anmunition, Counsil, Leo ab Aitzma p. 855.
Victuals, upon penalty of forfeiting all their Estates during life. Whereby i^
is apparent that His present Majesty of great Britta^n; could not have been
relieved by His Sister, or Nephew, in the greatest extremities imaginable, with
one morsel of bread.

Upon these concessions, (which make up the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12th Articles of
the Treaty) did Oliver consent to leave those other important points undecided:
Wherein as He never had any ^onsent of Ours, so we must declare that We should
think Our selves guilty of all the Blood shed in that fierce War, if we did not
profess, That the Right of the Flag; the Dominion of the British Seas; and the
disposal of the Fishery, are just, honorable and necessary causes of a War
with the Hollanders, or any else.

Thus much being said in behalf of what is the principal subject of this War,
We shall say less in defense of the other complaints insisted on by his
Majesty. We cannot see any reason why we may not reckon upon the English at
Surinam as our Fellow Subjects, since it never was their intention by
Capitulation to become otherwise: It cannot seem to any intelligent person a
Question, Whether They be the King of England's Subjects? If there can be any
dispute, it is this only, Whether Adrian Crynsen had power to make any such
Capitulations with those of Su^inam? If there had been any Superior Commander
at that time in those parts, or had there been any possibili^y of consulting
the States General upon the matter; somewhat might be said for the Dutch: But
affairs being otherwise, and the Articles only such as that They might
transport themselves and their Good^ into some of the plantations of his
Majesty; No Civil Lawyer will say, but that Adrian Crynsen might grant thus
much, and the States be concluded by His transaction: Otherwise Ea ducibus data
videntur omnia sine quibus tractari bellum, aut demandata belli pars non
contingit. U^ de data jurisdictione, and de mandato Iurisconsulti scribunt.
Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli, l. 2. c. x. Grotius de jure belli. l. 3. c. 22
sect. 9. Alber. Gentilis de jure belli commentat. 2. p. 89.
it will be necessary that the Commander in chi^f, or Admiral, be present in
all places; or opportunities of War will be lost: It is therefore adjudged,
that in cases of no higher moment, that Captain be reputed Supreme, who has
none upon the place above Him: And in case that the States General would not
ratify the Articles, Common equity obliges that the inhabitants of Surinam be
put again into the condition they were in before the surrender: for the one
party cannot be deemed bound, the other being free upon the non-ratification.
Ipse Bodinus in eo fallitur, quod istis ducibus obligat contrah^ntes cum eis:
interim dum non obligat aut duces, aut ducum dominos. Imo enim neque illi
contrahentes erunt obligati, donec domini ducum ratum habendo gesta ducum
suorum ipsi obligentur: ut sit aequalitas. Quod diserte Decius consil. 531.
Alex. 5. cons. 40. Alberic. Gentil. de, jure belli, l. 2. c. 10. Injustum est
promissorem in obligatione esse sine causa: ergo and nequit ante acceptationem,
quamdiu illa pendet, obligari. Joan. a Felden in not. ad Hug. Grot. de jure
belli. c. xi.. 18.


In the East Indies they have so injured the English from time to time, that it
cannot be presumed They will ever put a stop to their attempts there, until
they have totally destroyed our Trade, which is I should not have mentioned
this after that so many late Treaties have buried it in Oblivion; but that upon
the last breach of the League at Breda, All precedent claims are revived, and
all obstacles thereto are removed.
now reduced to that pass, that it consists in Pepper, Calicoes, and such
Commodities as are scarce worth the fetching, if we compare them with the Gemms
and Spices wherewith the Hollanders are fraighted. The Earbarities of Amboyna
will never be forgotten by the English Nation: being acted in time of peace;
and which is more, the chief Actors thereof justified, and preferred by the
States: and never any justice done upon them, though the pretended
Commonwealth, and Oliver obliged them thereunto. Artic. 27. No Treaty (though
K. James concluded many with them) in any Kings reign, no nor under Oliver,
could ever oblige the Hollanders there: In the East Indies it is that they seem
to have renounced not only Christianity, but Morality: or rather, it is there
they show that wickedness which here they palliat^. Our Court of Admiralty
preserves so many late Records of complaints against the Dutch in Guin^y, and
several parts of Europe, that the cries from the East Indies would not be
heard, but that they are able to reach Heaven, and move the most o^durate and
^nsensible on earth.

We cannot remember that War of the pretended Commonwealth against the Dutch,
without forming a parallel thereof, with that His Majesty is now engaged into.
The Dutch having attacqued the Fleet of Blake in the Downs, with an intent to
destroy the English power at Sea, and consequently to bereave them totally of
their Trade, and reduce them to a condition of receiving protection from
Holland, or becoming liable to any invasion: We did not thereupon seek a
tedious and uncerta^n redress from an Embassy and Treaty with that ^erfidious
State; but without denunciation proceeded to seize their Ships, and exercise
all Acts of hostility. We did not think it requisite to proceed by the ordina^y
rules of War against such an Enemy: Those formalities are to be observed
amongst the Civil part of mankind, not with Carthaginians, or Hollanders: They
that suffer not themselves to be concluded by the Laws of Nations, cannot
challenge any benefit from them; neither ought They to remons^rate against the
violation of those Piratis and praedonibus nulla mane^t ju^a: qui omnia jura
violant Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli, l. 1. c. 4. Iura ^tenim violanti, si
jus non prastatur, ei non violari, sed jus reddi, creditam est. id. de Legate.
l. 2. c. 6.
Rules by which they never acted. Since their first Erection into a Republic,
their constant practice has been an open or clandestine piracy upon the
English: since K. James first reigned in great Britain, they have never kept
any League in reference to Trade and Commerce: that rich Trade which we had
into the East Indies, at Japan, Amboyna, Banda and the Moluccos, is totally
ruined: our Islands of Poleron, Polaway, Lantore, unjustly seized into their
hands: and the damages we have suffered there, are computed in 1653. at 1656233
l. 15 s. And we are now totally excluded those Seas by these Hollanders, who
pretend that by the Law of nature and Nations, The Sea and Commerce ought to be
free. Their usurpations there have been accompanied with such barbar ties and
outrages, as we find more cause to wonder that MSS. Comment.
they were so long tol^rated, then that by the effusion of the blood of Dutch
Protestants, we should at last vindicate the Honor, Interest, Trade of
England, and revenge the deaths of our murdered Countrymen. Besides the
cruelties of Amboyna, they exercised inn^merable others: as appears by the
depositions from 1616 to 1620. The English Prin^ed at London, A. D. 1622.
Ships being taken, and their Goods confiscated, the Captains, Soldiers,
Factors and Mariners, were made prisoners, clogged with irons, kept in stocks,
bound hand and foot, tied to stakes, haling and pulling them with ropes about
their necks, spurning them like dogs, throwing them headlong down rocks and
cliffs, murdering some and star^ing others to death: some were landed amongst
the Indians, where they found better usage amongst the Paynim^, then the
Protestants of Holland: some were so lodged, that they were forced to tumble in
their own excremen^s, not being permitted to go forth to ease themselves.
L^urence Ryall, the Dutch General, caused ^rates and C^ge to be made, and
carried the English therein fetter^d, and showed them triumphantly to the
Indians at every port; saying Behold and see; here is the people of that
Nation, whose King you care so much for: Now you may see how kindly we use his
Subjects. They have robbed the Indians under English colors, thereby to
incense them against us, and to destroy our Trade there: They have
counterfeited the coin of other Nations, and then defamed the English for it.
The traffic to China and Persia, etc. was r^ined by their seizing and
destroying the Ships of Sir William Courteen and ^is Partners. We did by our
Ambassador St. John's demand satisfaction for all these damages, and charged
them with the blood of the English that had been slaughtered by them in the
Katharine and Dragon, in these words. Though we cannot positively prove, yet by
good circumstances we can make it appear, MSS. Speech of Mr. St. John's: see
also the printed account of John Darett. A. D. 1665.
that you did destroy the Ships Dragon, and Katharine; though the ships and men
were never heard of, yet the Guns and Goods of those Ships have been found in
your Country; which does give us some confidence to believe you did destroy the
Men and Ships: And we are informed that some of your own Contrymen, when
they lay on their deathbeds, did make consession of those cruel murders and
seisures, how that they met them going to the Cape of good Hope: and after a
friendly salutation The Remonstrance of G. Carew, Esquire printed 1^62.
the Dutch invited the English Commanders aboard, and after they had been
feasted, they told them that it was fitting They should drink ^stick, as well
as eat ^stick; and causing them to be bound back to back, they were cast into
the Sea. And in the Evening when the English expected the return of their
Commanders and their Crews, the Dutch with their own and English boats went
aboard the English Ships, and served every man in the same manner; and having
taken out what Guns and Goods they thought fit, the Ships were sunk by them:
the which were worth, according to the Invoyce, had they come to the port of
London, 170000 l. In Guiney and Brasile we have been treated with the same
usage: and the Dutch have been always either acting open hostilities, or
(which is worse) destroying the Honor and Renown of our Nation in Spain,
Italy, Russia, and all places whither a Dutchman trades. Therefore we were
then convinced, that the true way to advance the English trade, was to reduce
the Hollanders to greater moderation: and it was apparent unto us, That so
treacherous a people were not to be treated as fa^ and generous Leo ab (...) p.
786. 813.
Enemies, nor otherwise to be restrained then by Arms. The Hollanders surprised
us in the midst of a Treaty for a nearer Union: They abused us with
contumel^ous ^ictures and Lib^ls: They sighted the force of England; the town
of Flushing alone offering to fight any Navy we could put forth: But the usage
which His Majesty has met with is much more intolerable, He being a King, and
united to them by more then one firm League of Anity: Besides the obligations
his Ancestors had fixed upon the Dutch, He had extinguished at Breda a
mul^itude of Actions against Them, and, by consenting to that pe^e, He had
given them opportunity to resettle themselves in order to their security, who
were obnoxious to the French pretensions upon Brabant: as He afterward
preserved them by projecting the Triple Alliance. Yet as no Courtesy could
engage these Hollanders to Civility; so no Articles could tie them to a real
friendship. In a juncture when the puissance of France amassed and terrified all
Europe, they dispute the Flag and deny the Dominion of the Sea, threatening to
abandon England to the French, and privately tendering their aid and service
unto that King. Their Fleets were ordered not to strike sail unto the Ships of
this Crown: and thereby the whole Treaty at Breda annulled. They having thus
laid aside all respects for Faith and Honesty; all concernment for the
Protestant Religion; all regards for His Majesty, and the English interest: We
cannot think that his Majesty ought to be tender of their Amity, or suspend his
counsils upon a tedious Embassy to their High and Mighties at the Hague, who
had by a previous resolution about the Flag defeated all hopes of Agreement.

The War under the pretended Commonwealth, had this further resemblance with
that of His Majesty. That the Dutch did twice send over Ambassadors to amuse
us in our Counsils, and retard our preparations: Declaration p. 7. 8.
the first had power sufficient given by their Credentials, but yet They would
conclude nothing without the concurrence of the States General, and Provincial
also: The second came over without any power Ibid. p. 11.
to treat or conclude. The like Finesse we observe to have been put upon His
Majesty.

Upon this We proceeded to all actions of Hostility, publishing every where
that the Hollanders were the most perfidious persons in the world; that it was
in vain to seek a firm Amity or Union by Treaty or compact with Men that were
swayed only by interest and profit; that they did design to monopolize the
Trade of the Universe unto themselves, The case stated betwixt England and the
United Provinces. A. D. 1652.
to impoverish the English, and having weakened their strength at Sea, and
despoiled us of our ancient and indubitable right to its dominion (wherein
consists not only the Honor but Safety of the Nation: for those Seas and our
Ships are the outworks and Bulwarks of this Country) to dispossess us of our
Land-inheritance afterward upon occasion. That unless the Dutch would forbear
these pernicious designs, and own the undoubted Rights of the English with more
sincerity then They had hitherto showed, there could be no foundation for any
Agreement, nor any reason why we should loose time in attending their
opportunities for our satisfaction and security. To what advantage will the
Conclusion of any thing be, or what encouragement is there for any proceeds in
things of that nature? For though Leagues are consirmed with all the Sacredness
that Man knows of to bind the performance, yet if Profit be paramount to such
stipulations, when a fair occasion is presented, no bounds, be they never so
high and intrinsecal, will be able to preserve those Leagues from doing Homage
to the Supreme Deity of Gain and special Utility. Principles that center not in
the performance of Covenants, further then they are for advantage, what differ
they from, or rather How are they not more destructive to Civil Society and the
Law of Nations, and true Religion, then that vulgarly ascribed to the Papists,
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics?

We did remember a succession of Presidents in that Republic, How little
regard They had unto their words and contracts: That no obligation of benefits
received, no terror of cautionary Towns could moderate their minds heretofore,
but that they did most maliciously, impudently and intolerably abuse and defame
Q. Elizabeth, whereof she E. Reidanus Annal B^lg. ad An. 1587.
made complaint by the Lord Buckhurst. Though She were by the Articles to
protect them only until they could obtain an assured peace (not till they could
form themselves into a Republic) yet did They constantly reject all overtures
made by Her, for their reconciliation with Spain. Whereat She was so angry,
that She writ to them, How Gravissimam hanc injuriam, ^ngratum pro ingenti^us
beneficiis animum, justissimam Reginae causam dare, ut abjecta Belgarum cura
soli sibi consulat. id. ibid.
the indignities they put upon her Majesty were such; and their Ingratitude for
the eminent favors conferred by her so villancus, that She might very justly
desert the League, and relinquish their Amity. They formed a New Assembly of
The States General, distinct from the Council of State, and thereby excluded
Her Ambassador from being privy to all important affairs of State, which ought
to have been communicated unto Him by the League, and was intended when He was
admitted to sit in the Council of State. This Oldenbarnevelt said was no
violation of the Treaty, because the Ambassador retained Ubi and vetera
instituta and pact^a non prosunt Reipub. imo nocent, and ^tamen fidei publicae
causa perpetuo rata esse debent, ad nova recurrendum est, quibus nec tollantur
vetera, and tamen quae ex veteribus oriuntur mala praeveniantur. Disquisit.
polit. Hagae Commit. cas. 22.
His due place; but the cognizance and debates of the chief affairs were
transferred thence. It was then laid down for a Maxim of that Republic, That
whenever any received usages or leagues become inutile, or prejudicial to the
State; and yet, to prevent the imputation of Treachery, the Republic cannot
but adhere to them; some new expedient must be found out, whereby those customs
or contracts may not seem violated, and the public detriment be also avoided.
This fraudulent beginning had the High and Mighty States General: and as the
foundations of that Assembly were laid in Treachery, so the fabric has ever
since been supported by the same Artifices. Hereby they gained an opportunity
of transacting with the French, and sending Him assistance, without -- Teneri
ex foedere Reginam foederatorum in castris milit^m suum relinquere. Ad ea
Bodlaeus, etiam Patres adstrictos ait, bellicas res, modo ullius ponderis
forent, cum Regina, aut ejus Senatu, communicare. Nihilominus illos parum id
moratos, centurias xx Galliarum Regi submisisse, nec adhibitos in conscientiam
consilii Senatores Anglos, nisi jam decreta re. Nequaq^am urgere posse Reginam
ut pactis stet, qui prius little ipsi limits exuerint. Reidan. Annal. Belg. A.
D. 1592.
ever acquainting of the Queen, or her Ambassador. Whereas by the Articles,
All matters of moment that related to the war, were to be first communicated to
Her Majesty, or those that sat, by her appointment, in the Council of State.
At this She was so angry, that She was ready to recall Her forces, and desert
them: and being urged with the Capitulations, Sir Thomas Bodley replied for
Her, that It did not become such as observed no Covenants, for to press them
upon others. Neither were They more faithful in their Leagues with K. James,
notwithstanding that He prevailed with the Spaniard to own them as Free States,
and upon easy terms surrendered the cautionary Towns: After a firm Treaty in
1619. ensued the murder of the English at Amboyna, and other depredations in
the East Indies. They were to make satisfaction for that fact by the year 1625.
but K. Charles never lived to see any given: though He menaced them severely
with Reprisals, or a War, in case He had not reparations within eighteenth
months for the damage His Subjects had received, L^ ab Aitzma. p. 48. id. p
41. id. p. 82.
and the indignities done to His Crown and Honor. In the year 1625. King
Charles made a League with the Dutch, in which a sincere Amity was mutually
agreed unto, each being to do what they could for the benefit, safety, and
security of the other. In the year 1627. They form a League with France, to aid
that Realm, in case the English invaded it; and id. p. 86.
that they would prohibit, as far as they could possibly do, that the English
should be supplied with forces, ships, or ammunition to the prejudice of the
French: during all which time the Treaty of Southhampton was in full force. Nor
have the English only cause to complain of their perfidiousness, the Crown of
France has more then once been deluded by them. A. D. 1630. The Dutch made a
League with France, obliging themselves never to make any Truce or Peace,
either directly, id. p. 92.
or indirectly, without the privity of that King. This League was to continue
Seven years, and the K. of France paying them 200000 l. sterling annually:
Notwithstanding the assistance and moneys received in 1632. They treat with the
Spaniard publicly, without giving any advertisement thereof to the French, or
communicating any Articles. id. p. 107.
The Treaty came to nothing; and thereupon They ratified the f^rmer League of
1630. with France; adding other Articles for to make it offensive and
Defensive. April 15, 1634. This League was to endure 7. years from the date
thereof; and France to pay annually 300000 l. to the Dutch, besides other
advantages. This League was made by the States General, without being
communicated first to the Provincial States: Least this should vacate it,
another was contrived Febr. 8. 1635. Here they oblige the K. of France
immediately to invade Flanders with 25000 foot, and 5000 horse: and Neither
party is to conclude Con^unctione and consensu mutuo. Leo ab Aitzma, p. 176.
any cessation, or peace, but in conjunction with the other, and with mutual
consent: and the War to continue until the Spaniard be totally driven out of
the Netherlands: the Provinces being to be divided betwixt the French and Dutch
according to agreement. Notwithstanding all this, when the French had begun the
war, according to The case stated betwixt. England and the United Provinces.
the League, the Dutch privately sent their Secretary Musch upon another Treaty
at Cranebergh; and after that unto Turn-hout: thereof they gave no notice to
the French, but denied absolutely that He went Leo ab Aitzma, p. 180. etc.
upon any such employment; until the Treaty was frustrated by the arrogant
demands of the Spaniard. The French, to secure themselves against these
treacherous actings, ratify the former Treaties by another, September 6. 1636.
and they oblige themselves to pay the Dutch id. p. 201.
greater sums of money the next year. Every year these Treaties were thus
renewed, during the Reign of Lewis xiii. And after his decease, The same
Treaties were confirmed anew, August 30. id. p. 259.
1643. In 1644. the Munster peace being entered upon, and Plenipotentiaries to
be sent from France and Holland, a League of Guaranty id p. 273.
was concluded in order thereunto; in which it was agreed, that Neither party
should enter upon, nor conclude any Treaty, without the conjunction and consent
of the other; and to the end that one might not circumvent the other, it was
agreed that the Plenipotentiaries should inform the Spanish Ministers, that
there Legati ut Plenipotentiary, quoties id rogati suerint, Ministris
Hispanierum Regis indicars teneluntur, mutuam obligaiionem ac foedera^ionem
intercedere, nonnisi conjunctim atque communi consensu concludendi, alterumque
Tractatum prae alte o neutiquam promoveadi, id. p. 271.
was a mutual confederacy betwixt France and the United Provinces, so that they
were obliged to treat conjoynedly, and with mutual consent, and so to proceed
that the Treaties of both were to be dispatched with equal expedi^ion. After
this, March 10. 1645. all the former Treaties were again ratified, and a new
sum of 120000 l. extorted from the French: The same was again done Apr. 6.
1646. and a greater sum disbursed by the French. But notwithstanding all this,
the States General did not send out the Forces they promised, but rather
contrived how to retard the success of the French Arms: They made their
Plenpotentiaries swear to proceed Leo ab Aitzma p. 513.
conjunctly, and according to the League of Guaranty with France: March 1.
1644. And presently after the said Plenipotentiaries came to Munster, they
entered into a separate Treaty, first for a long Truce, and afterward for a
Peace with Spain: Amusing the French (and all the Provinces except Holland)
with this pretext, that They did but conclude provisional Articles, which were
to be inserted into the Munster-Treaty; id. page 406.
but that all was to be of no effect in the mean while; and thus much indeed
was expressed in the Preface to the Treaty: and so much of them was imparted
unto the French: the rest they needed not to inquire into, since the Articles
were to be hereafter approved by them, and were only agitated now to pass the
time. In the mean space The Dutch declined to assist the French; or manage an
offensive war against Flanders; and being pressed to regard Hollandia deputati
Gallorum ^imos bello plant deditos credentes propter iniquum plane atque
absurdum Gallorum agendi modum, qui propter veterem Societatem, initosque
Tractatus, nimia (uti existimabant) familiaritate utebantur, a Gallis abhorrera
cap^runt --
their Treaties, the Provincials of Holland began to hate the French, as men
that presumed too much upon old musty Leagues and Confederacies, which was one
of the greatest absurdities in the world. Instead of prosecuting the war in
1647. They found out an expedient to fulfill the League by ceasing from all
acts of hostility at Sea; the which cessation was proclaimed by Leopold, June
15. id. page 654.
1647. and ('it is supposed) ratified by the States (though id. p. 566, 567.
Aitzma could not find any deeds to that purpose) for They suffered their
Subjects to take the benefit thereof; even the Zealanders, who condemned the
Action as perfidicus, did by virtue thereof drive on a gainful trade with
Flanders. This year being thus passed, in 1648. The province of Holland by
sundry circumventions, and such proceedings as repugned to the Union of the
Provinces, commute the provisional Articles into an Absolute Treaty, and
ratify it without communicating it unto the French, or any way attending their
consent. Six of the Provinces were amassed hereat, the people astonished: the
Here van Nederhorst, one of the Plenipotentiaries, feigns himself sick,
refuses to sign thereunto, and gave in his reasons to the States General, id.
p. 616, 617, 618, 619. 495.
viz. that it was contrary to the Treaty with France; and contrary to his
instructions and Oath, as Plenipotentiary: The which action of his was
justified by his Superiors of Utrecht; and He received great thanks id. p. 519.
for adhering to his Instructions, and the real interest of his Country. On
the other side, the States of Helland by a public Act, do assert the integrity
and honor of their Plenipotentiaries, and avow they will id. p. 577.
protect and vindicate them against all the world: giving them the general
thanks of the Province. The Plenipotentiaries also by a Manifest endeavored
id. p. 523.
to authorize their demeanor; pleading That Treaties were subject to several
senses, how express soever: that their procedure at Munster might fall under a
good construction, if men would interpret it id. p. 502.
aright, and consider how much is to be attributed to emergencies and
occasions. That They had done nothing contrary to their Oaths and id. p. 501.
Instructions, as some, especially the contradictious French, did clamor: They
did respect the French Amity very much: but yet they found the obligations to
their Country to be paramount: that 'twas true, they had an Instruction to
observe strictly the League of 1644. and to communicate id. p. 345.
all their affairs with the French. But they had another more important Command
also, which was, That they should do all things that were for the benefit of
their Country, and Republic; and eschew all such id. p. 501.
things, as (in their judgment) might turn to its detriment and prejudice. The
French King writ Letters, and sent Ambassadors to expostulate and protest
against this Peace: but De la Thuillery either got no answer to his Memorials;
or only this, That the States General were satisfied, They had not failed in
their respects to His Master: Most of the Provinces at first refused to ratify
the Peace, and Zeland was obstinate to the last, never signing it, nor
suffering their Plenipotentiary Knuyt to attend the ratification. They desired,
that since things were proceeded so far, the States General would but be so
civil to their id. p. 644, 645.
old confederate, His most Christian Majesty, as to send unto him, and acquaint
Him with the true condition of affairs, and suspend the ra^ification until the
French had perfected their Treaty: that this was the great intent of the
Munster-Treaty, to effect a peace for France and Holland, if not for all
Europe. That to gratify his Majesty thus far, was but a small return for such
kindness as he had always expressed for the United Netherlands: the particular
testimonies whereof They should not relate, but so many, so ample they were,
that when Historians should record them, they would not be believed by
posterity, as they could not be sufficiently acknowledged by any retributions;
or assiduity of service, which the Dutch could pay unto that Crown. Besides, to
ratify this Treaty at Munster, what was it but to put an end to all the
Leagues betwixt the United Provinces and France, even those of Guaranty? and
then They should loose their best support and alliance: to the great danger of
their Republic. But no Remonstrances could prevail against the Artificles of
the Hollanders; wherefore by a plurality of votes (a course not legiti^ate in
so high matters) the States General did ratify the peace, and appoint it to be
proclaimed and celebrated with bone-fires, June 5. 1648. The Zelanders again
interposed, id. p. 685.
Calling God and Men to witness, that They did never assent unto this Peace,
with the exclusion of France: and that They were innocent as to all those
calamities, and misfortunes, which either the wrath of Heaven, or Indignation
of exasperated Princes might create unto the United Provinces. The Peace was
proclaimed on the day asoresaid, but the people were so possessed with the
horror of the Action, that many in Holland (as Leyden) made not any
bone-fires, and none elsewhere gave those usual signs of joy. The French KIng
(whose candor was justified by Nederhorst) recalled his Ambassador from the
Hague, adding that since He had no manner of League with them, a Resident might
serve the turn there.

By the same peace they betrayed their confederates, the Prince Palatine, and
the other Protestants of Germany, who might have had great advantages by a
General Peace; but the Dutch only reaped the benefits of this. These Dutch left
their old friends, the Hanse Towns, id. p. 578.
out of the Treaty betwixt Denmark and Sweden in 1645. without any other
motive, then their peculiar profit. There is not a Prince, or State in Europe
(or the Indies) that does not form the like complaints against them. Even the
Spanish Ambassador Le Brun averred, that the Dutch in a little time violated
Seventeen Articles of the Munster-peace.

As to Their Religion, we could never be convinced that The Hollanders did
regard any. Their first revolt was not founded upon any such principles: They
patiently Neque alia Belli Belgici causa, aut tumultuum origo, in medium
afferri potest, quicquid vulgo contra disser^etur, quam quod vi armat^ per
Hispanos and alsos ex^ticos milites extorquere a nobis voluerit, quod Comitia
Ordinum pu^a utilitati adversarium judicarent. Decret. de majest. and antiq.
jure Batav. reip.
endured the suppression of their Churches and Ministers: the Country did not
stir thereat, nor upon the execution of so many thousand Protestants. The best
of their Historians, and who was privy to the secret transactions of that age,
begins his Annals with a quite different account: The States of Holland and
West-Friesland avowed it: and it is notorious that the exaction of the Tenth
penny by the D. of Alva, did more Quorundam opinio fert, non Religionem Belgis;
sed Decimam defectionis fuisse causam: quippe ante gesta profugi patrarant.
Unde gravi^r in illos divina fuisse pana vid^tur, quod sacris se exui passi,
fragilium ^onorum gratia bellum Regi movissent. Reidanus ad ann. 1570.
exasperate them, then the Inquisition. By the pacification of Ghent, A. D.
1576. the Hollanders and Zelanders, united with the other more Catholic
Provinces, it being agreed that They should not attempt any thing against the
Roman Catholic Religion, or molest any for professing it; but demean
themselves without any offense: except it were within their proper A. E.
Meteran. A. D. 1576. Reidanus ad ann. 1578.
Provinces: Governments and Commands were promiseuously disposed of to Papists,
and those of the Reformed Religion. And by the Union at Utrecht, A. D. 1579.
The Provinces of Holland and Zeland, are to be of what Religion they please:
the rest of the confederates are to continue the Roman Cotholick Religion; A.
E. Materan, ad ann. 1579.
or at least to make no alteration therein, but by General consent, or the
Authority of the proper Magistrates. When they tendered the Leo ab Aitzma's
notable revolutions, in the prefatory account of that Union, A^. 13.
Sovereignty of their Provinces to France, it appears by the Articles and
Instructions, that They did not insist upon the having Protestant Magistrates,
but left that King to choose others, so they were but honest peaceable men, who
would not persecute or molest those that were of a different Religion. When the
Earl of Leicester came to be Governor Reidanus ad ann. 1584.
there, He found not only Papists, but even Ecclesiastics at Utrecht, to rule
in the Senate, and Province: Hic delectus magna in Belgicis motibus mala dedit.
Sape enim homines imperiti unum ob Religionis studium, ad magistratum evecti,
rejectis viris praestantibus. magnique in repub. usus, quod non in omnibus
eadem cum Reformatis sent^ent. id. ad ann. 1586.
and the original of the quarrel and complaints against Him were, that He
depressed the Papists, and advanced Protestants, contrary to the League at
Utrecht: in Their defense did Holland remonstrate against the Earl's
proceedings: this was the reason why the Ministers and all the zealous
protestants honored and loved the Earl, and only the Atheistical politicians
of Holland Hac^enus Ecclesiasticorum quibus^unque reformatae rel^gionis odium,
aut caritas Hispani pretium non fuerant patrias seeds aut parts deserendi,
prima publ^e suffragia, privatim bonorum ^uique administratio Idque Gandavensi
and Trajectino foedere, and conditionibus iis convenerat. quas de tolerandis
quam vis diversum circa sacra sentientibus Patres statuerant: qu^s contractus
nunquam violari passus Arausionensis, ut Gandavi totius Flandria exuio
evenerat. id. ibid.
opposed him. If we look upon them in their more flourishing condition; All
Religions are tolerated there, as well as Protestants, even such as are most
repugnant to the Deity and Gospel of Christ. Their actions are regulated by
principles of State, and upon those grounds do they invite and encourage all
Sects to live in their territories. When their interest does sway them, they
desert, or fight against Protestants. Thus they assisted the King of France
with twenty Ships of war against Rochel, A. D. 1627. 1628. When the Bosch,
Maestricht, and Breda were conquered, the Hujus^e reipub. operam fidam non
solum sibi, sedsuis quoque rebus perutile^ exper^us Christianissimus Galliarum
Rex in obsidenda and occupanda Rupella. Martin. Schoockius de marit. Imper. c.
27.
Popish Religion was always tolerated openly in those districts, in such
manner as it was exercised before: and so it was intended if Antwerp had been
taken: and at the Munster-Treaty, the States General did include as a part of
their Treaty, another private one made betwixt the Crown of Spain, and the
Prince of Orange, Leo ab Aitzma p. 402. 403.
in which it was agreed, that in the districts of Sevenberg, Deductio ord.
Holland. cap. 9. Sect. 8.
Turnhout and other places, the Roman Catholic Religion should be preserved
entire, and in the same manner as it was when that League was made, and that
All the Ecclesiastics should enjoy their Endowments, Estates, Immunities and
Privileges. At Munster, their Excellencies the Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the High and Mighty States General, those pure Protestans,
(out of mere ostentation, not business) sent to the Pope's Nuncio twice to
acquaint Leo ab Aizma, p. 346.
Him that They intended Him a visit. The Nuncio was not at home to receive the
first Complement; Upon the second message, He was solicitous what Answer to
return. It was most true, That He might entertain them as the Ambassadors from
a Free State; whereupon neither the Catholic King, nor Catholic Church, had
any pretensions: the one having relinquished His temporal claim, and the other
having no Spiritual Power over Locusts, Infidels, and Devils: Yet He
considered, That Navarrus manu. c. 27. n. 13.
where the Keys of Saint Peter were of no value, those of His porter ought not
to be made use of: That in this visit, He should rather give then receive
Honor: That these Dutch were very arrogant, and had Leo ab Aitzma p. 341.
instructions to dispute every punctilio of Ceremony and Respect: That in His
Palace These Fishermen would take place of any Roman Fisher, and quarrel with
Him, as They did with Mr. D. Avaux, for lolling a little upon their Half of the
Table: That He must attend them to their id. p. 279.
Coaches, and instead of Benedictions, Excommunications or Exorcisms, He must
teach them to pay respect (not Reverence) by beginning it: Upon such motives as
these He sent them word, That he was undressed, and not in a condition to see
Them. The which Answer, They took as if They had been interdicted his sight,
Sub sigillo Piscatoris. If the Devil had sent a Plenipotentiary thither, who
would pay them all the punctilities of Honor, which their Instructions obliged
them to insist upon with the Agents of Spain and France. These Ambassadors (to
show id. p. 343. 3^4
their grandeur) would at Noonday have made a visit to the public Ministers
of the Prince of darkness. In that peace, They pursued nothing but their
private advantage; for if they had joined in the making of one General peace
(as France and Sweden offered) the Prince Palatine had been restored, and the
Protestant Religion ^etled in Germany, according as it was before the war in
1618. This consideration id. p. 514.
was pressed by some of the Provinces earnestly, and as a motive for the
adhering to the Treaty with France. But these High and Mighty professors of
the Reformed Religion were swayed too much by the Maxims of Holland, to
prosecute any such matter, and instructed their id. p. 342.
Ambassadors to the contrary; their demeanor at Japan, is not the only
Scandal they have given unto Christendom: In the Kingdom of Pegu, when the
English Merchants had refused (being commanded to attend the Emperor at a
Solemnity) modestly, to sacrifice some parched-Rice to the Idol in the Temple:
as also did the Portugueses, spitting Mr. Britton a Merchant of London, now
living, was then present as chief of the English Merchants: from Himself did I
receive this Intelligence.
upon the said Rice: the second man of the Dutch factory (the principal
declining it) briskly takes the Rice, and addressing himself to the Idol,
offers it, as became a Christian of Holland. And Mr. Bevern^ngk being
Ambassador to the pretended Commonwealth, did say occasionally upon discourse
with a great Man in those days: That it was impossible for England to continue
a Republic, by reason of the violent animosities arising from the differences
in Religion. That in Holland, Christianity had no such effects upon the spirits
of Men; so as that it might be said, There were many opinions indeed in
Holland, yet but one Religion, which was their Interest: And we dare
confidently avow, that of all that have lived as exiles there, not one found
his reception to be bettered by the State, upon the account of Protestancy, or
Puritanism.

Seeing the Cause of Religion did so little intercede for the Dutch, and their
Treachery having been such as is expressed, the pretended Parliament and
Council of State, weighing well their extraord^nary success at Sea, did
conclude that Treaties of Alliance, how express and solemn soever, could not
yield any security to the English, against the perfidious MSS. Comment, Leo ab
Aitzma, p. 844.
Hollanders: that no contracts were able to ensure them that the Dutch would
not attempt again to surprise their Fleets in the time of peace, and when they
professed as great kindness as they had done in May, 1652. Whereupon 'twas
determined to put no end unto the war, until the Dutch should assent unto a
Coalition, so as that the two Sovereign powers should be united into one, to
consist of persons of both nations, as should be agreed upon; and All the
people to enjoy the like privileges and freedom in respect of habitations,
possessions, trade, ports, fishing and all other advantages whatsoever, in each
others Country, as Natives, without any difference or distinction. Other
course they saw none, in which they might with prudence and safety acquiesce.
The Province of Holland, being particularly sensible of the expense and other
detriments which that war brought upon them, did privately employ Col. Doleman
and others, (gaining unto them Hugh Peter's) to try the inclinations Leo ab
Aitzma, p. 816, 817.
of the pretended Parliament: this was concealed from the States General, and
known to few of the Provincials of Holland. The English did not seem averse to
a good peace; upon just and honorable terms; but refused to treat either in
Holland, or any neutral place: nor would they condescend to any such
negotiation, except the Hollanders did make the first overtures by a Letter.
For as their necessities, not affection to peace, protestancy, or the English
Republic, made them to seek it: so it was requisite for the Honor of England,
which had been so despised, and ignominiously treated by them, that They should
repair the passed Infamy and disgrace by effectual submissions. The States of
Holland and West-friesland, considering the miserable distress, and
incorrigible disorders of their people, did submit thus to confess their
Errors. March 8. 1653.

THe States of Holland and West-friesland considering, that without MSS.
Comment.
doubt it is a remarkable punishment from the just judgment of God, irritated
by the sins of the people, that notwithstanding the Leo ab Aitzma, p. 817.
communion of the pure Reformed Religion, which ought to oblige the two Nations
to Love, Unity, and a reciprocal care to procure each others good at home, and
mutual luster abroad (whereto Nature it self, by the vicinity of the Countries
on both sides, seems to have contributed and given advantage) yet contrarily,
the present differences have caused that the prudence of nature is forced
against Her aims, and the means which might tend to mutual Conservation, are
employed to the ruin of each other; and that the Religion, the most dear and
precious pledge, which by the Grace of God, has been so long, and until this
present, marvailously preserved between the two Nations, against the
machinations of the Enemies of its Honor, is become endangered. And also the
Lord God having furnished both Nations with matter of thanks and praise to his
clemency, in that by his grace they may subsist of themselves, and that they
have the convenience of assisting each other in case of necessity, and where
his honor shall require it, by these very Nations in lieu of due
acknowledgment of these his said mercies, matter is afforded to the Enemies of
God, and of both Nations, of rejoicing, by their present confusions, and to
hope for at length those will effect for them that which they themselves have
not been able to bring to pass: And that which adds to the reciprocal
misfortune is, that by the alternate and uncertain successes and daily effects
of Arms, seen by the great effusion of blood of the Household of Faith, on the
one and on the other side, both ways apprehended by the Enemies of Gods glory,
and his Church so precious, He that overcomes, considering the thing in true
Christianity, ought to lament the victory equally with the other, who seems
to be defeated. Wherefore the abovesaid What an impudent lie was this? and how
unseasonably is it inserted amidst so much sanctified language? But you must
remember it came from Holland, and De wit contrived it.
States, carried on by a pious zeal, and being, through the Grace of God, in no
wise constrained by any other consideration, have not in the least scrupled to
represent the abovesaid to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to
the end, that They having the same apprehensions with the said States
concerning this affair, Consideration may be had what ought to be done for
maintaining the Honor and Glory of God, and for the good of each other State;
whereupon without doubt the Good God, for His Name's sake, by the inspiration
of proper and fit expedients, will give his blessing: Or in case the said
Parliament be of another mind, the said States having abundantly discharged
themselves, may with much more peace of Conscience attend the issue which it
shall please God to give to the present Confusion and Disorders.

Done at the Hague. March 18. 1653. By order of the States of Holland and
Westfriesland. Herbert van Beaumont Secretary to the abovesaid States.


The Speaker received this Letter by a special Messenger, the Secretary of the
Lord Adrian Paaw, whereupon it was referred to the Council of State to answer
it as They thought fit. These considered that this Letter was the act of a
Cabal, and not of the States General, and MSS. Comment.
that They had to do with Hollanders, whose integrity they much suspected: They
determined to write one Answer to the Authors, and another to the States
General, acquainting them with the private overtures of Holland: intending
thereby either to make the States General own the same recognition; or to
create jealousies and animosities betwixt the other Provinces and Holland,
which had acted separately and clandestinely in a matter of that nature,
contrary to the Union. These Letters were dispatched, April 1. 1653. wherein
they told the Hollanders MSS. Comment. Leo ab Aitzma. p. 818.
(in a dialect not less specious and pious) that the inconveniences to
Religion in general, and to the Trade and Liberties of each Nation, were such
as any man might have foreseen; and that none could be ignorant, how requisite
it was for both Nations to preserve a good correspondence and amity together:
That the English had not omitted any thing on their parts; But the Dutch had
assaulted them in the midst of a Treaty for a strict Union; and their
Ambassador had used such tergiversation, as made them justly imagine, that
their sense of things was different from what They now professed. That the good
endeavors of the Parliament, were answered with unusual Preparations, Acts of
hostility, and other extraordinary proceedings thereupon: That they had this
comfort and satisfaction in their own minds, amidst the troubles and calamities
of War, that they had with all sincerity done what lay in their power to
obivate all the evils specified: That they did look upon the overtures of
Holland, if approved of by the States General, to be an effectual means for
composing this unwelcome war: That they should insist upon nothing but what was
reasonable and just: However the Parliament having discharged their duty,
would, in all Events, with patience acquiesce in the Issues of providence,
whereof they had so gracious Experience.

This was the import of the Letter to the States of Holland and Westfriesland:
that to the States General was more brief, though to the same purpose. Viz.
That there could be no doubt of the sincere affection and good will which the
English did bear unto the United Provinces: so that it might be well imagined,
that they were really inclined by Just and Honorable means to extinguish the
fire of war, stop the effusion of Christian blood, and restore Amity betwixt
the Nations: That as They had not been wanting in the beginn^ng to prevent the
ensuing calamities, so they were not altered with successes from their former
good Intentions: That they were ready upon the grounds expressed in the Letter
from the Pro^incial States of Holland and West-friesland, friendly ^to compose
Leo ab Aitzma p. 820. male serebant reliquae Provinciae id Hollandos fecisse:
contratium Unioni Ultrojectinae esse. Memini me Am^terodami, cum primum
epistola: evulgeretur, audivisse toto ejus Urbis Magistratu inscio decretam and
scriptam esse: quod tamen nec erat, nec esse poterat verum. Alibi similiter.
id. ibid. Leo ab Aitzma p. 350. 353. id. p. 349. 266. id. p. 269, 270. Ab
isthoc anno 1632. Gallos non rogatos Aransionensium Principi Titulos majores
magisque honorarios concessisse; contra vero huie Statui, Invi^tissimi,
Potentissimi, and Gloriosissimi Titulos su^puisse. id. p. 268.
differences, etc.

These Letters had that effect which the Parlamentarians proposed to
themselves: The other Provinces complained of Holland, that They had broke the
Union, by treating privately and separately. The States of Holland and
West-friesland denied they ever writ such a Letter: The Commonalty raged
thereat, and cried it was more safe to fight then to trust that Parliament. But
wiser men thought it impossible for them to continue the war, and Count William
of Nassau induced Friesland and Groninghen to join with Holland, and afterward
the other Provinces did consent to a Treaty. They were somewhat angry that the
pretended Parliament had given no Titles in the inscription of their Letter,
and that They had now lost the Elogies of High and Mighty: They saw that this
Treaty was not likely to be so Glorious for them as that of Munster, where
Their Plenipotentiaries were styled Their Excellencies, and the States General
never mentioned but with the addition of High and Mighty: when the Count
Penneranda waited on their Ambassadors unto their Coaches; and Mr. le Duc de
Longville, with D' Avaux and Sevaient gave them the precedence, and accompanied
them to their Coaches: That the K. of France in a thousand Treaties and Letters
had given them These Titles; and verified them by an Edict, upon complaint that
His most Christian Majesty had robbed Them of the Titles of The Most
Invincible, The Most Mighty, The Most Renowned, in some addresses of His; and
presumed to name them Sieurs Estats, instead of Seigneurs Estats in the draught
of the League of Guaranty, 1644. But these Parlamentarians were people of no
breeding, since They omitted these so usual Titles; and gross Sectaries from
the Reformed Religion to deny them all the Attributes of God Almighty, viz. The
Most High, The Most Mighty, The Most Foreseeing States General, etc. Yet since
they had to do with the Commors of England, not with Kings and Princes, with
such persons They would not now dispute Titles, the omission whereof did not
argue their weakness, but the rudeness of the English; and consequently the
disparagement was on Their side. A Letter therefore was sent From the States
General of the United Provinces to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England. Wherein they declared, that They had always endeavored with a good
and sincere intention, not only Ra^e Lies for a dying State.
to keep, but to augment more and more all manner of friendship and
correspondence with the said Parliament; and would now do any thing that might
contribute to so pious and Christian, an Union: desiring a Neutral place, and
Plenipotentiaries might be appointed forthwith on both sides. Apr. 30. 1653.
Whilst these things were thus transacting at the H^gue, Col. D^leman, and those
that transacted for the Province of Holland, together with Hugh Peter's, did
make very submiss applications to the Members of the Council of State, and
Parliament, confessing That they were not able to con^est with the puissance of
England; offering to acknowledge the English for Sovera^gns of the British
Seas, to express this in each Captains instructions, and declare it by an Act
of State: and withal to purchase their A^y with a sum of 300000 l. These
overtures being made to Genesis Cromwell amongst others, did raise in him an
Ambition to aggrandise himself, by deposing His Masters, who began to suspect
his Greatness and designs: whereunto the Dutch animated Him into the hopes of
that, or a greater sum. The pretended Parliament being secluded, the Army
places the power pro tempore in the Council of State, it being constituted of
many of the former Members, and some additional Officers of the Army. The old
Rumpers were befoold by Cromwell, as if He, by a kind of Dictatorship, would
settle that equal Republic, which 'twas impossible to institute and effect by
the Parliament. To the more devout and Fifth-monarchists He promised to erect a
Dominion of Saints: both became hereupon divided in their intents, though
equally animated against the Hollanders. To them does G. Cromwell impart the
Letter from the States General, which their Messenger Mr. Thilman Aquilius MSS.
Comment.
had delivered unto Him: The Council returned an Answer, May 6. 1653. signed J.
Lambert President: J. Thurloe Secretary, declaring That not withstanding the
late change and alteration of affairs, which it had pleased the wise and
all-disposing hand of God to bring to pass in the Commonwealth, yet They had
the said amicable intentions for the United Provinces, with sincere desires to
put an end unto the war, and establish a firm and lasting peace betwixt the
Nations: That it would be tedious to send Plenipotentiaries to a Neutral place;
but if The States General would send any to London, the Council would begin a
conference with Them, and yield to any terms that might reasonably be expected.
This revolution in England added new life to the drooping Dutch, they begin to
contemn the new Government, and think to extort any conditions from the
distracted Nation; they flatter themselves with an opinion that the conduct of
affairs will be altered, that the Fleet would not fight, and that the pretended
Parliament would attempt to re-establish themselves. Whereupon they equip out a
great Fleet under Van Trump, De Wit, the two Evertsons and De Ru^ter: And
withal design sour De^uties, Mr. Beverning, Nieuport, Vande Perre, and
Jonstall, to go upon an Embassy unto England: whereof the first should go away
presently, there to spy into the posture of the Nation, the intentions of the
Council, and to keep on foot a Treaty which they would seriously purs^e, as
occasion required. Their Fleet was much more numerous then that of the English,
the Commanders stout and expert: yet were They beaten June 2. and 3. upon the
Coast of Flanders, about thirty four of their Ships bu^nt and taken, and the
rest chased home toward their ports. This ill success hastened the dispatch of
the Deputi^s, and Van Beverning is immediately sent to London (not staying for
a Pasport) where He arrives about June 16. there He found a welcome answerable
to what He deserved: For His Superiors did hope to have retarded the English
preparations and Counsils, whilst They increased the Strength of their own
Navy, so as that They doubted not to put a more speedy end unto the war by
Battle, then by Composition: and the Council being aware of these intendments,
and that They did not really and cord ally embrace the Treaty for Peace, They
determined to use them with such haughiiness as Their present Victory inspired
Them with, and since but one of the four was come, and He not likely to make
any serious overtures, The Fleet was commanded to lie upon, and infest the
Dutch coasts about the Texel, new reinforcemen's being expedited: Nor did They
doubt but the Terror of the late bloody and g^llant fight, together with the
sight of the same Enemies constantly before Their eyes, would fill Holland with
consternation, and make them, with more sincerity and submissness, pursue the
negotiation. Van Beverning finding Himself so little respected, and considering
How deplorable the condition of His Country was, at last applies Himself by
way of Petition to Cromwell, and the Council of State, in these words.

To his Excellency and the Lords of the Council of State of the Republic of
England.
THe subscribed Deputy of the Lords the States General of the Un^ted Provinces,
having order on their behalf to propound diverse MSS Comment.
points of importance to his Excellency, and the Lords of the Council of the
State of England, prays most humbly and instantly that He may obtain a
favorable Audience, as soon as their other affairs and deliberations may
permit them, and if it might be, to day or to morrow. Done at London the 20/30
of June, 1653.

But He could not prevail to be heard until the last day of the Month: He was
very submiss in his address, gave the Council of State the Title of
Illustrious, and termed them Mess^igneurs: and prayed that ibid.
God with his holy Spirit might preside at all their consultations, and bless
their Government and the Nation with all prosperity and happiness, he desired
that the memory of the past actions might be obliterated, and that a perfect
Amity, and indissoluble Union, and more entire correspondence then ever, might
be established betwixt both Nations. That He, and three more out of the States
General, were sent to renew, with all candor and sincerity, the protestations
of their whole affections toward this Commonwealth, and to assure His
Excellency and their Lordships, that They remain also continually in the same
mind, and in the same intentions, They desire with all their hearts, that with
a mutual consent, upon honest and reasonable conditions, this unhappy and
bloody war might be ended, and a firm and perpetual peace established betwixt
the Nations. You see, My Lords (added He) the freedom and ingenuity of their
deliberations: They oblige Leo ab Ait^a p. 825.
not themselves to formalities, and have made no scruple to send their Deputies
to your Honors, without insisting so much as upon a Pasport, expecting from
you a reciprocal candor and freedom.

After this He tendered to Cromwell a Proposition for a straight Alliance
betwixt the two Nations, to be sincere, perpetual, and inviolable: desiring
They would relinquish the demands of Satisfaction and MSS. Comment.
Security, and acquiesce in a Defensive League, whereby each Republic should
assist the other with all their sorces, to preserve Leo ab Aitzma p. ^25.
and defend reciprocally the Liberty and Freedom of the People of both Nations,
against all that should endeavor to trouble them by Sea or Land: Never doing
or permitting that directly or indirectly, any Act of hostility be done to the
prejudice of this Alliance, neither that any Counsil or aid ^e given to the
Enemies or Rebels of the one or other part; But to the contrary, hindering
effectually and really all such and the like enterprises, and rigorously
punishing the Authors, as it is fitting. This (besides matters of commerce) was
the subject of his Proposition, which He concluded with a prayer, That the
Great, most good, and most mereiful God, would preside in their Counsils with
his Spirit of peace, etc.

Thus did He make an introduction to that Treaty which the other Three
Ambassadors were jointly to carry on: They arrived July 2. MSS. Comment.
1653. and all joined in one Petition for a common Audience, praying
thrice-humbly and instantly they may have a favorable answer to the
Propos^tion made by the Lord Van Beverningh: beseeching the God of peace to
cooperate.

After that their Credentials and Power had been enquired into, the Council of
State returned Them a peremptory Answer that without satisfaction for what had
been acted against England, and befitting Security, that no such thing should
be attempted again, they could not proceed to any League of Alliance. The Dutch
replied, that It was strange They should press so vehemently for Reparation,
Leo ab Aitzma p. 828.
who had so effectually satisfied themselves already by the prizes taken, which
were so many, that the loss of their Subjects was inestimable. As to Security,
They beseeched them not to doubt the sincerity of their Intentions, nor to
imagine that their Superiors would refuse to secure them by any just means and
equitable ways: and prayed a Conference.

Many conferences ensued, in which the English treated them with much
haughtiness, accordingly as They deserved: They wholly insisted upon
Satisfaction for all the charges they had been put unto; and for Security:
declaring that protestations of sincerity and love, or written compacts could
never assure them sufficiently of the Faith of the Dutch or That they would
continue sincere, who had dealt so treacherously in attacquing their Fleet.

Both parties did talk of nothing but sincerity of affection, and integrity of
their thoughts and hearts: Both were for laying the foundations of a godly
peace, the promotion of the Glory of God, the advancement of the Reformed
Religion: Both were impatient for an eternal, intimate, Leo ab Aitzma, p. 828.
and strict Union, such as never intervened betwixt two Nations: But they could
not agree upon the means whereby all this was to be effected: The Dutch were so
zealous for the prosecution of the Glory of God, and the benefit of the
Reformed Religion, that they held it a great Impiety against Heaven, and a most
enchristian deed, to protract by any Scruple whatsoever the strict, good,
sincere and mutual Amity betwixt the two Gloriam Dei, propagationem fidei,
salutem utriusque populi s^ spectare vel^nt; sine summa impietate in hoc ^ello
ob nescio quos scrupulos continuari non posse. id. p. 829.
Nations; because it was so important for the Honor of God, and propagation of
the Gospel. The Council of State did not come short of them in general
expressions of kindness, and the like: but since the matter in agitation did
Involve the welfare of the people of God, and the support of the cause of God
in these Nations, they could not betray these by neglecting to take requisite
security.

The Ambassadors were much perplexed with this intricate procedure, and found
a necessity to prepare for another fight, since the Treaty was thus delayed:
They urged the Council to come to the particulars wherein they would place
their Security, July 15. 1653. To which they received this Answer. That albeit
they might justly pursue to the highest point the Article of Reparation, yet to
show their Candor, and hearty inclinations to the strict A^ity, they would not
aim at great sums of money from the United Provinces, very much preferring a
Peace upon just and honest grounds, before any consideration of that nature.
And as to Security, since they were all so well agreed in the General
expressions, the Council thought fit to declare, that MSS Comment. Leo ab
Aitzma, p. 830.
This State is willing the said Security be, by Uniting both States together in
such manner as they may become one People and Commonwealth for the good of
both: By which means, not only the present breach will be made up, and the
difficulties of adjusting of each others interest by Articles of Alliance and
Confederation will be overcome, but all occasions of future difference removed,
and the strength and riches of both Nations, which are now employed one against
another, will be united for the common defense and preservation of the whole.
July 21. 1653. The Ambassadors being desired to give in a speedy Answer
hereto: seemed not well to understand the Proposal: They were very ingenuously
and sincerely ready to make and establish such an Union and Confederacy with
England, whereby both the States (conserving their several present
constitutions of Government) may be so closely United, and so nearly bound
together; that they may remain as one people and one Commonwealth. They were
exceeding glad to find that God had put into the Hearts of their Lordships
likewise, so good and pious intentions: and did beseech most instantly, that
after these general and mutual declarations, their Lordships would descend to
the particulars which thereto shall be judged by them fit and convenient. July
22. 1653. The Council returned Answer on the same day, that They did not
approve these delays; That the Ambassadors did not speak about any
Satisfaction to be given: and did also, where they speak of strict Union,
interlace words of M S S. Comment.
Confederation, and other expressions inconsistent with the common and genuine
notion of Coalescence.

The Ambassadors hereupon replied on the same day, That the Lords of the
Council having expressed themselves so, as if they did not value money in
comparison of a just, firm and honorable peace; the Ambassadors thought they
had relinquished the claim Leo ab Aitzma, p. 830.
of Satisfaction. That they used the term of Confederation, because their
instructions were so worded; and by reason it was most significant to that near
and intrinsic Union, which they desired: They confess ingenuously, that not
having found that word Coalition in the Answer of the Council July 21. but that
of Confederation and Union, They do not conceive what the Lords of the Council
do understand thereby, unless they shall please to explicate themselves.

The Council rejoyned: That as to the Satisfaction demanded, the Ambassadors
did mis-alledge their sayings, who only expressed M S S. Comment. Leo ab
Aitzma, Ibid.
How moderate they would be, but never intended to decline that demand totally.
As to Coalition, it was sufficiently insinuated in their proposal at first:
That they did not now urge the word, but the Thing; which was emphatically
enough declared unto them: That their intendments were that both Nations should
become One in Government, not pretensions of Amity, and that they should
indistinctly fish etc. with the English, and the English indistinctly Trade
with them every where, etc. Concerning this their Categorical Answer was
speedily expected; the Council having clearly explained their minds concerning
Treaties and Leagues of Amity, and Confederation between these Nations; The
insufficiency whereof to attain the ends of a lasting and durable peace, is
apparent by the attempt and war made upon this State contrary to these
Treaties, unless the same may be otherwise secured then heretofore they have
been. July 25. 1653.

The Dutch Ambassadors finding themselves necessitated to reply directly unto
the point of Coalition, did give in A Memorial thereupon, the which, and the
Answer of the Council of State, were as follows.

To the Lords of the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England.
THe subscribed Deputies of the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces, having nearer considered the Proposition expressed in the paper,
which from the said Lords of the Council in the Conference Monday last was
delivered to them; find themselves obliged to declare, that the said Lords the
States General have always had a singular good affection to the English
Nation, and endeavored not only inviolably to observe the Ancient friendships
and correspondencies established by the Treaties of former times; But further,
to make a more firm and straight Union upon grounds of the common Interests of
the One and Other Republic, and upon the offers of a mutual and more
intrinsic Alliance on the behalf of the Parliament of this Commonwealth, They
have presently used all possible means to facilitate the advancement and the
conclusion of such a Treaty, and have from time to time continued by all
convenient ways, by sending over their extraordinary Ambassadors, by their
Letters, and lastly by the said Deputies to reassume the interrupted
Negotiations, and to advance the same to such a perfection, that by a Treaty of
a nearer alliance and intrinsic Union, the Glory of God, and the propagation
of his Gospel may be advanced, and the liber^ies of the people assured, to the
mutual good and interests of both Nations. And Considering the Lords the States
General, have from the first beginning till this present time proceeded in all
the said Premises with an i^reprehensible candor and integrity, the
subscribed D^puties confess, that the said Proposition, in such terms, was
Unexpected: having never seen, or heard in any of the Propositions of former
times the least mention of a Coul^tion, or mixture of the several
Soveraignties: Fully persuading themselves that such Imaginations had never
been in the thoughts of either. And because the words Of a near Union and
Confederacy have always been most proper and significant to express the
sincere intentions concerning the mutual Alliance, They marvail at it, that now
in the said Propositions of the Lords of the said Council it is expressed, That
nothing more was offered by the said Deputies, but a straight and close
alliance between the two Nations, by a League of Amity and Confederation, being
glad that in the same Paper the Lords of the Council do openly confess, that
the very s^ had been propounded by the said Deputies at their first Audience,
and that the same Overtures have been made before ever the war began, and
confess ingeniously that yet they are not able to find a more convenient
expression to the intention of their Lords and Superiors, or to the nature of
the business it self; the intention of the Lords the States General having
manifestly been propounded from time to time, and especially in their last
Papers dated 22/2 and 23/2 July / August and the nature of the business it self
being so conform to this intention, cannot be otherwise managed, or expounded;
unless with the unusual novelty of such a Coalition and Mixture, all be put in
hazard to be imbroil'd in all sorts of Confusions and Impossibilities: If the
Treaty of Allyan^e and Confederation of the year 1495. be considered, there
will be found a good, sincere, true, entire, perfect and firm Amity, league,
confederation, peace, and union by Land, by Sea, and the fresh waters, for
ever. And if the Other succeeding Treaties from time to time be examined, the
same, or like words, will also be found; but of Coalition of Nations and
Republics, and of mingling the Soveraignties in such manner as is propounded,
not the least mark will appear, nor in any former ages in any Histories, or any
Treaty of any Nation. The Amphictiones This is false; it being usual in the
Roman Empire for several C^ies and Countries to be incorporated by Coalition
into the City of Rome, The Sovereignty being thereby mingled, and yet the
Municipal customs and Laws in many things, or totally remaining distinguished.
in Greece, the Associated Cities in Italy, in the first times of the Romans,
who were so straightly and closely confederated, that they had the same friends
and enemies, have yet maintained every one of them an absolute Sovereignty. The
same is, and has been observed by the Switzers, Grisons, and others in their
confederation; the Princes of the house of Burgundy, having obtained by
succession and time the Dominion of the seventeen Provinces, have endeavored
to Unite them Under one head, and supreme absolute Authority; the Princes of
the house of Austria in the same quality, and being supported by the German
Empire, and so many Kingdoms, have not only employed all sorts of Policy, but
all their Arms and Forces to the same effect; but the States of the said
Provinces, have not only opposed themselves with all sorts of reasons, and
remonstrances, but at last to maintain their Rights and the Privileges of
their Provinces, have employed their forces to the utmost hazards of their
lives and fortunes, and by God's blessing have had an happy Issue, and, being
necessitated to a mutual defense, for the future stand united by the most
complete and firm confederation that could possibly be made, yet with great
precautions of their several Soveraignties and Privileges, which cannot admit
any mixture and consequently They cannot because They will not. The Union of
Utrecht does not meri^ the name of a firm Union, the which ^very Province
breaks when They please, If it had been by entire Coalition, it had been more
political and valid: As the Government and Strength of Italy was more regular
and compact, when all the Cities were reduced into one Republic, then when the
Cities were, with distinction of Soveraignties confederated offensively and
defensively together.
no Coalition so qualified as is here propounded. And how can it be conceived
for us to join or unite our selves more strictly to others, then we are amongst
our selves? The same incongruities which offer themselves in the general, would
be discovered in the particulars, if all the circumstances of such a Coalition
should be represented at large, the marks, the rights, the effects, the
execution and practice of Sovereignty considered apart, would include a
thousand impossibilities, which are needless to specify in this Paper;
Assuring themselves that the Lords of the Council of State do easily comprehend
them.

And to Answer again to this Proposition, the subscribed Deputies are obliged
to say, that having been invited hither to a negotiation honorable and just,
They cannot comprehend that the Lords of the Council would now retard a
business of so high a consequence, for circumstances which they themselves
cannot but judge impossible; but will rather condescend to reasonable Articles
and Conditions by a Treaty tending to a firm and mutual union and confederacy,
wherein might be found the reciprocal satisfaction and security so much
desired. And if, contrary to their expectations, the Lords of the Council
persist still in the same resolutions expressed in their last Paper, the said
Deputies will be necessitated to return to their Superiors, to relate and give
an account to them of their negotiations here. And to that end, do earnestly
desire that as soon as possibly they can, the Lords of the Council will be
pleased to afford them the opportunity of taking their leaves: being very
sensible, that after more then five weeks expectancy, they shall be forced to
return without any effect of their wished and sincere intentions so often
reiterated in their several Papers.

Protesting before the Almighty God, that to their Power they have not been
wanting to set a just and fitting period to this bloody and Unchristian War:
and will be no ways guilty of the Innocent blood, and sad inconveniences that
will of necessity fall upon both Nations, they having such pregnant Reasons to
seek each others mutual good and prosperity.

The Answer of the Council to the aforesaid Paper.
THe Council of State having perused the Paper which the Deputies of the Lords
the States General of the United Provinces sent unto them upon Wednesday night
at seven a clock; do confess themselves to be very much surprised therewith,
having in no sort expected the Answer given thereby to the Proposition of the
Council contained in their last Paper delivered unto them in a Conference the
Monday before: and cannot yet comprehend the particular reasons and grounds
which have moved their Lorships thereunto. And therefore find it necessary to
declare, that having seriously weighed and considered with themselves the true
Interest of both Commonwealths, the state and posture of each others affairs,
and the grounds and causes of the present differences, with the security which
this State was in justice to expect; It was not obvious to them by what other
means this breach could be thoroughly healed, a peace secured, and those ends
professed by both sides to be aimed at in this present Treaty accomplished, then
by the Uniting both States into one Commonwealth, whereby a security would not
only be obtained, but great advantages arise out of it to both States,
especially to the people of the United Provinces: which is so demonstrable,
that if the said Deputies had by their Answer given opportunity for the
Consideration of particulars, instead of having under the General terms of
Confusions, Impossibilities and Novelties, condemned and concluded against it,
upon Allegations that they have not found such Coalition and mixture of
Soveraignties in the first times of the Romans, or in the Histories of former
Ages;. No doubt would have remained concerning the Candor and entire affection
of this State in the propounding it, or of the real benefits which would accrue
thereby: and it is such an Instance of friendship and goodwill on the part of
this State, that (all circumstances considered) no age can procuce a Parallel.

And therefore the Positive refusal of this Tender is no less strange unto the
Council, then it is to find also in the same Paper, that the said Lords
Deputies do confess openly and in express terms, that no more is meant by their
often repeated words of more Intrinsic Union, and close and straight
confederation, that what is contai^'d in the Propositions offered by them at
their first Audience, whereby they do demand free trade to the Islands and
Plantations of this Commonwealth in America, prohibited by an Act of
Parliament to all Strangers; and in the same Article restrain this
Commonwealth from trading to their These Propositions with the Reply of the
pretended Parliament. are recorded in Leo ab Aitzma, p. 7^0 etc.
Plantations in the East Indies, or elsewhere, save in Europe: the recalling,
as to them, the Act lately made for the Encouragement of Trade and Navigation,
and the taking away of Strangers-Customs, liberty for their people to buy land
in these countries equally with the Natives Nay, by the first article of these
Propositions, They do in effect demand to share with this State in the
Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas, and in their rights of Fishing: so that whereas
the Council d^d propound the Uniting of the two Commonwealths into one,
whereupon would follow an equal communication of all privileges and advantages
without distinction of Place or Persons, and wherein the Advantage would be to
the People of the United Provinces in respect of the greatness of this State,
the multitude of ^orts, the fishing, and other Advantages which the Netherlands
have not: they on the other part would unite in an alliance so far, as might
only give to One side a right to what is peculiar to the Other.

And these things being asked and vehemently insisted on by the Three
extraordinary Ambassadors of the United Provinces before, and at the time of
the Attempt made by their Admiral Tromp upon the English Fleet, and the same
being now again revived, and pressed in every Paper, as it cannot be otherwise
understood, but that the Present War was begun in a great measure to obtain
these by force, seeing they were not likely to be had by a Treaty, so does it
so much the more justify the demand of this State for satisfaction, and
concern them to insist upon security for the future; which latter they have not
in any of their Papers confined to Coalition, as excluding all other ways or
means of security, having propounded it no otherwise, but as that which in
their judgment is most just and equal in it self, most honorable and
profitable unto both, most easy and practicable in respect of the present
difficulties; and lastly the most likely means by the blessing of God to
obviate and prevent the designs of the Enemies to the Interest of Christ and
his People in both the Nations.

And seeing the said Lords Deputies are of another mind, the Council did expect
to have understood from them by what other particular ways and means this
State shall be secured (nothing having hitherto been propounded by them, but
what gives rather ground of Jealousy then Confidence) with their direct Answer
to the Demand of Satisfaction, that thereupon the Council might speedily have
applied themselves to a reasonable and moderating ascertaining of the sum; and
are sorry that after six weeks time They have not been able to obtein either.
Notwithstanding this State have not omitted at large to explain and evince the
justice and reasonableness of their demands on that behalf; nor to declare the
same by their Letters writ as well to the States of Holland as to the States
General before the sending of the said Deputies hither, expressing themselves
therein ready to proceed upon the same grounds for making up the present
breach, as formerly they offered in Answer to that part of the Paper of the
Lord of Hempsted, desiring This State to propound what might be just and
reasonable for composing the present differences; and without other alteration
then what is incident to that which has since happened in this unwelcome War:
which the said Deputies themselves acknowledge in their said last Paper to be
an Invitation honorable and just: and Therefore the Council does the less
understand why They delay to conform themselves thereunto, Seeing no more is
insisted now upon, then was plainly expressed in the afforesaid Letters, which
they call their Invitation hither. And this being in brief the true State of
the Proceedings hitherto, if the said Deputies of the Lords the States General
shall judge it best for the Interest of both States and the Protestant
Religion. to return home without giving any satisfactory answer to the Demands
of Repuration and Security, and thereby leave the Nations imbroyled in this
bloody War, when it is put into their power to End it; Although the Council
cannot deny to give them Audience to take their leaves at what day and hour
they shall desire it, yet this State will be able to acquit themselves before
the Lord and all good men, that with all uprightness and sincerity they have
contributed their Endeavors to make up the breach, and to unite the two
Nations more firmly and entirely then heretofore.

This Paper amazed the Dutch Ambassadors; it being manifest that the English
were inexorable, and resolute not to entrust their future safety and peace upon
any pretensions, promises, or assurances which the United Provinces could give
them: that it was impossible to divert them from these sentiments by any
Artifices, or by the interposition of any foreign Prince, in regard that the
Council of State had declined the medi^tion of the Crown of Sweden, telling Mr.
Lagerveldt, Ambassador thence, that They thanked Her Majesty of Sweden for the
zeal which she expressed for the resettlement of peace betwixt England and the
United Provinces: That the Parliament hoped, Leo ab Aitzma, p 816.
and did pray to God, that the hearts and minds of the States General might be
seriously disposed to accept thereof. Wherefore they desire a Pass for two of
them, W. Nieuport and Allard Peter Jongstall to go unto the Hague, there to
give unto their Superiors a full relation, with all the circumstances of these
proceedings. The which was readily granted, Aug. 3. 1653. The Council adding,
That as They had omitted no just and sitting means to testify their readiness
to a peace with the United Provinces: so do They continue the same good
intentions, and shall still contribute their endeavors to effect the same, for
the mutual good and security of both States, upon the grounds and principles
expressed in their former Papers.

The Ambassadors Mr. Van Beverning, and Van de Perre, which remained in
England, omitted not to solicit any persons that they thought might influence
the Council of State: The total defeat of their Naval forces, accompanied with
the Death of Van Trump, ensued the departure of those Deputies, and the States
General were about the same time acquainted with the demand of the Council of
State, and with the Successes of the English under the Admirals Blake and Monk,
who had sunk and fired about thirty Men of war (no quarter being given till the
end of the battle) six Captains, and about a thousand Men were taken
prisoners, and about six thousand slain. This added much to the courage of the
English Nation in general at home, and to their renown abroad: the Royalists
had no commiseration for the Dutch, because they had refused to mix the
interests of the King with those of the United Provinces; from whence They did
collect that the Hollanders did really intend the subjugation of England, and
that their purpose was to reduce the Nation to a perpetual dependence upon
them, as to Navigation and Commerce. The Parlamentarians did not doubt of the
sinister ends of the Dutch, and that They most perfidiously intended the
destruction of the English Fleet: The Munster-peace was fresh in every ones
Memory, and none could promise to themselves any security in the Leagues and
Promises of the Hollanders, who had so horribly deluded France: The point of
Coalition seemed most just and eq^itable, since it brought the Dutch into that
condition which they begged upon their knees to be received unto in the days
of Q. Elizabeth; and the effects of all the English conquests appeared moderate
and Christian, being to terminate in the making an union of the two Nations,
and putting the vanquished in the same estate with the Victors: As to the
dominion of the Sea, none doubted that it was the Right of England, and that we
ought not to abandon it, and suffer the encroaching Dutch to grow too potent
thereon: nothing being so certain as this, That the Dutch, wheresoever they
mingle themselves, do undermine and destroy the Trade of all other Nations that
resort unto those parts. The Convention summoned by the Council, and vulgarly
styled Praisegod Barebone's Parliament, were as averse from the Dutch as any
men: They looked upon them as carnal and worldly politicians, Enemies to the
Kingdom At Blackfriars Meeting, they pronounced all the Reformed Churches
(but especially ^he Dutch) to be as the out works: o Babylon, and that they
must be taken down, before there could be any coming at the main fort. They did
devov^ them to destruction, and presaged their destruction out of several Texts
of Scripture accommodated thereunto.
of Christ, and such as would, upon all occasions, retard the progress of the
Saints and People of God, in overturning the powers of this world: that
Antichrist, the Man of Sin, could never be destroyed in Italy, whilst the Dutch
retained any considerable strength in the United Provinces: The Nicety of the
Flag they did not much insist upon, nor assert the dominion of the Seas, but
they did hold it necessary, in order to the coming of Christ, and the personal
Reign, that the Seas should be secured, and preserved as peaceable as the Land,
and that all Powers, whether by Sea or Land, ought jointly to submit unto the
Scepter of King Jesus, whose ways They, and not the Hollanders, were to
prepare. As for the procedure of the Dutch by way of Petition, they thought it
might be continued, since the power of the Council of State was all one with
that of the Saints, and theirs derived from Him to whom all power is given: And
upon that account the Dutch ought to continue their addresses of Messeigneurs
and Tres-illustres Seign^urs, most honorable Lords, unto the said Council, not
in that sense wherein it is forbid by the Gospel but in that whereby our Lord
Christ assumes such T^les, and likewise confers them on the Saints: that the
signification, not sound of words was to be attended unto: that there is a
great equivocation in Language, that King and Kingdom, Power and Dominion, are
names equally communicable to Christ, and Satan, but yet there is a vast
difference in their import on such d^stant cases: The Saints therefore might
tolerate them without scruple, and the Dutch ought not to refuse them, least it
should be deemed a rejection of the Kingdom of Christ which was now
approaching: that the Dutch ought to kiss the Son, least he be angry and they
perish; and should have a care how they contemned his holy ones, least they
were chastised with the rod of Iron. In sine, so little did they value these
emp^y Titles in reference to the world, that if the Deputies would salute every
masiiff dog or barking curr in England, with the complement of Monseignor,
they would not resent it as an Indignity. The Ambassadors were now more
perplexed then before, it was difficult to treat with, and impossible to
prevail upon these Men: they were now in danger to be absolutely ruined as
Enemies of Christ, rather then of England, and a Coalition with England would
not satisfy, except they likewise annexed their Provinces unto the Fifth
Monarchy.

In Holland the distractions were so great, that the common people obeyed no
longer their Governors, The Placaris of the States General were despised, and
They in danger to be plundered and ruined by the ignorant and impetuous rabble:
However the Provincials met and Leo ab A^zma, p. 853.
consult about new Instructions for their Ambassadors in this juncture: The
opinion of Holland was, that The Coalition should never be assented unto: but a
strict League Defensive should be proffered, in the same manner as before: that
They ought to contract foreign Amities, especially with France; and equip out
a Fleet with all possible expedition. The other Provinces advised that
assistance should be given to the Scots; and no satisfaction yielded unto the
English: and that a League should be made with France, Brandenburgh, and the
German Princes. After this Nieuport and Jo^aestall depart for England, with
instructions to protract time according as they saw disorders to increase there
upon the male-governance of that pretended Parliament; to be ample in the
Ganerals concerning the defense of the Reformed Religion, and of the household
of faith: to reject the Coalition absolutely, and to offer a strict and
intimate League, but dealing as tenderly as They could in point of Reparation,
Satisfaction, and Security. Being come to London, their Reception was somewhat
cold: The most secret transactions of the States General were known to the
Council, as also their private Instructions: They knew also that They were
distracted into innumerable factions at home, the which were not to be
reconciled: That Holland complained it was exhausted by the losses they had
sustained, and contributions paid in this war: that some other Provinces
excused themselves by their poverty from contributing to the public: that they
were afraid least the Electors of Col^gne and Brandenburgh should repossess
their Towns, or the Emperor, in right of the Empire, seize them: They were
jealous of Spain, and uncertain least France should resent the Munster-peace,
so as to delay their Amity: Neither was it to be doubted but that all these
Princes would make them dearly purchase their Alliance: nor was it possible for
them ever to man forth their Fleets, so great a consternation had the last
fight and the death of Van Trump infused into them. The Fifth-Monarchists were
animated against them by the news of their Foreign Allianc^s: It was no more
then was prophesied in Scripture, and in course to be expected, that the
Gentiles should rage, and the Kings of the earth set themselves against the
Kingdom of Christ: but they should all fall before him, and be broken to
pieces: They were fierce to encounter Gog and Magog, and, by a series of
victories, inflamed to the combat with this Antichristian host.

After the Deputies had consulted together a few days, they repaired to Mr.
Jessop, October. 27. 1653. to deliver this Petition to the Council in French, and
English.

A Messeigneurs du Conseil d'Estat de la Republique a'Angleterre.
THe subscribed Deputies of the States General of the United It is observable,
that in the French they style the Sta^es General, Messeigneurs les Estats
generaux, which they omit in the English.
Provinces, being charged by their Superiors to propose to the Council of
State several points of importance, do thrice- humbly and instantly beseech,
that to them favorable Audience may be granted as soon as it is possible, and
the important affairs of the said Council will permit.

On the next day They obtained Audience, October. 28. 1653. and with great
submissions delivered the following Paper in French and English.

The Translate of the said Paper in English, as the same was then delivered by
the said Deputies.
Most honorable Lords,
OUr fellow Deputies Nieuport and Jongstall (having with all integrity and
fidelity related to the Lords the States General of the United Provinces, all
the Propositions which on our part since our first arrival here, have been
exhibited to your most honorable Lordships and the answers which you have been
pleased to return) are come back again with express orders of our Lords
Superiors, that we together should make our addresses again to this most
honorable Assembly, and renew yet once again the most sincere and cord al
protestations of their inviolable affection to this Commonwealth, and have
charged us to declare, that as, in general, the name and bloody effects of so
sad a war are to Oh! the extraordinary affection they bear to a Republic, and
to the Fanatic English!
them most abominable, so, more particularly, they derest it in regard of the
Government and Nation, wherewithal They are engaged. We are likewise persuaded
that there are no Christian considerations nor rules nor maxims of State, or
particular reflections which do not oblige Us reciprocally to join and unite us
closely and firmly with heart The necessity of the Dutch to join with those
English against the King and Royalists.
and affection, of Will and Deeds, against the machinations of all them who
endeavor to disturb, together with the truth of God and his holy Word, the
^ommon interests of both Commonwealths. We consider also that all Sovereign
powers are from God, and that the same Lord of Lords has ordained them to the
Glory of his blessed Name, for the advancement A Dutch Complement to the
Parliament of Praise-God barebones.
of his Truth, and the lawful liberty of his people.

We consider further, that the form and constitution of our Governments, and
the intrinsic interests of both Nations do lead and invite us, yea urge and
press us to a straight and sure union, for the discharge of our duties of piety
and justice which we owe to God and the People of both States: And finally we
consider, that we are reciprocally obliged to stop and prevent the further
effusion of innocent blood of the Professors of the same faith, and to
maintain with a mutual agreement and with all our forces, the Cause of God, and
his holy Gospel.

Therefore most honorable Lords, for the Glory of God and the love of his
Truth, and the welfare of both States and Nations, let us join our hearts, our
hands, our wills, and all our forces against all them that shall It is
observable, that from the first beginning of the Treaty with Mr. St John's at
the Hague, in June 1^51. until the end of the wars, All the tenders of a
defensive Allyan^e with the English, did originally and voluntarily proceed
from the Dutch: who did at first offer to en^er thereinto in their 36 Articles
tendered to Mr. St. John's, and the Council of State, before the War.
undertake to attack and disturb us by Sea or Land. We protest before God, who
is a Judge of the integrity of our intentions, that we offer you Ours with all
condour and integrity expecting of your Generosity the like from your
Lordships. The merciful God, we hope, will preserve and keep us from the
abomination of the Midianites falling by their own swords: and from the
punishment of Israel, when Ephraim did rise against Manasseh, Manasseh against
Ephraim, and both together against Judah. Truly that saying of the Apostle is
infallible, If we do bite and devour one another, the one shall consume the
other. Let us rather, as Gods people, be as one body, and march as one man,
that England, as formerly, be a nursing mother of brave men to maintain our
goods and liberties; and the united Provinces a Bulwark to this Commonwealth
against all who shall presume to disturb the Constitution of your Government,
and the just interest of both Nations; so that those that attack your liberty,
may be regarded as attacking our Government, and those that shall provoke our
State, as if provoking yours.

To that end we do propound, on the behalf of our Lords and Superiors, that
there may be established between both States and Nations, to the glory of God,
the advancement of his Truth, the protection of the Professors of the same
Faith, the liberty of our States, the freedom of our People, and the lawful
defense of their common interest, a (...) faithful and everlasting league in
the best form; and with such expressions and comprehension of the mutual
interests, so firm and intrinsic, as ever between two Sovereign States has
been, or can be made and established. And to fasten it with a more firm, more
straight, and more sure knot, to the end aforesaid, that this Union may be
extended to the other Protestant States of Christendom, and such as protect
and tolerate the free exercise of the Orthodox Reformed Religion in their
Dominions.

And for the greater assurance of this mutual security, that neither shall make
any Treaty of Alliance or Gonfederation with any State, Prince, or Potentate in
Europe, without the knowledge, and communication of the other, to be
comprehended in the same, if they think it convenient: and however, that in the
said Alliances and confederations nothing shall be concluded or established,
which shall be any ways prejudicial, much less contrary to the Articles of
this straight and sure Union, which we desire might be established between the
two Republics.

And whereas the consent and agreement of such an Union ought to be a sure and
solid foundation, whereupon, in pursuance, many other interests and particular
conveniences may be settled. The Lords the They desire in the first place to
begin with the Union of all Protestant States, for the advancement of the Truth
and honor of God, and the protection of the professors of the same Faith: And
this out of compliance with the Fif^-Monarchists then ^eigning.
States General, have thought fit that we should begin with the said
Proposition; and have given us sufficient Instructions upon all particulars
thereto belonging; And therefore we most earnestly beseech your Lordships,
that, after a mature consideration, you will be pleased to appoint us
Commissioners well instructed, to confer and debate together the particulars of
it. And because that time is much considerable for many reasons and respects in
this business, We wish it may be as soon as the important affairs of this
illustrious Council will any ways permit.

The Commissioners of the Council of State did not comprehend by these General
overtures what the Dutch intended, except it were to amuse them in their
preparations and counsils: Wherefore They desired (at a conference October. 31.)
that They would in writing explain themselves more particularly: which they did
in a Paper tendered Nov. 3. wherein They gave them a brief Analysis of their
first address: viz. that it consisted of three Articles. 1. In the first
A^ticle, there were two points: viz. The propagation of the holy Gospel, with
the protection of the Professors of the same Faith. And a straight, faithful,
sure, and everlasting Union betwixt the two Commonwealths: For the first, They
are of opinion, that it ought to be concluded in general Terms, with such an
intention, that if it happens that any particular wrong or prejudice be done
against it, and the professors of the same faith be any where oppressed, That
both States shall agree according to the constitution of times and affairs,
concerning the means by which they shall be best able to redress it. And to the
next point, That this straight, firm and intrinsic Union, shall comprehend all
the public and private interests of both Commonwealths, for to maintain and
preserve them against all those, whosoever they be, without any exception, that
shall undertake to cross, attack or disturb them by Sea or Land; and concerning
the means wherewith the same with Gods blessing is to be effectuated, and the
assistance that is mutually to be given, they are ready to confer and agree
with their Lordships, either that it be generally expressed, or specified.

2. To the second Article, They think it convenient (to add a greater efficacy
to the aforesaid ends) that the protestant States be invited and comprehended
in this Union, as the protestant Cantons and Free Towns of ^rmany, together
with the Protestant Princes there, and the Crowns of Sweden, Denmark; and
France also, since they are there tolerated and protected.

3. The third Article being perspicuous and couched in significa^nt terms, they
think it needless to expound it with other particulars, as not requiring any
further agreement: the subscribing Deputies persuading themselves that it is an
infallible and necessary consequence, that after the Conclusion of so strait
and everlasting an Union, there ought to be such a Correspondence and
confidence, that never any thing be done and undertaken against the mutual good
and interest of either, or of both Commons. Beseeching therefore most
instantly, that their Lorships would agree to the aforesaid Articles, etc.

This Paper being read in the Council, so far incensed them, that They would
not vouchsafe any Answer thereto, though the Ambassadors did twice (Nov. 7.
9.) beseech the most Honorable Lords of the Council to gratify them, as soon
as might be, with a favorable answer and resolution to the said Propositions
and Memorial.

Some there were, who apprehended that the Analysis was contumeliously penned,
as if by so many subdivisions the Godly (that usually preached) had been
scorned; These aggravated the Dutch insolence: Others concluded that the whole
procedure of the Ambassadors was dilatory, and inconsistent with the present
distractions at home (that Parliament having irritated the Clergy and Nation,
and dangerous factions increasing) and with the greatness of the Naval
exploits: that there was no sincerity in the Dutch protestations of Faith; no
imaginable Truth in their expressions of so ardent a Love for the English;
which the continual Libels, and infamous pictures did proclaim, and any man
might conjecture at by estimating what damage, what disgrace the victorious
English had done unto the United Provinces. That it was intolerable in them not
to propose any ^paration to the English, nor any acknowledgment of those Rights
which they had so openly and perfidiously violated, and the vindicating whereof
had cost so much Christian blood, and Treasure. If matters passed thus, the
Dutch would insinuate it, and the world would be prone to believe, that the
English did unjustly commence the war, and were guilty of all the blood shed
therein: That 'twas unreasonable for them to desire to be informed of all the
affairs of the English State, when they could not reciprocally per form the
like to England; It being evident, that though the States General should
undertake to do it, yet such is the constitution of that Government, so weak
the Union, that each Province can manage the highest affairs of State secretly
and separately, as appeared at the Munster-treaty, in the late address of
Holland for peace, and at other times: and the Province of Holland alone gives
laws to the counsils of the States General, by paying or refusing their moneys,
as they please. It did rather become the English now to impose, then receive
Laws: This is the Right of Conquerours, and that the fortune of the vanquished:
That The English should be false to themselves, and unworthy of the present
mercies God had showed them in this war, If they did not improve this
opportunity to a safe peace; If they reaped no other benefits thence, then a
little space to breath, and prepare for new engagements. A Coaliti^n being thus
arrogantly and obstinately rejected, by which we, in a most Christian manner,
would have done by them as by our selves, reconciled all interests, secured all
quarrels for the future, and as it were entailed peace upon both Nations: We
must establish our safety by other means, which if rigorous, are yet just and
Christian, because they are necessary to our just preservation, and put in
practice against those who by an unjust war, and a fallacious way of treating,
have subjected themselves to the extremest courses. If They cannot endure to
live as our equals by Coalition, We must continue them so far our Inferiors
(not by shadows, but substantial contrivances) that they may never attempt this
Nation again. Let us make them pay the usual Submissions at Sea; this is due to
your repute: Let them pay for the Liberty of Fishing: this is due, as you are
Sovereigns of the Sea: Let them pay for Convoyes, and ease themselves of the
charge of Wafters; it is you are the proper Guardians of the British Seas: Let
them never equip any number of great Ships, without giving you a real account
long before of their intentions, and ask leave to pass your Seas; and to all
this, add but the payment of such a sum as will satisfy this war (which in
conscience they ought to reimburse) and make reparation to each Merchant for
the damages sustained by them in several parts of the world (which to demand,
is a discharge of the Trust this Nation reposeth in Us) and if you gain these
points, you will contribute as much to a firm everlasting peace as humane
prudence can attain unto.

After some debates of this nature, the Council ordered a draught to be framed
of such Articles as might be the foundation of a straight, firm and everlasting
League, and which might prevent Leo ab Aitzma p. 857.
all matter of future quarrels and wars: and appointed a Conference with the
Ambassadors, Nov. 17. 1653. the which was principally managed by Cromwell, who
(though He did nothing in the point of Coalition, or in the recited advise;
then the cas^iered Members of the Long Parliament designed and suggested)
intended to pursue his ambitious projects by seeming the sole manager of this
affair, and by whose aid the Dutch must expect to find the conditions moderated.

Cromwell began his discourse with large protestations of the sincere and great
desires of the Parliament to make a firm peace and intimate Union with the
United Provinces: He laid his hand upon his breast, and called God to witness,
that the Council Cum ipsissima divini nomini^ invovocatione testatu^ de sincera
Concilii intention and affectione erga foederatum Belgium; and Angliam ipsam
Parlamento ^ariorem non esse, quam dict^ Belgii curam, id. p. 844, 846.
of State had a most sincere and hearty affection for the United Provinces; and
that the Parliament (being Fifth-Monarchy men!) was so devoted to do them all
good offices, that they equally studied the welfare of England and the
Netherlands: As an evident testimony thereof, They had proposed this Coalition
of people, by which they might unite the interests, as well as hearts, of both
Nations, and commu^icate the felicities of England with their good neighbors
of the United Provinces: But since it had pleased the Deputies to decline that
so amicable and extraordinary offer, and to insist upon a confederation id. p.
8, 6.
and stricter Union then ever had been before, The Commissioners were ready to
enter upon those debates, protesting before God the searcher of hearts, and
from whom nothing is concealed, that They hated war, and desired peace,
especially with the United Provinces. And although They thought they had great
reasons still to insist upon those preliminaries about Satisfaction and
Security, the which demands They found to have been en^cted and urged by the
late Parliament yet they did intend frankly to lay open their very bosoms unto
the Deputies, and acquaint them with Their further thoughts. It is an agreed
thing on both parts, that the Peace here agitated is not an ordinary one, but a
most straight, intrinsic, everlasting Amity and Union, such as never was
heretofore betwixt two Nations: To effect this, it is requisite that all
obstacles, all such scruples be removed, as may at any time give occasion to
new quarrels: the several Rights of both Nations must be clearly adjusted: and
therefore in the first place, and before any thing else, thus much must be
yielded to the English, that They are Lords of the British Seas; and
Proprietours of the fishing therein: These two things being premised and
granted, all subsequent Articles would admit of a facile determination.

The Dutch Ambassadors were somewhat amazed at this Harangue: the professions
of great sincerity and affection (with appeals to God) animated them a little:
the passing by the Articles of Satisfaction and Security, with a promise to
descend to plain and special Articles made them hope for a good issue of this
conference: But whither They did intend to pr^tract the time in expectation of
those necessities whereinto the distracted Government of England was then
running: or apprehended It is not for the Good natured, or timorous, to treat
with the Dutch, except they would become a prey unto them.
that This unusual condescension was the effect of an alteration for the better
in the minds of the Council, or the product of some unknown fears in them
(whereupon they intended to take advantage) or whither They acted cautiously
and prudently, as suspecting the favors of Men in open hostility with Them:
Certain it is, They replied with a great deal of reservedness. First They
protested, that nothing They should say by way of discourse, nothing that
should perhaps seemingly Leo ab Aitzma p 836, 8^7.
be agreed unto, and admitted of, should any way oblige them to adhere
thereunto, except the whole Treaty took effect, and were concluded upon. Then
They proceeded to say That the United Provinces would not refuse to pay unto
the English all those honors and respects at Sea, which their Ancestors had
formerly rendered to this Nation: As to the Fishing, They desired that might not
be controverted before the Articles of strict and intimate Union were accorded:
and after them it would be seasonable to treat of Commerce, and the Fishing.
The English Commissioners replied, That what the Ambassadors said, was nothing
to the purpose: The Sovereignty of the Sea, and the Fishing, were the
unquestionable Rights of England: and there was no Equivocation in the Terms,
no doubt nor scruple of the Things themselves. The Deputies rejoyned; that They
had spoken clearly and distinctly enough to both points: but They would add
further, That the Sea was to be considered either ^s Ships met thereon, and one
Nation paies respect to another; or in respect of Free Navigation. As to the
first, They had explained themselves: As to the second, there was another
distinction to be made; for as to the simple use of the Sea, that is open to
All: As to some particular profits and emoluments arising thence, There might
indeed be some plea for propriety: but this discourse would be most suitable,
when They were to treat of Commerce. The English were angry at this
reservedness of the Deputies, and Aliter Leges, aliter Philosophi. Cic. de off.
l. 3. Iurisconsulti non philosophorum decr^tis, sed populari captu ac sensu
civilem sapientiam metiuntur. Bodin. de rep. l. 1. c. 5.
told them, they did not come to hear or confer about Scholastic subtilties,
but the real, legal Rights of England, which They desired might be assented
unto in such manner as They had always been understood, and not eluded by such
disputes, and distinctions: That if old Rights were thus disputed, what
security would there be in any New Treaty? What foundation of a lasting and
intimate Union, if the proper Rights were not antecedently determined of? That
on the morrow They would transmit to the Deputies such Articles as were
equitable, and whereupon a perpetual Friendship and Union might be well
bottomed and established: And accordingly Nov. 18. A draught of such Articles
was delivered unto them by the Commissioners with this Preamble.

The Preamble to the Articles delivered by the Commissioners for the Dutch
Treaty to the said Deputies. November. 18. Anno 1653.
THe Deputies of the Lords the States General cannot make the least doubt of
the sincere love and entire affection of this State toward the United
Provinces of the low Countries, nor of the integrity of their intentions
toward them, If, among other things, the last Papers delivered by the Council
of State to the said Lord Deputies Viz. those about Coalition.
be reflected upon, and considered; wherein were made such tenders and
propositions on the behalf of this Commonwealth, as, through the blessing of
God, would have been effectual means not only to stop the further effusion of
Christian blood in the presentwar, but to bring both States into such an Union
and consistency of Interests as might totally have extinguished the seeds of
all future differences, and rendered their forces and other advantages more
serviceable for promoting those great ends of Liberty and Religion, professed
to be aimed at by both sides: And though They have expected these three months
for an Answer to their last Paper delivered in upon this subject, and found
their endeavors of this kind, to be hitherto without their desired fruit: Yet
such is the tender sense that this State has of the present condition of
affairs between the two Nations, and of the sad consequences and effects of
this bloody war; that they were resolved to leave no just and honorable means
unattempted, which may put an end thereto, and unite both States together more
firmly then heretofore; and accordingly they have prepared and digested into
several Articles the Body and Form of a Treaty, and do herewith propound the
same to the said Lords Deputies; the substance whereof being assented to by
them, and fitting Caution and Security given (to be now likewise agreed upon)
for the just performance thereof (on the part of the said United Provinces) we
hope They will prove the means of establishing a lasting peace and firm
friendship between the two Nations: And the Council does nevertheless reserve
full power to add, and to alter, or enlarge any of the said Articles before
the conclusion of the Treaty, as they shall find occasion for the same in the
future management thereof.

And whereas several demands were heretofore made and exhibited by the Council
of State in the name of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England to the
Lords Catz, Schaep, and Vande Perre, Ambassadors of the States General for
Satisfaction to be given, and reparation made for several wrongs, injuries and
depredations done and committed upon the English, as well in the East Indies,
as elsewhere, by the People of the United Provinces; The Council has the same
under their further consideration; And in what manner the East-India-trade may
be settled between both Commonwealths with Justice: and shall in convenient
time deliver the Particulars thereof to the said Lords Deputies.

It would be too prolix to transcribe them All at this time: They are pretty
faithfully recorded in Leo ab Aitzma, p. 837. Those which most aggrieved the
Dutch were these.

By the third Article, The Ships, Guns and Furniture, and the Goods and
Merchandises, and other things which had been taken at Sea, in Harbor, or at
Land from the Dutch by the English, during the war, should be accounted as part
of satisfaction and reparation for the Charges and Damages which the English
has been put to during the war. And the States General shall pay unto the
English such further sum for reparation as aforesaid, and in such manner as
shall be agreed upon in this Treaty: and thereupon all offenses etc. to be
forgotten.

By the fourteenth Article, They were not to enter or pass the British Seas,
but with a certain number of Men of War, to be agreed upon in this Treaty: But
in case the States General should have occasion to pass the said Seas with a
great number of Ships of War, that They should give notice of their intentions
to the English, and obtain their consent, before they put to Sea.

By the fifteenth Article, They were to strike the Flag and lower their
Topsails, be they Fleets or Ships, unto any Man of War wearing the English
Flag, and in their Service: and likewise submit to be searched by the English,
as Lords and Sovereigns of the British Seas.

The Preamble also of the sixteenth Article did perplex Them; viz. I follow
herein the English Manuscript: for the Latin of Leo ab Aitzma differs much
from this: This preface was omitted by Cromwell, the residue was transferred
into the fourteenth Article of his Treaty.
And as the Commonwealth of England have declared their Resolutions, that They
will from time to time take care to put forth upon their Seas, a convenient
number of armed Ships for the defense and safeguard thereof, and to maintain
and preserve all lawful Navigation, Trade and Commerce therein against Pirates
and Searovers, and all others that shall act, or do any thing to the
disturbance thereof: So for the greater freedom of Commerce and Navigation,
that neither of the Commonwealths shall give reception to any Pirates, etc.

The seventeenth Article obliged Them to take a Lease for One and twenty years
for the Fishing, and to pay an annual Rent. As has been related in the
precedent discourse.

The twelfth Article did oblige Them not to permit the Prince of Orange, or the
Princess Mary, to relieve with counsil, victuals, any Rebels or Enemies of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. And to seclude the Princes lineage from being
State-holder, Admiral, General, or Governor of any of their Towns.

The Dutch Ambassadors were extremely aggrieved at these Articles, finding all
the amicable protestations of the English to end in these so rigorous
impositions: whereupon They delivered in a complaint to the Commissioners, Nov.
22. which was that day reported to the Council, but not vouchsafed any Answer:
thereupon they sent another Paper to Secretary Thurloe, Nov. 25. which was the
same day read in the Council. Whereunto They received a Reply some days after.
The three Papers were these following.

A Paper delivered by the Deputies of the States General of the United
Provinces to the Commissioners for the Dutch Treaty, November. 22. 1653. and the
same day reported to the Council.
Most Honorable Lords.
TO the 27 Articles (which his Excellency, and the Lords, Commissioners of the
Council of State have been pleased to deliver to us in the last Conference on
^^/28 November.) We find our selves obliged to answer, that After a Preface of
the love and affection of this State toward the United Provinces of the low
Countries, and such a solemn protestation of their integrity and Candor many
times reiterated, yea with a calling to Witness God Almighty in the two last
Conferences, We are amazed to see a draught with an extension of Articles,
wherein we find nothing at all that is suitable or conformable to the
particular demonstrations that we did look for, nor to our expectations in the
Proposals of a firm and straight Union: which was to be the Scope and end of
our Negotiation; but contrary, that, examining all the Particulars, we find
that the Lords of the Council have been pleased to compile together some
Articles of the Treaty of Intercourse of the year 1495. and to draw some parts
thereof out of the Retroacts passed between the Extraordinary Ambassadors of
both Commonwealths heretofore at the Hague, and at London, also so framed and
composed, that in both the Intention and Interest of the Lords the States
General, together with their Considerations and Proposals are not regarded, but
put to Oblivion; And, contrarily, all is set down, and propounded, according to
the intention and meaning of this Government, and to their greatest advantage;
Insomuch, that concerning the same points, we find our selves yet, after a
negotiation of so many months, in the same state and condition as at the first
beginning; and some other Articles of gre^ter Concernment newly added
thereunto, which were never yet debated; far against and beyond our
expectation. Therefore we find our selves obliged (reserving also the same full
power to debate hereafter the Articles of less moment, which we pass for the
present, and to propound all which we think necessary for the interest of our
Superiors) In this conference to represent some points of greater importance,
justly and lawfully showing, that the same are no ways to be admitted.
Protesting before the Omniscient Lord, who is to be Judge of our Intentions,
that we have always proceeded with an irreprehensible sincerity and candor,
and that for the future we are most willing, according to our so many times
reiterated protestations, to confer and agree, if it be possible, with all
fidelity and uprightness of heart, without reserving any thing of the Orders of
our Superiors, in a business of such an high concernment. And therefore to the
third Article: forasmuch as there is mentioned in it of satisfaction; we must
say there is no justice, nor reason in the proposal. And to the Twelfth;
forasmuch as it touches the Prince of Orange, excluding the same and all his
line for ever out of the free Election, which the Lords the States General or
Provincial might make of his, or their persons: that it is a point absolutely
appertaining to the disposition of the said States, wherein, with no more
Reason or Equity the Lords of this Council are to meddle, then we in their
elections in the like occurrences in this Nation, And to the Fifteenth,
Concerning the submission to be visited as well for Men of War, as Merchants;
that it is against the Practice of our Country, and subject to a thousand
disorders and disputes; and injurious in the point of Dominion and Sovereignty,
The Dutch would reciprocally have searched the English Ships.
especially in that all reciprocation is wholly excluded. And to the
Seventeenth Article of permission of fishing for a certain Recognition of
money; We say that thereby the Lords the States General should be put out of an
immemorial possession without Cause or Reason: having always enjoyed the
freedom of fishing. And we shall at all times be ready to express our selves
more particularly, and to justify with a Convenient deduction of Arguments,
and reasons, our Intention concerning the beforementioned Articles. But before
we come to any farther debates of the said points, we are obliged to declare
our mind to the Fourteenth Article, speaking of the limitation of the Number of
the Men of War; and notice of their intention to be given to this
Commonwealth, and their Consent to be obtained for the passing, and before
they put them forth upon the Seas; Truly, my Lords, we can hardly persuade our
selves that it is in good earnest, that so unreasonable and extravagant a
proposal is offered: and indeed, if you do intend to give place to such
thoughts, we are obliged to tell you plainly, we are so far from it, that we
should esteem our selves unworthy of the goodness and favor of God, whereby
his Divine Majesty has blessed the endeavors of our Superiors in the lawful
prosecution of their liberty, If we did ^ut enter thereupon into a Conference;
or if we did make the least scruple of an absolute negative. We confess
ingenuously, that though we have no special orders or instructions of our
Superiors concerning that point (and how is it possible to have any upon such
an unreasonable and incredible a proposal) yet we are so well informed of the
Generosity of our Superiors, Their Superiors were at that time in great
perplexity: their Fleets destroyed, their people mutinous, their Seamen cried
out, the Hand of God was against them, and they would fight no more.
and the Constitution of their affairs and interests, as also of the intention
and goodwill of our people, that no living soul without an absolute
indignation, could hear of such overtures: How many times has his Excellency,
and the Lords praised our Ancestors, who with so much zeal and vigor have
fought for the liberty of their Coun^y? And how is it possible that they should
now have the opinion that their posterity is grown so base, that they would
suffer themselves, without reason, or necessity, to be deprived or frustrated
of so notable a part thereof. Liberty, we say, that permits them (being a
free, and under Gods grace, a Sovereign independent State) to go and return, to
be in action or rest, to take up arms, or lay them down, according as their
interest, and their just and lawful defense requires. We must needs say, that
we did not expect from his Excellency and the Lords, after so many
Protestations and obtestations before God, and men, in public and private, so
many times reiterated, that they would confine their good affections, their
sincerities and candours, to such an inapparent proposal, but that they would
rather (which we beseech most instantly) confer and agree with us on
conditions, whereby the glory of God, and the propagation of the Gospel may be
advanced, and a full, faithful and everlasting Union on Reasonable and
Equitable conditions rereciprocally may be established between the two
Commonwealths: in such a manner as we have represented in our last
Propositions and Memorials, or any other better and more convenient, so as we
together may agree. To all which we shall expect an Answer as soon as may be.

A Paper from the said Deputies sent in a Letter to Mr. Secretary Thurloe,
November. 25. 1653. and the same day read in Council.
To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England.
THE subscribed Deputies of the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces, being bound by the express orders of their Superiors to neglect no
time in the present transaction with the Commonwealth of England, for the
Reasons and Motives several times represented in their form^ Memorials, are
once more obliged to address themselves to the most honorable Lords of the
Council of State, most instantly desiring that the sincere and cordial offers
made in the behalf of their Superiors, to the re-establishing a good Christian
love, peace, straight and firm Union between the two States and Nations on just
and equitable Conditions (for the Considerations more at large expressed in our
Papers formerly exhibited) might be received with a mutual readiness. But
because we have observed, that in the three last Conferences his Excellency and
the Lords of the Council have alleged that in the former Proposal on the behalf
of the Commonwealth of England, it was thought the fittest and surest
expedient, not only for the removing of the present differences, but to prevent
any others in future times, that the Interests between the two Nations and
States, should be made Common without any distinction, which being by us (as
his Excellency and their Lordships supposed) absolutely contradicted, and only
a bare Union and Confederacy offered; had moved the Council to frame such
Articles whereby the Interests being separate, the Rights of either are to be
settled distinctly. We cannot omit to beseech, that his Excellency and the Lords
of the Council will be pleased to remember, that on Thursday and Friday the
17th and 18th of November, we have with all ^ndour and integrity of heart
expressed our selves, and declared that Distinguishing the Interests which are
of the Nature that they are Communicable, and such as cannot admit a mixture or
communion (as is the supreme Power and Government) without a total subversion
thereof; We conceived that all other interests of both States and Nations,
might as well be made Common between them, under the Notion of a straight and
sure Union, as of a Coalition: as by the Examples, and Presidents, has been by
Us demonstrated: and that we had showed, with several Reasons and Arguments in
our former Paper, that the supreme Power and Constitution of our Government
only could not admit such an unpracticable alteration: But for all other
Interests and Advantages, such as by the blessing of God, both Nations do
enjoy, that the Union might be extended and established in such a manner, that
in the United Provinces, and all the places thereunto belonging in Europe, all
the People and Inhabitants of See how tender They are as to he trading of the
East and West Indies.
the Commonwealth of England, should enjoy and have all the same Privileges,
Liberties, and Immunities, and benefits as our own Natives, without any
distinction at all: and so vice versa, that the people and inhabitants of the
United Provinces should be used in the Commonwealth of England, and places in
Europe thereunto belonging. And that further by the said straight and
intrinsic Union all the Liberties, Franchises, and other common interests of
both States and People, should reciprocally be maintained and protected against
all such as should undertake, or attempt to disturb, or attack either of the
two States and Nations in the Premises, by Sea or Land, with such forces and
means as should be agreed. And that We Conceived, that in such grounds, and
others expressed in our former Papers, being mu^ual and reciprocal, the Hearts
of the Nations could be best united to the glory of God, and advancement of the
Gospel, removing all Enay and Jealousies, and re-establishing a good Christian
love in peace and amity: Protesting before the Lord, to whom no secrets are
hidden, These Hollanders will con inue lying until their last
that we never had, nor have the least thought or intention to diminish,
prej^dice, or controvert any known Right or Pre-eminence, whereof the
Commonwealth or People of England have been in lawful Possession. Thinking it
likewise unreasonable, that in this time the Council of State, after such
serious protestations of love and tenderness toward the United Provinces,
should endeavor to put upon them harder Conditions, and more intolerable then
ever by all former Governments in this Nation have been offered to our
Ancestors: Yet because We cannot perceive in the Paper, or Preface before the
27. Articles, nor in the Articles themselves, that any reflection by the most
honorable Council has been made thereunto; but that contrarily, other very
strange Points and unusual proposals are therein inserted, We do apprehend that
our true and sincere meaning (being only delivered by word of mouth) has not
been regarded as it should have been: And therefore we have thought it our Duty
(seeing, that in a business of such a high Concernment, nothing ought to be
neglected that could conduce to hinder all further effusion of innocent
Christian blood, and the ruin of thousands of honest and godly people on both
sides) to represent the Premises in writing. Beseeching most instantly, that
the Council of State may be pleased to take to heart the sad inconveniences
between the two so near neighbor States, and Nations, in continuing this
unwelcome war, and to gratify us with a good and favorable Answer, and
Expedition.

A Paper agreed upon in Council, November. -- 1653. and ordered the same day to
be delivered to the said Deputies; which was done accordingly.
IF the Paper signed by the Deputies of the Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, and presented to the Council the 20. Inst. had not been
delivered by the said Lords Deputies themselves to the hands of our
Commissioners, We should have made some doubt whither their Lordships (trusted
in so great affairs, and fully acquainted with all that has passed in the
present Treaty) had indeed been the Authors thereof: several passages and
expressions being contained therein, which are altogether unusual, and no way
agreeable to the nature of transactions between States, and rather tend to
irritate and disturb, then to moderate and compose the minds and affections;
and for which no ground or cause was given in the 27. Articles delivered unto
them the 18/28 September. Instant: now in the Preamble thereunto. And therefore
considering the aforesaid Paper, and likewise reflecting upon what has passed
in former Papers, We most ingenuously profess our selves to be yet to seek of
the meaning and intention of their Lordships upon the Whole matter of this
Treaty.

When the Council by their former Papers of the 22. and 25. of July last,
propounded the uniting of both States into one, the aforesaid Lords the
Depu^ies were pleased, without coming to the debates of the practicableness
thereof, and of the Advantage and Utility accruing thereby to both States, to
reject and condemn the same under the General terms of Novelty, Confusions, and
Impossibilities; as appears in their Papers of the 27. of the said month of
July: offering nothing in the stead thereof, but general professions of their
desires to enter into a strict union with this State. And now We having
compiled and put together the Articles aforesaid, as the means to establish a
just peace, and to effect the desired league and union (being also at several
Conferenees pressed by the said Lords the Deputies to descend unto particulars)
and delivered them to their Lorships: When we expected by free debate with them
to have considered and examined from point to point every particular thereof,
as they lie in Order; They were pleased by a Paper, without any debate, under
General terms of unjust, extravagant, and unreasonable, to express their
dislike of, and declare themselves against them. Whereas if their Lordships had
thought it fit to come to a discussion of the Particulars (the method used in
all Treaties of this kind) as the proposing of them would have appeared to be
very suitable, and conform to the professions and protestations of Candor and
Ingenuity, made by the Council, or their Commissioners, upon this occasion; so
the Articles themselves having been considered and examined, might have been
settled and adjusted according as the justice and reasonableness should appear
upon the Arguments produced by both sides; which to do by Papers would consume
too much time, as affairs now stand. And because much mention is made in the
Paper of the said Lords the Depu^ies, of the Protestations made by the Council,
and their Commissioners, We find our selves obliged further to say, that
Certainly we did never declare our selves by any profession or protestation,
from asking and insisting on those things in the Articles, which are the
undoubted and unquestionable Right of this Commonwealth; nor give any ground
to the said Lords the Deputies, to expect that we should part with them as a
Demonstration of the affection of the State to the United Provinces: Our
Commissioners having to the contrary in the two last conferences, mentioned in
the beginning of their Paper of the 22. Instant, declared, that since their
Lordships had refused the Coalition and mingling of Soveraignties, whereby the
two States might not only be one in name, but in Truth; that now they were to
be considered as distinct in Interests, and as having peculiar Rights and
Privileges belonging to each other, the settling and fixing whereof was to be
considered in this Treaty of Union and Confederation: That when the Rights of
both sides were agreed upon, they should sooner become friends, and longer
continue so.

And we do not yet understand upon what other grounds either side can proceed
in this Treaty, as it is now stated; unless the expectation of the said Lords
the Deputies be, that this State should part with whatsoever is peculiar to
them both at Sea and Land, without having any thing in Recompense thereof, more
then the bare name of a strict Union: according to what seems to be held forth
in both their Papers of the 22. and 25. Instant: In the last whereof they say,
that distinguishing the Interests which are communicable from those which can
admit no mixture or communion (as the Supreme Powers and Government) all other
Interests of both States and Nations might be made common between them, under
the Notion of a straight and near union: and what the Consequences of such an
Union would be to this State, it is altogether needless to unfold, as it is to
show the inequality thereof: Or if the meaning of their Lordships be otherwise,
and their minds be to make this peace upon just and equal grounds, They may
have opportunity upon the debate of the Articles, to manifest and explain
themselves in particulars; and at any time during the Treaty, to propound what
they conceive just and reasonable to be insisted upon on the behalf of their
Superiors, further then is expressed in the said Articles. But the said Lords
the Deputies having most unexpectedly by their said Papers refused any
Conferences, or debate thereupon, it appears not what is farther to be done
therein on our parts, while they continue in this mind; Having already not in
General and Ambiguous Terms, but fully and particularly explained our selves,
and endeavored in all sincerity and uprightness to put the Treaty in that way
and method which might best discover the justness and Equity of each others
propositions, and the validity of these grounds and reasons they are enforced
upon, and thereby the sooner bring this negotiation to an happy Issue.

Notwithstanding the Rhodomon^ade mentioned in the first Paper, the Deputies
considering the necessities of their Country, and the unmov^able haughtiness of
the Council, did afterward sue for, and enter i^to several Conferences: though
I do not find the particular days Leo ab Aitzma p. 844 and 8^7 850.
set down. In all which the Commissioners (whereof Cromwell was always one) did
insist obstinately upon the acknowledgment of the Domi^ion of the Seas, and
Rights of fishing: in such terms as has been related before, where we spoke
concerning those subjects: The De^uties did remonstrate that the States General
had as great desires to enter into a firm and straight and everlasting League
as the Parliament of England could have: but as the English had declared in
August let, when they proposed a Coalition, that if the Dutch accepted thereof,
all disputes about the Sovereignty of the Seas and Fishing would surcease: So
upon the settlement of Peace, Union, and eternal Ami^y, those scru^ contes^s
ought to receive an end; especially since neither the United Provinces, nor any
other Nation had ever owned What will not these men say, that da^e avow this!
such Rights of the English. That it would be repugnant unto the nature and
const^tions of each Country to mix and confound them both in one: but if no
more were looked after then a mutual participation of all emoluments,
privileges, rights, and (...), these might be as well made common and mut^al
by a strict League, as by the said Coali^ien; betwixt which and the said Union,
the difference was but verbal. Hereupon Cromwell replying, said, Because you
have been pleased again to make mention of the Coalition, and to explain and
apply it according to your own sense; Know that the intentions of the Council
were to find out those means which were most valid and really secure, not such
as had only the strength which Idle words and Paper could give unto them; They
purposed not only to compose the present war, but to prevent all possible
ruptures hereafter: And to effect this great work, Coali^ion most avails. For
thereby, without any distinction, except of Municipal Laws and Usages in the
ordinary administration of Justice, all the Sover^ignty, Government, and
whatever depends thereupon in the two Nations, would become indistinct and
joint. But because you did decline this Proposal, and desired a strict Ami^y
and League, with a reserve of the Sovereignty and Emoluments proper to each
Republic, the Council was pleased to condescend thereto: And this being now
agitated, it behooves us to find out such expedients whereby we may redress the
present inconveniences, and prevent the like for the future. What you now
speak concerning an imperfect Coalition, seems to proceed from a defect in your
Instructions, otherwise We should not have expected to hear from so Wise and
Honorable Ministers as You are such an overture. Then He e^larged upon the
singular affection which the English did bear toward the Dutch; the sincerity,
the candid purposes of the Council, the extraordinary care which the Parliament
had for their wellf^re and prosperity, that They might share therein for ever
equally with England: Upon this score purely They had urged the Coalition; and
if the proposal be duly and rightly weighed, it will appear that the English
therein have no other scope, nor think to derive thence any other benefit, then
a secure peace; All the Emoluments and Privileges would redound unto the
United Provinces: To evince this, He discoursed of the situation and riches of
England, the convenience and goodness of the ports, and coasts, the benefits of
f^shing; the opportunity of trading to the English plantations, of purchasing
lands, and putting out their moneys to a greater interest. Concluding that the
English, for their parts, had offered unto them what was beneficial, and
reasonable, and were satisfied in their own consciences; and If the Deputies
would not demean themselves with greater sincerity and confidence, there was no
good s^cces to be hoped for from this Treaty. The Deputies withdrew aside a
little, and after some discourse, resumed their places, Avowing that They had
dealt heartily and sincerely, and had proposed what They thought most
advantageous and seasonable: That since, They had conferred with Their
Superiors, related all passages exactly unto them, and received orders not to
treat about any Coalition: But They were ready to confer about a strict and
firm Union, and to demonstrate that the same Peace and Security which the
English expect by the Coalition, might be established by a strict Union: Adding
that it was easy to demonstrate that The Dutch were already possessed in
themselves of all those advantages (or greater) which the English offerred to
communicate unto them by the Coalition. In fi^e, seeing that the Commissioners
seemed to expect that the Dutch should make the first overtures about a firm
peace, They declared that if the English would proceed frankly, The Deputies
had power to oblige their Superiors, to maintain, defend and promote the
Liberty and common good of the present Government and people of England against
all, indifferently and without any exception, who should attempt to disturb,
impede, or evert it: and this either at Sea, or Land, with all those forces and
by all those means which should be agreed upon mutually: That they did not
comprehend what greater or more sufficient assurance of peace and Security the
English could find in their Coalition; And therefore it was manifest, that in
this great debate the contest was merely about words. As to the pretended
benefits that would accrue to them by the Coalition, They with much modesty
answered, that it was true the English had several conveniences which the
Dutch wanted; but yet God had been pleased to recompense the United Provinces
with peculiar advantages: that if their Territory was small, yet all the Rivers
of the vast inland did flow through their Country; that they had so great a
multitude of fair and opulent Towns, and other felicities, that They had no
cause to repine at the unequal dispensations of Providence: As to the Rights
and Privileges which They were offered in England, the people of Holland stood
in no want of them, etc. Cromwell and the Commissioners having withdrawn and
advised together awhile, returned to the Deputies; and Cromwell made a long
Speech, which proved to be only a Repitition of what he had said before: He
protested that the Coalition was mentioned out of no other design, then that
the English might receive Satisfaction, Peace, and Security: that there was not
the least comparison to be made betwixt Security to be had by confederacy, and
that of an intrinsic Union: that How specious soever the title of Sovereignty
might seem to them, yet that was but a trifle, which He valued no more then a
feather in his cap; nor did He care a button for the troubles and cares which
inseparably and constantly attend such as are the chief in Government: He knew
how much the Dutch valued their Liberty, and how dearly they had purchased it;
yet really the tenders of the English ought to prevail above all regards: They
might, without boasting, say, that their Territories were so commodiously
situated, that the inhabitants thereof might sail and traffic without the
control, without the aid of Holland, into any part of the world: But the Dutch
could not do so: That they knew well who were the Enemies, and which the
Friends of the United Provinces: that They which hated the one (meaning the
House of Austria) did not affect the others: and therefore it ought to be the
aim and intent of both Nations mutually to conjoyn; and being united, They
needed not to fear any thing, but might, in point of Trade, give laws to the
whole world. Then He insisted upon the Dominion of the Sea, and the Fishing, as
necessary to be accorded unto, before the particular Treaty were entered upon.
The Ambassadors replied as before; And the English still insisted upon those
two points, and also costs and damages, with great obstinacy. The Dutch said,
they would not adjust the Dominion of the Sea, and Right of fishing, till the
other Articles were agreed: those that were now obtruded, being such as could
not be imposed on any but Rebels, and such as were utterly vanquished: that
since the English did esteem them so Rational and Equitable, (as they persisted
to do) the Deputies must break off the Treaty, and return within two days to
acquaint their Superiors with what had passed.

And accordingly They did send December. 7. 1653. unto Secretary MSS. Comment.
Thurloe a Paper, in which They besought the most honorable Lords of the
Council to gratify them with a safe conduct for their persons, followers and
servants, to transport themselves to Holland: The which was not granted at that
time, but -- was sent to entreat them to stay a while, so great business not
being to be suddenly transacted: The Deputies readily acquiesced; but withal
complained of the English Government, how distracted That was by reason of the
frensies of the Fifth-Monarchy Parliament, that, if Cromwell would assume the
Government to himself, They would be ready to accord with him upon more
moderate terms, and enter into such a defensive Alliance, as should secure him
against foreign and domestic Ene^s. Hereby They gained Oliver to contrive a
period for the pretended Parliament, with a resignation of their power into His
hands: December. 12. 1653. He was made Protector Dec. 16. and on the twentieth
notice was given to the Ambassadors thereof by the Master of the Leo ab Aitzma
p. 851, 852.
Ceremonies, who told them further, How ready He would be to treat with them,
How kind unto them; but They must withal pay him the same honor and respect
which was heretofore exhibited to the English Kings, and in writings and
discourses give him the Title of His Highness, which was in use here before
that of Majesty; That They being not in the quality of Ambassadors, but Lords
Deputies Plenipotentiaries, must be uncovered in His presence. The three
Deputies (one was now dead) assented to these Conditions, but resolved to avoid
all enterviews as much as possible: They sent to His Highness and His Council,
Dec. 23. a Paper of alterations and amendments, to be made in the Articles
aforesaid: And Dec. 26. Mr. Thurloe brought Them an Answer in writing, wherein
the Satisfaction demanded in the third Article was wholly omitted; but the
claims of the East India Merchants and others were to be compounded. The
fifteenth Article was changed MSS. Comment.
so, as that neither the Dominion of the Seas was mentioned, nor their Ships to
be searched: but They were to strike the Flag, and lower the topsail to any
English man of War within the British Seas: with several other concessions:
several conferences passed betwixt the Councillours of Cromwell and them, and
Papers were transmitted on the 26. and 28. of December. But the Deputies having
now engaged Cromwell irreconcileably against the Fifth-Monarchy-men and
Republicans, would come to no conclusion: They found a readiness in Oliver to
comply in those poin^s which He had so peremptorily insisted on before: and
knew that a defensive Alliance with Holland would be absolutely necessary unto
the securing Him in His New Protectorship: Besides They looked upon His
condition as uncertain, and therefore thought it imprudence to conclude with Him
as yet, until time should manifest the tendency of affairs: They desired a
Pasport to depart, Dec. 28. imagining that the noise of their departure re
infectd, would much startle the English, and imbolden them against His
Highness: But MSS. Comment.
Cromwell being aware of their Stratagems, and resolute to persist in his
courses, briskly and unexpectedly declares, that If they depart without
concluding and signing the Treaty, and mutually engaging to ratify it in a
certain time, His Highness would not be obliged to it, or any part thereof, but
account it at an end. Dec. 23. MSS. Comment.
Hereat the Deputies were a little surprised, and by a Paper, Dec. 29. 1653.
Assure His Highness, that They have always, and do still intend to proceed
with all integrity and candor, and that they do not decline to sign the
present Treaty, if His Highness be pleased that the Articles be extended in
such manner as they had propounded. -- That it will be an easy thing for to
reduce the Articles now into such order that they may be encouraged to sign
before departing from hence, and to agree in a convenient manner touching the
ratification thereof. Hereupon there were several conferences, and many things
either yielded unto, or silently passed over (as that of the Fishing, and
Sovereignty of the Seas: and the preamble of the sixteenth Article omitted) to
the great contentation of the Dutch: For Cromwell at this time minded nothing
but what related to his own Security; and in order thereunto He would never
abandon that Article for the Seclusion of the Prince of Orange from being
State-holder, General, and Admiral: He urged that No peace could ever continue
firm betwixt the two Nations, whilst that Prince should retain so great a power
there: That no Enemy did ever exercise such hostility, nor create so much of
prejudice unto the Parliament, as did the late Prince William: Leo ab Aitzma,
p. 848.
The Deputies had express Orders never to assent thereunto: But Cromwell
understanding that the Dutch usually sign two sorts of Articles, the one
secret, the other public: did move that this Seclusion should be put into a
secret Article: but neither would the Deputies assent thereunto. Whereupon
Cromwell sent for Mr. Beverning in private, ^d. p 852.
(whom He knew to be a true Hollander) and with Him He entered into a close and
long conference, were in He showed His readiness to conclude a peace with them
upon terms moderate and reasonable, repeating what He had already granted, what
He would further assent unto: But that He could never recede from that Article
of Secluding the Family of the Prince of Orange: that He could never think the
peace would be durable, nor England quiet, whilst that Lineage had such power
and authority amongst Them. That it did no less import Them then it did Him;
the attempts of Prince William upon Holland being fresh in their memory, and
the ambitious ends of that House being known at Amsterdam. If that the
Deputies, as sent by the States General, could not consent to the Article, yet
He might sign it, as a private Article, in the name of the States Provincial of
Holland: that He would be as well satisfied Quod^uti ^agni momenti negotium
est, ita necessitatem veluti quandam trahit secum, cum omnibus manifestum sit,
in quantum Hollandia, si in hanc vel illam partem inclinet, confer possit.
Deduct. Ord. Ze'andiae contra Holland, de seclus, Pr. Au^iaci.
with the Ratification of that Province alone, which had so often enforced the
others to concur with us dictates, as in the Truce of 1609. Munster peace, and
other cases: Nor would He desire that They should undertake for the other
Provinces, but for themselves, That they should never assent to such an
election, but hinder it as much as they could. What was agreed betwixt them at
that time, is a secret as yet to the world: The event showed it, and the other
Provinces suspected it to have been so, that Cromwell and Beverning did then
contrive to depress the House of Orange: Certain it is that an expedient was
found out that might be equipollent thereto in reference to the peace and
safety of Cromwell; that whosoever was State-holder, General by land, or Leo ab
Aitzma Aitzma. 8, 2.
Admiral, should in person swear to the observation of that Treaty. The
Depu^ies after this, departed for Holland, Jan. 6. 1653. and as They were at
Sea they formed up a body of 29. Articles, the subject whereof was agreed upon
by both sides, though nothing had been finally concluded or signed: This Treaty
they showed first to the States of Holland; then to the States General, Judge
by this authentic narration how little truth there is in the vulgar reports,
and common writers, (as Florus Ang^us, etc) that They went to fet^h money for
Cromwell: I do not believe He had one farthing from them.
who approved thereof, and of the demeanor of the Deputies as consonant to
their Instructions. That They might leave Cromwell in the greater perplexity,
and act thereafter like men that listen more to opportunities, then princi les
or promises, at their departure (notwithstanding their protestation of Candor
and Sincerity) They raised some scruples about the Article concerning Denmark,
with which they seemed totally dissatisfied: Cromwell sent to Gravesend after
them Commissioners to invite them back again, and assure them that the said
Article should pass as they desired it: They writ Him a Letter of thanks,
promising to return Ipsos tamen non obstante ejusmodi satisfactione, Londi^um,
quo compositis jam and ab utraque part concessis Articulis subsignarent atque
universum Tractatum confirmarent, neutiquam fuisse reversos, sed rect^ itinere
se in Hollandiam contulisse, universo Tractationis negotio-infecto, atque in
incerto penitus relicto. Deduct. ord. Holland. in Narrat. facti. Sect. 8.
with speed, and to deport themselves with all possible sincerity: But still
the Treaty was left suspended, and uncertain; Though it appears that every
point was adjusted, and there wanted no more but to reduce the Articles into a
formal Treaty, and that They should sign it for themselves, according as They
had promised December. 29. 1653. Cromwell was very much irritated at this
procedure of theirs; and more, when He perceived they delayed their return for
several weeks: He expedited his Naval preparations: and as after a storm,
though the winds cease, yet the billows do continue their former rage, so did
those impressions of hatred against the Dutch remain in the breasts of the
English, notwithstanding the rumors of peace: He began now to suspect the
frauds of the Dutch, and blamed himself for trusting unto their protestations
of candor and sincerity; and determined to ensure himself of the Province of
Holland, by some obligatory Act for the Seclusion of the House of Orange, or
else to prosecute the war. The Dutch (to amuse Him, and comply with the
Haughtiness of His Humor) send over in a splendid and formal Embassy the same
Plenipotentiaries; which did not a little add to the Honor and Glory of
Cromwell at home and abroad; but at their first arrival, before they came to any
Treaty, Secretary Thurloe desires a conference with ibid. Sect. (...), 10, 11.
Them, and informs them that His Highness would insist upon the Article of
Seclusion, to be ratified by the Province of Holland: great professions of love
and fair dealing passed on both sides, and Thurloe declared that the Protector
insisted thereon, out of pure kindness to them, the House of Orange being so
potent and popular, that if He were jealous least the Peace would not be
durable, they ought to suspect least their Liberty would be the shorter-lived:
that, if they really desired an everlasting peace with England, this was the
only course to secure it: without this Act of Seclusion nothing was more
evident, then that the two Nations would suddenly be imbroil'd in a second
bloody war, and in the mean while the English would be in a perpetual
diffidence and distrust thereof, the which would allay and abate much of that
f^rm and eternal Amity, which was now proposed: Nieuport and Beverningh
protested they had no power to promise any such thing in behalf of the said
States, and earnestly solicited the Conclusion of the Treaty with the security
already consented unto: This happened in the end of March, and sundry
conferences were had betwixt Thurloe and those two Ambassadors, the third is
not said to have been present at them: at last Thurloe proposes from His
Highness, the final and speedy conclution of the Treaty upon this condition,
that the said Ambassadors should promise (on their own heads) to procure such
an obligatory deed for the ibid Sect. 12 13.
Seclusion within some certain time to be transmitted by the said States
prov^ncial: But they declined this overture also; whereupon Cromwell appoints a
private conference with Beverningh and Him, only Thurloe being present: His
Highness was very prolixe in discoursing of his great and cordial affect on for
the Dutch, as his dear Neighbors and Protestan^s; ibid Sect. 14, 15. 16.
of his concern for the Reformed Religion, which would be much endangered
should another rupture happen betwixt them: that He did so earnestly desire the
mutual welfare of the two Nations, and an indissol^ble peace, that He had not
at all pursued His particular profit and interest in this whole negotiation, as
was manifest by the Treaty it self: and He did importune Beverningh to promise
in wri^ing to effect the said Seclusion: as for the time and form of the
Seclusion, He would leave it to their contrivance, When and How to do it; but
He would have the thing done: in the mean time the Capitulation should be
signed, and ratified. The Holland Deduction says that B^verningh promised only
that They would write unto the States ibid. Sect. 16
of Holland concerning the Seclusion, how solicitous the Protector was to
obtain it, and to procure their Answer (whatever it should be) upon that point,
the which should be sent over with the Ratification of the peace by the States
General. Howsoever these things were, Cromwell was forward in his Naval
preparations, and a rumor was scattered as if the Treaty were wholly broken
off, the which did much perplex the Ambassadors, amd 'twas fomented by the
Enemies of Cromwell, every opposite interest (especially the Republicans)
expecting benefit by the ruin of Cromwell, which would be a consequent of the
war, if it were prosecuted. All parti^s were implacable against the Du^ch, for
their complying with Cromwell, and what They had already done would accelerate
their destruction, or revive the first (...), if the Republ^ns came upon the
Stage again: They knew that Cro^ by his subtilty could re-ingratiate himself
with the Common-wealth-men; and that they, to re-establi^h themselves, would
connive at the actings of so powerful and necessary a faction: Upon these
mo^ives the Ambassadors did importune His Highness for to sign the Treaty,
which ('it is said) He did without much insisting upon the said Seclusion. The
Peace was proclaimed at London, April 5 1654. and mutual Ratifications sealed
before the end of the said Month. The Hollanders were in hope that the
Protector would desist from the Seclusion, and not hazard a Rupture
immediately after a Peace concluded; but finding Him obstinate therein, and
that the Republicans did endeavor to renew the war, They did May 4. 1654. make
a Decree, That the Noble and Potent States of Holland and West-f^sland would
never elect His present Highness, or any of his Lineage, to be ibid. Sect. 19.
State holder or Admiral of their Province, neither should their Province ever
give Their suffrage or consent, that He, or any of his Family, should be
Captain General of the forces of the United ibid. Sect. 20.
Provinces. This was transmitted unto Beverningh and Nieuport to be kept
secret, and not delivered unto the Protection^, if the thing might possibly be
avoided: But Cromwell would not exchange the Ratifications, until They promised
to procure that secret Article, the hich those Juglers had then in their hands.
Although that Cromwell did not Sect, 21.
know that the States of Holland and West-friesland had signed and sealed the
said secret Article, yet it was by some artifice discovered to the Sect. 22, 23.
States General, and divulged throughout the United Provinces. The other
Provinces sent to those of Holland, to know what They had really done, which
might give occasion to these reports: It being contrary to the Union of
Utrecht, that any of the Provinces should s^ngly make any Leagues or Treaties
with foreign Princes: It being also contrary to the unanimous and express
determinations of the States General; contrary to the Instructions of the
Ambassadors; contrary to the p^iviledges and liberties of the United
Provinces, whereby that could not be done to the meanest Subject, which now was
said to be decreed against His Highness, and the illustrious House of Orange.
The People inveighed bitterly against the Provincials of Holland: The States
General were upon recalling the Ambassadors to give an account of
transactions, and did send to know which of them had that secret Article; that
He should transmit a Copy thereof. The States of Holland and West-friesland
were amazed to find the Article become public before it had been tendered:
They delay to give a true relation of affairs, but declare unto all the
Provinces, that They neither had done, nor ever would do any thing contrary
unto the Union of Utretcht: and, reserving unto themselves the Supreme
jurisdiction of their own Province, they neither had attempted, nor should
attempt any thing that might infringe the Liberties of the other Provinces.
That the Lords Nieuport and Beverningh, were natives of the Province of
Holland, and therefore could not be obliged to give any account of the secrets
of their Country unto the States General. The Province of Zeland penned a
Rational and smart Manifest against Holland; The Deputies of Groninghen and
Friesland added much bitterness to their Arguments: The Pensionary De Wit was
bold, and used menaces in the behalf of Holland: thus all things seemed to run
into absolute confusion, and the new firm everlasting Peace and Defensive
Alliance contracted with Cromwell, was in a few months endangered, together with
the Union it self of those Provinces. Cromwell was aware thereof, and astonished
to see how the Dutch Ambassadors had deluded Him, notwithstanding all their
protestations of extraordinary candor and sincerity; and demanded the Article,
or menaced them with a sudd^in breach: But they dissembled with Thurloe, as if
They had not received any such ibid. Sect. 24.
secret Article signed by the Provincials of Holland and West-friesland: They
multiplied a thousand delays, and pressed the Protector to omit this Article,
the very rumor whereof had produced all this combustion in the United
Provinces. The friends of Cromwell were exceedingly perplexed with the
fraudulent dealings of the Ambassadors, Hollanders: and were consident that
such an Article had been decreed and transmitted to them, though They disowned
it: The divisions in the United Provinces, and the reservedness of Holland in
declining to communicate their privacies to the States General, made it seem an
undoubted truth: And all the Enemies of Cromwell rejoiced to find Him thus
abused, and cheated in a transaction whereon the grandeur of His H^ghness was
established. Cromwell at a conference with Beverningh and Nieuport, May 22.
1654. fiercely urged the delivery of ibid. Sect. 25.
the Article, and forbade them ever to allege any reasons to Him against it.
The Hollanders considering that the odium would be the same, if it were
delivered, or not delivered, since it had been resolved upon, and seeing the
whole peace, and their support against the exasperated Provinces was in
jeopardy by this delay, They did order the Ambassadors to deliver it unto
Cromwell; which was done in the beginning of June: and Cromwell dispatched a
comminatory Letter unto ibid. Sect. 26, 27. Leo ab Aitzma, p. 869.
the States of Zeland, to let them know that the Peace did entirely depend upon
the signing of that secret Article. June 16. 1654.

Thus was that League finished at last, in the management whereof the Dutch had
showed so much of Artifice, and Fraud: As to that secret Article, it is much
doubted to this day, Whether it were not Stipulated for at that private
conference betwixt Beverningh and Cromwell, Jan. 6. before Their departure into
Holland: Whether the delays in signing, and delivering it, were a finesse
complotted betwixt Cromwell and Holland, the better to justify the actions of
that Province unto the other Provinces; or whether They did not understand each
other, but that His Highness was really imposed upon in that manner during that
negotiation, Those know best who were Actors therein. The Deduction of Holland
is consonant to the precedent Narrative; But the Deputies of Zeland, Friesl^nd,
Ommeland, and Groninghen did suspect the Truth thereof: and believed there was
a more intimate Union between Cromwell and Holland, in opposition to the House
of Orange, then ever was made public. These are uncertaimies; But this is most
certain, that the said Ambassadors Nieuport and Beverningh sent by commission
of the States General, were to treat as from them, and during that Commission
could not receive In Legatione publica Foederatorum procerum, officio tenus,
quamdiu eo sunguntur, licitum non fuerit ab ullo mandatum, multo minus
contrarium, circa tractationes suas recipereaut. iis morem gerere: atque ad^
quia prohibitum erat, contrarium Hollandiae procerum mandatum excusare
debuisse. Propos. D. Deputati Groaning. etc. Item Deductio ordin. Zeland.
Mandates (especially contrary to their Instructions) from a particular
Province, much less obey them: as the Frieslanders and Zelanders did argue:
Besides, They were sworn at the beginning of the Embassy to proceed according
to the plain sense of Their Instructions: They never acquainted the States
General in the least with that Negotiation, no not in the end of May, when They
demanded a copy of the Article, and an account of what they had done about it:
Nay, They were so far from doing this, that upon the conclusion of the Treaty
upon the fifth of April, They writ to Ingenti studio and spectata fide placita
procerum peragere ^olitos fuisse, denique juxta eorundem decreta atque mandata
Tractatui finem imposuisse, adeo quidem ut nihil amplius reliquum esset ad
consummationem, quam ut utrinque fieret (...). ibid.
the States General that They had then finally concluded all the Articles
without any exception, and that punctually according to Their Instructions and
Mandates: whereas This whole affair, and this insuperable difficulty was still
remaining to be transacted. Such a demeanor has not been read of but in the
Annals of the United Provinces: yet did their Provincial Superiors justify
them for Honest men, and true Natives of Holland: This, and the interposition
of Cromwell, saved them from punishment; and silenced all contests upon that
subject.

This mutual defensive Alliance and secret Article did secure the greatness of
Cromwell, not only against the Republicans and Sectaries, but Royalisis; who,
together with His Majesty, were excluded from any Aid or Assistance out of
those Provinces, and not permitted to reside there. It depressed the House of
Orange, and all that party; It advanced Holland so far above the other
Provinces, that They gave Laws to them ever since; till their Arrogance and
perfidiousness made them insupportable to the rest of the Provinces, as well as
to their Neighbors, and so expedited their present calamities.

It is remarkable, that notwithstanding that Cromwell and the Dutch had
pretended so fervent zeal for the advancement and protection of the Reformed
Religion, and Household of faith, during Interim in Articulis nihil d^tum de
Religione. Leo ab Aitzma p. 852.
the Treaty, yet in the Articles there is not any mention made thereof; neither
were All the Protestants comprehended in the League. It is also observable,
that the said League was never well kept on the part of the Hollander, but so
violated in the East and West Indies and elsewhere, that Cromwell determined to
fight them again upon the first opportunity and leisure. The Lord Nieuport came
over to pacify Him a little before His death, and attended in Florus Anglicus,
part. 2. p. 280.
mourning at his Funeral: and was the first Ambassador which condoled His late
Highness's death, and congratulated the advancement of Richard, hoping that the
same firm League and Peace might be continued between His Highness and those
States, which had been between them and his Princely Father: He delivered His
message in a public Audience, and received an Answer conformable to His
desires: But yet, whereas by the Eighth Article of that League they were
obliged to defend Him against all His Enemies: The Dutch contributed ib. p. 315.
nothing to his support, but quietly permitted Him to be deposed, and
immediately (before He had resigned) courted those at an Audience within the
House, which had so injured their good Friend and Ally.

Upon a due regard unto the Considerations and Reasons alleged, We think it
our duty humbly to declare, that We are entirely satisfied with the
Righteousness of the present War with Holland: and that Common Equity, and the
most infallible Reasons of State did oblige His Majesty to vindicate the
Dignity of his Crown, and the Honor of His Kingdoms; as also to assert those
ancient and inseparable Regalities which do not only adorn, but chiefly support
His Crown: We do thankfully acknowledge the constant endeavors of His Majesty
to promote the Trade and welfare of His subjects, and to preserve them from
being injured and oppressed by the depredations of the Dutch: And seeing that
the Perfidiousness of the Hollanders (who have no regard to Oaths and Promises,
no sense of Religion, Honor, or Moral Honesty) did render All Leagues with
Them infirm and instable: Seeing Their dilatory and treacherous Negotiations
did render any Treaty with Them unsafe, in so perilous a juncture as the
puissance of the French King and their juglings with that Count, made Us to be
in; We cannot but admire and celebrate those Counsils by which We enjoy an
undisturbed peace, and tranquillity of our Consciences at home, and are secured
by a potent and victorious Navy at Sea. It is the prudent conduct of His
Majesty (next under God) which has seasonably prevented that desolation
whereunto the Hollanders would have subjected Us, by transporting hither the
French Armies: We are not redevable to their care or kindness, for that We are
free from a calamitous war and all the miseries which the United Provinces do
now sink under: That Our condition is not the same with Theirs, it is a
felicity we derive from the wisdom, vigilance, and Generosity of our Prince,
who has indefatigably busied Himself, exposed his only Brother to all the
dangers of the Sea, and the perils of those dreadful Fights, and exhausted His
proper Treasury to supply the present exigence, and to ensure the Estates of
His Subjects. May all his Subjects be sufficiently sensible, How much They owe
unto His Care and Goodness: May their acknowledgments equal His merits; May
every one by His Royal Example contribute what He can to the General welfare of
the Nation: May no Animosities divide our Minds: No impertinent quarrels, No
unnecessary and unseasonable debates retard or distract our Consultations and
proceedings: But may all advises, and actions tend to the common utility; which
all Intelligent and Loyal persons must measure by the Riches, Strength, and
Honor of their Sovereign: Such ought to be the Prayers, Wishes, and Sentiments
of every English Man.

Here follows a Memorial, read and delivered to the Lord of Hemsted, Adrian
Paaw, extraordinary Ambassador from the States General of the United Provinces
unto the pretended Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. June -- 1652.
Wherein the Importance of the Right of the Flag, and of the Dominion of the
British Seas, and of the Fishery, together with the Rights of England
thereunto, are deduced and demonstrated.

This Memorial was originally very brief in comparison of what it is now: It
being not the mode of those Times to allege any proof by way of Authority: I
have found out, consulted, and supplied the ^eficient Citations, which if they
are not those They went upon, are, I am sure, such as the Reader may rely upon.
And I have inserted them frequently into the Text, as conceiving it more
convincing and agreeable to the fancy of any Reader, If the whole were
represented as an entire piece, and He not distracted with the multitude of
References by way of Postscript: Who prepared and penned it, I cannot tell,
but it was (as I am told) supervised by Sir Henry Vane (and others of the
Commissioners) and any man will find it answerable to that opinion which the
world had of His parts and abilities, who was the chief director and manager of
that war, and whose constant judgment it was, that the Interests of England and
the United Provinces were as irreconcilable as those of Rivals, Trade being to
both Nations, what a Mistress is unto Lovers; that there nev^et since (...)
^ene any durable peace, except both Nations did un^ Coalition, or the English
subjugate the others, and reduce them into a Province, or by strict conditions
and contrivances ensure themselves against the growth and future puissance of
the Dutch.

About the middle of June, 1652. A conference was held betwixt the
Commissioners from the Council of State, and the Lord Adrian Paaw Knight. Lord of
Hemsted, Extraordinary Ambassador from the United Provinces. In which the said
Ambassador expatiated upon the mutual interest both Nations had to preserve
peace and amity; the great sincere affection which the Dutch continued to bear
unto the English; the rec^procal bonds of professing the same Reformed
Religion, and the dangers that might be fall Pro^estancy in general, should
such important Members thereof engage in a war: That Christian b^ood was
precious ^n the sight of God, and ought not rashly, or on a sl^ght occasion to
be shed by Men: that the fight in the Downs was casual, and not designed by His
Masters: That The str^king of the Flag was but a Ceremony of Honor, and matter
of complement, about which He hoped the true Professors of the Gospel of
peace, meekness, long-suffering, and brotherly love, would not contest unto
blood: that howsoever, His Superiors did never pretend, nor should pretend to
dispute the Honor and Dignity of this Commonwealth, which they repute the
first and most considerable in Europe: That no Del^beration had been made, No
Resolution taken, No Comm^ssion directly or indirectly given to their
Vice Admiral for to undertake any Dispute against the Fleet and Ships of the
said Commonwealth upon the Controversies and Differences of the Sea: And that
The Ships of war meeting at Sea, and behaving themselves as before and during
the time of the ^he said Ambassador in a Memorial given into the Council of
S^ate, July 24. 1652. acquainted them that the States General had by a public
Act, declared and decreed thus much. See it in the Declaration P. 3^. and p. 46.
former Government, there should be thereupon no more Dispute hereafter.

Some Reply was then made, but a full Answer was tendered and read unto Him at
the next conference, to this effect.

My Lord,

WE are very glad to understand from you mouth the sincerity with which you
profess the true Reformed Religion, and that cordial affection with which you
declare your selves to seek Amity and Friendship with this Nation: We would put
as good a construction upon the Intents of your Superiors, as the regards of
our own safety will permit; and certainly a prudent and due respect to our own
preservation, is not repugnant to the Gospel, or Protestancy; But we cannot
conclude otherwise from the Actions of your States, then that the late attempt
in the Downs arose from a formed and premeditated Design, To usurp the known
Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fle^ts that are under God, their
Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby expose this Commonwealth to be invaded, or
otherwise imposed upon at your pleasure. During an actual Treaty for a nearer
Union, offered by your selves, you took a resolution to equip out 150 say (...)
besides what were already in your service; and of this your Em^dours gave
notice to the Parliament March 15. 1652. Leo ab Aitzma hist. tract. pacis Belg.
page 762.
Whether this intimation was made to amuse, or terrify us, your Superiors do
best know: but such extraordinary preparations were not requisite at that time
to secure the Trade and Navigation of the United Provinces, when they had no
Enemy abroad: which upon the Rules and Declarat. page 8.
Maxims of State, was a just cause of Jealousy unto the English, and They had
reason to put themselves into a posture and condition to defend themselves, and
their known Rights at Sea. Nevertheless this State proceeded so slowly therein,
that until their Fleet was actually assaulted by Trumpe, and thereby the true
reason of preparing so great a Fleet made evident, they had not increased their
Fleet by one Ship: and, in fact, there were not above 22 Ships of their Fleet
at Sea, May 19. 1652, when they were assaulted by the Dutch Navy: and We were
so unprovided whereby to answer those exigencies, that we were constrained to
hire about fifty Merchant Ships to strenghthen and reinforce the Fleet. How
confidently soever you aver, that Van Trumpe had no instructions to undertake
any dispute against the Fleet or Ships of this Commonwealth, upon the
controversies and differences at Sea, yet it is notoriously known, and He
himself avowed it, that He had no Orders to take down his Flagg. The which
Omission w^ cannot reconcile with your so Christian desires to preserve a good
correspondence, See Major Bourne's relation: in the Parliaments answer to Three
papers, etc. A. D. 1652. See the Depositions in the aforesaid Answer to the
Three papers.
strict League, and nearer Union with this Commonwealth: It being an indirect
way and course to create a quarrel at any time. Others of your Captains have
been reproved, and threatened with the loss of their Heads, in case they did
strike the Flag unto Us; and it is most true, that Van T^umpe refused to do it;
and seconded his refusal with acts of the highest hostility. From whence we can
make no other deduction, then that the words you use of Unity, Peace, League,
and a very near Friendship, are different from what you imagine and purpose;
The Dutch in their Declaration of War at that time, do confess He did not
strike the Flag and Sail; but that He was going to Lower hi^ Topsails, which
Blake prevented by a suddam ^acque. Leo ab Aitzma, hist. tract Belg. p. 759.
Declurat. p. 7. 8.
and that Noble work which you say all honest men wish for, especially all the
Churches of the Reformed Christian Religion, is not at all pursued or intended
by the States General of the United Provinces. Wherein have you demonstrated
the least sincerity in your Negotiations with this Commonwealth? How
unheartily, and dilatorily did you deal with our Ambassadors at the Hague in
relation to their Errand? whereby those endeavors for Friendship became
fruitless. When your Embassado^rs came hither, How amicably we^e they received?
And with what delays did they protract the Treaty? When positive demands were
pressed, they were evaded in things not of the hardest resolution, with
Allegations of want of power; though their Commission showed no such restraint:
yet to obtain further Power, Returns must be made to their Superiors; and
before Answers could be had, the Provincial States must be Assembled: the which
gave small grounds of any real intendment of a firm Peace, and Amity.

As to the business of the Flag, How meanly soever you think of it, and however
you represent it as too trivial a subject to give beginning to a War, We cannot
look thereon but with different considerations. Were it only an Honorary
Salute, and Cere^ony; yet since it is such an Honor as has been paid to our
Ancest^urs for above four hundred years, Seldom. Mare cl^us. l. 2. c. 26.
since it is of such an advantage to the continuance of the renown of this
Nation, and serves to imprint new reverence in the foreigners that render it,
and adds so much to the courage of those our Seamen that exact it: We should
not consent to relinquish it: No Rules of ^rudence, no Maxims of State would
authori^e the deed. We know how much it imports a State that it be reverenced
abroad; and that Re^e is the principal support of any Government: it equally
influenceth the Subjects ut home, and foreign Allies. No Nation in the world
is more tender of their honor then the English; none more impatiently tolerate
the diminution thereof: With what resentments would (...) only the more
generous and noble, but even the popular and vulgar Seamen detest Us, should
this Age remit or loose that Reg^lity, those acknowledgments, which their
Predecessors with so much glory asserted, and the neglect whereof was always
punished as o^en Rebellion? We are confident the Nation would be so provoked at
the indignity of such an action, that to avoid an uncertain ruin by the forces
of Holland, we should precipitate our selves into evident danger of peri^hing
by the English f^ry. And we doubt not but you, my Lord, by this time ^ind in
your own reason, an Apology for our being resolute in this point; you must
needs be convinced that We ought not to abandon a Ceremony which is of so high
concernment. It is no policy to attempt the change of inveterate customs and
usages: In omnitus rebus ve^ ipsa plurinium habet dignitatis: ita ut
Massa^ienses quorum praestantis^ima creditur fuisse resoublica, laudentur eo
nomine qu^d glad^o ad puniendos sontes usi sint eodem a condi^a ur^e, quo
indicarent in minimis quoque relus antiqua consuetudinis momenta servanda.
Proxime eni^ ad Deum accedit Antiquitas, AEternitatis quadam imagine. Grotius
de an^e p. Ba^av. in praesat.
Even errors, and abuses, are upon this account legally tolerated. Let us then
so adjust the matter, Let Equity and all those inclinations you express for Us
as Neighbors Englishmen, and partakers of the same Faith, induce you to
continue those Honorary respects to the Ships of war of this Nation, which All
the Neighbour-States and Princes, and which you your selves, and your
Progenitors, have constantly exhibited: Which you may do without detriment or
disgrace; But We cannot for bear to demand without our unspeakable prejudice.
Private persons move in another Sphere, and act by other Rules then Sovereign
Powers: The regards of Credit with them, may oftentimes yield to those of
Utility, or other Motives; the public receives little of inju^y thereby, nor
Cateris mortalibus in eo stare consilia, quid sibi conducere putent: Principum
dive^sam esse sortem, quibus pra^ rerum ad famam (...). Tacitus Annal. l. 4.
Kingdoms are preserved by reputation; which is as well their strongest support
in peace, as their chiefest safety in time of war. When once they grow
despised, they are either subject to foreign invasions, or domestic troubles.
Card. Bentivoglio. Relat. of Fla^ders, concerning the Prince of Conde's flight.
is their wisdom questioned for such punctilio's, if they relinquish them for
other emoluments, or peace-^e: But Sovereigns cannot transact so: Their
Subjects, The People participate in their Honor, and Indignities; They have a
propriety, a direct Right in the former: Sovereigns cannot alienate or suffer
their Honor to be impaired, because it is not really Theirs: it appertains to
the Nation universally, and They are all effectually injured by such
transactions; either because the Indignity Si fama tua videtur necessaria ad
rectam muneris tui administrationem, non potes condonare. Lessius de Justit, l.
2. c. xi. dub. 24. Sect. 126.
does directly extend unto them, or because the Government and Authority is
thereupon weakened and prejudiced, which is the greatest of Civil detriments
that can befall a People, though ordinarily they are not aware thereof. As
prudence does thus distinguish betwixt the demeanor of private and public
persons; So does Ch^istianity it self: for albeit that the G^spel-precepts do
oblige particular persons to bear injuries and contumelies with patience, and
to surrender even the Coat as well as Cloak; yet is not this so to be
construed, as if even private Christians were to yield up their Civil rights to
every insolent, that would encroach upon and usurp them; or that they were to
deprive themselves of those re^arations which the Law, and Government affords
them: Neither is it so to be understood as if the Civil Magistrate in
Christendom, might not secure himself of that obedience, and reverence which
is due unto his dignity, but bear the sword in vain. Do not therefore go about
to teach Us patience, that you may more easily wrong us: Do not insinuate the
concerns of the Frotestant Churches, the interest of Religion, the Evangelical
rules for peace and brotherly love, that You thereupon may deprive Us of our
Rights, destroy our Fleets, ruin our Trade, and either subject Us to Your
States, or render Us a facile conquest for any invader.

Hither to We have acquainted you with the value we ought to place upon the
Right of the Flag, were it only an Honorary salute: with what prescription we
claim it; and with what injustice you refuse it. We now add, that The English
Nation did never regard it only as a Civility and Respect, but as a Principal
Testimony of the unquestionable Right of this Nation to the Dominion and
Superiority of the adjacent Seas, acknowledged generally by all the
Neighbour-States and Princes, and particularly by You and Your Predecessors,
besides Declaration p. 9.
many most authentic Records and undeniable proofs, together with a constant
practice in confirmation thereof: Yet did a Captain of yours refuse it,
affirming that If He did it, He should loose his Head: Your Vice Admiral denied
it to the English Admiral, and menaced such as rendered that submission to our
Ships. We do not upbraid you with mere incivility in this procedure; though the
grand^ur of England, and the obligations which the United Netherlands have to
th^s Nation, might contain you from being rude: It is the absolute and
substantial Sovereignty of the British Seas, which on our parts by such a
deportment as the striking of the Flag or Topsail to our Ships on those Seas,
is required to be acknowledged, and so has been for many hundred years
understood, agreed unto, and acknowledged Seld. mare claus. l. 2. c. 24. Le
Mere est del ligeans del Roy, come de son corone d'Angleterre. Fi^zherbert ^it.
Protection. 46
by the Nations of Europe.

Would you know the extent of this Maritime Dominion; our English Laws have
always reckoned upon the Four Seas; Such as are ^rn thereon are not Aliens;
and to be within them, is to be within the Ligieance of the King, and Realm of
England. The Records of Parliament in the days of King Edward III. and Henry
V. proclaim it, that those Kings and their Progenitors Le Roy and ses nobles
progenitors de tout temps ont este Seigneurs del mere. Sel'den. ibid. c. 23.
had ever been Lords of the Sea: And, God forbid that ever there should be any
Parliament in England that should consent to erase those Records, or cast dirt
upon them by renouncing the Sovereignty asoresaid. In the Records of the Tower,
there is a Libel relating to the times of Edward I. and Philip the fair of
France, in which the Procurators of most Nations bordering upon the Sea
throughout Europe, as the Geno^ses, Catalonians, Almains, Zelanders,
Hollanders, Frieslanders, Danes and Norwegians, besides others under the
dominion of the Roman-German Empire; All^ these jointly declare, That The Kings
of England, by Right of the said Kingdom, from time to Seldom. mare claus. l.
2. c. 27, 28. Sir John Boroughs, Keeper of the Records of the Tower of London:
In a Treatise of the Sovereignty of the British Seas. Printed in 1631.
time, whereof there is no memorial to the contrary, have been in peaceable
Possession of the Sovereign Lordship of the Sea of England, and of the Isles
within the same, with power of making and establishing Laws, Statutes, and
Prohibitions of Arms, and of Ships otherwise f^rnished then Merchantmen use to
be, and of taking surety and affording safeguard in all cases where need shall
require, and of ordering all other things necessary for the maintaining of
Peace, Right and Equity among all manner of People, as well of other Dominions
as their own, passing through the said Seas, and the Sovereign Guard thereof.
-- Out of this Libel we deduce, that The Kings of England had then been in
peaceable possession of the said Dominion of the said Sea of England by
immemorial prescription. That the Sovereignty belonged unto them, not because
they were Domini utriusq^ ripae, as when they had both England and Normandy,
and so were Lords of both Shores: (For Edw. I. at this time had not Normandy)
but that it is inseparably appendant and annexed unto the Kingdom of England,
Our Kings being The right unto the Sea a^eth (...) from the possession of the
Shores: the Sea and Land make distinct territories: and as the loss of one
Province does not infer that the Prin^e must resign up the rest; so the lo^ o^
the land territory does no^ by ^ritancy argue the loss of the adjacent Seas. It
is no more nece^y that (...) Sea town should command ^oo mile^ at Sea; then
that each City should command 100 miles byland. Iul. Pacius de dom. maris
Adriatici.
Superior Lords of the said Seas, by reason (as the said Record speaks) of
the said Kingdom. And since that the Sovereignty of the Sea did appertain to
the English Kings, not in any other Right then that of the Kingdom of England,
you cannot doubt the Title by which Our present clai^ is deduced. It Is in right
of Britannia that We challenge it: 'Twas in that right the Romans held it: This
claim justified K. Edward III. and his Rose-nobles: Though there are other
reasons, regarding to the Lancastrian line, which yield a color for the use of
the Portcullis in the Royal banners of England; yet (as we read) in reference
to his Maritime Dominion K. Henry VIII. did imbellith his Navy Royal therewith:
and Q. Elizabeth stamped it upon those Dollars which she designed G Malines Lex
Mercatoria part. 1. c. 35.
for the East India trade. A. D. 1600. thereby expressing their power to shut
up the Seas with the Navy Royal, as it were with a Portcullis. This Dominion of
the British Seas did authenticate the proclamation of K. James in 1609.
ordaining your Fishermen to take licenses at London, and Edinborough: This
justified the like Proclamation in K. Charles, and warranted the E. of
Northumberland in his naval expedition, in 1636.

That Prescription is valid against the claims of Sovereign Princes; cannot be
denied by any who regards the Holy Scripture, Reason, the Practice, and the
Tranquillity of the World: That the Dutch challenge the Freedom to fish in the
British Seas by Prescription, is certain: But Prescription depends not upon
the Corporal, but Civil possession; and that is retained, if claim be but made
so often as to bare the Prescr^ contrary, and it be evident by frequent
Medails, or retention, of Arms, or the like, that the Civil possession is not
relinquished. Our Kings have constantly claimed the Dominion of the Sea, none
else pretending to it, and all acknowledging it to be in them, till the most
modern Dutch arose: They never abandoned their Right, and These Medails (which
are all Elias As^mole Esquire could help me unto) preserve their claim. 1. The
Britannia of A^toninus. 2. Appertains to Edward III. 3. To Henry VI. 4. To
Edward IV. 5. To Henry VII. 6. To Henry VIII. 7. To Edward VI. 8. To Q Mary. 9.
To Qu. Elizabeth: 11. To K. James. 12. To K. Charles I.

Would you know of what importance the Dominion of the Sea is unto this Nation?
Hereupon a^one depends Our Security, Our Wealth, Our Glory. From hence We have
a Right unto all those advantages and emoluments which the Venetian Republic
draw from the Hadriatick Sea: where the Ships of the grand Seignior, of the
Emperor, King of Spain and Pope, pay customs to maintain those Fleets which
give Law to them within the Gulf. It Is hereby that We can shut or open these
Seas, for Ships or Fleets to pass and repass them: Whereto Queen Elizabeth
(your best Friend and Protectress) had so special a regard; that when the King
of Denmark and the Hanse-towns solicited Her Majesty to permit them f^ee
passage, they transporting Corn into Spain: She refused it to them; and when a
protestant Fleet of Hamburghers had presumed to do so, notwithstanding Her
prohibition, She caused Her N^vy Royal to burn them, when they were passed Her
ma^itime Territory, and within sight of Lisbon. June 30. 1598. yielding Seldom.
mare clausum l. 2. c. 20.
this reason for her justification, That they not only relieved Her Enemy with
provisions, But had presumptuo^sly made use of Her Seas, without obtaining Her
Royal permission for so doing. Proculdubio ne Mari Anglicano, injussu Reginae
temere uterentur. Joan. Marquar^us JCtus. de jure me^cator. l 1. c. ^6. Sect.
42.
It Is hereby that We can justly demand an account of any Ship or Ships
occurring in the said S^as, what their intentions are? And prohibit any State
to enter there with potent Fleets without pre-acquainting us therewith, and
desiring Our permission: without the which Right, we could never live secure on
shore; It being easy for any foreign Flee^s to amuse us with s^s pretenses,
and in their passage to invade and surprise Us: Thus whilst the Turk pretended
to sail for Malta, He occasionally possessed himself of Canea in the Is^e of
Candia. Many such presidents do occur in History: and in fear of such
surprisal, the A^henians (being Lords at Sea) did exclude the Persian Monarch
from S^lden l 1. c. 11.
sending any Men of war into any part of the AEgean; Khodian, Carpathi^n, I
II
III
IIII
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
and Lydian Seas, and that which bends thence into the West, toward Athens:
Thus the Carthagini^ns prefixed limits to the Roman navigation, that they
should not sail beyond a determinate Pro^ry. id. ib^d. c. 13.
The like caution was used by the Romans against King Ant^ochus, id. ibid. c.
14.
and the Carthaginians: And the Turk prohibits all Nations, saving His vassals,
to enter the Black Sea, or Pontus Euxinus: and also the Red Sea. We add, that
it is by force of the said Right that We can drive on Our Commerce, navigate our
selves, and permit others securely to trade with Us. It is true, You have
presumed several times of late years to violate the security of Our Seas, by
attacking the All^es of England, not only within Our Seas, but in Our Har^urs:
You presumed heretofore to pursue a French vessel as far as London: You have
more then once attacked the Alberic. Gentil. Hispan. A^vocar. l. 1. c. 14. See
Secretary Cooke's Letter to Sir William Boswell, April. 16. 1635. at the end of
the English Seldom.
Spanish Ships in Our Ports, and under the Protection of Our Cast^s; and
particularly We do tell you, that the Honor of this Nation suffered much by
the assault which you most insolently (and contrary to the faith given by your
Ambassadors, and Vice Admiral) made Scilicet hoc factum Hollandorum est contra
justitiam omnem pro certo: and contra reverentiam quae portubus and territor^is
debetur alienis. Alber. Gentilis Hispan, Advocat. l. 1. c. 14.
upon the Spanish Fleet in the Downs: in 1639. Such Indignities, if they be
longer tolerated, All that trade to England will find themselves under a
necessity to confederate with you, or to take Posports from you. Neither can
you well deny that the Dominion of the Sea, is of so great concern unto
England, seeing Ceste ^y enter aultres merit bien une consideration speciale,
que l^ con unction des dits pais d' Holland. Zeelaud, Frise, and des villes de
l Escluz, and Oste^nd in Flandres aevec les Royaulmes de vostre Majeste.
emporte and Soy (...) E^pire de la grand mer Oceane, and par consequence un^
asseurance and felicite perpetualle pour les subjects de vostre sere^issime
Majeste. John Stow^ supplement to Holli^shed. A. D 1585.
Your Ancestors urged Q. Elizabeth to receive the Sovereignty of the
Netherlands, because the annexing thereof to the Realms of Her Majesty,
imported so much as the absolute Government of the great Ocean Sea, and by
consequence an assurance and perpetual felicity to the Subjects of her Majesty.
And you must excuse us for insisting upon that, since it is our clear Right,
the which we might with some color press you and others to yield unto Us,
though We were otherwise in the wrong: So high and urgent are the concerns of
Governors for the welfare, tranquillity and security of their people. Take
notice, that the Dutch d^d solicit the pretended Commonwealth, that the
Intercursus magnus might be ratified: and in their second proposals (containing
35 Articles) tendered to the Council of State, by the Lord Catch. S^haep and
Vander Perre, Art. 18. They desired a freedom of Navigation, and of Fishing.
The Commissioners rejoyned, tha^, the rights of England being reserved, They
should conde^cend to such terms in reference to the fishing, as Reason and
Equity should direct. Leo ab Aitzma, P. 772


In right of this Dominion of the Seas, do we appropriate to Our selves the
British Fishery, and exclude all others from the free use thereof, except
License be obtained, or the same be conditionated for by Treaty. It is most
certain, that were the Sea free for Commerce and Navigation, yet would it not
thence follow, that 'twere lawful for every one to fish therein: for Diverse
private grounds, have through them (by Prescription, grant, or purchase) some,
Iter: some Actum: some, Viam: Yet, no man, that may there lawfully pass, may
also lawfully digg, to his gain, or otherwise, In itinere, Actu, o^ Vid, of
that sort, without further and due license obtained. So all Highways are
counted common and public, to travail on: But for any private man (though He
be a Subject) in any part thereof to digg for any Quarry of Stone, or Mine for
Oar, or Stone-coles, etc. It is not lawful: though He would fill it up again,
as well as He found it at first. Concerning this Right to the Fishing, it has
been always acknowledged by Foreigners to appertain to England: and such
Flemmings and Hollan^ers as used to repair to the Herring-fishing on our
coasts, did constantly take Licenses, and ask leave to fish at
Scarborough-castle, by an immemorial custom. For (says our great Antiquary,
Mr. Cambden) the English have ever granted them leave Cambden. Britannia. in
the description of Yorkshire, and of Scarborough castle. Hitchcocks Newyears
gift to Q. Elizabeth. edit. Londin. 1530. Seldom mare. claus. l. 2. c. 21.
to fish; reserving always the honor and privilege to themselves, but,
thorough a kind of negligence, resigning the profit to strangers. It is
evident, that at such time as the Danes and Norwegians did exercise their
Soveralgnty over the North-Sea, they did not permit any Strangers, either
Flemmings or English to Rex Norwegia etc. habet insulas aliquas videlicet
Istandiam, Feroy, H^landt, and alias plures ad regnum suum Norwegia
pertinentes, ad quas nulli ab antiquo solebant accedere de terris alienis ex
quibuscunque causis, sive piscandi sive mercandisandi, sub poena vitae and
membrorum; non magis homines regni Norwegiae, quam aliarum terrarum, praeter
specialem licentiam regiae Majestatis, etc. Isacius Pontanu^ discus. Histor. l.
1. c. 21. Seldom. mare claus. l. 2. c. 32.
fish near Shotland without License previously obtained: as appears by the
Danish records, and other Muniments preserved in England: If any did presume to
fish without License, they were punished with the loss of life and limbs: and
besides this License, they were obliged to repair to Berghen to pay their
customs and duties to that King's Exchequer. And this is avowed to have been
practiced constantly time out of mind, A. D. 1432. And in a Treaty betwixt K.
Edward IV. and Christian I. King of Denmark and Norwey, A. D. 1465. It was
agreed that no English should so much as sail upon any pretense into those
particular Seas Is. Pont^nns. ibid. Seldom. ibid.
and Islands without the Permission of the Kings of Norwey, upon penalty of
loosing life and goods. Afterward, by virtue of Leagues, this special license
was so dispensed withal, that such English as traded thither were only to take
a New license once in seven years: And even this was discontinued A. D. 1521.
upon the expulsion of King Christierne, by reason that the Right of the Danish
crown was in controversy; so that the succeeding Kings insisted not thereon:
until King Christierne IV. did exact it, and more, id. ibid. c. 21.
of the English: Q. Elizabeth offering that her Subjects of Hull and elsewhere,
should submit to that. Upon this Quarrel there passed sundry disputes and
Embassies betwixt that Queen and Christierne IV. In the same condition were the
Hollanders and Flemmings, they being excluded those Seas, though permitted to
trade and fish about the Kingdom Zuerius Boxhorn. Apolog pro navigat.
Hollandor.
of Norwey: Nor did they ever fish in those Seas, but by special License or
General indult of the Kings of Norwey: and albeit that the License-money were
abated, yet were Thus the Hanse Towns by a perpetual League with Woldemar K. of
Denmark, though, they had the Liberty to fish in the Sea near Schoneland; yet
for every last of Herrings brought on shore, they paid 10 d. in the money of
Schoneland; and every vessel la^en with herrings was to pay 11 s. for its
passage thorough the Sound. A. D. ^370. Joan. Angelius de rebusp. hans^at.
part. 3. c. 24.
they obliged to pay the Kings customs upon the fish taken by them; and in
order thereunto, to bring all their fish on s^ore, and there to pack it up,
that the King might not be defrauded of his rights: as appears by the Indult
given them by King Woldemarus, A. D. 1324. This Dominion of the Sea was never
disputed in those days, as to the King of Norwey; and the Rights of Sh^tland
being passed over to the Kings of Scotland, A. D. 1470. (or rather, 1468.) by
Christian I. upon the marriage of his daughter Margaret with James III. the
same powers were vested in the Kingdom of Scotland, which were before inherent
in that of Norwey: And the like Laws and Usages established: All Fishermen
being obliged to bring their fish on shore at Parlam. 4. Jacob. R 6. c. 60.
Parlam. 6. ejusdem c. 86. Jacob 6. p. 15. c. 237.
some of the free Forts, and there to p^y the Assize-herring; and other dues:
the which Assize-herring; and other customs upon the Fishery had been continued
immemorially in those Seas immediately appertaining to the Realm of Scotland,
and not subject to the dominion of Norwey. And a Scotch Lawyer speaking about
the fishing in the Eastern Sea of Scotland, writes thus. I cannot omit to tell
you, that in the past Age, after a most bloody quarrel between the Scots and
Hollanders, Gul. Welwodus de dominio maris. c. 3.
about occasions belonging to the Sea, the matter was composed in this manner,
that in time to come the Hollanders should keep at least fourscore miles
distant from the Coasts of Scotland. In a Treaty betwixt Mary Q. of Hungary,
Regent of Burgundy for Charles V. and the Tutors of Mary Q. of Scotland: and
renewed by James VI. 15^4. The whole Treaty is rela^ed by Peter Borre l. 30.
And if by accident they were driven nearer thorough violence of weather, they
paid a certain tribute at the Port of Aberdeen before their return; where there
was a Castle built and fortified for this and other occasions: and this was
duly and really paid still by the Hollanders, within the memory of our Fathers,
until that by frequent dissensions at home, this Tribute, with very many other
Rights and Commodities, came to nothing, partly thorough the negligence of our
Governors, and partly thorough the boldness of the Hollanders.

I have not opportunity to procure on the sudden, any exact intelligence from
Scotland, concerning the transactions there relating to Scotland: but that
inquisitive person Gerard Malines informs me that after this Agreement betwixt
that Crown and the Dutch, that the latter should not fish within eighty miles
of the Coast, least the Schools of Herrings should be interrupted: King James
before his coming into England, did let the fishing of Scotland to the
Hollanders for fifteen years. If this happened to be done at such time as The
Dutch sent their Ambassadors to the Christning of Prince Henry, A. D. 1594. We
may compute the time as expired in 1609. at what time King James issued out his
Proclamation, enjoining all to take Licenses. It is certain, that they did then
very much caress that King, that they presented the Prince with above 400
ounces of fine G^ld, and a Deed sealed, whereby the Royal Infant was to receive
5000 Florins annually out of Camp-ver^: So says Meteran. and Reidanus A. D.
1594. And They did renew the Perpetual Treaty of 1551. betwixt Mary of Hungary,
Regent of Burgundy for Charles V. But it is merely a Defensive alliance, and
obliges them to fish 80 miles from the Shores, as appears in P. Borre lib. 30.
It is certain the King could not any way alienate the Royalty of the
Assize-herring, by the Laws of Scotland; what the King might connive at, or
dispense with (as to Licenses, or nearer approach to the Coasts) in regard of
the s^id sum (pretended to be paid to the Prince) it is more easy to
conjecture, then determine. It were to be wished that some Scottish An^iquary
would inform Us of the Rights and Usages of Scotland concerning their fishing.
I am told there is a Record in Scotland, whereby the Hollanders do covenant to
pay K. Malcol^e a Rose-noble ^or every last of Herrings caught, on those
Shores.

As for the Irish Seas it is likewise evident, that Licenses were there issued
out unto each fishing Vessel; and there is a Statute of the Parliament in that
Kingdom under Edward IV. (in the fifth year of his reign) enjoining all Fishers
of other Lands to repair to the Lieutenant, Statut. Hibernic. 5. Edw. 4. c. 6.
Deputy, or Justice of that Realm for such Licenses to be obtained. Moreover,
K. Philip the second, K. of Spain (and Duke of Burgundy) in the first year of
Q. Mary, obtained license for his subjects in general Sir ^ohn Boroughs of the
Sovereignty of the Seas. and Gerard. Malins Lex mer^at. (...). 35.
to fish upon the North-coast of Ireland, for the term of 21 years, paying
yearly for the same 1000 pou^ds: which was accordingly brought into the
Exchequer of I^land; and received of Sir Hen. F^ton; being then Treasurer
there; as his Son Sir Ed. F^ton has often testified.

O^t of all that has been said. It is evident that this effect of the Dominion
of the four Seas, which relates to the disposing of the fishery, by giving
Licenses to fish, and exacting other dues, and enacting of Laws about it, does
appertain to the English, as now united with Scotland and Ireland: And it will
appear further by the Acts of Indulgence, whereby the Kings of England have at
sundry times permitted other Nations arbitrarily to fish in their Seas. It is
manifest, that none ever fished therein (but by usurpation) without special
License; or general Indult: It is also manifest, that there never was any Act
of State by which the Seas were permitted to be promiscuously fished in by all
foreigners whatsoever: But to particular Nations and Corporations there have
been several Indults of that nature. As, to the Subjects of France; Henry IV.
issued out Rot Franc. 5. Hen. 4. Sept. 29. Seldom. mare claus. l. 2. c 21 Sir
John Boroughs of the Sovereignty of the Sea.
his Letters unto all his Admira^s, that they should not molest the French in
their fishing for Herrings, or other fis^, throughout that part of the Sea,
which is bounded on this side by the Ports of Scarborough and Sou^hhampton, and
on the other side by the Coast of Flanders, and the mouth of the River Seine.
This was granted to the K. of France upon a truce betwixt the two Crowns: and
the ^ine was limited for the said fishing, betwixt Autumn and the first of
January. Moreover, it appears Rot. Franc. 33 Hen. 6. Membrum. 9. and 14.
by Records, that Henry VI. gave leave particularly to the French, and very
many other Foreigners, for one whole year only (sometimes Seldom. mare claus.
l. 2. c. 21.
for six months) etc. to go and fish throughout the whole Sea at all times,
and as often, etc. But this Leave was granted under the name So in the
Intercursus magnus, it is said that the Fi^hermen of both parties shall fish
without License, or impediment. Tha^ is, reddendo singul^ singulis, the Dutch
without License, the English without impediment or molestation: (...) on the
English did not use to fish upon the Flemmish coast; but both upon the English.
even of a Pasport, or Safe Conduct; yea, and a size or proportion was
prescribed to their Fishing-boats, that they should not exceed avove ^0 tuns.
It is true indeed, there was a kind of consideration or condition added in
these, and other grants to be mentioned, That such as were Subjects of the King
of England, might in fishing, enjoy the same security with Foreigners. Which
was for this cause on^y put into the Licenses, that if the foreigners did
disturb and molestthem, they should loose the benefit of the Licens. Also upon
a truce betwixt Edw. IV. and Francis Duke of Breta^gne, it was Articled, that
The Fishermen of Bretaigne might peaceably, and without Safe Conduct, attend
upon their Sir Io^ Borought Rot. Eran. 8^. 4.
occupation by Sea. And the King of France himself, in the reign of K. James,
and K. Charles, continued (as his Predecessors did) to request leave for a few
vessels to fish upon the English coasts near Rye, and This is averted by
Secretary Naunton in all e^ter to Sir Dudley Carleton, Dec. 2., 1618. printed
with the English Seldom as also by Sir John Borough^, Gerard. Malines Lex
Mercator. part. 1, c. 35. Rot patent. 23. Ed. 1. Membr. 5. Seld. mare claus. l.
2. c. 21.
that only for provision of his household, being tied to observe the Orders and
Laws of the English fishery; for breach whereof diverse of his subjects have
been taken and imprisoned in Dover-castle, and elsewhere. The Company of the
old Hanse-towns in the first year of Q. Mary, had also liberty to fish within
the said Seas, upon certain conditions, as appears in the Chapel of the
Rolls of Chancery. As to the Flemmings and Netherlanders; there was a Letter
written by Edward the first, and Proclamation made, that the Hollanders,
Zelanders, and Frieslanders, being in amity with England, might securely fish
about Yarmouth. Upon the same day, in favor of the Earl of Holland, and his
subjects, He set forth three Men of war toward the farther coast of the Sea,
for the safeguard (as He says in another Letter) of those vessels belonging
to your and our own Country, that are in these days employed about the
Herring-fishing, etc. and to guard your Coasts id. ibid.
near the Sea. Here He grants a Protection to fish: and in both the Letters, He
limits it within the space of two months. He alone also protected the
Fishermen upon the German Coasts (which by reason of its nearness, He calls
here your coast near the Sea, in his Letter to the E. of Holland) as well as
upon the English. There is likewise a Record, that Henry VI. did by a Treaty
betwixt Him and the Duchess of Burgundy, Sir John Boroughs of the Sovereignty
of the Sea.
grant unto the subjects of Brabant and Flanders, the liberty to fish in his
Seas, without impeachment or disturbance. So in a truce to endure for thirty
years betwixt the K. of England and his Heirs on the What this Duke was I know
not^ but Sir John Boroughs does justify the Re^ord.
one party, and the D. of Burgundy and his Heirs on the other party, one
Article is, That the Fishermen may sail and fish, without being obliged to ask
leave, or to take License, or Safe Conduct. The aforesaid Article was
afterward inserted into that famous League of Commerce, called Intercursus
Magm^s, and Intercursus Haereditarius, made betwixt K. Henry VII. and Philip
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, A. D. 1495. wherein They contract for
them and their Heirs, That Intercursus magnus c. 14. edit. per Zuer. Boxhorn.
cum Apologia pro navigat. Holland. Everard. Reidanus Annal. Belg. l. 1^. ad An
1598 In the year 1596. when a League was made betwixt the Queen, France, and
the Dutch: the Q. refused to admit the Dutch as a third party, but rather to be
comp^ed under her; as their Protectress: But the K. of France would treat with,
and comprehend them as a Free people. id. ibid. l. 12. A. D. 1596.
the Fishermen of both their Dominions, of what condition soever they be, may
sail any whether, and fish peaceably, without any impediment, license, or
safe conduct. The same intercourse was ratified again by Henry VIII. when He
made a peace with Charles V. And by virtue of that League did the Dutch enjoy
the privilege of fishing in the British Seas, without any License or
acknowledgment of K. Edward VI. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth: The last Queen did
never treat with you as a Republic, nor ever intended that you should be such:
but She protected you as Subjects to the House of Burgundy; whom She desired to
preserve free from the usurpations and tyranny of the Spania ds. After that
England and Scotland were united in the person of K. James, the condition of
that League of Intercourse was much altered: For the League being made by a K.
of England only, did not include the K. of Scotland, nor entitle the Dutch to
fish in those Seas without license, much less exempt them there from paying the
Assize-herring, and other cusioms which were an unalienable part of the
Regalities of that Crown: Moreover you were then in 1609. acknowledged by the
Heirs of the House of Burgundy (viz. the K. of Spain, the Archdukes Albert and
Card. Bentivogli^ History of Flanders, part. 3. l. 8.
Isabella) to be Free States upon which they had no pretensions at all: And if
the House of Burgundy had no pretensions upon the United Provinces, It is
manifest that the United Provinces could not pretend to any thing by virtue of
a League made purely with the Duke of Burgundy, his Heirs and Successors, their
Dominions and Territories, their Vassals and Subjects, This is expressed in the
first Article of that League.
that either then were, or afterward should happen to be so: For They are not
Vassals and Subjects to This same argument would exclude them from the League
of 1551. made with Mary Q. of Hungary in behalf of Charles V. had the^e been
any thing of the fishing therein: which yet is never averred by the Dutch in
any Writing or Memorial.
the Successors of the Duke of Burgundy, who was the Contractour at that
League: They are no more included therein then the K. of Denmark, or Sweden:
Nor can They pretend that though They be no longer Subjects to the House of
Burgundy, yet They are in deed the people included in the League: for when a
Government is changed from a Republic to a Monarchy, or from a Nam ut
subtiliter non sit ista Reip. mutatio: tanta est alteratio tamen, ut nec nomen
maneat, nec eadem dici Respublica possit. Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli
Commentat. 3 p. 206. Florentino duci ambienti ex jure veteru Reipublicae
Florentinae praecedentiam supra Ferratiensem ducem ju^isconsulti maximi
abjudicarunt litem, quod Status Dueis non esset idem ac Reipublicae. Novus
status est, si de populari mutetur in Monarchicum [and vice versa] and tum nec
subrogatum tenet jus ejus in cujus venit locum: quum sit diversae naturae. --
Nomina quae speciem significant, si mutentur, speciem mutant. Si nomen Regni
mutetur in duca^ nomen, extinguitur Regnum. Albericus Gentilis in disput. 2. de
Unione Regnotum Britanniae.
Monarchy to a Dukedom, or Republic, it is not legally the same, but the
former becomes extinct, as to Leagues, Privileges and Preheminences: and this
has been adjudged a thousand times by the best Civilians, and the common
practice of Princes. You must not therefore insist upon any Right of fishing by
that League; nor can you reckon the time past wherein you have enjoyed the
fishing without license, into an immemorial occupancy and prescription against
the English Title: For unto a Legitimate prescription, It is requisite that the
persons claiming thereby, should be possessed immemorially of the thing
claimed; But you were never possessed of the British fishery: A tenant, How
long soever He hold the Land, does not prescribe against His Landlord; and He
with whom any thing is deposited, lent, or entrusted in another's behalf,
cannot challenge it by this title, though after two hundred years. That which
is held by virtue of compact or League, or upon sufferance, without
renunciation of right, can never become the possessours by Confirm. jure
Civili. Nam L. M^le agitur. C. de praescriptione 30 annorum, sic dicitur. Male
agitur cum dominis praediorum, si tanta precario possidentibus praerogativa
defertur, ut ^as post 40 annorum spatia qualibet ratione decursa inquietare non
liceat. Vide L. Lessium de justitia. l. 2. c. 6. dub. 2. Lud. Molina de
justitia, ^act. 2. disp. 62.
Prescription. The League did not give away the English Dominion of the Seas,
but gave unto the Subjects of the House of Burgundy a freedom to fish therein
without L^se. The general Civil Right did still continue in the English; and at
the same time that you fished without License, the English rights were asserted
by enforcing others to take license, and pay the Assize-herring: And if your
fishing without license could prescribe for any body, the House of Burgundy
must reap the benefit thereof, and not the Free States of the United
Netherlands.

We conclude, that it is not only the undoubted Right of England to dispose of
and direct the Fishery, but to appoint Wafters, or Men of War to secure the
Fishers, and to exclude all other Ships from that employment: and withal, to
take a ratable proportion of every fisher-bark toward their costs and expenses
in securing the fishing. Thus K. Edward IV. invested three persons with the
Naval power, whom the Records call Custodes, Conductores, and Waftores;
Guardians, Conductors, and Wafters, Seldom. mare claus. l. 2. c. 21.
whose office it was to guard the Fishermen upon the coast of Norfolk and
Suffolk. To the end therefore that the expenses of the Guard might be defraied
by the Fishermen, and all others whatsoever excluded from meddling with this
kind of Guard or Protection, He appointed four Men, by name Sir John Hemingham
Knight. William Hopton, Edmund Yve, and John Wansfleet Esquire as well (say the Records
themselves) to over-see those Guardians, Conductors, and Wafters, as to give
notice to all Fishermen of what country soever, who shall desire to fish in
the parts aforesaid, under the protection of the said N. N. that those id ibid.
Sir John Boroughs of the Sovereignty of the Sea, does rec^e the Rocord at large.
Fishermen, and every of them do contribute to all and all manner of Costs,
Charges, and Expenses belonging to the same Guardians and Conductors in the
time of fishing, according to a certain proportion: They are also to arrest,
apprehend and commit to goal any else that shall presume to act as Wafters and
Conductors. And there are Letters Patents of the same tenor issued out by
Richard III. and Henry VII. with this additional clause, that no fishermen were
to be exempted from the said payments, though they had Letters of public
security and protection from other Princes.

Hitherto we have given you a plain and perspicuous account of the Fishery,
what Interest and Right the English have thereunto: And, If we do demand any
thing for special Licenses, or one in General, to be renewed annually, or after
term of years, It is no more then you your selves perform and comply willingly
with in the Seas of Denmark: That King receiving at his Ward-house in the Sound
for a License one Dollar; Sir John Boroughs of the Sovereignty of the Sea.
Gerard. Malines Lex mercatoria. part. 1 c. 35.
and for the Seal, or Rose; a Noble of every Ship: and for every last of
Herrings (being 12 barrels) one Doller. In Russia many leagues from the main,
the Fishermen do pay great taxes to the Emperor, and in most places, none but
the Natives are permitted to fish; but where the Hollanders are permitted to
fish, there they pay Joan. Loccenius de jure maritimo. l. 2. c (...). Sect 2.
every tenth fish to the Emperor. The King of Sweden amongst the Begalities of
that Crown, has that of the Tenth fish caught in his Seas, or if not that,
then a General composition for the fishery: He has also s^veral Recessus Holm^
de an. 1643. art. ult.
districts, channels, or veins Royal in his Seas, which are appropriated to his
particular use: Nor is there any fisting permitted in the open Sea there, but
by the leave and direction of the Governor of the neighboring Por^. Neither
are these the Absque venia Magistratus pr^ectique port^ Regis directione
piscatio in pub^ico non est permissa, jure po^s Suedico Ca^oli octavi, Art. 14.
and 25. c. 29. Sect. 1. de aedif. LL. prove. Su^. ^ante Locenio, ibid. Sect. 3.
only Princes which either exact money for Licenses, or totally exclude others
from fishing on their Seas; In Portugal the same is practiced in the Kingdom of
the Algarbes; and the Natives pay a certain tribute for their liberty to fish.
In Spain the Duke of Medina Sidonia does rent out the maritime jurisdiction
which he Joan. Botero. l b. 1. Europ. p. 5. Joan. Palatius de dominio matis. l.
1. c. 13.
has in reference to fishing, for eighty thousand Ducats of yearly revenue:
and the D. of Arcos raises by the Sir. John Boroughs of the Sovereignty of the
Sea.
same course the annual rent of twenty thousand Ducats. And you your selves do
impose taxes on the Fish, taken by your own Fishermen upon our Seas: In so much
that above 30 years since, there was paid to the State for Custom of Herring,
and other Saltfish above 300000 l. in one year: besides the Tenth fish and
Cask, paid sor Waftage; which comes to at least as much more. Whereas there
ought to be no other Wafters tolerated in the British Seas, but what are of
English appointment; nor any receive Convoy-money but by their Authority.

Could you claim any thing by virtue of the Intercursus magnus, yet you have
notoriously violated those Articles, and forfeited those Privileges, Qui suo
privilegio a^titur. illud amuttit. Jo. Marquerdus de jure commerc. l. 4. c. 3
by molesting our Fishermen. You have with your Busses and Dogger-boats, come
nearer and nearer to the British coasts year by year, then you did in former
times, without leaving any bounds for the English and Scotch, to fish upon
their own coasts; and you have affronted and seized upon several for
enterfering with your Fleets of See Secretary N^nton's Letter to Sir Dudley
Carlton. Ian. 21. 1618. at the end of the English Seldom.
Busses; your Wafters terrify them, and you frequently let some of your
greater vessels drive thorough their nets, thereby to endamage the poor men,
and to deterr them from fishing near you. Thus you anticipate and intercept the
great Scoles of white fish, and the Scotch and English have no advantages, but
upon the broken Scoles; and they are so broken, and so far scattered away from
our Coasts, that sew are sound worth Wel^ood's maritime Laws, Tit. 27.
the taking: So that the English and Scotch now buy of you their own Herrings:
against which there were Laws enacted by K. Henry VIII. An. regn. 33. which
continued in force until the first of Q. Mary; and Sir John Boroughs of the
Sovereignty of the Sea.
then expired by the artifices of the Spanish and Netherland interest
concurring in the person of K. Philip. To conclude, Be your Privilege to fish
in our Seas what you will, and How valid soever, They Fe^us in c. novit. de
judic. n. 8. verse. 2. and aliis passibus ex Are^no and secundum Innocentium
(...), Quod si privilegium concessum non subdi^, ex post. facto eno^er laedat
concedentem, praeter ejus intentionem, resolvatur tale privilegium ipso jure,
and possit revocati, allegans textum. in c. suggestum. de decimis. quib. ad. l.
Sejo. 10. Sect. penult. ff de a^nu. leg. and l. fistulas. 78. Sect. frumenta. 3
de contrah. empt. Facilius revocatur privilegium juris dictionum. and Rega^m,
si enormiter postmocum laedit. Io. Marquardus de jure commerc. l. 4. c. 3 Sect.
58.
do undoubtedly cease upon this account, that they do intolerably prejudice and
endamage the English, the donors thereof: and although they had been granted
you upon valuable considerations, yet upon this principle They would cease.
Thus Q. Elizabeth did abrogate the privileges of the Hanse-Towns in England,
when by their excessive trade and great immunities in this nation it appeared,
that the Crown had suffered prejudice thereby to the sum of a million and an
half: and that they did depress the English merchants, and hinder their
commerce, to the great decrease of shipping and Seamen amongst Us. Hereby our
fishing is discontinued, our Shipping and Mariners decreased, our maritime
towns depopulated, our General Trade (and consequently our homerents)
diminished, and the whole Nation weakened and impoverished: whilst you employ at
least 6800 ships and busses in the fishing, and thereby perpetuate a large
Seminary of 20000 Mariners, who are hereby not only enabled to brook the Seas,
and to know the use of the tackle and Compass; but are like wise instructed in
the principles of Navigation and Pilotage: you do also thereby supply all
Europe with fish, and engross all that Trade which of right appertains to the
English; and Sir John Boroughs.
the greatest part being sold for ready money, you commonly export the finest
gold and silver, and coming home, recoyn it of a baser alloy under your own
stamp: whereby your Treasury is advanced, and others impoverished. At the
first, your fishing was not so great as it is now, nor the damage so sensible
and evident as it is at this present: The way of Zuerius B^horn. Apolog. pro
navigat. Hollander. Io. Isac. Pontanus discuss. Histor. l. 1. c. 14.
pickling Herrings was discovered only in 1416. by Gulielmus Buckeldius, a
Flemming; yet even in the days of Henry VIII. the Parliament complained of the
decay of the English fishery and fishermen, and made an Act 33 Henrici, to
this purpose: Because the English Fishermen, dwelling on the Seacoasts, did
leave off their Trade of fishing in our Seas, and went half-seas over, and
thereupon the Seas did buy fish of Picards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders,
by reason whereof many incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. The decay of
the wealth and prosperity, as well of the Cinqueports, and Members of the same,
as of other Coast-towns by the Seaside, which were builded and inhabited by
great multitudes of people, by reason of using and exercising the craft and
fear of fishing. Secondly, the decay of a great number of Boats and Ships. And
thirdly, the decay of many good Mariners, both able in body by their
diligence, labor, and continual exercise of fishing, and expert by reason
thereof in the knowledge of the Seacoasts, as well within this Realm, as in
other parts beyond the Seas. It was therefore enacted, that no manner of
persons, English, Denizens, or Strangers, at that time, or any time after
dwelling in England, should buy any fish of Strangers, etc. The considerations
insisted upon in this Act; are much more prevalent with Us now, then they could
be at that time, when the evil effects of your so great fishing did but begin
to diffuse themselves; The towns which were then lessened in their greatness,
are now reduced to such a condition, that they scarcely find a place in our
Mapps: The fishing is abandoned quite, and the Men and Boats are no where to be
found: It was observed in England, that by your fishing at Yarmouth-coast for
Herrings for 36 years only, Dr. John Dei's British Monarchy, page 23.
the coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk decayed in their Ships to the number of 140
sail, and they from 60 to 100 tun, and upwards; besides Crayers, and lesser
vessels: and hence it arose, that in 1572. the English were not able to trade
to Island, as they used to do, to the great detriment and loss of the English
Nation. We are now brought to this estate, that we cannot carry on our foreign
Trade, or manage our Naval Force without retriving the Fishery: and you must
excuse Us, if we regard our own welfare before your emoluments: No tenderness
to our Neighbors ought to induce Us to prefer their Interest before that of
England; No policy allows Us to permit you to grow so potent at Sea, and so
rich in Trade, especially by our detriment: seeing that this will be the fatal
consequence thereof, that you will in a short time devour our Trade, and reduce
Us (your former Protectours and Fatrons) to a precarious dependence upon the
Power and Mercy of Hollanders. Somewhat might be said for you, were your fish
the product of your own Seas, and your Trade the result of your Industry: But
the vast commerce you have (not to tell you of the Fraud, and outrages upon the
English merchants) is principally supported by un-licensed en^ment upon Our
Territories. The Law of Nations obliges you to be just to every one, and not
to enrich or otherwise strengthen your selves by endamaging others: According
to the vulgar saying of Pomponius, Neminem W. Wel^ood of Maritime Laws.
debere cum al^rius damno locupletari: and that of Tryphonimus; Ex aliend
j^cturd lucrum haurire non op^riet. We do not desire you to fish upon our Seas:
But if you will reap any profit out of them, common reason obliges you to a
reciprocal acknowledgment of the kindness: and it is but just that you submit
to the Taxes and Conditions to be imposed, in case you desire to draw unto your
selves the emoluments. The common maxims of State do authenticate our
proceedings, if we totally interdict you them; and it is an Argument of our
respects to you, that we offer you to fish therein, upon such terms, that the
profits which accrue to the States General out of the said Fishery be
transferred upon Us, to whom They duly appertain: For the Sovereignty of those
Seas does belong unto England by immemorial prescription, continual usage, and
possession, the acknowledgment of all our Neighbor States, and the Municipal
Laws of the Land. Because the injuries which the English Merchants sustained as
Amboyna, have been the subject of much con^tion betwixt our Nation and that of
the United Provinces, and because the irregular proceedings, barbarous
torments, and Death practiced and inflicted upon the English factory there,
were things resented by K. James, remonstrated against by K. Charles I.
justified by the Dutch, and revenged by the pretended Parliament in the war
1652. Yet so as that They ^ld not cons^ to any peace, except they which still
survived, and were acting and assisting thereat. should be prosecuted by due
course of Justice: I have thought fit to add the Relation of what those
Innocent persius suffered, What the Dutch did to the Actors of that bloody
Tragedy, and what Cromwell connived at in his dear friends the Province of
Holland.


An Account of the English, how They were tortured at Amboyna, A. D. 1622. on
Sunday Febr. 16. old style; at which time they were in Amity by solemn League,
and Copartners with the Dutch in that Trade.
THE manner of the torture of John Clark (as also of Emanuel Tomson, See the
Relation reprinted and justified. London. A. D. 1633.
and Timethy Johnson) Assistants to the English Agent there, was as follows.
First they hoised him up by the hands with a Cord on a large door, where they
made him fast upon two staples of Iron, fixed on both sides at the top of the
door-posts, haling his hands one from the other as wide as they could stretch.
Being thus made fast, his feet hung some two foot from the ground; which also
they stretched asunder as far as they could reach, and so made them fast
beneath unto the door-trees on each side. Then they bound a cloth about his
neck and face so close, that little or no water could go by. That done, they
powered the water softly upon his head, until the cloth was full up to the mouth
and nostrils, and somewhat higher; so that He could not draw breath, but He must
withal suck in the water: which being still continued to be powered in softly,
forced all his inward parts, came out of his nose, ears, and eyes, and often as
it were stifling and choking, at length took away his breath, and brought him
to a swoun or fainting. Then they took him quickly down, and made him vomit up
the water. Being a little recovered, they triced him up again, and powered in
the water, as before, eftsoons taking him down as he seemed to be stifled. In
this manner they handled him three or four several times with water, till his
body was swollen twice or thrice as bigg as before, his cheeks like great
bladders, and his eyes staring and strutting out beyond his forehead: yet all
this He bare without confessing any thing. In so much as the Fiscal and
Tormentors reviled Him, saying that he was a Devil, and no Man, or furely was a
Witch: at least had some Charm about him, or was enchanted, that He could bear
so much. Wherefore They cut of his hair very short, as supposing he had some
Witchcraft, hidden therein. Afterward they hoised him up again as before, and
then burnt him with lighted candles in the bottom of his feet, until the fat
dropped out the candles; yet then applied they fresh lights unto him. They burnt
him also under the Elbows, and in the palms of the hands, likewise under the
armpits until his inward parts might evidently be seen. Being thus wearied and
overcome by the Torment, he answered Yea, to whatsoever They asked.

Having thus martyred the poor man, they sent him out by four blacks; who
carried him betwixt them to a dungeon, where he lay five or six days without
any Surgeon to dress him, until (his flesh being putresied) maggots crept
from him in a most loathsome and noisome manner. Thus they finished their
Sabbath Days work; and it growing now dark, sent the rest of the English first
to the Smith's shop, where they were laden with Irons, and then to the same
dungeon where Clark and the others (already tormented) lay, with several
Japoneses, whose ulcers were likewise putrefied.

Thus ten English of the East India Company (no way subjected to the
Hollander,) were tortured more or less according to their courage and
obstinacy, until they had confessed themselves guilty of a Plot, wherein ten
English without Arms, without any possible assistance from any other English
Factory, by the aid of ten simple Japoneses designed to surprise the strong
Castle of Amboyna, guarded diligently by two or 300 Dutch soldiers, besides as
many more Free-burghers in the Town, and which might be easily relieved or
re-taken by their neighbou^ing Castles well manned, which the Dutch had in the
same Island.

After this the Dutch Governors met, and before sentence, earnestly called
upon the name of the Lord, that He would be pleased to be president and
predominant in every one of their hearts, in this their sorrowful Assembly; and
that He would inspire them only with that which might be judged expedient and
just, etc. Then they adjudged them to be beheaded. They were carried to
execution, not the ordinary way, but round about in a procession, through the
Town: the way guarded with five Companies of Soldiers, Dutch and Amboyners,
and thronged with the Natives of the Island, that (upon summons given the day
before by the sound of Drum) flocked together to behold this Triumph of the
Dutch over the English. They all at their deaths professed that their
confessions were false, and extorted from them by the te^ours of the Torment;
and disclaimed that unimaginable and unseasible conspiracy.

But the Plot was on the Dutch-side, that they might hereby possess themselves
of the Spice-trade; and as Iezabel caused a Fast to be kept before judgment
against Naboth, so did the Hollanders in this case. King James demanded
satisfaction for their blood; they being neither guilty, nor Subjects to the
Dutch, nor within their Dominions; neither, if they had been, were they
proceeded against by the rules of Holland: Their Judges had no jurisdiction
over them; the proceedings were arbitrary and barbarous; such as none of humane
race, much less Christians, would execute against the greatest Criminals, but
these insolent, ungrateful, unchristian, Netherlanders. Yet no amends could
that King obtain for the murder of his Subjects, or the damage which the
Company had suffered by confiscation of their Goods. The matter was put off
with delays until 1624. And then the States desired 18 months time for the
recalling of the Actors of that bloody Tragedy; but in the mean space King
James dies; and King Charles I. succeeds; the Dutch, instead of disgracing or
imprisoning Harman van Speult Governor of Amboyna, receive him with great
honor and triumph at Iacatra, See the Preface to the defense of the East India
Company against the Dutch Remonstrance. Printed at London 1632.
and instead of sending him to Europe, according to the directions and command
of the States General (in a Letter conveyed thither by the English) they made
him chief Commander of a Fleet of Ships, sent from thence to Surat: and instead
of making any restitution or reparation to the English, which was promised and
pretended, they possessed themselves of the whole trade of the Moluccos, Banda
and Amboyna: about 1632. some of the Judges at Amboyna returned into the
Low Countries, where they lived free and well countenanced, and were never
punished by their Superiors. The remonstrances of K. Charles were ineffectual;
and he had employed his Arms for reparation, but that the controversies about
Ship Money retarded his Naval strength, and the succeeding troubles in Scotland
and England totally disappointed him. The los^ our Company MSS. Comment.
received at Amboyna, Banda, and the Moluccos, amounted to 48900 l. 15 s.
besides other damages. The pretended Common wealth, by their Ambassador at the
Hague, demanded ample satisfaction for all the losses of the East India
Company, and withal, So Mr. Saint John's says in his Speech to them.
judgment against those that had so murdered the English at Amboyna: some
whereof were then present in the States provincial of Holland: In their
Articles, they inserted one to this purpose: and it was agreed to under
Cromwell: But he, to establish himself the better by indulging the province of
Holland (his dearest confederates) did not enquire into the affair; having only
proforma, and as it were for his credit, in^ted on that Article; MSS. Comment.
or acqui^ing in the Retroacts of the Dutch, whereby they offered to justify
the procedure; the which Retroacts were printed in Quarto, 1633. and disproved
by the East India Company at the same time. Those Retroacts were no secret in
this Nation, being published verbatim, with the Answer: They which first urged
the Article, were not ignorant thereof, and Cromwell himself was satisfied with
the illegality of the Action, until he abandoned the regards of his Conscience,
to those of his Ambition and Interest.

O mites Diomedis Equi! Busiridis Arae
Clem^es! Iam Cinna pius, jam Spa^ace lenis,
Cu^ Batavis collatus, cris --
FINIS.

