A TRUE RELATION OF THE Cruelties and Barbarities OF THE FRENCH, UPON THE
ENGLISH PRISONERS of WAR.

BEING A Journal of their TRAVELS from Dinan in Britany, to Thoulon in
Provence: And back again.

With a Description of the Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent
Towns upon the Road, and their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and
the Number of the Men that died under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of
them, and the Places of their Deaths and Burials: With an Account of the great
Charity and Sufferings of the Poor Protestants of France: And other Material
Things that happened upon the Way.

Faithfully and Impartially Performed by Richard Strutton, being an
Eyewitness, and a Fellow Sufferer.

LICENSED June 27. 1690.

James Fraser.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the (...). MDCXC.

TO THE Most Serene and Mighty PRINCESS, MARY, By the Grace of God, QUEEN of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Most Illustrious Princess,
SINCE God, the Fountain of all Goodness, has given us Your Majesty's most
Sacred Persons to Rule and Reign over us, to the great Joy of all those that
wish well to our Zion, and a Terror to the Disaffected; I do humbly beseech
Your Majesty out of the Abundance of Your wonted Clemency, That when Your
Majesty's most weighty Matters shall give leisure, that then Your Majesty would
be pleased to lend Your Gracious Ear to the Travels and Sorrows of Your
Majesty's poor Subjects in France. So the great God above, by whose Power alone
Monarchs Reign, Bless Your Majesty's with a Long and a Happy Reign over us, and
Crown You with Glory Everlasting.

So Prays, Your Majesty's most Loyal, and Obedient Subject, RICHARD STRVTTON.

TO THE Courteous Readers: Especially to all SEAFARING Men.
AS it is neither usual nor convenient to jump at once from the Title Page to
the Matter, I shall therefore make this small Digression, not to tire your ears
with Tautologies, or unnecessary Trifles, but on the contrary, to give you an
Account of the whole End and Scope of my Design in gathering together this
small Tractate of the Hard Usage of some of our Countrymen in France, that
whosoever shall read this ensuing Relation, and will be pleased to compare it
with the Actions of other Nations, may then give their Judgments in the
general, whether or no this looks like the actions of Christians or not, and of
those who style themselves of the better sort. So that when you have had a
clear view of some part of their work, you may the better judge the Artifices of
the Workmen: That whenever it may fall in your way, as I doubt not but it
will of many of you; then let me desire you to remember the words of the Law,
(That whosoever sheddeth blood, by man shall his blood be shed) Many will be
apt to say, That these words were signified by Moses to the Commonwealth of
Israel, for the propagating of a Civil Government; yet notwithstanding, we see
that this Law has been translated and continued in all Ages, and amongst the
most Civilized people since that time; as for example, all those under the
Gospel Dispensation: Yet still many will object and say, These words are purely
meant in case of wilful Murder: To all such I shall humbly desire, That they
would be pleased to read, or else at least to give ear to this ensuing Diary;
wherein they will find the Manner and Method that was used by them, was to put
men to the worst of Deaths, (viz.) by Traveling, Beating, and also starving
them with Hunger and Cold; which is no less than wilful Murder; then pray let
them judge whether their Deaths was not designed by them when this work was
first cut out: True it is, Nero had his varieties of Deaths, which he was
pleased to impose upon the Primitive Christians in his time, for the which he
became famous for Cruelty, and was justly styled the Enemy of Mankind. But had
Nero lived in these days, he might very well have been comented, before he
commenced Master of Cruelty and Tyranny, to have become the Scholar of this
Most Christian Tyrant, who would have taught him better methods to have
accomplished his most Bloody Design, and not have fallen one jot short of it:
For as Nero did delight to see those innocent Christians Blood spilt in sport
in his Theaters, as he did, at that time there was no Power upon Earth that was
able to stop him in this his full Career of Blood, until the hand of Divine
Justice had done it, and brought his misery upon him at home, that he was
forced to say, when he was so miserable and forsaken of all Men, that he had
not so much as a Man that would kill him upon his own request: Nec amicum
habeo, nec inimicum; i.e. I have never a Friend nor Enemy. Just so it had
happened with us, the People of England, but that it pleased the Almighty God
of his great goodness to settle the Crown of these Kingdoms upon the Heads of
this Royal Pair, William and Mary, in that mutable time when the very breath of
the Factious had so much disturbed the Air, that the Seas became dangerous to
all that Navigated; that then they put a stop to the full Career of this
Tyrant's Fury, whom nothing else must have served, but a Sea of Innocent Blood.
Then, since it has so pleased God to avert that great Judgment which was
hovering over this Land, which tended to no less than the absolute Overthrow of
both Church and State: and on the other side, has given us a Nursing-Father
and Mother, to secure us safe under their shadow; let none of us therefore,
Englishmen, whom the matter does concern, that lay any Claim or Title to the
Heroical Blood of the Britains, whose Valor has formerly run through the
whole World, and has eclipsed the Glory of France more than once; let none
therefore, that puts his hand to this Plough, look back; especially now they
see the Examples of our Renowned Monarchs revived (viz.) those of Edward III.
and of Henry V. who to redeem the dying Honor of England, exposed themselves
to the greatest dangers, and came not back empty-handed; for it is said,
Audentes fortuna juvat; i. e. Fortune helps the Bold. Let us therefore set God
and the Gospel's Purity before us; and let That be the chief Mark we aim at;
and without doubt, by God's Assistance, we may eclipse the Glory of Louis le
Grand, as he is now styled. I do not doubt but it will fare with my poor
Endeavors in this Boook, as it has fared with those of ten thousand times
more worth, to be carp'd at by some of the Critics of this Age, who can sooner
find Ten Faults in the Actions of another person, than mend one in themselves.
I have not one word to say in the praise of it, it being but a rough thing, and
not so well polished as if it had been done by a more skilful hand; and
besides, my great trouble and weariness of Body, when these things were
collected together; my right hand being chained, in which I held my Pen, for
thirty seven days together: When all these things are considered rightly, it
will render me the more excusable. Yet I have this to say, Although it is not
put into a lofty Style, as might have been done by another Man; yet I am sure
that what is in it is so true, that it is able to contend with Truth it self;
and therefore I hope that Truth is not to be despised, although she be but in a
plain Dress. I shall therefore desire you to take this notice as you read, for
your better understanding of some particulars, which is not known to every Man:
The Sirdena signifies a small Fish, a little bigger than a Sprat; and as for
Beverage, that is meant Vinegar and Water, or Wine and Water; Denires is also
spoken of very often, which is the small Money of that Country, of which Twelve
makes one Souse, or Penny English. So wishing you more pleasure in the reading,
than I had in the writing, I take my leave, and subscribe my self,

Yours in all Love, Richard Strutton.
Deptford, (...) June 21. 1690.
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Cruelties and Barbarities OF THE FRENCH, UPON THE
ENGLISH Prisoners of WAR, etc.
June 8. 1689.

I Then being come from the Canaries, in the Ship Merry Frigate, Emanuel Dart
Commander, right off Portland we met a Privateer of St. Malo; after what
resistance we could well make, many of our Men not showing themselves so
valiant as did become Englishmen, but on the contrary ran down into the Hold,
and left the Commander, with only Three more, to fight this Privateer; which
thing we did to our utmost endeavor, killing them several Men; Our Commander
being dangerously wounded in the Shoulder, and the Gunner shot in the Leg, we
were at last forced to yield to merciless Men, who, after we were taken,
treated us like themselves, by striping us almost quite naked, and wounding
several of the Men. The Eleventh of this Month they put us ashore into the
Prison of St. Malo; the wounded were sent to their Hospital. In this same
filthy Prison we remained until the 25th of July, and then they sent about 180
of us to Rochfort.

July 25. 1689. die Jovis. About Ten in the morning came the Guard a Marine,
with his Company, for to take us out of the Prison of Dinan; he having a Roll
of our Names, called us over two by two, and drove us into an Apartment, where
we were Hand-cuff'd two and two together, with Hand-cuffs made of Leather, and
so locked with a small Padlock; That being in this manner done to us all, we
Marched out of the Castle into the Town, where we found a Hundred or more of
our English which were the same day brought from St. Malo^, all in the same
order, Handcuff'd, two and two; we no sooner met, but away we marched toward
Rochfort in a most miserable condition, some almost naked, and many barefoot
and bare-legg'd; in this manner we marched from Dinan to a Village called
Bechereal, fourteen Miles distant; in this place they gave us that Victuals for
Supper which we were to have had for Dinner in Dinan: As for our Liquor it was
Water; so here we slept in the Stables, and in Barns, and many were forced to
sleep in the open Yard in some Hay that lay there.

Friday 26. In the morning before we set forth, several of our Men that were
naked almost, Spun Hay Ropes, and so wrapped them about their Bodies, Legs, and
Arms, to keep them from the cold by night, The Handcuffs galling, the men's
Hands were loosed many of them, upon promise of their walking quietly and
orderly.
and the scorching of the Sun by day; after they had given us a small bit of
Bread and Butter, away we marched toward the City of Rhemes, Nineteen Miles
distant; as we were on the way, several of our Men fell lame, and could not
travel; then were they forced to hire Carts for them. By the way we saw two
Countrymen at work in the Field, whom the Guard a Marine commanded to fetch
their Horses to draw the Carts; the two Men seeing the Belt by which he
commanded, ran away; they being in the Fields, and an high Bank between them,
thought to get clear of them; but one of them dismounted and ran after them,
and so brought them into the Road, where the Guard a Marine drub'd them so
long, that I believe he gave them at least Fifty blows, so that I saw the Piss
run out of the Knees of the Breeches of one of them; and when that was done, he
made each of them down on their Knees, and of them take a good lusty heavy Lad,
and carry him upon his back at least a M^le. When we came into the City, we
were brought into a close Yard belonging to an Inn, where we were served with
Bread and Water, and our Lodging was in the Stables, and many lay in the open
yard, for want of room. The savage people many of them kept heaving of Stones
over the Walls at us; and those Soldiers that kept Guard over us, would not let
us sleep, but kept singing of Songs all night about the Prince of Orange.

Saturday 27. About Nine in the morning they gave us our breakfast, which was
the Broth of the Meat they boiled this morning. After our Drivers had bought
them all new Whips to drive us along, we began our March, Marching through Two
Companies of Soldiers who made a Lane for us, and beat the Drum; we Marched
about Nine Miles, until we came to a lone House, where was a Well under a
Hedge, by the which we sat down and eat our Dinner, which was but very small;
that done, away we Marched Nine Miles farther, to a Town called Polonia. When
we came near any Town, then our Drivers would begin to smack their Whips, and
upon the least occasion in the World, whip us too, if we did not keep in even
Ranks to very great exactness; so that Lashes was dealt amongst us very
plentifully, insomuch that one of them which took great delight in this
Exercise of Whipping, we nicknamed Whipping Tom. When we came into the Village
of Polonia, the people appeared very few, so that immediately the Town was
alarmed by Ringing of the Church-Bells, according to the manner of an Alarm;
then soon, into the place where we were, came all the people which lived within
the noise of the Bells; but truly Nine parts in Ten of the people that we saw,
was of the Female Sex, and Children. Inever saw a Country so thin of Men
before, which was contrary to what I did expect; for it was usual in England,
to hear people speak much of the popularity of France. When they had served us
our Supper, which was a piece of Black Bread and Water, they put us, some into
a Stable, and the rest into an empty House, where we lay on the Brick-Floor,
the Country People being all in Arms to Guard us, both within doors and without.

Sunday, 28. Early in the morning, we were carried out of our Lodgings into the
streets, where we all sat down on the ground, Ten and Ten together, for such
were our Messes. Now they served us our Breakfast and Dinner together, which
was Broth cut pretty thick with black course Bread, which was so four, that the
major part of our Men thought they had put Vinegar into it, until by the taste
of the Bread by it self, it was discerned: The Meat, that little there was,
they also gave us, which was not considerable; our Drink was Water. When we had
thus eaten, away we marched nine miles, to a Town called Beant: Just as we came
into this Town, the People were all going to Mass, so that we had a full sight
of the major part of the people of this place; which were but few, in respect
to the largeness of the Town; and of those, the most were Women and Priests.
Here our Guards made us sit down all on a row in the middle of the streets, and
so they commanded the Country People with their Pails and Buckets to fetch us
Water to drink. After we had all drank, away we marched nine miles farther, to
a Market Town called Dervalle: When we came into this Town, we were ranged
along the street for the people to behold us; which were not many, and of them
the major part were Women and Children. After this was over, that the people
began to return to their Houses, being satisfied with the fight of so many
English, which I presume to think, they never saw before, they put us into two
Stables, and there served us a Supper, a piece of brown, or rather black Bread,
and a Cup of Water for each Man. This black Bread was not given to us for the
want of any better to be had; for this Country abounds with plenty of good
Corn; such as Wheat, Rye, Barley, etc. but because they would not go to the
Price of it, although it was very cheap. When we had supped, we went to sleep
on the Horse-dung, not having so much as a little Litter to cover it.

Monday, 29. Early in the morning, we were ready to march, each Man getting a
Cup of Water, but that was all; so away we marched seven miles, to a large Town
called Nesce. Now because there was not a Town upon the Road within less than
twenty miles, we continued here all day in an Inn, whose Yard and Stables did
contain us all: They gave us here for our Dinner about an Ounce of Meat per
Man, with the Pottage it was boiled in; and at night they gave each Man a piece
of brown Bread: Water was brought in to us in a great Kettle, so that we had
enough of that, and that was all our Drink. At night, we were put up close into
Stables, Weather fair.
and were guarded by the Country People, who brought their Arms along with
them; such as wooden Pitchforks, some Hedging-bills, and here and there one of
the best of them had a Gun; to some of them our Guards gave their Pistols and
Carbines; but, alas, many of them knew no more what to do with them, than those
that never saw one in their lives. I saw one looking upon his Pistol, holding
the Muzzle in his hand, and with the other hand he was tampering with the Lock:
I stood looking on him a good while, thinking by and by to see the foolish Dog
shoot himself; and so he had, if he had not been prevented by one of his
Brother-Clowns, who came to him, and told him the danger of holding the Pistol
in that manner; and so showed him which end he should hold in his hand: Another
of them in the night I saw take the Candle, and because it did not burn bright,
he was knocking the Candle into the Muzzle of his Carbine; which, if Fortune
had not certainly favored Fools, he had without doubt shot himself. Here our
Lodgings were in two Stables, indifferent well littered with Straw.

Tursday, 30. Early in the morning, we marched out of this Town, the weather
being fair and clear, we marched twelve miles to a single House, which was an
Inn upon the Road. Here we dined; we had here Meat and Pottage a pretty
considerable quantity; but no other Drink but Water. When we had dined, we
marched eight miles farther, to a small Village called Treverah. When we came
thither, there was no Lodging to be had for us, nor any thing else; so here
they got some of their Country brown Bread, and gave every Man a bit; and also
they gave a Pot of Wine of about three English Pints, amongst ten Men; so we
were all forced to lie down on the cold ground in this open Field, having
nothing over head, saving the Heavens only, whose Spangled Suburbs entertained
our eyes for the most part of the night. Here they also alarmed this place,
that all the Country Boors came in with their Pitchforks and Bills to guard us.

Wednesday 31. By the rising of the Sun we began to March toward Nants; which
was distant ten Miles; when we begun to come near the Town of Nants, they began
to exercise their Whips upon every loose occasion; he that chanced but to stir
out of the Ranks, was sure to be lashed, if any of the Guards were near them;
so that with their continual Whipping, they had whipped all their new Whips to
pieces, that they bought at Reens, and so here they bought more new Whips. When
we had past through great part of the Town, we were brought to an Inn, in the
which place we were kept backwards in the Yards; here they gave us each Man a
penny Loaf of good white Bread; and as for Water, it was brought in by a Horse
in Burreco's, because the Water in the Inn was not fit to drink. Here many
People came to see us, but none were admitted, except they were known to be
such as was like their Grand Master. It happened that there was a Gentleman
came into this Inn to drink, which went up into an upper Room on purpose to
speak to us out of the window; but as soon as he was heard to speak English, he
was immediately hurried out of the House, and withal threatened to be put in
prison: our Drivers had for a long time promised to us, That as soon as we came
for Nants, they would give us a Hogshead of Wine, but instead of giving a
Hogshead, they stop the Money that a Gentleman gave us, enough to buy a
Hogshead, and then they gave a grand pot of sad sorry Wine betwixt ten men,
which was not above each man a glass; toward night they went into the Market,
and bought up a great great deal of the Refuge Flesh in the Market; such as
Sheepsheads, Bullocks Livers and Lights, and the like; so that for our Supper
we had about an ounce and 2/1 per man, with the Pottage this stuff was boiled
in; our want made any thing to go down with a pleasant taste; our lodging was
in the Stables.

Thursday, Aug. 1. We remained still in this place, our Guards had determined
to stay all this day to give us a day of rest: In the morning they gave us each
man a souse Loaf, and at night just such a Supper as we had last night of such
Flesh and Pottage; so after Supper we were put up close into the Stables, and a
Guard kept at the door.

Friday, 2. Early in the morning we made ready, being soon dressed, to march,
receiving every man a souse Loaf before for breakfast and dinner; so away we
marched for a Town called Egreville, distant from Nants 12 Mile; as we were
upon the Road this day, many of us suffered great drought for want of water,
the Road being very dusty, neither did we pass by any Spring or Wells upon the
Road; when we came into the Village called Egreville, we were put into two
Stables, and there we were served with Bread; and as for Drink, we had no other
than what the Well afforded; after our Supper was ended, we were put up into
the Stables to sleep; this afternoon four of our men had contracted to run
away, if any opportunity presented; the which thing they did accomplish this
night.

Saturday, 3. About six in the morning we were called out, and counted, as was
their constant custom; they mist four men; then they began to count over
again, and so they did at least six times; but when they found that four of our
men had deserted themselves, you would admire to hear how Jack Frenchman began
to swear, and to abuse all the rest. Immediately Horses and Men were sent in
pursuit several ways, but none of them could have any intelligence of them; in
the mean time we were all carried into a close Barn, and a Guard set over us
all day: about night our Guard a Marine came back, and taking his Roll of our
names, called us over two by two; and as they came out of the Barn, they were
sorely drubb'd, until such time that he was quite weary, and not able to drub
more; withal commanded them to tell where the four men were which had deserted
themselves; but alas! no man was able of us to give that account; for, I
believe, poor men, they did not know well themselves where they were. But as
for our parts we were all hand-cuft again: and because they had lost some of
their handcuffs, they bound many of our men with Cords; so away we were carried
to the place where we lay last night, having a great Guard over us all night,
giving us nothing but Bread and Water this day.

Sund. 4. Early in the morning we marched out of this Town into a small Town,
whose name I have lost; in this Town we were conducted to a close yard, where
we were served our Dinners, which was brown bread and water; after we dined,
away we marched to a Town which was distant from Egreville twelve miles, called
St. Saravan: now the weather being very Rainy, we went no farther than this
Town, but lodged all night in a Stable; our supper was such as our Dinner,
bread and water; so here we were well guarded all night by the Inhabitants of
the place.

Monday, 5. Early in the morning we were served with bread and water, so away
we marched twenty miles to a Town called St. Vincean, the Road very good; but
by reason of the dustiness of the Road, and the want of water, we suffered
great drought; when we came into Town, we were drove into a great Inn, in which
was a great square Yard; here they served us our Supper, brown bread and water,
but here they gave us each man a small bit of Butter; I am sure the Pot would
not hold six pound that served two hundred, the quantity and goodness were both
alike, for it had many colors, and very nasty stuff; not but that there is
good Butter to be had here, and enough. After we had supped, we went into the
Stables to sleep, where our Lodging was on the dung, having very little or no
Litter under us; the House was also well guarded by the Inhabitants.

Tuesday, 6. Early in the morning we made ready to march, eating our Breakfast
and Dinner both under one, before we came forth, which was brown Bread and
Water, by the strength of which we were to march Twenty Miles, before we were
to eat any more: In this Town, several of the Towns-people came to me, and very
kindly asked me, how I did, and would, if it had been possible have persuaded
me, that I was a Frenchman, and born in this Village, and therefore desired me
to speak my Native Tongue to them; they did not stick to swear, that I was born
here, unto our Guards. From hence we marched Twenty Miles, to a Village, called
St. Jacque, when we came into this Town, we saw our Guard a Marine, who left us
at Egreville, in pursuit of the four Men that deserted. He told us, that he had
taken them; and withal told us, that he had beat them so long, that he had
broke three Sticks over their Backs, which we after knew to be false, for he
pretended he had sent them to Rochefort before us, which when we came there, we
found there was no such Men. In this Town they put us all into an empty House,
where our Lodging was on the bare Floor. At our entrance into the Town they
rang their Bells to larm the People, who by the quantity that appeared, would
have gave a Man to think, that there had lately been some Contagion that had
swept all, or most all away, so few did the People appear. Our Supper was here
Bread, and each Man a Glass of Wine and Water; so after Supper was done, we lay
down to Sleep, but were prevented by their beating a Drum at the Door all
Night; and so like to Negroes they beat and made a noise, as if they had been
the same. The chief Man in this place was upon the Guard to Night, and his
Accoutrements were such, that for want of a belt for his Sword, he was forced
to make it fast to him with a piece of an old Halter; and this Man, our Guard
told me, was the Mayor of the place.

Wednesday 7. About Noon we marched out of this Town; but before we went out of
the Town, we expected we should have some Food; some of our Men asked the Guard
a Marine, if he would give us any Food, for he told him our People were not
able to March without; he presently fell to whipping him with his whip, and
told them they should have none until Night: So away we marched twelve Miles to
a Village, called Shearone; we crossed over a River just by this Town in a
Ferry-boat at twice, all of us; and when we came into the Town, we were put
some into a Barn, and the rest into Stables very well Litter'd; our Supper was
here a piece of brown Bread, and about half an Ounce of Butter per Man, and our
Drink was water: Now we being near the Seaside, they were very fearful we
should make our Escapes in some of their Burtoons, which lay in sight; for the
preventing of which, they got at least 30 Men very well armed with Firelocks to
guard us all Night.

Thursday, 8. Early in the Morning we began to march toward Rochel, which was
distant twelve Miles; within six Miles of Rochel, was a Town in the which they
gave us Bread, and several heads of Garlic, which they heaved into the road
amongst us, to make us scramble in the dirt for it: here they took off all our
Men's handcuffs, and loosed them, because they should not be seen in that manner
in the Town of Rochel. About three in the afternoon we came into the Town of
Rochel, where we saw many of their Soldiers at work, with other Artificers, in
building of Mud-walls, and digging of Moats, and laying out several Lines of
Fortification. As we passed by the Soldiers, they left off their work, and came
running at us open-mouthed, calling us what ugly names they could, and withal
railing against the Prince of Orange most desperately, until such time that
their Officers came and drubb'd them to their work. When we got into the City,
we heard many of the people speak good English, giving us their prayers to God
for our Deliverance; and all that could well come near us, privately gave us
their Charity. When they brought us to a round Tower next the waterside, we
sat down in the Street for the space of half an hour, in the which time the
good people of the place brought us a great quantity of pure white Bread, and
would have given us many things else, but were hindered by those Rogues that
guarded us. After the half-hour stop, as aforesaid, we were all put into this
round Tower. Our Guards here gave us nothing to eat or to drink; but the good
people of this place got leave of the Men that belonged to the Town, that
guarded us, to come in and relieve us, and so they did, for they brought us
white Bread and Butter enough, and a sufficient quantity of good Wine. At
night we lay all down to sleep on the cold Stones.

Friday 9. About Eight in the Morning we were brought out of this Tower; and as
we past along the Streets, the People gave us their Charity. Toward the
further part of the Town, we were ordered to sit down in the Street, where we
were served our Breakfast, viz, a six Denire Loaf, and one Sirdena per Man;
that done, away we marched toward Rochefort, being distant Fifteen Miles, some
call it Twenty one Miles; but by the way, at a single Inn, about half way
between Rochel and Rochefort, we sat down and were served with Bread and Water;
from hence we marched to Rochefort; about Seven in the Evening we entered into
the Town, and so were carried to the Prison; there we found about 200 of
Dutchmen, which were seized upon, and stopped at Bourdeaux. This Prison of
Rochefort, is, I believe, as fine a Prison as any is in Europe, for without
doubt, it was not designed for a Prison, for the Rooms were very neatly laid
out with very fine Chimneys, and curious Glass Lash-lights. It is said, those
Houses were built for the King's Officers to live in; within the Gates of the
Prison was a large Square Court, which did not contain less than 140 Square
Perches, and all overgrown with Grass. In this place, when we came in, we sat
down on the ground, and to every Seven Men we had a Loaf given, and a Can of
pretty good Wine; after we had Eat and Drank, we went into the Prison, where we
lay on the Floor. The Dutchmen that were there before, had Beds to lie on in
very good order; neither were they bare of Clothes, as we were, by reason they
had liberty to save both Clothes and Money, being only stopped and seized in the
River of Bourdeaux and Sherant.

Saturday, 10. About Ten in the Morning the Clerk came in, and took our Names,
with the Ships Names we were taken in; after which, we Mest our selves seven
and seven together. Four days in the week they gave us Meat, but it was but
very little; and at night Beans: The other three days we had Fish; but the
quantity did not exceed an Ounce per Man; and those nights we had Pease. Three
times a day we were served Wine about half a Pint per Man for a Meal, and the
Wine not much to be found fault with. As for Bread, we had about six Pound per
day for seven Men. Every thing now was ten times better than it was when we
came from Thoulon. Our Lodging was on the Floor for the most part of us.

Saturday, 17. Very near 200 more Englishmen were brought hither from Breast,
who came all the way in Irons: They told us, they fared very well upon the
Road, in respect to us. About thirty came also from Port-Lewis, presently
after. Amongst those that came from Breast, were two of those Men that deserted
themselves from us at Egreville. They told me, They had been down at Penbeef,
and there lay a Dane; they got on board of him; but the Dane was so unkind to
them, he would not carry them out, but put them ashore again, and would not
entertain them; and as they were wandering up and down, they knew not which way,
they chanced to cross the Road just as these Men were passing by, who came from
Breast: now because this Provost had lost some of his Men upon the Road, he
seizes these two Lads, and put them in Irons, and brought them hither.

Friday, 23. About Noon, this day of English, Scots, Sweeds, and Danes, were
mustered to the number of 200. and were drawn out of the Prison into a Close,
opposite to the Prison, by twenty Couple together; when we came there, there
was a strong Guard of Soldiers, and with them several Smiths, having all things
for their purpose in readiness; so we were forthwith all put into Irons,
Handcuff'd two and two together; and after this was done, to make us the more
secure to them, they made twenty Couple of us fast together, by ranging a Rope,
and fastening it to each pair of Handcuffs, giving us about three Foot space,
just to tread clear of one another Heels. In this order we were all commanded
to sit down in Rank on the Ground; that done, they gave Shoes to all such as
wanted to perform this long Journey; after this they gave us our Dinners, Bread
and Sirdena's, with a Cup of sour Beverage; our Dinner being ended, we began
our march, crossing the River of Sherant in the Ferry-boats; so away we march
to a Town three Leagues distant, called St. Jan Englae, on the outside of which
Town was an old Castle, and a great Farm adjacent; in this Close we were all
ranged in rank on the ground; so they served us our Supper, which was one Egg
and one Sirdena for a Man, with a Cup of Beverage Wine; that done, we were all
put into a Stable or Barn, wherein was plenty of Straw, where we got a very
good nights Rest, the best I ever got in France.

Saturday, 24. Early this morning, we were rouzed to march, being soon dressed:
so being roped together, and counted, we marched three Leagues, without eatting
or drinking, to a Town called Ogua: In this Town they drew us all together into
a place which formerly was a Burying place for Protestants; here they gave us
our Dinner, which was a Dish of Broth, as they call it; but it was such, that
the like I never tasted for nastiness, having no Meat boiled in it: I do
suppose they threw into it a little nasty Oil, and so, with some brown Bread
put into it, they gave us this stuff for our Dinner; but this stuff fell short,
that it would not serve all the Men; so they afterward gave amongst us about
thirty Eggs; so with this, and a Cup of small Beverage, we made our Dinner:
After Dinner, away we marched to a small Town at the Mouth of the River of
Bourdeaux, called Raan. Entering this Town, they made us all sit down on the
Sand by the Seaside, because that none of the Inhabitants of the Town should
come near us; in which place we sat until such time as they had provided us a
Lodging-place; keeping, in the mean time, strict Guard over us, to hinder the
Towns-people from giving us any thing; so that they could only stand at a
distance, bemoaning our sad condition with showrs of tears, but durst not come
near us, for fear of the Guards. The people of this Town, and likewise of the
Town of St. Jan Angliae, are known to be the major part of them Protestants. We
sat so long on the Sand, before they had provided us Lodging, that the flowing
Tide had driven us up to the very doors; after which, we were driven into an
empty House, in which we lay all night, not suffering one man to go out to ease
himself, so that those that had occasion, were forced to do it where we lay.
They gave us for our Supper an Egg, and one small Sirdena, with a piece of
Bread, and a Cup of Beverage for each Man, so here we slept, though most sadly
annoyed with the ill scent of our own Excrements.

Sunday, 25. We remained in this Town until Two in the Afternoon, and had our
Dinner here, which was one Egg and one Sirdena, with a piece of Bread and a Cup
of Beverage per Man. All this morning was not one Man admitted to go out to
ease himself; in which sad manner we continued, until the two Barques were
ready to take us in. At Two in the Afternoon we came all forth; and as we came
out, we were strictly searched for Knives or Razors, notwithstanding our being
so strictly searched at Rochfort: that done, we were all made fast together in
two parcels, an hundred Men in each parcel, for all we had no further to march
than about a Bowe-shot: but such was their great fear of our being rescued by
these Protestant People, or at least conveying us away from them. Many of the
people of the Town followed us at a distance, heaving after us Apples, Pears,
and Plums, etc. We walked down almost as low as Low-water-mark, where we entered
into two small Barks, called Burtoons, alias Brittoons. When, and as fast as we
came aboard, we were an hundred of us forced down into her small Hold, stowing
one upon the other in a most miserable condition; so that neither with Tongue
nor Pen am I able to express the misery we endured while we were on board the
Barque, both for want of Air and Room; and many times were the Hatches all laid
close over us for some time, until we that were next to them were forced to
heave them open, for fear of stiffing all the rest of the Men. At the first of
the flood, we floated, and away up the River we went, having in our Company the
Pottash, or Guard-ship of that place, to be our Guard. At night they gave us
one Egg, and one Sirdena, with a small bit of Bread and a cup of Water per Man;
so here we remained in a most miserable condition, not having room to sit,
stand, or lie down.

Monday, 26. We continued still on board the Barques, anchoring every Tide of
Ebb, the Wind being Easterly, so upon the Flood turned it up the River. Our
whole days allowance to day was a small bit of Bread, with one Egg, and one
Sirdena, and a cup of Water per Man, continuing still on board the Barque, in a
most miserable condition.

Tuesday, 27. About Noon this day we got up as high as Bourdeaux, anchoring
opposite to the Town. As soon as the News of our being there was got ashore,
off came the People of all sorts and sizes, both gentle and simple, and besides
a very great number stood on the Shoreside. Those that came off to us were not
suffered to come near us; yet some of our people did get some relief by
stealth, and did privately convey some Letters ashore. About Four in the
Afternoon, they gave us each Man a Bisket-Cake, and two Sirdena's, and a cup of
Wine. Supper being done, several of our Men were put into a great flat Boat,
to give more room for the rest: but their Lodging was this night very bad, for
about Nine at night it began to thunder, lighten, and rain, as if Heaven and
Earth would have met; in the mean time, our poor people lay in an open Boat,
having no shelter at all; nor in the morning any dry Clothes to shift
themselves; but if they had, they could make no shift, by reason of their
Irons; which would not admit of any such thing.

Wednesday, 28. About Eight this morning we were all put into two flat Boats,
in order to our passage up the River: in these Boats also we were stowed very
close, but yet not half so close as before. Ere we loosned from before the
Town, off came an English Merchant, who got permission to share amongst us some
Money which he had collected for us amongst the rest of our English Merchants:
He gave amongst us very near Twelve Pound sterling, and also several French
Merchants gave us Loaves of Bread, and Jars of Wine and Brandy, and several
roasted Geese; all of them wishing us well. Our English Merchants promised us.
That they would write to England, and give an account of us. About Flood, we
loosed, and away we went, until the Tide was done; then we came to an Anchor
opposite to a single House on the North-side of the River, where we staid until
the Ebb was done. Our Supper was two Sirdena's per Man, with Bread and
Beverage; so the first of the Flood away we went, Sail and Oars.

Thursday, 29. About Noon this day we were tract up as high as the Town of
Langoon; a little higher on the North side was a small Village, opposite to
which we Dined; our Dinner was one Egg, and one Siderna per Man, with Bread and
Beverage, as at other times; at night we came to a small Town on the North-side
of the River, called Quodero, here we went ashore all of us, and lay all Night
in an empty House, our Supper was Mutton and Broth; but as for the Mutton, the
quantity was so extreme small, that one Man might with ease eat Twenty Men's
allowance; with about Two Gallons of Beverage for Twenty Men: many that had no
Vessels, such as Drinking-Pots, etc. were forced to put their Broth or Wine
into their Hats: In this savage manner were we often served by these Brutish
Frenchmen. Supper being ended, we went all to sleep on the bare floor, the
House being well guarded round, both within and without.

Friday 30. Early in the Morning we came down to the Boats, being flouted and
scoffed at by the people all the way we we passed, calling us Rebellious Rogues
for Fighting against our lawful King James; one who, as they say, was as
righteous as a God; and withal running out strangely against King William,
calling him Jack Orange, and saying, they would cut his Throat in a short time,
and make us all Gally-slaves; yet for all this, we past along, taking no other
notice of them than this, by laughing at their foolishness: We entered all into
the Boats, and away we went; about Noon they gave to each Man of us for Dinner
one Sirdena, and one Head of Garlic, with Bread and Beverage; and for Supper,
one Egg and one Sirdena, with Bread and Beverage: So we slept all Night in the
open Boats, having no Canopy but the Heavens, the Weather fair and clear.

Saturday 31. In the Morning very early, the Boat-men began to work, tracking
us up the River; sometimes we had at least Thirty to a Boat; about Noon we came
opposite to a great Town on the North-side of the River, called Marmanda, and
went all ashore, where our Guards, upon some suspicion, searched all our Irons,
some they found had broke their Forelocks, to them they gave a sufficient
quantity of drubs with a great stick; so immediately a Smith was sent for to
secure them, and make them faster: That done, we were ordered into the Boats
again, where they gave us our Dinner, one Egg and one Sirdena, with Bread and
Beverage; and for Supper the like. We came to an Anchor close by the Shore,
near no Town, where we lay all Night in the open Boats, having nothing to cover
us: our Bodies being watered with several great showers of Rain.

September, Sunday, 1. In the Morning early we began to put forward, and about
Noon we came opposite to a Town on the North-side of the River, called Laport;
this day they pretended we should make a very great Feast of Flesh; so at, or
about Noon they gave us about an Ounce of Fat Pork; for it is the fashion of
this Country to cut away all the Lean clean off the Pork, and then eat the Fat
after it is Salted. They stopped us about half an hour before the Town, on
purpose to make a show of us to the People, the major part of them standing
laughing at us, as if such foolish Slaves as they are, were not subject to the
fortune of War as well as we: Then we went upwards until night, when they
always came to an Anchor, by reason that there is no Tracking in the Night, for
the many Shoals and Islands there is in the River. At Night they gave us for
Supper one Egg and one Sirdena per Man; so we lay all night in the open Boats,
the Weather fair and clear.

Monday 2. This day we past by several small Towns on both sides of the River,
whose names are insignificant; the people of one of them, when we put ashore,
brought us down into the Boats to sell, several Roasted Geese; those that had
Money amongst us, bought of them very cheap, a good Roasted Goose, not
excelling the price of Six Souse; our Guardians gave us for Dinner one Egg and
one Sirdena, with Bread and Beverage, and the like for Supper; so we lay still
in the open Boats all Night.

Tuesday 3. We continued still on Board the Boats, not going by Night ashore;
our poor bodies lay open to the Dew of Heaven, it Rained on us several great
showers of Rain this Night. By this time we had about Twenty four Men sick,
some of one Malady, and some of an other; our Diet was to day our former
allowance of Eggs, and Sirdena's, and Bread, etc.

Wednesday 4. We continued still on Board the Boats in this sad condition; our
Diet to day was about an Ounce of nasty greasy Pork; and for those that were
sick, that could not eat it, they must fast; for there was nothing else to be
given to them, although all manner of things fitting for the body of Man, for
food, was extreme cheap all over this Country; this we had for Dinner and for
Supper. At Night we came up to a Town on the South Side of the River, called
St. Anns, here we Anchored very near the Shore, about Eight at Night it began
to Thunder, and Lighten, and Rain, as if Heaven and Earth would have met; we
got a thin Sail to heave over the after-part of the Boat; but that did us but
little service, it not being proof against Water, we were all desperate wet:
The people of the Town kept a strong Guard all Night on the Shore. About Eleven
this Night died one of our sick Men, named Thomas Smith, who was lately, Mate
of a Virginia Ship, he was put in Irons to one of his Sons, who when his Father
was dead, was yet kept in Irons fast to his dead Father, for the space of
Eight hours; the sight of which was able to melt a heart of stone to see a
poor Youth weeping and lamenting the loss of his Father, and at the same time
to be Chained to him.

Thursday, 5. About Eight this Morning they carried ashore the body of the Dead
man, by Four men; but like themselves they carried him, one taking hold of a
leg, another of an arm, and so dog-like, heaved him into a hole by the
way-side: They gave us our Dinner here before we came from before this Town,
which was about an Ounce of rusty Pork with Bread and Beverage, and the same
for Supper: By Night we came to a Town on the South Side of the River called
Ratta, at which Town we went ashore, where we lay all night in a Barn, having a
great Guard over us all night, quite round the House.

Friday, 6. While we lay in this Barn, sick and well all together, we were most
sadly annoyed by the ill scents of our men's Excrements; for they were not
admitted to go forth to ease themselves, the Inhumanity of the Guards was such;
much like to the rest of their Contrymen, who are, by all that I can discern
of them in general, the most inhumane, barbarous Wretches, that ever lived
since the Creation. In the Morning one of our Boys spied a hole in the Wall of
the Barn, that looked into another Barn, in which was a Wine Press, and
abundance of Grapes ready for the Press; one of our boys crept in at the hole,
and handed out to the most part of our men their hats full of Grapes, which was
a great refreshing to us, besides filling our empty stomachs. About Nine in the
morning we came out of this Barn; and as we were marching down toward the
Boats, several of our sick men complained to the Provo of their extreme
illness; he presently told them in French, That they must pray to God for
forgiveness, for from him they must not expect any Mercy or Comfort. At Dinner
they gave us one Sirdena, and one Onion betwixt two men; and for Supper just
the same. At night we were brought up opposite to a Town called Burdoon, on the
South side of the River; close by the Shore side, we were brought to an Anchor:
When the rumor of being there was spread abroad about the Town, both Gentle
and Simple came down to stare on us, and so spend their Verdict, and so away
again. All this night we lay in the Boat, having a great Guard over us all
Night on the Shore side.

Saturday, 7. Before it was day, we weighed from before the Town, the morning
being foggy, and the day very hot; as soon as it began to clear up, we saw the
high Granada Hills very plain, the middle of them bearing South from us. Our
Dinner was one Sirdena per man, and one Onion betwixt two men, with Bread and
Beverage. About two in the Afternoon we came to a Shoal place in the River,
where we were all forced to get out of the Boat to lighten her. So we walked
about a mile, at the end of which the Boat put ashore, and those that were able
to walk a mile, came out of the boat; that done, we took up that little baggage
we had, and away we marched, leaving our sick men on the shore, until such time
as they could get Carts to carry them. About a mile from the place where we
landed, was a Town called Granada: close by the Gates of the Town we sat down
until the sick men were brought to us. We sat there at least two hours before
the Carts came; in the mean time some of us joined our stocks together, and
sent into the Town for some Wine by a Soldier, that was as a Spectator, looking
upon us; he took several of our Jars, and brought them full of Wine, and the
rest of our Money back, when we our selves did not expect that our Money would
have bought a quarter so much; but Wine was so extraordinary cheap, that by
Retail it was sold for less than three halfpence per Gallon, that is, eight
deniers the grand Pot; and the Wine was also very good; when our sick men came
to us, we all entered the Gates of the Town, and were conducted to the
Market-house, and by it was an empty house, where they used to put dry Goods,
as Wheat, etc. into this house we were all for close crammed, that we had
scarcely room to stand one by the other; here many of our men got their loads
of the Juice of the Grapes, insomuch that they fell to fighting one with the
other; the Guards coming in to part them, began to strike several of them, but
they immediately left off fighting one with the other, and fell foul on the
Guards, but alas! they came off by the worst, being all hand-cufft two and two
together. At night they brought us our Supper, Bread and Onions, with some few
Eggs and Sirdena's, but instead of serving us, they pa^^ed us, heaving both the
Eggs, and Sirdena's, and Onions at us, with all their force; I had a blow just
on my belly with a great Onion, that truly I thought it had beat all the breath
out of my body, and the Eggs were most of them broke all to pieces, the rest
were thrown on the ground in the middle of the house, just as if they were
serving so many Hogs. Before we went to sleep, they took many of the sick men
out of the house, and put them into another, to make a little more room for the
rest to lie down: That being done, we went to sleep, but were most sadly
annoyed before morning, with the sad stink of our men's excrements; the Towns
Guard being so like themselves, they would not suffer any man to go forth to
ease himself.

Sunday, 8. After our Guards had been at Mass, we came forth out of this place,
and so with two Ropes they made us fast together, about Eighty men or
thereabout, in a Rope; for some of the sick they had provided two Carts, but
two Carts was not sufficient to carry all of them; the rest they made fast to
us in the Ropes, on purpose that if they could not march, we might drag them
along, which we were forced to do by their continual drubbing us with Whips,
Swords, Sticks, and with their Guns likewise, if we did but stop to the cries
of our sick men; just as I have seen Carters in England do to their Horses when
they were upon a dead pull, giving each one a lick to mend his pace; so did the
barbarous Frenchmen to us; many times the sick fell down on the ground, not
being able to stand; then were these poor souls dragged along on the ground by
one arm, with a Frenchman following them, drubbing them, crying, March ye
buggering Dogs, and so never leave drubbing, until he had made them to stand;
and if by no means they could, then they would use them after this manner; They
would take them out of the rope, and so heave them into the Carts, like so many
dead Dogs one upon the other; so that I think it would melt a heart of stone to
behold it. I saw one of these Rogues drub a poor man that had the Calenture,
and was at the same time as senseless as a Stone, most desperately, to cause
him to make more room in the Cart; and alas, the poor Man he cried at his
Blows, but did not conceive what the occasion of them was; the next day the Man
died of his Distemper; in this manner we marched two Leagues, and the end of
which, we came to a single Inn by the Road-side; here we sat down to eat our
Dinner and Breakfast, which was always given us at one time, and now it was a
piece of Bread, and one Egg per Man, with a Glass of Wine; Dinner being ended,
Tholuse, Languedo.
away we marched three Leagues further to the great City of Tholuse; about
Eight at Night we came close to the Gates of the City, where thousands of
People of all sorts and sizes came out to see so many Englishmen as we were in
that Condition, but none was suffered to come near us, except by stealth; on
the outside of the City we were all drove into to a cold, wet Stable, Sick and
Well all together; where we had neither bit of Bread, nor drop of Drink given
us; neither would they let those that had any Money buy any; the place was
guarded all round by the Inhabitants of the place.

Monday, 9. This Morning about Ten of the Clock, we were all brought out of the
Stable, and as we were counted, so we were roped together; we were then ordered
to sit down on the Ground in the Close, just without the Stable; and here, to
make us amends for our Supper, they gave us this great Dinner, viz. about an
Ounce of nasty, rusty, greasy Pork, such it was, that many of our hungry
Stomachs could not away with; but withal, we had a souse Loaf, and a Cup of
Wine and Water per Man; Dinner being thus ended, we remained in this place to
be made a show of to the People; the end for which we traveled about the
Country; for the People of the place gave Money to come in to see us, and the
Rogues the Guard told them, that we were a Man of Wars Men's Company, whom they
had taken; also alleging us to be a pack of Rebellious Rogues, that had fought
against Righteous King James, and that by the King of France we were condemned
to be made Gally-slaves of, and most of the common sort of People believed it,
but the better Sort of People were more inquisitive into the truth of the
matter; this we understood by some of our People that spoke French very well;
who told them, that as yet, they had not as we could hear, gained that point of
Honor as to take an English Man of War; Five of our Men was left here in their
Hospital.
but otherwise we were of us at least thirty Ships Companies of Merchants Ships
Men, and most of them Ships of no force at all; several of the Gentry seemed to
pity us; but having Information, that we were not of their Opinion, but on the
contrary, that we were Calvinists; their Charity to us was barefooted and cold;
while we lay in this place, I do believe there was not less than Twenty several
Orders of Clergymen came in to see us, telling us we were wretched People, for
fighting against God and the True Religion; withal, telling us, That their
Beads which they showed to us, and their Prayers in their Cloister, was of
greater force than our Arms of England; they inquired of us, if there were
amongst us any Roman Catholics? we told them, none of the English; but we had
one Irishman that was, which was a poor silly Soul, that scarcely knew Good
from Evil; we brought them to him; and when they came to him, he understood not
one word they spoke; they crossed him, and that the French had done before by
taking him; and blessed him, and that was but small benefit to him; so away they
went; the poor Soul kissed their Sleeves at their departure, to show his
Obedience to their Church. About Two in the Afternoon, we marched from hence;
the People flocked to see us in a great number, both Gentry and others: For
this City is as near as I can guess, who was born in London, to be very near,
if not quite as big as the City of London within the Walls; and besides, the
City is very populous, the City is walled round with a Brick-wall, with a
Trench or Ditch without the Wall, but that was filled up, and Gardens made in
the same; there is little or no Suburbs belonging to this City, except it be
here and there a straggling House; and about the Town-walls, I could not see one
piece of Ordnance, nor any Fortification; and I am sure we walked the Wall three
quarters of it Circuit; we had not marched above a quarter of a Mile, but we
saw two Men that was broke on the Wheel not long since; as far as I could
gather, it was for being Hugonots or Calvinists; and we had several Men with us
that spoke French naturally; we marched two Leagues further, to a Town call
Castinata; when we came there, we were made to sit down on the cold Ground,
until they had served us our Supper, which was a halfpenny Loaf, and a Cup of
Wine; that being done, we were put into a Stable, and lay on hot Horse-dung,
like so many Swine, the Town being all in Arms to guard us.

Tuesday, 10. Early in the Morning we were counted like so many Sheep, and we
were roped together, and away we marched three Leagues to a Town called
Basiego, just about Twelve of the Clock we entered the Town; just at our
Entrance, we met a great Concouse of People attending a Funeral, which was
solemnized after this manner: I taking especial notice thereof in all its
Ceremonies, which was thus: The Priest walking before the Corpse reading the
Service, which was carried on a Bier very neatly dressed, and before him was
carried a wooden Crucifix, the Priest was dressed up in his Pontifical Habit, and
after him came one carrying Holy Water, sprinkling the People as he past; but
that which made me almost ready to Laugh, was to see a Woman that came after,
assisting the Ceremony with two Tallow Candles burning in one hand, and her
Apron held before the Candles with the other, to keep the VVind from blowing
them out, the Tallow of the Candles running about her fist, the Sun at the same
time shining very resplendently: The Ceremony was no sooner done, but in comes
the Priest into the Town, and pulls off the old Trumpery of the Pope, and got
amongst the Crowd staring on us, and by his Countenance was very well pleased
at the sight, to see so many Englishmen in Irons, and Roped together, sitting
on the Ground in the middle of the Street, eating an Egg, and one Onion, with
Bread and Beverage for their Dinner; by this time they had followed their
drubbing us so close, that they had broke all their Sticks, and most of their
Swords, and the Barrel of one of their Guns about our Backs: we have now about
thirty of our Men very Sick in the Carts, who never mist of drubbing scarcely
two hours in the day; some because of their weakness, they were not able to get
up into the Carts; and some for stirring in the Carts, sometimes to get a
little ease; we marched two Leagues further to a Town, called Villa Franko,
where we sat down in the middle of the Streets, and got our Suppers, one Egg
per Man, and one Onion betwixt two Men; when our Supper was ended, we were
drove into a Stable, where our Lodging was on the hot Horse-dung, the House
being guarded all round by the People of the Town.

Wednesday, 11. Very early in the Morning we were brought forth, being roped
together, and counted like Sheep, the Sick put into the Carts, who never mist
of drubs, for that they had duly paid, and that very often in a day; away we
marched three Leagues to a large Town, called Castela; when we came into the
Town, we sat down in the Streets in three Ranks; here they gave us for Dinner,
three small Sirdena's per Man, with Bread and Beverage; several of our People
would have bought something else of the People, but durst not, except it were
by Stealth; there was one of our Men went to buy of a poor Woman, a little
plate of fried Meat, which was discovered by the Rogues the Guards, who took
away the Meat from the Woman by force, and hove away the Meat, Plate, and all
into the middle of the Streets, broke the Plate, and spoiled all the Meat, and
this was their Cruelty, who would not give us Victuals scarcely enough to keep
Life and Soul together; neither would they suffer those that had Money to buy
any, except it were by stealth: we marched from hence three Leagues to a Town,
called Villa Picta, it was Eight at Night before we entered into this Town, we
being most of us most desperately tired with this days Walk, which was six
Leagues, and every League in Languedock, contains four Italian Miles; when we
came into the Town, we were all put into a great Stable, our Supper was one
Sirdena per Man, with Bread and Beverage; our Lodging was on the hot
Horse-dung, so in this manner we rested our weary Bones: This Afternoon we saw
the Highland of Barcelona in Spain, very plain.

Thursday, 12. Early in the morning we began our march, and marched three
Leagues to a Town called Villa Sancta, in which place we sat down in the middle
of the streets in ranks; here they served for Dinner, a small bit of bread,
with one Egg, and a cup of sad Beverage Wine, a very poor Dinner. Our sick men
were this day, as well as others, sorely drubb'd with Swords, Whips, and
Sticks, because by their weakness many of them were not able to help themselves
up and down; from hence we marched three leagues farther, to a Town called
Carkasonna; when we came there, the Inhabitants of the Town shut the Gates
against us, and would not let us enter until such time as the Provost, who was
our Grand Signior, made use of his utmost Authority, by showing his Commission,
etc. Then the Gates were opened, and in we all entered, where we were conducted
to a very large stable, in which we were all put, sick and well. Our Supper was
a bit of fat Pork, about the bigness of a Wallnut, and bread to the quantity of
a souce loaf, and each man a cup of Beverage. Our lodging was on the hot
horse-dung, which was as hot as any horse-dung whatsoever. This Town of
Carkasonna is a very fine fenced Town, with good Fortifications about it, yet
in all the Fortifications I could not see any Ordnance, mounted or unmounted:
The Town seemed to be very populous, but at this time there were no men in Arms
in this Town, such as Soldiers, etc.

Friday, 13. Before we came out of this Stable, they served us our Dinner,
which was a small bit of Pork, like that last night, with Bread and Beverage.
After that was served us, we were roped together, in readiness to march; our
sick men were likewise crowded into two Carts: About Ten of the Clock we
marched hence four Leagues, we marched to a Town called Porsarick; here we made
a stop in the streets for about half an hour; in the mean time several women
came to us, and distributed among us their Aprons full of Grapes, and took
great pity on us; [we were often, and in many places, much pitied by many of
the tender Sex]: At last we were conducted to a great stable, that held most of
us that were well in health, and the rest were put into another stable with the
sick men; they gave us nothing for Supper, saving one small Loaf, worth about
Six Deniers, without ever a drop of drink, and if we called for any water, in
came the Rogues our Guards, and would fall to drubbing us with their drawn
Swords most furiously; I was at this time most bitterly inflamed to see their
barbarous usage, and withal being very thirsty, walked with my Mate to the
door, desiring them to do that favor, as to give me a little water, but I
partly guessed before what would be the effect of it; in comes one of the
Guard, and salutes me over the Head and Shoulders with his drawn Sword, and
withal gave me a prick on the Arm; the lights being all out, I took him a good
box under the ear, and struck him down to the ground, and then I seconded it
with a kick on the guts; that done, up he gets, and away he runs to call in the
rest of the Guards; but I immediately slunk into a hole; in comes the Guards
with Swords drawn, and Guns cockt, looking to see if they could find who it was
that struck the Corporal, but could not find him, by reason it was done in the
dark, and I my self lay down, as if I had been fast asleep. This night they
were very fearful of our rising against them; so the Mayor of the Town was
brought to us, to examine the business; to him we made our Complaint; he to
appease us, promised that we should have a good Supper, and all things
necessary, as Wine, and Straw to lie on, etc. that done, away he goes, and
presently instead of performing his promise, he forthwith orders a strong Guard
to be set round the house, both within and without, and this was all we got of
Mr. Mayor, he being very like the rest of his Countrymen, viz. great and
notorious Liars, and deceivers of men. Close by my side was posted a Sentinel,
a poor innocent fellow, who not long after he was placed there, fell fast
asleep; I having just at my Entry a good view of a Henroost, went with my Mate,
and each of us got a very good Pullet; that done, down we came to our places,
without any noise, putting our Poultrey into the knees of our Breeches; our
Guard at the same time was fast asleep on the Ground, and with ease might any
man have disarmed him, but alas his looks did show him to be a poor Innocent
Fellow, and by that means we let him alone.

Saturday, 14. Early this morning we made ready to march, all the Town Guards
that watched us last Night, going with us: Before we got out of the Town, at the
Stable door where the rest of our men lay, we saw the dead body of one of our
men upon a ladder, whose name was Alexander Montgomery: Away we marched; and
when we had opportunity on the Road, we picked our Fowls. This part of the
Country is very mountainous, and yet abounds with plenty of Vineyards and
Olive-yards: On the very scraggy Rocks and Mountains, grow great plenty of
sweet Herbs, such as Thyme, and Lavender, Rosemary, Mirtles, and other
odoriferous Herbs. This morning two of our men did get out of the Rope, and so
slipped into the cranny of a Mountain, and knocked off their Irons, and went away
undiscovered by any of the Guards. After we had marched three Leagues, we came
to a lone Inn by the Road side, near a Town called Puzola; we were here
conducted into our old Halls, the stinking Stables; here we got our Fowls
dressed, and made a great Feast; we gave four parts in five to the poor sick men,
who because they were not able to get up and down, and help themselves, they
would not suffer them to come out of the Carts from Morning till Night, but sat
there all Weathers that blew; they gave us here for dinner a small bit of Pork,
with Bread and Beverage: As soon as we had Dined, we marched out, and being
counted out, as was their usual manner, they mist two of the number, which were
the Two that got away; they counted us over at least six times, but when they
found that two Men were gone, the Provost, with the rest of them, was in a
desperate Rage, swearing by all their gods, that they would travel us to death;
and when we could march no longer, they swore they would shoot us, and let us
lie dead on the Road: But alas! all their swearing at us was but to small
effect; for although many of our people saw them when they went, yet no Man
would say any thing of it to them, for fear lest they might be closely pursued,
and so taken; and if they should be taken again by any of these Rogues, it were
better for them they had never been born. Away we marched one League, to a lone
House, by the which was a close place, wherein they used to keep Sheep, into
this place were we drove, sick and well, all together; when we came in, we
found it to be a most loathsome place, full of Sheps-dung, and the Dung full of
Maggots; there was no place for any Air to come in to us, saving a small hole
or two in the Wall. Before Morning we were most of us well-near stifled, what
with the stink, and for want of air together: Our Supper here was a piece of
Bread and a Cup of Beverage; when our Supper was served us, the House was beset
all round with a strong Guard.

Sunday 15. About Six in the Morning we sat forth out of this place, the
Morning Rainy, with all the Guard that guarded us last Night, which were about
Fifteen in number, besides our usual Guard, which were about Fourteen Horse and
Foot; we marched Three Leagues, to a Town called Capista, and all was very
foul; when we came to Capista, which is a fine Walled Town, we walked almost
round the Town before they could find an empty Stable big enough to hold us; at
last they found a Stable that held us all, and would have held as many more, if
there had been so many more of us: Here they gave us our Dinner, which was a
piece of Bread worth Six Deniers, and about half an ounce of Fat Pork, with a
Cup of Beverage per Man. Dinner was no sooner ended, but away we marched; We
had been on the Road not much above an hour before it began to Thunder,
Lighten, and Rain, as if Heaven and Earth would have met; along we marched
through thick and thin for the space of three hours in this sad Weather: (the
Water runningout of the Knees of our Breeches) until we came to a fine fenced
Town on the top a Hill, called Besias, Three Leagues distant from Capista: When
we came near the Town, we that were before stayed for those behind, which were
quite foundred; thus in this wet condition we stayed in the Road near half an
hour in the Rain, until that they were come up to us: That done, we entered the
Town, and were put, as near as I can judge, into the Town Hall; here we staid
near Two Hours in this wet condition, as thick and close one by another as we
could well stand; at last we were carried out of this place through the Rain,
the Spouts of the Houses running, or rather pouring on our Heads for the space
of half a Mile, and in this wet condition were we drove into a large cold
Stable, where we had nothing to lie down on but the cold Ground, and the wet
Horse-Dung, our Clothes being as wet on our backs, as if we had been plunged in
a River, and could not get one rag off our backs, because of our Irons. For
Supper we had a small Loaf of Bread, with about half a mouthful of Meat; the
quantity of the Meat, I am sure, was not sufficient to give a Jack-Daw a meal,
and that which was of it was most part Bullocks-Liver and Lights. The Woman
that brought it in to us, brought it in a Earthen-pan under her Arm, covered
with another Earthen Pan; so that any one may judge whether Meat for Two
Hundred Men could well be carried in the nature aforesaid: With our Bread and
Meat, and each Man a Cup of pricked Wine, we made our Supper; that done, we lay
all down to sleep on the wet ground.

Monday 16. The Morning, and all the rest of the Day being Rainy, we continued
still in this Stable; about Ten in the Morning they gave us some dry Straw,
when we had little need of it, our Clothes being almost dry on our backs by the
heat of our bodies; in this Stable some of our Men found out a door that
entered into a Wine-Cellar, in which was a Butt of special strong Wine, into
which Cellar a little French -- Boy and others got in, and handed out to the
Men all their Pots and Jars full of this good Wine, which did so heat and
comfort many of them, that they soon forgot sorrow. In fine, before it was
discovered, we had drank out the best part of the Wine. Our Dinner was to Day,
a small Loaf per Man, and about a mouthful of boiled Guts, and Lights, and
Liver, and half a pint of sour Wine; for Supper a Loaf and Wine: This day died
a Man named Francis Evans a Carpenter.

Tuesday 17. About 10. this Morning we came out of the Stable into an open
place, and being all roped together, we in our usual manner were served
accordingly, which was Bread and Beverage. Twenty five of our Sick-Men we left
here in their Hospital, and yet we had at least Twenty Five or Thirty more that
were sick and weak. We marched from this place Four Leagues, to a Town called
Pezeain, a very fine walled Town, standing in a very fine level place, and well
Moated round. Into this Town we entered, and were put into a very large Stable,
well littered with Straw. For Supper, we had our usual Allowance of Bread, and
Pork, and Beverage; so here we had a very good Nights-Lodging.

Wednesday 18. We being roped together, and counted, as was their usual manner,
we marched four Leagues, to a Town called Dishean, where we went into a Stable,
and had for our Dinner Bread and Beverage, with a little bit of Pork, of about
an ounce weight. From thence we marched three Leagues, to a Town called Punian,
where we took up our Lodging in a Stable; our Supper was Bread and Beverage: So
we slept in the Stable on wet Horse-Dung. In the middle of the Night it began
to rain very fast, the Stable not being well covered, the rain came down upon
us, and almost floated us: Thus, and such like, was our Lodging in this
Country.

Thursday, 19. The Weather being still rainy, we continued still in this Stable
all this day: We had several Priests and Gentry came to gaze on us; who gave us
no comfort, but derided us, our King and Religion: Telling us withal, that
King James had routed General Schomberg in Ireland; and moreover, that next
Summer, England also was to be theirs. They said also to us, Your condition is
here very bad, but if you were in England, your case would be far worse; for
says they, There is at present a very sore Famine, and no Bread hardly to be
had for any Money. By this I did conjecture, that they had in their Country a
Lying-Oracle, and that Truth to them was a great Stranger. We were obliged to
give them the hearing of all their Stories, although we did not believe one
word they said. They gave us here for Dinner a piece of Bread, and a small bit
of Mutton, with Beverage; but so small was the quantity of Mutton, that one Man
might very well have eaten twenty Men's shares: So that of that little they
gave, bread was nine parts in ten of our Provision: The rest was not worth the
naming; our Beverage was sometimes pretty good in those places where they could
get no bad Wine; but many times it was worse than Water. For Supper they gave
us Bread and Beverage; and the Water they boild their Rusty-Pork in, under the
Name of Bon-Supper: This was our Fare; so here we slept this Night also, in the
same Stable, on the Wet -- Horse-Dung.

Friday 20. Early in the Morning the sick Men were put into two Carts, and the
rest of us being roped together and counted, began to march, wading through
several Rivers, whose Depth took us up to the Belly, the Stream running so
swift with the Freshes of the last great Rain, that it was like to overset our
weak Bodies: but our being forty or fifty in a Rope, the one held up the other.
As we past along by the Road side we had leave to enter into the Vineyards and
gather Grapes, which we did plentifully. Many Vineyards in this Country lie as
open to the Road, as many Commons do in England or elsewhere. We marched about
four Leagues before we came to Mompellier, which is as fine a walled Town, and
as curiously situated as ever I beheld a Town in my Life, the bigness of the
City I do verily belive to be about the bigness of the City of Bristol; but
about it is a far more pleasant Landscape, having about it several curious
Champion Hills, and fine Vine-yards and Olive-yards, and about four or five
Mile to the Southward of the Town is the fair Mediterranean Ocean, viz. the Bay
of Languedock. When we came near the Town, we were put into a very large
Stable, without the Walls of the Town. This Country is the best fitted with
large Stables of all the places that ever I was in in all Christendom, which
have been many. Here it is counted a very small Stable that will not hold two
Troops of Horse. And as for their Building, they are built with very much cost
and charge; most of them are built of hewn Stone, all arched over head most
neatly. In this Stable which we were all put in, I took especial notice of one
thing that is just at every Horses place all round the Stable: upon the Wall
was writ the Name of one Saint or other; what might be the humor of it I
cannot guess: but this I am certain must be the end of the design, either for
the Horses to worship, or else the Ostler; the Letters were large Capitals.
They gave us here for Dinner our usual Quantity of Pork with Bread, and
Beverage; that done, away we marched two Leagues farther, to a small Village
called Columbeas, where we were put into two Stables; our Supper was Bread and
Beverage; and our Lodging on wet Horse-dung.

Saturday 21. It being a very dreadful Night all the last Night for Thunder,
Lightning and Rain, and continued until about eleven this Morning, about which
time it began to clear up: so here we had our Dinner, which was a bit of fat
Pork of about three quarters of an Ounce Weight, and a piece of Bread, and a
Cup of Beverage: that done, we were roped together and counted, and away we
marched four Leagues to a Town called Imergos; here we were put into a loathsome
place where they used to keep Sheep in: our Lodging was on the Sheeps Dung,
having no Straw at all: some of us got the Hurdles to lie on, such as they fold
Sheep with, but the most part lay on the ground: It would grieve the Heart of a
Stone to hear the Groans all Night of our sick and dying Men which lay in this
sad Condition. Our Supper was a piece of Bread, and a Cup of Beverage, which
was far worse than Water: so here we lay until the break of Day.

Sunday 22. We were rouzed very early this Morning out of our stinking Den, and
being counted like so many Sheep, we were roped together, not without many
Drubs, for those we had daily and hourly: so away we marched for Cicile. The
People of Imergos told our Guards that much of the Country was overflown that
we were to pass through to day, and therefore advised them to get Carts to
carry us over the deepest of the Floods. According to their advice they got two
Carts, which when they came to a small place not above Knee-deep, they carried
us over in the Carts, and so dismissed the Carts: And within less than Pistol
shot of this Place, was a Place twice as deep, and ten times the length; over
this they made us to wade, which took us up to the middle, and with the
strength of the Stream was like to have carried us off the Ground, but that we
were roped together in great quantities, so we held up one another; thus were
we all tantalized with their Carts, making us to wade all the deep Places we
came at this day. About two in the Afternoon we came to the Town of Cicile,
being four Leagues distant from Imergos; in which Town we were all put into a
Stable, where they gave us for Dinner, Bread and Beverage, so we all continued
here until Night; for Supper they gave us Mutton and Broth, but so small a
quantity was the Mutton, that one Man might easily have eat as much as twenty
Men had; the Broth they served in such a manner, that he that had not a Cup or
Dish of his own, was forced to take his Broth in his Hat or Cap; by this means
one of our Men got scalded most sadly: At Night the People brought us Straw to
lie on, so here we got a good Nights Lodging.

Monday 23. In the Morning, about six a Clock, we made ready to march (being
soon dressed) to a City called Arlaa^, four Leagues distance: We past most of
this day through Fenny Land, that was all grown over with Tamarass, and by a
River side: Before we came to Arlaa^, we crossed over this River in a
Ferry-boat, at three several times, Sick and Well: On this side of the River
they discharged the Carts which could not pass over in the Ferryboats; we that
were well, marched about a Mile to the Town, but those that were sick lay on
the Ground until such time as they had got Carts to bring them to the Town.
Before we entered the City of Arlaa^, we passed over a Bridge made with Boars,
and so mored in the River, Head and Stearn, over which passed all their
Carriage, such as Carts, etc. This Town of Arlaa^ is a very fine Town; and
close by the Walls runs the River, and in the River is much Crast, such as
Settees and Tartans, etc. This River is that which divides Languedock from
Provence. When we had past almost through the Town, at the Eastermost end, they
put us into a Stable, and gave us Bread and Beverage for Dinner; several of our
Men that had no Money, being almost starved with their sad Allowance, did
protest jointly, that they would not march out of this Stable, unless they
would give them more Victuals; and if their Law would bear them out to kill
them that were their Prisoners of War, they were willing rather to die by the
Sword, than to be starved and traveled to death. They hearing our Resolution,
gave us our Supper here; which was pretty considerable, a Souse Loaf, and about
an ounce and half of Pork, with Beverage, which was large Allowance to what
they used to give us: So here we lay all Night, being well guarded by the Town
Guards, who were indifferent civil to us, admitting us to go forth to ease our
selves; which we took as a great kindness, being most an end denied that small
Privilege, but made us ease our selves where we lay.

Tuesday 24. Early in the morning we marched out of the Town of Arlaa^; the way
was level, but extreme stony. Just as we parted with the Town, we passed
through a Burying-place, where we saw hundreds of Tombs hewn out of solid
Stones of a vast breadth and length, most of them between 8 and 9 foot long,
covered with a Stone of a vast weight: The People of this place did tell us,
that this Town was anciently the Seat of their Kings; and by the infinite
quantity of Tombs, we could conjecture no less: which may signify that much
Gentry did attend the Place, as is usual in the Court of Kings: This is the
first Town we entered in Provence; we marched 3 Leagues unto a lone House, where
there was no Entertainment to be had for us, nor scarce any thing to be had for
Money: Here our grand Driver, or Provost, gave us five Souse a Man, in a place
where nothing fitting for Men was to be had; we were forced to give them their
own price, what they pleased to ask, for moldy Horse-bread, or any thing else
that the House would afford. After our Dinner was ended, we marched full five
Leagues to the Town of Sealoon; the way was extraordinary level, though very
stony; so that for the space of five Leagues, we past by but one or two Houses.
About seven in the Evening we entered the Town of Sealoon; our entertainment
here was very bad, not for any want there was in the Place, but through the
barbarousness of the People; we were all put into a large Stable, Sick and Well
altogether; and for every thing we had, we paid double the price: When we had
got what we could, we went to sleep on the hot Horse-dung, like so many Swine,
having a great Guard both within and without.

Wednesday 25. Early in the Morning we made ready to march, the Sick were put
in two Carts; many being in a manner dead, those they hailed out by the Legs,
and by the Throats; many of them were so weak, that they were not able to feed
themselves; yet these Wretches would not desist, but kept drubbing them daily
and hourly with their Swords, and punching them with the muzzle of their Guns.
We marched three Leagues to a single House by the Road side; the way very
mountanous: at this fingle House we sat down, and got our Dinner, which was a
brown Loaf, and half a pint of Beverage. From hence we marched three Leagues,
to a great Town called Anis; we were no sooner entered into the Town, but were
conducted to a very large Stable, the Mobile thronging about us, scoffing at
us; we were scarcely entered into the Stables, but several Stones were hove in
at the Windows, one of them cut one of our Men through the Lip; here we were
barbarously used; our Supper was a Souse Loaf, and about half an ounce of salt
Cheese, with a cup of Beverage Wine; we slept here like so many Hogs on the hot
Horse-dung.

Thursday 26. About ten in the Morning they put the Sick into the Carts; those
that were not able to help themselves, were most miserably drubb'd, hailing
them along on the ground like so many dead Dogs, to the Carts, and there beat
them in a most dreadful manner; one of our Men that was thus served, died
within an hour after he was put into the Cart: We that were well, were roped
together after our usual manner; and away we marched, the People many of them
hooping and scoffing, and the Boys throwing Stones at us: The Rogues, our
Guards, had given us such a Character of Rebels, that had rebelled against our
Righteous King, as they called him, that the People thought verily, I suppose,
that we were worse than Devils; and withal told them, that we were going to the
Galleys: We marched about two Leagues and an half to a lone House, where we
sat down and eat Bread, those that had Money bought Wine, and to those that
had none, our Guardian gave a Souse-worth of Wine between two Men; our Bread we
brought with us from Ais; hence we marched 3 Leagues to a Town called
Recavalia; the way was very mountainous and bad for Carts: When they came to
any steep Hill, this was their manner, they made fast all the Sick to the
Carts-Arse with Ropes, with a Man following them, whipping them along, left
they should hang on the Cart to ease themselves. This was the Method they used
with our sick Men. About seven at Night we came into the Town of Recavalia:
here we were put into two Stables (here in the Night our Men came amongst the
Hen-Roosts, and got several Hens, etc.) They gave us for Supper a small Loaf,
and about half an Ounce of salt Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage. In this place
they buried the Man that died that day in the Cart: they gave us in this place
a little Straw to cover the wet Horse-Dung: These People that were our Guard
were so abuseful to us all Night, that we that were near them could not sleep
all Night for the Noise they made of flouting and laughing at us, and calling
us ill Names.

Friday 27. We being roped together and counted, according to usual manner, we
marched three long Leagues to a lone House by the Road side: the way was very
mountainous, and the said Mountains all overran with pine Trees, so that here
much Rosin is made. When we came into this lone House, they gave us Bread with
about half an Ounce of fat Pork, with a Cup of sour Beverage Wine. Our Men here
picked up Sticks; and in their drinking Pots they boiled the Poultry they got
last Night. After we had dined we marched two long Leagues to a Town called
Prussia, where we lay in two Stables very well littered with Straw: they gave
us for Supper a souse Loaf and one Onion per Man. The Towns-People were here
indifferent civil to us, by admitting us every one, one after another, to go
forth and ease our bodies, which we always took as a great favor, and very
seldom obtained.

Saturday 28. We set out of this Town very early in the Morning, and we marched
two Leagues to a Town called Olivera, a fine large Town; here we dined, our
Dinner was a Souse Loaf and two Sirdenas a Man, with each Man a Cup of
Beverage. In this Town died John Wall, a Lad of about sixteen Years of Age,
whom these barbarous Villains had been beating not above an Hour before, for no
other cause than this, The poor Lad being cramb'd into the Cart amongst the
rest of the sick, when the bitter Pains of Death was upon the poor Soul, he
seemed to struggle for ease, and to get a little more room in the Cart; this
was all the occasion. Now after he was taken dead out of the Cart, for fear
lest he should not be dead, one of the beasts that guarded us, run his Sword
into the Belly of him, and so left him to be buried by the Towns-People. Dinner
being ended, away we marched for Toloun, being about a League distant. The
Afternoon proved rainy, and the way very bad. About four in the Afternoon we
came near the Town, but not suffered to enter; we were immediately sent aboard
of an old Man of War of theirs, which lay in the Mold, where we found about
sixty English Men, which were Prisoners of War, who were taken in the
Mediterranean Seas, and about two hundred Dutch: When we were got aboard, they
gave us orders to knock off our Irons, which we did forthwith, and hove many of
them into the Mold: The Scrivan belonging to the Ship took all our Names, and
the Ships Names we were taken in, and our places of Residence: which done, we
were mest, seven Men together in a Mess; and so for Supper we had Bread and
good Wine, half a Pint per Man, which was pretty considerable to what we used
to meet with. Our sick Men, which were forty in number, were put aboard of a
Fly-boat which was lashed aboard the other Ships: and this they called the
Hospital Ship; but it were more proper to call it a Slaughterhouse; for the
poor sick Men the major part of them had no other Lodging but the bare hard
Decks. Their Food was something bettter, although much lesser than the
well-People had, viz. Mutton and Broth every day. The Doctors that had charge
of the poor sick Men were the Chyrurgions of the Ships that they took here,
some English and some Dutch; but whether it were through Ignorance or Idleness,
or both, or for want of good Medicines, I am sure the Men died here very fast,
sometimes two, three, or four a day out of that number aforesaid.

Sunday 29. It so happened that he that was Captain of the Guard for this Day,
was one of my Dear Joys: who makes an Oration about the Ship for all those that
were Roman Catholics to go aboard the Admiral with him to Mass; but amongst
our Crew there was but one, and that proved to be the Captains dear
Countryman, which I spoke of before at Tholuse: but amongst the Dutch there
were several Romans. The Captain promised great matters to his Countryman,
what he would do for him for his Country and Religion sake; but to my Knowledge
he forgot to perform any thing of it. When Mass was over, and the Men come
aboard, we were served our Breakfast and Dinner, all under one double Alowance
of Bread and Wine, and of Meat only one Allowance, which although it was but
small, yet was it very considerable to what we ever met with yet in France; for
the Bread and Wine were both very good; and as for the Meat, it did exceed the
Weight very seldom of an Ounce, or an Ounce and half, or thereabouts: But this
was the Order in the Morning, every Man had a Loaf and very near half a Pint of
Wine; at Dinner the like, and Meat too if it were Flesh-day; and so the same
for Supper, Bread and Wine, and either Beans Pease, Rise, or Callavansis: and
those days that were Fish-days, because of the Scarcity of Fish, they gave us
either Beans, Pease, or Callavansis, instead thereof. Our Diet was very well
amended, but our Lodging was on the bare Decks: But as for those Prisoners of
English and Dutch that were here before, they had all Hammocks and Ruggs to lie
on. The Dutch here seeing of us very poor in Habit, and weak in body, began to
insult over us, in pretending we should stay till they were served their
Victuals every day, before we were served: but as soon as we discovered their
Ambition, we fell to work with them, and for all they thought to have been too
strong for us, yet were they deceived, for we soon put them to the Rout, and
made them take turns to be served, one first one Day, and the other the other
Day. The Irish Captain would very often make an Oration to us, requiring of us
to be loving and kind one to the other: and as we were Fellow Prisoners to be
quiet together; but it was soon ordered by the Intendant, that there should be
another Ship brought along this Ship-side for the Englishmen to be in by
themselves; for while the English and the Dutch were together, the Dutch would
neither pump the Ship which was very leaky, nor go in the Boat to fetch Water,
or any thing else aboard; such was their Pride, that tho I had ever much
Charity for the Dutch before, yet I was sorry to see them so arrogant. But that
day that the Ship was to be mored by the other, which was the third day of
October, there came an Express from Paris, that all the English Prisoners
should be carried back into West-France, in order (as they said) to be
exchanged. But in the mean time they took these Methods to keep our Men at
work, that fifty every day they sent aboard of a Fly-boat Man of War, much like
the King-Fisher, there they served and fitted standing Rigging for their Ships,
but as for wages they had none: Others they sent ashore to the Ropewalk, to lay
Cables to them; for their days work they were paid four Souce a day: Another
Gang was sent aboard of a Merchant's Ship belonging to some of the Grandees of
the Place, to heave out her great Stone Ballast, and make her fit to Careen:
Their Wages was three Souse and a half a day. Another Gang of Carpenters were
drawn out to go to Calk this Ship's side; to them they gave seven Souse a day.
Thus Necessity forced us to do that, shrewdly against our wills. In this place
of Touloun, Seamen were so scarce, that by the Report of the People, there
were not Twenty in the place; as for my part, I never saw ten whilst I was
there. Their own Carpenters were now fitting out ten Sail of Ships to be ready
to come down into West-France next Spring, and ten Sail is the most that is
here left, which will be any way fit for the Sea. The Admiral is a curious fine
Ship to look to, but she is broken-back'd, and not fit for the Sea; those Ships
that are capable of coming to Sea, are Ships of good Force, from Fifty to
Seventy Guns. We heard, whilst we were here, that the French had lately forced
many of the Dutch Prisoners of War to go to Sea in the Crusers, by heaving them
off their Gunnil into the Boat, if they did not go themselves into the Boat:
And since, the Ships which had these Men in them are taken, many of them into
Algier, and are now made Slaves; which Action is contrary to the Law of God and
Nature. The Weather being very bad as yet, we could not begin our Journey until
the tenth day of October; in the mean time we buried many of our Men, and yet
many more left Sick. We heard, after our departure, that they sent all our Men,
both Sick and well, to the Hospitals, to strengthen and refresh them, left
there should be none left to travel back, which was very true, as I heard it
reported by many of the Men when they came back to Rochfort: There were two
hundred more that came here, ten days after our departure.

From Toulon to Rochfort.

October.

THursday 10. About ten in the Morning, the Weather being fair, all the English
that were able to march, were commanded on Shore: So entering the Town, we were
brought to one of the French King's Magazines, where we were all called over by
Name: In the interim, in comes the Intendant, and makes an Oration to us, which
was Englished thus; Swearing by all his Gods, that we were clear Men, only we
were to travel to Rochfort, and from thence to St. Malo, where we were to be
exchanged. We desired him, (by the way of an Interpreter) that since his
Excellency was pleased to say we were clear Men, that we might travel back
without being afflicted with Ropes and Irons, which we saw lay ready for us,
and about six couple were already ironed; we promised upon our Faith, that we
would march quietly through the Country, without running away: He granted our
Request, alleging, we were clear Men. As soon as we came into West-France, we
all gave great credit to his words, not doubting but that a Man of his Rank and
Dignity would scorn to tell us (who were at present his Prisoners, and lay at
his Mercy, to do with us as he pleased) Lies: But we after found his Words to
be like the rest of his lying Countrymen, (who are the greatest Liars upon
Earth); I never heard Word or Promise made by any of them, since I have been in
the Country, that proved to be true, except it were when they promised to
plague us. The Intendant ordered to those that were almost naked (that were
many) to have Canvase Jackets, and to some Shirts, and the major part new
Shoes. After these things were served, away we marched, having for our Guard,
four of the Guarda-Marine, (who wears a Belt embroidered with Gold and Silver,
the Flower-de-Luce, and the Cross Anchors and Cables, which is their
Commission) besides the Provost and two Foot Soldiers. When we came to the
outer Gates of the Town, we stopped about two hours, waiting for more Company,
which were the Men that were taken in the Mediterranean Seas, belonging to
Capt. Willbourn and Capt. Blake, their Number was about sixty: So now we were
near two hundred of us. About three in the Afternoon we went out of Toulon, we
marched three long Leagues to a Town called Prussia; it was very near eight at
Night before we came into this Town; yet we marched along briskly, although the
Road was hilly and stony, we were in hopes the Intendant's words would prove
true; our Guards were somewhat civiller than they were before; neither was
there such strict Orders given to those that guarded us by Night as before, for
we were now admitted to go forth at any hour of the Night to ease our selves,
if it was required: They gave us here for our Supper each Man a small Loaf of
six Denires, and a cup of Wine; so here we slept very well, the Stable being
indifferently well littered.

Friday 11. About seven a Clock in the Morning we came out of the Stables,
every Man receiving a Loaf of six Denires, (which is half a Penny English); the
place we were to dine at this day, being a lone House, where Bread was not to
be had for such a Company of Men: Three Leagues we marched to this lone House,
the way very Mountainous; when we came there, they gave each Man a cup of sour
Wine, and that with our small Loaf we brought with us, we made up our Dinner:
After this we marched three large Leagues to a Town called Racavalia; after
about an hours stop in the Streets, we were put into two Stables: For our
Suppers, they gave each Man a Souse Loaf, and a dish of Porkbroth: now when
they came to serve us the Meat we expected, they gave not one Man in ten any;
it was my chance to get a bit so small, that I could have put twice as much
into my Mouth at once: and as for our Drink, it was downright Vinegar, that no
Man was able to drink it: Although good Wine was so plentiful here, and so
cheap, that it was not worth above one Crown the Hogshead by wholesale: The
Vinegar they gave us, we set it out at the Door, and drank Water, a Brook
running just at the Stable-door: We bore all this with patience, hoping once,
if it pleased God, to get out of these Rogues hands; so we went to sleep
quietly in these Stables.

Saturday 12. Early in the Morning we came out of these Stables; every Man
received a six Denire Loaf as he past, for we were to dine to day at a single
House: Several of our Men that were foundred in their Feet got Asses, some upon
their own cost, and some upon their charge that guarded: so away we marched two
Leagues to this lone House; there with our Bread and a Cup of Beverage we made
our Dinner, which was very little for poor Men to travel with so far as twenty
and twenty four Miles a day, and many times more: We saw most part of this
Morning the Alps, that divide Italy from France very plain, bearing about East
North East, and North East from us: From hence we marched three Leagues to the
City of Ais, the way very mountainous, but the Mountains were all overran with
sweet Herbs, such as Thyme, Lavender, Rosemary, Mirtles, and the Hedges of
Pomgranates, which cast a very sweet Odor. When we came near the City, we were
put into a large Stable without the Walls: This Ais is a very fine situated
Place, and the City laid out in excellent order, being built in a level place,
and circumdated with Hills all round: they gave us here for our Supper a small
Loaf of Bread, and about half an Ounce of salt Cheese, and to each Man was
measured half a pint of good Wine, for no bad Wine here was to be got, or else
to be sure we had had it. After we had supped, we laid us down to sleep on the
Ground, but many of us got some Hay and some Straw: we had here, as at other
places, a Guard of the Towns-People that watched over us all Night.

Sunday 13.

This Morning our Guards went all to Mass, and by that means we were all kept
in until eleven of the Clock, at which time they gave us our Dinner of Bread
and Wine. When our Dinner was ended, away we marched five long Leagues to a
Town called Sealoon. The Afternoon proved rainy, and the Road very foul. Before
we got into Town it was eight at Night. Most part of us being wet through those
few Rags we had. This Town is a very fine walled Town, situated at the bottom
of the Provencial Hills, having on the South, West and North part of the Town a
great Plain near thirty Miles long, which in comparison of Land, is as level as
the Sea; yet notwithstanding the Land is very stony and full of large peble
Stones, much like a Beach, and by that means very barren: yet sweet Herbs grow
wild upon it, such as Thime and Lavender; and in the Plain some Wood of the
ever-living Oak. We were here put all into one Stable, where they gave us for
Supper Bread and Wine; and the Stable was very well littered with Straw; so we
slept very sweetly all Night, having a great Guard about us.

Monday 14.

Early this Morning we came out of this Stable, every Man received a six Denier
Loaf as he passed, because we were to dine at a single House upon the Plain: We
marched five Leagues over this Plain, before we came to this lone House, at the
end of which they gave each Man a Cup of Wine and Water to our Bread. When
Dinner was ended, away we marched three Leagues farther, to the City of Arlaa.
Before we entered this Town, we heard that there were in the Town two hundred of
English and Dutch Prisoners of War, onward of their March for Toulon. This News
struck many of us into a damp, thinking that this was not the way to be
exchanged. When we came into Town, we were all cramb'd into a Stable, where we
lay desperate thick, one almost upon the other. One of our Men got leave of the
Guards to go where these other Prisoners were, to speak to them; who when he
came there, he saw several of our sick Men which we left upon the Road, which
were recovered; they were all in the same dress as we were in, as we went for
Toulon, viz. in Irons, two and two together: They also reported, that they were
far worse pinched for Victuals than we were: and as for their sick Men, they
were worse served; for when their weakness was so great that they could not fit
upon an Horse, or Ass, then were they thrown thwart a Horse's back, like a
Calf, with their Heads downwards, until such time that they died. Our Supper
here was a six Denier Loaf, and a Cup of Beverage a Man. So here we slept upon
the Horse-dung, for want of Litter; for except it were the Charity of the
People to give it to us, we very seldom had any.

Tuesday 15.

About ten in the Morning we saw the English and the Dutch Prisoners which lay
in this Town last Night pass by here: So we spoke to several of them which were
of our Company which we left sick upon the Road, they marched near the manner
as we did formerly, as we were going upward toward Toulon: We remained in this
Town until two in the Afternoon; at which time they gave us our Dinner, which
was a small Loaf of Bread, and an Onion, with a Cup of Beverage a Man. This
place of Arlaa is a very fine fenced Town, standing on level Ground; and in it
are very stately Buildings. On the East side of the Town is a most famous
Aquaduct, which stands upon abundance of Arches; and for the length of it, I
suppose it may be near a Mile. At this time the Land about the Town was much
overflown with the Freshes that came lately down out of the Hill-Country; so
that in the green Fields that were, as we past by here before, we saw many
Boats and Nets set to catch Fish, for the Water was considerable deep; and
beside, the strength of the Floods had carried away the Town-bridg that was
built upon Boats, as I said before; now the Land being thus drowned, we were
forced to march round the drowned Land, (our sick Men came after us by Water in
a Boat) upon a very fine Causey, which was made on purpose: for it seems these
Floods are not unusual, but common, once a Year in the time of Rain. We marched
three Leagues to a fine Town called Terrascoon; there we crossed the River in two
Ferry-Boats, to a Town opposite, called Boucaro, in the Province of Languedock;
for this River, as I have said before, divides Provence from Languedock. This
Boucaro is a very large Town; when we were entered into it, we were conducted to
a great Stable, which was both wet and nasty: Our Supper was a small Loaf of
Bread, with a Cup of Beverage; and as we were serving, in comes our Sick and
Lame People to take part of our hard Night's Lodging: the Ground was so wet and
cold, that we were forced to walk up and down the most part of the Night, to
keep our selves warm, the Weather being very cold.

Wednesday 16.

About Eleven in the Morning we had our Dinner served us, which was a Loaf of
Bread worth six Denires, and one Onion betwixt four Men, with a Cup of
Beverage; which, as soon as we had eat and drank, away we marched. Just as we
came without the Town, we met about twelve Men, who were pinioned and bound
together, going toward Boucare, with a Guard with them. We asked the People of
the place, what their Fault was that they should be thus led? They made us
answer, that they were Hugonots, or Calvinists, and were going for the Galleys.
This Report made my Heart to ache, to see so many good-look'd Men to be thus
treated, (by a cursed Tyrant of Hell) for their acknowledging and professing
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. We marched four Leagues to a fine compact fenced
Town called Nimes in Languedock. When we came near the Town, I went, with three
more of my Consorts, to a Tavern just by, to buy a little Wine: When we came to
the Door, the good Man of the House asked us of what Nation we were? we told
him, Of the English, (by one of our Companions that spoke very good French, he
being a Guernsey-Man); away went the good Man of the House, and fetched a
Pitcher of pure good Wine, and four clean Glasses; he gave to each Man a Glass
full of Wine, which we drank up; he filled the Glasses again, so we drank each
Man his second; the Glasses being large, and the Wine very strong, we were
afraid to venture upon the other Glass: We asked the good Man, what we were to
pay? he answered us, Nothing; but asked, if we would drink any more? we gave
him hearty thanks, and answered, No: He again asked, if we were of the Religion
of the Church of England? we told him, Yes. With that he took us by the Hands,
and squeezed our Hands, and desired God to be with us: we admired at the Humor
of this Man, not expecting any such kind of People here. As we were returning
to the rest of our Companions, we met with a poor Woman, (by her Dress we could
imagine no less) she had a fine white Cake of Bread in her Apron; she held it
out to me, I imagined it had been for me to buy it; but she bad me break and
eat, which I did; so she handed it amongst the rest of our Company, until it
was all gone: I durst to have sworn, that by my first sight of this Woman, that
she had been more apter to ask than to relieve. Before we went into the Stable,
a very brisk young Man came up to me, who had lived in England a considerable
time, and spoke English very proper; he asked many Questions concerning our
Affairs in England, for it seems here the current News is, that Schonberg is
routed in Ireland, and that the French had defeated our Fleet at Sea. I told
him, they had in their Country a damnable lying Oracle; and, that Knaves they
project, and Fools believe; but I said, if he had Faith to believe what I
should say, I must, to tell you the truth, tell you quite contrary; for in the
first place, Schonberg has advanced at a great rate in Ireland: And as for
your Fleet, they durst not show their Heads at Sea. I also told him, that it
was true, the French Fleet were out last Summer, but staid but a very little
while out, and presently ran into their Harbors again. I also told him how our
English Fleet lay against Breast, and sent them in a Defiance. The Man was much
taken with my Discourse, but time would not admit of it, for we were drove into
the Stables immediately: but before he and I parted, I asked of him what kind
of People the People of this place were; he told, that not long since the 9/10
of the People were Calvinists; and so they were still, although they were
forced to appear otherwise; and that you will find, says he, if you stay here
but until to morrow about eight of the Clock, as soon as People can have notice
of you; for as yet we did not enter the Town, neither was it designed that we
should. When this Man and I parted, he promised to see me the next Morning;
but, alas, he was prevented, for we marched away hence by that time it was well
light, we were here put into a Stable, where we were paid off with a great
Supper that they had long promised; for our Supper was about a Mouth-full of
boild Gut, or a piece of Liver or Lights, with a Loaf worth no more but three
Denires; the People of the place report, that the old Woman which served us our
Meat, brought it all in a Dish under her Arm, covered with another Dish; so
that it is easy to judge how much one Man must have, when we were to have no
more; each Man had a Cup of Wine: Also the Supper being soon ended, we went to
sleep, the Stable being very well littered: the Governor of the Town, just as
we were going to sleep, sent his own Guards to guard us; and very suspicious
they were, whatever their Humor was I cannot tell, of our setting the House
on fire.

Thursday 17.

Very early this Morning, before scarce any of the Inhabitants were stirring,
we began to march: many of our People got Relief by those People that were up,
which were generally the poorer sort: Away we marched four long Leagues to a
Town called Lunae: We came into this Town many of us before our Guards, so
those walked up and down. The People of this place were very charitable to our
People, by relieving them with such things as they had, as Bread, Meat, Wine,
Rasins, and to some Hats, they also told many of us that they were Calvinists.
The major part of the People of the Town withal praying for the Success of the
Arms of our King William, who fought the Battle of God, (this they spoke in
private to some of us.) Many of our Men by the Liberality of the People, got
mellow with Wine. When our Guards came into Town with the rest of our People,
we were confined into a Yard, where they gave us a small Loaf of Bread worth
fix Denires, and a Cup of Wine for Dinner; that done, away we marched two
Leagues farther, to a Town called Columbeas: About eight at Night we came into
this Town, where we were put into four Stables, the Stables being here very
small: The Supper we had was Bread and Beverage, and a couple of Sirdenass's a
Man, which was extraordinary. The Stables being very well littered with Straw,
we slept very well here; neither was there any Body to guard us, for in this
small Town were very few Men.

Friday 18.

Early in the Morning we came out of this Village, the Weather being fair and
clear, our sick and lame Men were put into two Carts; so away we marched two
Leagues to the City of Mompelier: We walked round the City close by the Walls,
but were not admitted to enter thereto, because here are many well-affected
Persons, who wish well to our Nation. In the Suburbs of this City we were all
put into a great Stable, where our Dinner was served us, six Deniers worth of
Bread, and about half an Ounce of miserable sad choaky Cheese, with a Cup of
Beverage for each Man. When Dinner was ended, away we marched three Leagues
farther, to a Village called Punian: In our way we met several Regiments of
Foot Soldiers, who came from their Campagainst the Spaniards in a great
Disorder. We heard by the way that the Spaniards had defeated the French Army
in Catalonia, and had taken two eminent Places from them, and were still
advancing upon them. When we came into Punian the People did not care to come
near us; for at the fame time they had the Plague in the Town, which, as they
report, we left behind us as we were going to Toulon, for in this Place we
lodged two Nights and one whole Day, by reason of the Rain: We were here lodged
in a very cold Stable, where our Supper was a small Loaf, and half an Ounce of
Cheese with Beverage, as at other times. When we had supped we laid us down on
the cold Ground to sleep, but were not able to lie there long; so that many of
us got up and walked about the best part of the Night, to keep our Selves warm.
About three in the Morning another Man and I went out of the Stable, where we
saw a Fire just by us, with four Frenchmen fitting round it with their Guns to
guard it; we walked toward the Fire, which when these poor Fellows saw, they
called out to us, asking us whither were we going? we told them to the Fire;
they bid us keep back, but nevertheless we went up to the Fire, which when
these poor Souls saw that we were not affrighted at their Words, which was the
utmost they durst do, they presently got up, and away they went, calling us
Bugera's, etc. and left the Fire to us, so here we two sat by it until we sat
it out, which time it began to be day: now we found that as last Night no body
would come anear us to let us have any Wine to drink, but what the Guards were
forced to fetch a Mile off; so by the Virtue of our ill Report, we got a good
Fire to warm some of us to our selves.

Saturday 19.

Before the rising of the Sun we marched out of this Village, the Morning clear
but cold: We marched to a Town called Lupean, marching very near the Sea side,
and rounding the Bay of Languedock. All the Places upon the Road were infected
with the Plague. The People as they passed by kept stopping their Noses for
fear they should get the Plague of us: and truly our greatest Plague was, that
of their own Countrymen, who drove us up and down until we were almost all
starved; so that the greatest Disease we had amongst our poor Men did proceed
from Hunger and Cold, and our stinking Lodgings. When we came into Lupean, we
were conducted to our old Halls the Stables, where our Dinner was a small piece
of Bread, and one small Onion, and a Cup of Beverage a Man. From hence we
marched three Leagues farther, to a Town called Pezeain, a very large Town: (by
the Town we saw about fifty or sixty Women carrying Earth in Baskets to make a
Bridge over the Low-land, with their Overseers by them, to keep them close at
work: This is done for Punishment for some Malefact committed or supposed.)
Here they were likewise infected with the Plague too, and all the Fault was
laid upon us, for they all say we left it behind us, as we marched this way: We
told them no, we left none of our Plagues behind us, for as yet they stuck so
close to us, we could not get rid of any of them. In this Town we were kept up
very close in a Stable, no body coming near us but our Guards that traveled
with us: here our Supper was no more than six Deniers worth of Bread, and half
an Ounce of sad Cheese, with a Cup of Beverage a Man; and by reason that no
body came near us, we found out the place where the Straw lay; we took what we
thought fit, and made our Lodging very good: this made well on our sides.

Sunday 20.

Early in the Morning we put our sick and lame into two Carts, each Man
receiving a six Denier Loaf as we came out. We marched one League and half to a
very small Village; there we sat down and dined, here they gave each Man a Cup
of new thick Wine, and that with our Bread made up our Dinner: so away we
marched two Leagues and a half farther, to the Town Besias: both this days
Journey, and that yesterday, the Land was most curiously planted with Vineyards
and Olive-yards, and besides most of this Province is so likewise. When we came
into the Town, we saw several of our sick Men which we left here behind us,
that were somewhat recovered; they were quartered in private Houses, yet kept
so close, that what they spoke to us was out of the Windows: We asked the
reason why they were put out of the Hospitals; they told us because so many of
their own People, both sick and wounded came into the Town, who came from the
Camp against the Spaniards, that they filled the Hospitals and more Places
besides; they told us of the Defeat the Spaniards had given them, killing them
1500 Horse one Morning, besides Foot. This I heard to be verified by one that
was in the Fight, which I shall make mention of in its place. They told us also
that the Spanish Army was advanced within four Leagues of that Place; and that
the Spanish Army did consist of eighty Thousand Men Horse and Foot, and that of
the French sixty Thousand: And moreover they told us, of those Men we left
here, three were dead, and two more lay a dying, and the rest that were
recovered were carried to Toulon in the last Company that past this way. We
past quite through the Town toward the outside; there we were put into a
Stable where we were most intolerably thronged for want of room, yet was there
no such Guard over us as in some of the other Towns, the People here being more
humane, and better knows the Fortune of War: Our Supper here was very
inconsiderable; for unless it were Bread, some got nothing at all; them that
had any more, it was about an Ounce of Liver or Lights, and a Cup of four Wine;
so we lay most desperately thronged, not having any room many of us to lie down.

Monday 21.

About seven in the Morning we came out of the Town of Besias, taking along
with us three sick Men of ours, which were something recovered: Away we marched
two Leagues to a fine fenced Town called Capista, in which Town we dined; our
Dinner was a six Denier Loaf, and about half an Ounce of sad choaky Cheese,
with a Cup of Beverage a Man. When Dinner was ended, away we marched four
Leagues and a half to an Inn by the Road side near the Town of Puzola. In our
way we both crossed and marched along the Banks of the cut River. In our way we
saw a number of Women at work, in banking and repairing the Sluses of the
River: The Women seeing so many Men pass by, began to geze at us, but
immediately comes their Overseer, and drives them to work with a Blow over the
back. Thus are the People of this Country plagued by their King who
Tarquin-like studies Torments; for the Men Galleys, and for the Women the new
River: so that he comes but little short of a Plague to all Mankind within his
Verge: About eight at Night we came into our Lodging, where we found our
Stables well littered with Straw, but I suppose it was not done for us, but for
the Soldiers which past by here lately, for the Straw was very louzy. Our
Supper was a small Loaf of six Deniers price, and about half an Ounce of
Cheese, like the former, and a Cup of sad Beverage: With this and such like was
our Fare, very seldom exceeding the price of two pence half penny a day.

Tuesday 22.

Before it was day we began our March, every Man receiving a half penny Loaf,
as he past out of the Stables: away we marched three Leagues to a Town called
Porsarick; we no sooner entered the Town, but we were conducted into a large
Stable; where with our. Loaf that was given us in the Morning, and half an
Ounce of Cheese, and a Cup of Beverage, we made up our Dinner. Our Men this
Afternoon began to be disturbed at their short Feeding; they did protest to the
Guards that served us, they would go no farther, neither were they able, except
they gave us more Food. The Guards go and tell the Provost that the Prisoners
would not march without more Victuals: Presently in comes the Provost with some
of the rest, with Swords drawn, and Pistols cocked, swearing he would be the
Death of that Man that did but refuse to march: up stands two Men and desired
to be heard by the way of an Interpreter: he seeing two Men speak, he
immediately cuts one of them over the Head, and the other he takes away and
commanded to be pinioned. So in fine both of them were pinioned and made fast
to the Carts Arse: and after this be began to display his Sword over the back
of all near him: I my self was one of the two that was made fast to the Carts
Arse, and Henry Robinson the other, he had his Head cut: and I was made fast
with my back toward the Cart, so close, that I could not turn my Face, but was
forced to follow the Cart backwards; and with the sudden fall of the Cart into
Holes, I thought verily with the Jerks, it would at once have broken both my
Arms and Back: Moreover my Arms were pinioned so straight, that my Veins in my
Hand were ready to burst: for the space of a League was I forced to walk
backwards until we came to a small Town called Marcheletto: When we came to the
Town they loosed both me and the other Man; so we were all put into a Stable,
sick and well together; and for our Supper they gave us about an Ounce and half
of brown Bread, and that was the most of it, with a Cup of Beverage; and they
pretended they could get no more; but this was all great Lies, for when they
came to never so plentiful a place, it did not much differ. In this Stable was
a door that opened into a Wine-Cellar, which our Men found a way to open; and
so went in and filled all their Pots and Jars, and had they not been discovered
by chance, by a Woman that came and caught a Man at it, without doubt they had
made clear work.

Wednesday 23.

Before the Sun rising we began our March: our sick and lame were put into two
Carts; but to those that were the most helpless, the Beasts would lay them on
stoutly in their getting up into the Cart. From hence we marched two Leagues to
a Town called Traevis, in which Town we were put into a Stable, where we were
served our Dinner, a small Loaf, and about half an Ounce of Cheese like the
former, with a Cup of musty Beverage, far worse than Water. From hence we
marched one League farther, to the Town of Carkasona: And from thence we
marched two Leagues farther, to a Village called Villa Sancto, in which Village
we were put into a most loathsome stinking Stable: Our Supper was a Piece of
Bread and one Onion a Man, and a Cup of sad Beverage: so here we slept like so
many Hogs in this stinking place. At Night we were shut up so close, that not
one Man could go out to ease himself, whatsoever Necessity he had: this
Privilege we were not denied ever since we came from Toulon until now: I
suppose it was out of Revenge for yesterdays work at Porsarick, in denying to
march.

Thursday 24.

About Eight this Morning we began our march, according to our usual manner,
without Eating or Drinking. Our Sick were put into two Carts, many of them now
almost famished with Hunger. Away we marched toward Villa Picta, two Leagues
distant: Upon the Road we met with a Flock of Sheep; and so our Men managed
their Business, that they singled one Sheep from the rest, and hove a Rug upon
him, and carried him away undiscovered, both from the Shepherd and our Guards.
In our way also we met several fine Troops of Horse going toward Beasias. When
we came into Town, we were put into a Stable; and so well our Men managed their
Mutton, that it was not discovered, tho the Men were told in one by one. Now
when they had the Sheep safely in, they soon killed it, and buried the Intrals
in the Litter; and so cut it into Quarters, and shared it amongst those that
were of the Cabal: Our Dinner here was a piece of Bread and a cup of Beverage.
So away we marched three Leagues farther, to a Town called Castlelador; when we
came into this Town, it was so full of Soldiers, that there were no quarters
to be had, so that after we had sat down on the Ground for the space of an Hour
in the cold, they got an order to put us into an Hospital without the Town:
Those Men of ours that were sick, lay upon Beds here, but as for the rest, they
lay on the cold Stones. Our Supper here was a piece of Bread and two
Sirdinasses, with a Cup of Beverage a Man: Our Men got some part of the Sheep
dressed here, with several Pullets they picked up on the Road; so the Broth they
distributed amongst our poor sick Men. After we had supped, we laid us down to
sleep, but were not able to lie long, so up we got and walked about most part
of the Night to keep our selves warm. Mr. George Winshuft was a dying all this
Night.

Friday 25.

About eight this Morning we began to march, every Man receiving half a Souse
Loaf. As we came out, our sick Men we put into two Carts. This Morning died Mr.
George Winshuft, as soon as he was put into the Cart. Away we marched three
Leagues, to a Village called Vinunut; here we dined; our Dinner was a Cup of
very good Wine, which was so extreme cheap, and no bad Wine to be had, that
they were in a manner forced to give good Wine against their will; for in my
sight they went all over the Village to see if they could get any Trash for us,
but could not: So with our Bread and Wine we made up our Dinner. After Dinner
we went several of us to work, where they appointed us to dig a Grave to bury
the Man that died this day; so we made his Grave, just by the Way side, whilst
others were employed in sowing him up in his own Blanket. After we had buried
him, away we marched, two Leagues further, to a Town called Villa Nova, where
we were lodged in two Stables; our Supper was a piece of Brown Bread, and a Cup
of Beverage. The Priest of this Place came to us, and discoursed one of our Men
in Latin: He told him, he had Charity for all Men that were Christians, and
therefore he did not disrespect us for our Opinion. He showed his Charity to us
more than all the Clergymen in the Country: He told us, he had no Money, but
he would send us a Pitcher of Wine amongst two or three of us; the which he
did. The Stables being well littered, we slept very well: This Night died Henry
Fullstone, Gunner of the Levantine.

Saturday 26.

Early in the Morning we began our march, leaving the dead to be buried by the
People. Hence we marched three Leagues to a Town called Castinata: Here we
dined; our Dinner was a small piece of Bread, and two small Sirdenasses a Man,
with Beverage as at other times: Here they took the Horses out of the Cart, and
laid our sick and dying Men in the Highway, until we were ready to go. After
we had dined, we put our Men up into the Carts; and away we marched, two
Leagues further, to the City of Toulouse: When we had surrounded a great part
of the City Walls, we were put in the same Stable without the Town that we were
in before. Here were we put, Sick and Well altogether, in this cold wet Stable.
Our Supper here was like our Lodging, a half Souse Loaf, and one Onion a Man,
with a Cup of sad Beverage. When we laid down to sleep, we could not for the
Sick and dying Men's Groans. The Rogues that guarded us kept the Door shut, that
we could not get out to ease our selves, many of our Men having the Flux; but
twice this Night we broke open the Door, and made way for our Sick Men. About
twelve this Night died Peter Holt, Carpenter of the Levantine.

Sunday 27. We staid here in this Stable until near two in the Afternoon, hear
they gave us our Dinner, which was a Souse Loaf and about an Ounce of fat Pork,
with a cup of Wine: after we had dined, we made ready to march; six Men more
were brought into our company, which were left sick upon the Road, and so put
into the Hospital here. When we marched hence we left two Men dying in the
Stable, viz. Richard Vincent Carpenter, and Peter Rose: from this Place we
marched about three quarters of a Mile, to the Riverside, to take Water; when
we came there, there was two Boats provided for us, the sick went all into one
Boat and had the advantage of lying in the Stern; after they had placed
themselves, the rest of the Men went in and filled up both Boats, so full that
there was not room enough for them all to lie down; yet, notwithstanding, we
could have no remedy: after we were all Embarked, away we went swiftly with the
Stream, about eight at Night we came to a Town on the South Side of the River,
called Blewnack, where we put ashore, here we lodged in two Cellers; the People
of this place were struck into a panick fear of us, for as soon as we were got
into the Cellar they would not let one Man come out to ease himself, and many
of our Men had the Flux; but when they saw that the Door was almost broke in
pieces by us, they came upon Terms with us; that was, that we should come out
only one at a time, and so when he was returned then another might come, so
they went and guarded each Man with three Men, one taking hold of each Arm, and
another stood to hold the Candle to him, and so in this manner they held them
out: our Men would fit and laugh at them, and were mightily pleased to see
themselves so ^^^erided. Our Supper was a small four Denier Loaf and a Cup of
Beverage; so here we slept until Daybreak.

Monday 28. Early in the Morning we went aboard the Boats, the Morning fair and
clear, by Noon we were fallen down as low as Burdoon, there we got our Dinner;
which was Bread and Beverage, and one Onion per man: From thence we fell down
as low as St. Anns, at which place we laid the Boats along the Shore, where
they gave us our Supper, which was a Loaf of three Deniers or one Farthing
Price, with one Sirdena and one Onion per man; here we remained all Night in
the Boats, not having scarce room to sit, and much less to lie down; over the
after part of the Boat they spread the Boats-Sail, which was so thin, that if
any Rain had fallen it would have signified no more, in comparison, than a
Cobweb; and as for all those which lay before the Mast, they had nothing at all
over them but the Heavenly Canopy, which was very cool and sharp.

Tuesday 29. About six in the Morning, before the Boat put off, they ferved our
us Dinner, (which was) a Loaf of three Deniers Price, with about an Ounce of
nasty rusty Pork, and a Cup of Beverage: From hence we fell down as low as the
Town called La Port, which was about Eight of the Clock at Night; as we went
out of the Boat every man received a Loaf of six Deniers, and one Sirdena; and
when we were got into the Stable, where we were to lodge, they gave each man of
us a Cup of special good Wine: so after we had supt we went to sleep in the
Stable, it being very cold.

Wednesday 30. Early in the Morning, before the break of Day, we came out of
this Stable, and so went aboard the Boats, the Morning cold and foggy; as soon
as we were stowed the Boats put off, and so down we went to the Town of
Marmanda, the Boats put ashore here to get Bread: our Dinner they served us
here, which was a piece of Bread and about three quarters of an Ounce of rusty
fat Pork, with Beverage as at other times. After we had dined the Boats put
off, and down we went to a Town on the North-side of the River, called Runae;
at this Town we went all ashore, and as we went out of the Boats we were served
with Bread; so into the Town we went, and because the Stables here were full of
Soldiers Horses, they lodged us in a College, or a School; here they gave us
Wine to our Bread, our usual quantity: our Lodging, for the major part of us,
was on the cold Stones; but to our sick. Men they gave a little Straw too. Here
being in this Town now a great many Soldiers lying upon free Quarters, two of
them, being Germans, came to see us: It so happened that we had a German
amongst us, who was not only one of their Countrymen, but was also born in the
same Town where one of these two Men was born, after some mixed ceremony was
past between them, both of Joy and Sorrow, the one for Joy to see the other
alive; and the other with Sorrow to see his Country man in such a miserable
state; he asked of his Countryman how he came to be in Arms for the French
King? (he thus replied,) Out of the desire I have to be in Germany; for, says
he, when it is Spring we shall be drawn out to go against the Emperor, and then
my design is to make my escape home. He told his Countryman, that when the
Imperial Forces lay against Buda, that he and several other, being Scouts, were
taken by the Turks, and so carried to Constantinople, and from thence sent to
Smyrna, and from thence to Scanderoon, and from thence to Grand Cairo, and from
Grand Cairo they came down to the Seaside, to Imbark for Constantinople; but
in their way they were happily met and took by a Maltese Gally, and so got his
freedom. Afterward he came over into Spain, and there he listed himself in the
Spanish Army, and was in the Army when the Spaniards gave the French that
Defeat I spoke of before: and told us the number of Men in each Army, and of
the great loss the French had. After we had taken our leaves of them both, we
went and laid down to sleep, but what with the coldness of the Stones, and of
the Weather together, we were forced to walk all Night long to keep our selves
warm.

Thursday 31. Early in the Morning, by the break of Day, we went aboard the
Boats, making no stop, but as soon as we were all aboard put off, so down we
went toward Langoon, the Morning very cold and foggy; when we came opposite to
Langoon they served us our Dinner, (which was) a piece of Bread and one Onion,
with a bit of Pork like the former, and a Cup of Beverage, making no stop with
the Boats at all; by that time it was Night we came to a Town on the North-side
of the River called Poeno; Here we came to an Anchor; but we remained in the
Boat all night in great misery, for want of room, and by reason of the Cold.
Our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Head of Garlic per man. The Night was
very foggy.

November, Friday the First. About eight in the morning it was here High Water,
and presently after we weighed, and about eleven of the clock we came down as
low as Bordeaux: The Boats were brought to an Anchor here, a good space off the
Shore, very near opposite to the middle of the Town. They served us our Dinner
here, which was a small piece of Bread and about an ounce of fat Pork, with a
Cup of sour Beveridge. For all that Wine is so extreme cheap here, yet could
they not afford us any thing else but sour Stuff, and the mere Lees and Trash.
Many People came off in Boats to us; but the most part came to scoff at us. We
were told here, That all our English Merchants were gone home that lived here.
We remained in these Boats until about five in the Afternoon, about which time
we were put aboard of three Burtoons, in order for our Passage to Roan. Our
Supper was a piece of Bread and one Sirdena per man, with Beveridge; and our
Lodging was on the Stone Ballast; some had a little Straw to lie on, but very
few.

Saturday, 2. This morning we had the Wind Easterly, and the Weather fair; and
this morning died Edward Davis of Boston in New England. About seven of the
clock we were under Sail, and fell down about three Miles below Blois; at the
last quarter of the Ebb our Boat ran aground there, and there we lay until the
first of the Flood: The other two Barks kept farther to the Southward, and went
clear. As soon as we fleeted away, we stood galing a head upon the Tide; about
High Water the Wind began to freshen at N.E. so away we went briskly: About
eleven at night we came down to Roan: Our Dinner and Supper were both alike,
viz. Bread and Beveridge, and one Sirdena per man; so we remained in the
Burtoons until morning.

Sunday, 3. In the morning our Guards went ashore to Mass, and at their return
they gave us our Dinner, a piece of Bread and a Sirdena, with Beveridge, as at
other times; after we had eat, we went ashore, the Boats lying dry: They had
provided two Carts to carry our Sick men, which came to the Boat sides. The
People of this Place are in general poor Fishermen, and Pilots, and the like;
but great was their Love and Charity toward us, whom they relieved with a
bountiful Hand, both with Money and Food; but when the Rogues our Guard saw it,
they drubb'd the poor Women for giving, and us for receiving, for no other
reason, as I judge, but because the People of this Town are known to be the
major part Protestants.

From hence we marched three Leagues, to a Town called Ogua, in which Town we
were lodged, some in a Stable, and the rest in a Bakehouse. Our Lodging was on
the cold Ground, and our Supper was like our Lodging, a piece of brown Bread
and one Sirdena per man. We that lay in the Bakehouse lay so cold all night,
that some of our men made a Fire, and burnt all the Bakers Tools they could lay
hands on.

Monday, 4. This day, being the last day that the Rogues our Guard expected to
have us under their Jurisdiction, they pretended to give us a very good
Farewell; so they bought a whole Sheep, which they boiled, and gave us the
Broth amongst us, and the Meat they carried with them to the next Town, where
we were to dine this day. Our Sick and Lame being put into two Carts, away we
marched two Leagues, to a Town called St. Jan Anglia: the major part of us got
into this Town above an hour and half before the Carts came in with the Sick
men, by reason they were drawn by slow-paced Oxen; in the mean time we remained
in the Market-house, where we found such Charity of the Inhabitants as was not
expected; for they gave us great quantity of Bread, and Wine, and Butter, and
such other things as they had in their Houses, with a most liberal Hand. They
told us the Name of this Town was derived from one of our own Countrymen,
which was a Preacher in this Church, when there was but one House built besides
the Church; and now it is a pretty large Town. They also told us, That for a
hundred Years together there did not a Popish Priest preach in their Church.
They gave us their Prayers, beseeching God to bless us in our Undertakings, and
prosper our King. These Words they spoke to us in their own Houses, privately.
I must needs say this of the French Protestants, That I do verily believe they
are the most faithful and charitable People that lay any claim to the Title of
a Protestant upon the Earth. When the Carts came into Town, they served us our
Dinner, Bread and Mutton; but very little of the last came to our share; not
above an ounce per man; and there was above twenty of us that had none at all.
After we had dined, away we marched toward Rochfort; distant from hence three
Leagues. Just as we came to cross the River of Sherant, it began to rain, when
the most of our Passage, especially the last twenty days, we had no Rain, so
favorable have the Heavens been to us. About four in the afternoon we came
into the Town, and so into the Prison, where we found of English and Dutch
Prisoners to the number of Four hundred. When we first went out of Rochfort, we
had Two hundred, and when we came from Toulon Sixty more, and at Tolouse Six
more; and now we had no more but One hundred seventy three, the rest being dead
and scattered about the Country.

Tuesday 5. This morning the Scrivan took all our Names that came in last
night, with the Ships Names we were taken in; also two of our Men that were not
attentive to give in their Names, were most sorely drub'd. Now I shall describe
the manner of the Prison-Diet. In the morning the Men were told out, and to
every seventh Man a Seal was given to him to go to the Cook, who gave him upon
the receipt thereof a Loaf weighing about six Pound, and that is the most, and
a Can of Wine, but more fitly to be called Beveridge, for the better half was
Water, and the other part sour Wine; of this we had to the quantity of seven
half Pints; and at noon were we thus told out again, and these Seals given in
the same manner, to be carried to the Cook, who upon receipt of it gives them a
Bowl with about seven ounces of Meat, and a Can of Beveridge. Now the Meat was
most an end either Liver, or else Lights or Milts; and if there was any other
sort of Flesh, to be sure it should be the worst that could be had, and that
often would stink most desperately. The World may very well imagine what good
Stuff it was; for it was common for a Man to sell his whole Days Allowance of
Meat for three Deniers, and that is but one Farthing: Their Drink they sold all
they had at a Meal for two Deniers, and that was thought a great Price; and
truly so it was; for whosoever bought any of the aforesaid Trade at these
Rates, paid more than it was worth. Their Bread was most an end very good, for
that was all we had to keep us alive. As for Food at night, they told them out
in the same manner, giving them a Seal to go to the Cook for Beans and a Can of
Beveridge. The Beans were most an end Horse-beans, and the quantity of them was
so small, for all three fourth parts of it was Water, that when every Man got
seven Spoonfuls, we reckoned we had large Allowance. I have several times taken
this especial notice of them. Fish-days are all one with them as the Flesh
days, only this, they have seven ounces of Fish for Dinner, and this is the
most. When they give their full Allowance, they give them to their Fish a
little Oil and Vinegar also; but Fish soon became so scarce, that they would
give us none, so the room of that was supplied with Horse-beans. Every thing
here is now ten times worse than it was before we went for Toulon: Our Lodging
is upon the baro Floor, many of us, for these seven first days, in which time
our Men fell sick so fast, that sixty went to the Hospital in two days, and but
very few came back. The eleventh of this Month they gave us Straw Beds, but
nothing to cover us; the Weather now was very cold and frosty. On the 13th of
this Instant there came hither 120 Men from St. Malo, of our English Nation;
Handoufft and Roped together; this gave us but small hope of Redemption, when
so many Men were brought from the Place where the Exchange was to be made.
December the first here came also from Breast 130 Men, which did belong to the
Portsmouth and to the Lively. December the fourth they gave us Blankets; but
after such a manner they gave them, that the better half of the Men had none at
all: Some had a Blanket for four, and some for fix, and some for ten, and to
above 300 Men they gave none at all. And moreover, although they divided them
among the aforesaid men in such a manner, yet were the Blankets very near all
of a bigness, and would not well cover above three men; the measure of them was
about six Foot square, and six Foot and a half was the biggest. The Weather now
was very frosty and cold, and for want of Food, Clothes, and Coverings, our
poor men fell sick at a strange rate, and died in the Hospital, seven or eight
in a night, and many times more: We had an account one night of twenty one
Englishmen that died in the Hospital, besides many that perished in the Prison
merely for want.

December the fourteenth here came eighty four men more, most of them belonging
to the Fire-drake; from Breast.

Before we went for Toulon, we were guarded by the Towns people; but now were
we guarded by Soldiers, who like cowardly Rogues did tyrannize over us at a
very strange rate, every pitiful Rogue carrying a great Stick in his Hand, to
drub the poor Prisoners at their pleasure. Many of the ragged Villains, if they
chanced to be coming along, and were to pass by us, if there was not a Lane
made for them to pass, immediately would fall to flourishing their Sticks
amongst us, laying on about them Thresher-like. The occasion of all this sprang
from a young foolish Fellow, that was their Major, who did most desperately
hate all those of the English Nation, Fool like, for he knew not what; so by
that means he tolerated all manner of Villainy that was acted upon us, both by
the Cook and Guards. This same Major was so Foollike, that his Person and his
Actions declared him more fit to have kept Geese upon a Common, than to have
had the Command over so many Prisoners.

About the latter end of this Month there came in here a great many of their
Ships, which were so full of Sick men, that they filled up all their Hospitals,
so that those few English that were alive, they sent away to the Isle of
Oleroon de Shattu, where those good People did relieve them with a liberal
Hand; and in the Hospital they were also very kind to them, as it did appear by
them at their return. I have heard our People say, when they came back, That
the People of this Place have taken off their Clothes from their own Backs, and
given to them; and the Women have plucked off their own Stockings in this cold
Weather, to give to some of our poor Lads.

But to return to our Prison at Rochfort: Our Men, by the hard Usage here, fell
sick so fast, that they pretended to make an Hospital for the Sick in the
Prison; which when they had brought to the utmost perfection, it might more
fitly have been termed a Slaughter house. I shall, as near as I can, describe
the manner of it.

In the first place these Rooms were an Apartment from the rest of the Prison;
yet were these as strongly fitted with Iron Bars in the Windows, as the rest;
and in these Rooms all round by the Walls they laid Straw Beds as close the one
to the other as they could lie, and to every Bed was a Straw Bolster, and one
single white Blanket; then to every Bed was two Men appointed, who were laid
down most an end with all their Clothes on they had, or else they could not be
warm, their covering was so thin; now they lay so thick in a Room, that a Room
of about Seventeen Foot square should have Thirty eight and some Forty Men;
their Excrements annoyed one the other so sadly, that when a Man was newly come
out of the Prison to be laid there, they were almost ready to dye with the
smell: This I speak by my own sad experience, their Excrements lying open in
Buckets; so that what with the smell of some having the Small Pox, and some who
would foul under them, with the Flux, and so by one means or another, there was
such a stink that cannot be expressed by Tongue nor Pen: Yet was not this all
their Annoiance, for in the next place was Lice, with which many of the sick
did so swarm, that I my self have seen a Man lie dead, and his Face so covered
with Lice, that until they were swept off I could not discern what man it was,
although he was my familiar Acquaintance; no manner of Shift had they here,
whatsoever occasion they had. In the next place, their attendance was some of
the Prisoners, generally either Guernsey or Jersey men, who for the coveniency
of their French Tongue were thought most fit; of these there were about Six,
whose business it was to empty the Buckets, and to help the weak Men to Stool,
and to serve the Sick with Victuals: As for their Victuals I cannot say but
that it was very good, and the Wine likewise, which they gave the sick men; for
truly some of their Doctors, who had the chief ordering of these matters, were
good tender hearted men, and would have done more for us if it had lain in
their power; poor men the best of them was taken sick, and some dyed, so at
last our men had no body to come near them. Here was an account of above One
hundred and fifty men that died out of this Slaughterhouse, not one in five
that went there that ever came out again alive; it was common to see Ten or
Eleven, sometimes more and sometimes less, lie dead under an Arch in the open
Prison yard: Then as for their Burial, it was much like their end, for if any
of the Soldiers buried them, they would heave them into a hole like a Dog, if
they fell on their Face so they lay, or if on the Side; and if the Grave did
fall out to be too short, as sometimes it did, that the Head of the man would
not go down, these Beasts would beat down their Heads with the Butt ends of
their Muskets; the Ground was so full of Water, that they were not able to dig
above two Foot deep. The faster and the more our men dyed, the more we were
tyrannized over by the Soldiers, who would drub us, and put our Men into Irons
upon the least occasion. I saw a Man drub'd once by one of these Rogues only
for letting a Can fall out of his Hand, and afterward was put into Irons, such
Irons as Gally slaves are chained to at their Banks, where he remained for
Eight days with nothing but Bread and Water, in a place where they kept their
own Countrymen Slaves, such who were Malefactors, for they hang but very few
here; if a Man commits any considerable Fact, he is sentenced forthwith to be a
Gally slave for Seven or eight year; if it be for Theft, Murder, or Rapes, they
cut off a Piece of their Nose, and a piece of their Ear, and so burn two
Flowerdeluces, one in each Cheek, and shave his Head, and so he is Condemned to
the Galleys for his Life. Their Soldiers that desert their Colors are served
in the same manner, and Seamen that leave their Ships. These things I write not
by guess or hearsay, but to my own knowledge and sight. This is the manner of
the French Tyrant, who is Cousin to Death (the King of Terrors) but yet after
all the Law is past upon these Malefactors, they after that take such methods,
to the best of their endeavor, to preserve these their Slaves in Life and
Health, by giving them Clothes to keep them from cold, good Shoes and
Stockings, and good Food to eat, and Covering to keep them warm; and when they
are sick, great care is taken for them in their Hospitals, both for good
Bedding, clean Sheets, and Linen to shirt, and both the best Food and Physic,
and careful Women to look after them as is to be be had; which is far different
to what we have heard of them, it being quite contrary. I shall now mention one
more of their most horrid Actions to us at the latter end of January, which was
thus; at this time the Weather was very Tempestuous, blowing a mere Huricane of
Wind, it so happened that a Stone fell off the House top, where there was many
laid to keep the Tiles from blowing off, and so it was, that this Stone fell
near to the Sentry Box, out came the Sentinel, and swore that the Prisoners
hove Stones out of the Window at him: It now being late, and all the Prifon
Doors shut, and most of the Men asleep, they came not in that Night, but staid
until the next Morning; then they came into the Room, where I my self lay, and
demanded of us who it was that hove Stones last night out at the the Sentinel;
we all protested that we were altogether Innocent of the thing, and knew
nothing of the matter, which was really so: Yet for all we labored to persuade
them to the contrary, by all the means we could use, all proved in vain. So
forth they took Ten Men out of our Room, I my self was one of the Ten, being at
that same time very weak and lately recovered of a great Fit of sickness. I
being very well acquainted with their Cruelty, did my best endeavor to give
them the slip, which thing I did when we came down amongst the thickest of our
People, and so I hid my self: Now they not having any great knowledge of me, I
put off my Coat, and altered my self so much, that they did not know me when
they saw me; the other Nine they carried away, and put them into such Chains as
the Gally-slaves were kept in, until about Night; then in comes the wise Major,
according to his accustomary manner, so to him they told their Tale; he comes
immediately to the Men in Irons, and bids them confess who it was that did
heave the Stones, or else he would whip every Man that lay in that Room, which
were Forty in number; our Men still protested that they knew nothing of the
matter; then he told them that should not serve their turn; so he ordered one
of them to be stripped naked to the Waste, and so laid down upon the Ploor on his
Face, with two Men to hold his Hands; that done, he commanded a Slave to give
him Twenty Stripes with a double smart Rope, that cut him in every stroke most
sadly: That done, he was sent into the Prison to us; he told them withal, that
he would serve them the like, and every Man in the Room, if they did not
confess. But his Fury ended in this, so that the rest that were in Irons was to
be kept there during his Pleasure; so that if they had not taken several of
them out, and carried them to the Hospital, they had died there, the rest
remained there Fourteen days, and had nothing but Bread and Water; the Man that
was thus whipped, his name is Matthew Milbourn of Scarborough, and came well over
to England in the beginning of June.

At the latter end of January several of our Men broke the Prison, and got
away, and where there was One got away Ten might, had not a parcel of Dutch
men, who were well heated with Drink, made such a noise that alarmed the Guard,
and by that means were prevented, and some of them taken and cut most
pitiously, and put in Irons Legs and Arms, whereof one dyed of the Wounds they
gave him.

About this time we had an Account, that from the Fourth of November 89. to the
latter end of January 90. Three hundred English men had dyed in the Prison and
Hospital, besides a great many Dutch. At this time the Protestants of Rochell
sent both Money and Clothes, a considerable quantity, to be distributed amongst
us, and for several Weeks together they sent every Lords day near Ten Bushels
of good Bread, which was shared amongst us by one Mr. Hosea, who was
Interpreter to the Intendant of Rochefort, by reason they durst not be seen in
doing of it themselves. If I should describe all the Acts of Charity that we
have felt from the Protestants since our first being in France, would deserve
of it self a particular Treatise; so I shall say no more but this, that I wish
all English People, who live under the sweetest umbrage of the most wholsomest
Laws upon the Earth; where the most Interlucent Beams of the most Holy Gospel
of Christ are spread abroad; where every Man holds in Right and Property all
that he possesses; these People, I wish they had but the Charity and Faith as
some of the distressed Protestants of France have.

February. The beginning of this Month several of our Carpenters were by the
Pithy persuasion of the Interpreter, for their health sake, persuaded to go
forth to work upon their Ships, and withal they were promised more Victuals,
and Twelve Souse per day, which they embraced, and went out to work; so that in
a little time they were bravely refreshed, when as before they looked like so
many Objects of pity, both for want of Food and good Air and Clothes, which
now many of them got; so they were employed only in Caulking their Ships upper
and lower Decks. Soon after they got a Company of Seamen to go forth to work as
Laborers in the Yard, giving them Twelve Pence per day, which was a great
comfort to them: This method they used, that in a small time they had all the
Men by turn out to work. One day they called a List of Fifty Men, and two days
after called another List, and so by this method most of the Men got a little
Money; now whether this working of the Men on this nature were purely for their
own Interest or no, which I believe it was, because their great Expedition
required more Men than they could have; but yet I am sure that it ended also in
the Interest of our Men, for now our Men were more healthful, and of a better
Countenance.

February the 16th. Several of our Men made an attempt and got over the Wall,
but were discovered, and several of them taken; about Twenty got away clear;
those that were taken were sorely drub'd; and after all that, they were put
into Irons, and fastened to the Wall, where they lay exposed to the Weather
night and day; their Fare being only Bread and Water, except it were any thing
they got from their Fellow Prisoners: No Men were admitted to come near them,
except it were by stealth; those that did, run the hazard of being drub'd: this
was some part of the Majors love to us. Not long after this some of our Men
found a convenience to make their escapes, by cutting through a Wall, and then
after lowering themselves out of a Window Three Stories high; so by this means
Three and forty of them made their escapes; and by the neglect of those that
stayed behind, which did not hail the Rope in, they were discovered, and the
whole Country alarmed, and Men sent every way in the pursuit of them, all
Rodes and By-ways, and the Woods searched: several of them were taken at several
times and places; and as fast as they were taken they were brought back and put
into Irons, and so fastened to a Wall under an Arch, where they lay in a most
miserable Condition: and if they had got no other sustenance but what the
French gave them, they without doubt had the better part of them perished, if
not all. These are the names of several of the Men that suffered in this kind,
William Deacons, Benjamin Guy, James Ingle, John Hutchins, William Punton,
Jacob Williams, James Ellis, and several others; and a Declaration was made
about the Country, That if any Person was found to give entertainment to any
English Prisoner, they should be put in the Galleys. Much about this time they
began to Lanch some of the Fisteen Sail of Galleys that were built here, and so
kept lanching One, Two, or Three a Week, so that by the latter end of April
they were all lancht. Before they lanch either Ship or Gally, this is their
method, about a dozen of their Infallible Doctors goes aboard, with their
Crucifixes and other Popish trumpery to bless the Ship or Gally, and when that
is done, they are sure all things must needs go well with them. I observed this
at the lanching one of the two Ships that was built here, whereof one was a
Three Decked Ship of Ninty odd Guns, and the other a Two Decked Ship of Sixty odd
Guns; the least of these two, before she was lancht, had a great number of the
Popish Priests went aboard to give her a thorough Blessing, with at least Five
hundred People after them: The next day this Ship was lancht, and in her
lanching she broke her Scag, and shatered the After Part of her Keell, so that
they had enough to do to keep her above Water; and if with the stroke she had
not after run over some Mud, that filled much of the Rent up, she had without
doubt sunk. Now these Ships were lancht long before they were finished their
upper Work being built a flote: When they had near finished this Ship, they
fitted for the Careen, and so hove her down, and cut out Fifteen Foot of the
After part of the Keell. Our Men that remained here in the Prison, and would
not go out to work, were by the Intendants Order kept hear to work, wheeling
Rubish into the Prison Yard to raise it, having Soldiers to be their Overseers,
continually following them which way soever they went. One of our Men, named
Thomas Fenwick, who refused to work in this kind for them, the Major and a
Sergeant immediately fell upon, beating him with their great Sticks in such a
barbarous manner, that it was thought by all the men that beheld it, that they
designed nothing else but to murder the man. After all this, they made him work
with the Wheel-barrow several days together, Slave like; nay, far worse then
Slaves were we treated by them in every respect; for, as for the Slaves, the
French King allows them very considerably for the work they do on Shore, by
which they get both good Victuals and good Drink; but all the Reward our poor
men get of them for their work in the Prison, is nothing but ill Words, and
many a blow on the Back.

March the Sixth Two hundred of our men were sent away hence for Dinan, in
order to be exchanged; this added to us new Life, thinking it might come to our
turns once to be Redeemed of this cruel Place, if it pleased God to spare us
our Lives, when as just before our hopes of getting clea^ was quite worn
Threadbare.

In the beginning of April here came an Express from Paris, for the speedy
fitting out of Five Sail of Ships of Sixty odd Guns a Piece: but the last Ships
that went away from this Place carried away all their Seamen, that they had not
so many left as was able to Rig these Ships; so that Orders was given by the
Intendant that they should take the English Prisoners out of the Prison, and
put them aboard these Ships, and make them rig them, which was done
accordingly; and when some of their Commission Officers, with other Soldiers
came into the Prison to us; our Men refused to go out at their Command, so
forth with they drew all their Swords, Cowards-like, and began to lay on; and
so by force they drove aboard One hundred and nineteen of them, and divided
amongst these Five Ships, where they continued Twelve days, working many times
both night and day; and when they had any time to sleep, their Lodging was on
the hard Deck: their Victuals also was very little, but yet they said they gave
to them as much as they did to their own People, which by the Descriptions of
it, is not half so much as the King of England allows his Men, for Bread is
the three fourths of their Provision. After they had rigged these Ships, they
also helped to carry them down the River, unto the Place where they used to
take in their Guns; one of these Ships taking in her Guns with our Men. After
this was done, the Captains of these Ships asked our Men if any of them were
willing to serve either the French King or King James; they all answered, they
would not willingly serve either of them, but that they would rather dye in
Prison, if King William would not Redeem them. Upon these Answers they were all
of them sent to Prison again, and this was all the Reward they had for their
work.

April 5. here came Eleven hunderd and fifty Gally-Slaves from Marseilles, who
gave us this account, That as they were crossing the Bay of Lanquedoc, in
several Galleys and Settests, they were chased by several Ships either English
or Dutch, or both; and they were of this Opinion, that if they had had but two
hours day light more they had took them every Man; for it seems they came up
with them so fairly, that they took the Stern of most of them which were laden
with Provisions for the Slaves, such as Clothes, and Covering, etc. This gave
such encouragement to the Slaves, that they did not fear to say before the Face
of their Patroons, that they did not doubt but that the English would set them
at liberty, if ever they went out to Sea in their Galleys. The major part of
these Slaves were Turks and Moors, and the rest were French men. The Turks and
Moors had also Contracted, that if ever they came but near an English Man of
War, they would do their utmost endeavor to give the Gally away to the
English, in hopes thereby to get their freedom: But I rather think these
Galleys will not venture to go out in these Sea, but rather keep them in
Harbor on purpose to plague his poor Subjects upon every small Offense. These
Galleys are much less then the Galleys in the Mediterranean Seas, but in Form
altogether like them, being about One hundred and twenty Foot long, and about
Eighteen Foot by the Beam, and not above Seven Foot deep in the Hold, which
when they have all their Men, and other Provisions aboard, they will be so
deep, not above Two Foot from the Water edge in the Midships, only their Oars
and Banks lie higher above the Body of the Gally, as is their manner so to do.
These Galleys carry Four Guns right forward in their Prow, and in the Midships
right forward in time of Service they have a Cushe Piece of about Six thousand
weight, which runs in a Trunk, and so lies when Service is done near the Mast
for Ballast. These Galleys that were here built at Rochfort, will Row with
about Fifty four and Fifty six Oars a piece, having six Men to an Oar; so that
these Galleys will carry Three hundred thirty six Slaves, besides Seamen and
Soldiers, which will be very near One hundred and fifty more. I am clearly of
Opinion, that if they come out into the Biscayan Seas, which they must of
necessity do if ever they come out, they will not find them like the
Mediterranean Seas; and if there does but blow any Gale at all considerable,
without they can immediately get into a Harbor, the Sea must be their Graves,
for I am sure that these Galleys will not be able to endure any Sea at all.

Just about the time aforesaid, we had six of our Englishmen brought here,
which were taken as they were striving to make their Escape, in this manner:
They were in the Hospital of Oleroon de Chattu, and when they were somewhat
recovered of their Illness, they did their endeavors to get for England; and
watching an Opportunity to get a Boat, which they had one night, they went
away, rowing along the Shore side, thinking to meet a small Burtoon laden with
Wine and Brandy, and so to clap her aboard, and then carry her away for the
Coast of England; but, poor men, on the contrary, they met a Privateer, who
chased them ashore in the River of Bordeaux, at a Town called Roan, where they
were seized, and so sent hither, and put into Chains, in the open place where
they used to put the other men that I mentioned before. Four days after these
men were taken, there came the Scrivan of Oleroon, to inquire of them who it
was that helped them to the Boat they got away with: They told him, No body;
for they took the Boat without the assistance of any one. Now in this Island of
Oleroon, as there are many Protestants, so, amongst the rest, there is a very
wealthy man, who used to extend the utmost of his Charity to our Englishmen,
for which he was hated by the other Party most desperately. Now this Scrivan
would fain have persuaded these men to confess, that it was this Protestant
that helped them to the Boat to make their Escape; for they needed no more for
the undoing of this good man, but only to have this laid to his Charge: But the
men stoutly denied the thing, and notwithstanding all his Threatenings, they
told him, they would not speak against their Consciences, to the undoing of any
Innocent man. The Scrivan swore by all his Gods, That he would make them
confess that it was that man, or else he would burn them with lighted Matches
betwixt their Fingers and Toes: Now whether he did so to them or no, I cannot
tell; for the next day I came away, with two hundred more, in order to be
exchanged.

April the twenty second in the morning, before we marched, the good Peopeople
of this place gave two hundred Shirts to our men that were to march to day, the
most of them being new.

From Rochefort to Denan, April 22. 1690.

TUesday, About Eleven in the Morning 200 of the English and Scots Nation were
called out of the Prison, in order for a march for Denan, to be exchanged as
they told us: just before we marched, they gave us a bit of Bread and a cup of
Beverage per Man: that done, away we went with great Joy, leaving behind us of
our English Men, in Prison and in the Hospital, about One hundred and forty or
thereabouts: the Morning was rainy, and by that the Ways dirty, but the
Afterternoon proved favorable and fair. Just as we came without the Towngate,
we gave the rest of our Countrymen, which we left behind, three Cheers or
Hollows: That done, away we marched Six Leagues, to a Town called Lazerean,
leaving Rochel on the left hand. About two Leagues off this Town was lately a
Town where resided much Protestant People; but, alas, all the Remains that is
to be seen of them now, is to see their Houses, which are many of them plucked
down to the Ground, with their Churches also: they quartered us all here in one
empty House, where the Floor was spread with Rushes: our Supper was a piece of
Bread and one Sirdena per Man: the inhabitants of the Town gave us Wine to our
Supper.

Wednesday 23. By six in the Morning we were all drawn up in a square Place to
be counted, and to be served our Dinner; and while we were at it, we heard a
small Hand-Bell tinkling, presently appeared a young Man carrying a Crucifix,
after him a great concourse of poor Men bare-headed, singing some of their
Popish Canticles: after them followed a Man bearing a white Flag, in the manner
of an Ensign of War; and after him, an other bore a Flag of red color, with a
cross in it like that of St. Georges; but it was thus carried, the Flag was
made fast to a Staff just the breadth of the Flag, and in the middle of the
Staff was a piece of Line made fast, and so made fast to the end of another
Stick, so it hung like a square Sail: After this followed the Priest in his
Pontifical Habit, and after him a whole drove of Women; who, as far as I could
perceive, minded us more than their Devotion: I did admire, that I saw but one
Vulture amongst all these Geese, for I always observed that these sort of Foul
most an end go in flocks. After we had eat a piece of Bread and a Sirdena, and
drank a cup of poor sorry Wine, away we marched for the Town of Maraine,
distant five Leagues, the Weather fair and clear, and the Road good. When we
came into the Town we were put into a great empty House, where our Lodging was
on the Floor; but some of us got a little Litter out of the Stable, but most
none at all: our Supper was a piece of Bread and one Egg, with a Cup of
Beverage.

Thursday 24. About six in the Morning we came out of the House, and as we past
out they gave each Man a small Loaf, and so we stood in two-Ranks to be served
Drink, which was a Cup of Beverage. Here many of our People received much
Charity of some of the tender Sex, who gave some of us Stockings and Shirts:
That done, away we went into three Boats, and so was carried up the River of
Maraine three Leagues, and were landed at a Town called Pouray; from thence we
marched five Leagues to a Town called Terray, the Weather fair and clear, and
the Road good: When we came into this Town it was quite dark, so we were
thronged all into a Barn, where our Lodging was very bad, and our Supper very
slender, viz. a piece of Bread and one Egg per Man.

Friday 25. About nine this Morning they gave us our Dinner, a Souse-Loaf and
about 50 Eggs for two hundred Men, with a Cup of sour Wine: That done, away we
marched six Leagues, to a Town called St. Vincean, here they gave us a half
Souse-Loaf per Man, with one Egg and a Cup of sour Wine; and as for our
Lodging, we were all thronged together in a Stable.

Saturday 26. About seven in the Morning they gave us our Dinner, a small brown
Loaf, worth eight Deniers, with one Egg and a Cup of sour Wine, so away we
marched six Leagues to a Town called St. Georges, the Weather very fair, and
the Road good, being all very good Champion Land in this part of the Country.
At our arrival into the Town we were conducted into a great Barn, and some into
a Stable, where our Lodging was very cold in the Night; our Supper was a small
brown Loaf and one Egg per Man, with a Cup of sad sorry Wine.

Sunday 27. After our Guards and Provo had been at Mass they gave us our
Dinner, which was such as our Supper, a small brown Loaf and one Egg, with a
Cup of sad stuff of Wine After we had eat and drank, away we marched four
Leagues, to a Town called Egreville; the Way being very good, but the Day very
calm and hot. When we came into this Village, we were quartered at the same
House we were quartered at in our passage to Rochfort, at the Sign of the three
Kings; our Lodging was in a Stable, our Supper was a small Loaf and one Egg per
Man, with a Cup of poor Wine.

Monday 28. About eleven in the Morning we were all served our Dinner, a small
Loaf, with one Egg and a Cup of sour thick Wine: that done, away we marched
four long Leagues, to the City of Nantes; when we came into Town we were put
into a close strong Prison, where we were most desperately thronged; and our
Supper was Bread and Eggs, as before, with the like Drink as before. We heard
that the Captain of the Portsmouth was kept here close Prisoner.

Tuesday 29. About eight in the Morning we were served our Dinner and Breakfast
all under one, as they used; but now they gave each Man two Eggs and a small
Loaf, with a Cup of Wine; the Morning was rainy, and so it continued until
about three in the Afternoon; yet notwithstanding we marched seven Leagues
through all the Rain, so that we were the most part of us as wet as well we
could be, and at the end of seven Leagues we came to alone Inn, where we had
very cold entertainment, nothing but Bread and Water, and very bad Lodging.

Wednesday 30. About six in the Morning we marched four Leagues to a Town
called Nosce, where we remained all Day, we lodged in the very same House we
did when we went for Rochfort; the Afternoon proving very rainy. They gave us
here a piece of Bread and a little bit of Butter, so we remained in two
Stables. At Night they gave us the Flesh that they had long promised, about a
pound for ten Men, and that was the most, yet Meat was very reasonably cheap in
this place: they gave us to drink some nasty foul Cider; I should choose rather
to drink Water than it.

May, Thursday the First. The Mornin being Rainy we continued here until about
ten of the Clock, about which time the Weather began to clear up: then were we
served our Dinner, just such a quantity of Meat as before, as near as could be
guest at, with the same sort of Drink. From hence we marched seven Miles, to a
Town called Dervall, and there we stopped an Hour or thereabouts; and from thence
we marched five Miles to a Town called Fushgecea. Here was a great Fair of
Cattle in this Town: and this Day we were carried through the Fair, and so put
into two Stables; our Supper being a small Loaf and one Egg, with Water, our
Lodging on the cold Ground.

Friday 2. About eight in the Morning we were served our Dinner, a Loaf and one
Egg per Man, with a Cup of foul nasty Cider; so away we marched three Leagues,
to a Town called Beant, and from thence to a poor Village called Polonia, one
League and a half further; the Weather was showry to Day, but the Road
indifferent good, the Land very hilly, but all the Hills very fertile; our
Lodging in this place was very hard, lying in an open Barn on the bare Ground,
the covering of the Barn was quite gone on the one side; our Supper was a small
Loaf and one Egg, and Water for Drink.

Saturday 3. About eight in the Morning we were served our Dinner, which was a
small Loaf and one Egg per Man, with Water; so away we marched six Leagues, to
the City of Reens, where we lodged, some in an empty Barn and some in Stables:
Our supper was a piece of Bread and one Egg per Man, and Water to drink; so we
lay many of us like so many Pigs in a Stye.

Sunday 4. About eight we were served our Dinner, viz. a small Loaf and one Egg
per Man; so away we marched four Leagues and half to a Village called St.
Chapel, but by the way Three of our Men deserted us. After they had given us
our Supper, which was a small bit of old Irish salt Beef, with a Loaf and a
little sour Syder, they began to miss those Men: by this means we were all
called out into the Close to be counted, and after many times counting, they
mist Three of their number; but good lack, what a toss was Jack Provo in, and
his Hounds swearing and cursing. These Men were Two of them Guernsey or Gersey,
and the other an English Man that they mist; after this we went to sleep in the
Stables.

Monday Five. About Nine in the Morning they gave each Man about an Ounce of
old Irish Beef, with about half a Souse worth of Bread. From hence we marched
six long Leagues to the Town of Denan: about Four in the Afternoon we came into
the Town, where we saw many Dutch Prisoners, and this day they cleared Thirty
six English Prisoners. After we were ranged in the Praid, and counted, we were
called over by our names; that done we were put into two close Prisons, 100 in
a Prison, where we got neither bit nor sup for Supper; in the Prison we found
several small heaps of Straw, on which we slept, our hopes of getting clear was
our greatest comfort.

In this Prison of Dinan were we kept for twenty days, a hundred of us in one
Prison, and the other hundred in another Prison. In the one of these Prisons we
had the benefit of a little fresh Air, but in the other none at all, both of
them being miserable stinking places, under Ground, in old Castles, whose Walls
were fifteen Foot thick, and the Windows treble barred; yet for all this place
was so strong, they kept Sentinels within the Prisons night and day, for fear
we should break Prison; and every day the Officers came and counted us, for
fear lest they should lose some of us. The Wall of this Place was so thick,
that the Prison was very cold, considering the time of the Year. For our
Lodging they gave us Straw, and as for our Food, it was very well, considering
the place we were in, being far better than any we met with yet in France; and
our Liquor was only Water. Those People that guarded us here were very civil,
not abusing any of us, as they had done in other places: Our greatest Annoyance
in this place was the horrid stink of the Prison, which did not only offend the
Nose, but make the Eyes smart also.

May the 24th. Mr. John White, Commander of the Betty, being employed by the
King to fetch and carry Prisoners of War, came here to day, and with a great
deal of Prudence and Exactness brought over a hundred and five Englishmen into
England, supplying many of them with Money according to their present
Occasions, giving them, whilst they were in their Passage, the best of Food,
and good Drink, and by God's assistance landed us May 31. at Weymouth; where
when we came ashore, we were kindly treated by those good People. June the
first we got our several Passes of the Mayor; so away we traveled to
Dorchester, where we were relieved by the People, the Mayor also giving us his
Charity very liberally; and at night we got to Blanford, where we were very
charitably relieved by the good People of the Town: But in all the rest of the
Towns we came through, our Men had so little Charity bestowed on them, that if
some of us that had Money had not relieved them, they had without doubt died on
the Road.

When we came to Salisbury, thirty of us went directly to the Mayor, and showed
him our Passes; who gave amongst us all four shillings: Our Men desired his
Worship to consider them, they having eaten nothing all day, and as for this
Money, they knew not well what to do with it: He hastily replied, Give it me
again, and I will give you nothing: So away they went with that little they
had. Now this Mayor of Salisbury had a Son that was taken by the French, and
traveled with us up from St. Malo to Toulon in Irons; and when we came back to
Rochfort, died in a most lamentable condition with the Small Pox. There were in
our Company two Men that belonged to the Ship this Mayor's Son did, whose Names
were Samuel Westmore and Thomas Dicas; and these men had taken care of this
young man in his Sickness, and when he was dead, made his Grave, and buried
him: Now they had often heard him in his Lifetime say, That his Father lived
well and in good fashion in Salisbury; and it so happening as they came through
this Town, they enquired for one Mr. Phelps; the People told them that Mr.
Phelps was the Mayor; so away they went to him, expecting to be sure a Belly
full of Victuals. They told him they came out of France, and that his Son
Charles was dead: He asked them what Ship he did belong to: They told him the
Ships Name and Commander too. Well, said he to them, I do believe your
Testimony, and withal gave betwixt them two a Double Stiver, and dismissed
them; now I heard the Men say, that the People of that Town would take it for
no more than a Penny.

By God's assistance the major part of us got into London the fifth day of
June. So here is the End of my hard Travels; which as it is not the full Sum of
our Sorrows, so I am able to produce the Testimony of at least twenty Men, in a
short time, if occasion required, that are able to make Oath, that I have not
writ any thing in this whole Work that is contrary to Truth. So I wish all good
People good Success in their honest Employments.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin.
THE Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant; containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the Beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, A Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop, about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

The Cabinet Opened: or, The Secret History of the Amors of Madam de Maintenon
with the French King. Translated from the French Copy.

The History of the Most Illustrious, William, Prince of Orange: Deduced from
the first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most
considerable Actions of this present Prince. The Second Edition.

A Collection of Fourteen Papers, relating to the Affairs of Church and State,
in the Reign of the late King James.

The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of I. The Laws and Government. II.
Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the Honorable
Sir W. Coventry. The Third Edition carefully Corrected, and cleared from the
Errors of the First Impression.

An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact
as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most Remarkable
Passages, omitted in the former. Collected by a Fellow of the said College.

The Absolute Necessity of standing vigorously by the present Government: Or, A
View of what both Churchmen and Dissenters must expect, if by their unhappy
Divisions, Popery and Tyranny should return again.

The Justice of the Parliament, in inflicting of Punishments subsequent to
Offenders, vindicated; and the Lawfulness of the present Government asserted.

An Account of Mr. Parkinson's Expulsion from the University of Oxford, in the
late Times; in vindication of him from the false Aspersions cast upon him, in a
late Pamphlet, entitled, The History of Passive Obedience.

The way to Peace among all Protestants; being a Letter of Reconciliation, sent
by Bp. Ridley to Bp. Hooper, by Mr. Samuel Johnson.

Purgatory proved by Miracles: collected out of Roman Catholic Authors. With
some Remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints. With
a Preface concerning their Miracles. By Mr. Samuel Johnson.

A Seasonable Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of
Imposition in Matters of Religion: Recommended to serious Consideration. By Mr.
Andrew Marvel, late Member of Parliament.

The Revolter. A Tragi-Comedy, acted between the Hind and Panther, and Religio
Laici.

A Collection of Poems, Satyrs, and Songs, against Popery and Tyranny. In Four
Parts.

An Answer to the Bishop of Rochester's first and second Letters, etc.

The Intrigues of the French King at Constantinople to imbroil Christendom;
discovered in several Dispatches past between him and the late Grand Signior,
Grand Vizier, and Count Teckley; all of them found among that Count's Papers.
With some Reflections upon them.

Plain English: In Relation to the real and pretended Friends to the English
Monarchy. Humbly offered to the Consideration of his Majesty, and his Great
Council, the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. The Second Edition.
With a short Preface, and an Appendix, concerning the Coronation Oath
administered to King James the Second.

The New Nonconformist: Or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in Preaching after a
Deprivation, incurred by the Express Words of a Statute: Fairly Stated and
Examined. With short Reflections upon Mr. Cook's Sermon, February the 2d, 16
89/90. which was Licensed by the Archbishop's Chaplain.

The Fate of France: A Discourse wherein it is showed, That by the Happy
Revolution in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal
Monarchy, are disappointed; and the Rational Grounds to believe his Downfall
near. In three Dialogues betwixt Father Petre, Father La Chaize, and two
Protestant Gentlemen.

The Anatomy of a Jacobite-Tory: In a Dialogue between Whig and Tory,
occasioned by the Act for Recognizing King William and Queen Mary.

The Great Bastard Protecter of the Little One. Done out of French. And for
which the French King put forth a Proclamation, with a Reward of Five thousand
Louis d'Ors, to discover the Author.

A True Narrative of the Murders, Cruelties and Oppressions, perpetrated on
the Protestants in Ireland, by the Late King James's Agents, since his Arrival
there. Published for the Information of the Jacobites, that endeavor his
Return again.

Reflections upon a Form of Prayer, lately set forth by the Jacobites of the
Church of England: and of an Abhorrence, rendered by the Late King, to some of
our Dissenting Bishops, upon his present Majesty's Landing.

A Sermon preached before the High-Court of Parliament at Edinburgh, on Sunday
the 27th of April 1690. And published by their Special Command. By George
Meldrum, a Presbyterian Minister, and till of late one of the Episcopal Clergy
of that Kingdom.


