A REPLY UNTO THE LETTER WRITTEN TO Mr. HENRY STUBBE IN DEFENSE OF THE HISTORY
OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY. Whereunto is added a Preface against Ecebolius Glanvill;
and an answer to the Letter of Dr HENRY MORE, Containing A REPLY TO THE
UNTRUTHES He has published, AND A CENSURE OF THE CABBALO-PYTHAGORICAL
Philosophy, by him promoted.

-- Spissis indigna theatris
Scripta pudet recitare, and nugis addere pondus.
OXFORD, Printed for Richard Davis. 1671.

THE LETTER TO Mr. HENRY STUBS Concerning his Censure upon certain passages
contained in the History of the Royal Society.
SIR,
WHEN I was (lately) at Warwick, I purposed to have waited upon you, but I was
told by a Person of Quality and of your acquaintance that you were gone to
Oxford, with a great carriage of Books, to write against the Royal Society, and
the reason of this enterprise was given to your dissuading Friends, that the
Society did design to bring in Poperty.

The accusation (1 confe) seemed to me very strange, but what was more
wonderful, is such mighty Zeal for any one Religion and against That. This
calls to my mind a discourse which you made one day at White Hall to a
Christ-Church Man and my self immediately after your return from Jamaica, where
you told us of a Provincial of the Dominicans, who being a Prisoner there, had
persuaded you to go and live with him in the Spanish Plantations, as being a
place, in which you might very gainfully practice Physic; and Nothing, as you
said, hindered your compliance with his overtures, but only this, that you could
not have carried away hereafter the Effects of your estate, but must have left
it, if you had left the Country.

In all which account of the transactions betwixt that Provincial (who was of
the Inquisition) and your self, you skewed so much gentle calmne of mind in the
affair of changing Religion, that I was almost ready to have pronounced, that
some one had stolen your Name and put it to the Censure; till I was better
informed that your quarrel to this Assembly is so unappeasable, that you would
fall out with any Religion, which they favored, and that if they had of each
kind amongst them, you would entertain no sort at all.

I must proof I always esteemed you (by your Printed Papers) a Man of excellent
contradicting parts, and I thought you would in this book have done as good
service to Aristotle, as a grave Dignitary of Canterbury has lately rendered to
him, when he very industriously maintains that the Philosopher in his Ethics
did teach, what is the summum bonum, as well as David could, when he set
himself on purpose to treat of the same Argument in the first Psalm. or that you
would have repeated some of the least natural experiments, laughed at them, and
then with very good conduct of style made all the rest appear ridiculous. But
you will say that may be done hereafter, but a present Religion, Religion is in
danger, and therefore you must succor your Dear Mother the Church of England.
It is done like a good Child: and further I must commend you as a generous
enemy in your censure of the Historian. He is a Clergyman, and herein you
challenge him at his own Weapon: And if you vanquish him in this Encounter, you
may expect to make both your Reputation and his lo very considerable, being
that in England a Churchman suffers more for being Popishly affected, then for
being a favourer of the New Philosophy. But i will tell you what falls out very
unluckily.

This History was not Licensed (as could have been wished) by the President of
the Royal Society: For then a Man might have charged every impious and
pernicious Paragraph upon that large body of Men, but so it is that it comes
abroad into the World with an Imprimatur from Secretary Morris, of whom we
cannot persuade the people to believe otherwise, but that he stands two or
three removes off from Popery. But now at last give me leave as a By-stander to
lock over your Game, and privately to advize you where the other side may espy
any advantage. As the first instance of a passage in the History Destructive to
the Religion and Church of England, viz.

While the Bishops of Rome did assume an infallibility, and a Sovereign
Dominion over our Faith, the reformed Churches did not only justly refuse to
grant them that, but some of them thought themselves obliged to forbear all
Communion, and would not give them that respect, which possibly might belong to
so Ancient, and so Famous a Church, and which might still have been allowed it
without any danger of Superstition. If any one should undertake a defense
against your censure, it is probable that he would say somewhat to this
purpose, that by Communion there mentioned the Author did not mean, that the
reformed Churches should join with them in all or the most important acts of
worship, being that hereby they must at all adventures yield to the points of
the controversy, which the Roman infallibility would thrust upon them, for he
tells us that our Churches did justly refuse to grant them that, but he
explains what he intends by Communion, when he does immediately add that they
refused to give them that respect, etc. Now who can say that Communion if taken
for Divine Worship can be the same with respect that it stewed to a Society of
Men; and whereas you seem to argue from the notion of the word Communion, as if
it were the same with the Lords Supper, it may by replied, that the one sense,
wherein it may be understood throughout the whole Scripture is, a friendly and
charitable action, and from this we cannot except that verse, which you
allege, and in this sense it is not impious to say that we should not forbear
all Communion, or deny to give that respect which possibly might belong to so
ancient, and so famous a Church. Nor can I see that these Titles bestowed on
Rome are so faulty, since there are methods of speech in our language suitable
hereunto, whereby we call that ancient and famous, not which is so at present,
but what was such a long time ago, and continued the same for a great while.
But I will grant that this is not the necessary, but only the possible meaning
of this Historian; Yet at least if the contrary intimation be so heinous, good
Nature should oblige to understand the phrase in the most favorable manner:
but supposing he thought that Rome even at the reformation of others, (though
it self was not amended) might neverthele be called a Church, he said no more
then what the most learned amongst the German Divines, though warm with
disputes, did readily acknowledge. It was usual with them to say that the
Church of Rome was truly a Church, notwithstanding that it abounded in many and
dangerous errors, seeing that they retained the main Doctrines of Christian
Religion, and they endeavored to clear their assertion by comparing it to a
diseased body, which yet is as truly a humane body, as it is a diseased one.

And if it may be termed a Church, it is without doubt very ancient and famous
too, for what it has been of old as to the piety and learning of many
Inhabitants of that City; and still is Famous for that precedence, which any
Herald would assign to it in a free Assembly of Western Bishops.

So that from what has been discoursed in this matter may be inferred, that
though the Author meant not, that we must communicate with them in the
distinguisting Offices of adoration, yet (for any thing I perceive) he needs
not to account them of that Church to be unto us as Heathens, or of such a
Number of Men with whom we may not so much as eat, but that we may maintain a
Communion of friendship with the professed of that Religion, whose morals may
afford an example, or whose learning might advance our knowledge. And the
reformed must still keep the hearty Charity for the Romanist, that after
succele debates, though managed with reason and temper, he should still
endeavor to improve him in all the uncontroverted instances of goodne and
virtue; such an exercise of Friendship and Charity as this is a Noble and
Religious Communion, it is an exhorting one another in our most Holy Faith, it
is an exact obedience to ihat command; That as far as we have already attained
we should walk by the same rule.

As to the next exception which you have against the same passage, viz. His
mistake in making the Papal Infallibility to be the grand occasion of the
differences betwixt the reformed Religion and Papist, I must tell you that he
may well enough defend himself, though indeed you pre closer in this then in
the former objection against all Communion with Rome. You say that only
Parasitical Canonists did ascribe to the Pope such a Sovereign Dominion over
our Faith: I suppose you mean at the reformation, though you cite many Authors
much later, and if so I shall only referr you to the report, which Cassander
gives of those days, in his Judgment which he passes on the controversies,
viz. That then they made the Pope but little le then God, that they set his
Authority not only above the Church, but above the Scriptures to, and made his
sentences equal to divine Oracles, and to be an infallible rule of Faith, and
(as he further proceeds) though there was another sort of people in the Church,
yet they were such as were obscure and concealed.

Again though it were granted that infallibility lay in a Council, yet the Pope
had the executive power of those decrees and Canons, which passed by so high an
Authority, and hereupon might be troublesome with an Infallibility derived from
others, and impose little things as absolutely necessary in their own nature:
and this practice of the Bishops of Rome (amongst others) caused those of
Germany to stand off from the Roman Church.

But for a fuller proof against the Author of the History, you allege, that
erroneous Doctrine about indulgences was the primary occasion of introducing
Protestancy. What you say is so far true, the first occasion of Luthers public
invectives against the Court of Rome, but for a good while after he maintained
Communion as a member of that Church. This is manifest to any one, that is but
in a small measure acquainted with the Histories of those times; but at last
when he saw there was no hopes of Reformation in this and other instances of
gross abuse, he utterly leaves them as past all likelihood of recovery.

So that I have now prepared the cause depending betwixt you and him, and made
it ready for a Trial, and it may be determined by finding out the true account
of the Grand hinderance of a Reformation at Rome. Your adversary might give a
very fair proof, that it was mainly a reputed infallibility. This is evident in
the impartial History of the Council of Trent, where we read of a consultation
held by Pope Advian VI. with some Cardinals for an amendment of what was amiss,
more particularly about the matter of Indulgences, after that much had been
said by himself and another against the mistakes and ill practices in that
affair, and after that he had declared his Resolution for the regulating
thereof, he was soon turned from his Former purpose by Cardinal Soderinus an
old Politician, and one who well understood the Frame of that Church. This Man
informs the Pope that any Reformation was dangerous for Rome, because that this
would implicitly yield that somewhat was amiss, and that possibly they might
err in more, whereas the successes of Rome, against such opposers were
obtained by vouching for what ever was blamed and by proceeding against them as
Heretics.

This made Adrian to bewail the unhappy condition of Popes, who might not
reform at home, if they would. And now at last you seem to make infallibility
so small a thing even in their own esteem, that as you cite the words of a late
writer amongst them, their Infallibility is limited to Tradition, and is
spiritually assisted in the Faithful reporting of what has been delivered. It
is easy to see thorough this harmless pretense of your judicious Author.

For to be the sole and undoubted witness in their own cause on which sentence
must follow in course is equally advantageous, as if they were taken for
infallible judges. Thus the Jews who did so highly advance the credit of their
Rabbinical traditions as thereby to make void the Law of God, do not (as we
see in Abravanel) own any more then only that they expound and stew the
Articles of Faith; yet that Jew, who shall despise or jeer at the Teachers of
those traditions, shall not (according to their Fundamentalls) have a part in
the life to come. And at the same rate may the Former sort of men denounce
Anathema's if you believe not their report, though in matters, which are not
only, not certain, but withal are unreasonable, ridiculous and impossible.

Another passage in the History is brought in by you, and deaply charged to be
contrary to the Analogy of Faith and Scripture (to wit) He (the Natural and
Experimental Philosopher) will be led to admire the wonderful contrivance of
the creation, and so to apply and direct his praises aright, which, no doubt,
when they are offered up to Heaven from the mouth of one that has well studied
what he commends will be more suitable to the Divine nature, than the blind
applauses of the ignorant. This (you say) makes the acceptableness of all men's
Prayers to depend more or less on the study of natural Philosophy. But the
Authors words may by asserted by the whole contexture of that Section, that he
therein answers an objection, and clearly shows that the study of experimental
Philosophy is not injurious to the worship of God; he supposes the person
already a Christian; and then he praises God more beartily for some examples of
power and wisdom, which he by inquiry has found out, but others have not; for
when a man praises God with understanding for what he discovers particularly
in the wonderful works of Gods own hand, his praises must needs be more
suitable on the same subject, then are those general thanksgivings, wherein a
man that has not meditated on the works of Creation, blesses God still for
them, but cannot say how far these exceed the utmost productions of art, or the
improved power of natural causes. Thus the commendation of any workmanship, if
given by a great Master in that Art, is more satisfactory to the Artificer,
then the admiring noise of the multitude, who probably may misplace their
greatest wonder upon that which is the least thing in it. And now (pray) what
harm in all this, and yet the Author (as far as I can see) speaks no worser,
but much very well, in the following clauses, against Atheism. But if I may ask
you to what end do you change his words Praises into Prayers? was it, that you
might prove (as you do) that Christ is our Mediator? he never did deny it.

But, methinks, this would be a pretty Medium to prove the not-suitableness of
experimental Philosophy to a Christian. You then proceed to make an apology for
Ignorance, because that of those who were first called, there were not many
wise after the flesh. To which may by replied, that this will avail little, if
it be considered, that by the phrase, wise after the slesh, is meant subtle and
designing persons, who by their politic managery of a cause though not good,
might propagate and spread it for self ends, so that it should find a general
entertainment in the world. There was no such thing as this in the first
advancement of Christian Religion. But that the ignorance of the professors
hereof was not acceptable to the Author of our Faith, is manifest; for that he
endowed his Scholars with the gift of tongues and such utterance, which their
enemies were not able to resist. You add immediately after the Text, that it
was intended of the Virtuosi, why so? Is it, because they are wise? I am
confident you will not say that this is the reason. They have taken that
course, that will scarce ever make them appear wise to the halfwitted World,
they are too timorous in what they affirm, they lay by much of that wordy
Philosophy, which furnishes men with expressions hard to be understood and
therefore is admirable, it makes a brave found to the ear, nay more then all
this, it supplies one with such useful distinctions that he may affirm
plausibly whatsoever he will, but instead hereof they practice a plain
Tradesman like Profession in Philosophy, instead of axioms and good old
sayings concerning nature and matter and substantial Forms, which have salved a
thousand difficulties, Nothing will serve them for proof in Physics, but
experiments and some what that is obvious to the senses; they must have new
Fashioned Telescopes wherewith to gaze upon the Heavens, and Glasses invented
to espy Atoms, and Furnaces for dissolution of bodies, and for other unheard
of curiosities, and yet though they do dissolve the compositum into its
constituting parts they would never yet reveal to the Aristotelian what kind of
a thing their substantial Form is, which (they are well assured) is one
principle in that body. Whereas (Sir) you have a nearer way to learning then
that wherein they go on. You became an excellent. Astronomer by reading a
Systeme of the Ptolomaean Hypothesis, and have no reason to suspect or search
further as long as you believe nothing about the Doctrine of the Sphere, out
what you have learned from those institutions, you need not to pore with a
microscope upon those minute figurings of bodies, thereby to guess how they
produce such and such effects. You can answer any ordinary question in nature,
by the 4. first qualities and their seconds; by the conjugation and
symbolicalness of the qualities, by natures abhorrency of a vacuum, by the keen
Appetite, which the first matter (of which we know very much Negatively) bears
toward a Form. Nay further, if any man should demand a Resolution of the
greatest problems, as of the Loadstone or the like, you are not constrained to
make such a pitiful Reply, as many others must do, you can readily inform
them, that it is either done by Familiarity of substances, which causes similar
attraction, or by a sympathy, and that the Loadstone and the Iron do earn till
they arrive at their mutual embraces; but if any one be so much a Novelist, as
to urge, that such affections as these cannot be found, except there be in
these bodies at least a sensitive Life, you can bid them then take this answer
for your last, I say it is performed by an occult quality.

There is yet another piece of learning that is Chemistry, in which with a
little ado you can equal their seize had through a process and tedious
course. For the whole of what they pretend in this drudging Art, is no more
then the solution and coagulation of bodies: by the first of these they with a
great deal of cost endeavor to separate their three Elements, but you (Sir)
more cheaply can show your four Elements parting asunder at the dissolution of
the mixed body. It is but laying of a green stick upon the other fuel already
inflamed, immediately the Element of Air comes away in smoke, that of fire in
the warm blaze, the Elementary water is that hissing juice at the end of the
stick, and the Element of the earth is the remaining Asks, which if it be in
the Grate will by its own inward propensity (if it can) slide away down to the
Hearth, because the Hearth is nearer to the Center of the Earth then the Grate
is; for it is well known that every weighty body has a great affection to that
Center. So that I think now you have outdone them at this trick, and you will
not be behind them at the other, to wit, Coagulation. They are pleased to say
that they Coagulate a body when they bring it from a liquid or humid to a solid
substance. This fine feat you so well understand and it is so much beneath you
that you leave it to the Apothecaries boy, when you prescribe troches for
colds, besides Rosewater and Sugar, etc. to make this solid, you appoint White
Starch q. s. and then refer it to the discretion of the lad to be made S. a.
and here is so good a Coagulation that you never desire to learn any other kind
of it as long as you live, except it be the secret of making the hard
Sea-bisket. No more at present of the comparison betwixt your Philosophy and
theirs. As I read on further in your censure I saw you were angry with this
Author, whom you have chosen for an Adversary, because he says that Religion
ought not to be the subject of disputation; in the sense wherein he speaks it,
he is not singular, nor left almost alone, he discourses of those Divines, who
have mixed and kneaded into one lump the Doctrines of Christian Religion, and
the Notions of the Peripatetick Philosophy, and hereby have twined into a
dispute much of that which primitively was matter of practical Holine: yet on
the other side there is a sort of men, who would le regard Religion, if it were
not the subject of disputation, like Hunts-men who are better pleased in
following then in catching the Hare; you further tax him with introducing
hereby a Popish implicit faith, whereas a little observation will discover,
that this sort of Faith has grown, and a better has decayed upon the general
respect, which the Philosophy now blamed by him has found amongst those, whom
we call Divines of the Schools., more usually and properly then Doctors of the
Church. A man does then implicitly believe, when he does not clearly and
distinctly apprehend. So that he that speaks not so, as to be plainly
understood, causes either that nothing which he says should be believed, or
else that it should be received as true in the Popish fashion, that is he
bestows his vote and assent to be disposed on by another at pleasure. So that
hence you may judge who it is, who draws on a novice in Religion the nearest
toward wrapping his belief up within the faith of another, whether he who
contends for so much plainne, that the things propounded need not to be
the-subject of disputation, or rather he who seems profound and wise in his
sentences, yet does so darken his wisdom with words, that the person to be
instructed has by this means no other way left but to believe that which he
cannot understand. You produce some sacred testimonies to evince a necessity of
divine illumination, yet do not apply them to the present discourse of the
Author, which is concerning School Divinity; but had you meant it of this, I
must have said with you that the obscurity of those writings would have made
such a Revelation necessary, had not the smalne of their worth rendered them
almost usele. It seems to me but reasonable, that as all the Books of Christian
Religion hope for acceptance, because they proof to be agreeable to the truths
of Scripture; so further if they design public benefit, they should imitate
the perspicuity and openne of the Evangelick Style. There is one argument
against the Author not inconsiderable, to which you have some reference, (that
is) the study of such controversies, distinctions, and terms are of great use
when we have to deal with a Papist disputant. Its very true, yet it proves not
any excellency in that knowledge of it self, but merely in relation to the
adversary; though we have fresh instances of worthy persons amongst us, who
have with good advantage managed the debate in behalf of our Church against
that of Rome, without much help from those Schools: yet that sort of Learning,
even for this reason, may still be maintained, in the same manner as tradesmen
who lie on the English borders toward Wales, usually keep a servant to jabber
Welsh (though no learned language) to the Britains their customers. The next
words of the History R. S. which receive a check are these, The grounds whereon
the Church of England proceeds, are different from those of the Separatists,
and also of the Church of Rome: and they are no other but the rights of the
Civil power, the imitation of the first incorrupt Churches, and the Scriptures
expounded by reason. Though I cannot find any such passage in the page to which
you send the Reader, yet I will take it upon trust, seeing that you have not
till now misrecited any thing out of his book, that which offends you is, that
he would have the Scripture expounded by reason. This appears to you like
Socinianisme, but I remember the Calvinists direct to as much as this implies.
They say that we must expound particular passages in Scripture by the main
tendency of the whole discourse, that we must consider the phrase, whether
literal or figurative, that we must observe all the circumstances of person,
time, place, and what else is of any moment, And now (pray) say whether these
directions can be practiced but by reason, and if not, whether be who expounds
Scripture by these rules, may not be truly said to expound it by reason: he
does not say that a man should not acknowledge Scripture, if it teach any thing
more then those sentiments which reason had entertained before it was
acquainted with divine writings. You would have them to expound the Scriptures
by the authority of the ancient Fathers, when they see why they should do it,
they at the same time expound by reason, if without cause given, they take up
the Fathers sense in that implicit Faith against which you did lately declaim.
The last Objection which you offer against this History, is about what he says
of wit, that it may be borrowed from the Bible, that this wit is (as he
represents it) magnificent, appears to the diligent and judicious Reader: and
that it may without offense be borrowed is as manifest to him, who gives
himself the pleasure to peruse the Greek and Latin Divine Poems both ancient
and modern, which fetch their or naments as well as materials from the Bible.
But you will say however Scripture-expressions ought not to be applied (as our
author would) to natural things. I see no reason which binders, especially
when natural things become the occasion of divine praises, and furthermore,
where as many Scripture expressions were by way of accommodation transferred
higher from things natural, they lose not their original suitablene, and when
they are brought back and lower in our discourses, it may rather be said of
them, that they are repaid then that they are borrowed; nor does the meanest of
the matter to which any saying is fitted out of Scripture, straightway make it
unlawful to be lent for a while; as for example the primitive Ignatius in one
of his genuine Epistles, which was written (if I mistake not) to the Tralliani
applies otherwise these words of our Savior to his Disciples concerning those
extraordinary assistances which they needed to receive from him: Without me ye
can do nothing. And affirms that as our Savior spoke these words to his
disciples, so a Bishop may say to his Presbyters, without me ye can do nothing.
Yet I must proof that I am very sensible of the indignities and scorns which
the sacred word of God suffers from a sort of persons, whose quality is better
then their converse, they are such who are scarce ever guilty of wit or
raillery, but when they are ingeniously profane or blaspemous. The
intemperance of these should lay a resiraint upen the sober and discreet least
by an innocent use of a little liberty, they should unawares give any
countenance to other men's extravagancies. You tell us upon this argument, how
severe the jews are in this case. The most that we meet with near this purpose
concerning them discovers not so much a holy reverence, as a stupid folly. They
pronounce (as in a former instance so on this) that no few shall have a part in
the world to come, who shall spit out, when he names God, or shall speak the
Tetragrammaton in a foreign tongue out of the Sanctuary. There is one thing
at the end of your censure which is very unkind, and contrary to the law of
common humanity; I speak of your sharp reflection on an excellent person
deceased Mr. Cowley, these younger fancies ought not after death to becomes his
reproach, especially since he left a charge, that what was offensive in his
Poems might be omitted: though it was judged by others, that he had written
nothing, but what (with his own sober correction of himself, and an equitable
allowance of charity) might well pa abroad in public. You know that those who
weeded out the worst of Beza's youthful verses, and presented them in one
bundle to the world, purchasd more shame to themselves then to the Poet. It is
now time that I should put an end to this tedious Letter, and I must request
that you would excuse my plain dealing; do not suspect that (upon some account
of friendship or acquaintance) I am too inclinable to vindicate the Author of
this History. I dare assure you I know him not otherwise then by face, and
Printed books, one of which is against Sorbiere, whom (though a piece of a
Virtuoso) he handles very smartly, examining the condition of his life and
actions. What apprehensions then might you have, least if he should happen to
have nothing else to do, be should write the History of your life, and herein
(as is usual) describe your person, and enquire into Physiognomy, what temper
of mind you must profess, and give a Catalogue of Books written by you, and
show in how many press-warrs you have served as a volunteer: But now that I
have done, I have time to think, what a deal of needless labor I have bestowed
to write, more then what you will have patience to read. I therefore take
leave, and am, your, etc.

FINIS.
A Defense of the Censure of the History of the Royal Society, against the
Reply of the Virtuosi.
AFter so many Months respite, so much deliberation, in a case nearly relating
to the welfare of the Religion and good Learning of this Monarchy, and even of
the Government it self, I expected at least from the Virtuosi something of Wit
and Solidity in their Reply: I knew the justice of my side too well, and the
grounds I proceeded upon, to fear it might be worsted; but I thought it no
unreasonable matter to promise my self florid Language, and a plausible, though
not satisfactory, Apology. But though an entire Cabala of the R. S. did consult
upon this responsory Letter, though a Learned Person of that Society did peruse
it, yet can I find nothing in it that should have deserved my serious
Animadversions, except the quality of those Persons who revised and allowed it:
and it is my respect to their dignity, that I put once more Pen to Paper about
this subject. It Is out of a regard to their quality, not performances; and I
more suspected they would interpret my silence as a contempt, then my answer as
arrogant. It had been more prudential for them not to have entermedled a second
time in this Contest, but to have enjoyed the benefit of that distinction which
I made betwixt the Honorary Members of the R. S. and the Comediants, then to
mix with so insipid a Generation, whose thoughts are not to be elevated by
indignation, and whom Learning it self, should it change Parties, could not
rescue, or protect.

I must renew those Protestations which their Ignorance has made me so
frequently to use, and avow, that it is a troublesome affair to deal with Men
that understand so little; they know neither how to state a Case, nor how to
oppose, or answer pertinently: I am affronted with naked Assertions of Men that
deserve no credit: my Conclusions are denied, and the premises not invalidated:
and to convince the World how little I injure them herein, I Reprint the first
Censure upon their History, their Defense, and my present Rejoinder.

The Anonymous Author of the Letter begins with an Admiration, that I should
have so mighty a Zeal for any one Religion; and why against Page 1.
Popery? But that I know weak Persons are surprised at small Occurrents, and
that their astonishment does not proportion it self to the greatness of the
cause, but the deficiencies of their Intellectuals: I profess it would trouble
me, that having lived a life hitherto (as the Age goes) not very culpable, and
having always professed my self of the Reformed Religion, and having united my
self to the Church of England upon its restoration (preserving always before
that a non-communion with the several Schismatics and Sects of this Nation)
that it should still be wondered at, why I should be concerned for any
Religion, or engage in opposition to Popery? But this surmise argues only the
vanity and folly of the Objectors; for were it in general indifferent unto me
what Religion were National amongst us; yet considering our Circumstances, and
that dismal Revolution which impends over my native Country, upon the
restitution of that Religion, a Man who is concerned for his own repose and
tranquillity, and desires not to be involved in the Calamities of a Change, can
not want prudential Motives to induce him to oppose such an Alteration: Any Man
that has but reflected seriously upon the Consequences which have attended the
Change of Religion, especially into Popery, any Man who is not unacquainted
with our English Histories, or ignorant of the Politic Cautions which wise
Statesmen have left unto us upon Record, will justify my demeanor, without
further inspecting into my Conscience. But to allow these Men of no reading or
consideration, to allow them as ignorant of these things, as of the Sweating
Sickness: why should they wonder at my being concerned against Popery, since I
had united my self to the Church of England? Is there any thing more repugnant
to our Liturgy, Articles of Religion, and Homilies of our Church? Was there
ever any action of my life could give them ground for this Conjecture, that I
would openly adhere to any thing, and avow my doing so, and yet desert it
rashly? I do not use to deliberate after Resolutions taken, whatever I do
before: It had better become those of the R. S. who are under many Obligations
to confront the Romish Religion, to have acted my part in this Contest, then to
malign, discourage, and disparage me, for a work which the Apostle would have
congratulated Philip. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
me for, though I had attempted it merely out of envy, strife, or pretense.
Beyond this Reply I know not what to answer unto this Passage, because I have
to do with Adversaries with whom Protestations, Appeals to God and Conscience,
are ridiculous, and more insignificant then a sobriety of life, taken up
neither out of affectation, nor design of gain, or honor.

The next Period relates an History of what passed betwixt me and a Dominican
Provincial, and Inquisitor, about my removal from Jamaica to Mexico and Peru. I
shall not deny the general Truth of the Narration; but since the alteration of
a Word or two may vary much the odium or truth of a Story, I must remind this
Adversary that the person I designed to accompany (but was hindered with
Sickness) was a Carmelite, not a Dominican: and that he never so much as
proposed to me the change of my Religion; the strictness of the Spaniards there
not being such as in Europe: and I did, upon particular Inquiry from some that
had been there, receive assurances, That Physicians, Chirurgions, and Gunners,
were so necessary there, and so welcome, that a prudent Person of those
qualifications, needed not to apprehend the danger of any Inquisitor: indeed
the power of that sort of men is not the same within the Patrimony of the King
of Spain (so those Territories are called) and in the Patrimony of S. Peter.
Had I, as the Virtuosi, and others do, proposed a Voyage to Spain, or Italy,
does it infer a design of changing my Religion? yet in all this Story, as it is
represented by themselves, there is no more said by me, then would have been
convincing in those other cases, were the Argument good. Oh! that a Cabinet of
the Virtuosi should reason thus pitifully! Surely Ignorance is infectious; and
it is possible for Men to grow Fools by contact.

That which follows hereupon is so ridiculous, that were my Page 2.
Dreams but so incoherent and impertinent, I would apprehend some eminent
Distraction, and cause my self to be let Blood: and I advise my Adversaries
speedily to transfer themselves from Arundel house to Bedlam, or convert the
Appartments which they enjoy now into convenient Receptacles for such
Franticks. Should I grant the truth of the Story, with all the advantages they
could wish to have been added thereunto, does it follow, that because I might
intend to change my Religion at Mexico, that therefore I would alter it in
England, considering the posture of our Nation? not at all, but with such as
the Virtuosi, those prudent Persons, that understand Men and reasons of State
so well. Nor are they more imprudent in that suggestion, That my quarrel to the
R. S. was so unappeasable, that I would fall out with any Religion which they
favored; and that if they had of each kind amongst them, I would entertain no
sort at all: I say this Suggestion becomes not intelligent Persons; for how
great soever my Quarrel were against them, it is to be supposed I would
prosecute it by befitting means, and such as were subservient to my ends; but
to fall out with any Religion they should favor, if it were not untrue,
destructive to the Monarchy, Laws, and Nation, were to defeat and overthrow my
intentions: and consequently such a procedure was not to be fixed on me, except
they had first proved that I was a Member of the R. S. I add, that if my
animosity against them had transported me so far as they represent, if I were
resolute to oppose whatsoever Religion any of theirs held, I must consequently
renounce Atheism, and all irreligion; those being, as it is to be feared, the
important qualifications of some of the Comediants: and assert Protestancy,
that being the Religion from which many of them are averse; and for which, as
it is established in the Church of England, others are not over-zealously
concerned.

That which ensues hereupon, is very dull and flat: the course Page 2.
how to attacque and overthrow these Ignorants, was not to be prescribed unto
me by them: and methinks it is great Impudence in them, after that I have
published these other Pieces, besides the Censure, to upbraid me as if they
were not extant; and whatever relates to their Experiments, their vanity, and
falsehood, and Plagiarisme, were still un-printed. It was not my design to give
precedence to the Censure: but they having procured a stop upon the
promulgation of the other Books, I inverted the Method, making them odious
first, and then ridiculous. But if I had done it voluntarily, am I to be blamed
for preferring the advancement or continuance of Protestancy, before that of
Natural Philosophy, though the last were better improved then these Comical
Wits can ever attempt? I think that Reverend Divine of Canterbury merits our
good esteem for his generous respects to deceased Aristotle: however his Age
and different Studies incapacitated him to carry on the Quarrel so far, as to
overthrow totally these Innovators: Yet since it was not my intent to defend
the truth, but the utility of the Aristotelian Physiology; I shall not suffer
my self to be engaged beyond my first thoughts, or permit that the Original and
Primary Controversies sink into oblivion by any excursions and digressive
Contests.

My Adversaries confess, That a Churchman in England suffers Page 3.
more for being Popishly affected, then for being a favourer of the New
Philosophy. -- It is my judgment therefore, that they ought to be very
sollicitous how they incur any such scandal, and endeavor timely to remove it.
I am not conscious to my self at all, of having misrepresented the Words of
the Historian, or having imposed on him other sense then the Words will, or do
bear: I now come to consider, what the History is unto the Virtuosi? and how
far I may conceive them interested in its Tenets.

My Adversaries say, That the History was not Licensed by the President of the
Royal Society, for then a Man might have charged every impious and pernicious
Paragraph upon that large body of Men: but so it is, that it comes abroad into
the World with an Imprimatur from Secretary Morris, of whom we cannot persuade
the People to believe otherwise, but that he stands two or three removes off
from Popery. -- If that the R. S. had made an authentic Declaration of this
Point, it had been material: but the profession of a nameless Pamphlet
concludes not the Body. When Olaus Borrichius was at London, and familiarly
conversed with the generality of the Virtuosi, even the most eminent of the
number, the Intelligence which that inquisitive Person gives to Bartholinus, is
thus expressed. Sociorum nemo posthac quicquam in lucem Th. Bartholin. Epist.
Med. Centur. 4. cap. 92. p. 538.
emittet, nisi prius communi suffragio approbatum, ne aliorum praesertim
vitilitigatorum ungues reformidet. This Letter bears date, 1663. Aug. 10.
Londini. and contains that account of the R. S. which he was, from their own
mouths, to communicate unto Foreigners: and in confidence of this promise of
theirs (which is divulged every where in Germany) certain Foreigners of great
Learning have expostulated with me for avowing (and proving) them to be so
negligent. But since my Adversaries will here allow no other Book to be
Entitled unto the R. S. but what is Licensed by their President, I will digress
a little to show their failure, even where the Authentic Brouncker, P.R.S. is
prefixed: and that is in Mr. Evelyns Book of Forest trees. I think I may with
confidence aver, from his own Cidermaker, that the account of Sir P.N's. Cider
is not perfect, and right: I am sure, that sundry Persons of Quality have
spoiled much Cider within this three Years, in following the directions of that
Book, which was read to the R. S. and published by their special Command: But
whether it be exact now, I have not had leisure to enquire. There are also a
multitude of Errors and Impertinencies in that Book, which I have not time to
pursue, being continually interrupted by the attendance upon my present
Practice: yet to show how much they have failed in their undertaking, I will
instance in the sap of the Birch-Tree, as a Liquor I have had the opportunity
to consider, and frequently use these fourteen Years: having tapped seventy,
and eighty, at one time. Though none be more communicative naturally them my
self, yet the R. S. having not merited any Civilities from the hands of a
Physician, or a Protestant, I hope I shall be excused from not divulging more
then is pertinent to the matter. Mr. Evelyn says, he is credibly informed,
That out of Page 72. Edit. 2d.
the aperture there will in twelve or fourteen days distill so much of the sap,
as will preponderate and outweigh the whole Tree it self, Body, and Roots. --
I never saw any ground for an Opinion approaching near to this; except you make
the exposition to be this, That if the collection of all that runs in many
Years be computed together, it may amount to so much; which, I believe, may be
true: but this seems not the Genuine import of his words: and in no other sense
are they to be verified. I have in large Trees inserted two taps, yet did they
not run twenty gallons. His account is very defective: the time he proposes to
draw it, is about the beginning of March: but I avow, that who stays so long
may sometimes lose his opportunity. I have known, in an early Spring, when the
beginning of February has been warm, the Tree to run on the tenth of that
Month, and usually about the Twenty fourth day it is time to look after it: but
in the Great Frost, when I came first to the Lord Mordant's at Parsons-Green, I
could not get them to run till the thaw and warm weather prevailed, which was
in the end of March, or beginning of April: then the sap ascended speedily, ran
thicker, and in greater quantities; but lasted I think but ten days. The truth
is, the ascent of the Sap, and its running, depends much (when it runs) upon
the Weather; it abates, intermits, and multiplies, as that varies: of which,
these Observators speak not a word. There is also (which is contrary to Mr.
Evelyn) a great difference in the taste, and color, and consistence of the Sap
of several Trees; some differs not from common water, and (whatever he say)
has neither smell nor taste of the Tree: some is a little vinous; some more
milky, and resembling Aqua Lactis. His Friend from whom he promises much,
says, he never met with the Page 73.
Sap of any Tree, but what is very clear and sweet. As to other Trees, I cannot
tell; but as to this, it is certain he little understands the Birch Tree: for
some at first have run lacteous; all that ever I saw, toward the latter end,
run thick, have a fracid or sour smell and taste; and at last in a geltinous
Body, stop the tap: for the truth hereof, I appeal to that Ingenious observing
Person, Mr. Willoughby, who seconded my Observations with his own, in the
presence of the Lord Bishop of Chester, at Astrop-wells. I add, That this
Water or Sap, contains in it such a saccharine essence, that if one evaporate
it, or consider the faeces upon distillation, they will appear in consistence,
and taste as a most perfect Syrup: and if you add Yeast to a quantity thereof,
and set it to work, it will cast off a great deal off black Barm, and come to
an Alish drink (and sometimes resemble a little the Mum of Brunswick) to be
kept as other Ale in Bottles; but it is no longer Saccharine, or like Metheglin,
which I purposed to produce by this Experiment. This Saccharine quality
degenerating into an acidity, is that which renders the keeping of it so
difficult, if not impossible: to set it in the Sun, whatever Mr. Evelyns Friend
say, is the way to hasten its degenerateness; for I have an hundred times set
it in the Sun in Bottles close stopped, and it turns sour, and smells fracid
suddenly: and on the top there gathers a concretion of the Birchy Particles,
white, with which the Liquor was impregnated, which I have known turn ligneous.
I shall not give any account of what I have brought it to by long insolation,
nor what way may be proposed to stop its degeneration into acidity in order to
its brewing (which is no difficulty;) nor by what ways it may be brought to a
Wine (without heterogenous mixtures) by a peculiar sermentation of its own in
certain Vessels: it is enough to have showed, that the prefixing of great Names
cannot secure us, when a Virtuoso writes. I now entreat my Readers pardon for
this Digression, which is very material to the main Controversy, though not so
much to the Paragraph instanced in: and I proceed to examine the credit of this
History.

In the Year 1664. in September, Theodorus Jacobi a Silesian, writes to his
Friends in Germany from London, where he had a great familiarity with Theodor.
Haak, Mr. Oldenburgh, and many others of the R.S. He having told his Friends
much of this most glorious Institution, adds, Interim lucem brevi videbit
tractatus Anglice conscriptus, Pe:Sachs: Gammarolog. p. 68.
in quo rationem instituti sui Orbi literario reddere decreverunt. If any have
a mind to entertain himself with the Fabulous Representations by which they
insinuated themselves into the esteem of Foreigners, let him read the Passages
in Sachsius, till any one can oblige the World with the Original Letter of
Theodorus facobi, that abused Silesian. This Tractate which they promised to
him in English, was no other then this History; of which such expectation was
raised, and such Miracles spoken, before it came out, as all England knows. But
to convince the World further about this History, take the Authors own Words.

They thought it necessary to appoint In the Relation of Sachsius they speak of
10 Secretaries, with many other notorious untruths.
two Secretaries, who H. R.S.page 94.
are to Reply to all Addresses from abroad, and at home, and to publish
whatever shall be agreed upon by the Society. These are at present Dr. Wilkins,
and Mr. Oldenbourgh, from whom I have not usurped this first employment of that
kind; for it is only my Hand that goes, the substance and direction came from
one of them. How much one of those two were interessed in the compiling of this
History, does appear hence, and from that Character with which He recommended
it to the World; of which none but the deaf and insensible can be ignorant.
That the R. S. did not publicly and personally read it, I am apt to grant: The
Comediants had not patience to read it, or any Book of that bulk; but, as in
other cases, gave their assent and applauds upon trust. But that the R. S. did
own it, any man knows that was in London at its publication: not to mention the
Character which Mr. Glanvill and the Transactor fix on it. Moreover, when the
first brute of my designing to write against the R. S. did reach London, Sir R.
M. writ to the Lady E. P. to inform them of my intentions; adding, That there
was nothing in which the R. S. as a Body, could be concerned, excepting this
History: and if I would civilly represent unto them any defaults therein, they
would take it kindly, and amend them. Hereupon I writ unto Him, as a Person
whom I greatly honor, and who has in all his undertakings and employments
(which have been neither mean nor facile) expressed a wit, prudence, and
conduct that is uncommon: to which, if I add those other Imbellishments, which
his Mathematical and other Natural Studies, have qualifyed him with, this Age
can hardly equal Him: To Him I writ, complaining of the Indignities put upon my
faculty by Mr. Glanvill, and their History, represented the Pernicious tendency
of those Books, in reference to the Monarchy, Religion, and Learning of this
Kingdom: and DEMANDED that the R. S. should disclaim both of them by some
authentic Declaration, or I would not desist, whatsoever might befall me: But
no repeated desires or Solicitations of mine could prevail with them to
disclaim the History: the other they were less concerned for, saying, He was a
Private Person, and that the sense of the R. S. was not to be collected from
the Writings of every single Member. Thus could I not extort from their
grandeur any just Declaration whereby to satisfy either the Kingdom in
general, or to oblige the Physicians in particular. After that they had denied
me the returns of Common Equity, I proceeded in that manner which I need not
relate: The Concerns they all along expressed, were more then a little
tenderness for a Fellow of the R. S. The menaces they made, and which were
noised through Court and City, showed that I had greater Opponents then the
Author of the History. What meant the Resolution, (I do not say Vote) of the R.
S. to give me no other answer; but that three or four of their ingenious
young men should write my Life: How comes this great concern for a Book in
which they are not interested? When the Censure came out, why did several
eminent Members presently report, and represent to the ___ that I had thereby
libelled His Majesty, and pressed to have me whipped at a Cartstail through
London? That Censure touches not the R. S. but only reflects on the Historian,
and that modestly, though severely. And to what height their exasperations and
power might have carried things, I know not: but a generous Personage
(altogether unknown to me) being present, bravely and frankly interposed,
saying to this purpose, That whatever I was, I was a Roman; that Englishmen
were not so precipitously to be condemned to so exemplary a punishment, as to
be whipped through London; That the representing of that Book to be a Libel
against the King, was too remote, and too prejudicial a consequence to be
admitted of in a Nation Freeborn, and governed by Laws, and tender of ill
presidents. Thus spoke that excellent English man, the great ornament of this
Age, Nation, and House of Commons; He whose single worth ballanceth much of the
Debaucheries, Follies and Impertinences of the Kingdom; in whose breast that
Gallantry is lodged, which the prevalence of the Virtuosi made me suspect to
have been extinguished amongst us. After all this, who can judge that the R. S.
is so little engaged in the Controversy, as this Pamphlet suggests? But to see
to what a period they have brought things? The whole effects of the Victory are
yielded unto me: for the Design I pursued, and which I said I would make them
to do, was the disclaiming of their History: and having done this, I am sure I
have performed a considerable service to my Country; and all other Disputes are
but Circumstantial, and such as Conquerors often meet with, after an entire
Rout, to be encumbred with some Parties of the scattered Enemy, and to be
amused with Retrenchments, and Passes. But this Renunciation contents not me,
because it is not avowed, nor solemn, and in such form as to conclude them
beyond their pleasure: I will make them not only to disown the Book, but the
Contents thereof, as not containing their Sentiments; and to add, that they
condemn all such, as under pretense of new and Experimental Philosophy, or any
Mechanical Education, do decry all Learning, and vary that breeding which is
absolutely necessary to the welfare of our Monarchy, Religion and Kingdom. Let
Them but declare this effectually, and I shall impose a Silence upon my self,
and willingly sink under their malice and obloquy for the public utility.

Having thus acknowledged, that the R. S. are not concerned to avow the
History, my Adversaries proceed to give some account of the Passages I had
chosen to censure. In the first Passage I am to complain, that since the Author
of the History, and another eminent Person, read over this Piece, yet the sense
of them which writ the History is not represented: the Question still
remaining, What the Authors meant? It Is here said, I will grant that this is
not the necessary, but the possible meaning of this Historian: yet at least, if
the contrary intimation be so heinous, good nature should oblige to understand
the Phrase in the most favorable meaning. ___ If that the Historian had not
been of the champerty, this Passage had been more plausible: but (Oh! Virtuosi
have a care how you mention Good nature!) it had been an excess of Charity, and
culpable, whilst that our Jealousies are such as they are, and that the credit
of the History remained entire, to have passed by those words which were so
inconsistent with our Church, and the Religion established, without demanding
an Explication, or renunciation of them. I add, That the sense of my
Adversaries is not consistent with the words, and therefore not possible: nor
could any goodness of Nature, but mere insensibility, subject a Man to this
construction. If that by Communion may be meant (without further import) a
Friendly and charitable action, then by the doctrine of Equipollency, if those
words be substituted instead of the other, the sense will be entire: but our
Experimentators never essayed this: I will assist them in this, as in other
cases.

It is natural to men's minds, when they perceive others to arrogate H. R.S. p.
47.
more to themselves, then is their share; to deny them even that which else
they would confess to be their right. And of the truth of this, we have an
instance of far greater concernment then that which is before us: And that is
in Religion it self. For while the Bishops of Rome did assume an Infallibility,
and a Sovereign dominion over our Faith: the Reformed Churches did not only
justly refuse to grant them that, but some of them thought themselves obliged
to forbear all friendly and charitable acts toward them, and would not give
them that respect which possibly might belong to so ancient, and so famous a
Church; and which might still have been allowed it, without any danger of
Superstition. I demand now of my Adversaries, which of the Reformed Churches
ever did think themselves obliged to forbear all friendly and charitable
actions toward the Papists? I have not read, to my knowledge, any such thing
in the Harmony of Confessions: and it is but just to expect the judgment of
Churches should be demonstrated out of Church-Acts. I profess it is news to me;
and so it is to hear, that one sense wherein the word Communion may be
understood throughout the whole Scripture is, a friendly and charitable action.
-- I desire him to try only these Texts, Page 4.
1 Cor. 10. 16, 18, 20.2 Cor. 6.14. and he will abate of the generality of his
assertion; which indeed is such, that I never heard of it before, though I have
had some acquaintance with the Scripture, and Ecclesiastical History: but if
the word might bear any such Analogical sense (as it does not, I think) yet, to
see the mischief of our old Logic, I did suppose that Analogum per se positum
stat pro famosiore Analogato. When our Virtuosi henceforward talk of Cocks and
Bulls, we know by this how to understand them.

I shall not enlarge much upon the rest of this Discourse, but refer my self to
the judgment of my Reader; Repet tions are tedious, and here needless, if he
have perused the Censure it self. He says, that the Historian in calling the
Church of Rome a true Church, said no more then what the most Learned amongst
the German Divines, Page 5.
though warm with Disputes, did readily acknowledge. -- I would he had
instanced in the Authors, that I might have taken their Words and Learning into
consideration. But Reader, take notice, that I enquire not whether the
established Religion of Germany, but that of England be here overthrown? I
enquire whether the Author of the History, or any else in Holy Orders, can avow
such words without violating their subscription to our Articles and Homilies.
It Is true, I was told by -- that he was not well versed in the Homilies: How
did he subscribe them then? or, How can he press others to subscribe to he
knows not what?

I will not expatiate beyond the Question in debate: Hic Rhodus, Page 6.
hic Saltus. In the next Paragraph, where he should have proved against me,
That the Infallibility assumed by the Bishops of Rome, and their Sovereignty
over our Faith, was the cause of the Reformed Churches separating from the
Papists: I find not one word of such proof offered; and indeed it is notorious
to any Man that has but a little insight into the History of those times, and
the grounds of the Romish Religion. All he alleges is a saying of Cassander
(not citing the Place and Words, and so I cannot well judge of them) to this
effect. That then they made the Pope but little less then God; that they set
his Authority not only above the Church, but above the Scripture too; and made
his Sentences equal to Divine Oracles, and an infallible rule of Faith, and (as
he further proceeds) though there were another sort of People in the Church,
yet they were such as were obscure and concealed. -- I answer, that this proves
not, That the Bishops of Rome assumed an Infallibility and Sovereign Dominion
over our Faith, (which is the Point in question) but that some ascribed it unto
him: Cassander must be understood in relation to the Canonists, which agrees
with my Assertion, (yet were not all the Canonists of that mind, for in the
Council of Pisa, which began at Millaine, Guicciardin. hist. 1.9. Carol. Molin.
annot. in Deoii Consil. 37.
there Philippus Decius, and others, did defend the Superiority of a Council
above the Pope) or else what Cassander says is evidently false: for the
Superiority of the Council above the Pope, and the limited power of the Papacy,
were the general Tenets, and universally taught at the time when the
Reformation began: and before it immediately, as any Man that traceth the
History of the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Pisa, may inform himself.
Cajetan himself, Cajetan. de potest: Papae. supra Council. c. 27. inde etiam
Francise. Victoriae relect. 4. de porest: Papae and Council: page 194.
who was a Cardinal, and Legate against Luther, though he prefer the Pope to a
Council, yet teaches this: Resistendum est ergo in faciem Papae public
Ecclesiam dilaniantis, etc. Nor do I find any such Tenet avowed by Franciscus
Victoria, Professor at Salamanca at the first beginning of the Reformation. In
France you will never read that such a Power was ascribed to the Pope there, as
Cassander speaks of; nor in Venice; no nor so much as in Swizzerland, as
Hottinger avows. It can only be thus far true what Cassander says, Hottinger:
method: legendi hist. Helvet. p. 543.
that the Canonists, who at Rome sway in the execution of the Papal
Jurisdiction, might teach so: but not that it was any way the Tenet of the
Divines: and there was then an opposition betwixt those two sorts of Men, as
now with us betwixt the Courts Spiritual and Temporal. And the Theologicians
did not hold themselves concluded by the Sentiments of the Canonists, nor the
People neither, further It Is very observable, That this Pope Adrian sending to
the Princes of Germany at the Diet at Noringberg, to suppress Luther, confessed
many abuses in Ecclesiastical Government, and doubled not to give Cheregat his
Nuncio instructions to say, In hac sancta sede aliquot jam annis multa
abominanda fuisse, which he therefore promised by degrees to redress. Ld
Herbert, Hen. viii. anno 1521. Where was now the question of the Popes
Infallibility? The question is most easily demonstrated on my side, by
^^mparing the times of the Council at Pisa, which exalted a Council above the
Pope, in 1512. And the Reformation by Luther, began in 1518. At what time the
generality of Germany inclined to refer things to a Council, and not to depend
on the Papal Determinations. So did Charles v. hold, and other Princes, as is
manifest in the History of the Council of Trent, page 683. And Calvin ( not to
mention Zwinglius, in 1518.) appeared in 1536. It Is impossible from hence to
fancy, that the case was such as is represented out of Cassander, without an
unimaginable Metamorphosis in the Divines, which are contradistinct from the
Canonists.
then was requisite to peace and order of Government. This being thus false,
and the relation of Pope Adrian impertinent (for the Papacy is thereby
confessed fallible, though for prudential Reasons not to be amended as Affairs
then stood;) I have nothing to add further, then to desire my Adversaries,
whenever they write, to think of the point in Question. It is an useful way
which is practiced in the Schools of Oxford, for the Respondent to repeat a
second time the Syllogism of the Opponent, and so to frame his Answer, when he
is certain he comprehends the Argument. I could wish my Adversaries had been
used a little to that custom in their Youth; their being habituated to such a
method, would have qualified them better then their beloved Curiosities in
Optics and Magnetismes for the managing of Controversies: If it be too tedious
to them to resume any Academick studies, I must recommend unto the imitation of
the R. S. what I have read of as to the Exchequer. There is an Officer in the
Exchequer, who though sitting with the Barons on the Bench, has no power to
vote with them, nor interposeth his judgment as decisive in any cause, but
observing silence in Ephemeris Parliamentar: in the Preface.
pleading, speaks sometimes as to the regulation of the time, how it passes
away.

What he should have said concerning the Religion of Adam in Paradise, Page 9.
and his mustering of all creatures together, I understand well: but what he
does say, it is not so easy to comprehend how it is much to the purpose. The
Question is, Whether the acceptableness of our praises to God (I added prayers
also; but took notice of the praises) depends upon the Authors being an
Experimental Philosopher? I see not that he says any thing against me therein,
but that the Historian does suppose that his Experimentator is a Christian, and
engrafted into Christ; and that the accessional of his merits shall sanctify
his praises, yet shall the Praises he shall make be more suitable to God, being
framed according to the genuine Texture of the Almighty Artist, then the more
general Thanks givings, wherein a Man that has not meditated on the Works of
the Creation, blesses God still for them, but cannot say how far these exceed
the utmost productions of Art, or the improved Power of Natural Causes. -- I am
sure he changes much the odiousness of the words of the Historian, who says,
That the praises of God celebrated by an Experimentator, shall be more suitable
to the Divine Nature, then the blind applauds of the ignorant; that is, of
such as are not Experimentators. If it were possible for us ever to come to
that perfection of discerning the operations of Nature, and the utmost
productions of Art, I see the Virtuosi will prove beneficial to the Church, and
'twill be necessary the Convocation desire them to alter the Te Deum, etc. and
to contrive new Anthymns to render our Church praises more suitable to the
Divine Nature: And Dr. More's Canto's will put down David's Psalms, as well as
Hopkins and Sternhold. I wonder Christ and Moses, both faithful in their
charge, forgot so important a recommendation as this of 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17.
the Virtuosi: I see now that the Scriptures cannot make a man perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, or completely wise unto salvation,
through Faith that is in Christ Jesus. All that follows upon this subject, has
no original from any thing I said: If to write thus be not a kind of
extravagance and madness, I know not what is. I did not at all in the Censure
compare the new and old Philosophy: I no where else avow the Truth, but the
usefulness of the Hippocratical and Aristotelian Philosophy in reference to
Physic. The whole digression is not only Impertinent, but silly: He tells me
of ways by which I attained knowledge, which I never pursued; and of solving
difficulties, which I never used; being always more ready to profess Ignorance,
then to yield an unsatisfactory Reason. I must renew my Protestations, that
it is nothing to the purpose of the Censure, before I digress against this
ensuing harangue. For my Exception against them lies thus: the Apostles did not
enjoin the Study of Natural-Experimental Philosophy; Christ when he inspired
the Disciples with that which was necessary to bring them into all knowledge,
and when they by Imposition of Hands did confer the Holy Ghost, and those
Spiritual Gifts by which some were qualified with Hymns and Spiritual songs,
they were not at all inspired with, or directed to this study of Nature, so
celebrated by the Virtuosi: therefore I say it is not requisite to the making
of our praises more suitable to the nature of God, that we go about to reform
the Psalms of David, or otherwise busy our selves about Experimental
Philosophy, thereby to render our Anthymns and Praises more suitable and
pleasing unto the Incomprehensible God of Heaven: we may acquiesce in
Scripture-expressions, though more conformable to vulgar Sentiments then the
Corpuscularian Hypothesis; Those Praises suit best with the Divine Nature,
which are consonant to his Word, and uttered with true Faith in Jesus Christ.
Thus I oppose the Letter of the Historian; and am repaid with an Excursion
concerning the Virtuosi, their Pains and Industry in comparison of the
Peripateticks. He says the Virtuosi are timorous in what they affirm: This is
not true: Page 11.
But amnot I so too? Do not I scruple to say any Philosophy is true; or can be
exactly and sensibly demonstrated? Do I avow any more then that the
Hippocratical and Peripatetick Notions are useful? Why am I upbraided with the
Ptolomaick Systeme; and ridiculous determinations of the cause of Magnetic
Phenomenon? I am not obliged to reply hereunto; yet I say that the Ptolomaick
Systeme produces us true Predictions in Astrology, and as good Almanacks as
the other: and our Navigation is not improved by any new Hypothesis of the
nature of the Lodestone. He tells me what I can answer about sundry Natural
Occurrents: give me leave to reply for my self, and I assure our Virtuosi, that
I am always better content to profess my Dicere nescio, est tranquillitas
animae meae. Proverb. Persic. L. Warner. Prove. 37.
own Ignorance, then to render an unsatisfactory account of things, except it
be in an exoterical and popular way, and where the Notions made use of are as
useful to practice, as if true. He tells me I became an excellent Astronomer,
by reading a Systeme of the Ptolomaean Hypothesis. This is news to me, and I
profess I learnt from Hippocrates not to be sollicitous much about those
Enquiries: yet they might have known I was not so great a stranger to Galileo,
and Ricciolus, as some of the Virtuosi. He proceeds to upbraid me with
Chemistry, but with so much Incoherence of thoughts, that I understand not the
Reflection. There is yet another piece of Page 12.
Learning, that is Chemistry, in which, with little ado, You can equal their
seize had through a long process and tedious course. For the whole that
they pretend unto in this drudging Art, is no more then the solution and
coagulation of Bodies; by the first of these, they, with a great deal of cost,
endeavor to separate their three Elements: But you, Sir, more cheaply then
they, can show your Page 13.
four Elements parting asunder at the dissolution of the mixed Body. It is but
laying of a green stick upon the other fuel all ready inflamed, immediately the
Element of Air comes away in smoke; that of Fire, in the warm blaze: the
Elementary Water, is that hissing Juice at the end of the stick; and the
Element of the Earth is the remaining Ashes. -- Were I concerned in the truth
of the Elementary Hypothesis (to the defense whereof I will not now be drawn) I
would tell them, that it is unjust to upbraid a Peripatetick with an Argument of
this nature, who will not avow that on Earth there is to be found any such
thing as any of the four Elements un-mixed, or separate and sincere: and
therefore he will never, in rigor of Speech, make any such Assertions as are
here Ignorantly imposed on him: it is true, that Gunter Billichius, a Man well
versed in Chemistry, G. Billich. Thessal. Chym. c. 10. sect. 108.
does endeavor rudely, by this way of Argumentation, to evince the Doctrine of
the four Elements. Take notice, that this Writer was an excellent Chemist, the
Scholar of Angelus Sala; and also that Quercetan in the Anatomy of Celandine,
resolves it into Water, Air, Earth and Fire: nor do the Chemists deny the four
Elements. Moreover, Beguinus does endeavor to demonstrate Quercetan. l. de
med. Spagyr. pre. sect. de vegetab. c. 2.
the Chemical Principles by as facile and cheap an Operation, as our Virtuosi
here impose upon the Peripatetick: For he writes thus, Exordiamur a lignis
viridibus, quae si cremes, egredietur primo aquosum quiddam, quod ignis flammae
concipiendae plane inidoneum est, and in Beguinus Tyrocin. Chyml. 1. c. 2.
fumum conversum si colligatur, in aquam resolvitur, diciturque Mercurius:
deinde exibit oleaginosum quiddam -- vocaturque Sulphur: tandem remanet siccum
and terrestre -- salisque nomen obtinet. But I proceed to demand of our
Virtuosi, why do they say, That All that the drudging Art of Chemistry aims at,
is by Solution of Bodies, to separate their three Elements; and by coagulation,
to bring a liquid or humid Body to a solid substance? Is there no other
operation in Chemistry, but solution and coagulation of Bodies? Enquire into
the Chemical Tyrocinia, 'twill trouble you to reduce all their Operations of
Calcination, Digestion, Fermentation, Distillation, Circulation, Sublimation,
and Fixation, to these two. Have those Artists no other end but the discovery
of their three Elements in their laborious processes? What think you of the
Opus magnum, the preparation of Medicaments, etc. about which they are very
solicitous, without any such aim as this Chemical Analysis? What do ye mean
when ye speak of only three Elements of the Chemists? do not they separate an
inutile insipid phlegm, or water also, and a Terra damnata? And, what is more
then all this, have not I demonstrated, that Chemistry owes its Original and
Improvements to the Peripateticks? I add, It Is not oriously false that all
Chemical coagulation is the reducing of an humid and liquid Body to a solid
substance: since there are coagulations in Chemistry, wherein the Body
coagulated comes not to a solidity, but continues still liquid; as any Man
knows to appear upon the mixtures of Liquors in the making of Lac virginis,
etc. A cold Posset comes not to a solid consistence. But our Grangousiers
enlarge themselves upon Coagulation. This fine feat you so well understand,
Page 13.
and it is so much beneath you, that you leave it to the Apothecaries Boy, when
you prescribe troches for colds, besides Rose Water and Sugar, etc. to make
this solid, you appoint white starch, q. s. and then refer it to the Lad to be
made S. a. and here is so good a coagulation, that you never desire to learn
any other kind of it so long as you live, except it be the secret of making
the hard Sea-bisket. -- Is not this a most excellent parade, and a good account
of the three months study of so many eminent Wits to contrive this harangue?
they are most excellent Diviners: They tell what I do, and what I acquiesce
in, with as much vanity and falsehood, as if 'twere one of their Experiments.
Physicians do indeed put Starch into some Troches for Coughs, but it is not to
coagulate it merely, but as an operative part of the Medicament; otherwise we
can boil the Sugar high enough to coagulate without Starch, or use the mucilage
of Gum Dragacanth, etc. But that we understand no other coagulation, or desire
to know none else, is a Saying becoming the Virtuosi, and none else. How many
ways had the Ancients of separating the caseous part of the Milk, and making of
Whey? Is there not any of us inquifitive how to make a Sack-posset, or Cheese?
Could not we coagulate Oil and Red lead into a Cere-cloth, nor give
consistence to Plasters with Wax, before these Insolents? Did not we
understand the making of Common Salt, Saltpeter, and Alcalisate Salis, etc.
before these Pig-wiggin Myrmidons appeared? To conclude, since Chemistry and
its several Operations were the discovery of the Peripateticks, as I have
largely proved elsewhere; it is not for the R. S. to upbraid them with the
ignorance thereof thus: nor for the Virtuosi to pretend to any praise
therefrom, till they discover more then they have yet done in that Science,
which my Adversaries here, you see, understand not at all. Pitiful Scriblers;
I am concerned for the Honor of our Nation, least it suffer more then ever by
such defenses as these. I assure the Virtuosi, I could not wish a sharper
Revenge upon them then to publish such Writings as these. Whatever Folly and
Ignorance I charge upon them, they furnish me with new Arguments to prove it: I
advise them hereafter to write against me in the Universal Character, that the
Ignominy of our Nation may be more concealed: or to retire into some Deserts
(fit receptacles for such Plagiaries, Cheats, and Tories) least this second
sort of worth-less Fanatics, these Alumbrado's in Religion and all Sciences
(for it is now manifest, that they understand Chemistry as little as the
Languages, Rhetoric, Logic and History) continue the Infamy of our Kingdoms.
There needs no more to be said to this Paragraph; and as to the next, I desire
only that my Reader would compare this Answer, and my Censure, and see how
Material the one is, and how Superficial the other: and let him take notice of
the great usefulness which he ascribes to Doctors of Divinity. There is one
Argument against the Author not Page 15.
inconsiderable, to which you have some reference, that is, The study of such
Controversies, Distinctions, and Terms, is of great use when we have to deal
with a Papist-disputant. It Is very true, yet it proves not any excellency in
that knowledge of it self, but merely in relation to the Adversary: though we
have fresh Instances of worthy Persons amongst us, who have with good advantage
managed the debate in behalf of our Church against that of Rome, without much
help from those Schools: yet that sort of Learning, even for this reason, may
be still maintained in the same manner, as Tradesmen who lie on the English
Borders toward Wales, usually keep a Servant to Jabber Welsh (though no
learned Language) to the Britains their Customers. -- This is the great
acknowledgement our Doctors have for dubbing any of the Virtuosi: the
Universities (who are mainly in the Colleges designed for that study,) are in a
fair way to be sold, though at present they may be continued. This defense is
pretty, and I think justifies my Imputation that they are enemies to the
Universities, and would change the education of England. I am astonished to
find such a passage as this, in a juncture when the R. S. is under so great an
odium.

The next passage I have nothing to say unto beyond the Censure: Page 16.
only he tells me, that He could not find any such passage in the Page I refer
unto. The reason is, because he never looked The truth is, the History is there
wrongly paged, and there is twice 362; and that which I cite is the second 362,
following after 369. How accurate are these men, not to know thus much in their
own Books? I argue according to the Church of England; how they answer, and how
pertinently, let others judge.

The last passage under debate, is the application of Scripture to Page 17.
common raillery. Let any Man weigh the Words of the Historian, and the Form of
my Censure, and he will find my reprehension just. I had expected all
Analogical senses, when used by the Fathers and others upon weighty and pious
occasions: he might have transcribed out of the Censure, passages as much to
the purpose as that out of Ignatius; and I granted the Fathers used it
frequently: but we must distinguish betwixt the Anagogical and Mystical
accommodations of Scripture to pious harangues, and the using of it in
raillery. The Question is, Whether it be lawful and fitting to accommodate
Scripture-sentences and the sacred phrase to the subjects of common and light
discourse? such are Amorous Poems, or Discourses of Natural Philosophy. I
instanced in Mr. Cowleys Poems, not to injure or upbraid the dead, but because
he at his decease having repented of such offensive Poems, desired the Author
of the History to dispunge them in the second Edition, which was recommended to
his care: and since, notwithstanding this request of his deceased Friend, he
thought fitting to continue them; I expounded him by himself, and fairly
instanced in those Passages as the raillery, commended by himself, and
conformable to what the Ancient Poets practiced in honor of their Gods and
Religion. I have no reason to recede from my Censure yet: but much greater
persuasions then before, that I did a necessary work; and whatsoever their
Malice may create me of Trouble, or Inconvenience, I never shall repent it.

The Conclusion of the Letter threatens me with the History of my Life, to be
written after the manner that Dr. Sprat writ against Sorbier. I never pittyed
that French man, because he had so flattered the R. S. and was himself a Member
of it, and recorded for such in their History. But when a greater Man then this
Epistoler made me the like Threat, I laughed thereat, and said, That as for my
Physiognomy whatsoever it was, He made us, and not we our selves; and that I
had observed worse Faces in their Society: and for any passage in my life, it is
not clogged with these Circumstances, That I took the Covenant, or Engagement;
or was a Visitor of Oxon; or Councellor to Cromwell and his Son: I shall not
have any Pindarick Ode in the Press, dedicated to the happy memory of the most
Renowned Prince OLIVER, Lord Protector: nothing to recommend the sacred Urn of
that blessed Spirit to the veneration of Posterity, as if

His Fame like Men, the elder it does grow,
Will of it self turn
Without what needless Art can do.
I never compared that Regicide to Moses, or his son to Joshua: When other Men's
Flatteries did thus Exorbitate, you will find my Resentments for the Church of
England to have been of another nature; and as I most associated my self with
the Episcoparians; so in the decpest he ats that engaged me for my Patron's
service, I did not decline to give them the Elogy of Judicious and Learned, and
to plead for their Toleration in these Words. To conclude, I Defense of the
Good old Cause, p. 131, 132.
should here become an Humble suppliant for those of the Episcopal Divines, who
understanding the Principles of that Churchway which they profess, have learned
in all conditions to be content: and in their Prosperity were neither rash in
defining, nor forward in persecting soberly-tender consciences. It is certain,
that we owe much to their Learned Defenses of Protestancy against the Papists,
and several other their Labors: and may reap much more benefit thereby, if
they may have a greater security (paying the respect which they ought to their
Governors, and Praying for them, that they may live peaceably under them) then
at present they enjoy in their walkings. -- I did there (in the Preface) cast
my self at their feet; and made my timely Submissions to the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Winton: I received from his Hands a
Confirmation in this Church, and never joined with any other in Communion: you
will never find me in a Presbyterian-Pulpit, nor leagued with the Sectaries:
Whatever was offensive in my Writings, I voluntarily abandoned; and have done
more in public for the Church and Religion of England, without any further
intent then the glory of God and welfare of the Nation, then others to be
Dignitaries: and have not only endeavored to fix others to the Preservation of
the Monarchy, but some ways signalized my self by Testimonies of particular
Loyalty, well known to the principal Secretary of State. I speak not this to
inodiate others: I would they had given me happy Presidents for doing so much,
or been Exemplary that I might perform more. But they (who perhaps are not so
much as confirmed) having attempted nothing of this kind, multiply
discouragements upon me; and would depress a Son of the Church, because he once
followed a different party. Is it Thus that they would express their affection
to the present Government? Is it Thus that they imitate him who would not
quench the smooking flax, or break the bruised reed? Do they envy me the Grace
of God? or would they have me add obstinacy to my other faileurs? Such
procedures do not become (...) Divine: and I desire God in his Mercy to prevent
the Inconveniences, which so scandalous and unchristian demeanor may occasion
to the Church, which must needs suffer in the public Miscarriages of the
Clergy.

FINIS.
A REPLY TO A LETTER OF Dr. HENRY MORE (printed in Mr. ECEBOLIUS GLANVIL'S
Praefatory Answer to HEN. STUBBE.) with a CENSURE upon the
PYTHAGORICO-CABBALISTICAL Philosophy promoted by him. WITH A Preface against
Ecebolius Glanvil; Fellow of the Royal Society, and Chaplain to Mr. Rouse of
Eaton, late Member of the Rump Parliament. By Henry Stubbe Physician at Warwick.

(...)

OXFORD, Printed for Richard Davis. 1671.

A PREFACE.
HAd the press been so much at my disposal as I could have wished, I had not
suffered Ecebolius Glanvill to have enjoyed the triumph of a few weeks: But
since it is impossible to dispatch a particular Answer before the approaching
Holy Days, I must beg pardon of the world for that short respite. It will
not seem strange that, omitting Him, I hasten out a reply to Dr H. More, for
the other is but a Zany to this Pythagorean, and the defamations of so
ignominious and scandalous an Algerine as Mr Glanvill, do not reach so far, as
the aspersions of his Master, which has some repute for learning, and more for
integrity, though his demeanor be such now, that I am necessitated to recant
my judgment of him, and so not disoblige him by a second Elogy for Piety. The
Prefatory Answer of Mr. Glanvill is no other then I expected, though several
others could not believe it possible that any such Resolve could be taken or
suffered to be put in execution. But though the performance did not beseem a
Christian (much less a Divine, of the Church of England) yet I knew it would
agree with the genious of a Renegado-presbyter turned Latitudinarian; and that
some of the Virtuosi would do what no Paynim or ancient Philosopher would
imagine: I had had frequent experience of this truth, and had learned by their
defamations and menaces of an assassination or bastinado (not to mention the
Suit at Law, whereunto Dr. Chapter M. was obliged by certain persons of --) that
neither Generosity, Morality, or Religion had any tie upon them superior to
their revenge. Not the relation that the Virtuosi pretend to have unto his
Majesty could reclaim my Adversaries from violating that Amnesty, the
indulgence whereof signalizeth him to all Ages, and the inscription whereof he
dignifieth with the honor of his Royal Motto: Not conscience, which is still
engaged to an utter oblivion by the ACT, though the PENALTY be determined: not
Civil prudence, which might have represented unto them how fatal this
president might prove, by raising jealousies and seeds of discontent in the
breasts of others whose case might be the same erelong, and whose crimes had
transcended mine, as much as the actions I had done to efface my offenses did
exceed their performances. It Was strange to find as it were S. Paul upbraided
with what he had done at the death of S. Stephen; and to see that I was
upbraided not only with what I had formerly writ, but blamed for contradicting
my self, though the contradiction amounted to a profession of Loyalty to the
King, obedience to the Church, and regard to the Universities. Was there ever
Indiscretion transported thus far? If that decision be true of Aerodius, That
it is in vain to pardon offenses, if the party so gratified may be upbraided
therewith afterward: May I not add, that it is in vain to expect any compliance
from the discontented and non-conformists, if their Conversion shall be
reckoned to their disparagement, and their ignominy aggravated thereby. Thus
Hudybras is come to Court? A wise objection, and becoming such as have
transcended me in their actings and Schismaticalness. To aggravate the
malignity of my temper, it is made my fault that I defended M. H. in some
Grammatical Questions against a member of the Royal Society, one much more
criminal than I could be. I am reviled with opposing Mr. B. in his Holy
Commonwealth and Key for Catholics: and to show how barbarous my demeanor
toward him was, after the Elogies of Reverend, learned, and ingenious, HE is
said to be a person worthy of great respect: and our Ecebolius adds, that he
can scarce forbear affirming concerning him as a learned Doctor of our Church
did, that HE was the pia philosoph. p. 111. 112.
only man that spoke sense in an Age of nonsense. -- As may be demonstrated
out of the Evangelium armatum. I shall not recriminate upon Mr. Glanvill: there
is a disloyalty which extends beyond writeing: it may be found in praying,
preaching, and communicating with Rebellious Schismatics: and if Education,
and the being bred in ill times may excuse him, what is it that deprives me of
that accessional alleviation? But since what I have said, has been
satisfactory to my Prince, and is more than many of my Adversaries can pretend,
I shall now insist upon NO OTHER EXCUSE. After our Impertinent has spent three
parts of his book in this unchristian Satyr, and which I had effectively
prevented, that which he says to the controversies in agitation is very
little, and his performances very mean. He gives no reparation to the
Physicians for these injurious words. The modern Plus ultra p.7 8.
Experimenters think, that the Philosophers of elder times, though their wits
were excellent, yet the way they took was not like to bring much advantage to
knowledge, or any of the uses of humane life: being for the most part that of
notion and dispute, which still runs round in a labyrinth of talk, but
ADVANCES NOTHING. And the unfruitfulness of those Methods of Science, which in
so many Centuries never brought the world so much practical, beneficial
knowledge, as would help toward the cure of a CUT FINGER, is a palpable
Argument, that they were fundamental mistakes, and the way was not right. For,
as my Lord Bacon observes well, Philosophy, as well as faith, must be shown by
its works. And if the moderns cannot show more of the works of their Philosophy
in six years, then the Aristotelians can produce of theirs in more than thrice
so many hundred, let them be loaded with all that contempt, which is usually
the reward of vain and unprofitable projectors. That this procedure has
effected more for the information and advantage of Mankind, then all the Ages
of Notion, the records of the Royal Society alone, are a sufficient evidence,
as the world will see when they think fitting to unfold their Treasure.

This passage, as it gave first occasion to the controversy in hand, so the
indignity thereof ought alone to continue it, though no further incentives had
been added. For what Physician can with patience endure to hear so great a
contumely done to all our Ancestors from Hippocrates and Aristotle down to the
latter days, when our most eminent Galenists did flourish in London? Of the
Methods of Ancient Science there were two, the one consisting of more general
principles, or rules; the other making up a particular Systeme or hypothesis,
such as the Aristotelian and Galenical philosophy (with its variations and
discrepancies) accommodated to Physic, and that part of it especially which is
called Materia Medica. Amongst the more general rules, I do comprehend the Art
of reasoning, and Method: as also those other preliminaries of Aristotle, and
Galen: that the final determination of philosophical truths (relating to
material beings) is SENSE: that we ought never to rely so far upon any
prejudicate reasons as to desert the convictions of our SENSES: That Physic,
as Calen. Method. med. lib. 9. c. 6. and ibid. lib. 6. 2.
well as the more universal philosophy of nature, did subsist upon two legs or
props, viz. REASON and EXPERIENCE: that though in obscure cases Analogismes had
their place, yet that it was always best to rely on direct experience, where it
was to be had. Now this being so ancient a Method of Science, and so received
by the Physicians, and which is agitated in the disputes of our writers, I do
justly complain that our Virtuoso should say, that the way they took was so
unfruitful, and brought so little practical beneficial knowledge, as twould not
help toward the Cure of a Cut finger. For they could from THINGS EXPERIMENTED
demonstrate their abilities THAT WAY: As I evinced. As to the particular
Hypothesis, called Aristotelian or Galenical, that even That was of much more
advantage than our Virtuoso allowed it, I demonstrated hereby, that the
Doctrine of Elements, of the first, second, and third qualities, as they were
explicated and disputed, had been the occasion of most of our compositions, be
they plasters, or other Medicaments, that they were invented at first, or used
afterward: that according to those a Vide Simon. a Tovar de compos. medicam.
exam. and Hieron. Mercurial. de compos. medic.
Principles of old, Galen, and afterward his successors generally (till of
late) did regulate themselves in their new mixtures, and discoveries: and this
way continues still amongst the Spaniards and Italians, then whom the world
never produced better Physicians: and in France till the days of Quercetan and
Mayerne, the practice was regulated by these Principles, and in the contest
betwixt the Chemists and College at Paris, upon the Notions of Forms,
Qualities, and Galenical or Aristotelian Temperament, was the controversy
agitated: And upon the introduction of any new Medicament, as of Quicksilver
for the pox, or lignum vitae, or sassafras, or the like, the Physicians for the
use of them were usually regulated by that Hypothesis: from whence it is
demonstrated, that since not only cut fingers, but even all Diseases were cured
by them (as well, or better then by the Chemists: as appeared upon public
trials before the Parliament at Paris) it is unjust and intolerable for us to be
upbraided with the sterility of that Philosophy, as if it had contributed
nothing to Beneficial Practical Knowledge, but ran round in a Labyrinth of
talk, advanceing nothing. I evidenced, that notwithstanding the Rhodomontade of
our Ignoramus, most of the Glorious Discoveries ascribed to our Moderns, did
refer to the Peripateticks, and their Philosophy. That for Anatomy we were
MORE obliged to Aristotle, Erasistratus, Herophilus, Galen, and the late
Galenical projectors, than to any of these new Corpuscularians. That the
natural History of Bathes, Plants, Minerals, had been prosecuted by them: and
accommodated to use upon those grounds: they not having, or not relying upon
any other. And certainly Impudence never discovered it self in a greater
effort, then when M. Glanvil writ his PLUS ULTRA: and He must be undeniably
ignorant, that can say that eighteen centuries of Peripatetick Philosophers
have not produced so much of WORKS, as these last six years of our Virtuosi. I
showed that the Arabians were disputing followers of Aristotle and Galen, and
regulated their Speculations by his Philosophy: yet these Disputers invented
much of Non habemus antiquiorem Firmico, qui Alchymiae mentionem fecerit, Jos.
Scalig. ad Manil. l. 4.
Chemistry, some part of it being known to Aristotle, and his followers: that
it is not the discovery of any old Egyptian Hermes, but the name and original is
of a much later date than the Peripatetick foundations at Alexandria: That the
beginnings of it there were cultivated by the Sarracens, and so far improved by
the Peripateticks downwards, that Paracelsus invented little or nothing of it,
but stole all he had from the Aristotelians. The Doctrine of the Atmosphere was
advanced by Alhazen: and the gravity of the Air (how it was only comparatively
light) asserted by Aristotle, and Averroes, and Claramontius: who weighed it in
a bladder. I Sancthr. in prim. Fen.
add now that Avi^enna in his Fen, and Sanctorius upon him, do maintain the
same tenet: and this Sanctorius was he who found out the Thermometer, or
Weather-glass, proceeding upon the Peripatetick notions of elements, heat,
cold, rarefaction, condensation etc. To all this Mr. Glanvil answers. Do I
speak of the Methods of Physic, Chyrurgery, or any practical Art? If I had so
done, Mr. Stubbe had had reason: But it was nothing thus, I had not to do with
any thing of that nature, but was discoursing of the infertility of the way of
Notion and Dispute, concerning which I affirmed, that it produced no practical,
useful knowledge. viz: by its own proper native virtue: and my sense here was
the same as it was in that expression of my, Vanity of Dogmatizing [ page 132
edit. sec.] I would puzle the Schools to point at any considerable Discovery
made by the Direct sole Not the Schools of Physicians: and it is impertinent for
to urge such a demand upon those of Theology, or Logic.
Manuductiom of Peripatetick principles. So that I never dreamt of denying,
that those Philosophers of elder times, that went that way, had Practical
beneficial knowledge: yea, or that they were Discoverers of many excellent and
useful things: But that they learnt that knowledge from the disputing Methods of
Physiology, or made their discoveries by them. These were the things I denied;
and I have the excellent Lord Bacon with me in the Negative. -- This is his
defense of that innocent sentence: The Historian says that the Peripateticks
and their Successors have been always wandering in fruitless shades: that
their Physics were utterly useleless for the use of mankind. And M. Glanvil
forgets what he has written, in talking thus.
which how false it is, any man may judge by what I have said, or by looking
into our Herbals, where the Nature and use of our Plants is explicated by the
elementary qualities of hot, and dry, cold, and moist: and into our books de
composit. medicament. where we are generally directed by no other principles
then these, and the like; not to mention that the foundation of our practice
was, Contraria contrariis curantur, which contraries were explained
Peripatetically. Nor would our Schools be puzzled to point at any considerable
discovery made by the direct sole Manuduction of Peripatetick principles: since
so many Medicaments have been discovered thereby; since that the weighing of
the Air, and the Thermometer were a pure and entire result of that
Manuduction; as you may see in Sanctorius. But Mr. Glanvil says, he speaks
not of the Methods of Physic and Surgery, or any practical Art? This is a
STRANGE EVASION considering Quippe praecedere oportet eam quae a vera Methado
proficiscitur, remediorum inventionem; huic vero experientiam ad certiorem
etiam fidem subscribere. Galen. Method. Med. l. 6. c. 2.
that the Aristotelians and Galenists did not act as pure Empericks, but as men
guided by a series of principles, and a Theory which they deemed Scientifical:
and so they were in Surgery also; for those two professions were commonly
united, and by few so separated, as that the Chirurgical cures and Medicaments
were not regulated by the same Principles: as appears from our Book of
Surgery. I I shall not enter upon the dispute whether Physic (a branch
whereof is Surgery) be an Act, or no: some holding Ars est habitus cum
recta ratione effectivus.
the Affirmative, some the Negative: No Dogmatists ever held but that it was an
Operative knowledge, or an Art guided by certain rules and observations to
effect its end. There were the (...) of the Physicians, to whose judgment
Aristotle thinks fit Men submit: and the (...), or such as by continual and
diligent observation and reading had acquired the skill of Curing, not being
devoid of the Dignosticks, Prognostics, and Method of Curing, and tried
Medicines: but being absolved from, or ignorant of any Philosophical Theory:
and for these the Stagirite declares a Respect. The Galenists and Disputing
Ages adhered to the former, and only reputed him a Physician who could give a
PERIPATETICAL account of the Cause, and Cure of the Disease: and except M.
Glanvil can demonstrate that the Physicians have for eighteen centuries acted
blindly and Empirically (without the guidance of Aristotelian and Galenick
principles) what he says is MOST FALSE. But to wave this discourse about Art
and Science, which is all one, to overthrow the insolence of our Virtuoso; he
says He was discourseing of the Infertility of the way of Notion and Dispute,
that it produced no practical, useful knowledge by its own proper native virtue:
this is the first time I heard that disputations fittingly managed (and I am
not to suppose men to be mad, or fools,) produce no useful knowledge, if the
subject debated be of that nature as to refer UNTO USE: it is apparently false in
point of Physic, as a man that reads a Spanish or Italian consultation, will
see. But it is not possible for me to divine what this insupportable Talker
means by NOTION. For if it be the Peripatetick Physiologie, what he says, is
untrue: if He mean Logical, or Metaphysical disputes, who was obliged to
understand him about them, when the Question was about Natural philosophy, and
practical knowledge? He might as well have said, that Arithmetic, or
Astronomy, or Grammar, or Music, did not by their own proper native virtue
produce any practical useful knowledge, in order to the CURING OF A CUT FINGER.
So that my Exception, and Indignation was just against this Insolent, and all
Physicians ought to join with me in demanding Reparation: nor will my Lord
Bacon's authority advantage our Virtuoso, for HIS Credit is valid perhaps in
LAW, but not in PHYSIC, I am sure.

As the Physicians have received no amends from our Insolent for the outrage
he and the Historian did us; so neither do I yet find any better sentiments
in my Adversaries for the UNIVERSITIES then they expressed heretofore: yet has
Mr. Glanvil the impudence to protest their great respects for those illustrious
Nurseries of youth: Have they authentickly disclaimed the History, or any part
thereof that was prejudicial to the Church and Universities? have not they
rather added to the former indignities by that new contumely against all the
Doctors and Divines in the Universities? There is one Argument against the
Author not inconsiderable, to which you have some reference, A Letter to H. S.
in defense of the History, p. 15.
(that is) the study of such controversies, distinctions, and terms is of
great use, when we have to deal with a Papist disputant Its very true, yet it
proves not any excellency in that knowledge of it self, but merely in relation
to the Adversary: though we have fresh instances of worthy persons amongst us,
who have with good advantage managed This can be but understood of some general
debates against the Papists; for many particular and great controversies as
Transubstantiation, Imageworship, imputed rightecusness merits etc. cannot be
handled without the aid of the Schools.
the debate in behalf of our Church against that of Rome, without much help
from those Schools: yet that sort of Learning even for this reason, MAY still
be maintained, in the same manner as Tradesmen who lie on the English borders
toward Wales, usually keep a servant to jabber welsh (though no learned
language) to the Britains their customers.

Certainly the most bitter Enemy that ever was to the Universities could hardly
have expressed himself worse than does this Virtuoso: He does not allow any
excellency to, or acknowledge controversial Divinity to be a Learned study,
though it include so much of reading, not only in School-Divines, but
Ecclesiastical History, Canon and Civil Law, and Critical knowledge: and though
the defense of our Religion against more than Papists, and the explication
thereof to our selves, depend ordinarily upon those studies, yet the
maintenance of such as are eminent therein, is founded upon the same reason,
that the Tradsmen near Wales keep British servants to talk and trade with the
Customers of that nation. And FOR SUCH A REASON the Lands of the University
given to the educating such Divines MAY be continued to that Employment. MAY
they not also be SOLD? As for Ecebolius, he referres us to what Praef. answ.
p. 72.73.
He has writ in his Plus ultra, and his Letter against Aristotle, there we
may find the highest expressions of Love and Zeal toward the Universities,
that were within the compass of his poor and narrow invention. I will oblige
him so far as to repeat his words, though I doubt the Universities will scarce
afford him their thanks for his kind respects. I have said nothing to
discourage young Academinas from applying themselves to those first studies
which are in Use in the Universities. Their Statutes require Exercises in that
way of Learning; and so much knowledge of it, as inables for those Duties, is
requisite and fit. Nor do I deny, but that those Speculations raise, quicken,
and whet the understanding, and on that account may not be altogether
unprofitable, with respect to the more useful Inquisitions; provided it keep it
self from being Nice, Aerie, and addicted too much to general notions. But this
is the danger, and the greatest part run upon this Rock. The hazard of which
might in great part be avoided, if the Mathematics and Natural History were
mingled with those other studies, which would indeed be excellent preparatives
and dispositions to future Improvements. And I add farther, that the young
Philosophers must take care of looking on their Systematick Notions as the
bounds and perfections of knowledge; nor make account to fix eternally upon
those Theories, as established and Infallible Certainties: But consider them in
the modest sense of Hypotheses, and as things they are to take in their passage
to others that are more valuable and important. I say the Peripatetick Studies
thus tempered, will not I suppose, be disallowed by the men of the practical
Method; and so the University establishments can receive no prejudice from the
spirit that dislikes a perpetual acquiescence in the Philosophy of the present
Schools. This is the result of his most calm and temperate thoughts, after a
repentance for having misspent his time in the Academick studies at Oxford, that
exercise the brain in the niceties of Notion and Distinctions, and afford a
great deal of idle employment for ibid. p. 123.
the Tongue in the combats of disputations.- "After I had spent some years in
those Notional studies, perhaps with as good success as some others, I began to
think CVI BONO, and to consider what those things would signify in the world of
Action and Business: I say I thought; but could find no encouragement to
proceed from the answer my thoughts made me: I asked my self what account I
could give of the works of God by my philosophy, more then those that have
none, and found that I could amaze and astonish Ignorance with distinctions,
and words of Art, but not satisfy ingenious inquiry by any considerable and
material Resolutions. I considered I had got nothing all this while, but a
certain Readiness in talking, and that about things I could not use abroad
without being Pedantick and Ridiculous. I perceived that that Philosophy aimed
at no more, than the instructing men to Notion and Dispute; that its design
was mean, and its principles at the best uncertain and precarious. -- "These
things then I pondered, and in the heat of my thoughts, and a Youthful
indignation, I drew up the Charge, and gave in the full of those bold accounts
to the public in a Letter about Aristotle, which perhaps you will not do
amiss to consider. Thus the great Impediment was removed, and the prejudice of
Education overcome: when I thought farther, That Useful knowledge was to be
looked for in God's great book the Universe, and amongst those Generous men
that had conversed with Real nature, undisguised with Art and Notion. And still
I saw more of the Justice of the excellent Poet's Censuro of the sons of
Aristotle, when he says,

-- They stand
Locked up together hand in hand;
Every one leads as he is lead,
The same bare path they tread,
And dance like fairies a fantastic Round;
And neither change their Motion, nor their ground.
From this Philosophy therefore, and these men, I diverted my eyes and hopes,
and fixed them upon these Methods that I have recommended, which I am sure are
liable to none of those Imputations. -- I appeal to any person of common
Intellectuals if this Virtuoso has not expressed a wonderful Love and Zeal for
the Universities. This is that just and most sincere esteem for those Venerable
Seats, and Fountains of Learning, which he solemnly protests to bear. He
does most cheerfully own, and is ready to celebrate the great Advantages they
afford for all Sorts of Knowledge, and He verily believes that the other
Members of the Royal Society have LIKE SENTIMENTS of them. Surely our
Experimental Philosopher takes the University for Assemblies of an ignorant and
stupid sort of Men, that were to be amused and deceived by Equivocations: He
professes an esteem for the VENERABLE SEATS; Are they not highly honored? He
styles them Fountains of Learning, but tells us not what those words import. Is
it because that the first New philosophy was so much promoted, and the R. S. as
it were embryonated there? And from that fountain issued those waters which
have served to quoddle our Virtuoso? Certainly there is nothing but imposture
in this complement, and they must be very easy souls that are deluded
therewith. The Character he has given of his FIRST STUDYES, and the abuses
which under the person of Mr. Cross, are put upon all Vniversity-men [ plus
ultra page 120.] are so detestable, that he must not expect upon the
profundities of the Philosophical course taught there, he should retain any
esteem or regard for those VENERABLE SEATS. He expatiates you see upon all the
FIRST STUDYES, which contain Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Physics, Ethics,
Metaphysics. He recommends the Study hereof to the young Academians, not
because they are useful, but because they are REQUIRED BY THE STATUTES; and
advises them only to enable themselves for the performance of their
Exercises; this is REQUISITE, and FIT. But for any thing more, if any man
design that, it is useless abroad in the world of Action, and renders the owner
Pedantick and ridiculous: and he must, by example of our Hero, repent thereof.
Does not this excellenly justify those harangues of sundry Virtuosi who every
where dissuade the Nobility and Gentry from resorting to the Universities, and
mispending their time in Notions, which afford a great deal of IDLE
EMPLOIMENT for the Tongue in Combats of disputation? Have not these Gentlemen
the SAME SENTIMENTS with the Rector of Bathe? If this Censure upon our
Academick studyes were true, who would resort thither except to gain a
Scholarship, or Fellowship? and submit to that Education, unless it were to
RISE by it? From that Philosophy, and these men, who would not with Mr.
Glanvill, divert his eyes and hopes, and fix upon those Methods which Plato and
the Faecundity of the CARTESIAN principles do instruct us with? what should
any Noble man do at Oxford or Cambridge? Those are not the residence of those
generous men, that have conversed with REAL Nature, undisguised with ART and
NOTION: The SEATS are more VENERABLE then the present possessors. Did I injure
these persons by representing them as such, who would overthrow the ancient and
necessary Education of of this Island? Could any thing be more seasonable, then
those reasons l allege in behalf of our Vniversity-breeding against the
Mechanical project? Twould be too tedious an excursion for me now to confute
this whole resvery; l desire only that the Reader would take notice how in the
end of the Paragraph first cited, he turns his displeasure upon the Academick
Physiology only, and says it may be used as an Hypothesis, This is the usual
depariment of several Virtuosi, they declaime in general against the
Periteticks, and Notions: and being pressed to instances of their deficiency,
they fly to the old Scholastic Theology, or the Aristotelian Physics, as if
our. Universities were so employed as in the days of Sarisburiensis. They cry
that Philosophy does not fit them for Action: and if you demand what Action,
what world they are not thereby prepared for: their reply only is, you cannot
learn hence the sophistication of Wines, the art of Dying and such like
Mechanic trades. Is not this rationally objected?
but not acquiesced in: and then he believes twill be ALLOWED OF to us. Why?
will it then cease to be notional, and steril in the world of Action and
Business? And will he retract his retractation, if we do so? l know none that
look on their Systematic Notions as the bounds and perfections of knowledge: If
Mr. Glanvil were of that opinion ever, he was not taught it in his time at
Oxford. Who did ever tell him that there was any absolute or complete knowledge
to be acquired in this life? Or was so impudent as to give the lie unto the
Apostle teaching us, That we see here but as in a glass; and know but in part?
There are indeed some Systematick Notions that are of real use to guide us in
our ratiocination, and regulate us in our inquiries that we be not imposed on
by the resemblances of things. The distinctions of Materialiter, and
Formaliter, secundum quid and simpliciter; the eduction of forms out of the
bosom of matter; the primum incipiens in motion; the Logical tricks about
shuffling and ordering propositions and forms of syllogism, are Speculations
that will seem Wonderful, Useful and Significant, as long as there is any sense
in this Nation, and that we are not debauched into superlative Folly, by such
illiterate, ignorant, and impertinent Virtuosi as Mr. Glanvill, and his
Adherents. Had he been such a Proficient as he insinuates in Academick studies,
he would never have argued as he does, or concluded a Discourse of this Nature,
with this Epilogism. " AND SO THE UNIVERSITY-ESTABLISHMENTS CAN RECEIVE NO
PREJUDICE FROM THE SPIRIT THAT DISLIKES A PERPETUAL ACQUIESCENSE IN THE
PHILOSOPHY OF THE PRESENT SCHOOLS. Let us hereafter judge of these Men rather
by their ACTIONS, than WORDS: or if we must lend an ear to what THEY SAY, let
us esteem of them by their SERIOUS DISCOURSE, not by what they RALLY or FLATTER
with: Let us believe of them, as of such as Innovate the Education, undermine
the Foundations of our Religion and Monarchy, supplant the Universities,
destroy Physic, endanger all Professions and Trades: Let us place the SADDLE
upon the right HORSES back; and not be deluded with the AMBLING OF THE SADDLE,
into a conceit that the Horse does not trot.

All the Digression about my Life and Writings, is but a Demonstration that he
could not justify himself against the imputation of ignorance; and therefore
he amuseth his Reader with matters impertinent. It had become him to show which
of those Instruments, MICROSCOPE, TELESCOPE, THERMOMETER, and the BAROMETER,
was the discovery of the R. S. for he had told us, that some of those Plus
ultra. p.10.
were first invented, all of them exceedingly improved by the Royal Society. He
complains for want of time to do what most imported him, and yet wastes that he
has in frequent sallys against Mr. Cross. It is a Year and an half since he
first began to collect my Books: he omitted to Preach at Bathe for many Weeks,
excusing himself by the pretext of Writing against me, and the result of all
his industry and study might have been included in two Sheets. All this
deliberation could not qualify him so, as to understand the right state of the
Question betwixt us: which is not, Whether Aristotle did know all things? Nor,
Whether the latter Ages knew more then the precedent? But, Whether Antiquity
was shie and unacquainted with Anatomy? Whether the Grecians, disputing Ages,
and Sectators of Aristotle, did know any thing of Chemistry? In fine, Whether
the Ancient Aristotelian Philosophy has Advanced Nothing of Practical and
Beneficial Knowledge? and Whether all the INVENTIONS that he attributes to the
VIRTUOSI, belong to them? and that the MODERNS can show more of the WORKS of
their Philosophy in SIX YEARS, (this restrains the notion of the Moderns to the
R. S.) then the ARISTOTELIANS can produce of THEIRS in thrice so many hundred?
These being the Questions, it is not enough for him that I grant this or that
Discovery to be MODERN, but he is to prove it the invention of a Novelist, or
NEW PHILOSOPHER, if not of a Virtuoso. Thus, if Chemistry descend from the
Alexandrine Peripateticks and Arabians; If Anatomy, were the particular
eminency of Erasistratus and Herophilus; if Caesalpinus or Harvey discover the
Circulation OF THE BLOOD, it is for the credit of the Man of Stagyra, and this
Glory appertains unto the Aristotelians, whom Mr. Glanvill represents as mere
Notionists, who still run round in a Labyrinth of Talk, but ADVANCE NOTHING.
It Is a hopeful Preface or Introduction to his Answer, thus to mistake in the
Beginning: But he is irrecoverably lost as to all Learning; all that he
flourishes with, is but the remains of a Treacherous Memory, which some years
ago studied something; or some Collections out of Vossius's Writings
concerning, the History of Sciences, or Translated out of Pancirollus and his
Commentator, without being able to judge of their Faileurs, by what others have
censured in them. This new Book makes Fust, or Gothenberg, to have found out
Printing: whereas P. 122.
he might have learned out of Hadrianus Junius, that 'twas found out by another
at Harlem. And that Flavius Goia Hadrian. Junius Bataviae. c. 17. Ricciolus
hydrograph. l. 10. c. 18. sect. 1. id. ibid. perieget. l. 3. c. 21. sect. 10.
discovered the Compass. Whereas I am confident that no good Author ever styled
him Flavius Goia, but either Flavius a Seaman of Amalfi, or Johannes Goia, or
Gira of Melfi: the Places are distinct; and some ascribe it to one, some to the
other. Some say that Paulus Venetus did bring it with him from China, in 1260.
But most certain it is, that Albertus Magnus, and Vincentius Belluacensis, do
speak of the Gilbertus de Magnete. l. 1. c. 1. Cabeus de magnet. Philos. l. 1.
c. 6.
Polarity of the Lodestone, and say, That the Seamen used THEM in Navigation;
and that the knowledge they had of it, was derived from a Treatise of
ARISTOTLE'S De Lapidibus, which is lost, and perhaps was but the Writing of an
Arabian Peripatetick. I add this to what I have already published, thereby to
satisfy all Men, that this arrogant prating VIRTUOSO is not at all acquainted
with Books, no not such as are of best Note amongst the Modern Writers, as my
Margin shows you; and it is by chance, not any solid Learning he has, if ever
he utters any Truth about such subjects of Discourse: And I appeal unto all
serious Men, WHETHER IT BE NOT FOR THE BENEFIT OF ORDINARY CONVERSATION, THAT
THESE KIND OF MEN SHOULD EITHER REFRAIN TO SPEAK OF LEARNED SUBJECTS, OR
PREMISE ALWAYS WHEN THEY INTERPOSE, AS A FOOL MAY SAY, or one that is
unacquainted with History and Books.

Ecebolius does find fault with a protestation of mine, and thus Pref. Answ. p.
142.
descants on it. It Is a rare Protestation that follows: I protest in the
presence of Almighty God, that if there be not great care taken, we may be in a
little time reduced to that pass, as to believe the Story of Tom Thumb. -- p.
11.] Does Mr. Stubbe seriously think this, or does he not? If so, he is more
ridiculous then one that believes Tom Thumb already: If he be not serious in
what he says, he is impious in it: And if it were another Man, one might ask
him how he durst in that manner use the Name of God, and protest a known and
ridiculous Falsehood in his Presence. -- I do own the seriousness of my
Protestation, and yet fear not the inconvenience I am threatened with by this
Dilemma. I have lived to see Dr. More credit the Miracles of Pythagoras, that
he speaking to a River, the River answered him again with Defense of the
Philosoph. Cabbala, p. 186, 187.
an audible and clear voice, (...), Salve Pythagora. That he showed his Thigh
to Abaris the Priest, and that he affirmed it glistened like Gold, and thence
pronounced that he was Apollo. That he was known to converse with his Friends
at Metapontium and Tauromenium (the one a Town in Italy, the other in Sicily,
and many days journey distant) in one and the same day. You will find more to
the same purpose there: and I mention this, because Mr. Glanvil's Patron admits
of Miracles Calvin. Pref. ad institut. ad reg. Gall. Hottinger. dissert.
Theolog. de signis Eccles. Ibid. P. 150.
in a false Religion: so did another Virtuoso in a Sermon well known: So that I
need not say that what I writ is justified by both S. Austin and Calvin, and
most Protestants that have writ De signis Ecclesiae. The same Dr. More says,
that the most Learned have already agreed, that all the whole Creation was made
at once. As for example, the most rational of all the Jewish Doctors, R. Moses
Aegyptius, Philo fudaeus, Procopius, Gazaeus, Cardinal Cajetan, S. Augustine,
and the Schools of Hillel and Sammai, as Manasseh Ben Israel writes. That
Doctor affords us in his Works an hundred Stories, which who so credits is
fairly disposed to credit the Fable of Tom Thumb. And our Ignoramus would
persuade us that Tertullian blamed a famous Physician of His time [ Herophilus]
for dissecting Men; that the Romans held it unlawful to behold the Entrails.
That the Grecians, and disputing Ages, were ignorant of Chemistry: with many
such untruths, which inform us of the dangers our approaching Ignorance will
betray us into. But my Animadversions on the History, and Plus Ultra, will
convince any Man of this Assertion; so that I need not transcribe the Discourse
about the Sweating Sickness, or what relates to the Hero's being worshipped
with Temples and Altars. Let our Bravo boast as much as he please of what
Future Reply I may expect, I Know the Grand Questions there Discussed, are
never to be revived by Him, except he make such an empty flourish as this is.
It Is more easy to talk of Falsifications, then to prove them: Such Virtuosi as
He could do nothing, if they could not talk: this pretended Experimental
Philosophy is degenerated into Words, Lies, or stolen Experiments. That I may
give the World an instance of that Impudence with which Mr. Glanvill demeans
himself in this effort of a desperate Ignorance, I shall set down what he
replies to me about the Deceitfulness of Telescopes: the which Point I have so
demonstrated in opposition to every particular assertion of his, as it is
undeniable. I added, that if Mr. Cross was in an error there, that I was sure
Mr. Boil was in the same: and I cited the Place according to the Latin
Edition which I had then only by me. Let us see upon what ground he built his
confidence Prof. Answ. p. 176.
in this first instance by which he impugnes Telescopes: Why M. Boil
complains, that when he went about to examine those appearances in the Sun,
called Maculae, and Faculae Solares, he could not make the least discovery of
them in many Months, and yet other Observators pretend to see them every day:
yet does Mr. Boil profess that he neither wanted the convenience of excellent
Telescopes, nor omitted any circumstance requisite to the Enquiry. Thus the
Animadverter; and hence he is sure that Mr. B. is in the same Error with Mr. C.
that Telescopes are fallacious. Let this be an instance how this Swaggerer
quotes Authors, and let the Reader look into the place cited from Mr. Boil: If
he do so, he will see that that Honorable Person says nothing there that tends
to the proving the deceitfulness of Telescopes; much less that he believes them
fallacious. I have not the Latin Translation of those Essays, but in the
second Edition of the Original English, I find the Discourse to which Mr.
Stubbe refers, p. 103. Where the excellent Author imputes it not to the Glasses
that he could not for several Months see the Maculae or Faculae Solares, but
seems a little to blame those Astronomers, who have so written of the Spots and
more shining parts, -- as to make their Readers to presume that at least some
of them are almost always to be seen there, which he conjectured was occasioned
by their so often meeting such Phenomenon in the Sun, [ ibid.]. But these for
many Months our Learned Author could not discover by his Telescopes; not
because of their fallaciousness, but because for so many Months they appeared
so much seldomer then it seems they did before. These are the Words of that
Honorable Gentleman [ ubi sup.] And now how does it appear hence that Mr. Boil
is in the same Error about the deceitfulness of Telescopes, with Mr. Cross? Is
it sure that he thought those Glasses fallacious, because he could not see the
Maculae and Faculae in the Sun, when they were not there? What are we to expect
from this Man in reference to the other Authors he cites, when he so grossly and
impudently mis-reports so known a one of our own, who is yet alive, and sees
how maliciously the Caviller perverts him? I shall examine his carriage to
other Writers in my next Book; and in that, show that most of the Arguments he
brings to argue the fallaciousness of Telescopes, prove only the Diversity and
Changes of Mediums, and of the Celestial Phenomenon, not the deceit of those
Glasses.

I have repeated Mr. Glanvills Words at large, that the solidity of my Answer
may appear: for it is not my intention to abuse the Reader with false Citations,
or amuse him with great confidence grounded upon a bare Reference to an Author
which he has not at hand: thus these Virtuosi may prepossess the unwary into
an ill Opinion of their Adversaries, whereas they that know them as well as I
do, will suspend their Assent till more diligent enquiry convince them. Having
informed my Reader that this Book, Caesalpinus, Sir H. Savils Lectures, and
many others, have no Index's, I proceed to repeat the entire Discourse of Mr.
Boil out of the Edition my Antagonist follows, page 102, 103. But to say no
more of the contingent Observations to be taken notice of in trials Medical, I
could tell you that I have observed even Mathematical Writers themselves to
deliver such Observations as do not regularly hold true. For although it has
been looked upon as their Privilege and Glory to affirm nothing but what they
can prove by no less than Demonstration; and though they use to be more
attentive and exact then most other Men, in making almost any kind of
Philosophical Observations; yet the Certainty and Accurateness which is
attributed to what they deliver, must be restrained to what they teach
concerning those purely-Mathematical Disciplines, Arithmetic and Geometry,
where the affections of Quantity are Abstractedly considered: But we must not
expect from Mathematicians the same accurateness when they deliver Observations
concerning such things wherein it is not only Quantity and Figure, but Matter
and its other Affections, that must be considered. And yet less must this be
expected, when they deliver such Observations as, being made by the help of
material Instruments, framed by the Hands and Tools of Men, cannot but in
diverse cases be subject to some, if not many Imperfections upon their account.
Diverse of the Modern Astronomers have so written of the Spots and more shining
Parts, or (as they call them) Faculae, that appear upon or about the Sun, as to
make their Reader, presume, that at least some of them are almost always to be
seen there. And I am willing to think, that it was their having so often met
with such Phenomenon in the Sun, that made them to write as they did. And yet,
when I first applied my self to the Contemplation of these late Discoveries,
though I wanted neither good Telescopes, nor a dark Room to bring the Species
of the Sun into, yet it was not till after a great while, and a multitude of
fruitless Observations made at several times, that I could detect any of those
Solar spots, which having dured many Months at least, appeared so much
seldomer then it seems they did before, that I remember a most Ingenious
Professor of Astronomy excellently well furnished with Dioptrical Glasses, did
about that time complain to me, that for I know not how long he had not been
able to see the Sun spotted. And as for the Faculae, which are written of as
such ordinary Phenomenon, I must profess to you, Pyrophilus, that a multitude
of Observations made with good Telescopes at several places and times, whilst
the Sun was spotted, has scarce made me see above once any of the so looked for
Brightnesses.

And as the nature of the Material Object wherewith the Mathematician is
conversant, may thus deceive the Expectations grounded on what he delivers; so
may the like happen by reason of the imperfection of the Instruments, which he
must make use of in the sensible Observations whereon the mixed Mathematics,
(as Astronomy, Geography, Optics, etc.) are in great part built. This is but
too manifest in the disagreeing Supputations that famous Writers, as well
Modern as Ancient, have given us of the circuit of the Terrestrial Globe, of
the distance and bigness of the fixed Stars, and some of the Planets, nay and
of the height of Mountains: which disagreement, as it may oftentimes proceed
from the different Method, and unequal skill of the several Observers, so it
may in diverse cases be imputed to the greater or less exactness and
manageableness of the Instruments employed by them. And on this occasion I
cannot omit that sober Confession and Advertisement that I met with in the
Noble Tycho, who having laid out, besides his Time and Industry, much greater
sums of Money on Instruments, then any Man we have heard of in latter Times,
deserves to be listened to on this Theme; concerning which, he has (among other
things) the following Passage. Facile, says he, lapsus aliquis pene
insensibilis in Instrumentis etiam majoribus conficiendis subrepit, qui Tycho
Brahe, lib. 2. de Cometa, Ann. 1577. p. 133.
inter observandum aliquot scrupulorum primorum jacturam faciat; insuper si
ipse situs and tractandi modus non tam absoluta norma perficiatur ut nihil
prorsus desideretur, intolerabilis nec facile animadvertenda deviatio sese
insinuat. Add quod instrumenta usu and aetate a prima perfectione degenerent.
Nihil enim quod hominum manibus paratur ab omni mutatione immune undiquaque
existit. Organa enim ejusmodi nisi e solido metallo affabre elaborentur,
mutationi aereae obnoxiae sunt; and si id quoque datur ut e metallica materia
constent, nisi ingentia fuerint, divisiones minutissimas graduum non
sufficienter exhibent, dumque hoc praestant, sua magnitudine and pondere seipse
ita aggravant, ut facile tum extra planum debitum aut figuram competentem dum
circumducuntur declinent, tum etiam sua mole intractabilia redduntur. Quare
magis requiritur in Instrumentis Astronomicis quae omni vitio careant
construendis, artificium pari judicio conjunctum, quam hactenus a quamplurimis
animadversum est. Id quod nos ipse usus and longa docuit Experientia, non parvo
labor nec mediocribus sumptibus comparata.

Out of this Discourse of Mr. Boyles, it is evident that He does believe that
Mathematicians when they deal in those Disciplines, which are not
purely-Mathematical, but consider Matter with its Figure, Quantity, and other
Affections', are not so accurate and certain in what they converse with, as in
those other parts of pure-Mathematicks: and this is much less to be expected,
when they deliver such Observations as, being made by the help of Material
Instruments framed by the hands and Tools of men, CANNOT but in diverse cases
be subject unto some, if not many imperfections upon their account. The
Assumption is easy, Viz. But Optics are a part of the mixed Mathematics; and
the Telescopes are Material Instruments framed by the hands and Tools of Men,
and consequently CANNOT but in diverse cases be subject unto Some, if not Many
Imperfections: Therefore in Optics, and about Telescopes, Mr. Boil does not
believe there is such a certainty as exempts us from Fallacy: which is the
thing now in Question. To evince the deceitfulness in mixt-Mathematicks, our
Judicious Author proceeds to instance in the Spots and Brightnesses related by
Scheiner, Galileo, and Zucchius etc. to be in the Sun: of which those Writers
pretend to be so assured by reiterated Experiments, that they have described
their Number, Figures, and determinate Motion, which they most regularly
observe. Mr. B. finds himself disappointed upon inquiry, though made my good
Telescopes, and all other requisite circumstances observed. And many fruitless
Essays passed, before he effected any part of his design. He does not say,
THEY WERE NOT THERE: but that He could not see them of a long time: nor did
the Phenomenon then agree to the accounts of Scheiner, (Whom Zucchius does
justify by modern observations.) And to what purpose was this discourse with
Pyrophilus, about the deceivableness of Optics, if he supposed his glasses
true, and that the spots were absent at that time? I profess I do not
understand the coherence of the introduction with what follows, if he meant as
Mr. Glanvil imposes on him. What has the variation of the object to do with
this remarque of his? Are mixt-Mathematicks and Optics deceitful, because the
Telescopes show those Maeulae and faculae in the sun, when they are there,
and omit them when they are not there? Are our eyes fallacious when they
represent the object accordingly as it alters? or would not any man argue hence
for proof of their certainty.

I have set down the passage faithfully, without changing an expression, as Mr.
Glanvil does: and leave it to every man's trial, if he can impose any other
meaning on these words, then that either the Telescopes of those Vel sola
inconstantia, quae patet in Scheineri experimentis argumentum est fallaciae.
Ricciolus Astronom. l.1.de sole. c. 12. 15.
other Astronomers, or those of Mr. B. were fallacious. If none can; then is it
true that He as well as Mr. Cross did believe that Optics might deceive our
judgments, and that Telescopes were not so certain as Mr. Glanvil says they
are: As for what Mr. Glanvil adds that he will show that most of my objections
to argue the fallaciousness of Telescopes prove only the diversity and changes
of the Mediums and celestial Phenomenon, not the deceit of those Glasses, it is a
vain Rhodomontade, and not to be made good by one that is unacquainted with
those studyes. It is undenyably true, that Long Telescopes show more spots then
the shorter: and that some Telescopes do take of those radiations which others
do continue: and it is no lefse manifest, that the most judicious men do
complain that the Telescopes did deceive their Adversaryes, as not being good,
whilst theirs did represent at the same time the same object under a different
phasis. I have demonstrated this so largely, that I need not pursue the
discourse farther: and whosoever reads what I have written, will see that Mr.
Glanvil mistook himself in saying indefinitely, That Telescopes are as certain
as our Eyes: And that they alter the objects in nothing but their proportions.
For this is false, except you limit the saying to some Telescopes employed upon
some objects; and that here on earth. And if the ordinary Telescopes (against
which I have alleged so many complaints) were as certain as our eyes, how
comes it to pass that so many men differ about the celestial phenomenon
totally, betwixt whom there would be no disagreement about terrene objects. But
if they were as certain as our eyes (which I have demonstrated they are not
here on earth) yet the employing of that only sense would never assure us of
what we see. I remember not long ago two miles distant from any town, in a
dark night I observed some thing on the ground that very much resembled a
glow-worme, but the light was not so pale, and the body seemed a little bigger.
Being surprised at this unusual sight, I lighted from my horse, and found the
supposed glow-worme to be a piece of lighted Touch-wood, which through the
bedewed grass had deluded me, a Baker having sat down there to smoke a pipe.
I did then call to mind that saying of Galileo, that notwithstanding all our
Telescopes, twill be more easy for us to conceive that which is not in the
Moon, then that which is. But I leave the reader to compare both our writings,
and judge how satisfactory his Answers are; and how foolishly he now defends
the Letter of his Plus ultra.

I will not anticipate my complete answer by insisting upon any more passages
of this nature: I add only that I did long ago request of Mr. Glanvil, that
he would not give me any trouble by multiplying of lies; for though I knew that
the refutation of them would be to my advantage against him, yet I had too much
busyness amidst my practice to pursue it. But neither his duty to God, nor
regard to the Ministry (which suffers in him) could restrain him from these
exorbitances. He has promised to be my VASSAL P. 161.
and VICTIME, if he do not prove all he says against me: Yet l have
demonstrated to the R. S. under a NOTARIES HAND, that my Head is not Red;
though he say it. And whereas he abuses me for styling my self in one book,
Physician to his Majesty in the Island of Jamaica; l was honored with that
Title by the King, and as such received 200lb. at my goeing thither, his
Majesty being graciously pleased to specify in the warrant (preserved in the
Signet-office) that HE INTENDED ME FOR HIS PHYSICIAN THERE. I have collected
several more untruths in my Answer, and intend to demand the performance of his
so solemn promise: If he fail not of his word, I will take care he shall live
better, preach better, and write better. One lie I must now take notice of
briefly, and it is this, That Mr. Cross did hire me to oppose our Ecebolius; and
by treating me at Bathe, and entertaining me diverse Page 181.190.
times at his House with dear welcome, gained a person to his rescue, who
before contemned him. I do profess in the first place that my tongue was never
guilty of those I suppose he means OLD FOOL.
expressions he sets down. I never called him Old -- nor said I would rescue
the poor fellow. I did say that I would rescue in great part the poor old man.
And that he had been as it were asleep, or buried for these 30 or 40 years in
the Country, and knew not the transactions of the learned world. Neither does
He pretend thereto, as our ignorant Virtuoso does. But this does not diminish
that respect which is due to him as a Divine, and as such, not unlearned. I
have heard the B. of Chester give him a much greater character then Mr. Glanvil
allows him: and it is notoriously known how eminent his repute was at Lincoln
College, and what esteem many honorable and understanding persons have for him.
I add, that He neither hired me, nor treated me at Bathe, except with one or
two bottles of wine (for I did not dine with him,) nor was I ever but once at
his house, where the entertainment was such as the Village affoorded, and my
unexpected coming permitted: and then was the Book finished and almost all
printed. I never had the least PRESENT from him in my life: nor did I see his
Book till mine was all finished, except what relates to the world in the Moon,
and a voyage thither, of which Mr. Glanvil writes nothing now, nor informs us
where those wings are to be bought that may supply so much as the flying
Coaches. I found that most of Mr. Crosses Book was personal, and I did not
understand what to conclude about so different reports as I met with about that
conference, till He, in whose house it was informed me, that all Mr Glanvill
said was not true: and I am not yet convinced by the certificate, how it was
possible for those to warrant the exactness and sincerity of the relation,
since that the meeting was impremeditated; the discourse without design, and
desultory, and interrupted by others that were there, and has received much of
enlargement in the writing beyond what was there spoken. But I leave that to
their consciences, which if they bear any proportion to that of Mr Glanvills,
neither shall Mr Cross, nor I, suffer in our reputation for any thing that
such persons utter, or certify.

Upon occasion of what Ecebolius says concerning the mercenarinesse of my
pen, and that I was HIRED to this performance: I shall say in vindication of
several others, that I was neither AT FIRST PUT UPON THE WORK, nor HIRED
thereunto by any. What Mr Glanvill says Mr Cross engaged me unto, Dr Merrett
says the APOTHECARYES did BRIBE ME TO UNDERTAKE: but there is as little truth
in what that Virtuoso relates, as in the reports of the Rectour of Bathe.
Others of the R. S. have told it publicly, that I was incited unto it by
several Reverend and Learned persons in the Universityes. But neither did any
one there know of it, till I had undertaken the work, and writ some of it. I
first acquainted the R. S. and after that, had printed and showed some papers
to their President, before I divulged them in either University: so that
nothing of that report can be true, except the Virtuosi do apprehend, that
the approbation and reception of my papers have met with all are demonstrations
that I was put upon it: whereas this does rather evince the general odium they
have drawn upon themselves; and I could wish they would endeavor effectually
to remove those umbrages, in which I placed my chiefest strength; and I did
presume to find all intelligent persons my abettours, but I took my measures
from their common interest, and not from any special assurances given unto me.
There is another Reverend person so unfortunate as to suffer by their malicious
intimations, as if He had HIRED me to the undertaking, because he was so
unhappy as upon another occasion to present me LATELY with a piece of plate.
There is not any course which I see these Virtuosi will not pursue thereby to
ruin me: twill be a conspiracy against the R. S. shortly for any one to
employ me as a Physician; and each Fee will be reported as a Bribe, and the
Donor esteemed as an enemy to the Experimental Philosophers. This is the
Method they now take, and thereby imagine they shall deprive me of all commerce
or correspondence with persons of Quality and interest. How generous and brave
these contrivances are, how becoming the name of a Royal Society, how suitable
rather to a company of Poltrons; I leave to the judgment of all mankind.

It may not be amiss here to profess that respect for the Royal Society
which does become me: I do avow all just esteem for the Institution; though I
cannot rise so high in its commendation, as the Historian: I think it might
have added to the glory of his Majesty, and been of great advantage to
learning, had the designs of the Royal Founder, and those persons of Honor
which joined with it, been diligently and prudently pursued. Their purpose
being at first, to make faithful records of all the works of Nature or Art,
which can come within their reach: that so the present Age, and posterity,
might be able to put a mark on the Errors, which have been strengthened by
long prescription: to restore the Truths, that have lain neglected; to push
on those which are already known, to more various uses: and to make the way
more passable to what remains unrevealed. It was never my intention to detract
from the laudable purposes of my Prince, nor to derogate from those of Quality
who were Honorary Members of it: nor to enterfere with any Learned men in it.
But if a sort of Comedians under pretense thereof, do overthrow that Education
which is necessary to the Church and Monarchy, undermine the established
Religion, and insult over the Faculty of Physicians; I hope it will never
Prejudice me in the favor of any Patriot here to interpose my self: nor will
any serious man interpret the greatest testimonies I can render of my Loyalty,
conformity, and peaceableness, for so many demonstrations of the malignity of
my temper, Hypocrisy, and sinister designs. I have offered to desist several
times, would they but make such a declaration as the publication of their
History, and Mr. Glanvils books, has made necessary. If they will force me to
extend the quarrel beyond seas, and acquaint forraigners with the abuses that
have been put upon them by a fabulous description of the R. S. If I must
protest against this sort of Virtuosi; that the nation is not to be valued by
their abilityes, or performances: it is their default, not any contentiousness in
me. Would they be pleased to contribute what they ought to the repose and
tranquillity of the Kingdom, I can tell how to employ my idle minutes in more
pleasing studyes, and such as shall have less of personal hazard and disquiet
then what I now attend on.

A Letter to Dr. Henry More, in Answer to that he Writ and Printed in Mr.
Glanvil's Book.
SIR,
I Profess that I read with a more than usual surprise your Printed Letter. I
wondered at the Contents, and that you should publish any thing of that nature
without giving me notice of it: the long acquaintance I have had with you, the
respect wherewith I mention you, and the place I hold in the esteem of a Family
which you honor, should have moved you to a more civil procedure: and I must
reckon this deportment as a new Ethics, which if your Enchiridion teach, the
World will not be much obliged by the Author. When I was busy in Animadverting
upon the History of the R. S. and Mr. Glanvil, you happened to be at Ragley;
and upon some incidental Discourse about the Virtuosi, I asked of you How you
could adhere to them, since they had published such Passages in their Writings
as did overthrow our Religion? That all your Ethics would signify as little
as those disputative ones of Aristotle and the Stoics, if that a Mechanical
Education would supply Histor. R. S. p. 341. Ibid. p. 63.
in some part the usual Morality, and have a surer effect in the composing and
purifying of our thoughts, than all the rigid Precepts of the Stoical, or empty
distinctions of the Peripatetick Moralists: That, if to pass an hard Censure on
the Religions of all other Countries, be dishonorable; certainly you were
extremely to blame who had writ so much, and so severely against Popery: That,
if the Mechanical and Corpuscularian Hypothesis deserve credit, all your late
Documents about the World, that its Phenomenon were vital, and not Mechanical,
must be grossly erroneous. After the exchange of some such words, you called for
the History it self, and determined to read it more exactly over than you had
formerly: and as you perused it, you affixed several marks (as it is your
custom) to the sides of the Book with your Leaden Pencil, according as you
approved, or disliked them: the Book is yet to be feen in the Library there,
and the Passages I animadvert upon are there condemned by you: You, your self,
was pleased particularly to show me the place, page 312. and to censure it,
according to what I say, and indeed as became Franciscus Paleopolitanus to do.
I told you that Mr. Glanvil did inform the World, that we might be secure that
the R.S. would no way endanger Religion, since so many pious Clergymen were
Members of that Body; amongst which, Dr. H. More is recounted: But now it was
apparent, that, notwithstanding those venerable and worthy Ecclesiastics, our
fears were not so Panick and causeless, as the Rector of Bathe reputeth of
them. I urged you to renounce the R. S. and employ a Preface of your next
Edition of the Enchiridion Ethicum against the History: you expressed much of
dis-satisfaction with the History, and extenuated your admission into that
Society, by laying it on the violent persuasions of others; adding, that you
seldom came there, though in London; and did not pay any of those contributions
which are usual in the Members thereof. I confess, I was so vain after such
Discourses, as to think that you might be wrought upon to testify in Print
your dissent, and you must pardon me if I expected no less from a Man who
pretends to such an uninteressed piety and Zeal, as Dr. H. More. But I now
perceive the injustice of that Opinion, that you are, as other Men, deceivable:
you will rather not be a Christian, then no Platonist; you will abandon Truth,
to gratify your Passion; and to preserve your Zany, most barbarously endeavor
to destroy your Friend. All I said of you, is this, Dr. Moor, albeit a Member
of this Society heretofore (for he allows nothing to it now) yet a pious one,
professes, That this Mechanical Philosophy does lead to Atheism: neither would
he approve Agaiust Glanvill. page 173.
of those deductions as necessary, but ridiculous, when I upbraided him lately
with that non-sensical and illiterate History. -- These are the Words that so
exasperated you, and raised in an Hypochondiac such Fumes as to blind his
Reason. I say, that you were a Member heretofore of the R. S. but allow nothing
to it now; meaning thereby, that in declining the Weekly contributions, you
seemed to have relinquished it; but I say not that you had formally left it.
And you had this sense upon your thoughts, when you made that harsh reflection
upon me; yet with that Mental Reservation, which would better have become a
Jesuit, you urge me with that sense, which the Conclusion will seem to sound
unto all Men at the FIRST reading. Was not this Heartily done, when your Memory
(not half so treacherous as your Heart) could tell you what I otherwise meant,
and had discoursed of unto you, and which was not grossly false.

Neither is that a gross mistake in me, that you charge me withal in the
second place. It is a gross mistake in him, that he looks upon that Mechanic
Philosophy which I oppose, to be the Philosophy which the Royal Society does
profess, or would support. -- Impudence it self never uttered a greater
Untruth, and it had better become Mr. Glanvill, then Dr. More. I appeal to the
History, which How Authentic it is, I have elsewhere showed; and it is evident
that the R. S. have not, nor will be brought to renounce it; and since the
Authors thereof may be presumed to understand the Principles of the Virtuosi,
better then Franciscus Palaeopolitanus, and are Secretaries of that Body,
'twere folly not to believe them, but to enquire at Bathe, or in the
Philosophical Bower, what the Royal Society profess. Dr. Wren produced before
the Society, an Instrument Hist. R. S. page 312.
to represent the effects of all sorts of Impulses, made between two hard
Globous Bodies, either of equal or of different bigness, and swiftness,
following or meeting each other; or the one moving, the other at rest. From
these varieties arose many unexpected effects; of all which, he demonstrated
the true Theories, after they had been confirmed by many hundreds of
Experiments in that Instrument. These he proposed as the Principles of all
Demonstrations in Natural Philosophy: Nor can it seem strange, that these
Elements should be of such Universal Use; if we consider that Generation,
Corruption, Alteration, and all the vicissitudes of Nature, are nothing else
but the effects arising from the meeting of little Bodies, of differing
Figures, Magnitudes, and Velocities. -- This Paragraph does not indeed confine
Supernatural Productions to the Rules of Mechanism: But as for all the Ordinary
Phenomenon of the Universe, and particularly those of Generation, Corruption,
Alteration, they are said to be Nothing Else but the effects arising from the
meeting of little Bodies, of differing Figures, Magnitudes, and Velocities; and
the Principles of All Demonstrations in Natural Philosophy, are recommended
unto us to be deduced from such Theories. Out of which it is manifest, that
they suppose not only that the Material part of every thing in the Corporeal
Universe is Body, or Corpuscularian, but that the Vicissitudes and Phenomenon
occurring therein, even in the Generation of Man, are the result of Corpuscles
moving Mechanically: For if it be not granted, that every part of the Corporeal
Universe, or this great Aggregate of Bodies, do move in certain Lines,
according to the determinate Figures thereof, and that without the Particular
Concourse of an Immaterial Incorporeal Being, putting such Corpuscles into this
or that Particular Motion, and continuing it therein Mechanically, then does
the whole Systeme of the Mechanical Philosophy falls to the ground; and the
Demonstrations cease to be any longer such. The very Word Mechanism imports
thus much: it being an allusion to the conformation of Machines, wherein each
part contributes to the effect according to its Situation, Size, and the
Geometrical Proportion it bears to the other Parts, of which the Machine is
composed: And if the Machine do not produce its effect entirely, by virtue of
such a Geometrical frame, we do not say that the Phenomenon is Mechanical.
Thus the Motion of a Water, or Clock, when it arises from its Fabric purely,
then it is Mechanical: but when a Man does wind it up, it is not a Mechanical
motion, except it do also appear that Man is also a Machine, and that what he
operates at that time, is purely Mechanical. I would not insist upon this
Argument from the denomination of the Philosophy, if it were not manifest that
they that profess it, did not desire to be understood so: for the whole
Hypothesis of the Cartesians does depend hereon: and Sir K. Digby, in his
Vegetation of Plants (a Discourse made in the R. S.) as well as in his other
Books, proceeds on these grounds: nor do they, or any Mechanical Philosophers,
demand any more than that God should at first create Matter in such a Quantity,
such Parts, and such Motions, thereby to folve all the Phenomenon of Nature,
without Specificating Forms, Plastic Virtues, or his particular Concourse to
the Action, or Production in an Immaterial Way. Thus the floating Corpuscles of
Salt or Nitre, are Mechanically, or by the Geometrical necessity of their own
Figures and Motions, together with the impulse of other Corpuscles in the Air,
Liquor, or Vessel, acting in the same Geometrical subordination of Causes,
precipitated and sized into their peculiar Crystals of Salt and Nitre: thus
Plants are said to be Generated, and the actions of Animals produced, and all
the vicissitudes of Nature to be NOTHING ELSE. And I am willing to allow your
Quibble, that this is the Mechanical Belief of credulity; but you must not go
about to persuade me, that this is not also that Philosophy which is properly
Mechanical, and which your Historian does assert: You understand not the state
of the Question, nor what you have done, or you prevaricate when you fay, that
the Mechanical Philosophy you oppose, is such a Mechanical one as professes,
That matter having such a quantity of motion as it has, would contrive it self
into all the Phenomenon we see in nature. For these Philosophers do not ascribe
Prudence or Contrivance unto Matter, or say that Matter can Operate upon, or
alter it self, being both Agent and Patient, but that God has so altered the
World, and so contrived Matter and its Motions, that it runs into all these
Phanomena by a Geometrical Necessity arising from the Fabric. And upon this
Philosophy you spend your Arguments, and enlarge into this Censure.

Dr. More's Censure of the Cartesian and Mechanical Philosophy.
AFter he had exploded the Cartesian Philosophy, by the name of not only
purely Mechanical, but of the Mechanic Philosophy, which professes the
Mechanical deduction of Causes in the explication of the Phenomenon of the
World, by an Hypothesis as close and necessary, as Mathematical Sequels: After
he had Charactered Descartes for a Person of the greatest-Wit (for the
extraordinary handsome semblance he makes of deducing all the Phenomenon he has
handled Dr. you never minded what you read in Des Carts, when you said this:
for he mistook even his own Mechanism in his account of Tides.
necessarily and Mechanically, and for hitting on the more immediate Material
Causes of things to an high probability) and of the greatest Folly that ever
yet trod the stage of this Earth: And he reputes him so egregious a Fool,
because he is so credulous, as not only to believe that he has necessarily and
purely Mechanically solved all the Phenomenon he has treated of in his
Philosophy and Meteors, but also that all things else may be so solved, the
Bodies of Plants and Animals not excepted. After he had pretended to have
demonstrated not only that Des Cartes-mistook about Gravity, but that all
Mechanical Solutions thereof are impossible, it being so manifestly repugnant
to the confessed Laws of Mechanics. The Dialogue is thus continued.

Hyl. It is very true. Divine Dialogues, Part I. Chap. 12.


Cuph. That may seem a Demonstration for the present, which to Posterity will
appear a mere Sophistical knot, and they will easily see to loose it.


Bath. I believe by the help of some new-improved Microscopes.


Philop. Nay, but in good earnest, O Cuphophron, (if you will The fond and
indiscreet hankering after the impossible pretensions of solving all Phenomenon
Mechanically, freely and justly perstringed.
excuse my freedom of speech) though I have not that competency of judgment in
Philosophical Matters, yet I cannot but deem you an over-partial Mechanist,
that are so devoted to the Cause, as not to believe Demonstration against it,
till Mechanics be farther improved by Posterity. It is as if one would not
believe the first Book of Euclid, till he had read him all over, and all other
Mathematical Writers besides. For this Phenomenon of Gravity is one of the
simplest that is, as the first Book of Euclide one of the easiest. Not to add
what a blemish it is to a Person otherwise so Moral and Virtuous, to seem to
have a greater Zeal for the ostentation of the Mechanical Wit of Men, then for
the manifestation of the Wisdom of God in Nature.


Sophr. Excellently well spoken, O Philopolis. As in water Prove. 27.19.
face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. You have spoken according to
the most inward sense and touch of my very soul concerning this matter. For I
have very much wondered at the devotedness of some Men's Spirits to the pretense
of pure Mechanism in the solving of the Phenomenon of the Universe, who yet
otherwise have not been of less pretensions to Piety and Virtue. Of which
Mechanic pronity, I do not see any good tendency at all. For it looks more
like an Itch of magnifying their own, or other Men's Wit, then any desire of
glorifying God in his wise and benign Contrivances in the works of Nature; and
cuts off the most powerful and most popular Arguments for the existence of a
Deity, if the rude career of agitated Matter would at last necessarily fall
into such a structure of things. Indeed, if such a Mechanical Necessity in the
Nature of Matter were really discoverable, there were no help for it: And the
Almighty seeks no honor from a Man's Lie. But their attempts being so
frustraneous, and the Demonstrations to the contrary so perspicuous, it is a
marvel to me, that any men that are Virtuously and Piously disposed, should be
so partially and zealously affected, in a Cause that has neither Truth, nor
any honest Usefulness in it.


Out of all which, as it is evident, that you understood by Mechanical the fame
thing that I do, viz. A Geometrical way of explaining of the Phenomenon of
Nature, according to matter and motion: So it is no less evident, that you do
absolutely explode it as having neither Truth, nor any Honest Usefulness in it.
And it is no less manifest, that you do oppose herein that Philosophy which the
R. S. do profess and would support: As appears by that Passage I Animadverted
upon in their HISTORY. Had not some BASE ENDS, some particular indulgence to
your Zany, malice against me, or inclinations to gratify some of the Virtuosi,
transported you, you would never have writ as you do now. I fay, that you have
refuted that Philosophy which proceeds upon pure Mechanism, in opposition to
what the Royal Society lays down in their History. View but your Antithesis,
and blush at your Ignorance iu Logic. It is a gross mistake in him, that he
looks upon that Mechanic Philosophy which I oppose, to be the Philosophy which
the Royal Society does profess, or would support. It were happy for you, if the
World thought you Distracted, and that Bedlam, not Cambridge, were the place of
your residence. I say, You oppose that Philosophy which the Royal Society lays
down in their History. You neither deny the Truth of my Allegation out of the
History, nor that they owned it ever: but tell me, That it is not the Philosophy
which the Royal Society does profess, or would support; If the History be owned
by them, they do profess it; If they do not, what you fay is not contradictory
to my averment. Less of Plato, less of Mathematics (yet have you not much
thereof) and more of Aristotle's Logic, would have prevented this, and a
thousand other mistakes in your Writings. What I do Animadvert upon, is the
Assertion at least of Dr. Sprat, and his Assistants: Your Puppet says, that
Geometry is so fundamentally Plus ultra, p. 25.
useful a Science, that without it, we cannot in any good degree understand the
Artifice of the OMNIPOTENT ARCHITECT in the composure of the great World, and
our Selves. (...), was the excellent saying of Plato; and the Universe must be
known, by the Art whereby it was made. -- I do not know what can be more
positive then this, that God is an Omnipotent Architect, and that he made the
World by Geometry. It Is News indeed, that CREATION should be a Geometrical
procedure: but he is inconsiderate in his Assertions, and consequently the
fitter for your esteem. But I add, that Dr. J. Wallis in his Discourse about
D. Wallis, de motu. p. 1, 2.
Motion, gives this definition of Mechanism: MECHANICEN appello, Geometriam de
motu, and per Mechanicen eam Geometriae partem intelligimus, quae MOTUM
tractat, atque Geometricis rationibus, and (...), inquirit, Qua vi quisque
motus peragatur. This Definition, as well as the Book, has met with general
approbation in the R. S. and agreeable thereunto, that Philosophy is
Mechanical, which proceeds to salve the Phenomenon by a Geometrical deduction
of Mechanical causes: such it is that you oppose; but that which you assert, and
would insinuate for the R. S. as if it were also Mechanical, does not deserve
the name of Mechanism: you equivocate therein, as you do in all this enterprise
against me: and when you seem in your Wits, you do deny the conduct of the
World to be Mechanical. viz. The Primordials of the World are not Divine
Dialogues, p. 1. c. 10.
Mechanical, but Spermatical or Vital; not made by rubbing and filing, and
turning and shaving, as in a Turner's or Black-smith's shop, but from some
universal Principle of inward Life and MOTION, containing in it the seminal
Forms of all things, which therefore the Platonists and Pythagoreans call the
great (...) of the World. -- Can any man read these Passages, and imagine that
Dr. More would be esteemed an abettor of Mechanical Philosophy, and not an
Opposer of it. I think I may securely acquiesce in my Citations, since they are
so well grounded: but to show that there is nothing secure from the attempts of
Impudence, or the ignorance of some of these Virtuosi, give me leave to
represent unto you the following Words. I believe indeed most of us, I am sure
my self does conceive, that Generation, Corruption, Alteration, and all the
Vicissitudes of Corporeal Nature, are nothing else but Unions and Dissolutions
(I will add also, Formations and Deformations) of little Bodies or Particles
of differing Figures, Magnitudes, and Velocities. But this thus bounded is not
the Mechanic Philosophy, but part of the old Pythagorick, or Mosaic
Philosophy, so far as I can see by any History. So that it is very unskilfully
done of your Antagonist, to bring me in as opposing, or clashing with the Royal
Society in a thing of this great Consequence, and so to make them Patrons of
that, which neither Sound Philosophy, nor True Religion can allow. -- Dr. More,
I have been heretofore Friendly unto you, I shall not give you now the advice
of an Adersary; but haste into the state of silence, or henceforward crust over
the present vehicle of your soul with the habit of a Mad man, and attire your
self in that guise whenever you come into company. I dare swear not one of
eminence in the R. S. will own this Philosophy at all; and not any, that it is
Mechanical. Your Formations and Deformations are two canting terms, equal to
any of the Peripateticks, and becoming Hippocrates, Plato, or Severinus Danus,
and not a Virtuoso. Here is not one Word to tell us wherein the Geometry of the
OMNIPOTENT ARCHITECT does consist, nor how those Unions and Dissolutions are
performed. What will Dr. Wrens Hypothesis about the rules and measures of
motion signify in your Systeme? What goodly Principles of Demonstrations in
Natural Philosophy will there be, when an Immaterial Deity, acting by the power
of his will, or a Spirit of Nature must bear a part in the Deductions? But
where is my unskilfulness in bringing you in as opposite to the R. S. you tell
me what you conceive, and what you believe they do: but since, you do not make
the last evident against my presumptions, and the Letter of the History; it is
unskilfulness in you to conclude so peremptorily, and not to reminde that
Caution I gave to such Virtuosi as you, to forbear all Conjunctions causal, or
illative. I now haste to that Remark with which you conclude this Passage, viz.
That neither any sound Philosophy, nor true Religion can allow of that
Hypothesis, which though it allow the Creation, solves all the Phenomenon of
Nature Mechanically. They are redevable to you for this Letter; and your
vindication of them, signifies as much as when you talk of the Learning and
Eloquence of Dr. Sprat; or the Parts, Judgment and Virtue of Mr. Glanvill.

Your last Exception against me, is, That I should say, You did not approve of
those Deductions of Dr. Sprat, as necessary, but ridiculous. I shall recite
your Words, because as serious as the Case is, I can approve of them as
ridiculous. Which Deductions, says your Antagonist, I would not approve of as
Necessary, but ridiculous: Truly, if I had said so, I should have made my self
ridiculous; for how could I approve of Deductions, especially in so serious a
Point, as, or Quatenus RIDICULOUS? for there is no man, let him be never so
Pious, unless he be a Fool, that can approve of Deductions for their being
ridiculous in so serious a Cause. But it seems he having a mind to monopolize
all the Wit in the World to himself, is content to repute me for Pious, so he
may remonstrate me to all the World to be a Fool, and such as he may play the
Fool withal, as he has done in all this Page you have pointed unto me. -- I
might here excuse the Wording of that Passage by my own haste, and the
disorders which happened in the Printing, the sense intended by me, being, that
you did not approve those Deductions to be necessary, but esteemed them as
ridiculous: and that this was my purpose, is so manifest, that all that you
Cavillatio, ut Caius I.C. definit, est subdola, ratio, quam conscii nobis
mendacii, vincendi tamen caus^ proferimus.
say is but the Cavil of an angry Hypocondriack; and who is also so ignorant,
as not to know there is a sort of ZEUGMA, wherein the latter part of the
Sentence is not construed, nor related with the preceding Verb, but depends
upon another, which is to be understood according as the sense requires. This,
and much more you will learn in Greek and Latin, when you and some others of
the R. S. are provided of an able Schoolmaster. I meet with very evil
Retributions for all my kindness to some of your Friends; that motion for to
supply you with an able Antiquary and Grammarian, might have become the best of
your Adherents; had it been mentioned sooner, and the Proposal took effect, H.
O. and Mr. Glanvill, Dr Sprat, Dr Merret, had YOU, and not committed such
childish errors, as you run now into.

But, you grant you might approve of those Deductions as smooth and plausible,
though not as necessary, but something of a lubricous and doubtful aspect: but
you know very well, you could not approve of them as ridiculous. Here then,
most argute Hypochondriack, lies the Question, Whether it be possible for a man
to approve of any passage as ridiculous where the subject is serious? And for
the proof hereof I do refer my self to all that have read Hudybras, whither
serious subjects are not there debated by such deductions, as any man will
approve of as ridiculous, but not as serious. I have in the Cabbala, which you
so admire, read a thousand deductions which I could approve Happeruschim
Bechinath. p. 63
of as ridiculous. Such is the Gematria of Shilo expounded to be the Messiah,
because the letters of both words make up the same numbers 358. such is that
Jewish argument of the worlds being created in September related in Schickard;
That every man's soul must animate three bodies, is prettily proved in that
Adam's name consists of three letters in the Hebrew, viz. A. D. M. and from
those three Letters it is likewise demonstrated that the soul of Adam must
animate David, and the Messiah, because that after A follows D. and then M. And
S. Cyprian's reason is no less pleasant, when he proves that Adam was made up
out of the four quarters of the earth, because the initial Letters of the four
quarters of the world in Greek do make up his name? (...). In your works, Dr.
More, especially your Cabbala I can find an infinity of passages which upon no
other account gain my approbation. They are pleasant instances of folly
disporting in paralogismes. You collect out of Des Carts and other
Philosophers what your phansy approves, and this you represent for a Mosaical
Cabbala, and prove it thus, In the Expounding of Moses, I think I may lay this
down for a safe principle, that there is no considerable def. of the Philos.
Cabbala. p. 138.
truth in Nature or divinity, that Moses was ignorant of, and so if it be found
agreeable to this Text [by any distortion] I may very well attribute it to him.
At least the Divine wisdom wherewith Moses was inspired, prevents all the
inventions of Men. Having laid down this principle whatever chimaeras the
imagination of Des carts furnished you with, or the mysterious nonsense of
the Platonists and Pythagoreans, you presently impose upon the Sacred Text, and
demonstrate them thus. -- He that is but a little acquainted with French
Philosophy understands the business plainly. As in case of the Celestial
matter; -- for the celestial matter does consist of ibid. p. 138.
two plainly distinguishable parts, to wit the first Element, and the second,
or the Matcria subtilissima, and the round Particles, as I have already ready
intimated out of Des Carts. -- Thus for the waters above which are mentioned
in Genesis; these are the seminal forms: the Pythagoreans called them Naides
or water-nymphs. Where for the ibid. p. 146.
watery powers (as Porphyrius also calls these Nymphs) it is not at all harsh
to conceive, that they may be here indigitated by the name of Vpper-waters. See
Porphyrius de antro Nympharum. Are not these goodly deducations? All you say
there almost from me gains no more then the approbation of Ridiculous. But I
think it highly concerns the Church and Magistrate to put a stop to the
further publication of such extravagancies, whereby the authority of the
Scripture is disparaged, and only a Truth of appearance allowed to the
Scripture, whilst the Platonicks and Pythagoreans are avowed to retain the
true sense and Hypothesis of the Creation. Thus you remove at once the credit
of the Scripture and whole Church, and by giving so great advantages to the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, endanger the rejection of the whole Bible in
comparison of that Philosophy, which is the most ridiculous of all, and the
most opposite to Christianity. Instead of the Law and the prophets, you allege
Pythagoras, Plotinus, Porphyrius, and I may justly retort upon you, Habes
Pythagoram pro Mose, pro prophetis Platonem, pro Paulo Porphyrium. Methinks the
mention of Porphyrius should fill you with horror: No man ever writ so
bitterly against the Christian religion: Thirty Fathers, are said to have writ
against Him; His Books were every where destroyed by Them, nor had this Antrum
Nympharum been transmitted to us, but that an unhappy casualty preserved it
under the name of Malchus: The fathers, Eusebius, Theodoret, and S. Jerome
speak not of Him but with detestation: quibus religio fuisse videtur nomen
Porphyrii absque execratione proponere: Lucas Holsten. de vita and Script.
Porphyrii. c. 16.
And when the Christian Emperors would make the Arians completely odious, they
commanded them to be called Porphyriani. He was either the Author or encourager
of the persecutions under Diocletian and Decius: that party were the Worst
Adversaries that ever Christianity had: those names you reverence are no other
then Hierocles, Iamblicus, Amelius and Plotinus. It Was that Pythagorical
Philosophy which gave encouragement to the Ethnic Idolatry and Magic: it was
that Philosophy whereby Julian the Apostate did justify Paganism, and those of
that sect were principally Paganin. Gaudent. de philcog. Juliani c. 15.
caressed by Him above any Peripateticks or Stoics, as Maximus, Priscus, and
Chrysanthius. Ea de causa Platonicis vacabat Julianus, quia ejusmodi
philosophia faciebat ad Genios, ad sacrificia, aruspicinum, auguralia, quorum
omnium fuit studiosissimus. That pestilent Pythagorisme produced those Sects of
Simonians, Valentinians, Marcionists, Gnostics, Maniches; and what troubles
Origon did oecasion in the Church, what divisions and Heresies issued from Him,
and his way of expounding Scripture, is a thing so notorious upon record, that
I am amazed to see that Dr. More's works should meet with a Licencer, and not
rather the Author, and his Zany GLANVIL sink under Ecelesiastical Censures.
The commendations by which You in the conelusion of the Philosophic Cabbala
endeare Pythagoras and his followers to the esteem of all men, are such as may
betray the Unwary to believe them True: though to ascertain you one thing, I
believe never did man more Abuse History, Argue Worse, or less understand what
he said, then You do. And it was upon that consideration I gave you the Elogy of
PIOUS, but not of Learned: This was the matter that exasperated You; To be
PIOUS, was no Character for a Virtuoso; to undeceive the world herein you
resolved to turn Liar; I did not without some scruple give you that other
Title: I do now Recall it. You wonder that any man of Piety and Virtue should
own the Mechanic Philosophy, it being such as no True religion can allow of:
yet have Jugled in favou of them that do, and endeavored to oppose Him that
had with so much peril contested therewith. You mention with Praise for Virtue
and Learning those that have Asserted it. I shall here represent unto the world
your Harangue in behalf of Descartes.

The ummannerly Superstition of many is such, that they will give more to an
accustomed Opinion, which they have either taken up themselves, or has been
conveyed unto them by the confidence of some private Theologer, then to the
Authority of either Fathers, Churches, Workers of Miracles, or what is best of
all, the N. B. He holds that Pythagoras, and Empedocles, and Abaris did
Miracles.
most solid Reasons that can be propounded; which if they were capable of, they
could not take offense at my admittance of the Cartesian Philosophy into this
present Cabbala. The Principles, and the more notorious Conclusions thereof,
offering themselves fo, freely, and unaffectedly, and so aptly and fittingly
taking their place in the Text, that I knew not how with judgment and
Conscience to keep them out.

For I cannot but furmise, that he has happily and unexpectedly light upon
that, which will prove a true restoration of that part of the Mosaical
Philosophy, which is ordinarily called Natural, and in which Pythagoras may be
justly deemed to have had no small insight. And that Descartes may bear up in
some likely equipage, with the forenamed noble and Divine Spirits, though the
unskilfulness of Men commonly acknowledge more of Supernatural Assistance in
hot unsettled Fancies, and perplexed Melancholy, then in the calm and distinct
use of Reason; yet for mine own part (but not without submission to better
judgments) I should look upon Descartes as a Man more truly inspired in the
knowledge of Nature, then any that have professed themselves so this Sixteen
hundred Years: and being even ravished with admiration of his transcendent
Mechanical Inventions for the solving the Phenomenon of the World, I should not
stick to compare him with Bezaleel and Aholiab, those skilful and cunning
Workers of the Tabernacle; who, as Moses testifies, were filled with the Spirit
of God, and they were of an excellent understanding to find out all manner of
curious Works.

Nor is it any more Argument, that Des Carts was not Inspired, because he did
not say he was, then that others are inspired, because they say they are: which
to me is no Argument at all. But the suppression of what s^ happened, would
argue much more sobriety and modesty, when as the profession of it with sober
Men, would be suspected for some spice of Melancholy and Distraction;
especially in Natural Philosophy, where the grand Pleasure is the evidence and
exercise of Reason; not a bare belief, or an ineffable sense of life, in
respect whereof, there is no true Christian but he is Inspired.

I desire you would compare this Passage with that Censure which you fix upon
the whole Cartesian Philosophy in your Divine Dialogues, and tell me, How you
will avoid the imputation of Levity and Instabilitie of Judgment? How will you
reconcile two so different sentiments? That He is inspired in the knowledge of
Nature; And that He is a prodigy of Folly: That He has not demonstrated any
one Phenomenon in Nature to be purely Mechanical, but has failed every where:
And, that He is to be compared (in your judgment) to Bezaliel and Aholiab, for
his transcendent Mechanical inventions, Divine Dialogues. part. I. c. 8.
whereby to solve the Phenomenon of the World. I am confident the World will
condemn you with Blasphemy for that comparison betwixt those inspired Artisans,
and your Des Carts: That they were Inspired, the Scripture assures you; you
have not so much as probability to esteem so of the other; yet do you not stick
to compare them, and Him. You cannot but surmise that Cartesianism will prove a
true restoration of that part of Mosaical Philosophy, which is ordinarily
called Natural: You know not how, with Judgment and Conscience, to exclude
his Principles out of that Cabbala of yours, which You advance so much above
the Letter of the Sacred Word of God, as (...) transcendeth (...), Introduct.
to the defense of the Cabbala.p.101, 102, 103, 104.
or Reality exceeds Appearance. Consider Dr. Moor, consider whom you thus
celebrated: A man so Infamous for, and Impudent in his Lusts, that he makes no
other Apology for his Transgressions of that kind, then That he had not vowed
Chastity? So impious in his Metaphysics, that he was condemned by the Reformed
Universities in Harderwick and Vtrecht, as a Pestilent Writer: and his whole
Philosophy prohibited to be Taught or Defended in Leyden and Herborne. Take
notice what Character you have imposed on the Papists, and remember withal,
that Des Carts your Alumbrado, is of that number. I Jac. du Bois in praefat.
adu. Wittichium.
must protest unto you, that the serious Animadversion upon these Passages of
yours, makes me scrupulous how to allow Dr. More the Attribute of PIOUS: and my
doubts multiply upon me, when I observe that you deduce your Cabbala from the
Pythagoreans, and rely more on the mysteries of their members, then the plain
Text, and Authority of the Universal Church. You dignifie Pythagoras so far as
to ascribe unto him a power of Working Miracles, as Moses and the succeeding
Prophets did; which Skill (dare you to call it Skill!) Empedocles, Epimenides,
and Abaris having got, they grew so famous, that Empedocles was sir-named
Alexanemus; Epimenides, Cathartes; and Abaris, Aethrobates, from the power they
had in suppressing Storms and Winds, in freeing Cities from the Plague, and in
Walking aloft in the Air: which Skill enabled Pythagoras to visit his Friends
after that manner at Metapontium, and Tauromenium in one and the same day. You
represent Plato as a Divine man for Knowledge, and Virtue: though it appear
otherwise in the Records of his Life: and Plotinus must be Sainted, though he
were a Magician, though he styled Christianity (...), and blamed Origin for
defending it. Good God! How far does prejudice transport you? How different are
your Sentiments concerning those men, from what the Fathers, and the most
Authentic Records of History, relate about them? Those that you almost
Idolize, were no others then Idolaters and Sorcerers; and Julian the Apostate
is redevable unto Dr. More, for assigning them a better Qualification. Thus
Plotinus and Dr. More; Porphyrius and Glanvill, are mutually ingratiated; and
the Creation better explained by the Allegories of the Platonists, then the
Mosaical Writings in Genesis. I find that Simplicius denies the Scripture to
be of Divine Authority, becaufe it is Erroneous about the Original of the
World: It Is granted by our Cabbalists! And if we extenuate the Assertions of
Gods Word, from concluding in matters of Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, How
shall we any longer reject the Alcoran, and Talmud, for Errors therein? With
what justice shall we deny them the benefit of that excuse, which we make use
of our selves? But I find my self to enlarge beyond the designs of a Letter:
I beseech you, Sir, to follow that advise I have heretofore suggested unto you;
Consult Books, and not your Phansy; enquire better into the Foundations of the
Cabbala, and the repute you give to the Pythagorical Philosophy: you will find
after a better Scrutiny, then your narrow Reading as yet qualifies you for,
that your Confidence is but weakly supported, and that upon prejudicate
Opinions you desert the Sacred Text, and obtrude upon us your own Conceits for
Mosaical; and with greater Impudence then any Jew, you obtrude for such what
you never Received as such: And lay down this extravagant position: Desense of
the Philosoph. Cabb. p. 138.
In the expounding of Moses, I think I may lay down this for a safe Principle,
that there is no considerable truth in Nature or Divinity, that Moses was
ignorant of; and so if it be agreeable his Text, I may attribute it unto him.
At least the Divine Wisdom wherewith Moses was inspired, prevents all the
Inventions of Men. -- By this Rule, it is impossible for any thing considerable
to be newly invented: neither need we contest with the Virtuosi whether one of
them, or a Peripatetick were Author of this or that; it is certain Moses was
acquainted with every thing considerable, and the Spirit of God, which inspired
him, does prevent all the discoveries of Men. Thus you attribute to Moses the
Opinion that the Earth is a Planet. Id.Ibid.p.138.
For, as I have elsewhere intimated, Moses has been beforehand with Cartesius.
The Ancient Patriarchs having had Wit, and by reason of their long lives
leisure enough, to invent as curious and subtle Theorems in Philosophy, as
ever any of their posterity could hit upon, besides what they might have had by
Tradition from Adam. -- Most excellently argued, a posse ad esse. Thus you make
the Three Elements of Des Carts to be Plainly Ibid. p. 151.
Distinguishable parts in the Matter first Created. And when you Write again,
the Elasticity of the Air, and its ponderousness, will at least become
Ingredients in your Cabbala; and the Authors are obliged unto you, if you do
not attribute the Barometer, Thermometer, and Air-pump, etc. unto the first
Patriarchs, who had so much wit and leisure. Did ever Madness arise to such a
height? or was there any man who more grossly transformed Scripture into a Nose
of Wax. Sir, you will pardon me for being earnest with you in a case of such
importance: I would believe you, but that in so doing, I should dissent from
God Almighty. I was inclined to believe you were an Hypocondriack, and that
your Opinions were not the result of your judgment, but of your temperament;
but you have no Intervals: and in the explication of your Preexistence, you
make the Bible not your Rule, but Pretense: and what you have asserted and
consented unto in the Church, you regard not in comparison of the Pythagorical
Tenets. Give me leave to tell you, that where the Foundations of Government are
dissolved, there can be no Piety. Our Laws oblige you to the 39 Articles; and
They to the Scripture: if such Glosses be put upon them, it is in vain to expect
that any thing can bind, or that the Act of Uniformity can take place: It is
much better that such as you were cast out of the Church, then continued in;
and an open enemy were better then such a friend. It concerns the Parliament to
look after such Latitudinarians; and if what your Apologist says, may take
place, That men by no Professions or Subscriptions are obliged further, then
not to contradict the Articles of Religion; all England will soon be Distracted
with variety of Opinions, some not crediting half so much as others; and an
Explanation must be made of the Words Assent and Consent.

Sir, These Considerations do allay very much the esteem I had for your Piety;
and I ascertain you, that if you will pardon me this time, I will not give you
a second cause of that nature for Exceptions. And I am the more resolute
herein, because I find you thus interposing in the behalf of Men whom no
Proposals or Supplications of mine have been able to reduce unto a Declaration,
concerning those controverted Points in the History: and you are pleased so to
interest your self, as to maintain Untruths concerning them, and to inodiate me
most maliciously, who threw my self upon the action without any other
expectation then that of Certain Ruin. Had you had any sense of piety; had the
Divine life fixed in a Divine body (and transcending dry Reason, in the
guidance whereof, a Man should either immediately feel and smell out by an holy
sagacity, what is right and true, and what false and perverse; or at least, he
shall use his reason aright to discover it:) had this swayed in you, My
Undertaking had became Dr. More: But since your Actions are a greater evidence
against you, then any specious Words can be for you; since Mr. Glanvills honor
is dearer unto you then Truth, and the Church of England, I do conclude with
this advise, that instead of a new Enchiridion Metaphysicum, you would write a
retraction of your Printed Works, and leave off to play, as it were, at
Boe-peep with Atheism, by defending Christianity with ridiculous Arguments.
When the Manichees, those Pythagorick and Cabbalistical Christians did arise
and oppose Orthodoxy, even Diocletian did make a Law, Nequis religionem
Christianam deterioribus religionibus impugnaret.

Sir, Your compliance with this Suggestion, will very much oblige me to be Your
humble Servant, Hen. Stubbe.
Warwick, Nov. 30. 1670.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir

TO require the intelligence you give me of the Enchiridion Metaphysicum, and
of your gallant performances and Experiments of the Virtuosi, to be discovered
there; shall requite your kindness, with somewhat you may impart from me to
your Correspondents. I intend next term to publish my full Answer to your
Ecebolius: and an Appendix containing the Standard of Latin, Eloquence or M.
Glanvill's epistle to the Clergy of Sommerset: some papers of M. Henry
O^denburgh, the Secretary and Vindicator of the R. S. as also some Letters of
Ortuinus a renowned Virtuoso of Germany, whose epistles were written a little
before the time that the Royal Society proposed first the transfusion of blood
There will be also the Travailes of another Virtuoso, who past over the River
Tanais at Mentz, and in a Gallery saw the twelve Caesar's, viz. Julius Caesar,
Augustus, Aristides, Themistocles etc. He travailed with my Lord Arundel to
Vienna: and I may as well reckon these for Virtuosi, as THEY do others for to
be inventours, and of the R. S. I have also a Treatise concerning F -- and Fi
-- in agitation, like to my Lord Bacons Historia ventorum: 'twil be of great
improvement to experimental Philosophy and Physic; but some Trials in consort
I must recommend to your friends, and some experiments about Belching to Dr.
More. I have some proposals of imbodying these Meteors of the Microcosme into
VEHICLES, and to try if it will give any light for the producing that divine
temper of body, which is requisite for a Pythagorean and Cabbalist: oblige me
by putting this into your Hint-box.

FINIS.

